TRVTH's INNOCENCE AND SIMPLICITY SHINING Through the Conversion,
Gospel Ministry, Labors, Epistles of Love, Testimonies and Warnings to
Professors and Profane, (With the Long and Patient Sufferings) of that Ancient
and Faithful Minister and Servant of JESUS CHRIST, Thomas Tailor, Who finished
his Course in the Year MDCLXXXI.

1 Thessalonians. 2.5, 6. For neither at any time used we flattering words, nor a Cloak
of Covetousness, God is Witness; Nor of Men sought we Glory, etc. LONDON,
Printed and Sold by T. Soul, next Door to the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street; and at the Bible in Leaden-hall-street
near the Market, 1697.

AN EPISTLE TO ALL Friendly and Impartial READERS.
THE Ensuing Collection is Recommended to your Serious Perusal, Charitable and
Tender Considerations, wherein expect not to find either Empty Flourishes,
Curiosity of Speech, or Acquired Eloquence, but Plainness and Simplicity,
wherein the Substantial Truth is sincerely aimed and pointed at. The Author, by
the Grace of God through Jesus Christ, being Converted from a Literal, Worldly,
and Mercenary Priest, (though one of the Better Sort) to be a Spiritual Minister
of Christ, and Free Preacher of Righteousness in Life and Doctrine, knowing
that Gospel Ministers, and good Preachers, must be good Livers; none being meet
to Convert others to God or Christ, but who are first truly Converted
themselves by his Power.

This Innocent and Upright-hearted Man, Thomas Tailor, seeing the great
Corruptions, Pride, and Covetousness, and other Enormities, among too many of
the Worldly Teachers, Priests, and Hearers, was the more Fervent in his
Testimony against them, who pleased themselves and others with good Words,
whilst they lived Bad Lives.

This our Deceased Brother and Servant of Jesus Christ, when Sufferings or
Storms approached, or Wolves appeared to Devour, did not Flee with Hirelings,
nor Flatter with Temporizers, nor Admire Men's Persons for Advantage, but as one
having a fixed Confidence in the Lord, and true Zeal for his Glory, was Valiant
for his Truth on Earth, and used much Plainness in his Ministry, Testimony, and
Warnings, both to High and Low, Professors and Profane, not sparing Disguised
Hypocrites, or Deceitful Workers, no more than Open and Gross Offenders, but as
a Partaker of the same Spirit and Life, the Primitive Ministers of Christ were
in, according to his Measure, was Exercised in the like Sincerity, Uprightness,
and Self-denial, intimated in 2 Cor. 2.17. For we are not as many, which deal
deceitfully with (or make Merchandise of) the Word of God; and 1 These. 2.3. For
our Exhortation was not of Deceit, nor of Uncleanness, nor in Guile. (Ver. 4.)
But as we were allowed of God to be put in Trust with the Gospel, even so we
speak, not as pleasing Men, but God, which tries our Hearts. (Ver. 5.) For
neither at any time used we flattering words, as ye know, nor a Cloak of
Covetousness, God is witness. (Ver. 6.) Nor of Men sought we Glory, neither of
you, nor yet of others, etc.

In like manner this Faithful Servant of Christ, (whom we now speak of) did not
sooth up People in their Sins, nor sow Pillows under their Arm-holes, like
False, Sin-pleasing Prophets, but in Tender Love and Pity to their Poor Souls,
Faithfully Warned them, and Persuaded them to Repentance, as one knowing the
Terrors of the Lord, and Revelation of his Righteous Judgments against all
Unrighteousness of Men; being also sensible, when the Lord had spoken, who can
but Prophecy? And when he says, Cry aloud, and spare not, lift up thy Voice
like a Trumpet, and show the People their Wickedness, Abominations and
Transgr^ssions, What Faithful Messenger dare be silent? He was a true
Encourager of Virtue, and Witness against Vice and Profaneness, and the Lord
was with him in his Christian Labors, M^^^stry, and Deep Sufferings.

Wherefore, Friendly Readers, let not the Simplicity of his Style, nor his
Plainness, Sharpness, or Zeal against Hypocrisy or Deceit, offend you in the
following Collection, or any Passages therein, we hope there is nothing in them
justly offensive, or that may not bear a Charitable and Just Construction with
the Impartial and Unprejudiced, if any thing should seem Dubious: Though where
Prejudice or Envy is against Persons or Things, (how Just soever) it will carp
and quarrel at the Clearest Truths; as has appeared both from Envious
Apostates, and other Enemies to Christ and his Followers: The Holy Scriptures
themselves not escaping the Causeless Cavils of Irreligious and Atheistical
Persons.

This Faithful and Zealous Servant of Christ was Divinely endued with a
Gospel Spirit and Ministry, and was of a True, Christian, Gentle and Humble
Disposition; and his Judgment was mixed with Mercy and Compassion to poor
Souls; and his Company and Society was Sweet and Acceptable to all the Faithful
in Christ, who had a True and Spiritual Knowledge of him, and Acquaintance with
him. He sincerely affected Christian Humility, Poverty of Spirit, and
Simplicity in Christ, beyond all Artificial Painting, and Humane Acquirements.
And seeing the Vanity of all Airy Notions, Scholastic Craft, and
Selfrighteousness, he laid it all aside, and was Refined from all that Dross,
esteeming the pure Gold, the Heavenly Treasure, the Excellency of the Knowledge
of Christ Jesus our Lord above all; therein asserting his Sincerity and
Innocence, when a Prisoner in about 1665, in Praise to the Lord God, who
supported him in his Sufferings, Patience and Innocent Condition. Concerning
which, please to observe his own Testimony inserted here as follows, viz.

This is my Confidence in the Sight of the Lord God, and my Clearness before
all People, that though I have been hated and persecuted, and evil spoken of by
many these many Years, yet it has altogether been without Cause, I praise the
Lord. For I can truly say, That I never sought the Hurt of any Man living upon
the Earth, though in Matters of Religion, or otherwise, he was never so
contrary to me, or against me: Yea, the Terrors of God and his Truth, did
preserve my Heart from seeking my own Revenges, but taught me still to commit
my Cause to God; and he, according to his Word, did still bring forth my
Righteousness as the Light, and my Judgment and Just Dealing as the Noonday,
Psalm. 37.5, 6. to his Holy Name's Praise, and my Soul's great Rejoicing; and
did still let me see, that the patient abiding of the Meek, is never forgotten
of God.

And so though I have been kept here (a Prisoner) above four Years for my pure
Conscience sake to God, yet to the King and the People, under whom I Suffer,
have I done no Harm, nor can think or intend them Evil; but have endeavored in
all things in the Power of God, as a true Christian, to live peaceably with all
Men, as those that have known me from the beginning can witness. For I never
drew Sword, nor Plotted against any, nor could ever persuade any others so to
do; but have still lamented the Misery of Mankind to see them, instead of
Loving and Helping one another, contrariwise Hating, Biting, Devouring and
Destroying one another.

So I rest in the Blessed Peace of my God, a Sufferer for his Blessed Truth,
Blessed for ever be his Name, who has called me, and counted me worthy
thereunto. But it will not be well with such as hate the righteous Man, as
says Scripture: But my Heart can say, Father, forgive them, for they know not
what they do.

And concerning Kings, and all that are in Authority, my Heart has said
according to the Holy Doctrine of the Apostle, Lord Grant that they may Rule
well, that it may be well with them in the latter End; and that we thy People,
whom thou have redeemed to thy self, may lead a quiet and peaceable Life, in
all Honesty and Godliness under them, to thy Praise. And for this Cause pay we
Tribute, etc.

This his own Sincere Account, appears truly agreeable to what the Holy Apostle
says in the like case, 2 Cor. 1.12. For our Rejoicing is this, the Testimony
of our Conscience, that in Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, not with fleshly
Wisdom, but by the Grace of God we have had our Conversation in the World, and
more abundantly to you-wards.

These things are recommended to all Serious and Well-inclined Readers, who
desire to seek the Lord, his Kingdom, and the Righteousness thereof, to weigh
and consider, knowing that it is all our Concerns, tenderly to mark and behold
the perfect and upright Man, for the End of that Man is Peace; as was the End
of this Innocent and Upright-hearted Man, whose Memorial is Blessed.

Diverse Friends have been for some time concerned, that the following
Collections were not published some Years ago; but many Occasions and Exercises
intervening, have thus long prevented the Persons concerned in Collecting,
Inspecting and Placing his Writings in Order, as they could find them, and as
might most tend to future Service, Admonition or Warning, that they might be
preserved for Ages to come.

We have great Cause to Praise the Worthy Name of the Lord our God, that he
has raised and sent so many Faithful Witnesses in our Days, who have not been
as Clouds without Rain, but Divinely Replenished and Qualified with Life,
Wisdom and Sanctity, for the Work which the Lord has called them unto. And
therefore Woe will be to those Enemies, Apostates and Back-sliders, who Contemn,
Reproach or Harm any such, who are the Lord's Anointed ones, Prophets or
Faithful Servants, either while Living, or Dead.

And it highly concerns all the Lord's People, who profess his Light and Truth,
sincerely to approve their Hearts unto him with unblameable Lives and
Conversations, walking before him in true Love and Christian Charity, and truly
to prize the Mercy of the present Day and Dispensation of Grace; and fervently
to pray the Lord of the Harvest, to raise up and send forth more Faithful
Laborers thereinto, that his Gospel-harvest-Day and Work may go on and
prosper, both in this Age, and the Ages to come; to his Eternal Praise and
Renown, and his Church's great Joy and Comfort in him for ever. Amen.

WE being satisfied, and having Unity with the foregoing Preface, with Relation
to, and in behalf of, our deceased Friend and Brother Thomas Tailor, his
Service, Labors and Travels in the Gospel of Christ, do hereunto Subscribe our
Names, Theodore Eccleston William Ellis Samuel Waldenfield George Bowls
Charles Marshall Thomas Lower John Bowater Joshua Middleton Richard Needham
John Field.

I Am Concerned to give this further Account: The said Thomas Tailor (after
other Imprisonments) being Twice Imprisoned at Stafford for his Tender
Conscience to Christ.

In the first Imprisonment there, he was near Eleven Years a Prisoner, (as I
Remember) and the Second Imprisonment there was for a short time, being
Threatened, Reviled and Falsely Aspersed, and called a Jesuite-Rogue by the
Deputy's Steward of the Court. I was made Instrumental in God's Hand for his
Release both times; the First in 1672. by Solicitation for him and many others,
whom thereupon K. Charles the Second Released. And the Second, by Endeavoring
for himself about 1679. Manifesting him to be no Jesuit nor Papist, but a
Peaceable Harmless Man in his Conversation, and a Dissenting Protestant,
Distinguished under the Name Quaker, to clear him from the False Aspersions
cast upon him; in which my Solicitation and Endeavors for his Liberty, I had
great Peace and Comfort, and the more, in obtaining the same for him and
others; for I truly Loved him for his Innocence, Integrity and Love to the Lord
and his People.

G. Whitehead.
London, the 20th of the 3d Month 1697.


AN INDEX OF THE CHIEF HEADS Contained in this BOOK.
I. A Testimony concerning our Dear Friend and Brother Thomas Tailor, who was
Convinced of the Lord's Everlasting Truth, and Received it in the Year 1652.
II. Christopher Tailor 's Testimony concerning Thomas Tailor. III. Thomas
Tailor 's Testimony concerning his Father. IV. A short Testimony of Hannah
Tailor, concerning her Dear Father Thomas Tailor. V. Robert Barrow 's Testimony
concerning Thomas Tailor. VI. William Fallowfield 's Testimony concerning
Thomas Tailor. VII. A short Testi^o^y concerning that Faithful Servant of the
Lord Thomas Tailor, whose Memory is Blessed. THomas Tailor 's Epistles. To
Friends Page 2 To Friends at Strickland head Page 4 To Friends in Warwickshire
and Staffordshire, etc. Page 7 To Friends Page 10 A Loving and Seasonable
Advice to the Children of Light from a Brother, Thomas Tailor Page 11 To
Friends that abide in the Truth: as also to such as are gone from it Page 15 To
Friends Page 17 To Israel 's Babes Page 20 Of Prayers Page 22 Concerning Zion
Page 23 The Life more than Clothes and Meat ibid. To the Insatiable Devourers
of Strong Drink Page 24 To my Dear Friends every where Page 26 To Friends Page
28 To Friends in London Page 30 To Friends of Sadbury side Page 32 To Friends,
Richard Boothman and Robert Clough Page 34 The Day of the Lord is Dawned Page
35 Some Prison-Meditations in the 7th Month, 1657. being a Free-gift Sermon,
mainly touching the Religious Robbers, or Spiritual Murderers, the Sermon and
Prayer-sellers of the former, latter and present Times; even to the whole
Company of Mystery Babylon 's Merchants and Members a Warning Page 37 To the
Judges, Justices, Juries, Teachers and People of the Nation, who Profess
themselves to be Christians, and the Scriptures to be their Rule, and yet
account themselves disturbed if any speak unto them, and cry against them in
their Assemblies or Streets in the Name and Word of the Lord (without any
Authority from Man) a few Queries Page 50 To those of Manchester that are
Zealous for their Sabbath Page 53 To a Wandering Apostate Page 55 To George
Ward, and those that had Fellowship with him Page 56 To a Plundering Priest
Page 58 To those that Rejoice in Bells and Bonefires Page 59 To them that plays
the Fool upon the Stage. Page 60 Against Mass. Times Page 61 To the Bear ward
Page 62 To the Dancers on the Ropes Page 63 A Warning to all People ibid. For
the People of England to Weep Page 64 To the Comers and Goers by the
Prison-Window, of both S^^^s Page 65 To King Charles the Second, concerning
Persecution, etc. Page 67 To Informers Page 69 Some Serious Considerations
concerning the Priests of the High Places, called Churches, their Sprinkling
Infants, Marrying People, and B^rying their Dead, etc. Page 70 To the ^ury-men
of Appleby Page 73 To (...) and Rulers Page 74 A Testimony of Truth Page 75 To
all that are Worshipping in the Outward Court, without God in the World, in
diverse Forms Page 78 To William Thornton, called Justice, at Hipswell, in
Yorkshire, Divulged for the Information of other Moderate Enquirers after the
Lord Page 81 To the Presbyterians so called Page 88 To the Presbyterians Page
90 To the Blind Teachers Page 91 For the Great People of the Earth, who love
the Pleasures of Sin, these ib. Concerning Bread and Wine Page 93 The
Indignation of the Lord upon all Nations Page 94 To Loose and Wicked Professors
Page 108 To Protestants Page 109 To the Sons of Vanity Page 110 Who they are
that only Rejoice in the Birth of Christ Page 111 A Testimony against
Persecution, to King Charles the Second, and his Magistrates Page 112 Woe to the
World, because of Iniquity Page 114 An Apology from the Harmless against the
Unjust. And to the King and his Magistrates against Plotting ibid. Against
May-poles Page 116 To a Dancing Master Page 117 To the Fruitless Vineyard of
England Page 118 To the People of England Page 119 God's Controversy with
England declared: Or, a Warning-word, by way of Reproof, to the Inhabitants
thereof, even to such as forget God, and are adding one Sin unto another Page
121 A Faithful Warning to Outside Professors, and Loose Pretenders to
Christianity of all Sorts Page 123 Something, as it came to mind, of what
passed at the Assizes in Stafford, betwixt the Judge and the People of God,
called by the World Quakers: But the Reproach of Christ is to us great Riches,
and the Scorners God will judge Page 131 To the Jurymen of Stafford, that
brought him in Guilty Page 138 To King Charles the Second Page 139 Against
Lotteries Page 142 To Stafford Page 143 To the Mayor of Stafford Page 144 For
them that Rule in Stafford ibid. To the Kings and Rulers Page 145 Concerning
his being taken Prisoner of Seven Years Continuance Page 147 To the Mayor and
Priest of Stafford Page 148 Concerning the Fall^n Christians Page 149 To the
Vain People of the World Page 150 An Exhortation to all People Page 150 To the
Teachers and Magistrates of Tamworth Page 151 To sinful People Page 152 To the
Children of Men Page 154 To the Fencers ibid. Concerning Sprinkling Page 156
Concerning Burying, and Churching of Women, etc. Page 157 A Testimony against
Bull and Bear-baiting Page 159 A Testimony against Sporting and Playing Page
160 A Loving Exhortation, to all Kings, Pri ces, Potentates, Bishops, and
People in the whole Christendom. Wherein is a distinction betwixt the True and
False Teachers. Page 162 A few Necessary Questions and Conclusions for the
Present Parish-Teachers of England, etc. Deeply to Ponder and Answer in God's
Fear, for the Good of their own and the Peoples Souls that are under them; for
the Lord is arisen to call all things into Judgment. Page 171 A Strong and
Terrible Alarm Sounded out of the Holy Mountain, against all the Wicked
Inhabitants of the Earth Page 179 Watching for Sin Page 181 A Warning to the
Nations, to lay aside all Prejudice and Enmity, the Ground of Strife and Wars;
and to come and Embrace the Light of Christ Jesus, that they may see
themselves, and come to be Saved and Healed, and United in the Love of God Page
182 To People whose Hearts are turned from the Lord Page 189 To the Magistrates
Page 190 To the Generation of Fleshly Fallen Christians, not worthy the Name of
Christians Page 192 To the King Page 193 An Exhortation to remember the
Judgments of God Page 195 To the Unclean Communicants Page 196 God's Virtue and
Goodness Extolled ibid. Richard Baxter 's Book, Entitled, The Cure of
Church-Divisions, Answered and Confuted Page 201 Some more of these strange
Sayings of this Richard Baxter in his Book Page 232 Some Gentle Remarks on a
Book, Entitled, A Discourse concerning the Idolatry Practiced in the Church of
Rome Page 249 The Day is Dawned that makes all Wickedness manifest Page 255 To
some of T. Hicks 's Friends Page 257 Something concerning that called the
Common Prayer Page 258 A Testimony for the Lord, the good Shepherd, and true
Minister of the Sanctuary, and true Tabernacle which God has pitched, and not
Man, against all the False Shepherds, and Hireling Ministers, and Teachers of
the World, under what Name, or Notion, or Form soever, who have run, and God
never sent them, and therefore cannot profit the People at all Page 273 The
true Fast from the False Page 283 Something in Answer to some Passages in that
naughty Book, called, A Looking-glass for Ladies Page 284 Thomas Tailor, who
was ten Years and an half in Prison at Stafford, writes a Letter to a
particular Adversary Page 293 To the People at and about Stafford, a Testimony
for God and his Truth, and against Deceit and Deceivers, especially the
Hireling Priests, as a Warning, Information and Instruction in Righteousness,
to them, (and all People elsewhere concerned) by the Spirit of the Lord in his
Suffering Servant Thomas Tailor Page 294 Something in Answer to some Passages
in that Wicked Antichristian Book written Catechism-wise, by some Popish
Stickler for his Master the Pope, the Romish Antichrist and his Followers.
Printed at Douay, and subscribed H. T. Page 299 A Warning to the Papists at
Stafford Page 314 Something in Answer to a Paper from a Nameless Author,
directed to be left at Joseph Holt 's in Okeham. Page 317 A Copy of Verses writ
upon occasion of a Visitation, so called Page 326 Certain Queries Propounded to
the People called Anabaptists, especially to such as believe, and hold forth,
that Water Baptism is an Ordinance and Command of Christ Jesus, the Door of
Entrance into the true Church, and so of such Absolute Necessity, as that there
can be no True Gospel Church Fellowship without it. Page 333 Christ Exalted
above Moses, and the Spirit above the Letter Page 337
A TESTIMONY Concerning our Dear Friend and Brother Thomas Tailor, Who was
Convinced of the Lord's Everlasting Truth, and Received it in the Year 1652.
HE had been an Eminent Parish Priest, and of Note among the Professors and
other Priests, and also a Lecturer in several Countries, Preaching Sermons on
the Weekdays. And he coming to Swarthmor in Lancashire, with some other
Priests, I asked him and them, before Judge Fell, Whether he, or any of them
could say, that they ever heard a Voice of God or Christ from Heaven, that bid
them go to Speak to any People, as God and Christ did to the Prophets and
Apostles? And Thomas said before them all, that he never heard any such Voice
or Command. And I asked him what he Preached to the People then, and he made
Answer, and said, His Experiences, and I told him his Experiences might not
reach to every Condition; but he that had the Word of the Lord, might Preach
it, whom God sent, and that would Reach all Conditions, who knows all
Conditions: And so the Lord's Word and Power struck him that he was Silent. But
the rest of the Priests were High, and Opposed, and came to nothing: And Judge
Fell wondered, and was astonished at what he heard Thomas say, that he had
never heard the Voice of God nor Christ to Command him to Preach to any People;
and the said Thomas Tailor, being looked upon a High Priest, and above the
Common Priests, and a Sober Man, and Beloved among the outward Professors, and
so I went along with him that Day, to a place called Newton, in Lancashire,
where he used to Preach sometimes; and he was very much down, and sad, and
groaned that Night. And the next Day we went to a Meeting which we had in the
Steeple-house-yard, but he would have gone into the Steeple-house, but the
Priest would not let us; and I told him, it was no matter. And there came
another Priest from Vnder-Barrow, and several others, and Thomas sitting still,
at last a tender Spring of Life Sprang up in him, and he Spoke very well in it
to the People, both of his own Condition, and the People's, and where they had
been; and now how they must turn to the Lord Jesus Christ,

And the Vnder-Barrow-Priest, and some other Professors, were Offended, and
Opposed him; but the Lord's Power came over them all: For he was looked upon,
in the time of his Priesthood, above them,

And Thomas Tailor grew in the Grace and Truth of Christ, and came to know the
Word of the Lord, and Preach Christ Freely, as then he had Received Freely, and
forsook his Parish-steeple-house, and his old Parish-wages, and the rest of the
Priests, that Preached for Hire; and he Traveled up and down in many parts of
England, Preaching the Word of the Lord, and his Gospel freely, as he was
Commanded, who had Received it freely. And likewise his Brother Christopher
Tailor, who had been a Public Preacher to a People, was also Convinced, and
Preached Christ freely. And many Disputes Thomas had with the Priests and
Professors, and continued still in his Confession to God, and his Truth and
People, and what their Conditions were, and had been formerly. And so from that
time he continued in the Truth, and the Grace of God, and grew mightily in it,
and boldly Preached it, and saw where the Priests and Professors were, and by
whom they were made and sent, not of God; so that the Priests and Professors
grew in a Rage against him, and Persecuted him.

And he, having been a Lecturer at Richmond in Yorkshire, was made to go there,
and Turn his Back to the Priest, and put his Hands to both his Ears, and stop
them, as a Sign, how God had stopped his Ears unto their Sacrifice, and Service,
and Offering. And then after he was cast into a Prison at Appleby in
Westmoreland for the Truth's Sake, under a cruel Jailer, and a very bad Prison,
being a sad, smoky place, by the Smoke that came out of other Rooms, enough to
Choke him: But he continued Faithful in the Life and Power of the Lord, and the
Lord delivered him thence. And afterward he Traveled up and down, Preaching
to Priests and Professors, and warning all, both Small and Great, to Repentance
and Amendment of Life, turning many to the Lord. He was after a while cast into
Prison at York for Truth, and after some time the Lord there delivered him. And
so when he was at Liberty, he still continued Laboring in the Work and Service
of the Lord, Preaching the Everlasting Gospel, and Turning People from Darkness
to Light, and from the Power of Satan, to the Power of God. And also his Life
and Conversation Preached, being a Man of a Sober Life, and Sound Judgment, and
a good Understanding in the Truth. And after he had Traveled much up and down
in several parts of this Nation, he coming into Staffordshire, was there
Imprisoned and Premunired for refusing to Swear in Obedience to the Command of
Christ, who says, Swear not at all; and there he was kept Prisoner Ten Years
and a half in the Town of Stafford, under cruel Goalers; and a sore, tedious
Imprisonment he had, and great Sufferings by those Magistrates, as his Letters
will Testify. and a wearisom Imprisonment he had through the wicked Prisoners,
which burdened and grieved his Righteous Soul. And when he was at Liberty, and
Traveled up and down in the Power of the Lord, in the Lord's Service, being a
Man of a Tender Spirit and Conscience, sometimes he met with Bull-baiting,
Bear-baiting, Plays and Shows, and Cock-fightings; and Mountebanks, and Ringers
of Bells, etc. which burdened and grieved his Righteous Soul, that People
should spend their precious Time in Sports and Vanities, and such as professed
Christianity, which were more like the Heathen-Romans than Christians who was
made to Admonish such, and Reprove them (as his Letters Testify) and not to
spend their time so Vainly. The Lord was with him, and did assist him, who was
an Elder indeed, and Partaker of the Glory, that is to be Revealed; who sought
to Establish such as he Convinced (and were Convinced,) in the Truth and Gospel
the Power of God; who was Beloved of God, and all his Faithful People.

And many bad Prisons or Goals he was cast into for the Lord Jesus Christ, and
his Truth's Sake. And he had a Dispute with Doctor Owen at Oxford, and the very
Scholars could say, That Thomas was too hard for him; for the Lord, with his
Eternal Arm and Power, did Support him. And he was a Faithful, True, Upright
Man in the Lord's Truth, to the last, and turned many to the Lord Jesus Christ,
that they became Hearers and Followers of him who Speaks from Heaven: And he
loved the Government of Christ, and his Spiritual, Heavenly Order among his
People. And when he had fulfilled his Ministry, and finished his Course (who
was a harmless and blameless Man in his Conversation) he laid down his Head in
Peace, and Died in the Lord, and is Blessed, and his Works follow him.

Much might be writ of this Honest and Faithful Servant of God Thomas Taylor's
cruel Hardships and Sufferings, that he went through for Christ, and his
Truth's Sake. He finished his Days at Stafford with his Wife, in 1681. after he
had been an able Preacher of the Gospel from about 1652. And is at Rest with
the Lord: And

Blessed is he that Dies in the Lord, yea, says the Spirit, his Works follow
him.
Precious (...) in the sight of the Lord is the Death of all his Saints,
Psalm. 116.15.
George Fox.
Edmonton in Middlesex, the 24th of the First Month, 1681.
Christopher Taylor's TESTIMONY Concerning Thomas Tailor.
MY deceased Brother Tho. Tailor was a Man, who, in his tender Years, had a
Sense of Sin upon him, and saw a Necessity of coming and attaining to a State
of Righteousness and Faithfulness to God that he might please him; so that for
several Years he was exercised under the Spirit of Bondage and great Fears,
lest he should miss of Eternal Salvation, and so come to be a true Seeker and
Inquirer after the best Things; and the Lord was Good unto him in a preparative
Work, as I may say, before he came to know the Sabbath of Eternal Rest in
Christ Jesus.

And as Light and Life appeared and sprung up in its Measure in the Land of his
Nativity, the Lord in Mercy gave him a Share in it, and a Fear came upon his
Heart, to preserve him in a State of Integrity and Simplicity, which kept him
very Sober in his Conversation, and Restrained him from many Evils others fell
into; so that he was accounted by many in those days who were Honest-minded, to
be a Religious Conscientious young Man: And the Lord gave him Sights and
Openings of good Things at hand, and opened a Door of Hope unto him, that he
should see the Lord's Blessed Day of his Heavenly and Powerful Appearance, and,
with Cornelius, waited and longed for God's Kingdom, and Powerful Appearance
unto his Soul. And when that blessed Instrument in God's Hand, George Fox, came
into the North to preach and declare the Everlasting Gospel of Glad Tidings to
Mankind, and to such who were waiting to be delivered from the Bondage of Sin
and Unrighteousness, this Dear Man was glad and was convinced of the Truth,
which was demonstrated in the Evidence of God's Spirit and Holy Power unto him
and many others: So that the Light and Truth broke up in him, to the breaking
of his Heart before the Living God, and the making of his Soul tender in
Humility, and the Dispensation of the Spirit of true Judgment, and Burning
seized on his Inward Man, and pure Tremblings before the Lord seized upon him,
and Judgment did so effectually take place in the Operation of the Authority of
the Mighty God, that his Inward Man rejoiced, that now he was come to know one
of the Great Days of the Son of Man. And the Work of the Lord was begun in his
Heart, so that his Soul cried mightily to God for Judgment, to Judge and
Condemn for ever, all that was Contrary to the Word of his Pure Power. And the
Lord heard his true Cries, which himself, by his own Grace, had raised up in
him, and extended his Mercies to him, and fulfilled that Saying, A bruised Reed
shall be not break, and smoking Flax shall he not quench, until he send forth
Judgment to Victory. So Victory he came to know, and Deliverance to his Soul,
through the Exercise of Faith and Patience in the way of Righteousness; and the
Lord raised him up to be a living Witness to his Heavenly Power, and the
breaking forth of its Blessed Day of Light, and sent him forth to Preach the
Everlasting Gospel, and to turn many to Righteousness; and he became a Faithful
Labourer and Servant of Jesus Christ in his Harvest and Vineyard, and many are
his Witnesses, how Faithfully he served God, and how truly he cared for the
Flock of Jesus Christ, wherever he came, and labored in the Faith, as one
wholly given up to Spend and be Spent, in that Work the Lord had committed to
him. Many and Great were his Sufferings from Wicked Men who sometimes lay in
wait for him, to have taken away his Life; and tedious it would be to repeat
the Hardships he underwent, and great Sufferings he endured, by the Malicious
instruments of Satan. But the Lord delivered him through all the Scourgings,
Buffetings and Evil Treatments of Unreasonable Men. As to Imprisonment he
suffered much in several Prisons in this Nation, as at Appleby in Westmoreland,
at York, Leicester and Coventry, and last of all above ten Years Imprisonment
in Stafford, and was there Premunired because he could not Swear. He was a
Faithful Prisoner of Jesus Christ, and kept his Blessed Testimony over the
Heads of Wicked Brutish Savage and Unreasonable Men he met withal in his
Imprisonments. It is hard to utter what he passed through in those Evil Dens
amongst such Savage Beasts, but the Lord upheld him, blessed him, and delivered
him out of all; and Dear and Near he was unto his God who upheld him,
Everlasting Honor be unto his Name: Deeply am I affected when I read him in
the Sense of Life, how Safe the Lord kept him, so that the Course of his Life
was Eminently Exemplary, so Grave, Tender and Humble he was, and Self denying.
Well it is and will be for all who are so truly preserved to God as he was, I
am persuaded none can justly tax his Life and Conversation, or present a Spot
or Stain upon his Garment, whilst he lived, after he was called to the Lord's
Work and Service. Oh! have I said in my Heart, What Happiness is it to those
who are so kept and safely preserved, to Honor God and Preach his Gospel, as
well in Life and Conversation, as in Words and Doctrine.

And as to his Testimonies in Writing, which are here given forth to be read,
they are plain and easy to be understood by every unprejudiced Person that
reads them in Simplicity with the Light of Christ, there are various things
testified against the Sins and Evils of the Times, for he labored much for the
Nations and Peoples Good, that they might be kept out of Debauchery,
Wickednesses, Games, Sportings and Evils of all sorts, that if possible such
Evils as too much abounded in our Nation, might not have that Liberty, or
Pestilential Disposition, as to Leaven and beget People further from God, and
as a Leprosy to spread over the Nation. Also he was tender over the Lord's
Innocent People, lest they should fall on the right Hand or on the left, and so
lose their Habitations in the Truth. He was right spirited to discern the Wiles
of Satan, and to instruct and give Warning to such as might be misled into any
Evil Condition under the Pretense of Truth to fight against it: I believe he
was never known, since he preached the Everlasting Gospel committed to him, to
turn his Back of any Enemy, to give way to him, of what Size or Sort soever he
was, or how Subtle soever the Devil could make him, the Lord gave him a Sight
beyond the Subtlety of Satan, and when he was Spent in the Service the Lord had
called him unto, in a good old Age, he departed this Life, and finished his
Course with Joy and Everlasting Rejoicing, to the Praise and Glory of the
Everlasting God, who for ever is to be admired of all his Saints, honored and
magnified for ever and for ever more, World without End. Amen.

Christopher Tailor.

Thomas Taylor's TESTIMONY Concerning his FATHER.
A Short Testimony lives with me to bear for my Dear Father, Thomas Tailor,
that True and Faithful Servant of the Lord, who was Born near Skipton in
Yorkshire, and was brought up a Scholar and sent to the University, and in
process of time he came to be a National Minister, and so continued for some
Years; but in those Days he had not many Equals, for he was a Man of a Tender
Spirit, seeking after a further Attainment of the Knowledge of God and his Holy
Way, whom to know is Life Eternal, which the Lord in his own due time made
known unto him. After he had heard the Word of Life declared in the
Demonstration of God's Holy Spirit through his Faithful Messenger George Fox,
he was then evidently Convinced of the Blessed Truth, as it is in Jesus; he
never after turned his Back upon it; many Days and Nights of great Sorrow and
Anxiety of Spirit he underwent, until the Old Leaven was purged out by the
Spirit of Judgment, and then he became a Vessel of Honor fit for the Lord's
Service, and left his Benefice which he then had at Richmond in Yorkshire, not
consulting with Flesh and Blood what he should do for a Livelihood, but trusted
the Lord that he would provide for him and his Family, he having then a Wife
and Five small Children, whom he afterward, through the good Providence of God
lived to see brought up to be Men and Women: Now this Faithful Servant of the
Lord not distrusting of the Mercies of God, gave up freely whatsoever was Dear
and Near unto him, that the Lord required of him, that he might win Christ the
Lord, who had Visited him with his Dayspring from on high, and Ruled him by
his Grace, and gave unto him the Word of Life to declare unto the Sons and
Daughters of Men, Warning and Admonishing them to turn from their evil ways,
and to seek the Lord whilst he might be found; and great was his Labors and
Travels in those Days, being moved often to go into Marketplaces and Steeple
houses, to declare the Word of the Lord to the People, where he often met with
great Opposition and Sufferings from the Hands of Unreasonable Men, but the
Lord by his Mighty Power delivered him wonderfully out of their Hands, and many
long and tedious Imprisonments this good Man underwent in his Day, but with
great Patience and Contentedness of Mind, knowing it was for his bearing his
Testimony to the Lord's Blessed Truth, and not for evil-doing: And this I have
further to say for this Worthy and Honorable Servant of Christ, who loved not
his Life unto the Death, that he might serve the Lord in his Day, who was a
Faithful and True Minister of the Everlasting Gospel, and labored mightily in
Word and Doctrine, and many in this Nation were Convinced by that powerful Word
of God that run through him, and they have great Cause to Bless and Praise the
Name of the Lord, even as I may say on his behalf, for he was a Zealous Man for
the Truth in his Day, and was one of the Worthies in Israel, who went through
many Combats both with Professors and Profane; and, by the Assistance of
God's Holy Spirit, oftentimes put them to silence, and the Truth prevailed over
all, Blessed be the Name of the Lord for Ever.

And now not being willing to be too tedious to the Reader, else I could
mention many more things concerning my Dear Father, who was a Faithful Follower
of the Lamb wheresoever he led him, through good Report and bad Report, for he
valued nothing so much in this World as the Propagation of the Truth, for his
Life was hid with Christ in God, at whose Right Hand there is Joy and Rivers of
Pleasure, and that for Evermore. And a little before my Father's Departure out
of this World, as he lay upon his Sickbed, several Friends that came to Visit
him standing by him, he being very sensible to the last, spoke on this wife, I
am going to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God, and so departed
like a Lamb, and is gone to his Everlasting Rest, to receive that weighty Crown
of Glory that is laid up in store for all them that loves the Appearance of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and keeps their Garments unspotted of this World.

Thomas Tailor, Jun.
Middlesex, the 3d Day of the 3d Month called May, 1697.
A short TESTIMONY OF Hannah Tailor, Concerning her Dear Father Thomas Tailor.
THis I have to say, concerning this dear Servant of the Lord, who followed the
Lamb through many Tribulations, and washed his Garmens white in his Blood.

That he served the Lord with a perfect Heart, and that he was endued with the
Spirit of Wisdom and of Understanding in the Truth, which he did value above
all the World, and all the Preferments thereof: For he counted all as Dross and
Dung, in Comparison of that Pearl of Price, which he Labored for both Night
and Day.

Yea, for Sion's Sake he could not rest, and for Jerusalem's Sake he could not
hold his Peace.

Because the Spirit of the Lord was upon him, and he had Anointed him to be a
Preacher of Glad-Tidings to the House of God's Israel.

But he was a Reprover of the Ungodly, yea his Testimony was against all
Wickedness and Evildoers.

Yea, he was clad with Zeal, as with a Cloak, and with the Righteousness, which
God had put upon them, as with an Helmet.

Yea, he was a Valiant Soldier indeed, he fought a good Fight, he kept the
Faith; and from henceforth for him was laid up a Crown of Life, which at the
time appointed he did receive, with all the Redeemed of the Lord, who rest from
their Labor, and their Works follow them.

Hannah Tailor.

Robert Barrow's TESTIMONY Concerning Thomas Tailor.
HE being a Man with whom I was Acquainted and Conversant for the space of
Thirty Years, some part of our Acquaintance in the time of our Notion and
Outward Profession of Religion in the form thereof, but the most of our time
was after God in Mercy had opened our Understanding, and revealed his Son in us
by the Word of Life, and Spirit of Truth, to know Christ in us the Hope of
Glory.

He was Educated and Bred up at one of the Colleges of Oxford, and became a
Parish Preacher, and had a Place in the County of Westmoreland, yet in those
Days he was a Seeking Man, having Real Desires to understand the Things of God,
and the Mysteries of his Kingdom, and was a Man of an Honest Life, and Clean
Behavior, and in his Preaching and Judgment was more Refined than the rest of
his Neighboring Priests, and many of his Hearers were a People commended of
the Common Hireling Priests of the World, which Priests Nicknamed his Hearers
Roundheads and Puritans, and many of those so called came frequently from the
next Parish and Town of Kendall to hear him, amongst whom I was one; and he
used to let John Audland and Francis Howgill sometimes Preach in his Pulpit in
that Profession, before either he or they was clearly Convinced of or Come to
the Eternal Truth, and awakened by the Power of God.

And in as much as that while he was a Public Priest, he would not Baptize his
Children at the Font, nor Sign them with the Sign of the Cross, so that the
other Priests were offended at him, and upon some Discourse about it, they
agreed upon a Dispute to be held at Kendall Parish Steeple-house, where was a
very great Auditory, and Three Priests appeared against him to prove Baptizing
of Infants by Scripture, which they could not do, and he came over them all,
and some of the Hearers run up Kendall-street crying, Mr. Tailor has got the
Day! Mr. Tailor has got the Day! which Outcry grieved the Priests: This was in
the Year 1650.

And about Two Years after George Fox came into Westmoreland, and Preached the
Everlasting Gospel and Power of God, in the Demonstration of the Spirit of
Eternal Life, and many of those called Puritans was Convinced and Broken by the
Power of God.

And the said Thomas Tailor was almost left alone, it being a very great Cross
to become a Fool to the World, and lose his Benefit, his Wife being a pretty
high Woman, having Six young Children, and nothing else to live on, yet he gave
up all, laying aside all superfluity of Naughtiness, and received with Meekness
the Ingrafted Word, which is able to save the Soul, and sanctify throughout in
Body, Soul, and Spirit.

And shortly after Margaret his Wife was Convinced, and laid aside all her
finery of Apparel, and trusted Providence for a Livelihood for her self and
small Children, and became a very good Friend, and kept the Faith, and laid
down her Head in Peace in the Town of Stafford, a Year or more after her Dear
Husband Died, who Died and was Buried in the same Town of Stafford.

So Thomas Tailor having received the Truth of God in the Love of it, and
denied himself in all things for the sake of it, in a short time he had his
Mouth opened, by the Opening and Inspiration of the Word of Life, by which his
Soul was then quickened, and he concerned in the Motion of God, and Authority
of his Name, to describe the Darkness of the Parish Hirelings, so that they
rose up against him, and, by the Aid of the then Unbelieving Magistrates, got
him to Prison in Appleby Goal, where he grew in the Knowledge of God, and
Government of Christ Jesus, and after he was released out of Prison, Traveled
abroad, and was a Living Instrument in the Hand of the Lord to the Convincing
of many.

And he being a Man full of Zeal and Integrity, and being filled with the
Spirit, was always in Truth's Service, that when he had been going on the Road,
he commonly had a Word of Caution to Professor and Profane; and some of his
Old Hearers who did not receive Truth, I have seen him speak to them on the
Market Day in Kendall street, and sometime go to their Houses to exhort,
admonish, and reprove, as the Lord directed; or if he had been Traveling on
the Highway, and seeing Boys playing on the First Day in the Summertime, and
their Barents or Old People sitting besides them, he would Preach to them, so
that he was always concerned for God's Glory, and Truth's Praise, and
Propagating of his Glorious Gospel of Peace: He was a Man I loved when he was a
Priest, and more abundantly when he was a Gospel Preacher: He was a Comely Man
of Person, Fair and Ruddy, his Hair Gray before he Died, being of a Good Old
Age. I was at his Funeral in the Town of Stafford, where was diverse Hundreds of
People; and I was concerned in Testimony in the Lord's Power among them. And
though it had been a dark Persecuting Town, ^et diverse of the Priest's Hearers
being his Neighbors, whose Children he had Taught in the Prison, they did
there give their Testimonies, and said, He was a good Man, and his Words and
Counsel they believed should never be forgot; and further said, They had not
such another to Bury in the Town of Stafford.

And as he Lived Honestly, he Died Honorably; yea, even in the Lord, and his
good Works follows him, the Reward whereof he is in the Possession of a Life
that is Everlasting, out of the reach of his Adversaries.

Robert Barrow.
London, the 9th of the 11th Month, 1690/^.
William Fallowfield's TESTIMONY Concerning Thomas Tailor.
THis short Testimony is with me to give concerning Thomas Tailor, having good
knowledge of him that he was a Man of a harmless Life and Conversation, in
which he was a good Savor, his Conversation confirming his Doctrine, God had
undoubtedly endued him with Patience, and had committed to him a Dispensation
of the Gospel, which he was both a Preacher of, and a great Sufferer for; his
Patience in his Sufferings manifested his Christianity, he never sought his
Liberty by any indirect Means, but waited patiently till the Lord effected it,
and when at Liberty he Traveled much abroad, and Labored much for Truth's
Prosperity; God that called him, did in all things fit him for that Work in
which he employed him, and his Labor therein was very Effectual, both for the
Comforting and Establishing those already Convinced, as also for the Convincing
of many, as many Living Witnesses that he has left behind can Testify, also
the stopping of the Mouths of many Opposers: He had a Word of Counsel to the
Weak and Feeble, and a sharp Reprover of Disobedient, Loose-minded ones; he was
altogether Accomplished for that Work whereunto his Lord called him. And what
shall I say, but that I have Dear Unity with that Spirit that he was acted by,
and does see him in that which is Immutable; his Bow was always bent, and
retained its strength; his Arrows were sharp, and often pierced the
Uncircumcised; and as one well skilled, he mist not his Mark; the Churches
amongst whom he was Conversant wants him, for he was a Faithful Labourer in his
Day, he sought not his own, but others good, walking according to the Example
of him that called him, in which he was fervent and diligent, Preaching the
Word both in Season and out of Season; and though he be taken from us as to
Visibility, yet his Life and Memory lives with us, several sweet Expressions
came from him in the time of his Illness, and was very sweetly kept in that
time of his Weakness; he lay ill not long, though for a considerable time an
Indisposition of Body did attend him, yet his Love and Good Will was such to
the Truth, that, as one striving against his Distemper, he kept not his Chamber
long, but went to Meetings, and visited Friends, but at last it prevailed over
him, and brought him to his Bed, where he Died the 18th of the First Month
1681. in the Sixty-fifth Year of ^is Age: I had Dear Unity with him, and with
those good savoury Expressions that proceeded from him, which tended to Unity
and Concord amongst Friends, which, while he lived, he was Careful to preserve;
he had a great Delight in it, and labored much for it. In a word, he was a Man
of Peace; and as he Delighted in it, now is a Possessor of it, and of that Joy
that is Immutable, in which he lives with his God; a Possessor of that
Blessedness and Reward, which through the same Faith and Patience, we that are
yet behind, shall assuredly obtain as therein we keep, in the Lord's time. Many
good things he wrote in his Day; if thou read this Book, thou will perceive and
meet with good Exhortations in it, which will I hope tend to thy Strength and
Encouragement.

William Fallowfield.

A short TESTIMONY Concerning that Faithful Servant of the Lord Thomas Tailor,
Whose Memory is Blessed.
DEAR Tho Tailor he was a Man who loved the Truth with a sincere Mind, and
sought the Honor thereof, and not himself: He was ready at all times to speak
a word for God, as there was occasion to inform the Minds of People, to that
which would stand them in stead, when time here shall be no more: He was a very
good Instrument amongst us, and a blessed Example in his Conversation, which
did bespeak him to be the Servant of Christ Jesus: He loved the Prosperity of
Truth more than all other things whatsoever, and for that was he given up in
Soul, Body and Spirit, to serve the Lord and his Generation Faithfully,
Traveling from Place to Place for that end; and as he lived in the Truth, so
he finished his Testimony in the same. And though his Body be removed from us,
and gone to the Earth from whence it came, yet his Spirit lives amongst us, and
his Life shall never die. Truly I am not without a living Sense upon my Spirit,
what a Loss we have of him amongst us, (who was always ready to serve the
Truth, and the least in it,) and Sorrow is ready to seize upon me in the
Consideration thereof; yet when I consider, that it is according to the Will of
the Lord, I am therein well content, knowing that he has this Advantage of us
that are left behind (viz.) Is freed from Danger of falling into the Snares of
this World, which we are liable to whilst in this Body, Amen.

Mary Comberford.
The 26th of the First Month 1681.
Thomas Taylor's EPISTLES.
TO FRIENDS.
MY Dear Friends, and longed after in the Lord, whose Minds are turned in by
the Light of Jesus Christ from the Worlds Worships and Ways, in measure, to
wait upon God, that you may learn by the Teaching of his Spirit in you, how to
worship him in Spirit and Truth, who is the Fountain of all your Soul's
Happiness; prize his great Love to your Souls every one of you in particular,
and wait to receive the Law from his own Mouth, to the quickening and reviving
your Souls out of the Death, and for the daily watering and refreshing that
which lives of himself in you; for if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus
from the Dead dwell in you, he shall by that Spirit quicken your Mortal Bodies;
for all whose Hearts are purisied through the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ,
are in the Covenant of that Everlasting Love of the Father, which gives to all
that waith on him a full Possession of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light;
but Woe and Misery from the Lord to the Unclean in the Earth: And therefore mind
your Soul's Guide, which is pure Light of Jesus Christ, and be Faithful unto
the Lord in whatever he makes manifest in you to be his Will, and let not the
Worlds Frowns or Smiles cause you to draw back from the Truth in any thing,
which the Saints have so great Recompense of Reward in, but be simple, be pure,
be harmless, be innocent, be Lambs, and walk as Lights, amongst a Generation of
crooked and devouring Minds, and think not strange concerning any Trial, but
embrace the Cross, which is the Saints Rejoicing, and in Patience wait to see
the Fleshly Mind Crucified with it, which would have ease below God, and do all
things in the fear of God, and let not the Ear be open to the Enemy, but mind
that which shows you the strait way continually, and learn to love one another
more and more, for Love is of God, but none can love as Brethren of Christ, but
those that love God, and keep the Commandments; and as you follow Christ in the
way of his Cross and Sufferings, you will Delight in one another Fellowship;
but as any depart from the Light, and Iniquity abounds in any, the Love in that
Person waxes cold: So God Almighty Bless you with his Everlasting Mercy, to
set free your Minds from all your Sins, to run the way of his Holy
Commandments; so rests

Thomas Tailor.

TO FRIENDS AT Stickland-head.
DEAR and precious Friends of God, who into the Fellowship of the everlasting
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, the Light of the World, that
Lights every Man that comes into the World are called, and who have tasted
of that Heaventy Gift, and upon that true Bread do feed, Grace, Mercy and Peace
from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, be among you, and in you all,
every where, in every place, multiplied with the Increases of the eternal Power
of the Holy Spirit in all your Hearts, Amen. Thomas Tailor your Brother and
Companion in the Patience, Sufferings and Kingdom of Christ, unto you all
sends Greeting, and by the Spirit of the Lord God does hereby give you all to
understand, That it is the true Grace of God, and Power of Life, into which you
are called, and which you have received, and wherein you stand, and whereby you
are enlightened, and have been given to see the old dead way of Sin and
Formality to avoid it; and the good and living way of Truth and Righteousness
in Spirit, to embrace and follow it to the Praise of our Holy Heavenly Father
World without end: And this Grace of God that has thus brought Salvation to
us, and is our Teacher and Guide in the good Way, is the same that would teach
all, and would have all Men to be Saved; and (to that purpose) has appeared to
all Men, to leave all without Excuse. So Dear Hearts, all in the Light and
Power of this Pure Truth of our God made manifest in us, dwell, and therein let
every Soul bathe it self, and drink thereof abundantly, and therewith be
covered, that as an Helmet, Sword and Buckler, it may be unto all our Souls,
against all Ass^ults of the Enemy, and a sure Hiding Place from Storm and
Tempest. And the Lord God of Glory upon this Rock of Ages you all preserve,
that living Water and living Bread, even the Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ,
your Souls may here feed upon, and be perfectly nourished with it, up into the
Fullness of Life, and Perfection of Peace, for ever more: That so upon the Wing
of this living Spirit, and Power of our God in Christ, we may be all
continually carried, and under the Shadow thereof be warmed, and caused to grow
triumph and rejoice over all Weaknesses, Wants, and Powers of Darkness
whatsoever: For greater is he, Dear Hearts, that is in us and for us (the
glorious God) in Light and Righteousness, Ruling and Saving, than he that is in
the World, (the Power of Darkness) raging and destroying: And the World, with
its Strength, Joy and Glory, which deceives and is deceived, is to be trampled
upon and kept under foot, as a thing that perishes, and passes away with the
Fashion, Trouble and Remembrance of it: But the Glory of our God, and Goodness
of his Love, with the Power of his Truth, Fatness of his House, and Peace and
Fullness of his Christ and Kingdom endures for ever, dearly to be prized of us,
Praises, Praises, everlasting Praises to his Holy Glorious Arm of powerful Love
for evermore: And let every Creature in Heaven and Earth Praise him, and all
his wondrous Works in us and for us where these shall come, and in all his
redeemed Ones every where, glorify him in Pureness, in the Immortal Mansions
of Light and Love, that cannot change nor be taken from us for ever and ever.
So again, all Dear Hearts, Brethren and Sisters in the Covenant of Life,
Children and Servants of the Most High God, in the Life and Strength of God,
and his everlasting Light of Truth, manifest, dwell and walk in it indeed, grow
over all the World, and Powers of Darkness and Wickedness whatsoever, that the
Seed of the Promise inheriting, and the Seed of the Serpent and Transgression
cast out, you may indeed be true Witnesses of, to the Glory of the Lord God,
and Good of your precious Souls for ever: For he that Believes, and in the pure
Faith truly waits, has and knows the Witness in himself, (the Spirit) which he
has of God for his everlasting Comforter; but the Witness of God, and his
Face, is against him that does Evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile:
But the Love of God, and Glory to such as continue Faithful and Patient in the
Well doing bearing the Cross, and enduring it to the End. And Blessed are all
that keep the Commandments of Life, that they may witness a daily Access and
Freedom to the Tree of Life and Throne of Mercy, to feed thereon, and Live for
ever: For now is the Life arisen, and the true Light, that lights every Man
that comes into the World appeared; and of his Fullness have all we received,
even Grace for Grace; and his Commandments are not now to us Grievous, Praise
to his Name for ever: And our Rock is not like the World's Rock, even many of
themselves already being Judges; all Holy Praises to him that has not cast us
off for former Ignorance and Unbelief, but has in this his day of endless
Mercy stretched out his Arm of Power for us, and his Wing of Love over us, even
to everlasting Salvation. So be it.

Thomas Tailor.
From the place of my outward Bonds here at Appleby in Westmoreland, in the
first Month -- 1658.
Let this be Communicated amongst the Faithful of the Lord, in their Meetings
or otherwise, as Freedom within and Movings are.
TO FRIENDS IN Warwickshire and Staffordshire, etc.
MY Dear Friends in Christ Jesus, in Warwickshire, Staffordshire,
Worcestershire and Hereford-shire, with the parts thereunto adjoining, where
my service in the Lord has been, my tender Love in the Bowels of God our
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ does dearly Salute ye all, Praying in the
Spirit for you all, and for all Saints; that as ye have received the Truth of
God through the Persecutions and Reproaches of the present times, so you may
all with the abounding of the Grace, Mercy and Peace of the Everlasting God
amongst you, be found therein Continuing and Walking to the Glory of his Name
to the End, to the receiving of a full Reward, and finishing the Testimony of
Christ amongst you to all Joy and holy Rejoicing in the Spirit, and to the full
assurance of Faith in the sight of God our Father, Blessed for ever; who has
chosen us, and called us out of the Death in the Powerful Word of Truth to be
his Children and Servants, to bring forth Living Fruits of Righteousness to his
Glory; and to bear his Name through the daily Cross and Sufferings of his Son
before the People of the World, that he, in all things, may be Honored, who is
the Head Christ Jesus, and we his Members, through the Operation of his Power
in us, may be given daily to feel the Glory of his Love, which shed it self
abroad in every part of the Body, by Virtue of Union with him, and Fellowship
in the Eternal Spirit of Life. And this is the Portion of the Living Branches,
who Faithful in his Work of Faith are found, and abide, not looking back at the
Glory of Egypt, nor murmur at the hardness of the way, but pressing forward to
the Mark set before them in Righteousness, which is of God, where the man of
the Earth comes not, but is shut out for ever. So God Almighty your Hearts keep
clean, and your Understandings always open, to discern the things that differ,
and to choose the things of the Spirit of God, which will be to your Everlasting
Peace and Glory in the Kingdom of our Heavenly Father, to whom be all Glory and
Honor for ever, Amen.

And now, dear Friends, as for my outward Condition, you may hereby know, that
it was so ordered, that within two or three Days after I was got to my outward
Being in the edge of York shire, here was an Assizes to be at this Town, called
Appleby in Westmoreland, some Fourteen or Fifteen Miles North of it, whether I
had movings to come, not knowing my service in particular until I came there;
and therefore when I was come to the Town, after pretty Service in the Town
amongst the Country People, I was ordered to go into their Steeple-house, at
the time when the Sermon before the Judges, as they call it, was in hand, and
there waiting in the Will of God, and hearing unsound Doctrine delivered, I was
moved in Spirit Publicly upon a Seat amongst them all, immediately after the
Man had done to declare against it, for which they pu'lld me down, and to
fulfill the Scripture, hawled me out of their Synagogue; and as I passed in
their Hands amongst the Crowd, through the Grave-yard, and into the Streets, I
Sounded forth the Day of the Lord, and the Judgments of our God upon all the
Wicked; Head and Tail; and for that, together for what was done in the
Steeple-house, they further hawled me by Command, as they said, to the Prison,
the common Goal, where I remained till the next Day, and then afterward was
led amongst the Fettered Felons, as they call them, to their Judgment Seat
three several times: Thus was I numbered among the Trangsgressors, and made
contented to bear Christ's Reproach: And, though the Enemies did not only
prepare a Bill of Indictment against me, and by their Juries, as they call
them, Judged me guilty, as they call it, of a Disturbance; but also the Judge
whom God will Judge, did set Five Marks Fine upon me, and Imprisonment until I
should pay it; though indeed the Disturbance and Offense was on their part, for
they Disturbed me in the Precious Work of the Lord, and have kept me hitherto
in the Goal for my good Will toward them, the Lord forgive them, for they do
they know not what; and so, what in them lies, provoke the Wrath of God
against themselves. But Blessed be the Lord, though they have, and do use me as
is said; yet the Truth, both at the time of my Examination, and since, has had
Dominion over them, and the Friends of Truth in the Country, rather encouraged
to go on in the Truth, than any way daunted; the Glorious God of our Life and
Peace be Magnified: And so let all your Hearts, dear Friends in the Living
Power and Truth of our God, be Comforted and Established, even to you I Speak,
who know the goodness of the Cross of Christ, and submit willingly unto it in
all things, not to be Terrified at all by the Enemies endeavors, knowing that
through many Tribulations we must daily pass to the Kingdom. And this is a
Faithful Saying, that If we Suffer with Christ, we shall Reign with him: And
truly, Friends, the Love of God to my Soul has been so preciously, and is
daily Manifested in this Prison-Condition, that, if it could be Expressed, you
would never be much troubled after it, at the Sufferings for the Truths Sake.

So all in the Light Walk, and in the Power of Truth Dwell, that you may bring
forth Fruits in all things to the Living God, that in Peace you may lay down
your Heads, and with joy give in your Accounts to God continually, as Good and
Faithful Stewards and Servants in his Vineyard, and work whereunto you are
called: And the Lord God of Fullness supply what may seem wanting unto you, or
any of you, in regard of mine, or other Friends in the Ministry, our absence in
this time; knowing that we are not our own, but in the disposing of Him, who
Rules and Orders all according to the good Pleasure of His own Will, and that
for good in all things, to such as Fear Him, and in Spirit truly wait: For
truly, Friends, I had thoughts of being up amongst you again, may be before
this time, if this or the like had not hindered,

So Rests your dear Brother in the Faith and Service of the Gospel, Thomas
Tailor.

TO FRIENDS.
Dear Friends,
MY Tender Love in the Lord Jesus Christ does dearly salute you all, wishing
and desiring, even from the Bowels of our Tender Father's Love, all pure
Refreshings, and holy, powerful Strengthening unto all your Souls, that you may
be born up and carried on in the way of his pure Fear, and heavenly
Righteousness, which he has brought you into, and blessed you in, to do his
Will, and to glorify his Name for Ever, that our Souls may live together in
the sweet Unity of Love, Life and Peace with our God, out of the reach of the
present Evil World, to sound forth his holy Praises World without end, even in
and under our own Vine and Fig Tree Christ Jesus, where none can come to make
us afraid, and where the Troublers of Israel neither do nor ever shall come to
disturb our Happy Peace and Rest World without end: For, Dear Hearts, however
things seem to be in the outward, yet truly God is good to Israel, even such as
are of a broken, contrite, pure and clean Heart. So God Almighty you all keep
and preserve, even so in his pure Love for Ever, rests yours, all Dearly in the
Love of our Father.

Thomas Tailor.

A Loving and Seasonable Advice TO THE Children of Light From a BROTHER,
YE Children of the Most High, Begotten to God by the Word of his Power, which
lives and endures for Ever, and who through the Leadings of his Heavenly Hand
are brought through the Vail (that is the Flesh) into the Holiest of all, the
Banqueting House of the Father, where his Banner over you is Love all Day long,
and so are come to read your Names written in the Book of Life, which is a
Mystery hid from all the Wisdom of the World: I say unto you, O all ye Children
of the Heavenly Wisdom, keep your Habitation, keep in the Wisdom and Strength
of the Lord God Almighty your Father, and give not your holy Things to Dogs,
nor cast your Pearls before the Swine, for the Dogs will turn again and rent
you, and the Swine will tread the Pearl under their Feet. So be ye wise in the
dispensing and dealing out of your Heavenly Father's Treasures which he has
betrusted you withal, and made ye Stewards of for his Glory. O stand in awe,
and sin not in this weighty Matter; be not too lavish (amongst the wicked
Contenders) of your Master's Choice Goods, to get a Praise to your selves, but
be content to be as Fools before them, rather than to let the Babylonians into
your Treasures, yea, though they make a dissembling show of Love, lest a
Judgment follow, as it did to Hezekiah, of whom you may read, Isa. 39. Chapter
throughout. O my Friends, the Serpent is Subtle, and Herod is Cruel, and
therefore wait in the dread of the Lord God, to feel and savor the Serpent's
Voice in all; for no more will any that are guided by the Serpent receive Truth
in the Love of it, though it be never so plainly told them where it is, and
what it is in it self, and what it will be to those that receive it in Love; I
say no more will they love it, than Herod did the young Child, whom he only
enquired after that he might slay him. So we may daily see that the Contenders
and vain Enquirers of this present time are of Herod and the Serpent's Race,
who cannot endure to hear of the Birth of that Seed that is above every other
Seed, and is King of the true Jews in Spirit, and to whom all the Fleshly
Births, under what Name or Profession soever, must be subjected and bow: And as
the love of the Lord does indeed constrain us as freely and abundantly to
Communicate of our Heavenly Treasure to the pure in Heart, who hunger and
thirst after Righteousness, as we have received them, even so does the same
Love and the Wisdom thereof engage us to do as our Heavenly Father does, who
hides the things of his Kingdom from the Serpent's Seed, the Wise and Prudent
of the World, and so the Cross is the safe way; and so, as we stand in the
Cross, our preaching is to the Jew outward a stumbling block, and to the Greeks
foolishness, as in former Times, 1 Cor. 1. And so in all our Disputings and
Reasoning with the World about the Things of God's Kingdom, we must mind the
Cross, lest for want of a Hedge, the wild Boar of the Forest get in and hurt
the tender Plants of God. Friends, strive not in your Wills for Victory, but
wait in the Light to feel the Spiritual Weapon, the sharp Two-edged Sword of
the Spirit of God to cut down the Adversary. There came one to Christ and said,
Are there few that shall be saved? And he said, Strive thou to enter in at the
strait Gate; so his Answer was in the Cross, and he minded more the Edification
of the Man's Soul, than to please the busiebody's curious Mind; so we must
dwell in his Wisdom, and that will lead into Christ's Work. Another asked him,
What he must do to enter into Life? He answered, What read thou? So to such
as profess Scripture to be their Rule, or so to bring them to the Obedience and
Judgment of their Rule; and if they cannot believe Scripture, which they
acknowledge to be true, how can they believe our words whom they look upon to
be as Heretics and Deceivers. The Servant of God, says the Apostle, must not
strive, but in Meekness instructing them that oppose themselves to the Truth,
must seek to bring them to the Truth, that thereby they may be delivered out of
the Snares of Satan, whom their Ignorance are led Captive by him at his Will.
Now, the Servant of God in this weighty Matter may consider what manner of
Opposers these are, whether they stand in a lower or higher place of
wickedness; for some are wicked in a high measure, who will neither enter into
the Kingdom of God themselves, nor suffer others; as Elimas the Sorcerer, Acts
13.9, 10. who withstood Paul, seeking to draw the Deputy from the Faith. These
may be more severely reproved, as was thereby the Apostle, but still with this
Cantion, that all be done by the pure Sword of God's Spirit, and not by the
Wrath of Man; for the Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God: And such
Opposers as this had Christ to do withal, against whom he pronounced so many
Woes, declaring their wicked Root, by calling them Vipers and Serpents, and
Children of their Father the Devil, Mat. 23. throughout, and John 8.44. But to
others who are not so high and strong in their Wickedness, much Wisdom,
Tenderness and Patience must be used, that if God may at any time give them
Repentance, that from the Darkness to the Light of God they may be turned, as
Jude says in his Epistle, Ver. 22, 23. Of some have compassion, making a
difference, and others save with fear, pulling them out of the Fire, hating
even the Garments spotted by the Flesh. And all my Dear Friends in Christ
Jesus, who are at any time called forth by the Power of the Lord God, to
Encounter your Spiritual Adversaries, the Disputers of this World, who Goliath
like, are so wise and strong in their own Conceit, and have so armed themselves
with their Carnal Weapons, that they are not afraid to defy Israel, yea,
Israel's God: I say, keep in the Power of God, and trust not to Readiness Armor,
but wait to feel the little Stone cut out of the Mountain without hands, to hit
the Enemy in the Forehead, and to bruise his Head, and to strike at his Feet,
that the false Foundation whereon he stands may be removed, and so the Image
may fall into nothing at once: And in this great Business, (to wit, the Lord's
Controversy) my Friends, always mind your own Standing and Foundation, to keep
close to it, and not to be driven from it by any means, for the Enemy will seek
to draw you from your sure Ground, the measure of Life and Experienced Truth in
you, into vain Janglings and fruitless Disputes, to gratify their Corrupt
Minds, wherein is no Edification to the Soul, which the Servant of God must
wait in all things to edify; and though for our Work herein we may be
accounted as Fools by the World, who cannot judge but by the outward Appearance
of things, yet with God shall we be accepted, because Doers of his Will, and
our Jay in his Sight and Presence shall abide, and none shall take it from us,
as thus we abide in God's Will, Work and Covenant, who is over all Blessed for
Evermore.

And Friends, of Scorners we must beware, for their Root is Rottenness, and
their Ground Accursed, and the good Seed in them has no place to grow.

And of such as Professing Scripture, and Wisdom, and neither can nor will
believe that Christ lights every Man that comes into the World with
sufficient Grace or Light, though John says expressly, That in the Word (Christ
Jesus) was Life, and that Life is the Light of Men, and the Light of that Life
shines in Darkness, (to wit in Men) lighting every Man that comes into the
World; and that such as received him in that his Appearance, to them he gave
Power to become Sons of God, John the first Chapter. I say of these Unbelievers
beforementioned, it may be truly said they are Children of Darkness, and so
much is not to be said to them, but even to bring them to Christ's Light in
them, to know it, and learn of it, for till then they will never understand.

Also such Professors as have been long Reading Scripture, and have heard the
like Testimony of the Kingdom of God from the Spirit of God in his Servants in
these Days, and yet plead for outward Shadows and Sounds, and things that
perish with them, to be the Way and Means of the Kingdom, and are Ignorant of
the Mystery of it in Man, and so deny the Word and Power of God nigh in the
Heart; and yet in this their Darkness separate themselves in Profession from
others, thinking themselves to be something when indeed they are nothing; these
are to be turned away from and judged.

As also such as deny sinless Perfection, and so know not the Birth of God in
Man, but will plead for Sin, yea, in the Regenerate, during term of Life, as
though Christ were a Minister of Sin, and could make nothing perfect like the
weak Figures of the Law. Though the Scripture says expressly, The Birth of God
sins not, and he that abides in Christ sins not, and that Christ the better
Hope makes perfect. See Heb: 7.19. and 1 John 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

Now the Reason why the Law could make nothing perfect, was because it could
not take away Sin, and so that Perfection that is not sinless is no Perfection
at all; therefore it is said, That Christ by One-offering has perfected for
ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. And behold the Lamb of God that
takes away the Sin of the World. Amen.

TO FRIENDS That Abide in the Truth: AS ALSO To such as are gone from it.
FRIENDS all still mind the Light of God in you, even that which is not of this
World, but leads out of the World, and the Worships, Lusts, Customs, Fashions,
Traditions and Inventions thereof up to God from whom it comes, which Light was
preached unto you in the Beginning, and as your Minds were turned to it and
believed in it, true Judgment was executed upon the Man of Sin in you, and
through the Light wherein God's Saving Power is felt, you became more than
Conquerours over the World and the Mind thereof, and so you became Lovely in
the Eye of the Lord the Father of Light, and so he entered into Covenant with
you, and you became his, and he yours in Truth, Power and Righteousness, and
his Banner over you was Love, and is Love to all who have kept their first
Love, and have continued Faithful to his Witness, and have brought forth Fruits
to God; you have reaped Life, because you have lived in the Spirit, and walked
in the Spirit, and sown to the Spirit of Life which God has freely given you
to profit withal, and to be a Blessing unto you in the midst of the Earth: But
to such amongst you who came out of Egypt with you, and saw God's wonderful
Working at the Red Sea, and came through the Sea to the dry Land amongst the
Israclites of God, but are now fallen a Lusting in the Wilderness, and with
your Hearts turned back again into Egypt, and so cannot enter Rest with God's
People because of Unbelief; I say your Condition is Sad and greatly to be
lamented, and your Bondage is great, that after all your Experiences of
Pharoah's Oppression, and the Mourning of the Seed under his Yoke, and your
Knowledge of God's great Power for you at the Red Sea, that you should so soon
forget your own Miseries, yea, and the Mercies of God also, in delivering of
you so Miraculously from under the Enemies Power, that you would be, yea are,
in the Brick-kills again; What, Is it the Onyons and Garlic of Egypt, and
Fleshpots, that has bewitched you that you are so weary of the Lord's Yoke,
that the Heavenly Manna has no Savor to you? O Foolish People, How are you
bewitched that you should not love, nor like to follow the Truth, which has
wrought such Wonders for you: O the Treacherousness of your Unbelieving Hearts,
How have they deceived your selves, and all who looked for Good from you? How
Foolish and Unwise are you become, to sell the Hope of eternal good Things, for
that which you have seen to be nothing but mere Husks, Shadows and Vanity. But
now therefore, if it be possible, call in your Minds, consider in your Hearts,
what it is that the Lord requires of you, you cannot be Happy without God and
his Truth, but he can be eternally Happy and Glorious without you, he can cloth
himself, and wrap up himself in eternal Light, Life, Power, Fullness and
unspeakable Glory and Satisfaction without you, but you, without him, cannot
enjoy one dram of Light, Life, Comfort, Satisfaction, or any Good, for in
Christ the Light, God's Gift, all Fullness dwells, and out of him, or without
him, nothing but Emptiness, Misery, Disappointment and endless Woe; yea, Vanity
of Vanities, and a sore Travel as all things under the Sun, in your best
Condition, without Truth, whilst here; and endless Woe, without all Comfort,
when gone hence; Without me, says Christ, ye can do nothing: And so say I,
Without Christ ye are nothing, nor have nothing, but are mere Beggars,
Prodigals, Lost, Undone, Blind, Wretched and Naked Out casts, profitable for
nothing; so Return, Return, Renent, Repent, says my Soul, in the Light of the
Living to you all. So be it.

TO FRIENDS.
MY Dear Friends in Christ Jesus, who are Faithful in God's Covenant of Light
and Life, to dwell, grow and increase; yea, and to bring forth Fruit of
Righteousness to God's Glory abundantly, my true and tender Love salutes you
all, and my Spirit in God rejoices because of you all, and I cannot but
evermore, upon every remembrance of you, Praise, Laud and Magnify the great
and glorious Name of our Heavenly Father, for his tender Love and tender Mercy
to you all, and for the Power of his Love in Christ, whereby he has reached
help to your Souls in the needful time, when all help of Creatures was at an
end; and has raised you up from the Dead, to be his living Witnesses in the
Day of his Love to Israel, and has chosen you for his People, and to bear the
Name of Sons and Daughters, Servants and Handmaids in his House, to do his
Service, and to bear his Name in Righteousness before the Children of Men. O my
Soul is even filled with the sweet heavenly Virtue of this Love of God upon
every Remembrance of you, even of you all, and every Member of the Holy Body of
Jesus Christ in every place: For who can express the Beauty of your Life, and
Fullness of your Treasure which you possess in his Love? O Blessed be the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has chosen us, and set his pure Love
upon us, whereby it comes to pass, that we are more than Conquerors over all
the things of Darkness, and Powers of Evil, that would separate us from his
pure Love. O Glory, Glory to his great Name, who by his pure Love has begotten
us again from the Dead, into the Image of his living, pure and holy Nature of
Love, to love one another, and to reach forth pure Love in Spirit and Truth
unto all; yea, unto Enemies, for at the Birth of Jesus this was sounded forth
by the Heavenly, even Peace on Earth, Good Will to Men. So that when Men have
us, and speak Evil of us, we know they have no Cause for it; for if they know
our Love and good Will to them, they would love us, and much more the Father of
our precious Life, by whom we are begotten into such a pure heavenly Love, as
even labors and travels night and day how we may fulfill that great Service of
Love, and continual Duty of good Will, that we owe to the whole Creation of
God: For Oh how great is the Bondage of a great part of it, as yet being so
burdened with the weight of Corruption that lies upon it, that it ever cries
unto God by reason of Oppression, and waits for the Manifestation and Enjoyment
of the pure and holy Liberty of the Sons of God, wherein God alone may be
glorified, and the Creature set free to run in the ways of his Commandments
with Joy, and the wicked one may be put under into the Pit of everlasting Woe,
there to remain for ever. So my Dear Friends and Fellow-Citizens of the New and
Heavenly Jerusalem, ye True and Faithful Seed and Servants of the everliving
and true God, do you rejoice and lift up your Heads, for from the eternal
Fountain of Life and Love is your Salvation come, your Portion is upon a Fat
and Fruitful Land, not as Egypt watered by Mortal Man, but as the Promised Land
watered from Heaven, and made to excel all Lands in Goodness and Fruitfulness;
yea, I know you Faithful ones are able to read in the Mystery where the
Fullness of all is enjoyed, and all Barrenness and Disappointment done away. So
my Dear Fellow Members in the Heavenly Body and Faithful Branches of the living
Vine, do you rejoice and lift up your tender Souls in God's Name, and in his
living Mercies at all times; trust, trust not in any thing, but in the Name and
merciful Power of the ever-living God our tender Father, and in this Faith will
be your Victory in all things; by this Faith will your Hearts be kept clean to
God alone, out of all Defilements and Worldly Intanglements whatsoever; yea,
and by this Faith will you be kept so continually a top of all Powers of
Darkness and Spiritual Wickedness whatsoever, that in Freedom of Mind, and Joy
of Heart, you may offer your selves to your Maker and Redeemer as a reasonable
Service, and pure Offering of Obedience to his Praise, as is due for ever and
ever.

So my Beloved, in God's pure and precious Truth, I am your Brother and
Fellow-Sufferer for the Elections sake, well satisfied in this through the
unerring Spirit, that as we abide Faithful to God in our Conditions, we shall
never want the Support, Joy and Comfort, and daily Supply of his abundant Love,
and all-sufficient Grace; so that we need not fear the Terrors of the Night,
nor noysom Plagues that destroys at Noonday, nor the Doing of Mortal Men,
because the Lord is become our sure and safe Hiding Place, and Castle of
Defense, as he was to our Brethren in the Faith in all foregoing Ages. And
what if they say, That we are a Poor Deceived and Contemptible People, it
matters not, seeing we have God's certain Truth in us, the Foundation of our
Building, and God's gracious Acceptance of us in Christ for our Strength and
Glory? And what if Men's Decrees be against the Liberty of our Holy and
Spiritual Worship? We must not be dismayed for such things, for so it was in
the days of his Flesh, who said, The Servant is not greater than his Lord; and
he endured such Contradictions against himself for our sakes; and he beheld his
Father's Power, and in it stood to the overcoming of all Enemies; and so has
given a good Example what to do in Times of Trouble, and whither to go in Times
of Need; for he that has promised is near to all that fly to him for Succor
who both has, and daily does make fully manifest his Kindness and Faithfulness
in us, and for us, that we might be to him a People, and he to us a God for
evermore. So into the Arms of his eternal Power, and Bowels of everlasting
Love, I commend you all, to be kept, comforted and carried over all that would
hurt you, or hinder you from walking in his good Way; and rests your dear and
tender loving Brother, in the Patience and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, as
Bound, yet Free, Glory to his Name everlasting. So be it, even Amen,
Hallelujah, Praise the Lord, says my Spirit, in the Unity of your precious
Life, which we have in his Love.

Thomas Tailor.

TO Israel's Babes.
THis, this shall be the Everlasting Song
Of Israel 's Babes, who Lilly like among
The pleasant Meadows grow; and, as the Rose,
Send forth their sweetest Smells, and do repose
Their tender Heads, on their dear Mothers Knee,
The new Jerusalem for ever free:
Free from all Sin and Sorrow; yea from all
That does the Soul Imbondage or Inthral;
As Fears, and Cares, and Earthly-mindedness,
Which, as an Heritage, Men's Hearts possess;
But Zion's Birth is free, and kept in Peace,
Abiding in the Fathers House Increase:
And fitting under his pure shaddowing Love,
Even all day long whilst he their Faith does prove,
They are in safety kept within the Just,
Not lending any Ear to the earthly Lust:
They knowing that in Heaven is a surer Rest,
Reserved for them, ay to be possessed. Hallelujah.
Praise the Lord, give thanks unto his Name, say ye ( O Holy Seed of Israel)
The Lord God Almighty (our Father) is Good, and his Mercies Everlasting, and
his Love unto us as Endless as Himself, who is the same, yesterday, to day, and
for ever, over all Blessed for evermore.

But Howlings, Misery, Woe will be the cup
Of all the Earth, who in their minds are up,
Exalted over that that is meek in the Heart,
And on it trampling; these must ever smart:
These, these are they, that Heavens fierce Wrath must feel,
These must be shivered with a Rod of Steel.
Will God Almighty ever wink at such?
That of his Glory due, him so much grutch:
And will not suffer him the Earth to Inherit,
Which by his Sufferings, as his right, did Merit.
And through his Cross and Death became right Heir
Of every Substance, Jewel, Precious, Rare;
Above the Heaven, and in the Earth below,
And in the deeps that in great Measure flow,
He Is Heir Apparent of all things, and Chief,
Sure holden and possessed in the Saints Belief.
Though the Wick^d and Ungodly will not yield,
That he should Rule, or his pure Scepter Wield
As Lord and King, yet sure his Name shall spread
From East to West, from North to South with dread.
He shall arise as Lions to the prey:
He shall proceed, in his Might, and will not stay;
Or stop his Work, for all the flattering Cries,
Of Hypocrites, his wicked Enemies.
He will not then regard their feigned Voice,
Who have not, nor yet will make Moses Choice;
But, with the Esaus of the World, choose rather
In The loss of all that is Heavenly, the Earth to gather.
And say within themselves, Give, give, these things,
That we may have our Lusts, and reign as Kings,
In this time present which with Eye we see;
For we believe not, what shall after be:
We like not such harsh Doctrine, as does tell,
Of Abraham's Bosom, and the Gluttons Hell:
For Pastimes, Pleasures, and such Recreations
As feed our Senses, with Prevarications,
Of all sorts, sizes, manner, form and fashion
That can be found in City, Town or Nation,
Is our vain Minds Desire and Hearts Delight;
Here, here is the Crown, for which we Strive and Fight;
For which both Night and Day, we Ward and Watch,
And thus at Shadows, all the World does Catch.
Even all the World, Professors and Profane,
Who that pure thing (Christ Light) within Disdain*
And for the Light, put Letters, Sounds and Forms;
And for the Substance, Shadows Over-worn.
In this they all agree to set at naught,
The living Virtue, by which Saints are taught,
And so at large, the wicked Mind is left
In Vnbeli^vers, to make up by theft,
And stealth in their outside and vain Profession,
What they of Truth do want in true Possession.
But Babes of Zion feed upon that Bread,
The real Substance, Jesus Christ, their Head,
Which came from Heaven, and thither has them led
With him to rest, in his Eternal B^d.
They feed upon him, in the Mystery,
Hid from the Raven and the Vulters Eye:
For where the Body is, the Saints Resort,
And there are kept secure, as in a Fort
Of Brass or Iron, where the Table's Ready,
All day full fraught with Dainties for the Needy:
Yea, for the Needy and the Hungry Soul,
To take and freely Feed, without Control.
When false, profane Professors, in the double Mind,
Much seem and dream they Eat, but all is but Air and Wind.
Of Prayers.
WHen, as a tuned Instrument, my Mind is in the Lord
Well set, and with his Power Assist, O then I can Record
The mighty Acts and wonders great of him that Rules on High,
And of his great Magnificence, from whom the Heavens do fly,
And Earth also, when he is pleased to make his Power known
In Mercies and in Judgments deep, for such as are his own;
When ^^e an Arm of Help does reach unto the needy Soul,
When he the daring Power of the Enemy does Control,
O then, I say, what Treasure can before his Presence stand,
Before his Glorious Face, who is the Lord of Sea and Land:
Where Kings and Princes are as Dust, and nothing in his sight,
Yea all who in their carnal Minds against his Glory fight:
Yet he does make his Residence with every humble Heart,
That loves his Name, and from his Truth by no means can depart.
His presence is their perfect stay; and they in him can say,
He is our Rock that nothing shall our Spirits much dismay:
Yea, though our Troubles for a Night, or so, upon us lie,
Yet in the Morning we are Saved, as we to him did cry. So be it.
Concerning ZION.
IF I Jerusalem forget, a People saved from Pride,
Then let my Skilful Hand forget the warbling Harp to guide:
And if Mount Zion in my Joy I do not still set up,
Then let my Tongue cleave to my Mouth, and taste of Sorrows Cup. (said David.
So shall the Seed of David now, in Heart and Pen endeavor,
The Praise of Zion to Record, and of her God for ever:
And Blessed are those Men on Earth, that with us now take part,
In this our Work of Innocence, when all the rest must smart:
For how can Israel 's Kingdom be the Portion of such Wights,
As will not have God's Truth to Reign, but still against it Fights.
The Life more than Clothes and Meat.
O Lord God, my Life is in thy Service, Meat's for the Belly, and the Belly for
Meats, but God will destroy both i^ and them; so Clothes for the Back, and the
Back for Clothes, but God will destroy both it and them; and so for other
things of the World, they serve but only for Worldly and Temporal Necessities;
but now Man, made in the Image of God, breaths after a more Excellent Good than
this World has to give; for in the Soul, which is Mortal, there abides an
Immortal Desire, and from that an Immortal Cry after that Holy and Heavenly
Food of Life, which is in the full Hand of God to give, and so when that is
received and digested in the pure Mind, then goes forth Praises and
Thanksgivings to the Lord, the pure and fall Fountain of all Everlasting and
Eternal good Things; and so happy they who come through the Obedience of the
Truth, to have their Hearts seasoned with this Heavenly Salt of the Word of
God, the Living Word which abides for Ever; For in the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was with God, and that Word was God, and is the Lise and Light of
Man; and all places in Man, which is not filled with this Living Light, is full
of Darkness; and the dark places of the Earth are full of the Habitations of
Unrighteousness and Cruelty, and there is engendered all the Ravenous Birds and
Beasts of Prey, all the fiery stinging Serpents, and every Venomous Thing which
annoys, hurts and disquiets the Living Plant which God has planted in the
Paradise of his Pleasure, and seeks to devour the Man-child as soon as it is
Born, but into the Arms of the Eternal Power of Life is the Babe taken, and by
the Choicest Angel is the Plant watered and defended, and so the wicked is
disappointed of his Prey, and therefore does he retreat into his Den of
Darkness, gnawing his Tongue because of his Plagues. So be it.

O Lord our Strength and mighty Joy,
How Glorious is thy Name within our Hearts:
We cannot cease to Preach thy Truth,
Though for it, at us Satan shoot his Darts.
Though Hell be broken loose upon the Earth,
To vent its Malice for a little time,
And make the Righteous Man his Butt to shoot at,
Yet God will Plague them for their mighty Crime.
The greatness of their Evil passes thought,
Their Sins in number far exceeds the Sand;
And therefore will the Lord against them plead,
With all his Judgments in his Wrathful Hand.
And though great Trials be to try the Faith
Of pure and upright hearted People now;
Yet that pure holy Power will us defend,
Who makes the very Devils fear and bow.
To the Unsatiable Devourers of Strong Drink.
WHat Hellish Spark is that, in your Inflamed Breast,
Which neither suffer's God nor Man to Rest;
But does disorder even the whole Creation,
Bringing God's Judgments thick on every Nation.
Ye will not hear nor learn the thing that is good,
But eat and drink up Sin your daily Food.
Be filthy still, ye filthy Ones, and when
Your Measure is full, your dreadful Doom comes then.
Thomas Tailor.
HE that to Glory would attain,
And many Happy Days would see,
His Tongue from Evil must refrain,
And eke his Heart from Sin keep free.
He must both watch and ward in Heart,
And persevere in that good deed,
Lest Satan wound him with his Dart,
As he does all that take not heed.
Such must not promise to themselves
Great things on Earth, as Sinners do,
Who build, and plant, and root therein,
As from it they would never go.
But he that to the Heavens would come,
To dwell in that which never fades,
Must not in the World set up his Rest,
Nor shelter under Mortal shades.
TO MY Dear Friends every where.
O My Friends, and Faithful to God, whose Hearts are Tender and Zealous after
the Lord and his Honor in this day, of the Trial of our most precious Faith,
Grace, Mercy and Power from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, be
abundantly multiplied in you, and the Blessed Arm of his Power support you, and
carry you through all the present and future Trials for the Gospels sake on
Earth; for us has the Lord drawn out of the many Waters, and set our Feet upon
the sure Rock of Ages, the tried Foundation, and brought our Souls into the
unmovable Rest, Glory to his Name for ever, that we might be to his Praise,
and Glory, and Honor for ever; that he might dwell in us, and we in him, for
ever; and so be safe for ever under his Wing, where the Wicked cannot come
because of Unbelief, and that great Violence whereby they have stopped the way of
all good from their Souls. But now Dear Hearts, and Beloved in the Lord, you
who have loved the Light, and received the Power which makes all manifest, and
cleanses from all Sin, you are Blessed, even the Blessed of the Lord God of
Heaven and Earth, who loves your Souls with a perfect Love, and fills your
Hearts day by day with his Infinite Goodness: Therefore, as a Recompense for
all his Mercies, give up your selves to his Holy Will in all things, and love
the Lord the same, our everlasting God and Father, with all your Hearts, Souls,
Mind and Strength, and he will do abundantly for you and us all, even his whole
Israel in every place, beyond all that we can ask or think: Look not out at the
World, nor their Love nor Hatred, for they are Men and not Gods; but keep in
the Sanctuary of God, the Spirit of Christ, and there is Safety; with him is
the Well of Life, which refreshes our Souls continually, and makes all things
easy and possible to us through Faith in his Name and Patience. So let
Patience have its perfect Work, for we have daily need of it, that we may
continually see and feel the Love of the Lord in the Land of the Living, and
not be clouded with the Spirit of this World, which gendreth to Bondage in any
thing: For if Lot's Wife look back, she is presently turned into a Pillar of
Salt; and if the Israelite turn back but in his Heart into Egypt, he is snared
in Unbelief. So, my Dear Friends, look up to the Lord in Spirit and Truth, and
wait continually to feel his living Presence in you, to keep you open and
single to him, that of the powerful Spirit of his Holiness, which slays the
Sin, and quickens the Soul to God, you may be Witnesses, and so come to possess
the Immortal Kingdom, where Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost only
reigns. So, with the Dear Salvation of my Love unto you all, I commend you to
the Lord, to bless, keep and water with his Goodness continually to his Glory,
who only is Holy, and gives us freely every good thing to enjoy both for Soul
and Body, who is near to the Righteous in every Necessity, to Help and Save to
the uttermost: To whom be Glory and Immortal Praise: Even so rests with you, in
the full Assurance of his Tender Mercies in Christ Jesus, your Dear Brother,

Thomas Tailor.

TO FRIENDS.
TO the Called and Chosen of God, the Dear Vessels of Life and Glory in all the
Earth, does the Tender Salutation of me your Dear Brother reach, who as a
feeling Member in the Holy Body of the Lord Jesus, do daily partake with you of
the Blessed Joys of Life Eternal, and of the present Sufferings for the same,
who therefore cannot but continually through the pure Love and Life's Motion
breathe out amongst you the Happy state of our Innocent Souls, because of
Truth, upon every Occasion, to the stirring up and refreshing of the tender
good thing, the Heavenly Mind in all, to the joint Praising, Blessing and
Magnifying of the Lord's great Name, for his abundant kindness toward every
Particular Faithful Ones for Ever and Ever; for he is good to Israel
unspeakably, unalterably true to them for Ever. And now, Dear Friends, seeing
God has been so gracious to us above all the People of the Earth, as to set
his Name upon us in Righteousness, to the Amazement and Astonishment of many,
and has caused our Rod that was dry (even as others) to flourish and bear
Fruits in the midst of the Earth, to the Praise of his Living Power, as a Token
of his Acceptance and Choice: And seeing God has so graciously performed his
Promises to us his Seed, made to his Israel of Old, in bringing up our Souls
from Death, and our Life from the devouring Sword, and has unloosed our
Tongues to speak of his Wonders in the great Congregation; why shall we not
then speak good of this the Name of our God, the true Everliving God, in
Comparison of whom the whole World, with their many Idols, Gods and Lords are
nothing? We may not be hindered by the Adversary from breathing forth our pure
Life given us of God for his Glory, in a continual mention of his Holiness; for
if we should be silent, the very Stones would do it; for now is the Lord Jesus
arisen indeed, and ascended far above all Heavens, Principalities, Powers,
Names, and Greatnesses whatsoever, and come again to our Spirits, according to
his Blessed Promise, that of his unspeakable Fullness we might all partake in
abundance, to the causing of our Cup to overflow with all Holy and Heavenly
Consolations and Praises, for the perfect Salvation of our God, to the watering
of every tender holy Plant in Israel, that waits for the same. For as the Dew
to the tender Herbs; so is thy Blessing, O Immanuel, to the Garden of thy own
planting thy Beloved Plants, that waits for thee amongst whom the pourings
forth of thy Name is as sweet Ointment: And Blessed are all that wait for thee,
who have enclosed thy Beloved People in the Arms of thy own Almightiness, and
filled them with thy own Blessed Kingdom and Righteousness, who hungered after
thee, even so, Father of Life, be it for Evermore to thy own unspeakable Glory,
who alone art worthy.

So now, Dear Friends, into the Unity of the Holy Life, Power and Spirit of our
Lord Jesus Christ, let every Soul of us gather and retire it self, to be
nourished up thereby, and preserved to a daily and perfect Victory over all
Temptations and Provocations whatsoever, that upon the very Head of the Serpent
we may tread! and let us not look at the seen things, for therein lies the
Wiles and Temptations, but let us eye and feel the Blessed Invisible Life, and
Powerful Heavenly Spirit of our God, to carry us through and over all to his
Glory, who has said, That he will never leave nor forsake his tender breathing
Seed that waits on him; so, Blessed are all that are found in this his
Covenant, and follow him as Dear Children, and Obedient Servants in the sure
and safe way of the daily Cross and Self-denial, to a perfect mortifying and
subduing of the fleshly evil part, and a full Resurrection of the spiritual
over it, so rests your Dear Brother in the Unity of the same Blessed, Living,
Victorious Faith.

Thomas Tailor.
From the Place of my Confinement for the Everliving Testimony of Jesus, in the
Fifth Month 1664.
TO Friends in LONDON.
OYE my Dear Friends, and Beloved of the Lord, in the City of London, my Love
in the Lord: Our Life is drawn out at this time, to salute you with an Epistle
of pure and unfeigned Love, because you are Dear and near unto my very Heart,
in the feeling Life which has given us the Blessed Victory over all Sin, and
Works and Words of Death, to serve the Will of our Heavenly Father with all
Fervency and Perseverance in our Day, Age and Generation, to the Praise and
Glory of his Grace in Jesus Christ our Lord, whom our Souls can never cease to
love, because the Savor of his good Ointment is ever fresh upon our Souls, and
his Law of Life it is that we daily seel to have set us free, and to keep us
free from the Law of Sin and Death; Praised be the God of our Salvation for his
unspeakable Gift, though the Enemy of one hand say, we are no Christians; and
on the other hand, call us a Form; and bark at our Holy Unity, and Blessed
Agreement in the ever-living Truth, and exercise of it, for the good one of
another, and Service of all: Yet over all these unclean and unrighteous
Spirits, and all others of like nature, we are more than Conquerors, and, like
a Rock, unmovable, which the Enemy may split himself with dashing against: Yet
Praised be the Lord our Rock stands sure, for it is Holy, Pure and Everlasting,
and the Gates of Hell shall never be able in the least to prevail against it
nor us, as we upon it continue, rooted and grounded in the Love of God, and one
of another, in his Seed, where all the Promises of Life and Salvation are, Yea
and Amen for ever. And so you, my Dear Friends, and much longed after in the
Lord, when I consider the many Trials, and great Contradiction of Sinners of
all sorts, which for the Love and Zeal of our Holy Lord God, and his
unchangeable Truth, you have endured from the beginning, my Heart is greatly
affected with the Glory, and cannot but Praise the Lord for you, that you are
even become as a Bullwark of his Truth, in the midst of a crooked, degenerate
and Backsliding Nation, who though like Sampson's Foxes, they look with Faces
several ways, yet in Heart are one, every one with Firebrands and Stings in
their Tails like Scorpions, to do Mischief, by stirring up the bad part in
People, against the Simplicity of the Gospel of Love, and Life of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which would gather, unite and heal all of all their Soul-Maladies
for ever, if they did not make themselves unworthy of. But O how the Truth to
you does still abide in its Luster and Glory without Alteration, knowing that
you, as we your Brethren in the same every where, are set for the Defense of
the Gospel; The Lord has set his Love upon us, and it is from Everlasting to
Everlasting; and therefore in his Name and perfect Goodness may we safely
trust; and Storms will be over, and his unspeakable Peace and Joy, which is
with us, and has so unspeakably refreshed us, shall be with us for ever: We
need not go to the Egyptians for help, as the Wicked do, for in the God of
Israel is our Hope and Help, who keeps Mercy and Covenant with his, Dear
People, for ever and ever. And when I also consider how the Samballat and
Tobias of this Age say on one hand, What will these silly returning Captives
do? And on the other, when I see the little Horn, with a Countenance more stout
than his Fellows, in his very Words of Reproach, and Work of Scattering, tell
of your Scattering whom God has gathered, I cannot but say, O Lord Bless thy
People (whom thou have so powerfully delivered) and govern and keep their
Hearts in perfect Peace with thee, through all and over all, even as thou do
this day, for ever and ever, that many may come to the Brightness of our day,
and Glory of our Kingdom, which is not of this World, but of God eternal our
Father, who is over all Blessed for ever. So under the Shadow of his
ever-blessed Wing, my Dear Brethren and Sisters dwell, and here is the true
Munition of Rocks, where the Living Bread is sure, and the Living Waters never
fail, rests your Dear Brother in the Patience and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ, at present in outward Bonds for the Testimony of his Truth in this
place.

Thomas Tailor.
Stafford, 21st of the 12th Month 1667.
And I desire that this may be communicated, as the Nature of it requires, to
the whole Flock of God in and about the City, in the precious Wisdom of God,
with Bowels of Love unto you all. So be it.
TO Friends of SUDBURY Side.
DEar Friends, and Well-beloved in the Lord, Brethren and Sisters in the Holy
Covenant of his Everlasting Love, my very Heart and Soul does dearly salute you
all, and often do I remember you in the Dearest Affections of unfeigned Love as
is meet, knowing your Love and Tenderness to God's Truth, and me your Dear
Friend and Brother for the Truth's sake from the beginning, and how the Lord of
his Infinite Love in Christ Jesus, has separated us from the present evil
World for himself, to hold forth his Virtues before the Children of Men, in a
pure Life, and so to feed at his Table as the Faithful do in the unspeakable
Fellowship of his Eternal Spirit of Life and Peace, whereby, O how often; yea,
how continually he has, and daily does refresh, feed, and strengthen our pure
Minds as in the simplicity of our Hearts together or asunder (as to the
outward) we have and do daily wait upon him, and in his Light are staid upon
his Power in our inward Man, to the Praise of his Glory, which makes us that we
cannot but love him, and one another in and for him, and so we cannot but
remember him, and one another; and so pray for and rejoice in one another's
welfare, as living Members of his Heavenly Body, who is over all, God Blessed
for Ever, who is the Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, and therefore we shall
not want nor miscarry, as we abide in his Love, and this we know, Dear Hearts,
that as we keep his Commandments, we do abide in his Love, and are at Rest in
his Power. Many from the Letter may say, God is their Shepherd, or so, and
therefore they shall not want; but truly Friends, there is none can say this in
Truth, but who are led by him, and subject to him in Heart and Life; they are
the Sheep of Christ who hear his Voice, and follow him in the Regeneration, not
losing their first Love, but growing and continuing in it to the end,
perfecting Holiness in the fear of God, and so working out their Salvation with
fear and trembling, knowing it is God of his own good pleasure that works in
us to will and to do. O Friends, how true we find it, in God's Light, that it
is not of him that wills nor runs, but of the Mercifulness of our God in
Christ Jesus to them that believe, and in pure Holiness and Simplicity of
Heart, wait upon him at all times; and this puts to silence all Flesh, and
keeps down all Boasting and fleshly Confidence and Conceitedness, to the
unspeakable Glory of the Pure, Eternal, Holy Name of the Living God, our
Father, who si^s upon the Throne, and is worthy of all Honor, the Righteous
are bold as a Lion, and through the help of our God we shall for ever leap over
all the Walls of Opposition, that the Enemy makes to hinder us in our way, for
it is the Fearful, Unbelieving and Disobedient in Heart that cannot enter, that
cannot come into and sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of
God this Day. But Praises to the Lord in the height of Heaven for all his
unspeakable Goodness, who over all gives us the Victory by Jesus Christ our
Lord, to whom be Glory Everlasting, and Kingdom for Evermore. And, so Dear
Friends, into the Arms of the Lord's unspeakable Love committing you all, rests
your Dearly Loving in the Truth of God a Friend and Brother,

Thomas Tailor.
Also Friends, you may know that my Wife has her very Dear and Tender Love
remembered unto you all, and is dearly affected upon every remembrance of you,
considering what sweet Refreshment she has sound amongst you in your Holy
Assemblies, where the Presence of the Lord has been abundantly witnessed by
many, and I hope Ever will be, meeting together in his Fear to wait upon him,
as you do. And as for our Condition here, praised be the Lord it is well; for
though my Bonds for the Gospel in this Place be yet continued, yet some little
Liberty of being with my Wife and Family sometimes, at her Hired House in this
Town, through the Tender Mercy of our God, is granted me; and so we are made
content, and all is good in the Good Will of God, and so our Souls are at rest
in his Love, where we pray that yours, and all the Holy Ones of God in every
place, may rest for Ever, and be abundantly satisfied. Amen and Amen. And so we
shall be glad to hear of all your Welfare in the Lord as he makes way.



TO FRIENDS, Richard Boothman and Robert Clough.
DEARLY Beloved in the Lord, and his Everlasting Truth, which has redeemed our
Souls, and does daily Comfort our Hearts, as we abide in it, my very Dear Love,
and tender Affections Salutes you, and all the Dear Flock of God about you,
giving you all to know of my Health in the Fountain of Health, where, in the
midst of all these Bonds, Trials and Afflictions, which, in Common with all
Saints for the Gospels sake on Earth, is ordered for us; my Soul is more than a
Conqueror, Praises to our God for ever: And we may not let fall our Holy Hope,
and trust in the least for any thing that Flesh can do against us; but by all
means let us keep fast in our Hearts the living Faith of the Lord Jesus, which
in God's blessed Sight is of greatest Esteem; for thereby we may effectually in
all things overcome; yea, and be well able also to quench all the fiery Darts
of the Devil: For upon our Watch must we needs stand in all things clothed with
the whole Armor of Light, that no Enemy at all may come between us and our
God, to deprive us of his precious Life, or hinder our Fellowship with his Holy
Spirit in the least. The living powerful Presence of his Glory in the Face of
Jesus Christ, be with all your Spirits, to Sanctify, Bless, Keep and Preserve
you all, my Dear Friends, in Body, Soul and Spirit, Pure, Spotless, and
altogether Blameless before him, in Love, Rests yours in the Dear Fellowship of
God's ever blessed Truth

Thomas Tailor.
Stafford, the 20th of the Eighth Month 1668. And thus, Dear Friends, I could
not, but thus in a few words, breath out of my true and tender Love amongst
you, desiring also, as opportunity is, to hear of your State.



THE Day of the Lord Is DAWNED.
THE Ever-blessed Day of the Lord God is dawned; let all the Children of the
Night fear, for they are now fully to be made manifest, and brought to
Judgment, and now where will the Workers of Iniquity hide themselves from the
Lord's Justice? Rocks nor Mountains will not cover them, they must come forth
this Day to the Righteous Judgment of the Great God, the Just Judge of Heaven
and Earth, of Quick and Dead; Rotten Rags and Fig Leaves of empty and filthy
Profession must now be stripped off, and the shameful Nakedness of all
Hypocrites, and unclean outside Professors and Professions must now be laid
open to the Glory of that Powerful God, who has long waited upon People to
teach them, and to do them good, but they would not, and therefore Desolation
upon Desolation, Overturning upon Overturning will come upon Thee, O thou
Corrupted Earth, with thy Inhab^^ants, who are crying, Lord, Lord, but never
come to do the Will of the Holy Lord God in Earth as it is done in Heaven; nay,
nor have so much as a Mind thereunto, but are angry with such as do it: And
therefore because these Inhabitants of the Corrupt Earth rebel against the
Light, some under the Name of Papists, and some under the Name of Protestants,
and yet say in their Hearts, We shall have Peace, and be Established in our
way; the Lord has said, They shall have no Peace, nor be Established in their
defiled Ways; for God's Establishing of People is now manifested to be in
Righteousness, and in nothing else. The Lord Jesus Christ is now to Reign, and
the Scepter of his Kingdom is a Scepter of Righteousness, and the Kingdoms of
this World must be the Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ, and he must Reign,
whose Right it is for Ever and Ever; according to Prophecy.

And now it is of the greatest Concernment for Kings and Princes, Priests and
Prelates, High and Low, Rich and Poor, to Kiss the Son, lest his Anger which
they have kindled against themselves by their sinning against his Light, and
grieving of his good Spirit by their manifest Transgressions break forth upon
them, and consume them to the uttermost: For this is the Day wherein he that is
greater than Solomon is upon his Throne, to execute Justice and Judgment in the
Earth; and now it is not the flying of Cruel Joab to the Horns of the Altar
shall save his Head, for Fire is gone and going forth from the offended God, to
consume all false Worships, and false Worshippers, who in the false Spirit and
earthly Fire presume to come near the Holy God; for with his Fire, and heavenly
Two-edged Sword, is the Lord pleading with all Flesh; and now many must bow
under his mighty Hand, that the Lord alone may be exalted, for to him must all
bow, and to his Justice be made to confess it is so; and now the Noise and
Boastings of a Church, and Sacraments, and Services, in their unclean,
uncircumcised, unmortified Nature, will do them no more good than the crying of
the false Jews of Old, The Temple of the Lord! The Temple of the Lord are we!

Thomas Tailor.

SOME Prison Meditations In the 7th Month, 1657. BEING A Free-gift Sermon,
Mainly touching the Religious Robbers, or Spiritual Murderers, the Sermon and
Prayer-sellers of the former, latter and present Times; Even to the whole
Company of Mystery Babylon's Merchants and Members a Warning.

Hosea 6. Chap. Verse the 8, and 9. it is written, Gilead is a City of them
that work Iniquity, and is Polluted with Blood: And as Troops of Robbers wait
for a Man, so the Company of Priests Murder in the way by Consent, for they
commit Lewdness. LONDON: Printed and Sold by T. Soul, near the Meeting House
in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street, and at the Bible in Leaden-hall-street;
1697.

SOME Prison-Meditations. etc.
NOW, all you People and Priests of the Earth, amongst all your observings and
gatherings of Doctrine, observe with me, and take diligent notice of these few,
short, plain Doctrines or Lesson from hence, and Tremble, and Repent; to wit,

1. That Workers of Iniquity, are a filthy and bloody People.

2. That lewd Priests or Teachers are Murderers, and Layers in wait for Blood.

3. Where the Priests or Teachers are naught, such as follow them are not good;
and so like Priest, like People, as here.

4. Lewd Priests, and Murtherous-minded Men, (false Teachers) have in all Ages
been many a mighty Band, fitted to devour.

But Hesea! How did thou escape this Bloody People, and these Murtherous
Priests, these Lewd Workers of Iniquity? Did they not Murder or Imprison thee,
or Sue thee at their Courts, for a Disturber of their Peace, or for a Slander?
How did thou, poor Lamb, escape these Wolves, these Bloody Murtherous Priests
and People. Thy Brother Ames, the Prophet, was accused by one of these
Murtherous Priests, for a Conspirer against the King, in the midst of the House
of Israel, and that the Land was not able to bear his Words, Amos, 7.10. etc.
And thy Brother Jeremiah was cast into a dirty Dungeon, almost unto Death,
besides the other Beatings, Jer. 20.1. etc.
and Stockings, and Imprisonings that he suffered from one of these lewd
Priests and the sinful Princes, for his Witness Sake in that Generation, as it
is to be seen in Jer. 38. and other places of that Book: And thy Brother (...),
Son of Barschia^, See Mat. 23.34. etc. Luke. 13.33. etc. and Chapter 22. and 23.
was Slain by this ^loody Generation, between the Temple and the Altar for his
Witness S^ke. Mat. 23.35. And all the rest of thy Brethren were evil Entreated
of this Bloody Murtherous Generation of Prie^s and People, for their
Testimonies Sake: And the Heir himself, Christ Jesus the Head, when he
appeared, was cruelly Murdered ^y these Bloody Priests, and such as followed
them, and consented with them; and that for Witnessing forth Truth against the
Wickedness and Lewdness of the Bloody City, and Venomous Priests, their
Teachers, as is in the Scripture of Truth to be Read, and is now also in these
present Days found true in Experience, by all thy Suffering Brethren and
Sisters: Oh Prophet^ Who are Reproached and Persecuted of this Present Evil
Generation of the Priests (the Teachers) and the People under them, under the
Nickname of Quakers: And therefore we having such a Cloud of Witnesses, and
Fellow Sufferers for the Truth's Sake going before us; we may be Comforted and
Encouraged in all our Tribulations, knowing that we are hereunto called, (...)
not only to Believe, but also to Suffer for Christ's Name Sake, that so we may
fill up the Measure of the Afflictions of Christ in our Flesh for his Body's
Sake, which is his Church.

Further, Oh all People! You may hence observe, and take diligent notice for
your good, that it has been an old Custom of the World's Teachers, such as are
called, of Men, Master, Matt. 23. and who Preach for Hire, Micah 3. and seek
their Gain from their Quarters, Isa. 56. I say, that it has been an old Custom
of such Wolves to Murder Souls and People of God; for in some Scriptures is
mention made of the Spiritual, and in others of the Bodily Murder, that they
had, and would be guilty of. And further take notice, that these Banding
Priests are a lewd Generation; which, in other Expressions, is all one as to
say, Thieves, Whores and Harlots; and so indeed they are also in Scripture
usually said to be; and therefore Typed, and set forth under the name of
Painted Whorish Jezabel, and the Well-favoured, Harlot; and here, under the
Similitude of Troops of Robbers, waiting for a Man; and Paul calls them,
Ministers of Satan, having a form of Godliness, denying and resisting the Power
and Truth of Godliness: And therefore (Oh all People!) you are Exhorted by the
Spirit of Truth, to turn away from them; yea, and commanded to come out from
amongst them, upon pain of Eternal Death, Jer. 23. throughout. Rev. 14 8, 9,
10, 11. Rev. 18. throughout. 2 Cor. 11.12, 13, 15. 2 Timothy 3.5, etc. Rev. 2.20,
etc.

Read Scripture, and see if these things be not so, and Fear the Living God,
and Bow to Truth, and be Exhorted and Persuaded all People, now at length to
learn Wisdom, and to understand whom you follow; for you see the Scripture
tells of Murtherous Lewd Priests that stood over the People for Teachers in
former Days; and in Christ's time there was Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites,
who were taken by the blind People to be sufficient Guides and Teachers, John
8.25. Matt. 25.
whom Christ called, Blind Guides, Children of the Devil, Painted Sepulchers,
Whited Walls; yea, Vipers and Serpents. And so you People that gather together
to the Steeple-house, which you call your Church, when you hear your Teachers;
who, nowadays, go under the name of Ministers with you, take a Scripture, and
out of it choose a Verse (or so) of a Chapter, according to their Wills, for
filthy Lucre, and calls it their Text, and from it draws Doctrines, and
Reasons, and Uses, as they call them, ask them whether there be any such
Company of False Teachers nowadays in England to be found, as this Scripture
speaks of, who as Troops of Robbers wait for a Man, so wait to Murder in the
way by consent: And who they are, and what, and who they Murder; and with what
they Murder; and how these Murderers may be known; what be their Fruits, For
by their Fruits ye shall know them, says Christ. And ask them further, Whether
these False Teachers, which the Prophet Hosea here calls lewd Murderers, be
not the same in Nature with those which Isaiah, in the 56. Chap. and 10 v. of
his Prophecy, calls greedy dumb Dogs, that sought their Gain from their
quarter, and could never have enough: And the same that Jeremiah spoke of in
Chap. 5. ver. 1, 2. and 23. Chap. of his Prophecy throughout, That stole the
word from their Neighbor, and used their Tongue, and said, he says, when the
Lord never sent them, and so could not profit the People at all. And whether
they be not the same that Micah the Prophet ( Mic. 3 5, etc.) speaks of, who
preached for Hire, and divined for Money, and spoke Peace to the Wicked for the
Gift sake, but if any put not into their Mouths, they prepared War against
them, and yet like all Hypocrites would lean upon the Lord in words, and say,
Is not the Lord amongst us? No Evil shall come unto us. And whether these
murtherous Priests were not one with those that Christ Jesus cried Woe against
in Matt. 23. Who were Sayers, and not Doers; who loved to be called of Men
Master, and bound heavy Burdens upon the People, and touched them not with one
of their own Fingers, but shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men, and would
neither enter in themselves, nor suffer others. And finally, ask them whether
such Men now, as stand over the People for Teachers, though under another Name,
and making another Profession in words, yet if they be found in the foresaid
steps, doing the foresaid Deeds of those forementioned False Teachers, are not
to receive the same Judgment, and to be cried against and denied, and forsaken
by all the Children of Light now, as formerly, Yea or Nay.

And now Hosea, thou Holy Prophet of God, thou have said and laid down these
two Doctrines or high Charges against the People in general, and against the
Priests in particular: The first, That the People in general are polluted with
Blood. The second, That as Troops of Robbers wait for a Man, so the company of
Priests Murder in the way by Consent. How do thou prove and make these good,
for the Gileadites are deeply concerned in it; and they will have thee to make
it good, or suffer for default? Yea, by the Spirit I make it good, thus: Gilead
is a City polluted with Blood, because they are such as work Iniquity; and the
Priests Murder in the way by Consent, because they commit Lewdness: And this
is witnessed not only by the Scriptures, but also by the same Spirit of Truth
that gave it forth in all the Children of Light to be so. But Hosea, thou must
not be tried per pares, that is, them of like Condition or Quality with thee,
to wit, the Holy Prophets and Children of God, who are Witnesses with thee
against the Abominations of their Times, and Sins that rules in Priests and
People, for that will not satisfy nor serve the Gil^adites turn, for so the
great Men of all sorts in City and Country would be sound faulty: But these
Priests and People think it fit (according to their Nation-Law) to have a Judge
and Justices sit upon the Bench, and to have a Jury of Inquest summoned, and to
have a Bill of Indictment found against thee, and then if thou plead thy
Innocence, and say thou art not guilty of doing them any Wrong, but only thou
spoke as thou was moved by the Spirit of God; then thou must have, as they
pretend, a fair Trial, (for thou must know that the Gileadites cannot believe
thy Witness, nor any for thee from that Spirit only) but this fair Trial must
not be by Spiritual Men, who only are able to judge of Spiritual Things, for
the Gileadites know not their Voice no more than thine, Oh Prophet! but it must
be further, by another Company of these Men whom thou have said are Workers of
Iniquity, and polluted with Blood, and so are Parties; and these must judge of
thee; and these (says the World) are a Grand Jury, a Company of substantial Men
of the Country, Sworn Men (Mark, out of the Doctrine of Christ, for his Yea is
Yea, and his Nay is Nay, without an Oath.) And these Men (the Grand Jury) must
bring in their Verdict (as they call it) against thee, for they have found thee
Guilty, (for thou have nothing on thy side but plain Truth, without Man's
Testimony, or an Oath) and the Judge of the Court (one of the chief Men among
the Gileadites that is versed in Law-matters) thinks it fit thou should be
fined to pay a Sum of Money for thy Offense, (Oh Prophet! thou Man of God!) and
be kept in Prison (Summer and Winter, that matters not) until thou pay it: But
what (Oh Prophet!) if thou have neither liberty in thy Spirit, nor outward
Ability to pay thy Fine, What course must be taken with thee? Well, for that (O
Prophet!) Gilead matters not, but imprisoned thou must remain, for so Gilead
will be quit of thee, and thou cannot come into their Synagogues, Markets, nor
other Assemblies, to cry against their Sins, and disturb them, for the People
and Priests would live quietly in their Sins, and they would not be disturbed
neither in the time of their Service, nor otherwise. And H^sea, that thou may
have no occasion to find fault with the Jury, or the Judge, one of these
Priests whom thou have by the Spirit declared to be Murderers and lewd Men,
have taken an Oath in open Court against thee; and do thou think that though
they be a lewd and murtherous Generation, that they will also Swear falsely; and
so what by one means, and what by another, oh Prophet, thou art fair to come
into Bonds for thy Testimonies sake: But what, oh Court, will you not hear the
Prophet's witness? Speak, No, no, they will not Swear, but they will have their
Yea and Nay to stand for Truth without more ado, as their Master Christ (they
say) has taught them; and they are Disturbers of our Peace as well as thy
self, oh Hosea! And unless some such course as this be used with you, Gilead
cannot Sin and be quiet, neither can the Priests Murder by consent, but be
told of it; and therefore to Prison must thou go, and be numbered with the
Transgressors, as (the Disturber of the Wicked's Peace) Christ Jesus thy Master
was. But what Care do these Priests and People, that have put thee in Prison,
take for thy Lodging and Diet in the long cold Wintertime? O! for that they
matter not, for they are as careless over their own Members, them of their own
polluted Church, (who diverse of them are left in Prison upon other accounts) as
well as over thee. And so unless thou be provided for otherwise, thou may
remain there in Misery and Want, or Perish there as well as they, for any Care
they will have of thee, for thou must not look that they that hate their own
Flesh can love thine. But the Righteous cannot be forsaken, for their Keeper is
the Lord God of Truth and Love. So (O Prophet) be content, and wait in the Will
of God in thy Condition; for, Blessed are they that Suffer for Righteousness
sake; and the Scripture must be fulfilled which says, They shall hawl you out
of their Synagogues, and many other ways evil entreat you; yea, some of you
they shall put to Death, and think therein they do God Service: And so wait to
see the Sins of Gilead full; and then in the Judgment shall thou, O Prophet of
God, and all thy Suffering Brethren, rejoice, and all the Workers of Iniquity
be Confounded, with all that Thirst for Blood; and into the Holy City shall
none such enter; but the pure in Heart, who have come through the great
Tribulation, and have washed their Garments white in the Blood of the Lamb,
shall only enter, and alone inherit, to the Glory of the eternal righteous God
for evermore; to whom all Honor and Glory is due, for ever and ever, Amen and
Amen.

And now for the Use of these Doctrines, oh Priests and People, that make a
Trade of talking of the Scripture of Truth, and Uses from it, now and then in
your high Places, but make none of walking in the Truth in your daily
Conversation, it is to let you see, That there were Wolves in Sheeps Clothing
formerly, and so to find such now, is no new or strange thing. And, That under
a Profession of God, People may be found Workers of Iniquity, and full of
Blood. And, That a whorish Spirit, in a Teacher, is a murtherous Spirit, and
will draw others from God into Wheredoms and Death, and so by all means to be
taken heed of. And it is to let you see, oh all People, what evil use the
Priests and Leaders of you the People in these days (as formerly) make of the
Scripture; for whereas (as you may see here) it was given forth by the Holy Men
of God, a Witness against the Enemies of God, and for the Servants of God, such
People and Priests (as formerly, so now) abuse and wrest it from its proper
Mind. Use and End, going about, what in them lies, to make it speak for Deceit
and its Upholders, and against Truth and its Followers, as is manifest: For
whereas the Scripture speaks of no Worship now, nor Worshippers to be
acceptable to God and Christ, but that which is in Spirit and Truth, they
wrest, and force the Scripture for carrying on a Worship which stands in
outward Ceremonies, carnal Ordinances, Types and Shadows, and a Kingdom to come
in outward Observations, as Lo here, lo there, like the Jews, which a Man of
Flesh, a C^in, or an Ishmael, or an Esau, or a Haman, or a Dives, or a Judas
may conform unto, and be accepted with them, just contrary to Scripture, and so
in effect deny Christ the Substance to be come; and as the Scribes and
Pharisees which came to Christ, and said, Why do thou and thy Disciples break
the Traditions of the Elders, in eating with unwashen hands? To whom Christ
said, Why do you make void the Law of God by your Traditions? mentioning in
particular their Corban. So when the Priests (the Teachers) heaped up over the
People in this Age, say unto us (whom God, by his mighty Power and
outstretched Arm has delivered out of Mystery Babylon, yea Sodom and Egypt
Spiritual, where the Witnesses lay flain, and where our Lord also was
Crucified, to worship him in Spirit and in Truth,) I say, When they object and
say unto us, Why do you not observe, but transgress the Tradition of the
Elders, in not bringing your Infants to Baptism; in not frequenting the Meeting
at the Steeple-house, called the Church? And why pay you not the Priest, now
called Minster, his Tithes, Easter-Reckonings, and other like things, called
his Dues? And why observe you not the Customs of the World, in Swearing at
Courts, and bowing the Hat and Knee, and giving flattering Titles to Men, Job
32.21, 22. and bidding God speed to the Wicked, and the like? 2 John v. 9, etc.
Our Answer to all such is, Why do you break the Commands of God by your
Traditions, teaching for Doctrine these and the like things, which are merely
your own Commandments and evil Customs, and not the Commands of God? For we put
you (all Teachers and People) to prove by Scripture, where we are commanded
these things you put upon us to do; and if you do not, (which we know you
cannot) then I say, your gathering together in Companies, and going about to
establish such things by a Law, for any People to observe, which Christ has
not commanded: See how you can free your selves from the Charge which the
Prophet here lays upon the People of Gilead, and the Priests thereof; and
therefore why may not the words be turned upon you, and applied to your
Condition, with the Names only changed after this manner, that is, England is a
Nation of them that work Iniquity, and is polluted with Blood; and as Troops of
Robbers wait for a Man, so the Company of Hireling Teachers, called of Men
Ministers and Masters, murder in the way by consent, for they commit Lewdness.
And therefore high time for you all People who love your Souls, and would not
be murdered, to look about you, and in the Light which-Christ has lighted you
with, to watch, and take heed that you be ^ot robbed and spoiled of the
Heavenly Treasure, by these Layers in wait, as you would be careful to avoid a
Troop of Robbers that wait for a Man; so all having time, prize it, and come
out from among them, and know Christ in you to be your Teacher, for he is the
true Light, that lights every Man that comes into the World, that all in him
should believe; and he is come to teach his People himself, and to deliver them
by his Power and Spirit, from the Hands and Mouths of all such as have made,
and would still make a Prey upon them, according as he promised of old by his
Servants, who spoke and wrote from his Mouth of these things, as you may read
in Scripture all abroad, and namely in Deuteronomy. 18.15, etc. Isa. 54.13. Ezekiel. 34.
throughout, Jer. 31.33, 34. and Heb. 8. John 6.45. 1 John 2.20, 27. Romans 8.14.
Rev. 21. throughout. And the Scripture cannot be broken, For behold, the days
come, says the Lord, that I will perform the good thing which I have promised
to the House of Israel, and to the House of Judah, Jer. 33.14. Now all People
know that these are the days of fulfilling these Scriptures, and the
Destruction of Antichrist, and the setting up of the Kingdom of Christ, not by
might, nor by Power, but by the Spirit of the living Lord God believed and
witnessed by, and amongst us who are reproached by many for the Truth's sake,
under the name of Quakers; but the Reproach of Christ is to us great Riches;
and the Scorners God will judge.

And again, all People when you see the Company of Priests (the Parish
Teachers) gather together on heaps upon every occasion at the Foot of the Great
Men of the Earth, to get their Conclusions and Doctrines Established by a Law,
for binding under Darkness the dark People, who are Ignorant of their Wiles,
and unacquainted with their Ends; and for the Ensnaring of Tender Consciences,
who are come to the Teachings of Christ and his Spirit, and so have found the
true Shepherd and Bishop of their Souls, and so through Grace have escaped the
layers in wait. I say, when you now see them gathering together by Troops for
these evil Purposes, and the like Self Ends, marvel not at the matter, for it
is no new thing, but one of the old things under the Sun, as you see here; for
the World's Teachers, set up in the Will of Man, have always been many and
evil, kept up by the evil Power; but the true Prophets not so, but rather few
and faithful, and those preserved by the Power of God; yea, often found that
the Prophets of Baal are Four Hundred and Fifty, and the Prophets of the Groves
Four Hundred, which eat Meat at Jezebel's Table, for one Elijah the Prophet of
the true God, who feeds upon the true Bread, and ministers it forth as he has
received it freely to others, without Self ends: See 1 King. 18 Chap. Ezekiel. 34.
Jer. 23. 2 Timothy 4.3. 1 John 4.1. And so the false Teachers under Antichrist are
set forth b^ an Army of Locusts, the sound of whose Wings was as the sound of
Chariots, and of many Horses running to Battle, Rev. 9. from 1, to 12. Ver.
when the true Witnesses are set forth under a small number, even two, Rev. 11.
And so those many Locusts and Frogs (the false Teachers) are the unclean
Spirits of Devils working in his Servants, his Ministers, going forth unto the
Kings of the Earth, and of the whole World, to gather them to the Battle of
that Great Day of God Almighty, being thereunto fitted in a Miraculous manner,
being trained up in the Wisdom of the Serpent and Sorceries of Egypt for that
purpose, so that none can avoid following them but such as are in the holy
Anointing, whose Names are written in the Lamb's Book of Life; see Rev. 16.13,
14, 2 Timothy 8.9. 1 John 2.20, 27. Rev. 20. last. And of the truth of this, to
wit, of the great number and swarms of Locusts, false Teachers of all Coats,
Black, etc. and of all Names and Orders, Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Deans,
Deans and Chapters, Prebendaries, Priests, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Rectors,
Ministers, etc. let thy many Thousands of Soldiers of this kind fighting daily
(against the Lamb and his Army) under Satan's Banner, and in constant known Pay
(as Hirelings) in thee, O England, Scotland, France, Ireland, Spain, Germany,
Italy, and other Lands, be witness: And therefore, O whole Earth and World! How
art thou Corrupted! How great is thy Misery! What Lamentation shall be taken up
for thee! A wonderful and horrible thing is committed all abroad in thee: Thy
Prophets Prophecy falsely, and thy Teachers are Lewd and Treacherous Men,
bearing Rule by their means over thee, fleecing thee in that greedy Mind that
seeks the Gain from the Quarter, and can never have enough, crying, Peace,
Peace to thee, when the Lord has not spoken it, and preaching unto thee a
Vision of their own Head and Heart, and not from the Mouth of the Lord, and so
strengthening thy Hands in thy Wickedness, and stirring thee up to Wrath and
Persecutions against the Innocent, and thou love to have it so; and what will
ye all do in the end of these things? Will not the Lord invade you with his
Troop? Will he not come upon ye, O Princes! as Clay? And tread you down under
his Glorious Power, Oh People! as Mire is trodden down under Foot in the
Streets. And who of all the false Spirits and Teachers, that you in your
Rebellions against God have followed, shall deliver you out of his Hand?

So all be warned, and repent, and return to Jesus Christ the one Head
Shepherd, and Bishop of the Soul, and (as was said before) know him in you to
be your Teacher, that out of the Hands of all Devils you may be delivered: And
now having time, prize it, for this is assuredly the Day of your Visitation,
and after that the Judgment upon you all; for Woe, Woe, Woe both is and will be
more upon you all who puts the Day of the Lord afar off, and who love Darkness
rather than Light, because your Deeds are evil; and your Head and Leader is not
Christ, but he that came up out of the Bottomless Pit, and shall go into
Perdition, with all his confounded Followers, the Children of Darkness.

And therefore, on the other hand, all ye Servants of the Lord (my Brethren and
Sisters in the Truth of Jesus Christ) every where, who are Sufferers for his
Names sake, be encouraged, for stronger is he that is in us, than he that is in
the World; and there are more with us than them, though we be not known to the
World, nor our aid, 1 John 3.1. and 2 Kings 6.16, etc. for little Children we
are of God, and the whole World lies in Wickedness; and so one single Elijah,
and two Witnesses being God's Troop, are well able to encounter with all the
Troops of the Wicked; for Truth shall prevail for ever and ever, and all
Iniquity shall stop her Mouth, and so shall the due Praises be sung from off
Mount Zion our Holy Hill, unto our God the Holy One of Israel, World without
end, for his Goodness to us, even for evermore, Amen and Amen.

For now is the Day of the Lord appearing, and Fire goes out of his Witnesses
wouths; and who of all the Adversaries can stand before him who is a consuming
Fire, and to the Wicked everlasting Burning? Isa. 33.13, 14.

Given forth for the Good of all People, by the Spirit of Truth in a Servant of
the Lord, who for witnessing forth Truth, as he was moved of God, in the
public Assembly of all sorts of People, at Appleby Steeple-house in
Westmoreland, in the Assize Week there, in the sixth Month 1675, against the
Deceit there uttered, though not until the Priest had done his Oration, or
Sermon, as they call it; yet was hawled out of that Synagogue, and so being
hurried along into the Streets, and declaring the Day of the Lord, and warning
them all, and calling them all to Repentance, was sent from thence (by command
from some it is aike) by an Officer to the Common Goal, for my good Will and
Servicesake, where I was kept until the next day, and afterward thrice carried
with the Felons of the Goal to their Judgment Seat, [so bearing Christ's
Reproach] where there was first by one Jury (as they said it, for what is
abovesaid only) a Bill of Indictment found against me; and then after that, an
Oath in the open Court taken against me, by one of the Scandalous Priests; and
then by another Company of Men, called the Grand Jury, (who should have better
considered of the Matter, who are chosen by the Country, as principal Men to do
Justice, and had bound themselves thereunto also by Oath) was I found guilty
[as they said it] of a Disturbance; but I am sure the Disturbance was on their
part, for they pulled me down from one of the Seats in the Steeple-house as I
was speaking, and violently hawled me thence, and so to Prison as is said, and
so disturbed me in the Work of the Lord; but none could I disturb, being bound
to Peace by a Law the World knows not: And how could I be said, by any
reasonable Law of Man, to disturb them, seeing violent Hands on none outwardly
did I lay; neither did I speak in their Congregation till all was done, and
they were silent? And what was said by me, either in Steeple-house or out of
it, at that time they hawled me to Prison, I was there ready (as was offered)
in the face of the open Court and Country, to make good by Scripture, both for
Matter and Manner, if liberty had been granted me; but they liked better to
proceed by their own Law than that: And so last of all, him called the Judge of
Assize, instead of punishing Offenders who had wronged me, he fined me [the
Offended] five Marks, and Imprisonment until I should pay it: And so because I
cannot give them Money for their unjust Proceedings against me, and unchristian
Dealings with me, I am kept here accordingly in the common Goal a Prisoner, yet
free, and in that everlasting Truth of God which cannot be bound, but tramples
upon the Neck and Head of all Deceit more than a Conqueror. But from hence all
that have Eyes, may see what little liberty Truth can yet get in the Earth,
after so much War and words protested for it: And therefore whoever thou art
that reads these things, know, that in England also now, if thou will live
godly in Christ Jesus, thou must suffer Persecution; for the Scripture cannot
be broken. And this Persecution now in England, arises mainly from the blind
Zeal that many have for keeping up their Ministers, as they call them, from
being spoken unto in the Assembly, either in, after, or before the time of
their Preaching, especially on the first day of the Week, by them called the
Lord's day, and Sabbath day, and this the People are prompted unto by the
wicked Spirit in their Teachers, which cannot endure the Light that God has
raised up in his People in these Islands in these days: And so this is the
Condemnation of all such Children of Darkness, whether Priest or People, that
Light shines, and they love Darkness more than Light, because their Deeds are
Evil. And so all may see, whether the Teachers and People, that act in such
Darkness, are going; for in the days of Queen Mary, the Persecutor, the Law
reached only to a punishing of such as spoke to her Priests in the time of
their Service; but now the Zeal of some for them is so increased, that neither
in the time of their Speaking, nor in their coming nor going from their
Steeple-house, especially on the day aforesaid, must their Teachers be spoken
unto, but they will impute it to the Party for an Offense, without examining
whether there be cause for it yea or nay; but the Teacher, though he be never
so false in Doctrine, or vicious in Life, yet if he be a Parish-Teacher, and
receive the World's Hire, as Tithes, Glebe-lands, and Augmentations, with the
State-allowance, or upon other Accounts, be allowed for a Public Teacher by
the Nation-Law, he is like to be defended; and he or she that speaks to them,
though such a one be never so dear to God, and speaks truth in that particular
never so clearly, is like to be punished as an Evil-doer: And if this be not a
provoking of the Wrath and hot Displeasure of God against thee, Oh England!
then let him that has Understanding declare what more can be: And therefore
thou art now in time warned of these things, that thou may, by Repentance, be
saved from those things that shall assuredly come upon the Wicked. But for the
present, all Poor People every where, who are in the dark Mind, unacquainted
with the Teachings of God in the Spirit and Light of the Holy Anointing, but
are following the Blind Guides, that endeavor to get their Wickedness
established by a Law, your Misery is great, and much to be lamented, and the
case of such of you as have any true Breathings after God, is to be pitied:
And who shall deliver you out of your Bondage, but he that delivered Israel out
of Egypt, and has in all Ages been a present Help unto them in the needful
Time of Trouble, and will still deliver them that fear him out of all
Adversity: So wait upon him, and the Work is done, and be encouraged all that
wait upon him, for there is no end of his Goodness to us, for his Mercy
indureth for ever; and before him goes a devouring Fire, to consume the
Adversaries of his glorious Truth round about, and the day is dawned that will
leave them neither Root nor Branch. And in this Rest I am your dear Brother, oh
all ye Free People of God! And in the Patience and Sufferings of Christ your
Fellow Servants for the Imbondaged Seeds sake, Thomas Tailor.

To the Judges, Justices, Juries, Teachers and People of the Nation, who
profess themselves to be Christians, and the Scriptures to be their Rule, and
yet account themselves disturbed if any speak unto them, and cry against them
in their Assemblies or Streets in the Name and Word of the Lord (without any
Authority from Man) a few Queries.

1 Query.
WHether was that a Disturbance in Christ Jesus, when he went into the Temple
at Jerusalem (a Figure of his Body) and made a Whip of small Cords, and with it
(without any Authority from Man) whipped out the Buyers and Sellers, and
overthrew the Tables of the Money Changers, and commanded the Merchandise to be
taken thence, Yea or Nay? Matt. 21.12, etc.

2 Query.
Whether was it a Disturbance in the young Prophet of God, that was sent to cry
against the Altar at Bethel, whereon the King Jeroboam Sacrificed even in the
time of his Worship; or the Disturbance was not on the King's own part, who put
out his Hand against God's Servant in God's Work; and whether the withering of
that Hand was not an evident Sign on whose part the Disturbance was, 1 Kings
13.1, etc. Yea or Nay?

3 Query.
Whether did Jeremiah the Prophet disturb the People of Israel, when he spoke
unto them, and cried against them terribly in the Word of the Lord ordinarily
in their Assemblies, and Gates of their Cities, Yea or Nay? Or did not they
disturb him, in putting him in Stocks and Prison for so doing? Consider well of
it, and give Judgment accordingly, Jer. 20. and Chap. 26. and Chap. 37 and 38.

4 Query.
And whether was it wicked (...), King of Israel, and his House that had sinned
against God, or Elijah the Prophet of God, who cried against their Sins, that
disturbed Israel's Peace, Yea or Nay? And whether the wicked King's Judgment,
or the Holy Prophet's Judgment, will you be of in this matter? See 1 Kings
18.17, etc.

5 Query.
And whether Amos, who prophesied even in the King's Court and Chapel, the
Sword upon the King's House, and Desolations upon all their Sanctuaries, was a
Disturber in so doing, or so accounted then (that we read of) save only by one
wicked Priest, as you may read Amos 7.7, etc. And whether Jonah, preaching
Repentance in the open Streets of Nineveh for a whole day together, was a
Disturber or a Friend to their City, Yea or Nay? See Jonah 3.4, etc.

6 Query.
And whether the King and People of Nineveh, who instead of persecuting him the
Lord's Prophet, did repent at his Preaching, shall not rise up in Judgment with
this present Generation, and condemn it. Yea or Nay?

7 Query.
Whether did Paul the Apostle disturb the Jews and Gentiles in their Synagogues
and Markets, when he reasoned of the things of God's Kingdom, and disputed as
it were daily with them there, as you may read in the Acts of the Apostles? And
whether you who account your selves disturbed with the like things, doing in
these days, do not allow of the Jews persecuting of him for his Works sake
then, Yea or Nay?

8 Query.
And whether the same Paul in the Corinthians when he said, In the True Church
all that have any thing revealed unto them from God, may speak one by one. And
when he that is speaking, hears such an inspired one begin to speak, he (to
wit, the first) is to hold his Peace, that all things may be heard, and all
edified; I say, whether Paul, in preaching such Doctrine, preached disturbing
Doctrine, Yea or Nay?

And lastly, It is required of those that judge others for Disturbers in such
cases as these, That they do set down what is the true and infallible Rule of
trying Doctrines and Spirits by in these days; or for ever hereafter that they
let the thing alone.

These from the Lord's Prisoner, Thomas Tailor.

To those of MANCHESTER THAT ARE Zealous for their Sabbath.
1. TO all you in Manch^ster, who are Zealous for Morning Exercises, or
Sermons, as you call them, on the First day of the Week, and so seem to
overrun others in the way to the Kingdom, give me leave, in love to your poor
Souls, to propose a few things to you.

Do you know really and in Truth, by the Teachings of God upon your Spirits,
what the Evening is, and what the patting out of all your own Lights is, seeing
the Evening must be witnessed before the Morning, for the Evening and the
Morning make the First day? And whether you have known the Voice of the Light
shining in the dark place, and have taken heed to it as the Scripture speaks,
and have obeyed the Voice of it, which calls you to return, and come to the
Lord, from all your own ways; and there in Repentance do now wait in the Inner
Man for the Dawning of the Day, and the arising of the Day Star in your Hearts?
Or are you not yet in the deceivable Doctrines of them that are without, who
cry Lo here, and Lo there, as all such do.

2. And whether you do believe and expect any such Promise to be fulfilled in
you here; so that being in the Day, and borne up into the eternal unchangeable
Light, and so coming to know the Teachings of the Father, and the Anointing of
the Holy One, ye shall not need that any Man teach you, but as that Anointing
teaches? Or do you imagine that you shall always be beholden to borrowed
Lights, and Man's Teachings, as you are now, and so be the silly Women that are
always learning, and never able to come to the Knowledge of the Truth?

3. And whether that Ministry you are under, and please your selves so much in,
can truly be said to be the Ministry of Christ, seeing it leads not to an end?
Nor can you or they witness any one hitherto presented thereby, perfect to God
in Christ without Spot or Wrinkle, or any such thing, or ever like to be,
seeing you generally hold, That no Man can be free from Sin, and so perfect,
while you are here: And whether you are ever likely to come to the Unity of the
Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, to the Measure and Stature of
Christ, by that Ministry that stands in the Will of Man, and which denies the
Light which has enlightened every one that comes into the World, to be the True
Spiritual and Saving Light of Christ; and so build upon another Foundation, and
reject the Light of the World Christ, as he is in Man the Foundation already
laid by God himself; and so denies at once the New Covenant, Gospel, Christ and
Scriptures, as your Ministers do, who deny the Light which is in Man (which
shows him Sin and Evil) to be Spiritual and of Christ, and calls it a Natural
Light; and so putting the Letter which is without you for the Light, draw your
Minds out to build upon their Meanings, Conceivings and Imaginings of it; and
so to forsake the true Light, the Word it self, the Teaching of the Holy
Anointing within you, and to neglect the Promise of the Father, which would
lead you into all Truth, if you did wait upon it, and did honestly, through
Faith, giv^ up your selves to be guided by it; and whether you have not just
cause to forsake these Builders, who have rejected Christ the Cornerstone, and
caused you to build upon the Sandy Foundation, which in the arising of the
Storm of the Lord's Trial and Indignation will not bear you up; but Iniquity
being still found in you, you are condemned within your selves, and with the
Sinners and Hypocrites in Sion, you will all, ever long, be forced to cry out,
Holy Priest and People, Who among us can abide with devouring Fire, or dwell
with the everlasting Burning?

Thomas Tailor.

TO A Wandering Apostate.
O The Desolation that, giving way to the Enemy, thou have brought upon thy
Soul! What, must not God be Infinite, because thou can not comprehend
Infiniteness? Thou art that Finite One that stands against His Infiniteness,
and glories in thy old uncircumcised Heart; but His Infinite Light has
comprehended thee, and does and will Judge thee for thy Evil Work, and
Blasphemous Thoughts of Him, whom the Heaven, and Heaven of Heavens, cannot
contain; but thou would limit His limitless Nature to a creatural Form like
thy self, as the Wicked do who know him not. And so of that Beast and
mysterious Babylon thou art, who this day, with their many Heads, and Horns,
and Forms of False Knowledge, and Worships, and Churches, so called, do all,
with one Consent, push and fight against the Lamb, the Light and Son of the
Incomprehensible and Infinite Father, and his Faithful Followers; but the Lamb
both has and ever shall have the Victory, and the Mouth of all Iniquity shall
be stopped, says my Soul. And so well had it been for thee, if thou had
continued Faithful amongst us, but a Wanderer and Unfaithful in Heart have thou
been many a day; and so the Whore that watched in the Evening for the unwary
young Man, has caught thee in her Net, and there thou art a Slave in the Bands
of Darkness, to the great Wounding of thy poor imprisoned Soul.

Thomas Tailor.

TO George Ward, And those that had Fellowship with him.
GEorge Ward, to thy self, and those in Fellowship with thee, whether Speakers
or Hearers, a few Words from the Movings of God in my Heart; You are weighed in
the Balance, and are found wanting, and the Glory of the Holy Kingdom of God
you are fallen short of in your Unbelief, and have not a Heart, as yet, to walk
in the strait and narrow Way that leads unto it. You have not suffered your
Minds and Souls to be guided by the pure Light of Jesus Christ that has
Visited you in great Love in these Days, but have rather chosen to follow your
own Thoughts and wrong Expositions of Scripture to your great hurt; And,
because you have Preached and Professed that washing the outward Water is the
only Gate in the Christian Fellowship, you are both to loose your Credit
amongst Men, by owning the more Excellent and Everlasting Way, though it be
most plainly declared, and by the Spirit demonstrated to you in these Days: And
so you go about to Establish that which makes nothing perfect, in Opposition to
the Power of God which only makes Perfect. And so you resemble them of old, who
stuck in the Shadows of the Law, in Opposition to him that was the End of the
Law, and came to fulfill it; Christ Jesus over all God Blessed for ever. And so
if I could have found in you a true Desire after God's Kingdom, may be I might
have gotten a little Liberty to have Reasoned with you at this time of the
things thereof: But seeing there has been so many Endeavors and Desires in us
after your Eternal Good, and ye will not come to Christ to know him in you,
that you may have Life; for this time I thus rest in Peace with my God the
Righteous Judge, believing, that in his own Way and Time, he will Silence every
Tongue that moves against his Blessed Truth (the Light) and those that love it
and follow it in the Regeneration in this Day of his Power, wherein the willing
People are brought up, through the Death of the Flesh, to serve the Lord in the
Land of the Living, in new Jerusalem, as our Souls do this Day, ever Praised be
his Name, the Arm of his Holiness, for it is worthy.

And now, where is the Disputer of this World, who pleads for seen things which
Quicken not the Souls, and will not have the Invisible God, who is the
Resurrection of the Life, to Rule in them; but are glad when they can get any
thing seemingly that makes for them in their perishing Way? But our Work is,
Praised be God to hold the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints in a
pure Conscience, and in the Ability that God gives us to help to bring People
to God, where is the true Rest for ever: And those that will not submit their
Minds, Hearts and Souls to the Light of the Eternal Word which is nigh in the
Heart, shall never be Established in Righteousness and Peace, but shall weary
themselves in the very Fires for Vanity; and this we have Learned through many
Tribulations, Blessed be God for his Unspeakable Gift; and so if you be Wise,
be Wise for your Souls, and Learn with us to sit in Silence at Jesus Feet, to
know what he requires of you, and cease your running and doing without him, for
you have spent too much time in Vain already, seeing the Spirit of the World is
unfallen in you; Rests your Souls Friend, and a Lover of the whole Creation of
God, being become a willing Sufferer for the Holy Seeds Sake.

And whereas you, or some of you, seem Offended that Widow Cock has left you,
and come amongst us, and say, she has done it, and yet given you no sufficient
Reason and Satisfaction for her so doing, I say, that Reason, I suppose, she
has shown sufficient to some of you, but to give Satisfaction to you in it
that is hard, seeing you Speak Evil of the Good Way of God which she has
tasted of amongst us; for, of a Truth, the Lord and his Power and Presence is
with us, Blessed be his Name for ever: And she stayed too long upon the barren
Mountains where your Flocks Feed.

Thomas Tailor.

TO A Plundering Priest.
YOUNG Man, all thy Prayers, Preachings and Praises, are Abomination to God, so
long as thou keep the Just in Bondage; Thou being but newly, as it were,
come on to the Stage of the World, begins thy part very badly; if thou had
been as an old overgrown Tree in Customs of Covetousness, less could not be
expected from thee than what some in Swaledale have sound: But thou being, as I
hear, a young Man, under the Notion of a Scholar, nay more, of a Minister of
the Gospel, to fall on a Suing People at Law, and putting in Prison, upon
account of Hire, quite stains all thy Glory, and blasts thy Reputation with the
Odium of a Hireling and Fersecutor. Thou might consider, if the God of this
World had not blinded thy Mind, what thou daily, as it were, reads in the
Scripture, Whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, even so do unto
them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. And if thou be not come so far as
the Law and the Prophets, thou art most unfit to take the Gospel into thy
Mouth. For, without all question, if thy Condition had been Michael R^w's, thou
would have accounted it hard Measure to have been so dealt withal as thou have
dealt with him. A Man with a Wife and ten or eleven Children depending much
upon his Labor for their Maintenance, and this Man to be put into Prison, and
there kept from year to year, for nothing at all, but because, for
Conscience Sake to God, he cannot put into thy Mouth. What a Cry this has, and
will have, in the Ears of God, it concerns thee deeply to consider, for he is
well known not to withold Right from any where it is due: But though his
Sufferings for time be long, yet thine, if thou repent not, will be very much
longer; for it is a very fearful thing for thee, thus in thy Sins, to fall into
the Hands of the Living God. So whilst thou have time prize it, and say not
within thy self, that thou shall have Peace, though thou continue in this thy
Hard-heartedness, for certainly there is no Peace from the Holy, Just and
Merciful God, to any abiding in the Paths thou walk in. So if thou have an
Ear, hear what the Spirit of Truth says unto thee in his Servant,

Thomas Tailor.

To those that Rejoice in Bells and Bonefires.
WOE, Woe, from the Lord to this Heathenish manner of Rejoicing with Bells and
Bonefires; Have you not learned it from those Wicked People called Papists, for
Deliverance from whom you seem to Rejoice: And so instead of honoring God,
with your Mirth, you greatly grieve and burden his good Spirit: And therefore
your ^ins remain, and Judgment after Judgment still waits for you, until you
turn to God with your Hearts, which yet to this day you have not done, O People
of Stafford, and of all England, who delight in such vain things; yea, though
Mercy after Mercy you have been tried with, yet still you are doing what you
should not do, and leaving undone what God wills you to do; and so indeed have
no Spiritual Health or Soundness in you, but all full of Putrefying Sores you
are, and so unfit to enter God's Holy and Heavenly Temple: And that which makes
your Wound uncurable, you cannot endure to have your Wounds searched to the
bottom, but such as can daw^ you over with their untempered Mortar, and call
you good People, and good Christians, when your Lives loudly witness the
contrary; those you account your Friends: And therefore will the Lord judge you
according to your Deeds; and according to the Fruit of your Doings will he
reward you, if you speedily return not to him with your whole Heart, for a
short Work will God make upon the Earth, when neither one Name nor another, nor
one Profession nor another, shall be able to hide the Wicked from his Stroke,
for it is in the Truth it self, as Truth is in Jesus, that the safe Hiding Place
will be, and ^o where else, as says his good Spirit in his Servant

Thomas Tailor.

To them that plays the Fool upon the Stage.
THOU that plays the Foolish Man upon the Stage, and invents all the Lies and
vain things that ever thou can, to move Laughter in the Rude Multitude, which
is Madness, as Solomon speaks, and all this for filthy Lucre: I demand of thee,
whether thou believe that there is a God, that will call into Judgment all
Men's Words and Deeds, yea, to the very Thoughts and Intents of the Heart; and
whether Christ's words are true which say, that for every idle word that Men
shall speak, they must give account thereof in the Day of Judgment? And if this
be true, as most true it is, then how will thou stand in thy multitude of vain,
idle, unclean and corrupting words before the Righteous Judge of Heaven and
Earth, whose Wrath is kindled against all such as have even thus sold
themselves to do Iniquity: And his Judgment is near, and the Judge even at the
Door; therefore in love to thy Soul I write this, that, if possible, thou may
repent, and not Perish Eternally.

O ye People, whose Eyes are abroad, and whose Minds are in the Vanities of
this World wandered from the Lord: How can ye behold such Men as these doing
such Foolish things upon the Stage, without all fear of God, and care what any
one that fears God can say against them, and yet profess themselves to be
Christians? How can ye forbear to reprove them? Does not the Apostle say to
Christians, Have no Fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, but
rather reprove them. And this is a Work of gross Darkness, for People to
profess Christ, to do these Deeds of the Heathen, who said their Tongues was
their own, and they may use them at their pleasure: But God will call into
Judgment every vile, vain and unclean Word, and account must Men give for them;
and then, Woe to the Wicked, and all that love Lies, and such vain Inventions as
this Foolish Man upon the Stage, for filthy Lucre, does practice. So People,
fear God, and repent of your Deeds, for the Lord God is at the Door, ready to
judge the present evil World for all their Iniquities.

Thomas Tailor.

Against Mass-Times.
WOE to this degenerate World of People called Christians, What shall be said
concerning you, and who shall declare your Misery? For as you have multiplied
your Transgressions as the Sand of the Sea, so will the Lord multiply his
Judgments and Plagues upon you, for you have violated the Laws, and broken down
the Bond of that everlasting Covenant, that should have redeemed and kept your
Souls to God; and you have wholly suffered the Spirit of this wicked World to
carry you away Captive by Millions and Multitudes into the Land of Darkness and
Wickedness, which is Spiritually called Sodom and Egypt where our Lord was
Crucified, and is at this day trodden under foot by you, where the Abominations
of the Heathen, and Superstitions of the Jews, are kept up by you, and
practiced in the face of the Sun, and many of them held up by force of a Law;
and such as depart from the Iniquities thereof, even become a Prey to you. So
that the Lord has dashed you together, for many Generations, like a Pot-sheard
one against another, and will yet dash you together for your great Iniquities
and grievous Idolatries, and will raise up his Plant of Renown from amongst
you, and become the Teacher of his People himself, and they shall no more be a
Prey to the Teeth of the Dragon, Wolf nor Fox, but shall feed in the good
Pasture, as in the beginning before Antichrist was; and the Temples of
Antichrist, with the False Worships therein, shall be a Desolation for evermore.

Woe, Woe, to all ye observers of Mass times, and Tides and Seasons of the Year,
wherein the Spirit of this wicked World, which is called Satan, God's
Adversary, and Antichrist, Christ's Enemy, sets you at liberty to do all those
Evils and abominable Works, wherewith the Spirit of the Holy Lord God that made
you, is so much burdened and g^ieved from one end of the Year unto the other,
so that he can smell no sweet Smell in any of your Sacrifices that you offer up
unto him, because of the gross Darkness of your wilfully deceived Hearts, and
the great Filthiness of your polluted Hands. O how the Lord, and his good
Spirit in all, is pressed under the weight of your Iniquities, as a Cart under
her Sheaves: And therefore has the Lord rejected your Confidence, and called
you Loruhamah, not Beloved; and Loammi, not his People; for as the Plant of a
degenerate Vine are you to him, a Field overgrown with Weeds, and your Spot is
not the Spot of his People; and therefore into the great Captivity are ye gone,
and there are amongst the Heathen, worshipping the Works of your own Hands, and
falling down to that which your Fingers have framed, Where is the Promise of
his Coming; when as him, Christ Jesus, the Light in whom all the Promises of
God are, Yea and Amen is rejected by you, even by your Builders.

Thomas Tailor.

To the Bear-ward.
UNTO thee, O Man, who art called the Bear-ward, do these words come: Fear and
tremble before the Lord God, who is against all such wicked and ungodly Men as
thy self is, who contrary to the Law of God and the Nation, go up and down
the Country keeping this great Evil of Bear-baiting on foot, to the Corrupting
of the Country for thy own filthy Lucre and abominable Covetousness, which is
the Root of all Evil: And the Lord's Hand has been long stretched out against
all such Lewd Men; but you go on in your Wickedness and repent not, and
therefore nothing can you expect, as a Reward of your evil Work, but
everlasting Woe and Misery.

And to all you, Foolish and Heathenish-minded People, who are the Upholders
and Spectators of these Brutish Customs of Bear-baiting; yea, and can spend
your precious Time, Strength and Money in the thing, the Lord is against you
also, and his Soul is greatly grieved and burdened with you, and will
assuredly visit with his Wrath, these and all your lewd and wicked Practices:
So if there be in any of you, any Heart left for the Good, repent, lest you
Perish in your Sins with such as hates to be reformed, Rests the Lord's
Servant, who cannot but Sorrow to see you thus, from time to time, go on in
your Sins without Remorse,

Thomas Tailor.

To the Dancers on the Ropes.
WOE to the Dancers upon the Ropes, and Tempters of God with their wicked
Inventions; and Woe to the Man that maintains and upholds such for filthy Lucre,
to draw the Peoples Minds from God: O Repent, Repent, the Day of the Lord is at
hand, a Day of bitter Howling and Lamentation to all such Workers of Iniquity
will it be. Did ever any Child of God, or any that had any Fear of God in them,
go up and down the Country with vain Fellows at their heels, disfiguring
themselves, and playing Tricks upon Stages and Ropes, like the Heathen that
knew not God, and all merely to draw the Minds of the Multitude after them for
filthy Lucre. O Cursed Covetousness! What have thou done in all the Earth, the
Root of all Evil well may it be called, and Idolatry, which whosoever follows,
do separate their Souls from the Glory of God, and all the Good that is in his
Kingdom? And then O ye deceitful and vain People! What will it profit you to
gain the whole World, and lose your Souls. Rests God's Servant, and a Witness
in his Power, against all vain and wicked Inventions of Fallen Man,

Thomas Tailor.

A Warning to all People.
WEEP not for the Dead, but Weep for the Living, even for those that remain in
the Body upon the Earth, because of the Miseries, Plagues and Judgments, that
are come and coming upon all the Wicked, Sinful and Unholy People in all Lands,
for the Lord has a Controversy with all Nations, and great will be the
Desolations, because of Iniquity and Violence that is grown up to so great a
height, that it has even as it were filled the whole Earth, and the Lord sees
all your Doings, O People, and your secretest Workings, when in your Minds ye
Plot against the Lamb's Life, which would redeem out of all the many Snares of
the Devil, whereby the Ungodly are kept fast at his Will. But the Men of
Nineveh shall rise up in Judgment against the Impenitent in the whole Earth,
for they repented at the Preaching of Jonah, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and
they believe him not, neither repent of their evil and violent Doings, but
harden their Hearts against his Holy Spirit's Reproof to their own Destruction.

Thomas Tailor.

For the People of England to Weep.
WEEP thou England, Howl, Howl ye People, for the Dreadful Day of the Lord God
is at hand, it is at the Door, as an armed Man coming swiftly upon you, to
break down and tread under feet thy Pomp, Glory, Pride and Strength: Thou have
exceeded in thy Sins, and art grown monstrous in thine Iniquities; so the Lord
will be exceeding Terrible unto thee: Thou have suffered the Wicked in thee to
have liberty, and to take their Fill of Sin, when the Voice of the Righteous
cannot be endured in thee; but he that departs from Iniquity, and would
persuade others so to do also, is even made a Prey of by ungodly and
unreasonable Men, their Bodies imprisoned and banished, and Estates spoiled,
and many sorts of Injuries done them for thy Name and Truths sake, O Lord God:
And therefore will the Lord God arise to take Vengeance for these things; yea,
his Soul will certainly be avenged on such a Nation as this, says his Spirit
in his Servant,

Thomas Tailor.
And moreover, because you have said in your Hearts, We have compassed them
about with an Act, and now none shall worship God but as we please: Therefore
will the Lord, the mighty God, compass you about with his Terrors, and you
shall find no place to hide your selves in from his Wrath, because of the Pride
of your Heart, and Evil of your Doings, O all ye People of the Land, who are
guilty in these things, says the Lord God.



To the Comers and Goers by the Prison-Window,
ALL simple-hearted People, who have any thing of the true Fear of God moving
upon your Hearts, and whose Desires are in any measure purely after God and
Goodness, and are not altogether hardened against the Lord, and Good of your
Souls: Consider and ponder a little, and unbethink you well, as in the Presence
of God, what has been from time to time declared to you, and all People, out
of the Prison-Window: Has not the Witness of God, in his Servant, declared
amongst you, the Dreadful Day of the Lord God, which will assuredly come upon
all the Wicked, and such as are covered, and not with the Spirit of the Lord,
whether Priests or People: And has not the same Voice, in great Love and
Tenderness, freely proclaimed Peace and Good Will to the Penitent; and the most
acceptable Day of the Lord to the Brokenhearted, and such as Mourn under the
Sense of Sin, and Burden of Unrighteousness, without respect of Persons: And
are not these things to be laid to Heart, and not at all to be slighted? And
therefore I say unto you, O People, even you that love your Souls, and are not
yet come to the true Rest, Christ Jesus in Spirit, but are wandering from
Mountain to Hill, after the Hireling-Teachers, one day after another, and yet
are not satisfied with their empty Words, but are dead, dry and barren in
Heart, as to the Power of Godliness, after all your Money spent and Labor
taken: I said, Is not this an evident Sign, that it is not Bread that has by
them been ministered to you, but the Chaff of Men's Inventions: For says the
Lord, Does not my words do good to them that desire after me? But alas People,
the Hireling's Words which he sells you for Money, are not the Word of God, but
only what he has gathered and conceived from the Letter of another Man's Line,
and so cannot profit you, though you should hear never so much of it, no more
than Chaff can feed: And so do not say the Fault is not in our Teachers, but
only in us: For I say unto you in the Spirit of Truth, the Fault is now in you
both, for the Day of God is dawned, and now you are both warned, and so are
left both without Excuse. There was a Time of Darkness and Ignorance which God
winked at, but now the Life is manifest, and the true Light that enlightens
being broken forth through the Clouds, you are hereby warned, and all every
where exhorted, to Repent. So harken to the measure of that Light that shines
in your dark Hearts, which convinces you of Sin and Unbelief, and would lead
you from them, this is the Word of the Spirit of God that is nigh you
wherever you are, and from whose sight you can hide nothing, though never so
secret. Here is your Guide to God and Life eternal if you love it, and here is
the Door that shuts you out from God and his Glory if you hate it; so prize
your time, and while you have time, learn to know this Light of Christ in your
Consciences to be your Teacher and only Guide, For why will ye die, why cease
you not from Man, whose breath is in his Nostrils, that broken Cistern? Time
will come when Fools will wish they had been wiser, and when God's Witness will
be remembered, and when such as now Suffer for Righteousness sake, will be had
in Honor. Rests, as always, your Friend

Thomas Tailor.
And you that go carelessly by this Window, and do not regard the Word of the
Lord, Hear the Word of the Lord ye Careless ones, ye go and come from the
Steeple-house, and in your Minds secretly conclude that you shall have Peace,
and no Evil shall come upon you, when the Lord God has spoken no Peace to you,
for there is no Peace to the Wicked, and there you are even in the Wickedness
under the Wrath of God, for the Wrath of God abides upon all the Children of
Disobedience. And verily the Lord is arising in mighty Power to Judge the World
by Jesus Christ whom ye have Crucified, and whose Counsels you have set at
naught, and have chosen rather to follow the Hireling-Teacher, and his ways,
than the way of the Lord God. So consider what is here said, and run not
headlong to your own Destruction, for what account can ye give to a pure God,
in the day of his fierce Wrath, who are not yet at all cleansed from your
Unrighteousness; Will your crying Lord, Lord, Save ye, who are found doing your
own Wills and satisfying your own Lushs, without Repentance. To that in your
Conscience I speak, which, in the day when the Book of your Conscience is
opened, will justify the Truth of these things against you all, who in the
broad way are found at that day to Condemnation, and the Day is at hand, and
the Judge is at the Door, and Woe will be to such as put it far off. Rests the
Lord's Servant still in this Prison, but the Truth cannot be bound,

Thomas Tailor.



To King Charles the Second, concerning Persecution, etc.
IT is in my Heart, as from the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, to warn thee to
stop the Current of that grievous Persecution which is raised up against us,
the Harmless People of God, in Scorn called Quakers, for our pure Conscience
sake at this day: For of a Truth the Lord God has raised us up in his eternal
Love to be his People, to bear his Name in Righteousness before the Children of
Men, and so to exercise our Consciences in a pure Love and true Good Will
toward God and all Men as he has taught us, and does teach all that come to
him: And therefore weigh things well in thy Heart, in the cool of the day, and
be not a means of injuring us for this the Exercise of our pure Conscience, for
truly the Lord Jesus Christ is highly displeased already for what is done
against us. O consider, consider, Does not his Holy Eye behold, and his
Heavenly Heart consider, the great Wrongs that are daily done us for his Names
sake, our Bodies imprisoned, our Estates spoiled, our Meeting Houses pulled
down; yea, whole Families ruined, as to the outward World, for no other cause,
but because we cannot cease to meet together in his Name as he requires us, and
required his, in a most harmless and peaceable manner, as his People in former
Ages did, and as we have always done, since we were to God a People. And never
let it be said, that Charles the Second disappointed the Good People of the
Land, under his Government, of their Expectations; for behold we looked for the
Continuance of Good Things from thee, because of some words passed out of thy
Mouth, but behold great Evil has ensued. O let not the Evil Counsel of thy own
Heart, or of others, cause thee to go on in that which will certainly bring
God's Judgments upon thy Soul and Body, and the whole Nation, if it be
persisted in, as this present undertaking against us will do. We desire not
your Ruin no more than our own, but this we know certainly, and the Scripture
of Truth abundantly witnesses it, That never did any Prosper, who did, or
suffered to be done, so great Injury, against a Harmless and Innocent People,
as we are known to God to be. O let not the King believe any longer, the vain
and false Suggestions of evil Men against us. If we had had any Mind against
the King's Welfare, we should not have had that Boldness that we have in God's
sight and thine; but now knowing in our Consciences, that all our Endeavors
have been from the beginning, how to glo^ifie God, and to serve all Men in Love
to this day, therefore are our Hearts in God's Truth, greatly strengthened and
emboldened to hold forth our Innocence before thee and all Men, For the
Righteous are bold as a Lion, praised be God for ever. And why should it seem
strange to thee, or any at this day, that we cannot give over to worship God as
he has taught us, seeing to God, the Judge of Quick and Dead, we must give
account; and if we could give over our Meetings, and Holy Exercises, and please
God, we should certainly do it, for God's Fear and Love is in our Hearts; but
seeing it is God's Good Will, and Holy Command, that we should assemble our
selves together, as we do, to edify one another in our most Holy Faith, and so
to hold forth God's Truth, as we have received it, before all, Why should the
King, or the Parliament, or any of his Counselors, think much that we should
obey God rather than Man in this matter. Wherein we can, with Safety of our
Conscience to Christ, we do obey you; but wherein we cannot, is it not your
Wisdom to bear with us, as your selves in the like case would be done by? And
so fulfill the Royal Law indeed, which says, As you would that Men should do
unto you, even so do unto them. And this is a Law worthy a King to meditate in
night and day, and not to follow the Counsel that is contrary: And this is a
Foundation which all Parliaments and Councils ought to build upon, or otherwise
how is it possible their House should continue; for from the height of Heaven
has the Lord beheld the Afflictions and Oppressions, and heard the Groans and
Cries of the Innocent Sufferers in England this day, and will certainly deliver
those that wait for him: But I would not have the King to be an Object of God's
Wrath in that day if possible. And therefore in the Name of the Lord God, am I
thus moved to write unto thee, and lay these things before thee, desiring that
thou may read them, and well weigh them, for they are of greatest
Concernment. And that, which rightly made use of, tends not only to thy
Well-being in this World, but also to the Eternal Good of thy Soul Rests God's
Servant, and thy Soul and the Nations Friend,

Thomas Tailor.

To Informers.
LEt all such in these days, as are Informers against the People of God, for
their Holy Worship and Service to God, consider, if they have not lost all
savor of Good, and care of their Souls. What became of all such Informers in
days past, whom the Scriptures make mention of. And first, let Haman, one of
the great Informers come into your Mind, and consider his Work and End, a woeful
Work did he work against his own Soul, in his Informing and Incensing the King
Ahasuerus against the Jews, because honest hearted Mordecai could not bow to
his Pride, as the Heathen did; and see his End, and tremble ye when ye read the
History of the Matter, as at large you may in the Book of Esther.

And consider ye, in the cool of the Day, what became of the Princes mentioned
in Daniel, who not only in their Wickedness got a Law from the King, without
cause, but also Informed against the Holy Man Daniel for breaking the King's
Law (which the King never intended against Daniel) because he prayed to God as
at other times: And read in the History of Daniel, where at large you may read
it and tremble, what a miserable End came upon them Informers, who themselves
were destroyed in that very Den of Lions in which they had thought to have seen
the end and destruction of honest-hearted Daniel, but the Lord did deliver him,
as he will ever do all them that fear him, from the Mouths of all the Lions.

And let the dreadful End of those miserable Jews in Jeremiah's Time, that
Informed against him for speaking the Word of the Lord: And in after time, of
those Jews that Informed against Jesus Christ and his Apostles, come into your
Minds, and affright you at Midnight, and terrify you at Noonday; for
assuredly if you go on with them, and be still found with them in their Work of
Informing against, and Persecuting of the Righteous, you must partake of their
Plagues; as says God's Truth, which never failed in his Servant,

Thomas Tailor.

Some Serious Considerations concerning the Priests of the High Places, called
Churches, etc.
1. IN their Sprinkling they abuse, and miserably wrest Scripture to prove
their Practice: For that Scripture, Suffer little Children to come unto me,
etc. speaks not a word of Sprinkling them, much less of their Doings and
Doctrines about it. And for that Scripture, Except a Man be born of Water and
the Spirit, etc. it is nothing at all for them neither: For it is certain, the
Spirit of God both can and has, and daily does Regenerate People without
outward Water; but the Water without the Spirit never did, nor never can
Regenerate any, and how the Spirit comes to the Insensible Infants (that by
their own Confession cannot act Faith) or whether it come to them at all in or
by this doing of theirs, I am sure they cannot tell, neither have they any
reasonable Ground to say or think it does, seeing there is no Command nor
Promise at all, in all the Scripture for it, upon such their Doings, upon such
Subjects, unless they will say with the gross Papists, that Grace is conferred
upon People, ex opere operato, viz. by the Priests mere doing about them.

2. They commit another great Evil in this Matter in bringing in People to
promise that for the little Children which they neither do, nor (of themselves)
never can do; nay, which they have not Faith so much as to believe that ever
any can do by any means, whilst they are upon the Earth; to wit, to forsake the
Devil and all his Works, etc. which is manifest by their denial of sinless
Perfection, since all Sin is the Devil's Work: And after the old Popish manner
calling them Godfathers and Godmothers, so taking God's Name in vain; and
otherwhile calling them Sureties, so taking Christ's Office from him, who is
the alone Surety, Mediator and Advocate between God and Man.

3. And Thirdly, In their great Blindness and Presumption, calling upon the
People to give God Thanks with them, for that he has Regenerated, as they say,
the Infant or Infants then under their hands by such doings; though as I said,
they have neither Precept nor Promise for it, nor Manifestation from God then
upon the Child, for their so believing and concluding. And so for their
manifold taking God's Name thus in vain, and causing you their Followers to do
so also, how shall they be held Guiltless: For, says God, I will not hold them
Guiltless that take my Name in vain. And how can these Priests blame the blind
Papists for their foolish Doctrine of washing away Original Sin by their Baby
Baptism, when they by the like doing proclaim Regeneration and Inheritance of
the Kingdom of Heaven to such as can neither Exercise Faith nor Repentance in
it. Tell me, whether is greater, washing away Original Sin, or Regenerating and
giving Inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven. O what a Reformation is this? If
this be not amended, surely God's Hand will be stretched out against you still.
But you present Parish-Teachers, that practice this thing, Answer this sober
and necessary Question: Do you believe this your own Doctrine and Practice to
be good, or you rather do it because this is the way to please the Times, and
so to get Money? If the former, then are you blind Guides indeed. If the
latter, then are you Covetous indeed. And Covetousness, says the Apostle, is
Idolatry. And then let all judge, whether either of these be fit to guide and
teach others.

And next, in their Marrying of People, besides their manifold taking of God's
Name in vain, as in their other doings; and besides, their evil Custom of the
Ring, do not they teach the People to swear and commit Idolatry, in saying,
With this Ring I thee Wed, with my Body I thee Worship, and with all my worldly
Goods I thee Endow; and at the conclusion of their Work, must plight their
Troth one to another. Is this sound Doctrine? These Priests use to say the
Scripture is their Rule. But no Scripture is there for certain for such doings
as this; but against it (if this be an Oath) for Christ says, Swear not at
all; but these Priests not only break this Commandment themselves, but teach
others so to do also; and so as Christ says, are least in the Kingdom of
Heaven: And Christ says, Thou shall Worship the Lord thy God only, but these
teach People to Worship one another. And does the Priest examine whether this
be true, which he teaches the Man to say to the Woman, With all my Worldly
Goods I thee Endow? Or they matter not what they do? so as they can stubber
over the business and get Money. But that which makes all this the worse, is,
that it must be declared to be done in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, though never so unscriptural and corrupt. And therefore will the Lord
visit for this thing also.

But from the beginning of Genesis to the end of the Revelations, I do not find
that there is any Command from God, either for Priests under the Law, or
Ministers under the Gospel, to Marry People, nor so much as an Example that
they did it. But the true Gospel Minister keeps himself pure to Christ out of
the World's Evil Customs and Self Ends, lest he come under Condemnation for
partaking with them in their Sins: For now is the Cry gone forth from the Lord,
Come out of Babylon my People, lest partaking with her in her Sins, ye partake
also of her Plagues. And therefore when People that pretend much, run into
things without the Heavenly Call, it is no wonder to see so much Evil attend
their doings.

And, Lastly, when they come to Bury People, having begun so badly, they
continue so to the end; for having ushered in the dead Body in their
Superstitious Surplice to the Grave, they must say, Earth to Earth, Ashes to
Ashes, and Dust to Dust, in sure and certain hope of Resurrection to Life
Eternal, of all they so Bury. Is not this a sore Evil, to conclude so directly
against Christ's words, who says, John 5.29. That some, not all, shall come
forth to the Resurrection of Life, and some to the Resurrection of Damnation.
But you say all, at least all, that come under your hands thus to be Buried,
though they live and dye never so badly. Nay, these Buriers profess that they
have a sure and certain hope of it too, though oftentimes it so falls out, that
they have no knowledge of the Party so Buried, neither of the Person Life nor
Death. But what shall be said to such Priests and People whose Eyes are so
blinded with Evil Custom and Covetousness, that they heed not much what they
say or do, but heap up Wrath against the day of Wrath, against their poor
Souls. But the true Spiritual Man, the true Christian, who is a new Creature in
Christ Jesus, sees all these things, and judges them and avoids them.

And now, as for the Sermons, Prayings, and Preachings of such corrupt Men as
these, what are they good for, or what benefit has or can your Souls, O
People, expect to reap from them? Can a corrupt Tree bring forth good Fruit,
can Chaff Feed Peoples Souls? And he that has not the Word it self, which is
Spirit and Life, and as a Hammer and Fire, though he may have and run with the
Words that declare of it, as the False Prophets of old did, for filthy Lucre,
yet he is but a Dreamer and a Deceiver of his own and others Souls, Jer. 23.
And though for Witnessing against such as these do, I suffer Imprisonment, yet
herein is my Joy, that the Lord has delivered my Soul from the trouble which
they lie in; and that I am accounted worthy to speak for God against Deceit. So
all People consider what you have to do, for this is the day of the Revelation
of all things reprovable; and so whatever has been hid in Darkness, is now by
the true Light to be made manifest. And though the Wicked in their several dark
Forms, dig as deep as Hell, and think to hide their Counsels and their Doings
never so deep in the Dark, yet to this Day of God which is already Dawned, and
in great Power arisen, must they all come forth to be judged, and to receive
every one a Reward according to their Doigns, without respect of Persons or
Professions, as testifies his good Spirit in and by his Servant,

Thomas Tailor.
And what also shall be said to that one thing amongst many in your Communion,
where it is said to the Receiver of the Bread and Wine when the Priest delivers
it, The Body or Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve thy Body and Soul unto
Eternal or Everlasting Life. Is this holding the Form of Scripture Words, or of
sound Words, as the Apostle Exhorts? Do you pray in Faith when you say these
words, O Priests, or may it not be said rather to you, who has required this
at your Hands. And do you consider what Bodies and Souls these People have that
you would have thus preserved, are they clean, are they pure, perfect, and
Holy; For such as are preserved unto everlasting Life must first be such,
because no unclean thing enters God's Kingdom. And the Church that Christ
presents to himself is such as are Sanctified, and thoroughly Washed by his Word
from all Spot and Stain of Sin, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. But what have you to do
here, you miserable Offenders, who by your own daily and customary Confession,
have no Spiritual Health in you. So as Israel's outward Lepers were shut out of
the Camp by the Law, so out of the Fellowship of God's Spiritual Israel must
the inward and Spiritual Lepers be kept this day: It is so.



To the Jurymen of Appleby.
ALL ye of the Jury (which is by Interpretation Swearers or Sworn-Men) who are
not yet come to Christ's Doctrine, where the Yea is the Yea, and the Nay is the
Nay: Such, I say, of you who found the Bill, and brought in the Verdict as it
is called against me for a Disturber of the Peace, because in Obedience to God
I witnessed against Deceit publicly amongst you. Consider, Do you know what
you have done? Do you know what Verdict signifies? a Verdict sounds in your
Language as much as a true Saying, or conclusion upon consideration of things
in question; and is yours brought in against me so, to that of God in all your
Consciences I speak,

Thomas Tailor.
From Appleby Goal. And further consider, how durst you say, or how dare you
say, that what was done by me was done maliciously and wilfully, is there no
fear of God abiding in your Hearts. Awake, awake to Righteousness, for herein
you have not done according to the knowiedge of God, I speak this to your Shame.



To Judges and Rulers.
HEar, O Judges and Rulers! and hearken, O all People! the Lord has a
Controversy with you; your Teachers have deceived you, and you that have
followed them are destroyed: You are full of Strifes and Debates, your
Iniquities are increased, your Assizes are full, your Fat overflows, your Pride
and Vainglory, with your Profession, is grown high; and in the open Sun are
these things manifest, and you are grown a heavy Burden,

Thomas Tailor.

A Testimony of Truth.
MANY are the Enemies of the Glory of Christ in this his day, who through their
wilful and affected Ignorance, would set up a Faith in the People, that
purifies not their Hearts to God, nor presents them Spotless and without Sin in
his sight, carrying the poor People in hand, that they may be Christians and
abide in Christ, though they Sin and do Evil, directly contrary to the plain
Doctrine of the Scripture, 1 John 3.3, 6, 7, 8, 9. which John says, And ye (to
wit the Brethren) know that he (to wit Christ) was manifested to take away our
Sins, and in him is no Sin: Whosoever abides in him sins not: Whosoever
sins, has not seen him, nor known him. And amongst these Enemies of
Christ's Kingdom and Glory, are found even many who highly profess him in
words, who therefore would be accounted better than others; yet upon true
Search and Trial, are as Ignorant of the Mystery of God and Christ as any; as
was yester day manifest by two of their Teachers; one whereof affirmed, That
even the Perfection wrought by or in Christ, was not Sinless: And the other
denying, and going about with all his might to prove, That this plain Scripture
here set down, must not be understood literally as it speaks; nor that other
Verse 9. of this forementioned Chapter, which says, Whosoever is born of God,
does not commit Sin; for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot Sin, because
he is born of God. But it must, says he, be understood some other way than the
letter speaks, otherwise (says he) it would make People go out of their Wits,
What none born of God that Sins? Can People live and not Sin? or to this
purpose. I will bring a Scripture, says he, to prove, That these words of John
have some other meaning, and not to be understood literally as they speak. Yet
H. Osland, in one of his Papers, says, They follow the Lamb in all his ways.
Which Profession of his, though it be most False, as is manifest, yet from his
words I demand, Whether such as follows the Lamb in all his ways, or
whithersoever he goes, do Sin, Yea or Nay? Is not the Lamb's way undefiled? And
they that walk in that way are undefiled, are they not? Are not these the
Called, and Faithful, and Chosen? And then he turned to the Book of
Ecclesiastes, Chap. 9.3. which says, Yea, also the heart of the Sons of Men is
full of Evil, and Madness is in their heart while they live, and after that
they go to the Dead. To which was answered, This shows only the State of Man by
Nature in the Fall, and so under the Law and Curse, and does not at all concern
the Gospel Dispensation, which Ministers Righteousness and Life to the Soul,
and gives a new, clean and wise Heart, according to the Blessed Promise that
says, I will give them a new Heart, and Circumcise their Hearts, that they may
sear me, says God. According to that blessed Doctrine of the Apostles, which
says, To such as really believed in-Christ, and so were not under the Law, but
under Grace, ye are God's Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works,
which God has ordained you shall walk in them. What will this Contender go on
in his Blindness, Blaspheming and saying, That Madness is in the Hearts of
these while they live, and that these new Creatures, in Christ Jesus, are full
of Evil in their Hearts while they live, and so go to the Dead. O Sad, that
ever such should take upon them to be Teachers of others, and be so Ignorant of
the Gospel-Mystery themselves: And therefore Woeful and Miserable must needs the
Condition of all such be that follow them; for as Christ said, If the Blind
lead the Blind, they must both fall into the Ditch; and in the Ditch they are
both, in this day of God, manifested to be; and that which makes their Sin out
of measure sinful, is their Unwillingness to come out of it, though one do
reach never so loving a hand of help unto them: Also by this we know, that they
are no Messengers of God, who cannot put a difference betwixt the Precious and
the Vile, to wit, between such as are under the Curse of the Law, and such as
are under Grace; to wit, betwixt such as are born after the Flesh, and such as
are born after the Spirit. But here the Apostle John, a true Minister of Jesus,
put the real difference, when he said in the forementioned Epistle and Chapter,
Ver. 7, 8 and 10. Little Children, let no Man deceive you. He that does
Righteousness, is Righteous, even as he (to wit, Christ) is Righteous. He that
commi^teth Sin is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from the beginning: For
this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the Works of
the Devil. And in this the Children of God are manifest, and the Children of
the Devil: Whosoever does not Righteousness, is not of God. So Woe to all evil
Doers, and uncleanhearted hearted ones, who believe not the Truth, nor receive
the Truth, as it is in Jesus, but in your Hearts suffer Madness and Folly to
rest, and in your Hearts continue full of Evil while you live, and so with the
Dead lie down in Sorrow. But on the other hand, Blessed and Happy for ever are
all you who have believed in the Light Christ Jesus, and abide in him with
Thanksgiving, your Cup daily overflows with Heavenly Blessings, from his
Heavenly Fullness, and ye are Complete in him who is the Head of all
Principality and Power, and in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge; and in him abiding, you daily witness his Circumcision in you, which
is made without Hands, in putting off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, and
not keeping on you the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, as the Hypocrites do, who
only talk of Christ, but in his Life do not walk.

So all Dear People, who love your own Souls, and would know the Salvation that
is in and by Christ Jesus, come out from amongst them that plead for the
Devil's hold, which is Sin, Folly and Madness, to be in Peoples Hearts while
they live, as though the Son of God were not come to destroy the Devil's Work,
which is Sin, and so to cleanse the Heart, Soul and Conscience to God from Sin.
And being come out from amongst these Blind Guides, you will come Savingly in
the Light of Jesus, that leads forth from them (all you that follow the Light)
to know daily more and more the things that belong to your Eternal Peace.

Also to set forth the Fruits of these Teachers, how little they prosit them
that follow them, because they have run and God never sent them, I shall
mention one Passage which I had with some of these Nonconforming-Priests
Followers at Stafford; for I being moved of the Lord to go amongst them, they
did not only violently haw^ me forth with their hands, and threatening
Persecution to me from the Mayor, but also opposed the Blessed Doctrine of
Sinless Perfection by Christ, with an Argument, directly one in nature with
that which Priest Osland, one of their Teachers, yesterday brought to the same
end, as is said, and it was this, Romans 3.10, etc. There is none Righteous, no,
not one: There is none that understands, there is none that seeks after
God. None that does good, nor knows the way of Peace, nor have any fear of God
before their Eyes, but Destruction and Misery are in all their ways, etc. Now
when they had brought this, I could not but somewhat wonder to see such gross
Ignorance of the Gospel in such a Professing People, for who could so have
abused and wrested Scripture, as to bring the wretched State of such as are
manifestly declared by their Works, to be under the Law and Curse, to prove
against the Happy State of such as by Christ are delivered from both, and
stated into the Holy Life of God's own Righteousness. And so these Professors,
who know not God nor Christ, are laying all these heavy Charges upon God's
Elect, whom he justifies. What have Christ's Members no fear of God before
their Eyes? And do not they know the way of Peace, but Destruction and Misery
in all their Ways, like the wicked World, whose Mouths must be stopped; yea,
yea, praised be the Lord for Ever; the Dayspring from on high has vilited us
that sat in Darkness, and the true Light now shines, that has led the Zion
of God out of all those Condemnable Things beforementioned, into the Way of
Life, Truth, Holiness, and Peace, Glory to his Name for Ever.

And so by this it appears how like these Priests and their Followers are, all
sucking at the Breasts of that Mystical Whore and Dragon that opposes the Lamb,
and his Followers, but the Lamb shall always have the Victory, as he has this
Day, Glory to his Name over all. For a Voice came out of the Throne (says
John, Rev. 19.5.) saying, Praise our God all ye his Servants, and all yet hat
fear him small and great: And I heard as it were the Voice of a great
Multitude, and as the V^ice of many Waters, and as the Voice of mighty
Thunderings, saying, Alleluja, for the Lord God Omnipotent reigns. Let us be
glad, and rejoice, and give honor to him, for the Marriage of the Lamb is
come, and his Wife has made her self ready; and to her was granted that she
should be arrayed in fine Linen, clean and white; for the fine Linen is the
Righteousness of Saints: And is not this Garment sinless, and without spot?
Yea, yea, And blessed are they that are called to the Marriage Supper of the
Lamb. Amen.

Thomas Tailor.

To all that are Worshipping in the Outward Court, without God in the World, in
diverse Forms.
THE ETernal Truth of God is now making i^self manifest in Sons and Daughters,
Servants and Handmaids, according to Scripture, and the Lord God of Heaven and
Earth to his own Glory is raifing up his own Seed by his own Power, and in this
Day of ours working that Work and Wonder which the Children of the Night cannot
believe, though it be told them. And now is the Searcher of Hearts appeared,
and the hidden things of Esau are in searching up, and Judgment b^gins to take
hold upon Old Ely's House, and the Vengeance of the Almighty upon his Propha^e
Sons: And now that these things are in doing, the Powers of Darkness band
themselves together to keep out the Judgment, but all in vain, for the
Consumption decreed must overflow in Righteousness, and the Hall shall sweep
away the Refuge of Lies in Priest and People, and all Fellow ships and
Communions of People, whose Hearts are in the Earth, and who are covered, but
not with the Spirit of the Lord, must be cast out, and have their Portion with
the Hypocrites, where is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth for Ever.
And now that Christ Jesus, the True Light, is arising, the Children of the
Night, Who love Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds are evil, are
inventing all manner of false Covers, and false Arguments, to hide their
Nakedness and Shame withal; but the Judgment of this Light they cannot avoid,
for it is to give to every Man according to his Deeds. And now therefore all ye
Teachers of the People awake, and arise to Judgment, and bring your Deeds to
the Light, and you Principal of the Flock come forth, for the words of the Lord
by Jeremy his Prophet, Chap. 25. Ver. 34, 35, 36. are now to have their perfect
Accomplishment upon you. And these are the words, Howl ye Shepherds, and cry,
and wallow your selves in the Ashes, ye Principal of the Flock, for the Days of
your slaughter, and your Dispersions are accomplished, and ye shall fall like a
pleasant Vessel, and the Shepherds shall have no way to flee, nor the Principal
of the Flock to escape: A voice of the Cry of the Shepherds, and an Howling of
the Principal of the Flock shall be heard, for the Lord has spoiled their
Pasture. Now he that has an Ear let him hear what the Spirit of the Lord has
here commanded to be left in writing: And see and consider, all you that are
under the Woe of these words, even all you who are called of Men Masters, with
your Elders and Officers, and Repent, for where will you hide your selves? And
where will ye leave your Glory? For the Lion of the Tribe of Judah is arisen,
and it is God, and not Man, Spirit, and not Flesh, that is pleading with ye;
and the Powers of the Earth, and the Wisdom of the Beast will not shelter you,
nor secure you from the Wrath of him that sits upon the Throne, and of the
Lamb. For now though you be changed, as to the outward form, somewhat from the
way of your Forefathers, yet in the same Nature and Steps, as to the substance
of Things, are ye found; for were they justly cast out for feeding themselves,
and not the Flock? Ezekiel. 34. And is it not so with you? And did not their House
become desolate, because they stuck to the Shadows, and denied, yea, Crucified
the Lord of Life, the Substance, in his Appearance? Luke 13.34, 35. And is it
not so with you? And was not the Spirit of the Lord grieved then to see that
filthy and horrible thing committed in the Land, to wit, to see the Prophets
prophecy falsely, Jer. 5.30, 31. And is it not so found now with you? And was
it not the Spirit of the Lord that moved to Cry against such then as stood for
Watchmen over the People, and yet were Blind and Ignorant, yea, as Dumb Dogs,
and greedy, which could never have enough; such Shepherds as could not
understand, who all of them looked to their own way, every one for his Gain
from his Quarter? Isa. 56.10.11. And is it not with you so now? And were not
the People a prey to the Enemy of the Soul, when things were thus with them
then as it is now? And was it not for the Covetousness and Cruelty of the
Teachers of the People, that the Lord brought his Judgments upon them, so that
they had no Answer of God, Micah 3.5, 6, 7. As it is now? And what was it that
made the Priests contemptible and base in the Eyes of the People, but their
horrible Breach of God's Covenant? Mal. 2.8, 9. As it is now. And therefore ye
Proud Men called Ministers and Teachers of the People in the High Places in
England, and elsewhere, who have made a Covenant with Hell and Death, as those
of Old did in Jerusalem earthly; hearken, and give ear, for the Lord has a
Controversy with you, as he had with your Fathers, who were in Covenant with
the Powers of Darkness, to keep the People in Blindness and Ignorance from the
true Light and Life then, as is your continued Custom now; for says Hosea in
his Day by the Spirit of the Lord, As a Troop of Robbers wait for a Man, so the
Company of Priests Murder in the way by consent, for they commit lewdness,
Hos. 6.9. And is it not so with you now? See and try, and let that of God in
all Consciences give Judgment, and both your selves, and all your
Congregations, see and consider, and fear the Lord, and be not Mockers, lest
your Bands be made strong, Is it not so with you now, as it was with them of
Old, which the Lord sent Isaiah his Prophet to declare against, Chap. 29. to
whom these words were sent, Ver. 9, etc. Stay your selves and wonder, etc.
(Here the words to the 15th Verse were written at large; and after them) see
and consider, is not this your Condition? And are you not worshipping in the
oldness of the Letter, and the earthly Spirit, and not in the newness of the
Spirit of Christ, and the Heavenly Wisdom, which is pure, peaceable, and full
of the Fruits of Righteousness, without Partiality, without Hypocrisy. And
therefore will the Fire of the Lord be hard to endure by you; for now the
Sinners in Sion are afraid, and fearfulness surprizeth the Hypocrites, because
of the Everlasting Burnings; see Isa. 33.14. And take warning while time is,
for this is the Day of the Lord's Visitation, and witnessed by his Spirit in
his Servant,

Thomas Tailor.

To William Thornton, called Justice, Hipswell, in Yorkshire, Divulged for the
Information of other moderate Enquirers after the Lord.
FRIEND, I have received thy Lines, in answer to those I sent thee; and thou
do rightly conceive of the ground of my writing them to thee; for it was
indeed out of pure Love to that which lies in the Death in thee, thy Soul,
unto which I spoke (though in the Death) to hearken to the Light of God that
shines in thy dark Heart; for the Gospel is Preached to the Imprisoned Souls,
who are dead in Sins and Trespasses, that the dead may hear the voice of the
Son of God, (even of Jesus Christ, who is the Gospel it self, the true Light
and Life of Men, who shines in Darkness, though the Darkness do not comprehend
it) and so live. And if thou have an Ear within open, thou may hear what
here is spoken, and so there will be no contradiction in directing thee to a
pure Principle, to attend to the pure Light of God within, freely given to
guide to himself; but thou will, if thou be'st once indeed turned to the
Teachings of that Light of God in thee, which shows thee thy Sin and Death
daily, and calls to Repentance and Faith, see clearly that the Contradiction
lies in the disobedient Nature within in thy self, as in all others without
Exception, of what form or way of Religion (so called) whatsoever, that are
disobedient to the Light: But, dear Heart, so long as thou judge of Spiritual
things in thy Natural Reason, as here thou do, how many seeming
Contradictions will there be in the Writings of the Holy Prophets and Apostles,
which never can be reconciled to that fallen Wisdom, but are all in Unity only
to those that are new Born in God, from before whose Eyes the Veil is done away
in Christ, who is the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God to all that receive
him in Love, but a stumbling Block, and Rock of Offense to the Jews, and
foolishness to the Greeks, who stumble and are offended at the stumbling Stone
(the Light within) through Disobedience, as says the Scripture: And therefore
here will be thy Wisdom, even to cease from Man, whose Breath is in his
Nostrils, and all the Wisdom of his Words and Teachings which are without, and
which stand in the Will of Man; and as was said before, to hearken to the alone
Teachings of the Spirit of God, the Light wherewith Christ has enlightened thee
within, which stand in a daily cross to thy own Will and Reason and of all Men,
and cast off every weight and burden of Sin that hinders thy Soul from running
the ways of God's Commandments, as in that Light they are discovered to thee;
and so the Beam being removed out of thy Eye, and Judgment brought forth into
Victory in thee, thou will see clearly into the Mystery of Truth, as it is in
Jesus, which yet truly, the Veil of dark Flesh being unremoved in thee, hinders
that thou can not; and therefore in the Fear of God, sink down into the
deepest Humility, and willingly become a Fool, that thou may be wise; for to
Repentance thou must come, which yet thou have not come unto, before thou enter
the Kingdom; to that in thy Conscience do I speak, which will show thee this to
be true, hearkening to it, though the Enemy at present in thee, it seems,
whispers otherwise. Oh! the Serpent is more subtle than any Beast of the Field,
and has deceived the whole Generation of the first Man, and does, and
therefore his Head being not yet bruised in thee, causes thee to cover, but
not with the Spirit of the Lord; and so the Woe will meet thee, till his Head
be bruised in thee by the Seed of the Woman, which way soever thou turn thy
self. Therefore must thou pass a strait Gate, as all the Children of God have
and do, before thou come to Feed on the Tree of Life; even the fiery flaming
Sword must thou pass, which is in the Hand of a Cherubin, which yet thou have
not passed, and therefore thy own Life and Strength yet remain, which yet must
go, or thy Soul Perishes for ever; for that Sword must cut down the Subtilty,
that that which has led out from God may not lead to God; for it cannot, but
the Simplicity (through the destruction of the subtle Serpentine Wisdom) must
enter, which breathes after God to do his Will, that must enter by Jesus
Christ. And for that thou presses the necessity of a search, by what Spirit I
was acted in Writing, and that because, as thou say, these are Times of
strong Delusion, wherein Multitudes are Captivated, etc. Thou may know, that
though it be true, that many are Captivated by Satan now, as at other times,
and strongly deluded, yet neither in these Times, nor any other, were any
Captivated in those Delusions, but such only as received not the Truth in the
Love of it, but have Pleasure in Unrighteousness, even such as turn the Truth
of God into a Lie, and holding it in Unrighteousness, becoming vain in their
Imaginations, worshipping and serving the Creature more than the Creator. And
such God in Justice does indeed give up to believe a Lie, and to be strongly
deluded by thinking themselves to be of God, and Christians, when old things
are not passed away from them, much less all things become new; and such are
they also that the God of the World has blinded the Minds of such who are
minding Earthly Things, who live in the Lust of Uncleanness, turning the Grace
of God into Wantonness, having indeed a form of Godliness, but denying the
Power, the daily Cross, loving the Friendship of this perishing Evil World, and
the things thereof, as the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and the
Pride of Life, making it hereby manifest, they know not the true God in his
Power and his Purity within them, but Worship they know not what, a God at a
distance, far away from them, and a Christ by hearsay. And now, Friend,
consider seriously, and lay these things to Heart; for to thy Conscience, in
the sight of God, I speak, Do not thou love the things of this World? Art
thou in Soul indeed separate from them? Do thou not love Fineness in Apparel,
Fineness in Dwelling, Fineness in Meat and Drink, Fineness in Speech, and
Conformity to the World in their vain Fashions and Customs in many other
things? I say unto thee in tender Love, God is no respecter of Persons, and
do thou respect Persons! Art not thou more afraid to Offend some than others,
and more careful to please some than others, and that because of the Person?
Friend, let me speak plainly to thee, has not thy fear of displeasing thy
Carnal Relations, now at Hipswell, been a cause of thy strangeness to us; I
know it is not altogether (as thou writest that) because thou thinks us
deluded, that thou art so estranged from our Fellowship, which once thou seemed
to Love, but some other thing; the Light in thy Conscience will let thee see
what it is: Ah! the Cross, the Cross thou must bear, if thou should now own
us, will be, I fear, found in the Matter, though I know it will be heard to
confess it, if thou hearken to the Serpent, and not to the pure voice the Light
of God in thy Conscience. Dear Heart, consider it is not every one that says
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of God, as the Scripture says, and
thou will, I know, acknowledge, but those only that do the Will of the Heavenly
Father, which is Perfect and Holy; and though thou look at it now as something
harsh to be told of Dissembling with the Lord within, yet I know through the
Revelation of Jesus Christ in me, if ever thou come to see in Truth the deep
Deceitfulness of the Heart of Man, thou will see a dissembling Nature lie
lurking within thee under many Vails, which now thou see not, and though thou
say now, Lord let thy Kingdom come, thy Will be done in Earth as it is in
Heaven, yet then when God comes to set up his Kingdom in thee, and so to
advance his Son Jesus Christ in thee, in the destruction of the Kingdom of the
Devil, and of all thy own Wisdom, Glory, and Idols, and so to do his Will in
thy Earthly Heart, in shaking its Foundations, and burning it up with the
Increase thereof, thou will find something in thee strongly Gainsaying; yea,
even Fighting and Opposing to Death, which yet thou art not acquainted with,
and secretly wishing, that the way were not so narrow, but that thy Ishmael
might live before him, how much more in the swelling of Jordan will it be hard,
when Isaac is called for also; but thou must witness a forsaking of the World,
and the Religion thereof, before thou see thy Isaac Born, as did Abraham the
forsaking of his own old Country, and the rejection of his fleshly Begetting,
his Bond-Child Ishmael, before the promised Seed appeared; now if thy Ear be
opened, thou will this also hear. And for so many being besotted with the lofty
Notions and Expressions of some refined Monks thou speaks of, thou had dealt
Ingeniously if thou had told wherein either I, or others with whom I have
Fellowship in the Gospel of the dear Son of God, are found Guilty; for if the
Scripture Expressions be such, we cannot deny them, though a Monk should say
the same; but I know thou can not, from any sound Ground in thy self, believe
that we have Intimacy with such as are called Monks, but thou art cousened into
this Conceit by the false Reports of the envious and blind World, who do what
they can to hinder the pure Truths progress, as they ever did by all means
possible, together with what thy own misapprehension of us has suggested to
thee. But herein is our Joy, that Men speak all manner of Evil of us falsely,
for the Names sake of Jesus Christ, whom alone, through Grace we own for our
Savior and Guide, and not another; and therefore it is that the World hates us
because we cannot follow them in their Obedience to the Spirit of this World,
as they do. And therefore, as I said before, so in love I advise thee again,
not to trust in that vain Religion, that thou art yet unseperated from, which
stands in outward Observations, which has not so much as a promise of
Perfection in it, where there is yet, lo here, and lo there is Christ, where
there is a Temple made with Hands, and a mention of Sins untaken away
continually, as in the time of Moses's Law, which was a shadow for a time, and
could make nothing perfect, seeing perfection was to be brought to Light in
Jesus Christ, the substance of all Shadows, Types, and Figures: And they that
were Preachers of the Gospel preached Perfection in him; And where Christ the
Substance, the Lamb of God was manifested in any, it was for the taking away of
Sin and perfecting in Holiness, and so they could direct others. And ^rith the
Scripture, Ephesians. 4, 10, etc. He that descended is the same also that ascended
far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things, and he gave some
Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers
(he himself gave them, and not Men) for the perfecting of the Saints, for the
work of the Ministry, for the edifying the Body of Christ, till we all come to
the Unity of the Faith, and the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect Man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. And this being so, it
is something strange thou should so far forget, as to say, thou knew not of
any Text, in the whole Book of God, which does promise to the People of God
Perfection in this Life. For though as in Heb. 7.19. The Law (which stood in
outward Observations) made nothing perfect, yet the bringing in of a better
hope (which hope is Christ, in the Saints a hope of Glory) did, by which they
draw nigh unto God; Having their Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and
their Bodies washed with pure Water, Heb. 10.22. And therefore there was a
necessity of disanulling of the Letter Commandment going before, because of the
weakness and unprofitableness of it, as in the 18. ver. of that 7. cap. And so
Friend, the reason of thine, and all the World's Imperfection, is unbelief and
disobedience to the Spirits teaching within, whereby the Soul is kept in the
outward Court and Temple, and so not coming through the Vail, the Flesh, which
only is rent in the Death of Christ, the Holiest of all is not come into, where
there is Perfection, which Perfection indeed is not known in the Life and
Glory, which is of the first Man, which stands in the Law of a carnal
Commandment, but in the Power of an endless Life, without beginning or end of
Days; which also if thou have an Ear thou may hear, and the Lord give thee
understanding that thy Soul may live, and not remain in Death, for the Letter
Kills, but the Spirit gives Life. And for my own Seize, which thou
calls Imaginary Transcendent, thou knows I said nothing of my self in
particular; and therefore be advised to beware of that Spirit that pats off
wholesome Advice by evil Judgings and Surmisings concerning the Advisers: For,
for my own part, I acknowledge my self to have nothing of my own to boast of,
but to be by the Grace of God what I truly am, and that Grace is my
Sufficiency, and rejoice in this to see the strength of Christ perfected in my
Weakness, but Wickedness he Destroys, and will not allow of any work of
Iniquity in any, and so in my Condition am I pressing forward to the
Resurrection from the Dead, through the daily Death; and though I have not
fully attained, yet I see every Gift of God to be perfect, and those that rest
in Christ, rest from Sin, and there are perfect; and so whom the Son sets free
are free indeed from Sin, and that where Christ is received, there is Power
received to become a Child of God, and there the work of the Devil is
destroyed, which is Sin; seeing he that commits Sin is not born of God, but is
a Servant of Sin, and so a Child of the Devil. And therefore it is time for all
to have out of the Spiritual Sodom and Egypt of Sin and separation from God,
lest the Wrath that hangs over fall on, and there being no Remedy nor Escape.
And for that thou entreats me to beware of the confused Notions and great words
of Jacob Bewman, and such like frothy Scriblers (as thou in disdain art pleased
to term them) who thou say may hereafter prove broken Reeds to those who now
admire them; thou may know, that those who follow the Light of Jesus Christ,
wherewith he has enlightened them in Spirit, which leads them orderly up out of
the fallen Estate of Sin and Separation from God into the Kingdom of perfect
Righteousness and Fellowship with himself, and lean not to any Man that can
Deceive, but have all one Master and Teacher, which is Christ; in them all the
Head, and they need not that any Man teach them, but as the Anointing leads
them they are safe, and this the Scripture witnesses. And by the Holy
Anointing in them; as also says the Scripture, they try all things, both Men
and Writings, Words and Works, and do separate the Precious from the Vile, and
know therein what to choose, what to refuse, as the Mouth tries Meat, and yet
are not Wise, as Men count Wisdom, but Fools to the World, and their Wisdom is
in their Head, hid from the World, which is Christ the Mystery, their Eye, and
so the truly wise Man's Eye is in his Head, and so their Guide and Teacher is
not Men or Means (as they are called) without them, but their Teacher is within
in the midst of them, and not removed into a Corner; and if any speak not
according to that Word within, it is because they have no Movings in them. And
if thou be'st humble-minded indeed thou will in Self-denial, bearing a daily
Cross to thy own Will and Wisdom, wait with these simple Children and Babes of
God in silence of Spirit to hear what the Spirit and Light of Christ it self
alone, and not another speaks within thee; and this thou will find to be a
straiter way than ever yet thou walked in when thy Mind must be kept in the
Cross, and not have liberty to feed upon any visible or audible created Word,
Writing, or Thing, but only upon the pure, immortal, and increated eternal Word
of God within; then will the Serpent Rage, and the earthly Mind Famish, when it
can come by no earthly Food. And for thy light Expressions of Jacob Bewman,
(the rest thou names not, and so I can say nothing punctually of them) I know
in most things he speaks a Parable to thee yet, and so his Writings may well be
lightly esteemed of by thee; but there is that in his Writings which, if ever
thy Eye be opened, will appear to be a sweet unfolding of the Mystery of God,
and of Christ, in diverse particulars, according to his Gift. And therefore
beware of speaking Evil of that which thou know not, lest thou come under
Judas Reproof. But, dear Heart, thy poor Soul not yet freed, as I said before,
from the guidance of Self-Wisdom, thou travelest in a Satisfaction with that
which therein only thou can comprehend, and not only so, but therein also
takes upon thee to judge that which is beyond it, which is very dangerous; but
if Christ and his Kingdom were so known, it were no Mystery. And for that thou
questions what I mean by my exhorting thee to come up to the Feast of
Tabernacles; if thou know the Scriptures which thou read, thou may see
what it is to come up to the Feast of Tabernacles, it is not to come up to any
Man's Tenets or painted Novelties (as thou too scornfully miscallest the Truth,
we in our measure desire to walk in) but it is to keep a Feast with the Israel
of God in the Wilderness, as though come out of Egypt into the Travel and Warfare
toward the Promised Land, having not for the present a City to dwell in, and
so to be separate from thy first Mother's Womb, which is from below, and is in
Bondage with her Children, that thy feeding may be upon the Heavenly it self,
which yet is a Mystery to thee, and all who cannot witness an Implantation
together into the likeness of the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ; if
thy Ear be open thou will hear. And for that Scripture in the 7th of Matthew.
thou concludes with, thou may know that it does not forbid the Judgment of
the Spirit of Truth in any; but it truly and plainly shows to the Pharisee and
Hypocrite his own Condemnation, who judges that in another which he is guilty
of in himself much more. And therefore every one is to wait to see the Beam
cast out of their own Eye, and so Judgment brought forth into Victory in the
particular, and so the true Spirit of Judgment set up in the Heart in
particular, true Judgment, according to every Spiritual Man's measure, goes
rightly forth upon the general, so as Christ there says, there is so, a clear
seeing how to cast out the Mote out of the Brother's Eye, the Beam removed out
of ones own. And now, Friend, if I should seem tedious to thee, consider it is
my Love and desire of thy Souls Information, that if possible thou may be
delivered from every Snare to serve the Lord in the truth of Spirit, being
taught of and guided by that Light wherewith Christ has enlightened thee, lest
otherwise it be thy Condemnation, as it is, and ever has been to all the
Children of Disobedience. So rests thy poor Soul's continuing Friend,

Rich. 18th. Feb. so called. Thomas Tailor.

To the Presbyterians so called.
WOE to the Teachers of the People, who daub with untempered Mortar, and cry,
Peace, Peace, when the Lord has not spoken Peace, for the Lord speaks Peace to
none in their Sins, but they teach for Doctrine, That none can live without Sin
whilst on this side the Grave, and so they Minister for Antichrist the Man of
Sin, and not for Christ who is without Sin. God's Righteousness, and he that is
born of Christ, sins not, for the Heavenly Holy Father of the unspotted
Generation of the Righteous is he; And the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against
such as abide in Christ: The Root is Holy and so is the Branches, but the Old
Adam, or Fallen Man, is not so, nor his Children, for the Root being Corrupt,
the Branches must needs be so; and so they that are in the Flesh cannot please
God, but they who love the Light, Christ Jesus, and walk in him, please God,
for this is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; Hear him, says God, and
know ye not that Christ is in you except ye be Reprobates. So the Voice of
Christ the living Word, (is to be heard and waited in) which is nigh in the
Heart, and the pure in Heart walk in the Light of his Holy City; and to such
there is no occasion of Stumbling; but such as walk in the Darkness of their
own Imaginations, stumble and fall into the Pit of Sin and Condemnation: But to
such as are in Christ Jesus the Sinless Man, to them there is no Condemnation;
for by his Spirit are they led and preserved out of Sin, which is the cause of
Condemnation, and come to witness Justification through his Blood; for if we
walk in the Light, as he is in the Light then have we Fellowship one with
another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin. How
beautiful is the way of the Just, they do not Iniquity that walk in God's
undefiled way, the Light, for by the Light are they led out of Sin and Evil,
and so come through the true Door Christ Jesus the Light into the Sheepfold,
which is the strait and narrow way indeed, for whosoever walks in Christ, and
holds forth his Life before Men, shall be hated of all Men for his Name and
Life's sake; for it is a Cross to all the World, who are in their own Wills,
doing the Will of the Flesh, which is Enmity to God. And so Woe to the Climbers
over the Door, who are gotten into a Prosession of Christ, without his Cross,
without the Lord's Law, which is Spiritual, without the knowledge of that
Flaming Sword to cut down the Man of Sin, that in the Birth which is Holy, one
may come to the Tree of Life which is in the midst of the Garden: O ye People,
harken a while, who have been feeding upon the Tree of Knowledge, and never
came through God's Judgments, the Flaming Sword, to the Tree of Life, your Food
is Death, your Works will burn, and your Fig-leaf Covers will fall off, and you
be left naked and bare to the Shame of your Nakedness, as in the day that you
were born; For what is any Covering worth, unless it be that of the Spirit of
Christ? The Lord God, who is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, will bring
your Deeds to the Light of his Judgment, and before him will nothing stand but
that which is pure; your defiled Preachings, Prayings, Singings, Hearings,
Readings, will all be rejected and cast out as Dung, from the Presence of the
pure holy God that consuming Fire. You have multiplied Words without Knowledge,
you have not been, neither yet are ye, Doers of God's Will (to God's Witness in
your Consciences I speak) therefore in vain do you say, Lord, Lord, and he will
not hold them Guiltless that take his Name in vain: Your Garment is not of the
pure white Linen, which is the Saints Righteousness, but Linen and Woollen is
your Covering, the Linsey woolsey Garment, a thing forbidden by God's Law: Your
Field is not sown with the one Heavenly kind of Grain, the good Wheat, but
another Seed have you mingled with it, and the Mixture is so great, that the
Earthly has almost covered and quite choked the Heavenly in you. If you will
work, you must into God's Vineyard, and be exceeding Diligent and Laborious in
plucking up the Weeds by the Roots in you, the Light of Christ in the
Conscience waiting in it, will give the Understanding. But Woe will be to them
that call Light Darkness, and put Darkness for Light, and so suffer the Good in
them to wither, and nourish the bad part, which is like the Grave that never
has enough, always Learning, but never able to come to the Knowledge of the
Truth. But both Teachers and Hearers all in Sin, and laden with diverse Lusts
all their Lives long: And Woe to the Fleshly and Selfish Workers on this Holy
Sabbath day of the Lord, wherein he has given his People Rest from all their
weary Labors and Burdens. The outward day, the First day of the Week, shall
not cover you, nor be a Sabbath to you, but in the Breach of God's Holy and
everlasting Sabbath you being found, you must bear his Judgment: And you feed
upon the airy. Words of Man's Wisdom, raised up by the Crafty Spirit to please
the Itching Ears of Fallen Man, and whose Faith stands in the Wisdom of these
Words, and not in the Power of God; a day of Scattering comes upon you, it
comes, and a grievous Whirlwind from the Lord; and though a Famine of the Word
of the Lord is upon you already, yet you will not know it, nor he humbled for
it; but the pleasant Breasts of Mystery Babylon, which you so much delight in,
will be dried up, that you will get no Suck nor Food for that unsatiable Mind
in you, that is like the Grave that can never have enough, Sodom, that will
bear no more Grapes; for all the Earth has drunk so deep of the Wine of the
Fornication of the great Whore, that the Nations are Mad against the Appearance
of the Lamb, who is arisen to set up his Kingdom over all; for the Lamb must
have the Victory, and Reign; so be it for Evermore.

And you that talk so boastingly of your Faith, and Suffering Mind, you know
not what Spirit you are of; for the same Mind that you think to suffer in, is
it which has formerly caused Sufferings to the Righteous, and would do the
like at this Day, if Power were in your Hands; and so if you could give your
Bodies to be burnt in this Uncharitable and Persecuting Nature, it would profit
you nothing at all.

Thomas Tailor.

To the Presbyterians.
O Ye People, called Presbyterians, you have fully manifested your selves this
Day to be of the Spirit of Cain, the first Persecutor of God's Righteous Seed;
and as for your threatening of me, and hawling me out of your Synagogue toward
the Mayor, because in Obedience to God I came to speak in his Name, to let you
see your Sins, and to warn you of the Judgments of the Lord God that will
certainly come upon you for them, if you speedily Repent not, and humble your
selves for all your Pride, and Hypocrisies, and false Accusations, and
Persecutions of the Righteous Seed of God, which he has raised up this Day in
the Earth, to witness for him against all the false ways of fain Man, that so
all may come to the Power Christ Jesus, to know him in them to be their Light,
and Life, and alone Teacher to Salvation: And this is my Witness for God this
Day, that except you come hither, you will never be Established.

Thomas Tailor.
But what are you grown so high already, that one must not come amongst you,
though in never so peaceable a manner, to speak a word, though in the Name of
the Lord? This is not only contrary to the Order of the true Church in the
Apostles Days, but also contrary to the King's Late Declaration, which says,
That the Places of Toleration must stand open for all to come into. But this
Persecuting Spirit is but the same that has been in you of Old,
notwithstanding all that has come upon you in these Late Days.



To the Blind Teachers.
WOE to the Teachers that have Eyes, and see not, Ears, and hear not, and Hearts
that will not understand, who can put no difference betwixt the Precious and
the Vile, but give the things they account Holy, to the manifest Unholy, Wicked
and Profane, and so dishonor the Lord, and deceive the Souls of the People;
and so they not discerning the Lord's Body, nor the Members thereof, which are
holy; they speak Peace to the Wicked, who are Members of the Wicked One; for
his Servants, and Members, People are to whom they do Obey; so Woe is to this
present evil and wicked World, who in words profess Christ, but in their deeds
do grievously dishonor him; the Day hastneth wherein the Scripture must be
fulfilled upon you, who will not that Christ should Reign, rests a Mourner in
Zion for all the Abominations that are done amongst you.

Thomas Tailor.

For the great People of the Earth, who love the Pleasures of Sin, these.
TO you that are great in the Earth, and in the Glory of the World exalted, the
Word of the Lord God is to you come down, come down to the Light of the Lord
Jesus Christ in your Consciences which shows you Sin and Evil, and it will let
you see how you have spent your time, and how your Hearts are taken up with the
Love of the World, and the Lusts thereof, that the one thing necessary is not
so minded by you, as the worth of your Precious Souls requires, but you eat and
drink, and sport your selves with the Pleasures of Sin, and feed your minds
with the vain Delights thereof, so fat and so full of Self love are you, that
there is no place empty for Christ in you, wherein to lodge, or whereon to lay
his Head, but as a Stranger in you, and in your Families, is the pure Son of
God found, and an empty Profession of him that is heavenly in your earthly
Minds, is all the Food that he can find amongst you: Alas! Alas! For you poor
Careless People, what will ye do in the Day of the Lord, when an Account is
required of you of all that ever has been done in your Body? Is not Christ a
Stranger amongst you, and not taken in, Sick, and in Prison, and ye visit him
not? Read within. Oh how often has the Lord knocked at your Door? and he is
not yet in Love entertained in, the Heart's full of other Lovers, he cannot Sup
there with you, and so you Sup not with him, but you eat your own Supper, and
prefers that before his, and so discerns not the Lord's Body, and so
Condemnation is near. Do you not? (to that in your Conscience I speak) Do you
not, I say, sit down to eat and drink, and rise up to play? Is not all Places
where you are found Witnesses against you, that you serve not our Lord Jesus
Christ, but your own vain Minds, and perishing Lusts rather? Does not your
Houses, your Diet, your Changeable Suits of Apparel, and your daily New
Fashions, with your manner of going abroad, whether upon Horse, or in Coach,
and your many unnecessary Attendants, and their Attire, show you to be so far
from Christ's Doctrine, and out of his Life, that scarce any thing of the true
Christianity is to be found amongst you: For where is the daily Cross to your
Wills and Lusts taken up by you? Or where is the Crucifying of the World to
you, and you to the World, witnessed amongst you? Or any such thing as the pure
Worship of God, which stands in Spirit and Truth, wherein he only delights? But
this poor Soul does mostly satisfy you, (to wit) to get a Carnal Man who loves
to be called of Men Master, to say over a few devised words, (or so) which he
calls Praying, and Preaching to please your itching Ears, but neither he nor
you doing the things which Christ Commands you; nor do you live the Life of
what in words you profess, and so to your other Sins you add that great Sin of
Hypocrisy, which is in words to profess the Knowledge of God, but in deeds to
deny it: But better it were for you all to mind the Fear of the Lord, and to
consider what end the Lord made you for, and not to pass away your precious
time so, without the Fear of the Lord God in your Careless Minds, as you do;
for this you should know, that the Lord of Glory, who respects no Man's Person
will not be mocked, neither can the respecters of Persons who love the Praise
of Men, and seek the Worlds Glory live with him; for such are Unbelievers, as
receive Honor one of another, and seek not that Honor that comes from God
only. See John 5. toward the end: And now that you have time prize it, and lay
aside your vain Thoughts a little, and in the cool of your Minds consider, and
let that of God in your Consciences speak, if it be not the greatest Folly in
the World, to Gain the Lusts of the World with the Loss of your Precious Souls.
And are you not in great danger of being found in this state, so long as the
true Prophet Christ Jesus, whom God has sent a Light into the World, (that all
through him should come out of Sin) is no more regarded by you. So now having
time prize it, and know this Day of your Visitation, and what indeed belongs
unto your Eternal Peace. Rests,

Thomas Tailor.

Concerning Bread and Wine.
THE Lord Jesus never ordained, that the unbelieving evil World should eat
Bread and drink Wine in remembrance of him, when they daily deny him in their
Life and Conversation, for that were Abomination. Carry such an Offering to the
Governor, and see if he will accept thee; will he be pleased with thy words,
when he sees thy deeds daily contrary to his Mind and Will? And how much less
then can the pure God accept thee or thine Offering, whilst thou only in thy
words seems for him, but in the whole Course of thy Life art directly contrary
to Him and his Holiness. O thou that art in the state of Sin and Corruption,
whose Fruits manifest thy Nature and Inside to be evil, how can thou endure
the Trial of this Day of God, which is as Fire, wherein all that are proud and
do wickedly, are as Stubble to be burnt up Root and Branch; he that has an Ear
let him hear what the Spirit says.

Thomas Tailor.

The Indignation of the Lord upon all Nations.
THE Indignation of the Lord is upon all Nations, and his Fury upon all their
Armies; he shall greatly distress the Inhabitants of the World, he will now
plead the Cause of his Covenant against all those that withstand his Glorious
Appearance and Work of Restoration in this the Day of his Mighty Power, wherein
he is Restoring the Kingdom of his Everlasting Peace to Israel's Seed under the
whole Heavens, who fear his great Name, and tremble at his Almighty Word of
Life, which shakes not only Earth, but Heaven also. And now is the Lord God
Almighty bringing forth his Glory to light, and Creating the New Heavens and
New Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, according to his Promise, Isa. 65.17,
etc. wherein the People beat their Swords into Plow-shares, and their Spears
into Pruning Hooks, never to learn War any more; but every one now that
believes in the Truth Christ Jesus, the Light and true King of Righteousness
and Peace shall sit under him the true Vine, and none to make them afraid, Isa.
2.2, etc, And now, even now, is the Lord God Almighty got up into his High
Throne of Majesty and Everlasting Glory to Reign, and of this his Peaceable
Kingdom which he has begun to set up in his Trembling People there never shall
be end: The true Israel of God is now coming up out of the Spiritual Egypt
indeed, to possess the true Land of Promise, the Inheritance and Free Gift of
our God, and no Enchantment shall now stand against God's Spiritual Host, nor
Divination against the Redeemed of the Lord, who have known his Wonders in the
Deep, and known the Outgoings of God's Power against Pharaoh, and all his Host
in the Red Sea of his Fiery Indignation. And now will God be exalted in
Judgment, and avenged in Righteousness upon all Nations and People under
Heaven, who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, and will not that God's Holy
Son, Christ Jesus the Light, should Reign, though he be come to Reign and Judge
in the Earth: For to him the Light, who lights every Man that comes into the
World, is all Power in Heaven and Earth given; and his Light shines freely into
all your Hearts, O all People of the Earth, and shines in the thickest
Darkness, making manifest the Creator's Will to all your Consciences, through
your Darkness, though People comprehend it not; but it comprehends you, and all
your dark Ways and destroying Thoughts, and lets you see plainly, that for all
your great Workings, and toilsom Labors in an outside Profession in your
earthly Wills, you have wrought no Deliverance in the Earth, but your Soul's
Enemies still stand in strength; and it lets you see plainly, that for all your
striving, and sighting, and killing, and spoiling, and destroying one another
about earthly things, you have done no good at all, but brought God's Judgments
upon all your Souls, and pierced your selves through with many Sorrows: And
therefore the Heavenly Voice sounds through the Earth, and calls aloud in your
Ears, and knocks at the Door of your Hearts, O all People of the World, High
and Low, Professor and Profane, Jews and Gentiles, Christian^ and Turks,
arise, arise, awake, awake, turn in your Minds to the pure Light of Jesus
Christ, the Judge of Quick and Dead, the Son of the Eternal God, Creator of
Heaven and Earth, who Died for your Sins, and Rose again to give you a New,
Holy and Everlasting Life in himself, through Faith in his Name: And behold he
lives for Evermore; and all see and search diligently in your selves, what you
know of his Holy Life made manifest in you to destroy the Body of Sin and Death
in you, which in the Days of Darkness has filled your Vessel, and brought your
very Soul, Mind and Heart, into the Thraldom of that wicked One, who is called
the Devil and Satan, and compassed with Terrors, and Fears, and Affrightments,
your very Life and whole Man, because of the Wrath of the Almighty, which you
by your sinful, unrighteous, and unholy, and cruel doings, both against God and
your Neighbor, have stirred up against you: And behold the Earth languisheth
because of these things; and the Children of Light, who are Redeemed to God out
of these sore Evils, and grievous Plagues, do mourn for you, and bewail your
Misery Night and Day, as well knowing in the Light of the Lord, what your woeful
End will be if these Briars, and Thorns, and noisome Weeds, the proper Fruit of
the Curse be still suffered to grow in you, and cumber God's Ground. O how nigh
unto Cursing is that Field which God's Rain rains upon, and yet brings forth no
better Fruit than Killing, and Slaying, and Spoiling, and Cousening, and
Cheating, and Defiling, and Oppressing one another, besides Lving, and
Swearing, and Cursing, and Drunkenness, and Pride, and Persecution of God's
Righteous Seed, with all other Abominations of the World against the holy
Light, and Checks, and Reproofs of the good Spirit of the Almighty, both in
their own Consciences, and the Mouth of God's Servants, and Holy Witness of
Truth in the Scriptures, which notwithstanding all these their Abominations,
many of them profess to be their Rule: But know, O Man, whosoever thou art, or
whatsoever Profession thou art of that that is thy God, and Ruler, and Father,
and Teacher, and Way, whose Commands thou love, and whose Works thou do,
and whose Will in the inward of thy Mind thou closest with; as Christ said to
those Liars, false Accusers and Murderers in his Day, John 8.44, etc. Ye are
of your Father the Devil, for his Works ye will do, he was a Liar and a
Murderer from the beginning; so thou that goes from the Light of God in thee,
which shows thee thy Sin, and the evil Lustings and Desires of thy Flesh and
Mind, thou goes from God, and from his Fear, and from the Way of Peace, and so
thou going from this, and joining to evil Motions of Sin in thy Flesh or
Corrupted Mind, thou joins to the Devil, and so brings forth Sin, which is the
Devil's Work, and the Wages of every such Work is Death, and so in the very
Moment of time in which thou do the evil Work, whatsoever it be, (contrary to
God's Light in thee) thou die the Death, and so remainest Dead from the Life
of God, and his Blessed Righteousness, until the Day of true Repentance and
Amendment of Life, and then what will it profit thee to have gained the World,
or Victory over thy Neighbor, or Satisfaction to thy Lusts in the Loss of thy
Soul's Life, therefore arise, arise, awake, awake, O all Nations and People,
come forth to the Judgment of this great Day of God Almighty; for now is the
effect of every Vision to be known and felt in the Earth, and the high Towers
of the City of Confusion, the Mystery Babylon, the Great Whore, the Mother of
Harlots, shall fall to the Ground, and the Mountain of the House of the Lord
shall be exalted over all; yea, the Lord alone, and his Righteousness, and
Truth, and Peaceable Kingdom, on the top of all shall stand, and no Weapon
formed against him and his People shall ever prosper.

And how is it, O all Nations, Kings and People, that ye are not yet willing,
after so many Years knocking at the Gates of your Cities, and Doors of your
Hearts, that you will not open to the King of Glory, Christ Jesus, the Light
that lightneth every Man that comes into the World, that he may come in, and
be Judge, and Lawgiver, and King in the midst of you, that the Desire of all
Nations may come, and be Head in all? For what is it that the Soul which God
has made in all Nations does desire, but to see it self unburthened of that
grievous Corruption which has defiled it, and to be delivered from that Body
of Sin and Death, which has and does so Embondage it from the beginning, until
Christ's Power be known within, to work the Work of God, and to destroy the
Work of the Devil, and to save the Soul from its Sin, and present it spotless
to God, which is the true Salvation indeed. Now this is my Witness for God
amongst the Servants and Redeemed of the Lord this Day, whom the World in Scorn
call Quakers, who suffer for Righteousness sake, That there is none that can
thus know the Day of Christ's Power to Salvation, but as they believe and
receive that Light of God and Christ which they be freely enlightened withal,
which shines in their very Hearts and Consciences, which searches their very
Hearts and Reins, and makes manifest to Man his Thoughts, and from which none
can hide any thing, but all things are naked and bare before him the Light
Christ Jesus, who lights every Man that comes into the World, Jew and
Gentile, one and other, who searches the most hidden things of Man, and brings
them forth to the Judgment of his Righteousness; for though the Night may hide
the Adulterer and the Thief from Man, it hides them not from God, there is one
nigh in the Heart and Conscience that tells Man and Woman all that ever they
have done, and do daily do, even their secret Thoughts; is not this the Christ
of God, the true Messiah that was to come, and is come, and dwells amongst us,
and we look not for another: And of his Fullness have all we received, and do
daily receive, who believe in his Light, which shines in our Hearts according
to the Scriptures of Truth: And this the Fullness of our Blessed God and Savior
Jesus Christ the Light, is it which fills all that come to him with all
Spiritual Blessings, and Heavenly Good Things; and without whom all is
Darkness, Emptiness, Death, and Desolation, as all the poor, deceived, lost
Sons and Daughters of the fallen Adam do sooner or later know, and are made to
confess: But Blessed are they that consider of things in time, and lay things
to Heart before it be too late; for there are but Twelve Hours in a Day in
which Men may work, says Christ, and then the Night comes in which none can
work, but the Door will be shut upon all who have slighted and neglected the
Day of their Visitation. O England, England, and all Lands far and near, that
you had known, or could yet believe the things that belong to your Everlasting
Peace, before they be hid from your Eyes; therefore turn ye, turn ye at the
Reproofs of God's Wisdom and Spirit of Light and Truth, which sounds through
all, and lets you see the Vanity and Evil of all your Works, and Frailty of all
your Lives, how soon the Thread of your Life is cut off? And then where is the
great Emperors and Kings with all their Crowns? And where is the great Captains
and Commanders with all their Bloody Victories? And where is the Wise
Achitophel's, and Cunning Counselors of the Earth with all their Admirers? And
where is the Covetous Oppressors with all their Houses full of the Spoils of
the Innocent? Yea, in that Day, where is all the Glory and Lusts of the World
with all the Lovers of it? Surely in Darkness and Misery shall they lie down
together, and Death shall have Dominion over them, even all who have not
believed in the Light Christ Jesus, and who have not followed him in the
Regeneration that they may be saved, but have spent their Days in the Pleasures
and Lusts of the present evil World to Destruction.

Now therefore, O all People, hearken to the Counsel of the Lord in this your
Day, and learn of the Lamb, the Light, who calls you to Repentance from all
your grievous Ways: How long shall the Spirit of the Lord strive with you? When
will you cease learning War, and Destruction, and Oppression, and Spoil? O when
will you beat your Swords into Plow-shares, and your Spears into Pruning Hooks?
O when will you go and say one to another, one Neighbor to another, and one
Nation to another, Come let us all be humbled before the Lord God of Heaven and
Earth, who made us all of one Blood to dwell together upon the Face of the
Earth in Truth, Goodness, and Love, to serve one another, and so as Branches of
one Tree, to receive Life, and Virtue, and Power from our God into our Souls,
to strengthen us unto his holy Work, who came not to destroy Men's Lives, but to
save them, whose Kingdom is not of this World, and therefore is not set up or
maintained with Carnal Weapons, Violence and Spoil, but by the Eternal Spirit
of our God, whose Fruit is in all Goodness, and Righteousness, and Truth; and
let not the wicked Devil, the Destroyer, deceive us any more, by his Lies and
Delusions, but let us all with one Heart and Soul resist his Temptations, when
he persuades us to seek to be great in the Earth, and be avenged on them we
count our Enemies, let us not hearken to him, but let us overcome their Evil
with Goodness, and not to seek the Destruction of their Persons, or Spoil of
their Estates, as the Heathen do, that know not God, but let us follow the
Example of Jesus Christ, God manifested in Flesh, who when he was reviled,
reviled not again, but prayed for such as despitefully used him. O come let us
follow this meek Lamb in Righteousness and Truth, and let us learn of him in
our Hearts, who is meek and lowly, that we may find rest for our Souls, who
rebuked his Disciples who would have had Fire to come down from Heaven to
destroy the Samaritans, who would not at that time receive Christ; for what
know thou, O Man, but the Samaritans may in time come to a better Mind, and
then thou will see it was thy Will, and not God's, that desired their
Destruction in their Sins; for Christ would have all to be Saved, and to come
to the Knowledge of his Truth, but many will not come to him that they might
have Life, and so their Destruction is of themselves, and their Condemnation
just. And who are now therefore those that withstand the Doctrine of the Truth,
which says, Love your Enemies, and seek not the Destruction of their Persons
and Estates, but seek them by good Doctrine, and good Life, to bring them out
of their Sins. And if they will not, but rather hate thee for thy Goodwill; be
content thou have quitted thy own Soul, and art clear of their Blood, and so
thou becomes a Sufferer with Jesus Christ, and shall Reign with him in due
time: I say, who are these now on the Earth that are against the good
Self-denying Doctrine of Christ, and continue in the hateful destroying ways of
the old Jews and Gentiles, but such as will not be counseled by the Lamb of
God, the suffering Seed, who said, Learn of me for I am meek and lowly of
Heart, but ye are Men of corrupt Minds, and account Gain, and worldly Honors
and Promotions, more than Godliness, who cry Peace, Peace to themselves in
their Sins. And that same Spirit in them which creates that false Peace in
them, is the same that stirs them up to kill, destroy, oppress, and spoil one
another for selfish and worldly Ends; but the Lord is arisen to Judge all these
Evil things, and to redeem a Seed to serve him, as in the beginning of the
Gospel before Antichrist the Murderer got up amongst them, that professed
Christ in Words, but denied him in Deeds, and so had a Name that they lived,
but were dead from that true Life that was in Christ Jesus, whom in words they
Professed: And though the passage we feel now to be as hard of coming from
amongst the false Christians and Turks, as it was for the first true Christians
to come from amongst the Jews and Gentiles, yet the Almighty Power of our God
is able, over all, and through all, to carry us to the End, whom he has called
and saved with a mighty Salvation, ever praised be his Name, and who will yet
save his beloved Seed Israel, and gather them from the East and West, and from
the North and South, to sit down with Christ in his Kingdom. And this is no ill
News to any, but who are glewed to Deceit, and married to Iniquity: But it is
good News and glad Tidings indeed to all that love their Souls, and the Honor
and Glory of Truth more than the things of this perishing World: And I could
desire, that all who are apt to reason as the Jews did when they heard the
Declaration of the Gospel of Peace, and Kingdom of God, which stands in
Righteousness and Peace, saying, If we let this go on, then the Romans and
others will come and take our Place and Nation: I say, that they would
consider, that the very course which they, to wit, the old Jews in the denial
of the Truth took for saving of themselves, brought utter destruction upon them
and their Nation: But what shall vain Man in his foolish fallen Wisdom, and
Earthly Reasonings, think to be wiser than God, and to have a greater Care and
Love to the Creation than God himself who made it has. What, shall Angels, at
the Birth of Christ, sing Glory to God on high, and Good Will to Men, and yet,
when the way of God in Christ is published, for bringing this great Work of
Salvation to pass, vain Man must come in with his false Mind, and say, This is
the way to confound all Order, and destroy all Good, and that this Doctrine
turns the World upside down, and that the Messengers of Christ are Pestilent
Fellows, and movers of Sedition. O Earth, Earth, tremble before the Lord, for
thou shall never have Peace in 'thy own ways, thou shall never be saved by thy
own Strength, thou shall never be established by thy own Counsels, thou shall
never have true Peace nor Plenty within thy Borders, until thou believe the
Gospel, which says, Learn of Christ, whose Kingdom is not of this World, and
whose Weapons are not Carnal but Spiritual, mighty through God, not for the
pulling down of outward Walls and Bodies, but for razing, and pulling down, and
destroying the strong Holds of Sin and Satan in the Hearts and Lives of the
Children of Men. For after that, says the Apostle, the World by Wisdom knew
not God, it pleased God by the Foolishness of Preaching such Doctrine as this
(which is a Cross and stumbling Block to all Flesh) to save them that believe.
So lay things to Heart, ye People of the World, and Inhabitants of all the
Earth; for God's purpose is not to exalt any Man or Men of this World, nor to
glorify any Flesh, but to exalt his own Son Christ Jesus, the Heavenly Man,
the Lord from Heaven, the Truth over all, of whose Kingdom and Government there
shall be no End. And all that Obey his Voice, and for Obedience thereto are
made willing to Suffer with him, shall Reign with him for evermore. But all
others, whether they be called Christians or Turks, or whatever else, shall be
as the Dust or Chaff before the Wind, to be scattered, as the Lord by his
Spirit from the beginning has said, and at this Time speaks in his Servant,

Thomas Tailor.

To Loose and Wicked Professors.
HOW long, O ye People, will ye sleep and slumber in a dead Form of Religion,
without the Life and Power of Godliness? How long will ye dote upon the shows
and appearances of Things, where the Substance is wanting? Can the Soul of Man
live upon that which perishes and passes away with the using, as the things of
this present time do? How long shall the Trumpet of the Lord be sounded in the
Land, before the People prepare themselves to serve the Lord, and worship him
in Spirit and Truth, as he requires. How long shall the Judgments of the Lord
be in the Earth, before the Inhabitants thereof learn Righteousness. O the
hardness of the Hearts of the Children of Men this day upon the Earth! how past
feeling are the Men of this Generation grown, and without Understanding! Never
was Sodom more secure! The Day is dawned, and the Sun is up, and yet they lie
fast locked up in the deepest Sleep of fleshly Ease and carnal Security. And
because the Lord suffers not his whole Displeasure to arise at once upon them;
therefore they go on to harden themselves in their Sins, as the People of old
did, whom the Lord overthrew in his Wrath: And so because Judgment is not
speedily executed upon their Evil Deeds, therefore they set their Hearts to go
on in their old ways of Sin, Vanity, and Uncleanness, and so cover themselves,
but not with the Spirit of the Lord, nor any of the pure and Holy ways thereof;
but take Counsel one at another, and strengthen themselves in the Arm of Flesh.
Woe, woe unto you, O wicked and evil People, who harden your Hearts against the
Lord, who shall sufficiently bewail you, or what Lamentation shall be taken up
for you? With the Mourning of them that mourn for the Dead slain by the Sword,
cast out into the Highways to be trodden under Foot, shall you be lamented.

Thomas Tailor.

To Protestants.
OYe poor People called Protestants, in the sense of the Love of God to my
Soul, and pity to yours, do I write these Lines; It is many Years now since it
pleased the Lord to deliver you from the bloody Conspiracy of them called
Papists, in that Powder Plot, and you have kept a Yearly Remembrance of it in
an outward Day, in an outward manner, Acclamations, Organs, and other bodily
Exercises; but alas, your Souls lies still in the Death, Ignorant of that
Heavenly Deliverance and Resurrection from Sin, which the Saints in Light
witness to the everlasting Praise and Glory of his Grace, daily and hourly to
be remembered, and at no time to be forgotten. And for want of this, your
Offerings cannot be accepted of the pure God, who looks for Spiritual Obedience
from the very Heart of all that receive any Blessing, Mercy, or Deliverance
from him, either for their Souls or Bodies. But truly, the Lord God is not
pleased with your Organs, Ringing of Bells, and Singing and shouting on the top
of a Steeple, or any vain words of Thankfulness for an Offering to him, and you
still remaining in that nature, which grieveth his Holy Spirit. And so you
dishonor the Holy Lord God, the Creator of all things by your base and low
thoughts of him, judging his Thoughts to be like your Thoughts; and that such a
sorry Service as you offer to him will please so great a Majesty: Truly, the
Lord might justly give you into the hands of those he has thus delivered you
from, because of your Sins, and because you lay not his Goodness to Heart, as a
truly thankful People do. So whilst you have time prize it, and awake out of
Sleep, and come to the Light of God in you the Soul's Searcher, and it will let
you see the Truth and Seasonableness of my Words, that you may repent of all
your Sins and sinful Sacrifices, and learn to offer unto God your whole Heart
to be disposed of to his Will and Service, that by his Power he may purge you,
and through his Righteous Judgments he may make you clean in Heart for his use,
who is over all blessed for ever. And who is seeking such Holy Worshippers in
this day of his Power, wherein he is arisen to purge the Earth with his fiery
flaming Word, and to slay the wicked with the Sword of his Mouth.

Thomas Tailor.

To the Sons of Vanity.
YE Sons of Vanity, whose Exercise and Delight is not all in God and Goodness,
but in Sin and Vanity, to the darkning and separating of your Souls from that
blessed Peace which the Saints in Light enjoy with the Lord God. O the
miserable Desolations that Sin in this Night of Apostasy has made in the
Earth; yet Glory to God, though the Egyptians sit in the grossest Darkness, yet
the Children of Israel who fear the Lord, and work Righteousness, have Light in
all their Dwellings. And in that Light they stand Witnesses for God
continually, against all vain Inventions, and cruel Sports of Men of corrupt
Minds, whom God will Judge, and severely Punish in his Judgment-Day. O consider
this ye Cock-Fighters, Bull-Baiters, and all that forget God; for the Judgment
hastens, and who shall stand in the Gap for wilful Transgressors.

What, did ye seem to humble your selves lately in a Public Fast for your
Sins, and are you so quickly turned again to the Vomit of your old Vanities?
How should the Lord but smite the Land for these things,

From a Servant of God these, Thomas Tailor.

Who they are that only Rejoice in the Birth of Christ.
NOne can rightly Rejoice in the Birth of Christ, but the Spiritual Newborn in
Christ. Those that think to please Christ with Eating, and Drinking, and
Sporting, and Playing, are Garnally-minded, and the Carnal Mind cannot please
God, Romans 8.6, 7, 8. so its manifest, that the Service and Kingdom of God
stands not in Meats and Drinks and foolish and worldly Delights, but in
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. For Meats for
the Belly, and the Belly for Meats, but God will destroy both it and them,
says the Apostle.

But God will never destroy such as Serve and Worship him in Spirit and Truth,
all the days of their new and redeemed Life; and so it is manifest, the more
Spiritual that any one is, the more are they dead and separated from that
foolish Mind, and vain Customs that the evil World loves and lives in. And, on
the contrary, those that make most Provision for Flesh, to satisfy it in the
Lusts thereof, let the time be what it may, are the gre^test Enemies to Christ
and their own Souls. So let things be well weighed and considered, and it will
appear to the open Eve, that God is not more dishonored in any Twelve Days of
the Year, than in these that People pretend most to Honor him in, which to a
Godly Heart cannot but be matter of great Sorrow, as says the Apostle, Phil.
3.18.18. Many walk of whom I have told you often,

And this is the miserable and woeful Condition of too great a part of the
People, that, in these days, bear the Name of Christians, over whom the Spirit
Mourns.

Thomas Tailor.

A Testimony against Persecution, to King Charles the Second, and his
Magistrates.
THough our Sufferings be little accounted of in the Eyes of those that Afflict
us, yet be assured they are seen to be great and many in the Eyes of God our
Heavenly Father, for whose Name and Truths sake we suffer; and for this are his
Judgments begun to be poured out upon the Land; for though the People of the
Land of all sorts, be guilty of many other Crying Sins, yet this one Sin of
Persecuting the Righteous for their pure Conscience sake, is and always has
been the most Grievous in the Eyes of Jesus Christ, whose Glory is mainly
concerned in it, as one may see by that in Acts 9. where it is said by Jesus
from Heaven, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me. The Jews and Saul thought
they had done well, so to persecute those Poor Members of Christ in those days,
because they would not conform to the Ceremonies of their Law and Service; but
Jesus saw it was done against him in them, what was done against them. So
though many may think they do well, in doing thus against us in these days,
because we cannot conform to your Customs, contrary to that of God in our
Conscience: Yet know assuredly, we are justified in the sight of God for what
we do, and he will assuredly plead our Innocent Cause, as he did the Sufferers
for Truth in those former Days; and it will not be well with the Land, so long
as these Yokes of Oppression are upon us, who desire nothing more than the
Peace, Welfare, and everlasting Good of the King and all People; but alas, it
will not be so long as the Law, which should be laid upon the Wicked Drunkards,
Swearers, Unclean Persons, and Wasters of God's Creatures upon their Lusts, is
thus laid upon the Righteous, who live Peaceably, Righteously and Godly, in
this present evil World. And so you Judges, be awakened to true Judgment and
Justice, and know aright for what both Land and Sea mourns at this day, and
let the King also and all People know the same, and know that it is for all
your Sins, and especially for the hard Usage of us the Peaceable and Innocent
People of God in Scorn called Quakers, for our Pure Conscience Sake, and Holy
worshipping of our God in Spirit and Truth, as the Lord Jesus Christ has
taught us: And so till this, with the rest, be repented of, How can the Lord
accept you, or be for you? Yea, though Noah, Daniel and Job, stood before God
to intercede for you, yet his Heart cannot be for you, so long as your many
Sins, and this grievous Sin before mentioned, do remain: Yea, though you should
meet together every day in the Week, and call it a Fast, and seem in the
outward to humble your Souls, yet till these Burdens of Sin be removed from off
your Souls, and the Yokes of Oppression from off Christ's Lambs, it cannot be
well with you. Your Teachers may tell you of Sin in the general to be the cause
of these Plagues, but they tell you not nakedly and truly for what the Hand of
the Lord is lifted up against you, neither indeed can they, because of the
Blindness of their Hearts, and the Spirit of deep Sleep that is fallen upon
them. So Friend, these things are on me, as from the Lord, to advertise thee
and you all of, in love to thy Soul and you all, and to desire you, in the Name
of the Lord, to lay them to Heart, and ponder of them, and not to pass over
them slightly, as too many have done, because they come from such a one as I,
who am as a Man rejected by you: Yet the Lord loves my Soul, and cares for me,
praised be his Name; and in the Patience, and Joy, and Strength of the Peace of
God's Blessed Spirit, am I kept and preserved in these continued Bonds and
Sufferings for his Names sake; and the Love of Christ constrains me to seek all
your Good and Welfare in the Lord, though the more I do this, I be the more
hated and persecuted of some for my Good Will; but this I impute not here to
thee, but desires that thou may more and more keep thy Heart and Hands clean
from the great Offense (to wit, the Hatred of Goodness and good Men) which has
sunk Nations and Kingdoms into the Pit. And my desire is, That the King, and
all in Authority, may timely know and consider of these things, as things of
most Concernment to their Immortal Souls, Rests God's Servant

Thomas Tailor.

Woe to the World, because of Iniquity.
WOE to the World, because of the great Iniquity that lies upon it. O how are
the People of this present time wholly loose in their Hearts to all manner of
Vanity. The Lord sees and well pondereth of these things, though you, O poor
deceived People, will not see it. For O how the Enemy of your Souls, through
long Custom, has blinded your Minds, so that the Good which God has commanded
you, you like not at all, but the Evil which your own Hearts have devised you
call Good, and so bring your felves under the Woe, Woe, Woe, to the cursed Customs
of the World, which are many: Your Races, both by Men and Beasts, where
Multitudes meet together to spend their precious Time, and to satisfy their
Vain, Covetous and Drunken Minds, the Lord is against it; and Judgment from
Heaven lingreth not, you will not be warned until you feel it. Rests God's
Servant and Witness against all vain Inventions,

Thomas Tailor.

An Apology from the Harmless against the Unjust. And to the King and his
Magistrates against Plotting.
WE, who are of the World called Quakers, do testify, as in the sight of the
Blessed Lord God of Heaven and Earth, that we are clear in our Hearts from all
Plottings or Contrivings of Evil or Mischief against the King or any of his
Subjects; and that our Meeting apart from the Steeple-house Worship, is merely
in Obedience to God and at his Command, who says, Come out from amongst them
who live in Sin, and plead for the continuance of the Body of it (Yea in the
Regenerate themselves) during term of Life: And so while we touched the
unclean thing with you, we could not be accepted of God; and therefore the Lord
called us out, that we might meet together as we do, and have done these many
years, in his holy Name and Fear, to worship him in Spirit and Truth, not in a
Pretense, but in the real Truth of the thing: And we have found his Heavenly
Presence with us, and his Holy Promise fulfilled amongst us, which says, Where
two or three are gathered together in Christ's Name, he will be in the midst of
them; Praises to him for ever. And now as concerning those People called
Monarchy-Men, who are Fighters with Carnal Weapon, and it seems did rise up to
disturb the Peace of the Nation by outward Force, we do utterly deny; and not
only them, but all others who think the Kingdom of Christ can be set up with a
Carnal Weapon, or that his Church can be preserved and kept clean by worldly
Force, for God has given us graciously to see beyond all such things, and has
manifested in us that Blessed Heavenly Power and Spirit of Christ, by which his
Church, which is his Body, is raised up and preserved, and builded up for
evermore; and the Sword of this Blessed Spirit of Jesus, which is the Word of
God we know, for the cutting down not of Persons but Sins, Praised be God; and
so to the outward Fightings and Warrings our Hearts are dead, and we dare not
avenge our selves as the wicked World does, but to God to we commit our Cause
in Welldoing, for he is the Avenger of all Wrongs, and Pleader of the Innocent
Cause of his People in all Generations, Glory to his Name over all. And
therefore it cannot be but a most unjust thing, that we should suffer by a Law
that was made against Plotters and Seditious Conventiclers: I say, we who
through the Grace of Christ are made to witness against all such things from
our very Hearts, and therefore it concerns all, who are in Authority, to see
what they do, and to distinguish rightly of Matters, lest they cause the
Innocent to suffer, as some to their own Hurt have done, and so bring God's
Judgments upon them; for not the greatest that ever were upon the Earth, could
escape God's Judgments who wronged his People, witness Ahab's House, and all
the great Kings of the Nations in all Ages, who touched God's People, who were
as dear to him as the apple of his Eye: Do you not remember what they did to
Daniel for the Worship of his God, and how the Lord delivered him, and the Pit
devoured his Adversaries, with the Informers and false Accusers? Daniel could
not worship but according to the Law of the God of Heaven, and so we cannot
worship but according to the Law of the Spirit of Life which is in Christ
Jesus: Must we therefore suffer; well we are helped by the Love of God, to
rejoice and bear patiently the Will of the Lord, until he plead our Innocent
Cause, and judge in Righteousness betwixt us and our Adversaries, for in his
Judgment is our Boldness, Glory to God for ever; but the Haters of the Good
cannot stand before him. The Jews said, They had a Law, and by their Law Christ
ought to die: Was that a good Law which condemned the Innocent? So whatever Men
pretend, as a Cloak to cover their Doings from Men, yet God sees the Hearts of
all Persecutors of the Righteous, and will judge them as such. Rests

Thomas Tailor.

Against May-poles.
O People of Penkridge, and the Places thereabout, who had a Heart or Hand in
the setting up of these Heathenish May-poles, especially this second time, you
have shamed your selves and your Religion thereby in the sight of all, and you
have greatly provoked the Lord God against you by these doings: And the old
Heathens did never more manifest their evil inside in setting up their Idols,
than you have done in setting up this dead Stick, and adorning it with
Garlands, or so, and sometimes Dancing and Rejoicing about it, as your Brethren
in the Wilderness did about the golden Calf. And now upon this particular
Stick, what may be judged by the Flag that stands on high upon it, but that you
have bid defiance to all Good. O the Pride, O the Selfwilledness, O the
Naughtiness of your blind deceived Hearts! How long will you strive against God
with your Doings? How long will you provoke the Eyes of his Jealousy against
you? A sad day is coming upon you from his provoked Throne, O Repent, Repent,
the dreadful and terrible Day of the Lord God is at hand; And what will you do
in that day? Will you cry to the May Pole which you have so long danced about
for help? O the Blindness and Wretchedness of your deceived Hearts, when will
you a wake, when will you consider, and when will you remember your latter End?
This dead and dry Stick, is a true Figure of your dead and barren Hearts to God
and Goodness. So whilst you have Time prize it, for this is the Day of your
Visitation from the Spirit of the Lord in his Servant

Thomas Tailor.

To a Dancing Master.
TO hear a Dancing Master plead for his Kingdom, because of the evil Gain that
he reaps from his evil Work, is no strange thing; but to see him plead for it
from the Example of Holy David's Dancing or Rejoicing before God's Ark in
Ravishment of Joy (for its return) is abominable in thee, and the same which
the vain Fiddlers and Pipers of the Country (condemned by the Law) do, who will
plead David's Music to bolster themselves up in their unholy Work; and so
there is no more Agreement betwixt David's Dancing and thine, than there is
betwixt David's Music and the Fiddlers. If David's Dancing before God's Ark
were seen by your Eyes, who plead for your Heathenish Herodian Dancings, in
these days it would be accounted no less than Madness and Folly to you, as it
was by Michael in the former days. O the Blindness of thine and all such
Hearts, who are not afraid thus to wrest ^cripture to your Destruction: And
whereas thou would excuse Hecodias (thou should have said Herodias's
Daughter) her Dancing Heel from being a cause of the Baptist's Death, to cover
thy Work withal, thou may know this Cloak is too short, for though Herod's
Heart was evil, not only for marrying Herodias, but also in Imprisoning John
for reproving him for it (as many in these days both do Evil, and Imprison the
Servants of the Lord for telling them of it) I say, though Herod's Heart was
evil and temptable, yet her Dancing Heel (as thou calls it) was as a Devil to
tempt him to that rash Vow at that time; for it is manifest by his Unwillingness
of answering her Demand for John's Head, that he had no desire of his Death, at
least at that time, though he had put him in Prison.

And so my Exhortation to thee (in Truth and not Hypocrisy) is to give over
thy Dancing work; for as I said before, so I say again, it is not of God, and
so it cannot prosper, nor that Gain or Pleasure that comes to thee or any
others from it: And hate good Counsel no longer; for it will be hard for any to
kick against the Pricks of God's Reproof.

Thomas Tailor.

To the Fruitless Vineyard of England.
OH ye Blood-suckers which hunt after Blood, which lay Tracks and Snares to
slay the Righteous! Oh what a Profession is this that you live in, that are so
full of Fury and Rage, some Mocking, some Beating, some Stocking, some
Stoneing, some Plotting and laying wait to shed the Innocent Blood, and yet you
do make a Profession of God and Christ, which Christ never taught that
Doctrine; and there you show your selves to be as Bloody Persecutors as ever
the Jews were, who Crucified Christ and sought to slay the Apostles. Oh
England, England! Is this the Fruit of thy Ministry? Is this the Vineyard which
thou have planted? Howl ye Vine-dressers: Oh how is the Vineyard full of
Briars! Oh how is the Vineyard full of Thorns! Oh how is the Vineyard full of
dead Trees, which cumber and bring forth no Fruit! Oh how are the Springs
stopped (that should Water it) with the Philistines! Oh how full is the
Vineyard of Serpents! Oh how is the Vineyard full of Thistes! Oh how is the
Vineyard full of Weeds! Oh how full is the Vineyard of Nettles! Oh how full is
the Vineyard of wild Beasts, and of Trees that bear wild Grapes, and sour
Grapes, which sets the Childrens Teeth on edge! A time has been, and is, that
the pretended Dressers and Lookers to the Vineyard are blind, and do not know
one Tree from another, and cannot distinguish a Lamb from a Dog, a Sheep from a
Goat, a Dove from a Kite; full is the Vineyard of Wolves, strong Horses
neighing, and the Horses of Pharaoh and his Chariots whirling up and down: And
the Vineyard is full of Thieves and Robbers; and the pretended Watchmen are
blind, and cannot discern betwixt a True Man and a Thief, but they call the
Thief true Man, and the true Man Thief; they call Light Darkness, and Darkness
Light: They call them who have come in at the strait Gate to Life, and so come
in at the Door, these they call Thieves and Robbers; and those who have never
received the Word of the Lord from the Mouth of the Lord, but are climbed up
another way, and live in the broad way, Pride and Covetousness, and the Lust of
the Flesh, these they call the Messengers of God. Oh how full is the Vineyard
of Drunkards, Drunk with the Wine of the sour Grape: The Land is full of Oaths,
and mourns because of such, that their Flesh is defiled; the Land is full of
Respecting of Persons, which is a Transgression of the Law of God: But now the
Lord is risen and rising, who respects no Man's Person, and lays the Axe to the
Root of the Tree; Every one that brings not forth good Fruit, must be hewn
down and thrown into the Fire: For now is the Lord sending Sons and Daughters
and Servants into the Vineyard; Spears are broken and turned into
Pruning Hooks, and Swords into Mattacks and Plow-shares: Some are Plowing up,
and some are Hacking up; and some are Pruning, and some are dividing the Sheep
from the Goats, and the Lambs from the Dogs, making a distinction, and putting
a difference; and some are bridleing their Horses which have been wild; and
some are distinguishing the Kites from the Doves, and putting a difference
betwixt the Precious and the Vile, betwixt the Holy and the Unholy: Tremble,
Tremble, Tremble, ye Mountains and Hills, before the Lord, for out of Sion does
the Lord utter his Voice, Woe, Woe, unto all you that does inhabit the Earth, ye
will be scattered as the Wind scatters the Chaff; you will be consumed as the
Fire consumes the Stubble; for the mighty day of the Lord is coming, which
shall burn as an Oven; look upon an Oven when it burns, and you are afraid to
go into it: But the Fire of the Lord is coming, which will burn you up Root and
Branch: The Mouth of the Lord has spoken it, who will perform his Word, and
none of you that are Proud and Wicked can escape it: Though you may live a
while in Pleasure and Wantonness, now you have time prize it, this is the day
of your Visitation.

Thomas Tailor.

To the People of England.
O Ye People of England, whose Iniquities are broken forth like the breaking of
the Sea, whose Mire and Filth appear in every place: O what an evil Savor is
come up in every place: The Land stinks before the Lord, because of the
Abominations that makes desolate in every place. Oh the filthy May-Poles, that
Heathenish thing, how they stand up in every place, some Naked, some Painted,
and decked with Flowers, Garlands, Ribbons, and such foolish things, after the
Custom of the Heathen of old that knew not God: And Oh with what Shoutings,
abominable Drinkings, foolish Dancings and Noises have they been brought in and
set up in the Towns and Villages: Oh poor naked England! as if thou had lost
all Taste and Savor of Christian Religion: And what will the Heathens and
Papists say, when they hear the Report of thee and thy Children? Old and young
even mad after their Idols, and none scarce any Courage left to help in these
things, the hands of all even as it were fallen down in thee, and few but a
company of hidden Mourners lay the things to heart that are ready to overwhelm
thee. Oh! the Cry; the Cry, of thy Sins O England is grown great, and thou have
been often warned by the Lord God, but thou have not repented, but even hardened
thy Heart, and fitted thy self for Destruction: And what shall the Lord now do
unto thee, but even open the Floodgates of his Vengeance, and cause his Wrath
to come upon thee, Judgment upon Judgment, Misery upon Misery, till thou be
brought low, and be made very small, and in the Dust it may be thou will
remember the Lord, and cry unto him.

But Oh! what Lamentation shall be taken up for thee, and for thy Teachers in
the midst of thee, O wretched England! For thy Teachers have also manifested
themselves to every Eye, to be a company of Self-seeking Men, striving one with
another about the Fleece, but none helping or healing the Diseases and Wounds
of the poor torn scattered Flock, but every one cries Give, Give; they all look
to their own way, their Gain from their Quarter, and fear not me, says the
Lord God; the best of them is as a Briar, and the most Upright among them as a
Thorn-hedge: And now is the Lord arising, and he that has overcome is coming
in his mighty Power to dash the Pot-sheards of the Earth together, and break
them one against another, and Babylon the Great shall fall, and be a place for
Dragons, and be no more inhabited by any Son of Man, as the Lord has said, for
ever.

So, howl ye Wildernesses, and rejoice ye Fruitful Fields, for the Lord has
visited Sion and comforted his Afflicted, and the Kingdom shall be the Lord's,
and the Haughtiness of the World shall be humbled, and the Loftiness of their
Looks shall be brought low, that the Lord God alone may be exalted for he is
worthy: And this is our Holy Hope, and living Confidence, and faithful Witness,
who are counted worthy of God to bear his Reproach amongst you (O People) under
the name of Quakers.

So People, cease striving against the Lord, and his Witness in you, and devise
not Evil against the Innocent; but fear the Lord, and in time repent, lest his
Fury br^^k in upon you, and his fiery Judgments be multiplied upon you, which
none can stop or quench, for yet the day of your Visitation is not wholly past.

Thomas Tailor.

God's Controversy with England declared:
UPon the second Day of the fifth Month, 1661. as I Traveled under the Burdens
of the People, the Lord God of everlasting Power, Glory, Wisdom and
Righteousness said unto me with a strong hand, write my Controversy with this
Rebellious People of England, who are Wise to do evil, but to do good will have
no Knowledge, who proceed from evil to worse, and Fear not me at all, says the
Lord God; whose Iniquities are greatly increased against me, and to such a
height do the Floods of their Ungodliness make haste to arise, that all the
Measures will be quickly full; And then Woe, Woe, unto them, says the dreadful
and holy One. For thus says the Lord, I will Overturn, Overturn, until you
wicked and profane multitude be no more; Even until you, O People, whose Ears
are wholly shut against the good be consumed and brought to nothing: For your
Iniquities do burden my Righteous Soul, says God, and Sodom was not more
grievous to me than you are. For, O what studying and striving is in thy
Multitude, how they may exceed in their Vanities, in their Riotings, Drinkings,
Revelings, and Heathenish Abominations! Has not my Soul considered, says God,
what you have done, both the last Year and this, under pretense of honoring
your King. What do you think by dishonouring Me, to honor your King? You and
your King (if he allow of your doings) will I severely Judge, says the Lord
God, except ye speedily Repent, and all look better to your Ways than hitherto
you have done. O consider this, ye forgetters of God, ye filthy hearted People,
how have ye made the Land to stink before me, with your Abominations! O I have
seen, says God, how, wickedly, and with a high hand, as it were in despite of
me, you set up your May poles, that accursed thing, the last Year, and I warned
you of it, and called ye to Repentance; but, as if I had said nothing, you have
doubled your wickedness in the same thing this Year also, to provoke my Soul to
arise up against you to your hurt: And the Be^som on the top of some of them,
signifies that I will sweep the Land of evil doers; And surely, it shall come
to pass, that if ye will not yet repent of your wickedness, that I will plague
you with the Plagues of Egypt, and I will do such things amongst you in my
Judgment, and fury poured forth, that the Nations about that hear thereof,
shall stand amazed at thee. O Revolted and Back-slided Nation; whither at thou
gone already? and whither will thou run, if thou be suffered to go on? Into the
Pit that thou art stepped already, and into the nether most Hell thou will fall
if I let thee alone. But I will arise, says God, I will execute Righteous
Judgment in thee, with fire and sword will I plead with thee, and thy mighty
Men shall fall with thee, who sing thy Song, and take part with thy Lewdness,
and strengthen thy ungodly hands in thy wicked ways, and say in their hearts, O
this is a good day, these are good Subjects, this is the time we have long
looked for; now we reign; now we may do what we will, and who shall control
us? who who shall hinder us from filling our selves with all manner of
delights; now we are settled in our way? now will we Build our decayed Houses,
and Restore our fallen Worships; now will we Repair the broken Fences of our
Parks, that we may have Game to the full; now shall our Horses be well fed for
the Race, that they may fully please us; now let the Cock-Pits be looked to,
for that (cruel) Sport, and let our Bowling-Alleys be well Dressed for our
daily Recreation; now shall the Stage Players for our delight, have their full
Liberty, and all the Sons of Vanity have due Encouragement; for the Old things
we Love, and that which is New, though never so much the Better, our souls
Loath; We like the Old Ways of our Fathers, because when they had Lord-Bishops,
and their Minister Services with Mattens and Evensongs, with Organs and
Singing-boys, and such like Things, then there was Peace and Plenty; and when
the Neighborhood could meet together, and sit about a Bone-fire or May Pole,
or under a Bower, and drink strong Drink, and tell Stories, and Sing and Roar,
then there was Love and Agreement; And when Plays, and Pastimes, and Wakes were
duly frequented and observed, then was it a Merry Time, and a Joyful Land, and
all went well in all those Days, when such Things were on foot; And when those
that said they scared the Lord, and so could not join with us, but rather
Witnessed against us, and Reproved us for such Things, were taken a Course
withal, O then was it a good Day, say many; And as it was then, so would we
have it now, says your vain and wicked Hearts, O ye fallen Sons and Daughters
of Adam! And I see you, says the Lord God, with both your bands endeavoring
these Things, and abusing my Power, if possible, to set up the Devil's Kingdom
with it; And thus, quite contrary to my Ordinance, says the Lord, are you
become as a Terror to the Good, and ^n Encouragement to them that do Evil, and
mine Eye sees you right well, and my Heart considers you thoroughly, and I
cannot Love you, for Profaneness and Hypocrisy is your Covering, and you are
as the clothes of a Menstruous Woman in my sight. Away with your vain Worships,
says God, my soul loathes your Sabbaths and Services thereon; yea, your
Sacraments are a burden to me; I hate your Prayers, Praises, Professions, and
Confessions, for you mend not your lives and doings at all; I will stir up my
Jealousy, and it shall kindle like flames of fire upon you, and utterly
consume the joy of your Hearts, and for joy the bitterest of sorrows shall
seize upon you, and you shall become a burden to your selves, except you
speedily Repent, and turn to the Lord God, from whom you are far gone away. For
I have a long time held my Peace, says the Lord, but now I will cry like a
Traveling Woman, I will destroy and devour at once, I will lay waste the
Mountains and the Hills, because they have not answered my Power with fruits of
Righteousness to me. And the Multitudes of People who are as Grasshoppers in thy
Bowels, devouring every green thing, and spending my Creatures upon their
Lusts, not regarding my Glory at all, shall be as heaps of Fuel for the fire of
my Jealousy, and it shall kindle upon them, and none shall quench it, neither
shall it cease burning till I have consumed thy Dross, and appeased my Wrath in
the Consumption of thy Wicked Ones, says the Lord God. For Tophet is prepared
of old, for the Purposes of my Heart, according to the Scriptures, says the
Holy One, through his Servant,

Thomas Tailor.

A Faithful Warning to Outside Professors, and Loose Pretenders to Christianity
of all sorts.
COme all ye Professors of Scripture, upon the Face of the whole Earth, under
what form soever, what have ye learned hitherto of all ye profess? Have ye
learned to Fear God and keep his Commandments? Have ye learned thus to Love
God? And do you love your Neighbor as your selves? Do ye not profess to love
God above all things, and your Neighbor as your selves? Is this done? What?
will a profession of words commend you to God, where the Obedience is a wanting?

O thou that art called Christendom, how art thou fallen! How art thou become
the Plant of a degenerate Vine! How are thy Grapes become as those of Sodom!
who shall bring healing to thee, who have rejected the Balm of Gilead, that the
Father brought to thee.

O thou foolish Child! how have thou trifled out thy precious Time about Toys
and Trifles, and have not regarded the Voice of thy Maker, who has waited all
day long to gather thee, and to do thee good, but thou would not! Thou have
chosen the worse part, in that thou have forsaken the Lord, the Fountain of
Living Waters; and have hewed and chosen to thy self a Cistern that will hold
no Water. Thou art gone into the ways of the Old World, upon whom the Flood
came: And which of those Sins, for which Sodom burned, are a wanting in thee?

O! the pure River of Life that would quench thy Thirst, how is it slighted and
neglected by thee! and therefore art thou utterly unsatisfied in whatsoever
thou do, or attempts to do. Thou art never able to satiate thy Soul with
husks: Thou must come into the Father's House before thou have Bread enough.

But thou say in thy Heart, Thou art a Queen, yea, That thou art Rich, and
endued with Goods, and have need of nothing: When as alas in the true Light,
thou art seen to be Miserable, Poor, Wretched, Blind and Naked. A long Course
have thou run; but the promised end thou have not reached: Thou have been like
a bewildred Sheep, running from Mountain to Hill to find a resting place, where
no rest is. Thou came indeed a little out of Egypt: But O! how soon did
thou turn back again thither, from whence thou came, and loved the Fleshpots
of Egypt, yea, the Onions and Garlic better than God's Manna in the
Wilderness: Thou should have followed the Lord perfectly unto the Land of
Rest in Patience, and silence of Spirit under his voice and teachings.

But thou grew weary of waiting upon thy God, and saw Images of things on
Earth, and Images of things in Heaven, and bowed thy Heart to them, and did
not keep thy Heart to the power that broke through the Darkness for thee. Nor
did thou keep thy Eye to the Light of Life, that freely shined out of
Darkness for to have guided thee through the dark howling Wilderness to Sion.
But thou being careless and felfish, thou lent thy Ear to the voice of the
Stranger, and cried, Lo here, and Lo there, and so wast thou led out of the Way
into Bypath of Sin and Death, where thou have been lost from the true Life,
and true Light, and Spirit that wrought in thee in the beginning. And thou have
not to this day thoroughly considered thy loss; nay, very little is thy
Nakedness and Wretchedness laid to Heart in thee.

And now therefore thou, that art called Christendom, What is the Wood of thy
Vine (seeing thou have left off to bear Fruit to the Lord) better than the Wood
of another Tree? nay, it is not so good as any. For, if the Salt, that should
season other things, have lost its Savor, wherewith shall it be salted? and of
what use is it, but even to be trodden under Feet of Men. O! that thou were
wise to consider, at least in this thy day the things of thy Peace in this
great Day, wherein the Bridegroom, which has been as one traveled into a far
Country, is come again, and is appeared in his ancient Love, Power, and
Perfection to visit thee, and to seek thee out of every place, where thou have
been scattered through Sin, in the long Night of Apostasy, to see, if any of
the pure Love that was in thee in the day of thy Espousals, may be recovered to
himself; that he may know how to do thee good, and how to make manifest his
ancient love unto thee, which bowed the Hearts of his simple Israel into such
love of his goodness, as to follow the Lamb wheresoever he went in the
beginning.

But O! thou polluted Woman, how art thou wandered away from the true
Sheepfold! How art thou gone a whoring from thy God! How art thou covered with
the shades of Night! And how art thou lost amongst the Countries, and mingled
with the Heathen! yea, thou have chosen thy own ways, and worshipped the works
of thy own Hands, and have cast the pure Law of God behind thy back. Yea, the
Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ, which has shined to thee, and would
have gathered thee up to God, thou have rejected, and have not liked to retain
God, nor his Light in thy Knowledge. And so thou art become vain in thy Mind,
and thy foolish Heart is become so dark, that thou worships thou knows not
what, like those that know not God, and art become a Prey to every Beast of the
Field, and art bowed in thy Heart to the Creatures, more than to the living God
the Creator.

And therefore will he arise in great Majesty, and dreadful Power and will yet
again bring to pass his Act, his strange Act in thee. And he will not meet thee
as a Man, but as a consuming Fire: Because thou have rejected his Goodness,
Patience, and Forbearance. And have heaped to thy self Teachers after thy own
Heart, who have rocked thee asleep with their false Voices, crying, Peace,
Peace, when there was no Peace; for there is no Peace to any wicked one, says
the true God, profess what they may.

For the Lord is come to look for Fruits. And now, Woe, Woe, to the Fruitless
Trees, to the Briars and Thorns! for the Fire of the Lord God will consume
them. And now will the Lord God bring to nothing all thy Might, Wisdom, Glory,
and Greatness, whereby thou host exalted thy self, and dishonored him; and the
Meek shall Inherit Heaven and Earth. And blessed is he that overcomes that
Evil and wicked Spirit, that so much reigns and rages in thee; for he shall be
called God's Son, and shall Inherit all things, as says the Scripture. For the
end comes: And who shall stop the course of the everlasting Sun of
Righteousness, whose Day is dawned, blessed for evermore?

O thou Corrupted Earth, who wallows in the Blood of thine Iniquity! who art
become Deaf to the Heavenly Voice, and art become an Enemy to nothing so much,
as to that good thing that would unburden thee of thy Corruptions! O; O how
has Hell enlarged it self for the multitude of those wilful Transgressors in
thee, that are posting on in their sins this day to the Chambers of Death! who
are making Provision for the fleshly Lusts, which War against the Soul! who
will not believe what their miserable State shall be, though one come from the
dead to declare it in true Experience to them.

But, O thou little Remnant of Wheat amongst such a heap of Chaff! O thou
lovely Seed of God, which brings forth Fruit of Righteousness to his Glory, and
so shines forth as Lights in the foresaid dark World. Do thou rejoice, and be
thou glad for ever in the Lord thy Savior, who has loved thee with an
everlasting Love, and by his Arm of Power has raised thee up to be his
Servant, and has gathered thee into his Bosom of Safety to lie down, and rest
in Peace with himself for evermore.

So be it, even so be it, says the Spirit and the Bride. So do thou, O Lovely
Holy Seed, begotten to God in Righteousness; do thou trust and rejoice in the
Lord thy God for ever.

And be not troubled nor dismayed at the roarings of the Waters of Babylon; but
be still, be still, be at rest and Peace in the Arms of the Lord God Almighty,
blessed, blessed for evermore.

From a Lover of God's Everlasting Truth, Thomas Tailor.

PEOPLE,
THIS know, that the Entrance into Righteousness is the Only and Alone Entrance
into the Kingdom of God, and there is not another. Christ is God's
Righteousness, and so the Door: He that enters not in by me, says Christ, is
a Thief and a Robber. So, see all People, where you are? I am the Way, the
Truth, and the Life, also says Christ, and no Man comes to the Father, but by
me. So consider all People: Is Christ your Way? And is nothing Truth to you,
like Christ? And have you a Life in nothing at all, as in Christ? Deal honestly
with your own Souls, and deceive not your selves; for God will not be mocked.
Bring your Deeds to the Light, and seek not to hide your Sins from the Lord:
For there is nothing secret, which shall not be made manifest.

Drunkard, bring thy Deeds to the Light. Thou know by the Light, thou
should not be Drunk, nor spend God's Creatures upon thy Lust. Here thou have
learned thy Condemnation, and the Wrath of God abides upon thee in this
Condition, profess what thou may. And all thy Prayers and Performances are
Abomination to the Pure God, whilst thou abidest in the Lust of Drunkenness;
for it defiles.

And all ye Vnclean-hearted Ones, who burn in your Lusts one toward another,
and are as the Brute Beasts, who know neither Guide nor Rule over your Minds;
but are in the Evil Liberty, to follow your own Evil Hearts. Bring your Deeds
to the Light, and it will let you see you should not be so: It will tell you,
That the Unclean shall not enter God's Kingdom; and without Holiness none can
see God. Here ye may see your Way to be to the Chambers of Hell and Death, and
not to Christ.

And all ye Swearers, Vain and Obscene Talkers, and Foolish Jesters, whose
Tongues run through the World: And as you know no Limit to your Lusts, so you
know no Bridle to your Tongue. Your Religion is vain, Jam. 1.26. Bring your
Deeds to the Light; there you may read your Condemnation. For there is that in
your Conscience tells you, according to Scripture, that for every idle, vain,
unclean or profane Word that Men shall speak, they must give Account thereof
to the Pure and Just God in the Day of Judgment.

How! then ye Guil^y, and be humbled for your Sins, lest that Day come suddenly
upon you as a Thief in the Night, and sweep you all away, as it did the Old
Wo^ld, who regarded not the Day of their Visitation, but went on in their Sins,
until there was no Remedy.

Awake, Dead and Careless-hearted, who put the Day of the Lord afar off, and
cry Peace, when there is no Peace. For, what Peace to the Wicked? There is no
Peace to the Wicked, says the true God; but Peace only upon Zion, and to such
as turn from Iniquity in Jacob. So let not one take the Name of Christ in their
Mouth any more, until they depart from Iniquity. For such as go on in the
Custom and daily Practice of Sin, and yet think to cover themselves with and
Outward Profession of Christ, do but deceive themselves, and increase their
Condemnation, adding Sin to Sin. This is God's Truth, which he that has an
Ear, let him hear; and he that has any Desire in him to return to God, let him
consider of, and give Glory to God by Repenting of that, which does any way
dishonor God.

Also this know for truth, That your Invented, Licentious Gaming for Vain
Delights and Pleasures is not of God; but an Invention of that Wicked One, who
is called the Devil and Satan, Invented to please the Vain and Empty Minds of
his Children and Servants, which are out of the Law and Truth of God. But the
Children and Servants of God are full of Goodness, and are exercised in the Law
and Truth of God Day and Night; and so deny the Devil and his Works. So let no
Man deceive any of you, neither be deceived in your selves; for the Judge is at
the Door. And the True Light is arisen, which makes manifest every Work, and
the Reward of it for Ever.

And all ye Stage Players, Puppet-Players, and the Authors and Inventors of
such things, with all that love such Heathenish Things, yea, and give your
Money for them, that thereby ye may feed the Covetous Lusts in the Players,
that thirst after Money; and the Vain Lust of your own defiled Eyes and Ears,
which are after Pleasures more than the Lord God that made you. Know this, That
your Works are all weighed in an equal Balance, and by the Light of Christ you
are all seen to be out of the Doctrine of Christ in the Heathenish Nature,
upholding and practicing those things, which Christ came to destroy. Yea, and
by the Light of Christ in your own Consciences, when you are a little sober and
still in your Minds, you know, you should not do such things: Here you also
have learned your Condemnation, and cannot in this State stand before the Lord,
because of your Sins.

And all ye, that can please your selves with beholding one Creature hurt and
torment another, yea, sometimes even to Death, as at Bull baitings, Bear
baitings, Cook fightings, and the like. O! what Minds have ye, and how contrary
are ye herein to the Tender Nature of Christ, and all Christians, truly so
called, who could never Rejoice in any such things, tender, pitiful and
merciful Nature! O ye Children of Cruelty! when will your Hearts break, your
stony Hearts melt into Tears before the Lord for all your mighty Sins? And when
will you bring your Deeds to the Light, that ye may see the Ugliness of your
Sins, and repent of them; lest the Judgments written fall upon you for them, as
it did upon all such from the beginning of the World, and there be no escape?

O England, England! How have thou defiled thy self by thine Iniquities! How is
the Flood-gate of Sin broken open in thee to the polluting of thy Land! O, how
art thou wholly overspread with Briars, and Thorns, and Weeds! so that the
Lord must arise to purge thee by Fire; seeing thou have refused to wash in that
pure Water of Life, that sprung up in thee. So if thou have an Ear, hear,
before it be too late, and the Door be shut.

Thomas Tailor.

YE Feasters, ye Gamesters, ye Drunkards and Gluttons, ye False Christians,
whose God is your Belly, and whose Care is how you may satisfy your Ungodly
Lusts; you are Enemies to the Cross of Christ: Yea, you Crucify Christ afresh
to your selves, and put him to open Shame by your Lewd Living.

The Hand of the Lord is against you, ye Profane Esau's, who have sold and are
selling your Birthright for a Mess of Pottage. When will ye Awake, when will
ye Arise from off your sinful Bed, where you cry Peace to your selves in your
Sins?

When will ye lay to Heart the Apostle's Doctrine, ye Common Sinners, who
proudly boast of your Common Prayers, and yet depart not from your Iniquities?
Is not the Sacrifice of the Wicked an Abomination to God? And will God regard
your Prayers, whilst you so love and regard your Iniquities, and walk so
contrary to the Doctrine of Christ?

Does not the Apostle say, Make no provision for the Flesh, to satisfy it in
the Lusts thereof; and ye, in a direct Opposition and Hatred to this Doctrine,
make all provision for the Flesh to fulfill and satisfy it every way in the
Lust thereof. And so your Table is as the Table of Devils, and not of Saints;
and ye cannot both partake of the Table of Devils, and the Table of Christ, the
Apostle being Witness.

So howl ye Sinners, and Ungodly People, and be humbled for all your
Lewdnesses; and repent of all your Whoredoms, whereby ye have gone a Whoring
from the Life of Christ, and his Saints. And let your Feastings be turned into
Fastings, and your Laughters and Merriments be turned into Lamentations and
bitter Mournings, for the Misery that is to come upon you from the Presence of
the Lord, in the Day of his Fierce Wrath, which is nigh to come, and be
revealed upon you in Flames of Fire for all your mighty Sins.

O ye, that are so contrary to Christ, be humbled before the Lord for all your
Hypocrisies, who say, You are come out of Popery, and yet continue in some of
their Idolatrous Customs, as this Profane keeping of the time, which ye in
Imitation call Christmas (among other Superstitions) whereby ye show your
selves to be too near of Kin to that Whorish Woman, which has defiled the
Earth with her Abominations. Ye make haste to fill up the measure of your
Iniquities, as though the time would fail you to make your selves perfect in
Wickedness. And ye seem to entertain Christ as the Heathens of Old did their
Idols, who thought, The more Vain, Lustful and Wanton that they were, the more
they pleased their Idols, and offered a more acceptable Sacrifice to their
Gods. But O! be humbl'd for these things, lest the Lord carry you back again
into the Belly of Egypt and Blackness of Babylon's Darkness, whither ye have
manifested too much a Mind to return. And as a Just Recompense for all your
Unrighteousness, he Swore in his Wrath, That ye shall never enter into his Rest.

Thomas Tailor.

Something as it came to mind, Stafford, betwixt the Judge and the People of
God, called by the World Quakers: But the Reproach of Christ is to us great
Riches, and the Scorners God will Judge.
WE being called to the Bar, we came up in the Dread and Fear of God, and in
the Love of Justice, with our usual Garments on.

Judge. And the Judge asked us, If we knew where we were? To whom it was
Answered,


Ans. Yea, we stand in the Presence of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth; before
whom all are.


Judge. Then he bid Fine us Forty Shillings a piece, for keeping on our Hats;
and then caused our Hats to be taken off.


Ans. To whom it was Answered, That some of the Men called Justices, now in
Authority, had been heard to Condemn Oliver Cromwell for such a thing.


Here the Judge spoke something of Oliver.

Ans. But where is it read in Scripture, that the Apostles suffered for keeping
on their Hats. To which the Judge replied, They had no Hats: And so proceeded
to other things.


But here by the way all may take notice, that the Scripture speaks of Hats in
Dan. 3.21. which was long before the Apostles time; and surely the Apostles had
something to cover their Heads withal; whether called Hats or Caps is not
material: And that it is not putting off the Hat, but putting away deceit from
the Heart, that Honors God's Authority.

Now as concerning the Oath, the Judge asked, If we would take it?

We Answered, Christ taught us not to Swear, but said, Let your Yea, be Yea,
and your Nay, Nay, for whatsoever is more comes of evil.

Then said the Judge, You have spoken many words more than Yea and Nay.

To which was Answered, That Is not it; for the Lord does not forbid his People
to speak more words as need is in his Fear, but he intends plainly this, That
when we affirm a thing, we should affirm it in the Truth, and what we deny, to
deny it also in the Truth, and both without an Oath: For though under the Law,
where Strife was, there was also Oaths, yet now Christ being come to make an
end of ^trife, he ends Oaths also, and the occasion of them.

Judge. Then you must be the Expounders.


Ans. Not we, but the Spirit of God in all.


Says the Judge, But we read that God Swore; but where is it read that the
Devil Swore?

To which was Answered by one of us; yea, the Devil both did, and now also does
Swear, in the Mouths of all wicked Men, and that falsely also.

Then here about the Oath of Allegiance was read.

And it being read, one of us Answered whose Name was T. T. It seems this Oath
was made against them called Papists. And as for Popery, I do here declare as
in the Presence of the Lord against it, and their wicked Tenants, such as there
is mentioned. And for our good Desires for the King, and all Men, is in like
sincerity also now acknowledged.

This is, as it were, the substance of the Oath, said the Judge: Then said I,
Let that serve.

Judge. But why will you not Swear?


Ans. Because my Yea, is Yea, and my Nay, is Nay, without Swearing. And I do
not deny to Swear in Contempt of Authority, but in Conscience to God. And so
all People may see that if I suffer for this, it is not for substance, but
circumstance, or so.


Judge. But how shall we try Matters of Difference without Swearing?


Ans. By Faithful Witnesses, without Swearing.


Judge. But what if they witness false?


Ans. The same may be said concerning Swearing: For you do not know by a Man's
mere words, without further Trial, more when he Swears falsely or truly, than
when he speaks falsely or truly. And so if ye had the same Law against False
Witnesses, as is against False Swearers, it would be all one.


Judge. But we have not such a Law.


Ans. But you may have.


And here all People consider, what the Law of God amongst the Jews that were
under the Law, in such Cases as this, was; see Deuteronomy. 19.16. to the end: The
words are these, If a False Witness arise up against any Man, to testify
agdinst him that which is wrong, then both the Men, between whom the
Controversy is, shall stand before the Lord, before the Priests, (who were
Types of Christ to come) and the Judges which shall be in those days. And the
Judges shall make diligent Inquisition, and behold if the Witness be a False
Witness, and has testified falsely against his Brother, then shall he do unto
him, as he had thought to have done unto his Brother, etc.

If such a thing as this were minded, Would not this keep the Wicked in awe?

Judge. Reach him the Book.


Ans. What Book is it? Is it not the Scripture? Yea, said the Officer. Then
said I, That Book witnesses against Swearing now to Christians.


Judge and Officers. You must lay your Hand upon the Book and kiss it.


Ans. I must lay my Hand upon my Heart when I speak Truth, as I do now. And the
Lord says not that we should kiss a Book, but Kiss the Son lest he be angry.
See Psalm 2. last.


Now as concerning Meetings.

The Judge charged us with meeting contrary to Law.

We answered, Not contrary to the Law of God. And the Apostles and Saints did
meet separate from the rest of the People.

Judge. What are none the People of God but of your Gang? And said something of
those formerly called the Godly Party.


Ans. We are manifest to that of God in all, to be such as fear God; and so let
us not suffer for the Name, until you can prove some Evil by us.


Judge. The Judge spoke of our coming to that called their Church, a
Steeple-house.


Ans. And we wished him to prove there by Scripture, where Christians were
limited, either to that, or to any place whatsoever. Which he could not do. And
then said I, It Is read in Scripture, That Men should lift up Holy Hands to God
in every place, without Wrath and Doubting.


But for such passages as these the Judge was at length troubled, and though he
had been moderate a good while, yet he wanted all Patience, and so thought to
proceed against me by the Act of Praemunire; yet for a little space he was
seemingly willing again to proceed with me as with the rest upon the new Act;
and so they caused it to be read, which being done, I was made to say something
to this purpose, to wit, It seems then that your Intentions are to get us from
amongst you, and if it should be so, that the Righteous were taken from you,
would not God's Judgments fall upon the Land? And then the Judge threw up all
as it were, and spoke in anger to the Grand Jury to draw a Bill of Indictment
against me; and so I was as it were separate from my Brethren, and set apart
for the greatest Sufferings, and that as is said for nothing but declaring
Truth, and keeping my Conscience pure to God, and so I was put by for that time.

Again, I was called certain hours after up to the Bar again, and then was that
wicked thing, called an Indictment, framed and brought in against me: O what
unchristian and unsavory things was it fraught with, as though I had wickedly
and contemptuously denied to take that Oath called Allegiance, which was made
against Papists and Gunpowder Plotters: When as the Lord knows I denied only to
Swear in Obedience to Christ, who says, Swear not at all; and so to keep my
Conscience pure to God in the thing I denied to Swear, and neither in favor of
Popery, nor in opposition to the King, as I had declared before from the Truth
of my Heart, and the Judge himself was once made to acknowledge it, as is said
before, yet because I could not lay my Hand on a Book and kiss it, and so
commit Idolatry, and because I could not say I Swear, I Swear, or so, they
proceeded to bring in Sentence against me, as if I had been the greatest
Offender in this case that might be; even to Confiscation of all in the outward
World called Mine, whether Lands, Leases, Goods, Chattels and Liberty, though
in the fight of God, and that just and righteous reasonable Principle of God in
every Man I stand clear, which is my Joy.

Yet before they proceeded to give Sentence, they would make a show of Legal
Proceeding, but it was only to deceive themselves withal, for all others saw
them.

And so after they had read that wicked Instrument called an Indictment, some
words passed from me in the dread of the Lord; as first, I declared my
Innocence there, as to the thing charged upon me, in the sight of the Lord God
and all Men; and so warned the Judge to take heed what he did against an
Innocent Man, for with the same measure was measured to others, God would
measure to all Men again. And so speaking again something concerning Swearing,
the Judge said.

Judge. But what if a Thief should rob you, and deny it, would you take his
word?


Ans. I would take his Word as soon as his Oath; for a Thief's Word and Oath
are both alike?


Judge. But you go up and down Seducing the People.


Ans. No, I Seduce none, but desires that all may be Saved; and do endeavor,
wherein I may, to help all People out of Darkness into Light; and so from under
Satan's Power to God. And the Apostles did not Evil, in going up and down upon
so good an Account.


Judge. But how should we know that you are an Apostle?


Ans. What I am by my Fruits may be known.


Judge. But prove your self to us to be an Apostle.


Ans. If the Truth which I declare, and my innocent Life, will not satisfy
concerning what I am, I must rest satisfied in God's Will; and what you know
not, or cannot believe now, God may reveal it to you: So be not hasty in doing
any thing against me. But the Apostle Paul himself, could not so prove himself,
as to satisfy all of his Apostleship, for says he to some, Though I be not an
Apostle to others, yet I am to you.


Judge. But is Christ in none but you?


Ans. Yea, in thee also, except thou be a Reprobate.


Judge. But you see here is a Law.


Ans. But it is not safe for any to act by a Law, unless it be according to God:
For those in Queen Mary's time, that burned People about things called
Religion, did it by Pretense of a Law, or under color of a Law or so; yet it
is now held (as it was indeed) by all Protestants, to be an unjust thing they
did.


Judge. But you have been in Prison before now.


Ans. Yea, for Truths sake.


Here it may be observed, how this Judge, being a mere Stranger to me, could
know this; for immediate Revelation of God he pretends not to: Then how came he
by this knowledge, but even by the Whisperings of the Enemies of Truth, and of
my Soul, who were not far off, nor wanting to whisper anything into his Ear,
that might help on the Matter against the Innocent.

Judge. But how many Prisons have you been in? This observe he asked temptingly.


Ans. In several for the Truths sake.


Judge. But why will you not tell me? Do you not say your Yea is Yea, and your
Nay, Nay, or so?


Ans. Yea, my Yea is Yea, and my Nay is Nay, when I speak; but I am not bound
by the Lord; to speak at every Man's Will.


Then hereabouts the Judge proceeded toward the end, and though I had declared
my Innocence in the thing before, yet he asked according to their Custom,
Guilty or Not Guilty.

Ans. Here I being kept silent for a time, waiting in the Will of God, at
length these words came to me, and passed through me.


He was led as a Sheep before the Shearer, and as a Lamb dumb before the
Slaughterer, and he opened not his mouth.

At which words, though they in the Darkness were something troubled, yet the
Judge proceeded and said,

Judge. If you will not answer, we will take it pro confesso, you know what
that is, etc.


Here the Simple may take notice, that to take a thing pro confesso, is as much
as to say, They take it for granted.

Ans. Then I perceiving, in the Light of the Lord, what their purpose was, I
said something to this purpose in the Peace of my Spirit.


It Is manifest enough how things are, and so you may proceed, if it seem good
to you, the Lord will reward every Man according to his Deeds.

Judge. But what say you to the Jury? etc.


Ans. It Is not like that a Jury, or a Company of Swearing Men, will do any
thing for me, who am for Christ's Command against Swearing: For I could wish
that they, and all Men, would speak Truth without Swearing.


Here I was put away from the Bar for that time also.

The next day being called up to the Bar, amongst Felons, Thieves and
Murderers, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, the Judge prepared to give
Sentence against the Servants of God, called by the World Quakers; we being
four in number, now brought together, though separate for a time: And he caused
me to be first called up and spoken to, as being all along accounted the
greatest Offender, because God had pleased to make use of me in his Service,
more than of some others.

Judge. He, to wit, the Judge, asked me, If I had considered of things.


Ans. Yea, and it is my daily Work in Christ, to keep my Conscience pure to God:
And I perceive what is purposed by you, if I yield not to Man's Will, contrary
to that in my Conscience in this thing, even the loss of what is called mine in
the outward World, etc. But that Law was made against Papists, etc.


Judge. But not only against them. And so caused that Stat. 7 Jac. to be read.


Ans. But I look at the words of the Oath, and it appears plainly it was made
against them. Yet I do not hear that it is executed against any of them now,
though they be the Parties thereby intended.


Judge. You may be Jesuitical or so.


Ans. Concerning Popery, I have truly declared against it before, and I have it
under their own hand, that we, called Quakers, are accounted by them their
worst Adversaries. And I have also by me to show, in seventeen main
Particulars, wherein we are made by the Truth to oppose them in their Way or
Religion.


And so I say, what thou do against me consider, and fear the Lord God, for
if thou be a means of taking that from me which my Wife and Children should
outwardly live on, and put it into the King's Treasures, it will not be a
Blessing there, but a Curse, for I openly declare, that if I Suffer now upon
this account, or so, it is for the Truths sake. And so do what thou do in the
fear of the Lord.

Judge. Here he said faintly, I hope I do, and I am loath to do it.


Ans. Mind that which makes thee loath to do it, and it will never suffer thee
to do it.


Yet notwithstanding this he broke through all, and gave Sentence against the
Innocent, and so filled up his measure, adjudging me to the loss of outward
Estate, Liberty or so, and all this, as is said, merely for Truths sake. Then
it came through me, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, Blessed be the
Name of the Lord.

Then being spoken unto to go away from the Bar, as I was going down, it was
fresh in me, as from the Lord God, to exhort them on the Bench, etc. to
Repentance, and to take heed of such Doings as these, for which, and the like,
a great Cloud of Judgments hang over the Land.

And so staying amongst the rest of the Prisoners, till they were all dismissed
and sending away, it was further upon me from the Lord, in the Peace of my
Spirit, and pity to their Souls, to look upon the great Multitude of People
there present, and to speak to them, to mind the Fear of the Lord God, and the
Day of their Visitation, and to turn to the Lord whilst they had time, or so.
And for this Work of the Lord, the Judge, and some other great ones there, were
all so troubled; and so I was commanded and carried away, and down out of the
Hall into the Street toward the Goal: And then the Word of the Lord arose in
me in great Majesty, Dread and Power, and went forth amongst the Multitudes of
People there, and to all People in the way to the very Goal door, to let all
Workers of Iniquity know of the dreadful and terrible Day of the Lord, that is
risen and arising, and come and coming upon them, to leave all without Excuse:
And to let those also that fear God, know of the Love of God to their Souls.
And so I was received into Prison, where I rest a Freeman of the Lord Jesus
Christ, Blessed for ever more.

The other three of my Brethren were Fined, two of them Five Pounds a piece,
and the other Twenty Shillings, because they had been together with some other
Friends of the Truth at a Meeting, to wait upon the Lord, to hear his Voice,
and to Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem according to Scripture.

Something might be said also of the Nakedness and Wretchedness of their Judges
and Prosecutors, in their Proceedings against them in this Matter, but hoping
of their Repentance, it may be let alone here.

The Fine for not putting off our Hats, mentioned in the beginning, it seems
fell and came to nothing, for we heard no more of it.

Thomas Tailor.

To the Jury men of Stafford, that brought him in Guilty.
YOU that are to be the Jury, to bring in that called the Verdict concerning
the Servant of the Lord Thomas Tailor; I say, before you conclude any thing,
consider in the Fear of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth what you do: You have
heard things Debated, and you may know, and that in your Consciences will also
tell you, that I am not really Guilty of the Breach of that Law, concerning
that Oath called Allegiance: For it was made, as you may see, expressly against
the Papists, who hold, it seems, such wicked things against Kings as is there
expressed. But you might or should hear, that I declared against them, yea, and
my Declaration was from the Truth of the Heart, the Searcher of Hearts knows
it: And I also expressed my real Innocence and good Desires concerning the
King, and all Men: Insomuch that the Judge himself confessed, I had as it were
confessed to the thing in the Substance. And so you may see, if I Suffer, it is
for Formalities, and not for Substance. For I believe, that that Custom of
Swearing upon, and Kissing, a Book, was first invented in the Dark Time of
Popery, when Men's Minds were wholly, as it were, alienated from the Life and
pure Knowledge of God, and gone into Idolatry. And so be not ye guilty of
Sinning against God in this Matter? Neither let any of you have a hand in
Oppressing a Man and his House, a Man and his Family; For if you be wise you
will see, that taking that which God has lent me in this World, for the
Service of my Outward Man and Family, will not be a Blessing in the King's
Treasures; For it is Righteousness upholds the King's Throne, and nothing of the
contrary. So rests in the Will of God.

Thomas Tailor.

To King Charles the Second.
On the Third Day of the Fifth Month, One Thousand Six Hundred Sixty and One,
in the Morning, the Movings of God were in me, to the effect following to Write.
AND now, O Charles Stuart, King in these Islands, whose height is grown great,
and who art in the Heart of a Multitude, as if thou were some Deity; unto thee,
and to thy Nobles, thy Councils, thy Parliaments, thy Judges, and Justices, and
all under Officers of that Nature: Thy Bishops and Clergy (so called) and all
Officers and under Officers of that Nature: And to thy Captains of Hundreds and
Thousands, and all under Officers of that Nature; unto you all, says the Son
of God, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and dreadful over all, whose
Eye is as a flame of Fire, who came not to send Peace on the cursed Earth, but
a Sword, and whose Sword never returns empty from the Battle; unto you all I
say, says the Holy One, the Lord Jesus Christ, Do not I see your ways, and
your doings, both what you have done, and what you do; yea, do not I search and
see your Hearts and Reins, and know what you would do? O! consider, consider,
do you know that I am near when you sit in Council, and work all your Works,
even your darkest Works, and take notice of them, and treasures them up in my
remembrance, to give to every Man according to his Ways, and the fruit of his
Doings? Do not I know that you all in Words profess me, and call me, Lord,
Lord, and say, I am your Savior; but alas, alas, you will none of me to Rule
in you, and over you; nay, nay, you ask not Counsel at my Spirit, and so are
not for my Honor in what you bring forth. Only sometimes, when my witness is
reached in you, a little is done by some of you for my Babes; but then your
Goodness stays not, but passes away like the early Dew, and then your evil
Hearts turn back again from me, and then you take Counsel one at another how to
establish your own Kingdom, Wills. Glory, and Greatness, which is of this
World, and regard not my Honor, my Glory, my People, who fear before me; and
with Moses and all my Saints do quake and tremble at my Word, but suffers them
to be a Prey to many, and lets mine Enemies go free amongst you. What shall
Drunkards, Sweaters, Morrice-Dancers, Stage Players, Gamesters of all sorts,
and Hypocrites of all sorts, have liberty to meet together to dishonor my
Name, without danger and fear; and my Babes only who meet together to wait upon
me to glorify my Name, sand to edify one another in the most Holy Faith, be
threatened, stocked, and haled before the Judgment-Seats, and be Imprisoned, as
though they only were the burden of the Land? Shall I not visit for these
things, says the Lord, and shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation and
People as this. O! how has the Enemy of the Soul deceived you, in making you
believe, that you are setting up my Kingdom and Gospel, when you are fetting up
your own Nests on high, and going about to establish your own Traditions. My
Kingdom is not of this World, but that which you set up is of this World. My
Worship stands in Spirit and Truth, yours in Form and Shadows, and outward
Show, which the Hypocrites for self ends can fast enough run into. My way is in
a daily cross to all Flesh; yours in the Will and Liberty of the Flesh. O the
burden, the burden that I bear of you! O the weight that you are unto my
Spirit! O the cry, the cry and deep Groans of my oppressed Seed amongst you,
because of your Iniquities! O! consider, consider, what is lately come to pass
concerning Oliver Cromwell and his House, and his Friends and Flatterers; and
shall not my Hand find out you, if you be found in their Ways, or worse? Did I
visit (amongst other things) for the several Excesses committed about him in
the time of his Life and Greatness, and especially for that at his Death, and
shall I not visit for the several Excesses and Wastings of my Creatures about
thee, O Charles Stuart, in these late Months, especially about that of thy
Proclamation and Coronation, says the Lord God? Lay things to Heart ye
forgetful and stout-hearted Children. What can you say that was Evil and
Oppressive in their Days, and is not as yet amended in yours? I the Lord look
for Judgment and Righteousness from you: I look that you should make use of my
Power for the encouragement and help of them that love me, and fear my Name in
the Lands, and not of their Oppressors: I will call you and all Nations quickly
to account for all things. I will not be always (says the Lord) as one that
sleeps or winketh. I will arise, I will come in mine eternal dreadful Power
amongst you, O Sinners and Hypocrites in these Islands, and in all the Earth! I
have been long as a gentle Lamb, and little oppressed Child amongst you! I will
now arise! I will put on Zeal as a Cloak, and will cloth my self with Garments
of Vengeance, and will roar from my Holy Hill, and will be as a Lion, and as a
fierce Lion amongst you to take a Prey! And all your false Shepherds and
pretended Watchmen with their false Instruments shall not frey me, nor in the
least dismay me, nor deliver the Prey out of my hands: Neither will I hear
their false Cry and Prayers, nor regard their deceitful Fastings to do them
good, who now in this day of my Visitation will none of my Counsels, but at
naught set all my Love, and evil entreat my dear Servants who mourn amongst
them, and in much tenderness warn them to Repentance. But oh! oh ye Mu^^^de of
tall Cedars, ye strong Oaks, I will raise up a strong Wind amongst you, and
your high tops shall dash against and split one another; and with your fall
shall the great multitude of Bramble Bushes, Briar-Trees, and low creeping
Shrubs, who admire and adore your Height and Greatness, and tremble at you, but
not at me, (says the Lord) shall be crushed down, together with you, in your
Fall. But Israel shall do Valiantly, and your Fall shall be as a Resurrection
to my dear Seed; and I will do Valiantly, says the God of the Spirits of all
Flesh, for all that wait for me, and love mine appearance. For Time is mine,
and Place is mine, and I will not be limited (says the Lord) and my Servants
shall serve me, World without End; and that which has not been seen, shall be
known in the Earth, and Iniquity shall stop her Mouth! And Israel's Liberty
shall be proclaimed over all the Earth. And all Holy Praises by the Lord's
Redeemed and Ransomed ones shall be founded forth unto his Name for ever, as it
is by the living in Jerusalem at this day; Even so come Lord Jesus, come
quickly, says my Spirit.

Thomas Tailor.
Thus much the Lord God of Heaven and Earth (who desires not, nor delights
not in the Death of Sinners, but rather that they might amend their Lives and
live) was willing to have the King and his Servants to know, which might,
according to its date, have come sooner to your hands, if it had been so
ordered; but if it yet be ordered to come, I beseech you in the Bowels of Love,
as a Servant of God, not to slight it, but weigh it well in the true Love and
Light that searches all things, and it may be yet serviceable to you; for
truly Wrath from the Lord is gone out against you, and how can it be turned
back but by a speedy Repentance of those Evils for which it is gone forth; and
by calling in all such Acts and Decrees as are gone forth, either before or
since its Writing; whereby the pure Seed of God, in these Islands, either have
been, or may be imbondaged, and the good Spirit of God limited, For it is not
fit that the Lord God of Glory should be stinted or limited in his Way: For he
is a free Spirit, and will not be tied or bound up to any outward Form
whatsoever, but will have his People Worship him in Spirit and Truth, and to be
acted forth in the World, in such a form ^s he himself, Abraham's Seed (...)
for ever. By a Servant of Jesus Christ, and a Well-wisher to the (...) and all
People upon Earth, earnestly desiring the Welfare of all God's Creation, that
it may be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption; and my Weapons are not
Carnal but Spiritual; For if my Enemy Hunger I am taught to feed him, if he
Thirst, to give him Drink; if he seek to do me any Evil, to overcome his Evil
with Goodness, as the Lord has dealt with me, and not to avenge my self,
because it belongs to the Lord God for ever, who is worthy of all pure
Obedience for evermore.

Thomas Tailor.
This last part dated in the Fourth Month, 1662.


Against Lotteries.
IS it not sad, O all People! to see such wicked and deceitful Inventions as
these Lotteries still on Foot, and passing too and fro in the Land
uncontrouled, after all the late Manifestations of God's Anger against the
Nation and People thereof? O! when will People lay God's Judgments to Heart,
and cease to Cosen and Deceive one another! Is there any so blind that they
see not these filthy things called Lotteries, to be one of those Abominations
that have come out of the bottomless Pit to deceive the People withal, and so
to defile the Nations, to the pulling down God's heavy Judments upon you? O all
People who are either the Inventers or Upholders of them, so cease, cease, from
all such sinful and ungodly Things, whose Foundation is Covetousness, the very
Root of all Evil, and mind the fear of the Lord God, lest the day of his
Patience pass away from you, and you be shut up in that woeful Darkness, and
Hell of Misery for all your Sins, where is nothing but weeping and wailing and
gnashing of Teeth, for evermore. Rests a Witness for God, in his Power against
the Sin of all People, without respect of Persons, and blessed are all who take
warning betime, for the Lord is arisen out of his Holy Place, to ease him of
all his Adversities.

Thomas Tailor.

To Stafford.
O Stafford! Stafford! thy Judgment lingreth not, thy Condemnation slumbreth
not, thine Iniquity abounds, and thy Transgressions are multiplied daily as
the Sand of the Sea; yea, thou makes haste to fill up the measure of thine
Iniquities, that the Indignation, when it comes, and behold it comes swiftly,
and the Wrath of the Almighty, whom thou have grieved, may be seen justly to
come upon thee in the sight of all! O the mighty Patience and Long sufferance
of God has been great toward thee, in sparing thee hitherto (...) but thou
have not at all answered the Goodness of God toward thee; thou art a Stage for
all manner of Sin and Sinners to act their Part in thee, and thou a Partaker
with the Ungodly in all their Ways; and so must thou assuredly partake with
them of their Plagues, as sure as ever thou have been of one Mind and Heart
with them in their Sin; O the ha^d-heartedness of thine Inhabitants, that could
never Repent, nor lay things to Heart for your good, unto this Day, nor say
within your selves, What have we done? though the Lord has made me a Warner
and a Reprover unto you all, this Fifteen Years, both by Words and Writing, in
Love, Truth, and Faithfulness, that your Souls might live and not dye; showing
unto you the Evil of your Doings, that you might Repent and turn from them; but
you would not hear, nor amend your Lives to this Day, but have increased your
Sins as the Old World, whom God destroyed with Water, and Sodom, whom the Lord
consumed with Fire; and like Jerusalem, whom God gave into the hands of a cruel
Enemy, for all their mighty Sins, over whom the Prophet Jeremiah lamented,
because they would not hear; and over whom Christ wept, because they would not
believe: And so my Soul has long, and yet shall weep in Secret for your Pride,
if you will not now at length, before it be too late, humble your selves, and
repent of all your unholy Ways and Worships, whereby God's Soul is burdened for
you, are most manifestly of those that say, Lord, Lord, in a dead form of
words, out do not at all what he by his Spirit requires of you, but the
contrary, and so you taking his Holy Name so manifoldly in vain, he will not
hold you guiltless in his Judgment Day; so woe, woe, will unavoidable be your
Portion from the Lord God, and everlasting Banishment from his Holy Presence of
Life, except (as is said) ye speedily Repent in the deepest Humility and Godly
Fear, as says his Spirit in his Servant,

Thomas Tailor.

To the Mayor of Stafford.
AND now to the Mayor of Stafford, who so busieth and trouble^h himself,
without cause, about the Harmless and Peaceable Meetings of the People of God
in their own Houses; if he would get true Praise with God and good Men, and
Comfort to his own Soul, let him look into the Streets, and open places of the
Town, and use his Authority, to the restraining and hindering of that great
Wickedness, and abominable Debauchery, and Heathenish Practices, that are
committed there, at such times as these called Christmas, i. e. in the face of
the Sun. And let him now stand up for God, who is grieved and burdened with
such things, if he would find Mercy to his Soul; for an Account to God must all
give of their Stewardship: For what bad Customs shall one find amongst the
Heathens, which at such times as these are not practiced by the People of
England, who in words profess Christ. But alas what will such a Profession do,
where the Life and Power of Godliliness is wanting.

Rests God's Servant, and all your Souls Friend Thomas Tailor.

For them that Rule in Stafford.
O Unrighteous People! What will ye do in the Day of the Lord, when the Just
and Holy God, who lives for Ever, does call you 20 Account for all your doings?
Do you judge it an Evil, and punishable by the Law, for one of us, though never
so truly moved of God to come amongst you, when you are at your Worship, to
speak a few words in a peaceable manner for your good, and yet can see no Evil
in your selves, to come in great Companies amongst us the People of God, when
we are gathered together to worship God in his own free Spirit, as he has
taught us, and not only speak to us, but hawl, and pull us hither and thither,
some one way, some another, without all Fear of God, yea, though you find us on
our Knees praying to God, or other wise preaching the Everlasting Gospel? O how
is it that you never seriously lay these things to Heart, and smite upon your
Thigh in Godly Sorrow, saying, What have we done? How have we Transgressed
God's Righteous Law? How shall we stand before the Judgment Seat of Jesus
Christ, where all must appear, as well the High as the Low? Does not Christ the
Judge say, Whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you, even so do ye to
them, for this is the Law and the Prophets? And therefore never boast of such a
Law and Religion as is not one with the Law and Prophets of God; to the Witness
of God in you all I speak, Would ye be done unto your selves as you do by us in
the foresaid Business? Nay, nay, we see by Experience the contrary. And so you
think to carry things on with a high Hand, but God is higher than all,
therefore fear him; for if you still go on offending against God, who shall
plead for you? O say not within your selves, We have Power, and therefore who
shall question us, and control us? I say, there is no true Power but of God,
and to him you must give Account for it; and the true Power is for the praise
and protecting of them that do so well, as to Worship God in his Good Spirit
and Truth, as Blessed be the Lord we do; and all our Adversaries never could,
nor never can, make it appear to the contrary. And so you that are in Power,
see that your Law be laid upon the Lawless, and not upon the Innocent, lest
their Cry come up into the Ears of the Lord against you, and your Power be
taken from you for your Abuse of it; for the Lord's Heart is for the Righteous,
and against the Evildoers in all Generations, without respect of Persons:
Rests your Soul's Friend, though for my Good Will to you I be too much hated by
you; but for you I can say, praised be the Lord, Father forgive them, they do
not well know what they do.

Thomas Tailor.
So be not Proud, for the Lord has spoken, and a Consumption from the Lord
will certainly come upon all that will not know God nor be subject to the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.
To the Kings and Rulers.
O Ye Kings and Rulers of the Earth, who profess the Name of God and Christ,
ought ye not to Rule for God and Christ, to whom ye must give Account of your
Stewardship? And do you not read in the Scripture of Truth, that it is said,
All Power in Heaven and Earth is given to Christ, and he does what he sees good
in Heaven and Earth, and all his Ways are Righteousness and Holiness for Ever;
and that without him ye can do nothing; ought ye not therefore to take Counsel
at his Spirit in all things, and so to be very Careful that you do nothing
against him, nor his Children; for this Lord Jesus Christ, the Supreme and
Great Ruler over all, has a Generation of Just Men and Women upon the Earth,
who are his Children, and as near and dear to him as the Apple of his Eye; and
he that offends the least of these, offends against a Member of Christ's Body,
and he will Recompense Tribulation to such as Trouble them; and every Knee to
him shall bow, for God respects no Man's Person; he is higher than Agag; and
King Saul himself, though he be taller by the Head than any Man in Israel, must
down if he disobey God's Voice; and the Mighty Kingdom from Rehoboam must be
rent, if he take Counsel of the Wicked to Oppress God's Heritage; and Great
Nebuchadnezzar into a Beast shall be turned, if he grow Proud, and Rob God of
his Honor; and Overturned shall all Kingdoms be, who Rule not in
Righteousness; for the Lord is determined that Truth and Righteousness-shall
Rule and have Dominion upon the Earth, and nothing else, and that Nation and
People that will not now submit to Truth's Scepter, shall come to naught. And
seeing the Apostle says, That such Magistrates as are God's Ordinance, are a
Terror to evil Doers, and a Praise to such as do well: Then whose are they that
do altogether discourage the Good, and encourage the Evil? They must needs be
of the Number of those for whom the Lord by his Prophet complains of against
Israel, saying, They have set up Kings, but not by me; and Princes, but I knew
it not. These Kings and Princes were such as set up and carried on Idolatry in
those days, and were even made glad with the Lies of the False Priests and
Prophets; For in that day, as Troops of Robbers waited for a Man, so the
Company of Priests murdered in the way by consent. See Hos. 6.9. And in the
days of those Kings, says Daniel, shall the Lord God of Heaven set up a
Kingdom, and it shall be for ever. And ought not all People, who profess
Christ, and hope to have Benefit and Comfort by his Appearance and Kingdom, to
search, and see how they may come into Favor with this King, and be Heirs of
this Kingdom? For behold I show you a Mystery, every Subject of this Kingdom,
is an Heir of this Kingdom.

Thomas Tailor.

Concerning his being taken Prisoner of seven Years Continuance.
THomas Tailor, Prisoner of the Lord, who owes nothing but Love and Good Will
to the Creation of God, has been a Sufferer here at Stafford, for no Evil at
all, but because in Conscience to God he could not Swear, above seven whole
Years, being taken as I was on my Journey with my Wife, as I was going into
Worcestershire to see a Son that we had Apprentice there; and so the two Men
called Justice Layn and Justice Pierchouse, being put on (it seems by a wicked
Man) came upon me as I was standing without the Door of a House at
Tipton-Green, where a few Friends and I had been for a little Season waiting
upon God; and so the Meeting being broken up, and I, with the rest of Friends,
ready to depart, every one to their place, and I on my Journey, as is said,
they laid violent hands upon me, and caused a Constable to search me, as though
I had been some dangerous Person, when, as the Lord knows, I bore no Carnal
Weapons for this four and twenty Years space, neither did I Plot or Contrive an
Evil to any Man in the least; but have, as much as in me laid, sought the Good
of all Men in Word and Deed. And yet for my Good Will was I thus apprehended,
as is said, by the two Men before-named (who since are both dead) and by them
forthwith committed to the common Goal at Stafford for not Swearing, as is
said. And so the same Spirit that so committed me, could not be satisfied until
it had seen me run to a Praemunire, as they call it, for not Swearing; though
the Man called Judge Tirrel, who did it, confessed before all the Country, I
spoke or confessed the Substance of that Oath, called the Allegiance, yet
premunired me for want of kissing the Book, or saying, I Swear, I Swear, or so,
which are but light Matters compared with the Substance: For I told him and the
rest, that Popery I was against, but not against the King, or good Government
of this Nation. And therefore as the Lord has, so will he ever judge
Righteously betwixt me and my Persecutors, and bring the Wheel of his Judgments
upon the Wicked, his Enemies.

Thomas Tailor.

To the Mayor and Priest of Stafford.
WHAT! Is the Mayor and Priest of Stafford both in a dead Sleep, that neither
Heart, Hand nor Tongue is left, either to punish or reprove open Wickedness and
Profaneness committed in the open Sun amongst them, though both the Law of God
and Man forbid the same? What! Are not Players, Bear-wards, and such lewd and
wicked Persons going about the Country, and practicing their Wickedness as this
day, not only condemned by the Law of God, the Light in all Consciences,
according to Holy Scripture, but also in express words forbidden and
punishable, as Rogues and Vagabonds, by the Laws of England, see the Statutes
39 Eliz. 4. and 1 Jac. 7. and 1 Jac. 25. with 3 Car. 4. And yet for all this no
stop put to them, but even openly tolerated and cried up by the Multitudes of
People in open Streets, to the great Dishonor of God, and Shame both of the
Town and Nation, when the Servants of the Lord cannot be suffered so openly to
cry Repentance, and declare God's Judgments against them, and the like
Abominations that are in the World? And therefore may it not be well said of
you, as it was by Jeremiah the Prophet of old, Chap. 10.21. The Pastors are
become Brutish, and have not sought the Lord, therefore they shall not prosper,
and all their Flocks shall be scattered. And Chap. 11.9* And the Lord said unto
me, a Conspiracy is found amongst the Men of Judah, and among the Inhabitants
of Jerusalem, they are turned back to the Iniquities of their Forefathers
which refused to hear my words. And Isaiah 59.14, 15. Judgment is turned away
backward, and Justice stands afar off, for Truth is fallen in the Street, and
Equity cannot enter: Yea, Truth fails, and he that departs from Evil, makes
himself a Prey; and the Lord saw it, and it displeased him that there was no
Judgment. So awake and arise, and consider well of things, and repent, lest the
Lord God come upon you in his fierce Wrath and Judgment, for these and all your
Sins, whereby you have dishonored him and the King, and suffered your
Neighbors to be unhelped, when it was in the Power of your hand to have done
it. And what Christian Heart can endure to see one Creature tear, and spill the
Blood, and torment one another, and that for no cause, but only to satisfy the
Lusts of ungodly and lewd, vain and cruel Minds of the Multitude? Will not God
punish for these things, and his Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this, as
have even corrupted the Earth with their Abominations? He that has an Ear let
him hear and fear.

Thomas Tailor.

Concerning the Fallen Christians.
BLUSH O Heavens! and fear thou Earth! for the Lord God will certainly bring
forth his Judgments, and plead the Cause of his Truth, in Vengeance and
Righteousness, against an Hypocritical People, and Wicked Generation, scattered
upon the Earth in several Countries, who call themselves Christians, and yet
none more contrary to Christ in Heart and Life than they. For they strengthen
the Hands of the Wicked in all the World with their lewd Practices, and cause
the Name of Christ to be Blasphemed by their evil Doings: They surpass the
Deeds of the Wicked, and exceed all the Heathen that ever went before them, for
they Eat and Drink to the highest Excess of Gluttony and Drunkenness, and
Apparel themselves to the greatest Measure of Pride and Vanity that ever was.
Their Inventions, how to please themselves, and satisfy one another's ungodly
Lust, are innumerable; and the Burden of their Covetousness, Unreasonableness,
Oppressions, Uncleanness, Profaneness, Superstitions, Foolishness, Sports,
Pleasures, Pastimes, and Unchristian Doings, is too heavy for God long to
endure; yea, and that which serves to fill up, yea, to make the Measure of
their Iniquities to overflow, is their Hatred and Persecutions of the Righteous
that are amongst them: And therefore now again does the Lord God say the second
time, Ah! I will ease me of mine Adversaries, and be avenged of mine Enemies,
and will cause the Arm of my Power to rest upon them, and the Power of my
Jealousy and Wrath to consume them; until they know and acknowledge their
mighty Sins, and be unfeignedly humbled, and repent before me for them: For
their Iniquities are Grievous, and I am weary with forbearing, says the Lord
of the whole Earth, God over all, to be dreaded for ever, who will shiver in
sunder the Hearts of the Stubborn Wicked his Enemies, and they shall fall, and
never rise again.

So be it, O glorious Lord God, for the raising up of thy own Dear Seed out of
the great Captivity, faith my Spirit,

Thomas Tailor.

To the Vain People of the World.
TO all the vain People of the World, of what sort soever, that go up and down
the Country with their Vain Shows, Tricks, and Foolish Inventions, to deceive
the People for filthy Lucre, by drawing their Minds from God, A warning from
the Lord unto you all, howl, howl, the day of your Captivity, and Scattering,
and Desolation is at hand; the Lord will be terrible to you, for you have long
grieved his good Spirit, burdened his Seed, and deceived the People; so that
you are grown fat, full, and most careless and forgetful of God and all
Goodness; but the Lord will thin you, and empty you, and judge you in his
Wrath, as a Company of deceived and deceiving Men, whose Minds the God of this
World has blinded, that you see not the Gospel of God, nor the good things
thereof, which so much concern the good of your Immortal Souls, but you have
chosen the God of this World, that wicked One, who Rules in all the Children of
Disobedience, to be your Guide and Teacher; and the Gain of Sin before Goodness
you have preferred, and chosen to your great hurt; and the Lord has often
called you to Repentance, but the Custom of Sin, and the filthy Lucre coming
thereby, has so blinded your Minds, and hardened your Hearts, that you have not
set your Hearts to seek the Lord unto his Day, but cries, Peace to your selves
in your Sins, where there is no Peace; so if things of you that can hear and
believe, consider, and lay things to Heart, before it be too late, for this is
the day of the Visitation, from a Servant of God, and Lover of your Souls,

Thomas Tailor.

An Exhortation to all People.
O People! where is your ascending with Christ, who are not yet arisen up out
of your earthly and vain Conversation? What benefit can you have by any thing
of Christ, whilst you remain Strangers to the Life of Christ, in the broad way
of the World? Are you not in the broad way of the World, whilst your Lives are
wholly fashioned to the course of the World? Your observing of a Day, and
calling it Holy,

Thomas Tailor.

To the Teachers and Magistrates of Tamworth.
O Ye Magistrates, Teachers, Fathers, and Masters of the People of this Town of
Tamworth! How is it that in all this long Profession of Christian Religion, you
are not come to a better sense and feeling in your Hearts, than to suffer, if
not to countenance, this vain and foolish Custom of Ringing and Jangling of
Bells, and especially in your House of Worship, to the grief and burdening of
the good Spirit of God, and the tender Souls of God's People, who are redeemed
from such Vanities. O! consider, consider, how you will give account to God for
your Selves and the People, especially the Young Men, who are so greatly
Corrupted and kept from God by such Practices; for they seeing you that are
Rulers over them, suffering of them, if not delighted with it, they go on
persuading themselves that they do no Evil in spending their precious Time and
Strength upon such Vanities. For it is manifest, that all such as are exercised
in such Vanities, spending several Hours in them, and that so often delight in
them, and are Lovers of Pleasures more than Lovers of God, and so no Friends,
but Enemies to the Gospel of Peace; so Repent all, and turn to the Lord's
tender Spirit of Light and Life, and suffer it to have Place and Rule in in
you, and it will not suffer you to live in such things as these, which not the
true God, but the Evil Spirit of this wicked World has set up, and keeps up to
the Dishonor of God, and Blemish of the Profession you make: Rests a Lover of
your Souls, and a Witness for God against all vain Inventions.

Thomas Tailor.

To Sinful People.
AH sinful People! who, in the blindness of your Hearts and unbelief, are
scattered upon the face of the whole Earth, from God's Way into the ways of
Destruction, whose Delights is not at all in the Law of the Lord, neither are
you afraid of the Judgments of our God, the pure and holy One, who Dwells in
unspeakable Glory and powerful Majesty, whose Voice is uttered amongst you, and
of whose terrible Judgments for Sin poured forth upon the Generations of the
Wicked, from whose Loins you are sprung, you cannot be wholly Ignorant you are
a corrupt Seed, a People in whom the Lord God of Heaven can have no delight;
for in the ways of God, which are Holy, you delight not, but in your own ways,
which are altogether Corrupt, you daily defile your selves. Hear the Word of
the Lord God, ye Rebellious ones, the Day of the Lord's fierce Wrath is nigh to
come upon you, his Soul loathes all your Meetings; yea, your best Works are
Abomination to him, your Prayers and Praises of your Temple are Sin; your
Weddings Joy and Mirth is brutish as your Lusts are from which they proceed;
you Buy, and Sell, and Marry, and Meet together to Worship, and all in the
Accursed Thing, the Nature of the wicked One, which Christ came to destroy; and
yet you are not ashamed to say, Did not Christ Institute our Marriages, and our
Religion? Ah foolish People! when will you learn Wisdom? When shall Folly
depart from ye? When shall the pure Voice of God and his Wisdom be heard, which
cries to you for Repentance in the Streets, in your Hearts, and in all your
Meetings? What will you make of Christ? Was he, or is, do you judge, such a one
altogether as your selves are? Does his Spirit delight in your Pipings,
Dancings, Drinkings, Ramblings, Fooleries, unbridled Tongues, vain Religion? Is
there any Time now left by him for such Things? Nay, verily, ever since he
suffered upon the Cross, and ascended into Glory, the Times of the World's
Mirth he has put to an end, and for ever condemned it, and your Glory is no
more; neither shall ever your sinful Hands find that any more that shall help
you; but now you are called into the Cross of Christ, to deny your selves, and
forsake the Vanities and Wretchednesses ye delight and live in; and ye are
exhorted to enter in at the strait Gate, and so to follow Christ in the
Regeneration and new Life, where the Vanities of the World are judged, and put
off with its false Flattering Religion and double Tongue, that would deceive
God with the Lord, Lord, in the words; when the Heart is after every evil Lust,
and the works of the Devil daily brought forth amongst you to his Dishonor.
Now you are again warned to remember it; and now you have time to Repent in,
prize it, lest the Door be shut.

And unto you, O wretched Men! the Teachers of this People, who have caused
them to err by your Lies, and by your Lightness, and by your destroying
wrestings of Scripture, who have received here of this vain People, and who
receive Honor from this wretched Multitude, and they call you Masters, and you
receive it; and indeed their Masters you are, and lead them Captive at your
Will, after your blind Doctrines and Practices to where they are even Strangers
with you to the Life Food. The Piper or Fiddler brings you a couple of Carnal
People to the Steeple-House, and they come in to you to be Wedded, and in a few
deceitful Words you join them together for filthy Lucre, and says, Whom God
has joined together let no Man separate; and then you send them forth again,
with their Train, and the vain Man the Fiddler or Piper, or Waits, who brought
them to you, receives them again, and goes with them to the place of Feasting,
Drunkenness, and Sportings, where the great God of Heaven and Earth, and Jesus
Christ his Son is most highly Dishonored with old and young all the Day and
Night after, if not longer; and thus Lust begins the Match, and Lust carries it
on and finishes it, and you are all but dead Men in God's sight, with all your
doings; and will you call this a joining in the Lord, and the Honorable
Marriage. O Blasphemous Men, how dare ye so Blaspheme the glorious Name of God,
shall you never be judged for these things; yea, verily, the Lord will require
a strict Account, for it is now Day time, and you Sin in the Day after Warning;
and so your Sins are the greater, and the Judgment will be accordingly. And as
you begin with the People, so you lead them on with their corrupt Seed,
bringing that also into your cursed Covenant, by sprinkling with earthly Water,
which washes away the Sin; but the Lord God is separating ye all to the Sword,
and you shall be a Prey to his Wrath; and his Servants who now Mourns for you,
and thus Warns you, shall rejoice for ever, even so Lord Jesus, Amen and Amen.

Thomas Tailor.

To the Children of Men.
O Ye Children of Men! does not the Eye of the Lord God behold all your Doings?
and does he not see all your studyings, how to satisfy and fulfill the Lusts
and Desires of your own evil Hearts? Is not all your Gamings, Sportings, and
Mispendings of your precious Time known to him? And when he beholds your
Cock-Pits, your Bowling-Allies, your Play Houses, and the like places of
Vanity, does not his Soul abhor them that spends the Creation in making and
setting up such things, and that lets forth his Heart in delight after the
things there practiced?

O how is the Lord dishonored by such doings? Did Christ come into the World
to hold up such things, or to pull them down? and will you profess Christ, and
keep up those things which he came to destroy? O blush for shame, and lay your
Hand upon your Mouth, and never boast of your Religion more, until you leave
off your Vanities and Iniquities: For, because of the Evil of your Doings will
the Lord plead with you, and all the Children of Vanity; And the Wicked shall
not be able to stand before him in this day of his Wrath, that is come and
coming upon all the Earth, to consume the Sinners out of it, For the Lord has
a Controversy with the whole Earth, and by the Fiery Sword of his glorious
Mouth will he get himself the Victory: And not by the Sword of either Great or
Mean Men, shall the Earth be purged from her Dross. He that has an Ear let him
hear, and repent of the Evil of his Doings. For he that goes on in Sin, after
the Admonition of Truth, shall not prosper, says the Spirit.

Thomas Tailor.

To the Fencers.
O Ye Fencers and Sword-Players, vain Men! How will you Fence off, or defend
your selves from the Judgments and Wrath of God that is to come upon you for
your Sins? O what a Company you gathered together Yesterday for your own filthy
Lucre sake, to the Dishonor of God, and wounding of all your poor Souls in the
sight of God! O the Wickedness of these Times, and Evils of these Evil Days!
And what, O ye People, the Lovers and Beholders of these Vanities, will you not
see the Evil of your Doings? one Day gather together into that you call your
Church, in a presence of Worshipping God, and the very next Day found assembled
together with Drums into the County House, to see the Heathenish Actings of Two
vain Men with Naked Swords, which, amongst Christians, should be put up into
their Sheath. What Abomination is this, to see a Town and a Country gathered
together, and that not of the Meanest of the People, to give their Money and
spend their Time, to see Two vain Men Fight for a Wager, as they pretend, and
yet in Hypocrisy too, to get the People's Money, and especially in these hard
Times, when many poor Souls have not a Penny to buy them Bread withal! Will not
God Judge for these things? Will not God's Soul be avenged on such a Nation as
this? Yea, sure he will, and plenty in abundance of Drums and Naked Swords may
you hear and see to your astonishment: And that in earnest to waste and cut
down a Proud, Wicked, Gainsaying, and Hypocritical People. Howl ye Priests, the
Head of all this Vileness, who have taught the People to be Heathens, and to
delight their Hearts in things which God's Soul hates. Howl ye Magistrates,
who have born the Sword in vain, and have not withstood the doings of the
Wicked, but have suffered them to act their Abominations in the chief Places of
your Towns, even before your Judgment-Seats. Howl all ye People, high and low,
who are Upholders of, and Delighters in the vain Inventions and Heathenish
Works of all sorts of Wicked Men, and your Hearts are secretly departed from
the Living God; so that your delight is not in any of his Ways. The Lord's
Controversy is with you, and he will certainly ease himself of you, and all
his Adversaries, as says his Spirit, in his Servant

Thomas Tailor.

Concerning Sprinkling.
HEAR O ye Priests, and harken O People, for the Lord has a Controversy with
you, because of the Evil of your Doings, your Gatherings together are for the
worse, and not the better; and the Lord can smell no Sweet Savor in your
Feasts, because of his Name, which is Holy, which you so much take in vain at
such times as these: For when you tell of Christning a Child, and Regenerating
it, and making it an Heir of God's Kingdom, by such your Doings, you deceive
your selves and the Infant greatly. And so when in words you seem to give
Thanks to God for doing that which he neither does, nor never promised to do by
such a means, Do you not greatly dishonor him, and take his Name in vain? The
Apostle Peter says, It is not the washing away of the filth of the Flesh, but
the answer of a good Conscience in the Resurrection of Jesus, that Sav^s. But
what answer can the little Child have at present, who is sensible of no such
thing? And for your selves, your own words do daily bear witness against you,
to be an Unsaved People; for you say, You do that you should not do, and leave
undone what God commands, and that there is no Health in you: And this not only
in such Doings as this at this time, but also in the whole Course of your Lives
you make good: For the Lord, I say, that he never required this at your hands,
to wit, To take a little Water, and sprinkle it on a little Infants Face, and
then to say, that thereby it is made a Member of Christ, a Child of God, and
Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven. And the Scripture no where says any such
thing; and so you have no ground in the Truth for such a thing, nor for your
Godfathers and Godmothers, as you in your Blindness call them, to promise that
for the Child, which you never did perform for your selves to this day, as is
manifest, for to that of God in your Conscience I speak, When did you forsake
the Devil and all his Works, Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and all
the sinful Lusts and Desires of your Flesh? Nay, nay, it is most manifest in
your Lives, as your words before set down prove against you to be otherwise. So
in God's fear give over Mocking of God, and deceiving your own Souls, and the
little Infants, and turn to the Lord in Spirit, that he may teach you, lest his
Wrath break forth upon you, as it did upon the People of old, who went on in
their Sins, and there be no Remedy.

Thomas Tailor.

Concerning Burying, and Churching of Women, etc.
AT the casting Mold upon the Corpse in the Grave, the Priest shall say in the
Burial these words,

For as much as it has pleased Almighty God of his great Mercy to take unto
himself the Soul of our dear Brother here departed, we therefore commit his
Body to the Ground, Earth to Earth, Ashes to Ashes, Dust to Dust, in sure and
certain hope of the Resurrection to eternal Life, etc.

And now lest any should say, they do not here say this in a particular
Application of these words to that present Dead, in the Collect afterward in
the same Burial they say,

That when we shall depart this Life, we may rest in him, as our hope is this
our Brother does: And that at the general Resurrection at the last day, they
may be found acceptable in his sight, etc.

In their Churching of Women,
There is read the 116 Psalm or the 127, instead of that which in former times
was read, wherein, The Sun shall not burn thee by day, nor the Moon by night.

But still to understand, the Woman, whatever she be, must be considered of the
same Heart and Soul as David was when he wrote these words, which is very often
as contrary as Light is from Darkness, for afterward they say, without fear,
Save this Woman thy Servant, and answers, which puts her trust in thee.

And afterward pretend to give Thanks for the Delivery of that Woman (whoever
she be) which they call God's Servant, from the Pain and Peril of Childbirth,
etc.

Then the Woman must offer the accustomed Offering, now what these are I know
not, but the Priest it seems does: But why do they not enjoin them the
Offerings of Moses, seeing you have your Pattern from thence? For in all the
New Testament I never read of a Priest Churching of Women.

In their Weddings they Swear, etc. saying, both the Man and the Woman, and
that after they have promised, before all, to live together as Man and Wife,
which one would think were sufficient, (but what can be sufficient where Truth
is wanting) they must say, And thereto I plight thee my Troth; and yet not
content with this neither. It is there said,

Then shall they again loose their Hands, and the Man shall give to the Woman a
Ring, laying the same upon the Book, with the accustomed Duty to the Priest and
Clerk, (O here is the Business,) (this is that Wheel that carries all on, to
wit, Money; and all is for Money amongst the Hirelings.) And the Priest taking
the Ring, shall deliver it unto the Man, to put upon the fourth Finger of the
Woman's left Hand, (what Sorcery is here) and the Man holding the Ring there,
and taught by the Priest (it may well be said such a Priest as this that is
blind, for it is certain God never taught such a thing as this) shall say,

With this Ring I thee Wed, with my Body I thee Worship, and with all my
Worldly Goods I thee endow.

And this they must pretend to do In the Name of the Father, etc. Thus taking
God's Name continually in Vain in their vain and uncircumcised Lips.

Visitation of the Sick.
And in this the Priest of the Parish, be he never so Notorious a Sinner
himself, yet he must say coming in, Peace be to this House; and why, because
Christ said to such as he sent in the Power of his own Spirit, that they, going
upon the Message of the Gospel, might say, where they entered, Peace be to this
House, or so. But really God will not be mocked, for what have Hirelings and
wicked Men, who abide not in Christ's Doctrine, to do with Peace. What, because
Paul, by the Power of Jesus, cast out Devils out of People, must therefore the
Exorcists, the Sons of Seva, though he was chief of the Priests, do so? Nay,
but must be given to know, through Judgment, their bold Presumption, see Acts
19.13, etc. And here must the Sick Man, though never so bad, be prayed for thus,

O Lord Save thy Servant which puts his Trust in thee, etc.

But what, O bold Priest, if the Lord should even then call thee to Judgment,
and say to thee, How do thou know he is my Servant, and puts his Trust in
me? What signs of this has he given in his Life and Conversation, or since
thou came in, for the Tree is known by his Fruits? Would not the Priest be
struck Dumb? Yea; as surely as ever the Man was, who dared to come to the
Wedding without a Wedding Garment.

O what dawbing with untempered Mortar is in all heir Doings! The Lord will
ease himself of all such Burdens, as these Men and Things are to his holy Soul,
and ever blessed pure Spirit.

But some may say, it is left to the Priest's liberty, whether he will so Pray
for him before he have Confessed him or nay: Grant it be, but what then, O may
the People or Priest say, the Creed was read to him, and he asked punctually
whether he did believe it or no; and the Sick Man answered, That all that he
did steadfastly believe. I answer, Did he so: Then see in the Book how that came
about, even by their own means; for the Book says, That after the Priest has
asked the Sick Party, whether he believe those Articles of the Creed; that the
Sick Person shall answer, All this I steadfastly believe. Then it seems he must
say so right or wrong. O these Men made Forms and Customs of Praying,
Confessings and Professions, what Havoc they have made in the World. And
afterward it is so, that if the Party feel himself burdened with Sin, and
confess it, and desire Absolution, the Priest shall Absolve him in these words,

Our Lord Jesus Christ, who has left Power in his Church to Absolve all
Sinners who truly repent and believe in him, of his great Mercy forgive thee
thine Offenses. And by his Authority committed to me, I Absolve thee from all
thy Sins, In the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

And yet in the next words, called the Collect, Pray for the Forgiveness of his
Sins, as though nothing were done, as indeed there is not. O Confusion!

The last thing in the old Service, is the Commination, or Denouncing of God's
Judgments against Sinners, to be used on the first day of Lent, or at other
times as the Ordinary shall appoint.

Thomas Tailor.

A Testimony against Bull and Bear-Baiting.
O Ye Magistrates of Stafford, my Heart was grieved for ye and your Town, to
see and hear Bulls and Bears led about your Streets with a Drum, and a
multitude of People, in order to more Vanity and Wickedness, and that at such a
time as this, wherein you pretend to be more Servants of God than ordinary, by
your Communicating together in your Eating and Drinking the Signs of Christ's
Body and Blood: But alas for you! What will all this avail you, so long as Bull
and Bear-baitings are tolerated amongst you, with such full Allowance as this,
to the Grief of God's Spirit, which abhors all such Cruel Sports and Heathenish
Customs? Do you not publicly profess in your Church Service, Repentance and
Amendment of Life for all that is contrary to Christ? And do you not yet see,
that to delight in seeing Bulls, and Bears, and Dogs, tearing and tormenting
one another without cause, is a grievous Sin in the sight of God, and therefore
not to be tolerated by you. Besides the great hurt it does in the Minds of your
young ones, who are led away from remembering their Creator in the days of their
Youth by these things. Surely the Lord is grieved with you, will you not see
the Evil of such Doings; for I know if you would come to the Light of Christ in
your Consciences, you could not but see them, and stand against them with all
your might, and so discharge a good Conscience toward God and his Creation.
And how do you know, but the general Liberty for these Evils to act upon the
Stage of these Nations, is one cause of the present Judgment of the Sword
amongst them.

Rests God's Servant, who has been a Mourner in Spirit for ye almost this Ten
Years, because of the Evil of your Doings; but as yet you have not laid things
rightly to Heart, which shows your Misery to be great.

Thomas Tailor.

A Testimony against Sporting and Playing.
NOne can rightly rejoice in the Birth of Christ, but the Spiritual Newborn in
Christ. Those that think to please Christ with Eating, and Drinking, and
Sporting, and Playing, are Carnallyminded, and the Carnal Mind is Enmity to
God; and those that live in the Fleshly Mind cannot please God, Romans 8.6, 7, 8.
So its manifest, that the Service and Kingdom of God stands not in Meats and
Drinks and Worldly Delights, but in Righteousness and Peace and Joy in the Holy
Ghost, Romans 14.17. For Meats for the Belly, and the B^lly for Meats, but God
will destroy b^th it and them, says the Apostle. But God will never destroy
such as Serve and Worship him in Spirit and Truth, all the days of their new
and redeemed Life. And so it is manifest, the more Spiritual that any one is,
the more are they dead and separated from that foolish Mind and vain Customs
that the Evil World loves and lives in.

And on the contrary, those that make most Provision for the Flesh, to satisfy
it in the Lusts thereof, let the Time be what it may, are the greatest Enemies
to Christ, and their own Souls; so let things be well weighed and considered,
and it will appear to the open Eye, that God is not more dishonored many
Twelve Days of the Year, than in these that People pretend most to Honor him
in; which, to a Godly Heart cannot but be matter of great Sorrow, as says the
Apostle, Phil. 3.18, 19. Many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell
you even Weeping, that they are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose end is
Destruction, whose God is their Belly, and whose Glory is in their Shame, who
mind Earthly things.

And this is the miserable and woeful Condition of the most part of People, that
in these Days bear the name of Christians, over whom the Spirit mourns.

Thomas Tailor.

A Loving Exhortation, TO All Kings, Princes, Potentates, Bishops and People in
the whole Christendom. Wherein is a Distinction betwixt the True and False
Teachers.
To be Read over in Meekness and the Fear of the Lord.
OYE Kings, Princes, Potentates, and Rulers of the Earth, we desire not your
Thrones, Honors, Places or Dignities, neither do we envy you for them; for we
have enough in God our Father, who has made us Kings and Priests to himself by
Jesus Christ, Spiritually to reign over the Evil in the World, and to offer up
our selves in Righteousness to his Glory; and this is our Crown, and that which
we strive after in a pure Conscience; for we are not of those that fight with
Flesh and Blood, and with Carnal Weapons, for an Earthly Crown, but such as in
the Strength of Almighty God are taught with Spiritual Weapons to War only
against that Mystery of Iniquity and Power of Darkness, that captivates the
precious Soul of Man, and keeps it short of the Glory of God; desiring from the
Truth of our Hearts, that neither the Soul nor Body of any may perish, but that
this Wicked one, which is the Enemy of both, may be destroyed out of the Earth,
in this day of Christ, by the Spirit of his Mouth, and Brightness of his
appearing; that so the whole Creation of God may be delivered from Bondage, to
stand in its Holy Order, to the Glory of the Creator, as in the Beginning; that
so he may take delight in the Children of Men, and make his Abode with them, as
at that time, when the Morning Stars sung for Joy, and all was full of Beauty
and Sweetness, and no Death in them.

And O ye Bishops and high Teachers of the World, we desire not your Seats,
neither do we envy you for your great Promotions, but do desire that you may
know with us, the true Shepherd and Bishop of the Soul, Christ Jesus, the good
and true Shepherd and Bishop, who gave himself for the Sheep, that he might
Redeem them from all Iniquity, and deliver their Souls from the hands of all
Oppression, to serve him in his own free Spirit, where none can come to make
afraid. And as this Savior you come to know and receive, your knowledge of Men
and Things according to the Flesh will cease, and the Love of the World, and
the Worlds things will die in you, and a Love to the Seed that breaths after
Righteousness will arise in you, and you will know what God requires of you,
and how you may do that which will commend you to God in the great Day of his
Judgment, which is nigh at hand, and apply your Hearts thereto.

Therefore awake, awake, arise, arise, for the great Day of the Lord is indeed
nigh at hand, yea the Sun is already arisen, and his bright Glory shines upon
the Sons of the Morning, and the true fearching Light, from which nothing can
be hid, is felt and known in the Earth, and before it the Workers of Iniquity
are as Chaff, and before it can no mortal Man stand in Judgment, though he
glister never so much in outward Glory in the Worlds eye; for in the presence
of this Light, the Judgment proceeds not according to Person or Worldly
Appearance, but according to Truth, Equity and Righteousness; and so every Evil
doer hates this Light because his Deeds are Evil, and the Light reproves him to
his Face, and in his Heart, without respect to his Person: And therefore none
but they whose Deeds are wrought in God, can willingly come to this Light with
their Deeds, or endure that this Light should pass Judgment on them; for it is
the Righteous only that has Praise in the Presence of this pure God, the Light
who lights every Man that comes into the Word; and is come a Light in the
World, that all through him might believe, and come out of Darkness, and the
Deeds thereof, and be saved.

So if any of you perish, it is in your love of Darkness, and your Destruction
is of your selves, for God would have you to be saved, and to that purpose
holds forth his Love in his Light to your Consciences daily, that you might be
warned and not perish: And if this Gospel of his Love and Grace, the Light, be
hid from you, it is because the God of this World, with his deceitful
Allurements, has blinded your Eye. Mark, The God of this World has blinded
your Minds; that Old Sepent who is called the Devil and Satan, and Prince of
the Power of the Air, which works in the Hearts of all Disobedient ones, has
captivated your Understanding, if this Gospel of Light you perceive not to Love
and Obey it. And consider how the Power of Darkness deceives Man; it begins
with him betimes, and works subtly with him in his Mind when he is tender and
young, carrying him forth eagerly after Childish Vanities, and Youthful Lusts,
if by the Light, that secretly Checks for these things, he be not resisted. The
World tells the Youth, that by going forth into some Form of Religion, and
conforming to that, is God's way, by which Man may be helped against his Sin;
but God, the Truth, says, I have laid help upon One that is mighty, Christ
Jesus the Light, who is to be known in Man, a present help against Sin. And, by
what means, says David, may a young Man cleanse his way, save only by taking
heed according to the Word of God. And, the Word is nigh, in the Heart, says
Paul, discerning the Thoughts and Intents thereof. And, the Light shines in
Darkness, says John, (in Man) yea, in every Man that comes into the World,
making all things in secret, manifest; and who can bide their Deeds from it? So
if the young Men come not to this Light, then they abide in Darkness, and grow
up in Darkness, and covering themselves, but not with the Spirit of God, so
long, until there be no Remedy, but the Woe and the Curse must needs come upon
them. But he that follows me, says Christ, (the Light) shall not abide in
Darkness, Sin nor Evil, but shall have the Light of Life, and shall not come
into Condemnation.

So, He that has an ear, let him hear, and mind the Light of Christ in you,
that lets you see all that ever you have done, and sets before you your Sins in
order, and brings Judgment and Condemnation upon your Souls for them: And love
the Light and its righteous Judgments, for Zion must be redeemed through
Judgment; and bring all your Deeds, Words and Thoughts, to this Light of
Christ, and hide not any thing from it; for he that hides his Sins, from the
Lord, shall not prosper. But he that in this true Light sees his Sin, and
forsakes the Sin, and turns to God in his Light, and abides therein, shall be
Blessed. But Woe is the Portion of such as turn not to him that Smites them, but
instead of owning the Pricks and Reproofs of Wisdom, kick against them. These
are the Ungodly, whose Sacrifice the Lord could never accept; but they abiding
in their Sins, all their Prayers and Performances were still returned upon
them, from the pure God, as Dung upon their Faces. Therefore, go not forth,
says Christ, for the Kingdom of Heaven (which he compared to many little
things) is within you: And when they shall say, Lo here, lo there, says
Christ, go not after them: For those that draw People from the Light and Spirit
of Christ (that Holy Anointing within) in Man, were always Antichrists. And in
John the Apostle's Time, many of these were come; and, they went out from us,
says the same John (the beloved Disciple of Jesus.) From us, understand such
as were in the Anointing of God, which taught all things, and they neeved not
that any Man should teach them, abiding in the Anointing, wherewith their Souls
and Spirits, of God were anointed; for that was true, perfect, and sufficient
to lead them into all Truth, according to the Promise; it was in them a
Spiritual Unction, a Free Gift from the Holy One in Christ, the promised Seed,
with whom, through Faith, (the right Holy Faith) they were become one Spirit,
and so became Heirs of the Promise, and true Witnesses of the New and
Everlasting Covenant, which says, And they shall all be taught of God. These
are not outwardly anointed, as those under the Law (the Figure) were, but these
were and are Spiritually Anointed of God himself, in Christ, and so were and
are true Heirs of the Gospel (the Substance) and true Children of the day,
walking in that Heavenly and Eternal Light, wherein they could and do in truth
say, Our Fellowship is with the Father and the Son. So here in this Holy Body
there was no Antichrists; but those that went out from these into the Worlds
Ways, Worships, Customs, Traditions and Inventions these were Antichrists: And
now being gone forth from the Lord and his Spirits Teaching, they become one
with the World, using their Tongues to talk of the things of God in the Worlds
Spirit, without God: And so they being of the World (says John) herefore the
World hears them, 1 John 4.5. But he that is of God (says the same John)
hears us, even us that abide in the Holy Anointing of God in us. And my Sheep
hear my voice, says Christ, and follow me, but a Stranger they will not
follow. So there are two Spirits, the Spirit of Christ, and the Spirit of the
evil World: And two sorts of Teachers accordingly; the one hears the Voice of
God in Christ, and in the strength of this Spirit, goes forth with the Word of
God, and Gospel of Truth in their Heart and Mouth, in Obedience to God, and
pure Love to the Soul of Man, and not for filthy Lucre, nor any worldly End
whatsoever: And these the true Seed, God's Little Ones, Lambs and Sheep hear,
love, and are one with, merely for the Truths sake, which is one, and endures
for ever.

But now contrariwise, the other sort of Teachers, who are rightly called
Strangers, because they are Strangers to the Life of God, and Holy Motion of
his Spirit; they go forth in their own Wills, according to the Motion of their
own earthly Spirits, without God, for Self Ends, in the allowance of the
earthly Power, Name, and Authority; not to build up the Body of Christ, or ^o
minister to his in any, for to that they are Strangers, but to commend
themselves to fallen Man's Wisdom for Self-advantage, and to gather People into
several Forms and out side Professions and Observations, where all sorts of
Sinners are taught to say, Lord, Lord, but never a one to do the Will of God
perfectly from the Heart; and so they build up Babel, the City of Confusion,
where there is like Priest, like People, the Teachers living in Sin, and the
People that follow them living in their Sins, always learning, never learned to
worship God aright: For the Teacher being blind through his Ignorance of God
and Christ, he must needs lead them, that follow him from God, into the Ditch.
And of this sort were they in Christ's time, that loved to be called of Men,
Master; fair Sayers, but evil Doers, who loved the Praise of Men, and their
Greetings in the Market, and their chief and high places in their Feasts and
Synagogues; and loving, for this end, to go in long Robes, and costly Apparel,
outwardly appearing beautified to the Worlds eye, but inwardly full of Pride,
Covecousness, Uncleanness, the Spirit of Persecution, and all manner of
Unrighteousness, as one may read in the 23d Chapter of Matthew, and other
places of Scripture, where Christ had to do with the false spirited Rabbis in
his day, whom he compares to Graves, painted Tombs, Serpents and Vipers, who
shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men, and neither entered in themselves nor
suffered others, but did what they could to hinder those that were entering. And
of such Christ gave his Disciples warning to take beed in time to come, and
told them, though such Wolves should get the Sheeps clothing on them (to wit,
the good words) yet they should not trust them, but should know them by their
Fruits. And so the Tree that is by Nature a Thorn and a Thistle, has
manifested its Fruit; and by their Fruit the Children of Light now know them,
and according to Christ's will, avoid them. And of this sort are they that not
only in the days of Christ withstood him, but even the same that in all Ages
withstood his Spirit and Work, as at this day. For with such earthly-spirited
Teachers it was, that the Prophet Jeremiah's Heart was so broken in his day, as
one may read all along the 23d Chapter of his Prophecy, and of whom in his
fifth Chapter he so grievously complains, saying, A wonderful and horrible
thing is committed in the Land: The Prophets Prophecy falsely, and the Priests
bear rule by their means, and the People love to have it so. And therefore
Destruction from the Lord came upon them all. And these Teachers said still in
their lying earthly Spirit, that Jerusalem (though sinful) should have Peace,
and that no Evil should come upon them People, though they walked every Man
after the Imagination of his own evil Heart, Jer. 23.17. And of this sort were
they that the Lord sent his Prophet Micah to cry against, saying, Thus says
the Lord concerning the Prophets that make my People to err; that bite with
their Teeth, and cry Peace; and he that puts not into their Mouths, they
even prepare War against him: Therefore Night and Darkness came upon them, and
the Vision ceased from them in the just Judgment of God. For a self-end was in
all their Work, and the dead Fly of Covetousness corrupted all: As one may read
at large in the third Chapter of his Prophecy, Verse 5, etc. And of this sort
are they, that Isaiah, the Prophet of God, in his time so grievously complains
of also, as one may read in the 96th Chapter of his Prophecy, saying, Verse 9,
etc. All ye Beasts of the Field come to devour; yea, all ye Beasts of the
Forest: his Watchmen are blind, greedy, etc. all looking for their own way,
every one for his Gain from his quarter, etc. And against this sort of
earthly-spirited Teachers it was that God sent his Prophet Ezekiel to cry Woe
against, saying, Woe to the Shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves; should
not the Shepherds feed the Flock? Ye eat the Fat, and ye cloth you with the
Wool, ye kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the Flocks. And so the God of
this World, through Pride and Covetousness, had so blinded their Eye, and
corrupted their Hearts, that they had neither Will nor Skill to help nor heal
the poor diseased, sick, broken, scattered Souls of their Hearers; and
therefore the Lord was glad to put them aside as Physicians of no value, and
became the Teacher of his People himself; as one may read in the 34th Chapter
of his Prophecy throughout. Glory to the Lord, who has fulfilled his Promise
to his Israel this day; and is become the Teacher of his People himself,
whereby they come to be truly profited, as it is written, I the Lord thy God
teach thee, O Israel, to profit. But the forementioned Teachers, who have run
in their Wills, for Self Ends, and the Lord never sent them, could never profit
People at all: And as Christ Jesus the Lord, and his true Prophets, in former
times were trouble and opposed by such Hirelings: So also the true Apostles of
Christ did not escape the Trials and Oppositions of that deceitful Spirit by
which they were acted, For such, says Paul, are false Apostles, deceitful
Workers, Satan's Ministers, transforming themselves into the likeness of the
Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor. 11. Some of these were already come in his day: And
I know, says he, that after my departure grievous Wolves shall come in among
you, not sparing the Flock: Also, of your own selves shall Men arise, speaking
perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them, Acts 20.29, etc. And as the
Kingdom of Antichrist grew, these perverse things were established for Doctrine
by a Law: For the very Name of Antichrist holds forth a Spirit opposing it self
to every appearance of Christ, and of his Holy Spirit and Anointing in Man.

The true Apostles and Ministers of Christ drew the Soul from Men and self,
unto Christ, and his Anointing in them, to know that to teach them: But these,
and all other False Teachers, draw from Christ and his Anointing within, to
look at Flesh and Form without, which perfects not at all to God. And of this
sort also are they, says the same Paul, which creep into Houses (understand
the great stone Houses, called Churches, as well as others) and lead captive
silly Women, laden with sins, led away with diverse Lusts; ever learning, and
never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth, 2 Timothy 3. Of this sort, says
Paul, as shall come in the last perilous times, even Lovers of their own
selves, Covetous, Boasters, Proud, Blasphemers, Unholy, (who say they are
Christians, but are not so in truth) Fierce, etc. having the Form of Godliness,
but denying the Power thereof; and these he exhorted true Believers to turn
from; and so in Obedience to God, those now who are come to know Christ, and
his Anointing in them, to teach them, are turned from such. And though these
Deceivers have proceeded for a time, to wit, during the late Night of Apostasy,
which Paul, 2 These. 2. spoke of, to deceive many; yet now that the Light is
risen again from under the Earth, they are manifest, and can proceed no
further. Let none therefore now be so void of understanding, as to brand the
true Messengers of Jesus Christ in this Day, with the Name of Deceivers,
because they declare Truth, not only publicly, but also from House to House,
by virtue of the Holy Spirit only; for so did the Apostles themselves, and yet
were no Creepers into Houses; for creeping into Houses denotes the Work of the
Children of Darkness, who run without the Lord Jesus Christ, his Spirit, or
Authority, in their own Wills, for Self Ends, as before; leading about People
in their silliness and sinfulness all their Days, as by woeful Experience, in
the late Ages of the World, since the Apostles Days, has been fully manifest;
wherein the World has wondered after the Beast. And as there were false
Prophets among the People, says Peter, even so also shall there be False
Teachers among you; who shall privily bring in Damnable Heresies, etc. 2 Pet.
2. But how may these be known, may some say? By their Fruits, says Christ, ye
shall know them. And of this sort are they, says Peter in the same Chapter,
who through Covetousness, with fained words, make Merchandise of People; and by
walking after the Flesh, in the Lust of Covetousness and Uncleanness, and
Despite of Christ's Government, even deny the Lord that bought them. These are
the Presumptuous Ones indeed, who count it Pleasure to Riot in the Daytime,
speaking evil of the worthy things that God works and makes manifest in his
Children, which these Presumptuous Ones know not. And these false Teachers are
of those whose Eyes are full of Adultery, and that cannot cease from Sin: For
how should they, seeing their Heart is exercised with Covetous Practices,
loving the Wages of Unrighteousness, like Balaam, as he (to wit, the Apostle
Peter) there speaks. And therefore, those that see not these are Blind indeed;
and those that these Teachers can deceive, may well be said to be without a
Foundation: And hence it has come to pass, that through such Teachers
Wickedness, and Peoples Ignorance, the World has been as a Wilderness. And now
therefore is the Lord, according to his Blessed Promise, bringing up that
knowledge of himself and his Christ again, that shall make the Wilderness a
fruitful Field, and sweet smelling Garden for himself to be glorified in. And
this knowledge of God shall cover the Earth as the Waters do the Sea. And
thereby shall all hurting and destroying be done away from amongst Men, Isa.
65. last; as is this Day witnessed amongst such where this Knowledge of God
has place. Glory to his Name for Ever. So now therefore, all ye Kings,
Princes, Potentates and Rulers of the Earth, see in what Principle you stand,
and upon what Foundation you grow, and whose Work you are a doing; whether
God's or your own. True Magistrates are not a Terror to the good, but to the
evil. But how can ye see the good and the evil truly asunder, or know what to
punish, and what to protect, if you come not to the Light, Christ Jesus, that
true Light which lights every Man that comes into the World (as was said
before) to take Counsel at him, for he is the Wonderful Counselor: and
whatsoever makes things truly manifest is his Light, and with it every hard
thing is known, and every secret thing found out, but without it nothing; but
all People that walk in the Darkness of their own Understandings, do err in
Vision, and stumble in Judgment, and so know not what they do, nor whither they
go: And this way that seems good in the Man's own Eye, is that which always
tended to Death, and disordered all things. And by such a Judgment Barrabas was
Released, and the Innocent Jesus delivered to be Crucified; and by this the
false Prophets in all Ages were protected and born up, and the Dear Servants of
Christ cast out as a thing of naught.

So arise, arise; awake, awake to Righteousness, and Sin not, for the Lord is
on his way to give unto every Nation, and each People therein, Rewards
according to their Works, without respect of Persons. And until God's
Righteousness rule in all, and over all, how can any thing stand, let that of
God in all Consciences judge; so lay things to heart, for this is the Day of
your Visitation. Also, you Bishops and high Teachers, who are pleased in your
Minds because accepted of Man; consider, Are you accepted of God? Is your
Sacrifice so pure, and your Persons so innocent, that the Holy God can receive
them? Is your Doctrine so sound, and Life incorrupt, that none can justly blame
it? Have your Hands handled the Word of Life which you speak of to others? And
do you know in your selves what that living, sh^rp and powerful Word of God is,
(which the Apostle, Heb. 4. speaks of) which divides betwixt Joint and (...),
Soul and Spirit, and discerns all the thoughts and intents of every Heart?
And are your Hearts cleansed by it? And do you Preach and Minister this
internal, living, and eternal Truth (the Word) to the People, or the dead
Letter only? See how it is: For the Fruit ^ow must be the real Witness of every
Trees Nature. Have you received the Free gift from above? Then sell it not for
Money. Would you be counted Ministers and Ambassadors for Christ, and would you
have the Children of Light to own you? Then approve your selves to them as Paul
did to the Brethren in his Days, 2 Cor. 6.3, etc. In much Patience, in
Afflictions, in Necessities, in Distresses, in Stripes, in Imprisonments; as
dying, yet alive in the Hearts of the Hearers by the Power of Truth, etc. And
let all People see that you mind the good of the Soul, and God's Glory, more
than the World, and your own Self-ease and Advantage: For the Day is dawned
that makes all things manifest. And lay by your Carnal Weapons, and make proof
of your Spiritual Weapons (if you have any) and try a little, how you can
persuade Men to be of your Mind by that means: For People begin to question
much the forcing of Men into Religion by the carnal Sword, and outward
Constraint, whether it be of God or no. For it is found by Experience, that into
what People are forced by the outward Power, by the same means may they be
forced out of that again, and so remain restless, and without a Foundation,
until the Truth it self settle them. So set not up your rest in the Wilderness,
much less in Egypt, but look toward the Holy Land, the undefiled, unmovable
Foundation, and suffer others to do so too. And those that have spied out the
good Land, hinder them not from entering in, but help them on in their Journey,
if you can, lest you be found Fighters against God. For now is the Effect of
every Vision coming in; and a feeble one in this Blessed Jerusalem, that is
descended, and daily coming down from God out of Heaven, is as David, and David
as the Angel of God before them, Zach. 12.8. He that runs may now read, if his
Eye be open. And Blessed are all that have believed in God's Holy Name; these
will not be troubled at Zion's Prosperity, but will set to their Seal that God
is true, and praise the Lord with us, the Children of the Womb of the Eternal
Morning, Prais^d be God. So be it.

And all know a separation in your selves betwixt the Precious and the Vile,
and the Vile brought under, and the Precious bearing rule there, and then will
you be in some measure able to discern and judge aright of things abroad, but
not until then. The Carnal Man seeks to gather a great heap into a Form, but
the Spiritual Man, whose Eye is in his Head, he seeks to bring People out of
the Evil of the World, into the Good of God's Kingdom and Power of Godliness.
Blessed are they that can lay down all their own at the Feet of Jesus Christ,
that they may be what they are in him; for the World, and the Glory of it, and
the Lovers of it, is as a fading Flower, but he only that does the Will of God
abides for Ever.

Given forth in the Movings of the Spirit of the Lord God, in his Servant, who
is a Sufferer amongst his Reproached Ones (called Quakers) for the Testimony of
his Everlasting Truth, Praised and Blessed be God for Ever, who has counted us
worthy thereunto. Thomas Tailor.

A Few Necessary Questions and Conclusions For the Present Parish-Teachers OF
ENGLAND, etc.
Deeply to Ponder and Answer in God's Fear, for the good of their own and the
Peoples Souls that are under them; for the Lord is arisen to call all things
into Judgment.
1. WHether any can be said to be true Gospel Ministers, who are not sent of
Christ, as Christ was sent of the Father, seeing Christ said, As my Father has
sent me, even so send I you; for all Power is given me in Heaven and Earth?
John 20.21. and 17.18. Mat. 28.18.

2. Whether any can be justly blamed for not hearing or upholding such as are
not thus sent of Christ, seeing Christ said, My Sheep hear my Voice, and a
Stranger they will not follow, for they know not the Voice of a Stranger? John
10. 1 John 4.

3. Whether it benot the greatest Presumption for any, upon what Pretense
soever, to take upon them to be Ambassadors for Christ (the Great King) who
were never Authorized or Commissionated thereto by Christ, as aforesaid, it
being his Proper Right to send forth his own Laborers?

4. Whether any who are not thus sent of Christ, as Christ was sent of the
Father, can profit the People at all, though they have never so much Authority
from Man, or be furnished with never so much Oratory, or Wisdom of Words, or
Excellency of Speech, according to Man, seeing the Scripture testifies, The
World by Wisdom knew not God? 1 Cor. 1.

And if any should say, How was Christ sent, or can any be sent now as Christ
was sent? I Answer, Christ was sent in the Wisdom, Power and Spirit of the end
less Love and Life of the Father, to Preach the Kingdom of God, and the
Everlasting Gospel thereof, as it is said, Luke 4.18. The Spirit of the Lord is
upon me, for he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the Poor, etc. and so
were the true Ministers formerly sent of Christ, Luke the last, 49. Acts 26.16,
17. Acts 20.28. John 16.13, 14, 15. 2 Cor. 3.5, 6. And as in all former Ages,
all the true Messengers and Ministers of God and Christ were sent in the
Wisdom, Power and Spirit of God and Christ, and thereby directed and guided in
their Work, both when, to whom, and what to speak, Jer. 17. etc. Exodus 3.10,
etc. Amos 7.14, 16. Acts 10.19, 20. Acts 8.26, 27, 29. 1 Cor. 2.12, 13. Gal.
2.7, 8. Even so are Christ's true Messengers and Ministers sent now, and always
must be, because without Christ they can do nothing, John 15.5. and because no
Man knows the Things of God, but the Spirit of God; and therefore without that
Spirit it must needs be impossible for any, either rightly to know or minister
the Things of God, 1 Cor. 2.7, etc. and so says Christ, I am with you, (not
some, but all my Servants) John 17.20, 21, 22. (not for a time only, but
always) even to the end of the World, Mat. 28.20. And therefore says the
Apostle, How can they Preach, except they be sent? (to wit, as Christ was, Luke
4.18, etc.) as is plain by the Apostle's applying that in general to Christ's
Ministers, which the Prophet speaks in the singular number of Christ, Romans
10.15. compared with Isa. 52.7. Again, Christ was sanctified and sent, so are
also his Messengers and Ministers sanctified, and sent as Lambs among Wolves,
John 17.16, 17, 18, 19, etc. Isa. 6.7, 8. Let no unsanctified Man here shelter
himself under Judas, who was only for the turn of fulfilling the Scripture
numbered amongst the Twelve, but not at all for a Pattern of true
Gospel Ministers. Again, Christ came not to do his own Will, but the Will or
him that sent him; and so it is with every one that Christ sends, and who abide
in his Doctrine; and as Christ endured the Contradiction of Sinners against
himself with all Patience, even so do all he sends, and who abide in his
Doctrine, not avenging themselves, but committing their Cause to God, who is
the Avenger of all Wrongs done to his Servants: Also seeing Christ said, The
Tree is known by its Fruits, and by their Fruits ye may know such as come to
you in Sheeps Clothing, but are inwardly ravening Wolves, Mat. 7.15. Therefore
it is further asked of you,

1. Whether such as love to be called of Men Master, which Christ forbad, Mat.
23, 10, 11, 12. or seek and affect other Titles of worldly Honor, and to be
Great, and to exercise Lordship in the Earth, like the Gentiles, do not plainly
manifest themselves to be such as Christ is not with, seeing he said to his, It
shall not be so amongst you, Mark 10.24, etc. And how can they believe, (says
Christ) who receive Honor one of another, and seek not that Honor which comes
from God only? John 5.44.

2. Whether such as make Merchandise of their Words, even selling them as it
were for Money, by agreeing with the People for so much a Year, to settle at a
place for Preaching, etc. and yet will not settle at a Place as Teachers, but
where they know beforehand so much Hire or certain Yearly Maintenance provided
for them, seconded with the worldly Power, to compel People to pay it them, or
by Force to take it from them, whether they will or no? I say, is not this a
manifest Token that such Ministers are not sent of Christ, seeing he said to
his, Freely ye have received, freely give; and the Apostle said, We seek not
yours, but you? But if you say, the same Apostle also said, If we have
ministered to you Spiritual Things, is it a great Matter if we partake of your
Carnal Things?

3. Then I Query (to let pass the Question here concerning what you minister,
whether it is Spiritual or Carnal) whether ever the Apostle, or any true
Minister of God and Christ, either under the Law or Gospel, did ever use any
other Means for that they had allowed them of God, but the Power of the Word
only? Or did ever the Apostle, or any Minister of Christ, receive, much less
compel by worldly Force, any Maintenance for Preaching from such as denied them
to be true Ministers? And so such now as not only compel Wages from their own
Hearers, but even from such as they do no Work for, do plainly manifest by
their Fruits that they have run, and God never sent them, and are so far from
being Successors of the Apostles in their Spiritual and Heavenly Ministry, as
that they Merit to be accounted of the Kind of Old Eli's Sons, who by their
Doings caused the Offerings of the Lord to be ab^o^red, 1 Samuel 2. from Ver. 12,
to 18.

4. Whether such as cannot content themselves with the Incomes of one Parish,
though it be Sixty, Eighty, or One Hundred Pounds a Year, but seek after one or
more Parishes or Places of Revenue besides, are not out of Measure Covetous,
and so palpably out of the Doctrine of Christ, and so Idolaters, seeing the
Apostle says, Covetousness is Idolatry? E^^. ^ 5.

5. Whether did ever any Minister of Christ's sending Preach up the Tenth of
Peoples Labor, or Increase of the Earth and earthly Things, as a standing
Gospel-maintenance for his Ministers, seeing the Apostles Writings are wholly
silent in the thing? And now if any of you in your high Minds think much or
strange to be questioned concerning these things, such may know that these are
the latter Days, spoken of by Jeremiah, Chap. 23.20, 21. wherein God has done,
and is doing great things for his People; And in these latter Days (says the
Prophet there) you shall consider perfectly of the pouring forth of God's
Wrathful Indignation upon the false Prophets and Teachers, who have run, and
God never sent them, as also throughout that whole 23d Chapter of Jeremiah is
to be seen: Also concerning the false Prophets and Teachers you may read John
10.1, etc. Isa. 56.9, etc. Ezekiel. 34.1. Mic. 3. 2 Pet. 2. with diverse other
Scriptures, which speak of the false Prophets and Teachers, also of the true
Ones; from all which these few (amongst many plain and necessary Conclusions)
following may be gathered, viz.

1. The true Prophet, Messenger or Teacher is sent of God (as before) in the
Power and Spirit of God, with the living Word of God, which is as a Hammer and
a Fire, to break the hard Hearts in sunder, and to burn up the Chaff and Dross
in the Minds of Disobedient People, who know God's Will, but do it not, but
hold the Truth in Unrighteousness.

The false Prophet or Teacher, he runs in his own Will, and having stolen the
Word from his Neighbor, uses his Tongue to say, the Lord says, when the Lord
never sent him, and so with good Words and fair Speeches deceives the Hearts of
the unwary Hearers, making glad the Hearts of Hypocrites, and crying Peace,
when the Lord has not spoken it.

2. The true Prophet, Teacher or Minister, as he has received freely, so he
ministers freely; but the false Teacher, as he runs in his own Will, so he
ministers for a Self-end; and if People put into his Mouth, he cries Peace, but
if otherwise, he prepares War against them, and out of his corrupt Heart cries,
Give, and can never have enough.

3. The true Minister has a Mouth always open for God, and against Sin and
Evil in every Appearance of it, without respect of Persons, and like a true
Watcher gives notice of the Wolf's approach, and does not flee when the Wolf
comes, but opposes him in the Loss of all, because Christ's Sheep are dear to
him: But the Hireling flees, because he is a Hireling, and cares not for the
Sheep; and as concerning Sin, it may live in People for Ever for him, for he
cannot bark against Sin, he is so full of it himself; for how can he that is an
Unclean, Covetous, Proud Person himself (with a Face) stand against such Sins
in others; nay, nay, the barking of such must needs be against such as do from
the Heart depart from Iniquity, and so separate from such as live in it,
according to the Call of the Lord.

4. The true Prophet, Minister or Teacher fights the good Fight of Faith, and
his Weapons are Spiritual, and not Carnal, and so he sights not with Flesh and
Blood, to destroy Men's Persons, Liberties or Estates, but his War is with the
wicked Devil (the Power of Darkness in Men) that separates Men's Minds, Hearts
and Souls from God, and brings them into Sin's Captivity, and so under God's
Wrath; and so the true Minister's Work is to Preach People out of that woeful
Condition into the Liberty of the Sons of God: But the false Teacher or
Minister his Weapons are Carnal, and he runs to the worldly Powers to help him
against such as oppose his evil Doctrine and Practice, crying, Men of England,
etc. help, as the Jews cried out against Paul, Men of Israel help, and so
matter not though they weary the Magistrate, and set all the World in an
Uproar, to keep themselves up in their high Places of Deceit, and so prove the
greatest Enemies against God's Truth and his Servants of all other, as is
abundantly to be seen in Scripture, concerning the Priests and their
Confederates, who Presecuted Christ to Death, and raged against his Followers,
because of their holy Testimony for God against their Soul-destroying Ways.

5. The true Messengers and Ministers of Jesus Christ, as they are powerfully
sent of God, so they work effectually for God, for the edifying of the Body of
Christ, and perfecting of his People in Holiness to God: But the false Teacher,
as he has run without God, so his Work is for strengthening that Part in Man
(to wit, the Serpent's Wisdom) which is against God, and wars against the
Simplicity of Christ and Good of the Soul in all; and so they being themselves
out of that Heavenly Power which perfects the Soul to God, and gives it perfect
Victory over all Sin, they cry, No Perfection here, no perfect Victory over Sin
on this side the Grave; and so they lead about a People laden with Sin and
Lust, silly as Woman in the Transgression, ever learning, and never able by
their Means to come to the Knowledge of the Truth itself, which sets the Soul
free from all Sin; for how should People ever come to the Knowledge of the
Truth by following such Teachers as are out of the Truth? For if the Blind lead
the Blind, must they not both fall into the Ditch?

Also seeing you profess the Scripture, and not unwritten Traditions to be your
Rule, and would have People to believe, that what you do is according to
Scripture, therefore it is demanded in a few words further,

1. What Scripture have you for your Sprinkling of Infants, and Signing them
with the Sign of the Cross, and telling People, That thereby they are made
Members of Christ, Children of God, and Inheriters of the Kingdom of Heaven,
when in your own Catechism, in Contradiction to your Practice you teach, That
Children, by reason of their Infancy or tender Years, then cannot perform the
Requests of Baptism, to uit, Faith and Repentance?

2. And what Scripture have you for your Sureties (so called) which you most
unscripturally call the Childrens God fathers and Godmothers, which you
pretend to make up the Defect in the Infants, by and for putting these
Pretended Sureties upon such bold Undertakings, and unadvised Promisings of
that for the Child, which they never yet did for themselves, nor indeed have
Faith to believe, that so great Works can be done in any upon Earth, to wit, To
forsake the Devil and all his Works, etc. seeing that such generally held, That
none can live without Sin: Is not Sin the Devil's Work? Yea, yea: And is there
any Undertaker for Man to Godward but Christ? And was there any Surety betwixt
God and Man, but Christ only, who says, Without me ye can do nothing? So then
this evil Custom of your undertaking, being derogatory to the Honor of Christ,
Who can say that God has required it at your Hands? But if you will yet plead
for it, show us your Scripture for it, if you would be esteemed to act as
Protestants, and not as Papists, and to own Scripture above Men's Inventions and
Traditions.

3. Also what Scripture have you for your Surplice, Canonical Coats, Typpets,
etc. and for wearing Black rather than other Colors, seeing the Apostle blamed
such as placed Religion in Days, Meats, and the like; surely he would not agree
with such as place their Religion in Garments and Colors; Blessed be the Lord
whose Day is dawned, which makes all things manifest, and none will hate the
Light of it but Evildoers.

4. And what Scripture have you for your Tithes, Easter-Reckonings, Mortuaries,
and the like, now under the Gospel, and for your Laws, which you call
Spiritual, to compel the People to pay you them, seeing Christ is come, the End
of that Levitical Priesthood, under which Tithes were payable by Law?

5. What Scripture have you, who profess your selves to be Christians, for your
Swearing, Swearing in your Courts (so called) Swearing in your Spiritual Courts
((...))? The poor People called C^u^e^-Ward^ns, gr^^an under the Burden of this
evil Custom: O this is far from following Christ, who said and says unto his
Swear not at all; but you are grown to that pass, that you cannot trust one
another without Swearing, no not in your Church Matters: Is not this a Fruit of
Apostasy, and departing from that ancient Faith which was once delivered to the
Saints?

6. And what Scripture have you for giving David's Prayers, Prophecyings,
Roarings, Quakings, Tremblings and Confessions in Rhyme and Meeter to the World
to sing, who are of another Spirit than David was, and so utterly unacquainted
with David's Conditions; and so instead of singing with the Spirit and
Understanding, as the ancient Christians did, you sing in a Form without the
Power, thereby not honoring, but rather dishonouring the Lord, who is a
Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and Truth?

7. And what Scripture have you for teaching People to worship one another, and
for your Ring in Marriage, where you teach them to say (With this Ring I thee
Wed, and with my Body I thee worship.) Is not God alone to be worshipped? How
then are such to be accounted Christian Ministers, who abide not in Doctrine? 2
John 9.

And lastly, seeing you pretend to be Christ's Ministers, and so God's
Freemen, I ask you these few plain Questions further, Gal. 1.10. viz.

1. Why do you limit your selves, or suffer others to limit you, to such and
such Forms of Words, and Gestures, and Apparel, as is in Use amongst you in all
your Services? Is it from any Excellency you see in those Words or Forms more
than in any other? Or is it because you are so weak of Judgment, or brittle of
Memory, as that you can do little without Book? Or is it not rather for filthy
Lucre sake you are willing to be so^ty'd, because you know, that without
Conformity to the Wills of the great Ones in this Matter, you can get no Power
to compel Peoples earthly things from them? O what will not the Love of Money
compel covetous-minded People unto! 2 Timothy 6.10, 11.

2. What is that makes you go to the Bishop, rather than any other Man or Men,
for Ordination? (as you you call it.) Is it because you know or believe that he
is more Holy than any other? Or has more Power to confer any Spiritual Gift
upon you, by. Imposition of his Hands, more than any other? If you say, he
has, where had he it? And wherein does it appear? Or is it not rather that you
go now to the Bishop for Ordination, as you or your Brethren went formerly to
the Classical Presbytery (so called) in Oliver's time, because this is the Way
now, as the other was formerly, to empower you to come into Parishes, and be
their Teachers, and command their earthly things from them by Force, whether
you do any Spiritual Work for them or no? Yea, from such as in the Lord's Light
see you to be no Ministers of the Spirit, and therefore not able to minister
Spiritual things, and therefore deny you: Oh that ever such a thing should be
among such as profess to be Gospel Ministers.

3. Whether do you believe that all things in the Church ought to be done and
spoken in the alone Power and Spirit of the Lord Jesus? And if so, then how can
you expect but that God will overturn, overturn all Things, until he (to wit,
the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom all Power in Heaven and Earth is given) comes to
rule in all and over all, to whom of Right it belongs. So be it.

And what is the Cause that you are so dark in your Minds, as concerning the
Mystery of Christ's Kingdom, and the Spiritual Saving Power thereof, if it be
not that mentioned in the third Chapter of Micah's Prophecy, verse 5, 6, 7.
where it is written, Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets that make my
People err, that bite with their Teeth, and cry Peace, and he that puts not
into their Mouths, they even prepare War against him; therefore Night shall be
unto you, that you shall not have a Vision, and it shall be dark unto you, that
you shall not Divine, and the Sun shall go down over the Prophets, and the Day
shall be dark over them; then shall the Seers be ashamed, and the Diviners be
confounded; yea, they shall all cover their Lips, for there is no Answers of
God.

So be not proud, for the Lord has spoken, but see in the Dread and Fear of
God, how you can acquit your selves from the Charge against False Prophets and
Teachers mentioned in this Paper, and more abundantly in the Scriptures; For if
you be found in their Sins, how can ye escape their Plagues? Rev. 18.4. For Woe
will be to them that seek deep to hide their Counsel from the Lord, and their
Works are in the dark, and they say, who sees us, and who knows us; see Isa.
29. from ver. 10. to ver. 16. Read, and consider, and be wise for your Souls.

From one who Travails for the Prosperity of Sion, Thomas Tailor.

A Strong and Terrible Alarm Sounded out of the Holy Mountain,
WOE, Woe unto you Rulers, Priests and People, who live without the Fear of God,
and do hide your Abominations in Hypocrisy and Dissimulations, you are got
into several Sects and Opinions, and there some of you have long made a
Profession of God with your Tongues and Lips, but your Hearts are removed far
from him; so that your Profession stinks in the Nostrils of the Almighty, and
he Ioaths and abhors your Preaching and Praying, for you are weighed, and are
found too light, your Covering are too narrow, they will no longer hide you;
for now you are searching with the true Light which makes you manifest, and rips
off your Coverings, so that your Nakedness appears; the Day has made you
manifest; and now is the Light risen, and with it you are seen to be out of the
Life of Truth; yea, you are found to be the greatest Enemies to the Life that
be upon the Earth, for you seek to Murder it wheresoever it is brought forth;
yea, and in all its appearances you seek to Suppress and Murder it: Remember
your Forefathers Cried, Not this Man, but Barrabas; and your Cry and Practice
is seen-to be the same in Nature now; for in you, and by you is the Son of God
Cried against, who has long forborne you; and, because his Judgments were not
speedily executed upon you, have strengthened your selves in your Wickedness
and Imaginations, and have provoked the Almighty to Wrath, and have not
considered that his Long suffering toward you was to have drawn you to
Repentance; but the Day of your Visitation you have despised, and have hated
the Light of his Son in your Consciences, which has often showed you your Evil
Deeds; and so have trampled the Blood of the Covenant under your Feet, and have
done despite unto the Spirit of Grace, and have chosen to follow the vain
Imaginations of your own Hearts, and have contemned the Counsel of the Lord,
and would not that he should Reign over you. For which cause his Judgments
linger not against you, but are ready to be poured forth upon your Heads, even
upon you who have sold your selves to work Abomination in the sight of the
Lord, and are Worshipping in the House of your Imagery, and are joined and
become one with the great Whore of Babylon, who has made her self Drunk with
the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus, but now is she come in
Remembrance before the Dreadful and Terrible God, and now shall both she and
her lovers be Plagued and Tormented together. Therefore ye Nobles and Rulers,
Captains and Mighty Men, Priests and People, High and Low, Rich and Poor, Bond
and Free, who have Committed Fornication with her: Awake to the Judgment, and
behold your King, the Old Dragon, which is the Devil and Satan, for he is come
forth and deceives you, and he is come to gather you to the Battle of the great
Day which is at Hand, for the Harvest is ripe, and the Winepress is full, and
your Fats overflow, and the Measure of your Iniquities is great and now will
God be Avenged on you, who will bring you all down to the Valley of Descision,
even there shall the Day of the Lord be upon you, which will be a Day of Pain
and Anguish, a Day of Blackness and Gloominess, and of thick Darkness unto you
that have slain the Witness of God, and have made merry over him: Your Mirth is
almost at an end, and instead thereof shall be Mourning and bitter Lamentation
which shall come upon you in one Day, and now is the Day of Vengeance
Proclaimed, now is the Trumpet Sounded forth; behold the Lion Roareth.
Therefore, O all Inhabitants of the Earth, Fear and Tremble before the Living
Dreadful God, and Dread ye his Name: For, now is he arising in his Majesty and
Glory to shake Terribly the Earth, the noise of a Trumpet goes before him,
which sounds an Alarm, Strong and Mighty is he, there goes a Sword out of
his Mouth, and a Threshing Instrument is in his Hand, wherewith he will cut
down the tall Cedars, and thresh the Mountains to Dust: A Fire proceeds out
of his Mouth also, which shall devour and burn before him, and none shall be
able to quench it, and the Breath, that comes forth of his Nostrils, shall
scatter the Earth as the Whirlwind scatters the Dust: Yea, Terrible and
Dreadful will he be unto you wicked, who Live in the Earth, you shall not be
able to behold nor stand in his Presence. Therefore Weep, and Howl, and Lament,
for the Misery that is coming upon you, for Destruction is at hand; yea, the
Lord has decreed an overthrow of the Wicked of the Earth, for now shall his
overflowing Scourge pass through the Earth, and the Beesom of his Destruction
shall sweep you away, except you Repent: For your Wordomr, and Murders, and
Idolatry, and Drunkenness, and Swearing, and Lying, and Wantonness, and
Profaneness is come in Remembrance before the Dreadful and Terrible God, who
will be avenged on you at once.

Rejoice ye Saints, who are clad with Zeal, and Shout for Joy, you Sons of the
most High God, and Sing ye Heavens, and you that dwell therein, for the Lord is
risen, ye are Witnesses thereof. Behold he comes in and with ten thousands of
his Saints, to judge the Earth in Righteousness, and to execute his Judgments
upon his and your Enemies: The Vials of his Wrath are made ready to be poured
out upon them; and his Indignation is waxen hot against them, which shall burn,
and slay, and consume them unto the end, Glory, Glory, Honor, and Dominion,
and Praise, be given unto our King, who lives for ever, for he is worthy to
reign over all; who was dead, but now is he alive, and lives for evermore, and
has redeemed us from the Earth, and has brought us above the Earth, to reign
with him upon the Earth; eternal Praises to our King for evermore, who is above
all, and over all; who was before the World was, and has brought us to reign
with him eternally above the World. Now here is the Joy and cause of our
Rejoicing, who have followed the Lamb through great Tribulation, and are
brought above the Tribulations, to dwell in the Presence of the Living God:
This is Joy unspeakable and full of Glory which shall never have an end.
Hallelujah to our King for evermore.

By a Friend Thomas Tailor.
Watching for Sin.
WOE to you that wake to Sin, and watch for Iniquity; that spend their Days in
Vanity, and so bring themselves with Sorrow to the Graves, and their Souls to
the Pit of Destruction. The Trumpet of the Lord is sounding, to awaken you to
the Judgment of his great Day, which burns as an Oven against all the Workers
of Iniquity upon the Face of the whole Earth. The Apostle says, Awake to
Righteousness and Sin not. But you that observe these Popish Wakes and
Antichristian Revels, you awake to Sin and Unrighteousness, with the Strength
and Delight of your uncircumcised Hearts, like the Heathen that know not God.
The Papists appointed a Feast at the Dedication of their old dead Mass-houses,
and you their Children, who uphold these Wakes, bear witness against your
selves, that you were never yet in heart truly separated from their Idolatries*
O the Blindness and Deadness of your Teachers, that cannot bark against this
dead Idol; And therefore does the Lord warn you all to stand up from the Dead,
that Christ may be your Light, to see such wretched and Soul destroying
Vanities as these Wakes are, that so, through Repentance for them, you may find
Mercy, and not perish with them that perish from the right way. Rests God's
Servant,

Thomas Tailor.

A Warning to the NATIONS, To Layaside all Prejudice and Enmity, The Ground of
Strife and Wars; And to come and Embrace the Light of Christ Jesus, that they
may see themselves, and come to be Saved and Healed, and United in the Love of
God.
THE Indignation of the Lord is upon all Nations, and his Fury upon all their
Armies; he will greatly distress the Inhabitants of the World, he will now
plead the Cause of his Covenant of Light against all those that withstand his
Glorious Appearance, and Work of Restoration, in this the day of his Mighty
Power, wherein he is giving the Kingdom of his Everlasting Peace to Israel's
Seed under the whole Heavens, who fear his Great Name, and tremble at his
Almighty Word of Life, which shakes not only Earth, but Heaven also: And now is
the Lord God Almighty bringing forth his Glory to light, and creating the new
Heavens and new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, according to his Promise,
Isa. 65.17, etc. wherein the People beat their Swords into Plow-shears, and
their Spears into Pruning Hooks, never to learn War any more; but every one now
that believes in the Truth, Christ Jesus, the Light, and true King of
Righteousness and Peace, shall sit under him, the true Vine, and none to make
them afraid, Isa. 2.2, etc.

And now, even now, is the Lord God Almighty arisen, and got up into his high
Throne of Majesty and everlasting Glory to Reign; and of this his Peaceable
Kingdom, which he has begun to set up in his Trembling People, there never
shall be End. The true Israel of God is now coming up out of the Spiritual
Egypt indeed, to possess the true Land of Promise, the Inheritance and Free
Gift of our God; and no Enchantment shall now stand against God's Spiritual
Host, nor Divination against the Redeemed of the Lord, who have known his
Wonders in the Deep, and known the Outgoings of God's Power against Pharaoh,
and all his Host, in the Red Sea of his Fiery Indignation. And now will God be
exalted in Judgment, and avenged in Righteousness, upon all Nations and People
under Heaven, who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, and will not that God's
Holy Son Christ Jesus, the Light, should reign, though he be come to Reign and
Judge in the Earth. For to him, the Light, who lights every Man that comes
into the World, is all Power in Heaven and Earth given. And his Light shines
freely into all your Hearts, O all People of the Earth; and shines in the
thickest Darkness to make manifest the Creator's Will to all your Consciences,
though your Darkness, O People, comprehends it not; but it comprehends you, and
all your dark Ways, and destroying Phoughts; and lets you see plainly, That for
all your great Workings, and toilsom Labor in an Outside Profession in your
Earthly Wills, you have wrought no Deliverance in the Earth; but your Souls
Enemies still stand in strength. And it lets you see, that for all your
Striving, and Fighting, and Killing, and Spoiling, and Destroying one another
about Earthly Things, you have done no good at all; but brought God's Judgments
upon all your Souls, and pierced your selves through with many Sorrows.

And therefore the Heavenly Voice sounds through the Earth, and calls aloud in
your Ears, and knocks at the Door of your Hearts, O all People of the World,
High and Low, Professor and Profane, Jews and Gentiles, Christians, so called,
and Turks; Arise, Arise, Awake, Awake, turn in your Minds to the pure Light of
Jesus Christ the Judge of Quick and Dead, the Son of the eternal God, Creator
of Heaven and Earth, who died for your Sins, and rose again to give you a New,
Holy and Everlasting Life in himself, through Faith in his Name. And behold, he
lives for evermore. And all see and search diligently in your selves, what you
know of his Holy Life made manifest in you, to destroy the Body of Sin and
Death in you, which in the days of Darkness has filled your Vessel, and
brought your very Soul, Mind and Heart into the Thraldom of that Wicked One,
who is called the Devil and Satan, and compassed with Terrors, and Fears, and
Affrightments, your very Life, and whole Man, because of the Wrath of the
Almighty, which you by your Sinful, and Unrighteous, and Unholy and Cruel
Doings, both against God and your Neighbor, have stirred up against you. And
behold, the Earth languisheth because of these things; and the Children of
Light, who are redeemed to God, out of these sore Evils and grievous Plagues,
do mourn for you, and bewail your Misery Night and Day, as well knowing in the
Light of the Lord, what your woeful End will be, if these Briars and Thorns, and
noisome Weeds (the proper Fruits of the Curse) be still suffered to grow in you,
and cumber God's Ground. Oh! how nigh unto Cursing is that Field, which God's
Rain rains upon, and yet brings forth no better Fruit, than Killing, and
Slaying, and Spoiling, and Cousening, and Cheating, and Defiling, and
Oppressing one another, besides Lying, and Swearing, and Cursing, and
Drunkenness, and Pride, and Persecution of God's Righteous Seed, with all other
Abominations of the World against the Holy Light, etc. Checks and Reproofs of
the good Spirit of the Almighty, both in their own Consciences, and the Mouth
of God's Servants, and Holy Witness of Truth in the Scriptures, which
notwithstanding all these their Abominations, many of them profess to be their
Rule. But know, O Man, whoever thou art, or whatsoever Profession thou art of,
that that is thy God and Ruler, and Father, and Teacher, and Way, whose Commands
thou love, and whose Works thou do, and whose Will in the inward of thy
Mind thou clofest with: As Christ said to those Liars, false Accusers and
Murderers in his Day, John 8.44, etc. Ye are of your Father the Devil, for his
Works ye will do; he was a Liar and Murderer from the beginning. So thou that
go from the Light of God in thee, which shows thee thy Sin, and the evil
Lustings and Desires of thy Flesh and Mind, thou go from God, and from his
Fear, and from the Way of Peace: And so, thou going from this, and joining to
evil Motions of Sin in thy Flesh and corrupted Mind, thou joynest to the Devil,
and so bring forth Sin, which is the Devil's Work; and the Wages of every
such Work is Death. And so in the very moment of time, in which thou do the
evil Work, whatsoever it be (contrary to God's Light in thee) thou dyest the
Death; and so remainest dead from the Life of God, and his blessed
Righteousness, until the Day of true Repentance and Amendment of Life: And then
what will it profit thee to have gained the World, or Victory over thy
Neighbor, or Satisfaction to thy Lusts, to the Loss of thy Soul's Life?

Therefore Arise, Arise, Awake, Awake; O all Nations and People! Come forth to
the Judgment of this great Day of God Almighty: For now is the effect of every
Vision to be known and felt in the Earth, and the High Towers of the City of
Confusion, the Mystery Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, shall fall to
the Ground; and the Mountain of the House of the Lord shall be exalted over
all; yea, the Lord alone, and his Righteousness, and Truth, and Peaceable
Kingdom on the Top of all shall stand; and no Weapon formed against him and his
People shall ever prosper any more.

And how is it, O all Nations, Kings and People, that ye are not yet willing,
after so long a time knocking at the Gates of your Cities and Doors of your
Hearts, that ye will not open to the King of Glory, Christ Jesus, the Light,
that lights every one that comes into the World, that he may come in, and be
Judge, Lawgiver, and King in the midst of you, that the Desire of all Nations
may come, and be Head in all? For what is it that the Soul that God has made
in all Nations does desire, but to see it self unburthened of that grievous
Corruption, which has defiled it, and to be delivered from that Body of Sin
and Death, which has and does so imbondage it from the beginning, until the
Day of Christ's Power be known within, to work the Work of God, and to destroy
the Work of the Devil, and to save the Soul from its Sin, and to present it
spotless to God, which is the true Salvation indeed?

Now this is my Witness for God amongst the Servants and Redeemed of the Lord
this Day, whom the World in Scorn calls Quakers, (who am a Sufferer with them
for the Kingdom of God's sake) That there is none can thus know the Day of
Christ's Power to Salvation, but as they believe and receive that Light of God
and Christ, which they be freely enlightened withal, which shines in their very
Hearts and Consciences, which searches their very Hearts and Reins, and makes
manifest to Man his Thoughts, and from which none can hide any thing; but all
things are naked and bare before him, the Light Christ Jesus, who lights
every Man that comes into the World, Jew and Gentile, one and other, who
searches the most hidden things of Man, and brings them forth to the Judgment
of his Righteousness. For though the Night may hide the Adulterer and the Thief
from Man, it hides them not from God; there is one nigh in the Heart and
Conscience, that tells Man and Woman all that ever they have done, and do daily
do, even their secret Thorghts; Is not this the Christ of God, the true
Messiah, that was to come, and is come, and dwells amongst us? And we look not
for another, and of his Fullness have all we received, and do daily receive, who
believe in his Light, which shines in our Hearts, according to the Scriptures
of Truth. And this the Fullness of our Blessed God and Savior Jesus Christ, the
Light, is it which fills all that come to him with all Spiritual Blessings,
and Heavenly good Things; and without whom all is Darkness, Emptiness, Death
and Desolation, as all the poor, deceived, lost Sons and Daughters of the fallen
Adam do sooner or later know, and are made to confess.

But blessed are they that consider of things in time, and lay things, to
Heart, before it be too late; For there are but Twelve Hours in a Day, says
Chriff, and then the Night comes, in which no Man can work: But the Door will
be shut upon all who have slighted and neglected the Day of their Visitation.

Oh England! England! and all Lands far and near, that you had known, or could
yet believe the things that belong to your Everlasting Peace, before they be
hid from your Eyes. Therefore turn ye, turn ye at the Reproofs of God's Wisdom
and Spirit of Light and Truth, which sounds through all, and lets you see the
Vanity and Evil of all your Works, and Frailty of all your Lives, how soon the
Thread of your Life is out off; and then, where are the great Emperors and
Kings, with all their Crowns? And where are the great Captains and Commanders,
with all their Bloody Victories? And where are the Wise Achitophel's, and
Cunning Counselors of the Earth, with all their Admirers? And where are the
Covetous Oppressors, with all their Houses full of the Spoils of the Innocent?
Yea, in that Day, where is all the Glory and Lusts of the World, with all the
Lovers of it? Surely in Darkness and Misery shall they lie down together, and
Death shall have Dominion over them, even all who have not believed in the
Light, Christ Jesus, and who have not followed him in the Regeneration, that
they might be saved; but have spent their Days in the Pleasures and Lusts of
the present Evil World to Destruction.

Now therefore, O all People, Hearken to the Counsel of the Lord in this your
Day, and learn of the Lamb, the Light, who calls you to Repentance from all
your grievous Ways. How long shall the Spirit of the Lord strive with you? When
will you cease learning War, and Destruction, and Oppression, and Spoil? O when
will you beat your Swords into Plow-shares, and your Spears into Pruning Hooks?
O when will you go and say one to another, one Neighbor to another, and one
Nation to another, Come let us all be humbled before the Lord God of Heaven and
Earth, who made us all of one Blood, to dwell together upon the Face of the
Earth in Truth, Goodness and Love to serve one another, and so as Branches of
one Tree, to receive Life, and Virtue, and Power from our God into our Souls,
to strengthen us unto his holy Work; who came not to destroy Men's Lives, but to
save them; whose Kingdom is not of this World, and therefore is not set up or
maintained with Carnal Weapons, Violence and Spoil; but by the Eternal Spirit
of our God, whose Fruit is in all Goodness, and Righteousness, and Truth? And
let not the wicked Devil, the Destroyer, deceive us any more by his Lies and
Delusions; but let us all with one Heart and Soul resist his Temptations. When
he persuades us to seek to be great in the Earth, and be avenged on them we
count our Enemies, let us not hearken to him; but let us over come their Evil
with Goodness; and not to seek the Destruction of their Persons, or Spoil of
their Estates, as the Heathens do that know not God; but let us follow the
Example of Jesus Christ, God manifest in Flesh, who when he was reviled,
reviled not again, but prayed for such as despitefully used him.

O come, let us follow this meek Lamb in Righteousness and Truth, and learn of
him in our Heart, who is Meek and Lowly, that we may find Rest for our Souls;
who rebuked his Disciples, who would have had Fire to come down from Heaven to
destroy the Samaritans, that would not at that time receive Christ. For what
know thou, O Man, but the Samaritans may in time come to a better Mind; and
then thou will see it was thy Will, and not God's, that desired their
Destruction in their Sins. For Christ would have all to be saved, and come to
the Knowledge of his Truth: But many will not come to him, that they might have
Life, and so their Destruction is of themselves, and their Condemnation just.
And who are those now therefore that withstand the Doctrine of the Truth, which
said, Love your Enemies; and seek not the Destruction of their Persons, and the
Spoil of their Estates; but seek by good Doctrine and good Life, to bring them
out of their Sins: And if they will not, but rather hate thee for thy good
Will, be content; thou have quitted thy own Soul, and art clear of their Blood;
and so thou becomest a Sufferer with Jesus, Christ, and shall Reign with him in
due time. I say, who are these now on the Earth, that withstand Truth, and
continue in the hateful destroying Ways of the Old Jews and Gentiles, but such
as will not be counseled by the Lamb of God, the Suffering Seed, who said,
Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in Heart: But are Men of Corrupt Minds,
who account Gain, and Worldly Honor, and Promotions more than Godliness, who
cries Peace to themselves in their Sins: And that same Spirit in them which
crie^ that false Peace in them, is the same that stirs them up to Kill,
Destroy, Oppress and Spoil one another for Selfish and Worldly Ends.

But the Lord is arisen to Judge all these Evil Things, and to Redeem a Seed to
serve him, as in the beginning of the Gospel, before Antichrist the Murderer
got up amongst them, that professed Christ in Words, but denied him in Deeds;
who had a Name that they lived but were dead from that true Life, which was in
Christ Jesus, whom in Words they professed.

And though the Passage we seel now to be as hard of coming from amongst the
false Christians, and Turks, as it was for the first true Christians to come
from amongst the Jews and Gentiles; yet the Almighty Power of our God is able
over all, and through all to carry us on to the end, whom he has called and
saved with a mighty Salvation (everpraised be his Name) and who will yet save
his Beloved Seed Israel, Jews did, when they heard the Declaration of the
Gospel of Peace, and Kingdom of God, which stands in Righteousness and Peace,
saying, If we let this go on, then the Romans or Others will come and take our
Place and Nation. I say, that they would consider, That the very Course which
they, to wit the Jews, in the Denial of the Truth took for saving of
themselves, brought utter Destruction upon them and their Nation.

But what! shall vain Man in his foolish fallen Wisdom and earthly Reasoning,
think to be Wiser than God, and to have a greater Care and Love to the
Creation, than God himself, who made it, has? What! shall Angels at the Birth
of Christ^sing, Glory to God on high, and Good Will to Men; and yet when the
way of God in Christ is published, for bringing this great Work of Salvation to
pass, vain Man must come in with his false Mind, and say, This is the way to
confound all Order, and destroy all Good; And that this Doctrine turns the
World up-side down; And that the Messengers of Christ are pestilent Fellows,
and Movers of Sedition?

O Earth, Earth! Tremble before the Lord; for thou shall never have Peace in
thy own Ways, thou shall never be Saved by thy own Strength, thou shall never
be Established by thy own Counsels, thou shall never have true Peace, nor any
Plenty within thy Borders, until thou believe the Gospel, which says, Learn
of Christ, whose Kingdom is not of this World, and whose Weapons are not
Carnal, but Spiritual, Mighty through God; not for the pulling down of Outward
Walls and Bodies, but for razing, and pulling down, and destroying the strong
Holds of Sin and Satan in the Hearts and Lives of the Children of Men: For
after that, says the Apostle, The World by Wisdom knew not God, it pleased God
by the Foolishness of Preaching, (to wit, such Doctrine as this, which is a
Cross and Stumbling Block to all Corrupt Flesh) to save them that believe.

So lay things to heart, ye People of the World, and Inhabitants of all the
Earth; for God's Purpose is not to exalt any Man or Men of this World, or to
glorify any Flesh; but to exalt his own Son, Christ Jesus, the heavenly Man,
the Lord from Heaven, the Truth over all; of whose Kingdom and Government there
shall be no End. And all that obey his Voice, and for Obedience thereunto are
made willing to Suffer with him, shall reign with him for evermore: But all
others, whether they be called Christians or Turks, or whatever else, shall be
as the Dust or Chaff before the Wind to be scattered, as the Lord by his Spirit
from the beginning has said, and at this time speaks in his Servant

Thomas Tailor.

To People whose Hearts are turned from the Lord.
O All People! whose Hearts are gone away from the Lord, out of his Pure and
Holy Fear, and are in the Broad Ways of the World, at Liberty in the Flesh,
satisfying the Lusts and Desires thereof, making Merry over God's Witness,
which lies at present as dead amongst you in your Hearts; and so because
Judgment is not speedily, and at present executed upon you, therefore are your
Hearts in you wholly set to do evil; and so you grow up like noisome Weeds in
your Vanity, putting far from you the Evil Day: And none lays to Heart the
Afflictions of Joseph, nor considers the Sufferings of the Seed of God, that
in this present Day, and in these Nations, are great and many; but you Pipe,
and Dance, and Feast, and Drink, and Revel, and Fatten your Hearts as in a Day
of Slaughter, as if there were no such thing, and mind not the time to come,
nor take notice of the present, wherein God would gather you out of your Sins
to himself, and do you good for Ever, but you will not; therefore is your House
left unto you desolate, and your present Mirth will be all turned into
Mourning, when this thing you come to be made sensible of, by the Just
Judgments of God, and his Hand upon you. Yea, and all your Temple-Songs will
become Howlings also in that Day; for what Pleasure, O vain People! can the
Lord take in you, or your Services? for in that same Mind that all your
forementioned Evils are done, are your Preachings, Prayings, and Singing
Performed; with the same Mouth you Bless, or rather seem to Bless God withal,
with the same Mouth you Curse, and Swear, and Backbite, and Slander, and tell
Lies, and bear False Witness against Men, and Sing your filthy Rhimes; and all
these things,

Because of Swearing, Drunkenness, Wantonness, Pride, Covetousness, and
Persecuting of the Just, thou Land of England, and of the whole World, even
Mourns and Languisheth. So rests God's Servant and Witness, in outward Bonds.

Thomas Tailor.

To the Magistrates.
TO the Magistrates of the Town of Stafford, who are angry with with me for
coming amongst you, whilst the Money-Sermon was in hand, and think you do God
Service in Persecuting me for it; be it known unto you, that I did not Rebuke
the Man in mine own Will, but the Lord, by my Mouth, did it for your Souls
Sake, that you might not always be deceived with such Men, whose Mouths, not
the Lord, but filthy Lucres opens; for when the Rich Man Dies, then comes the
Sermon at his Buryal, but the Poor Man is put into the Earth with little Noise,
and are ye so Ignorant as to think that the Lord takes not notice of such
things, and does, and will Reprove them: Will you Punish me, as those of old
did the Prophets, for doing God's Work, and be Guiltless: What? Will you say
with such evil Men, that the Lord has forsaken the Earth, and is there
Knowledge in the most High? And will you say, you have a Law, and therefore I
must suffer, though spoke never so truly; because not according to your Wills,
what think you of the Jews, who said concerning Christ, We have a Law, and by
our Law he ought to dye. And why consider you not in your selves, that it is
fit for God, by whom he will, to call such down as he never set up, as is come
to pass in this present Business. Whether you Prosecute me upon Mary's Act, or
upon the Oath, you will be guilty of Evil in the sight of God in both, for in
the one you will but Imitate the Papists in Mary's Days; who, by that Law,
endeavored to stop the Mouth of God's Witness against their Superstitious and
Idolatrous Doings: And by the other, you will make your selves like them whom
God had taken way before you, who Persecuted me, because I could not Swear, and
so break the Command of Christ, who says unto his, Swear not at all.

So consider what you do, for it is not me, but the Truth of God in me, that
you have set your selves against; for I would not have you destroy your selves
by striving against Gods Truth, for though I be as nothing, and you may trample
upon me as a Man, yet God's Ever-blessed Truth, which dwells in me, and is with
me, and for me in this, as in other of his Works you cannot overcome, for Truth
is stronger than all, and has ever been my help, when Men of Evil Minds have
risen up against me for Truth's Sake, I praise the Lord: And so I have found,
by manifold Experience, That Jerusalem, the City of Truth, has been a
burdensome Stone to all that have fought against it; as says Scripture,
Zechariah 12.3. So if you be wise, you will Understand, and provide for your
Souls Peace, by letting the Innocent go free, and not keep him in Bondage for
Pleasing your selves, and the Hirelings, whom God is against, for it is not for
their Sakes that the late wicked Popish Plot was discovered, but for God's
Everblessed Truth's Sake, which he is purposed to Exalt in these latter Days,
and for the sake of all such as love Truth in Sincerity. Rests God's Suffering
Servant, and your Friend, who am, I praise God, no more, nor otherwise a
disturber of your Peace, or the Peoples, than the Prophet Elias was in his Days
of that Generation, though so by them Accounted, 1 Kings 18.17, 18.

And consider well, in the cool of the Day, what is the reason that things go
so oddly on concerning those. People, called Papists, who seek the hurt of all,
without Respect of Persons or Professions, who cannot bow to their Idols: Is it
not your Sins, O People, and your keeping amongst you so much of the Popish
Leaven yet Unpurged out from you, as it was the Sins and Superstitions of
Israel of old, that gave the Babylonians so much advantage against them. So buy
of Christ Eye Salve, and anoint your Eyes with it that you may see, and then
all things will be plain to you.

Thomas Tailor.

To the Generation of Fleshly Fallen Christians,
CHrist Jesus came into the World to save his People from their Sins, and to
cleanse their Hearts and Lives from all Unrighteousness, and not to keep up the
Customs of the Heathen, whose Religion stands in Eating and Drinking, and
Gameing and Sporting, and every way serving the Lust of the Flesh, and of the
Mind which must Perish; for Meats for the Belly, and the Belly for Meats, but
God shall destroy both it and them, says the Apostle: And so Christ's Doctrine
is not that People should make Provision for the Flesh to satisfy it in the
Lusts thereof, with Meats, Drinks, Pleasures, Pastimes, and all manner of
foolish Inventions, but that People should abstain from Fleshly Lusts, because
they War against the Soul. And did not the Apostle weep for such as made a God
of their Belly, and Gloried in their Shame, and minded Earthly Things; and
plainly tells them, That they were ^nemies to the Cross of Christ, and their
End was Destruction, Phil. 3. And so thou, whoever thou art, that pretends to
Honor Christ, by making Provision for thy Fleshly Part, to satisfy it in the
Lusts thereof, thou art no Servant of God and Christ in this, but a denyer of
his Truth; and so instead of following Christ in the Regeneration and daily
Cross, and Self denlal, thou follows Christ's Enemy, the great Antichrist and
Satan, who has seduced the Minds of People from Christ's Doctrine and Life,
into the Doctrine and Life of all Unrighteousness; and so they that Eat and
Drink, and Game and Sport after the Custom of the Heathenish World, their
Professing of Christ in Words will do them no good in the Day of the Lord, when
God will Reward every Man according to their Deeds; for now, instead of a Holy,
Pure, Righteous, Self-denying Life which God requires, thou offers him an
unclean Sacrifice of an unholy and corrupt Life which he will not accept: And
so many shall come in that Day, and say Lord, Lord, Open unto us; to whom he
will Answer, I know ye not, depart ye Workers of Iniquity. O dreadful Sentence
to such as it hits; who, like Esau, sell their Birthright for a mess of
Pottage, and choose rather to follow the Fleshly, Sinful World in the broad way
to Destruction, than the Lambs of Christ in the straight way that leads to Life
Eternal: So all Awake and Arise from your dead defiled Customs and Practices of
Sin, to the pure clean Fear and Worship of God; for God is a Spirit, and Christ
is a Spiritual Lord, and will be Worshipped and Served in Spirit and Truth, and
who is this Day seeking such to Worship him, who shall bring forth Fruits to
him worthy, amendment of Life, And one thing is needful, says Christ, and Mary
that sat at his Feet hearing his Word, chused that good Part which shall never
be taken from her; but Martha was cumbred about much in the outward; as too
many are now, and that in a Heart far from that of Mary's Heart, to their Souls
great disadvantage. So he that has an Ear, let him hear, for these Words are
Faithful and True.

Thomas Tailor.

To the King.
O That the King and all his Councils, the Parliament and the Rest would hear,
and believe these Words; for in the Truth of God's Spirit, and Uprightness of
my Heart, are they thus written, and sent to them for that purpose; Consider of
your ways, for thus says the Lord, the Holy One, Creator of Heaven and Earth,
Mine Anger is kindled against you, because you have not made a Separation
betwixt the Precious and the Vile, but have numbered my People, who tremble at
my Word, with the Transgressors, and will not hear the Voice of my Mouth to let
my Israel have their Liberty to meet together in my own free Spirit, as I have
Taught them to wait upon me, and to Edify one another in their most Holy Faith;
but you will Punish them, and Afflict them, and evil Entreat them for this, and
surely if you go on in this Work, and think to destroy this my Heritage from
being a People upon the Earth, and to Root them up from bearing a Testimony to
my Name in their Holy Assemblies before the Children of Men, I will Work
Wonders; yea, I will Work Wonders, and make all the Earth to know that these
your Thoughts and your Doings are against the Lord and his People, as truly as
ever Pharaoh and Egypt, and the Nations there abouts, in that Day of Israel 's
Oppressions and Deliverances (did know) have you no Understanding, that you
would eat up my People as Bread, says the Lord, in whose hand is your Breath.
Oh! that you could once lay things to Heart what you have done, and what you
should do; and not still take Counsel at a wrong Spirit, which hurries you thus
on in a way that is not good, to the grief of God's Spirit; and, in the end,
(if continued in) your own Destruction, have you not Heard, and do not you
Read, what God has done in former times to great Kings and strong Nations, for
their Doings against his People; and do you not know that the same Evil Spirit
which causes you in other things to do what you ought not to do, and to leave
undone what you ought to do, is the putter of you forward in this grievous Work
of Persecuting the Seed of God, who Fear and Tremble at his Word, and work out
their Salvation with Fear and Trembling, as the Lord Commands; and who, in
their Meetings, never had, nor at this Day have any other end, but to Glorify
their God, the true God over all, in obeying his Voice with a true good Will in
our Hearts toward all Men, without the least thought of Evil to any, as God's
true God over all Men, without the least thought of Evil to any, as God's true
Witness in all Consciences, where it is harkened unto, does plainly Testify at
this Day, as it has done ever since we were to God a People: For from War,
Bloodshed, Wrong and Spoil has the Lord called and delivered our Souls into
his Holy Habitation of Truth, Peace and Love; that as Lambs we might in the
midst of the Earth stand in Christ's Innocence, to hold forth the Virtues of
God, who has Blessed us in Christ Jesus, with the Knowledge of himself, whom
to know is Life Eternal: And so if you hate us because God loves us, what will
be the end; O Consider, consider, this matter is of the weightiest Nature: And
so, though at present, by reason of the Darkness that is upon your Minds, you
do not see us as we are, but present us to your selves, as Evildoers, or so;
yet seeing you know in your own Consciences, as in Words also you often Confess
that in other things you are miserable Offenders; you ought to be more
Moderate, Sparing and Careful what you do in this present matter concerning us;
because where Sin is, and remains, there must of necessity be a want of Ability
as to the right judging and discerning of Men and Matters Spiritual, as Christ
foretold of some, that, through the Error of their Minds, should think they did
God Service, when they were Killing his Children: This was a sad Mistake.
Therefore let this be upon your Hearts when you lie down, and when you rise up,
and when you sit in Counsel, and walk by the Way, to keep you from Sinning this
great Sin against God, for never did any strive against God and Prosper; and
thus, in God's Spirit, having given you in a few Words, a hint of what
certainly is, and will be: And so having cleared my Conscience to God, and paid
my debt of Love to you in this matter, I leave all to him, who is the righteous
Judge, and the true Pleader of the Cause of the Innocent in all Generations,
and the Avenger of all Wrongs that are done upon the Earth; and rests his
Servant, in whose Love is my Souls Life, who am a Sufferer for the Testimony of
the Everlasting Truth, amongst the Despised People of God, whom the World, in
Scorn, call Quakers; yet the Reproach of Christ to us is great Riches.

Thomas Tailor.

An Exhortation to remember the Judgments of God.
HOW long, O ye People of this present time, will ye grieve and burden the
Spirit of the Lord with your Works? How long shall he suffer your Manners
unpunished? Is it not high time for the Lord to lay to his Hand, seeing you
have so covered his Law with your Traditions and vain Customs, that the poor
People can hardly find any one thing you do, savouring of Pure Christian
Doctrine, or the Apostles Practice? But the Hand of the Man of Sin is the
Worker in you, and by the power of the Earth is your Building upheld; But Woe to
the Building which the Lord has not builded, and Woe to the Builders of that
House wherein all the Wicked of the World inhabit, lie down, and are at ease,
and bring forth their Young: Is this the Church of God? Nay, nay, this is the
Synagogue of Satan, and not of the Living God, for the House of God is Holy,
and nothing but Holiness dwells there, nothing that defiles can enter this day
into God's Temple, for Holiness is the Ornament of God's House for ever. So Woe
to the false Builders and Daubers, that cry Peace to People in their Sins; the
Lord speaks no Peace to any Sinners, but Judgments, Plagues, and Woes to
Priests and People who live in their Sins, and plead for a Continuance in Sin
as long as they live, as at this day. Woe to the unspiritual Men, that bind
heavy Burdens upon others, and will not touch them with one of their Fingers;
that bind the poor Men whom they call Wardens of their Church, by Oath, to do
impossible things, and punish them that make Conscience of their Ways and dare
not Swear nor Forswear, but would keep their Hearts clean to Christ, in whose
Church is neither Swearing nor Forswearing this day, but the Yea is Yea, and
the Nay is Nay, in all things, in Truth and Righteousness. But Woe to the wicked
World, that takes God's Name in their polluted Lips, the Lord is arisen to
judge thee in Flames of Fire, for the day of the Lord is dawned upon thee, and
thy building will he thrown down, and a visible downfall shall Babylon have
upon the Face of all the Earth, for the Pastors have not gathered in, nor
visited with Truth, the good Seed, but with Force and Violence over it do they
Rule; and therefore is the Lord arisen to plead the Cause of the Poor and
Innocent, as the Mouth of the Lord has said. So be it.

And let all the Earth fear and tremble before the Lord this day, f^r our God,
the true God, is a consuming Fire, and will by no mea^s acquit the Guilty.

Thomas Tailor.

To the Unclean Communicants.
YOU that tell of a Communion, and say, you eat Bread and drink Wine in
remembrance of Christ's Death, and yet live in your Sins, confessing with your
own Mouths, that you daily leave undone that which you ought to have done, and
do what you ought not to do, and that there is no Health in you: Consider of
your Ways, and see in what your Fellowship and Communion stands, Does it not
stand in Sin and Disobedience? And examine your selves what you eat, Do you not
eat Damnation to your selves, not discerning the Lord's Body? For the Lord's
Body is Holy, but you are Unholy, and live in Unholiness, as your selves
confess, and as is manifest in your Lives and Conversations; so you have cut
your selves off from being of Christ's Holy Body, you that live in your Sins,
and do your own Wills, and leave undone that which he wills now to do; for no
unholy or unclean thing can be joined to Christ's holy Body. Again, Christ's
Body is a sound and healthful Body, and no Leper in it, but you have no Health
in you, as you confess, and so you are of that Body and Number who have not as
yet so much as touched the Hem of Christ's Garment with a true Heart, but are
in the Mud, and Filth, and Diseasedness of this sinful lost World, through
which the wholesome Waters of God's Sanctuary have not run to cleanse you: So all
you do in this your sinful State, is unclean in the sight of God, and he can
take no pleasure in your seeming Services, because of your Sins. For as the
Leperous Bodies under the Law, were shut out of the outward typical holy Place,
so the Spiritually Defiled are altogether unfit, in this day, to enter into, or
have Communion with any thing of Christ's Kingdom.

Thomas Tailor.

God's Virtue and Goodness Extolled.
O Thou pure God of all Heavenly Glory, Virtue and Goodness, how Holy are all
thy Ways, and Righteous all thy Judgments! O how plainly and clearly have thou
manifested thy Mind and Will to Mankind in all Generations, and especially
since the first publishing of thy Gospel, and in this of ours, and yet alas
with grief of Heart may it be said, never was the Earth more burdened with the
Evil of her Inhabitants than at this day; never was there more provoking of God
by evil Customs and bad Doings than now, They spend their Days in satisfying
the Lusts of the Flesh, and of the Mind, that is Earthly, Sensual and Devilish,
and say in their Hearts unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the
Knowledge of thy Ways. The strait way of Christ they perfectly hate, and the
broad way of the World, which leads to Destruction, they willingly choose,
because their Hearts are evil; and to Christ's Light they will not bring their
Deeds, because they be so evil, that the Light will utterly condemn them. And
thus in the Blindness of their uncircumcised Hearts, they heap up Wrath against
the Day of Wrath and Revelation of God's just Judgments upon them. And though
the Trumpet of the Lord has been plentifully sounded amongst them, yet they
will not hear nor awaken to Judgment, but say in their Hearts, Yet a little
more Sleep, yet a little more folding of the Hands to Slumber, the Judgment is
far off, we will not forego our present Pleasures and worldly Delights for
Glory to come; Where is he that is come from the Dead to tell us what is in
another World? Let Us Eat and Drink and take our Fill of Pleasures, for
tomorrow we Dye and are not, say they. O the Wretched, O the Atheistical
Hearts of the Men of this present evil and adulterous Generation! The Lord is
gathering his Lots from amongst them into his happy Fold of Truth and Rest,
that the Judgments of God may hasten upon the wicked Sodom and Egypt who burden
the Just, that God's righteous Soul may be eased of them: Even so come Lord
Jesus, for thou art worthy to reign, says my Soul.

Thomas Tailor.

Richard Baxter's BOOK, ENTITLED, The Cure of Church-Divisions, ANSWERED and
CONFUTED; And he PROVED to be a Physician of no Value; Who has Manifested his
Folly and Weakness in Undertaking a Work which he has so little Understanding
in.

By THOMAS TAILOR.

For, from the least of them, even unto the greatest of them, every one is
given to Covetousness, etc. -- They have Healed also the Hurt of the Daughter
of my People with sweet words, saying, Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace,
Jer. 6.13, 14. -- But ye are Forgers of Lies; ye are all Physicians of no
Value, Job 13.4. London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, next Door to the
Meeting House. in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street; and at the Bible in
Leaden-Hall-Street, near the Market. 1697.

Richard Baxter's BOOK, The Cure of Church-Divisions. ANSWERED and CONFUTED.
RICHARD BAXTER, a Man, who through a show of Learning and Religion, had gotten
(in Oliver Cromwell's Days) a great Esteem in the Minds of the Ignorantly
Zealous Professors of Religion in this Nation, and especially in the Parts of
Worcestershire, about Kidderminster, (where he then resided) has since the
Change of the Times, and coming in of the Old Common-Prayer-Book-again, much
manifested his Nakedness, Confusion, and Unsoundness to every Eye, that in any
measure is open to see the difference of Truth and Error in the ground of it,
as by his Works appear: And that it is so, amongst other things, that Book of
his, fasly called, The Cure of Church-Divisions, which I have now underhand to
Answer, does plainly manifest: For, instead of Curing Divisions, he has showed
himself to be a Physician of no Value, and so instead of Curing, has struck at
(under a Judas Kiss of Unity and Concord) the very Life and Foundation of all
true Christian Unity and Amity; to wit, The Free and Perfect Teachings, and
Gifts, and Work of the Spirit of Truth, (the Spirit of the Father and Son in
his Believing Members) whereby they cry in a spotless Mind, Abba Father, and
freely and powerfully declare the Glory of his Kingdom to the Children of Men;
and instead thereof, would bring in and establish that Soul-deceiving and
Church-dividing Doctrine of Humane Learning and Humane Helps, as absolutely
necessary to the procuring and engaging, as it were, the Holy unlimited God to
give unto the Creature his Holy Spirit, and the Knowledge of the Mysteries of
his Eternal Will and Kingdom for the same; as in Answer to an Objection in the
6th Page of his Book, in his first Direction (so called) is to be seen. The
Objection against his Carnal Reasonings, for Old Men's Knowledge, is in Page 5.
where he says,

I know those that I have to do with will say, That Divinity is not learned by
Labor and Men's teaching, as other Sciences and Arts are; but by Teaching (I
add, yea, and most free Gift) of the Spirit of God, and therefore the Youngest
may have as much of it as the Eldest.

And to this R. B. there thus Answers.

Answ. There is some Truth (says he) and some Falsehood, and much Confusion in
this Objection.

But let us hear how this R. B. proves that, that there is either Falsehood or
Confusion in the Objection.

It is true (says he) that the Saving Knowledge of Divinity must be taught by
the Spirit of God; but it is false, that Labor and Humane Teaching are not the
Means which must be used by them who will have the Teaching of the Spirit.

Reply, But O the Darkness, yea, rather Enmity, that is in R. B's Heart against
the free Teaching of God's Spirit! That he would find any thing against so
plain and manifest Truth, as is in this Objection! But what will not Flesh do
that is lifted up with Conceits of his own Wisdom, to keep up its Honor before
the People, rather than the Pur^ Undoubted Truth of the Gospel, and
Self-abasing Spirit of Truth, should Reign and have the Pre-eminence.

But to this I say, that a Child of Light, in the least Measure, does easily
see the Falsehood of that Spirit, by which this R. B. is acted in this his
Answer: For the Wind of the Spirit blows where it lists, and thou hear
the sound thereof, thou natural Man; but neither knows whence it comes, nor
whither it goes; so is every one that is Born of God: And without this Birth,
all thy Knowledge is Damning, not Saving, John 3.7, 8, etc. And Job 32.7.8. I
said, Days should Speak, and multitude of Years should Teach Wisdom: But there
is a Spirit in Man; and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives them
understanding. And says God, It shall come to pass in the last Days, that I
will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh; and they shall all know me, from the
least to the g^eatest: Yea, and Young Men shall see Visions, and Servants and
Handmaids shall Prophecy: And ye have received an Unction from the Holy One:
And ye know all things, (says the Apostle John) and ye need not that any Man
teach you. This is the Day of the Lord, wherein these things are fulfilled;
praised be God: And the New Covenant abundantly witnessed in the Children of
Light, whom this wicked Book of R.B's strikes at; but his Wickedness turns upon
his own Pate, and his own Iniquities shall slay him: For he, by his Carnal
Wisdom, would darken Knowledge, and shut the Kingdom of Heaven against Men, as
his Predecessors of Old, the Pharis^es mentioned Mat. 23. did: But the Lord
has opened a Door to the Believing Souls this Day, which all the Powers of
Darkness shall never be able to shut; Glory to his Name for Ever.

But what is that Labor and Humane Means that People must use for getting the
Spirit of God, or Saving Knowledge of Divinity, as he calls it? Is it tumbling
over a Ruck of Books, stuffed with Art and Humane Wisdom, or Learning from
below, as this R. B. has long done, to the darkning of his Heart from the
Knowledge of God, and Way of his Spirit; so that he knows nothing of it, after
all his long lost Labor, but what he knows naturally, as a Brute Beast (and
that is plain) for it sanctifies him not, as by his confessing, That his best
Duties, even his Prayers, are not without Sin; and affirming, That no Man prays
without Sin? As in his Book is to be seen, Page 195. and in his Preface.

And so the Prayer of Faith, and Preaching by the Spirit, he is ignorant of;
yea, Preaching by the Spirit is become a Mock and a Derision to him and his
Brethren at this Day: But Paul, and all the Ministers of Christ, Magnify the
Free Grace and Infinite Gift of the Spirit of God, according to that (2 Cor.
3.) saying, Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think a good Thought;
but our Ability is of God, who has made us able Ministers of the New
Testament; not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for the Letter kills, but the
Spirit gives Life: And that which the Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor
has entered into the Heart of Man (or Humane Heart) to conceive, has God
revealed to us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, yea, the
Deep Things of God; and which Things we Preach or Speak not in the words which
Man's (or Humane) Wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing
Spiritual things with Spiritual, 1 Cor. 2.

But this R. B. comparing Spiritual Things with Carnal, is not wise, who,
because Old Men, and long Students in Arts and worldly Sciences, are most Wise,
or likely to be so; therefore they that Labor and Study most in Books of
Divinity (so called) get most of the Spirit's Teaching.

O sad! that ever the Minds of the Children of Men should be so covered with
Darkness, and yet read the Scripture of Truth, which witnesses to no one thing
more than to the Free Teachings of the Spirit of God, without Humane Helps! For
all the Help that is Humane, or that Man who is ( ab humo, that is) from the
Earth can afford, is but Natural, and of this World, which comes to naught;
therefore is it said, That none of the Princes (that is, the Chief Men) of this
World knew the Mystery of Christ and his Kingdom then, which made them so Band
against him, see the 2d Psalm. And the Natural Man, with all his Natural Means,
discerns not the things of the Spirit of God, because they are spiritually
discerned: So every one that would know the Mind of the Spirit of God, must
come to feel (through the Most Holy Faith) a measure of it in themselves: For,
after ye believed, ye were Sealed with the Spirit of Promise, says Paul: And
the Word is nigh thee, even in thy Heart and Mouth: O thou that have an Ear to
hear, hear what the Spirit speaks, even the Word of Faith, which we Preach:
Therefore go not forth from the Anointing of God in thy Heart, to hear the
frothy and false Doctrine of such as R. B. who have run and set up themselves
by their Humane Helps, in the Place of Teachers, and God never sent them, and
therefore they cannot profit the People at all; but lead them about, like silly
Women, laden with diverse Sins and Lusts; yea, in their Prayers and best
Performances, as is manifest; and so, not being sent and enabled by God's
Spirit, they can never lead you to it, but from it, as is manifest.

Also R. B. in Page 6. beforementioned, says, The Objection has much
Confusion in it. (And how proves he that? But by saying) 1. It confounds the
Spirit's teaching us, by inditing the Scripture with the Spirit's teaching us
the meaning of the Scriptures. 2. And it confounds the Common Knowledge of
Divinity, with the Saving Knowledge of it. No Man comes to a Common Knowledge,
fit for a Teacher of others, without the Spirit's teaching by the Scriptures;
for that was the first part of the Spirit's teaching us, to inspire the
Prophets and Apostles, to deliver a Teaching Word to the Churches, by which we
might all be taught of God through all Generations. But many Men have Excellent
Common Knowledge by this Word, and by the Common Help of the Spirit, without
that Special Help, which begets Saving Knowledge: And all Knowledge
requires Time and Labor to obtain it, though the Spirit gives it, and though
it may be sanctified to us in a little time; but that may be a means of saving
others, which saves not the Man that has it.

And in Page 114. farther says, Take them not for no Ministers that want Grace
totally: And marvel not that Gifts are more necessary to the validity of
Ministration, than Grace is; he may perform the Office of a Minister to the
Benefit of the Church, that has no Saving Grace at all. Thus far R. B.

O! What Sorcery and Egyptian-darkness is here, to make void the New Covenant,
and Free Gracious Teachings of the Spirit of God in these Days, and to
Establish the Letter in the room and stead thereof, which only witnesses to is,
and is a Declaration concerning what the Spirit of God did in them, and in the
World before Christ's coming in the Flesh, and what was done during his being
in it, and what the Spirit would do in the Believing Souls, and in the World
after that time? But this the Hirelings do, that they by their trading with,
and giving their false meanings upon the Scriptures, they may keep the People
in Blindness, and so from the Anointing, and Teaching, and Enjoyment of that
Spirit that was in them that gave forth Scriptures, that they may not see their
deceitful Doctrines and Merchandises, lest they should buy no more of them: For
no Man that knows the badness of Babylon will buy them any more, and then will
the Merchants of Souls mourn: For, they that know the Lord, and his Spirit's
Teaching in them, which is the Good Old Way, yea, and the ever New, Fresh,
Profitable, and Living WAY, will follow no more such Men, as would bring in,
and establish a Graceless Ministry, as this R. B. does here, to his Shame. But
such Graceless Priests the Lord will have none of; nor his People neither: For
my Sheep hear my Voice, says Christ, and a stranger they will not hear: Surely
a Graceless Man is this Stranger: They (to wit, graceless Men, says John, 1
Epist. 4.) are of the World, and the World hear them; we are of God; Stewards
of the manifold Grace of God, 1 Pet. 4.10. And they that are of God hear us.

And so, Ever Blessed and Praised be the Great and Glorious Name of the Lord
Jesus, who has restored to them that Obey him, the Glorious Doctrine of the
Spirit's Teaching, as was in the Apostles Days, according to his true Promise;
where all in the Truth (of which we, the People of God, in Scorn called
Quakers, are Members) is done in and by the Holy Spirit, praised be God; and
nothing owned amongst us, but what is so done: Here is Praying in and by the
Spirit, and Preaching in and by the Spirit, and Singing in and by the Spirit of
our Holy Lord God; and so the Head being Spiritual, and the Members of the Body
every one Spiritual, (for we are all Baptized by one Holy Spirit into the one
Heavenly Body) our Food is also Spiritual Heavenly Bread, and Heavenly Wine,
and the Water Spiritual that sanctifies us, and mak^s us clean to God in all
our Sacrifices and Services: For Christ gave himself for his Church, which is
his Body, that he might wash it, and present it spotless to himself, and
without all Deformity, by the washing of Water (even the Water of Life) in the
Word of Life, the Creating Word of the Everlasting Father, which is Spirit and
Life, the Resurrection and the Life in every believing Soul; for we are
Redeemed from Death thereby, that we might for Ever hereafter serve God, in the
newness of his own Spirit, and not in the oldness of the Letter, as all such do
as know no other Teaching Word but the Letter, as this R. B. does; and so they
having gotten a little Brain-knowledge by their Humane Helps, and not by the
Spirit of Truth, they wrest Scripture to their own and others Destruction,
desiring and boasting themselves to be Masters and Teachers of others, whilst
themselves need teaching what the very Principles, or beginning Doctrines of
the true Christian Religion is, as is plainly manifested by his seeking to
bring in a graceless Minister, or Wolf into Christ's Fold, surely the Wolf
comes not but to rob and destroy. All that ever came before me, says Christ,
are Thieves and Robbers, and never came in by the Door, as its plain, the
Graceless Man does not, but has climbed up another way by his Humane Helps, as
Baxter speaks; and to this purpose, see John the 10th, and Mat. 23. where
Christ at large sets forth such Wolfish Teachers; who can perk themselves up in
Places of Teachers, by the World's help outwardly; but will neither enter into
the Kingdom of God themselves, nor suffer others, but shut up the Kingdom of
Heaven against Men, by such deceitful Doctrine and Antichristian Inventions, as
this R. B. has, by saying, That Gifts are more necessary to the validity of
Ministration, than Grace is; and that he may perform the Office of a Minister
to the Benefit of the Church, that has no Saving Grace at all; And all
Knowledge requires Time and Labor to obtain it, though the Spirit gives it;
which last saying does directly thwart and contradict the Scripture; which
says, I was found of them that sought me not, Isa. 65.1. And Paul sets
believing and working in this great Matter of the Knowledge of God and Christ
to Salvation, one against the other, as the way of the Law and Gospel; for to
him that works, says he, is the Reward reckoned of Debt, not Gift of Grace;
but to him that Believes it is of Grace, to the Glory of God's great Love to
Man; for says the Scripture, God so loved the World, that he gave his Son,
that whosoever on him believe, should not perish, but have Life Eternal: And
none can truly say, but those are the best knowers, and wisest People, that
have Eternal Life in them, though they never labored for it, nor sought for
it; and so such as this R. B. who looks at all, as obtained by Time and Labor,
they are those Spiritual Proud Ones, who are swel^ed so big with Spiritual
Pride, that Self-idolizing Sin, which, as himself says, in his second
Direction (so called) is the great Rebel against God, the chief part of the
Devil's Image, that one Sin which breaks every Commandment; the Heart of the
Old Man, the Root, and Parent, and Summary of all other Sin; the Antichristian
Vice, which is most directly contrary to the Life of Christ, etc. and these
Letter-wise Men, that have parched together a Garment of Fig Leaves, to cover
their sinful Nakedness, are Proud of mere supposed Spiritual Excellencies; for
the way of the Blessed Spirit, and its free Gifts, and free Workings in the
Children of Men, they are strangers unto; and then through their Humane
Learning, and lost Labor, having gotten a little or a great deal of talk from
the Letter of the Scripture concerning Religion, in their Earthly Spirits,
which sees nothing of the Kingdom of God; they condemn the Generation of the
Just, whom God teaches and Blesses with all Spiritual Knowledge in Heavenly
Things, and call them Spiritually Proud; because they cannot but speak very
highly, and yet in the truest humility of Heart, concerning the great Things
that God has done for their Souls; and because they cannot join with the
Wicked whom God abhors, neither in their Worship, nor other sinful Customs.

And so out of that Old Bottel, come all those unsavory Expressions of R. B.
beforementioned, against the free Teachings of God's Spirit; yea, so great an
Enemy he is to the wholesome Doctrine of Free Grace, that Page 7. he says, Is it
not Blaspheming of God's Spirit, to make it the Patron of Men's sloth and
idleness under pretense of Magnifying Grace?

To which I answer, That pretending we deny, and truly say, with the Apostle,
That God who commanded Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our
Hearts, to give us (yea, most freely without our own La-Labour, or any Humane
Help) The Knowledge of the Glory of his Kingdom; and those that call this
Doctrine, either in the Apostle, or us, a Patronizing of Sloth and Idleness,
are those that do really Blaspheme God's Spirit which teaches it.

But many Texts (says R. B.) commands us diligence; and sloth is a great Sin.

To which I say, the Scripture indeed commands a diligent Improvement, and holy
Exercise of the free Gifts which the Spirit has given the Faithful: But the
Scripture never said, that Humane Labor and Helps are the Means to be used for
getting the Spirit's Teachings; and without which no Knowledge in Spiritual
Matters is now received; Stir up the Gift of God in thee, says Paul to
Timothy, so say I; but he no where puts the Humane or Carnal Man to Work or
Labor to get the Spirit; for that is quite contrary to this Scripture, Gal.
3.2. as also Romans 9.16.

Obj. But this R. B. asks this Question, Why has God settled a Teaching Office
in his Church, and commanded all to attend, and hear, and learn, if we are
taught by the Spirit without Man's help? Why were the Apostles sent forth into
all the World, etc?

Answer, Here is the great stumbling of these Unbelievers, (the Worldly-wise
Ones indeed) what, because God in his free unlimited Spirit did begift Men, and
in his own Spiritual Power sent them forth to preach and publish all abroad the
Glory of his Kingdom, and Good Will to Men; cannot People therefore be taught
by the Spirit without Man's help? What Reasoning's this? When the Scripture
expressly says, That all the Gifts, and Abilities, Helps, and Means of bringing
People to God, and the Knowledge, and Enjoyment of all the Good Things of his
Kingdom, are merely, solely, and wholly from God and his Blessed Spirit's free
Gift in Christ, and not from Man at all: And therefore, when the Corinthians
began to look at Man, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, he calls it Carnal,
and said, Christ was not divided, signifying plainly it was Christ, and the
Spirit of his Power, that alone did all in all; as Christ said. Joh. 15.
Without me you can do nothing; for in the True Church Christ ever was, and ever
will be all in all, and and Man nothing; as Paul said of himself, Paul is
nothing: But in the False Church where R. B. is pleading for Man; yea,
Graceless Ministers, Man is all, and Christ suffered to have no Rule: But those
mine Enemies, says Christ, that would not that I should Rule, bring them and
slay them before my Face.

But what sottishness is this in R. B. to ask such a Question as this, when
himself confessed in the very last words before it, That none are so forward to
Preach as these same Men that cry down Men's Teaching? Whereby it plainly
appears, that we do not deny God's Teachings, and the Spirit's Good and
Gracious Gifts, freely given for the edifying and building up of the Body of
Christ, till we all come to a perfect Man, to the measure and statutre of the
fullness of Christ, no more than the Apostle did, Ephesians. 4.11, etc. but that
which we cry down, is that Antichristian Spirit in R. B. and all such Men as by
setting up Self; and Flesh would draw from Christ and his Teachings in Spirit
to look at them, and their Painted Words, and Love-killing Doctrines, who are
this Day Goliah-like come forth to defy the Armies of the Living God; but the
Stone cut out of the Mountain, without Hands, shall dash them and their Images
all to pieces; Glory to the Lord for Ever. And though they with their Humane or
Earthly Spirit and Sorceries, withstand the Truth and Spirit thereof, as Jannes
and Jambres withstood Moses, when he was about to call Israel out of Egypt; yet
as their Folly was soon seen, so are these, and they shall not proceed far; but
Israel out of Egypt shall go, and those Faithful Ones that are escaped, shall
they not with all their Enchantments bring back again into Egypt; Glory to the
Lord for Ever, Amen.

But would thou indeed know, O vain Man, R. B. for what the Apostles, who had
Ability to Preach (without Man's help) were sent forth? Then thou may know,
it was to reprove such as th^e that would limit God to vain Man's Help, and to
call his People from amongst you, who lay heavy Burdens on Men's Shoulders, but
will not touch them with one of your Fingers; it is even so.

But whereas thou addest and said, Those are taught of God, who are taught by
those who are sent of God to be their Teachers; it plainly shows the numerous
Company thou boasts of, who believe thee, are not taught of God; for thy
Doctrine already mentioned, shows most plainly that thou wast never sent of
God; for never did any, whom God sent set themselves against the Free and
Gracious Teaching and Gifts of God's Spirit, to Establish Humane Helps, as thou
do: But as if that which thou have said were nothing, thou addest, Page 8.

Advise with the Experience of all the World; who was the Man that ever you
knew, able to Expound one Chapter in the Bible by the inward Teachings of the
Spirit alone, without any Labor of his own, or Help from others by Voice or
Writing? Where dwells the Man, who by mere Inspiration can turn one Chapter
out of the Hebrew or Greek into the Vulgar Tongue? And where is the Man that
can solidly unfold any Doctrine of Divinity, which he never read or heard of,
or can Teach that Truth, and deny that Religion which he was never taught by
Man?

And afterward in his Second Direction, and Page 16. having led his wretched
Disciples into a Labyrinth or Mist of words, about their Uncertainties in their
Matters of Knowledge; and having advised them to Humility, as he calls it, or
not to think too highly of their own Knowledge; he there adds, and says in that
16th Page especially, If you know your Advantages for Knowledge have been less
than other Men's, that you are young; or that it is but a few Years since you
entered upon the Study of the Scriptures; or that you have not any stronger
Natural Parts than other Men; that you have not had that Measure of Learning
which might further your Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures; but that others that
differ from you have had much more of all these Helps and Means than you, and
have Prayed more, and Meditated more, etc.

And in Page 17. in his Answer to an Objection; which is, That the Learned
Men are not always the Wisest in the Matters of Religion; he says, many Men
are learned in the Languages and Sciences, who are not learned in the
Scripture; because they applied not their Studies that way; and many Men are
learned in the Scriptures and Sacred Languages, who yet live in Sin, though
they are able to Teach the Truth, for others: Here (by the way) all may take
notice what a False Teacher this R. B. is, who is not ashamed to say, That Man
that lives in Sin, may Teach the Truth for others; for such as live in Sin,
neither know the Truth (which is Christ) nor have seen him, (as John's first
Epist. Chap 3. expressly says) but this R. B. goes on, and says, But those
that well understand the Scriptures without learning the Languages which they
are written in, and the Customs of those Times and Countries, or without much
reading, and long Study of the Scriptures themselves, and the Writings of them
that better understand them, are so few, if any at all; that if you will
pretend to be one of them, you had need of some Miracle, or something like a
Miracle, to make your selves or others believe that you are not deceived.

I might here add his other false Doctrines immediately following these in that
his Book, as his Answer to an Objection there set down against Singularity, or
so; the Objection is this, The greater Number are not always in the Right;
therefore why should my Singularity discourage me. But because his Answer has
a pretty many words in it, I refer it to another place, and to what he has
already said, do Answer, and say in brief thus.

First, That as by his other words, so also by these, it is most manifest from
what Fountain this R. B's knowledge has proceeded, to wit, not from the
Inspiration of the Eternal Spirit, which gave forth Scripture; but from his own
Earthly or Natural Spirit and Humane Industry and Studies, and Trading in Books
and Letters without him, from which earthly or humane Spirit and Wisdom has
not come (nor possible ever can come to any) the right Meaning and
Understanding of Holy Scripture (as such as he would have it) For the natural
Man, as the Apostle says, perceives not the things that be of the Spirit of
God, 1 Cor. 2.14. But all false Visions, and lying Divinations have ever come
from that earthly Spirit, and all the cruel Wrestings of the Holy Scriptures,
from the beginning to this Day, have proceeded from it, to the miserable and
woeful Undoing of the Generality of that People, called Christendom; as also the
Blood-sheds, and all the cruel Usage of Spiritual-minded Men, for their pure
Conscience Sake, have issued from that Fountain of the Earthly Spirits, and the
false Births thereof, from the beginning, and that great Whore found Guilty of
all; for in her was found the Blood of Prophets and of Saints, and of all that
were Slain upon the Earth, Rev. 18.24. For what Spiritual Man did ever ask such
a Question, or rather affirm; for in him, his question is an Affirmation, to
wit, That no man is able, by the inward Teachings of the Spirit alone, to
Expound one Chapter in the Bible: And that there is none can solidly Unfold any
Doctrine of Divinity, which he never Read or Heard of, or can teach the Truth,
or defend that Religion, which he was never taught by Man.

Oh happy therefore are they who are come to the Everlasting Covenant of God,
and to know the inward Teachings and Leadings of his Holy Spirit in their
Heart, to lead them into all Truth, according to Promise, John 16. without
being beholding to vain Man's Help; for whereof is he to be accounted, as is
manifest, even as a thing of naught, is the best of them, out of the Truth: For
O! How Ignorant of the Ministry of God and Christ, and the Holy Spirit's
Inspiration, sufficient Teaching, is this R. B. who is not content to fit among
the Parish-Teachers, as a Fellow; but even takes upon him to be a Teacher of
the Teachers? Yea, so Ignorant and Unbelieving is he, concerning the Spirit's
Power and Sufficiency in these Days, that without an outward Miracle, he will
not believe any such thing: Nay, he would not have People believe for
themselves, that God teaches their own Hearts, unless it comes in Man's Way,
and by humane Study, Labor, and natural Means: Therefore the Lord saw good for
his own Glory, and for the Vindication of his own Honorable and Everlasting
Truth, which the Hirelings had made void by their Traditions; and for the
absolute necessity of his own beloved Seed, to restore unto us the Ancient
Doctrine of the Holy Spirit's Sufficiency, in all the Work of bringing Man out
of the Fall to God, that the Lord, the Spirit, might be the first and the last;
yea, all in all, in their Salvation, without Man's help; for he is worthy, who,
as he Created all things, by his own alone Power, and according to his good
Will; so he Restores all things, according to the Counsel of his own Will, and
not of Flesh, nor of Blood, nor of the Will of Man, as the Apostle also Speaks,
John 1.13. But, Oh! How unlike is this Doctrine of the Apostles, to R. B's; for
when the Apostle had said, To them that received Christ, to them he gave Power
to become the Sons of God; lest any should think, as this R. B. does, that it
was either by Man's Labor or Study, or humane Endeavor, or Art, or Parts, or
any Natural Abilities or Helps whatsoever; he says, It was not of Flesh, nor
of Blood, nor of the Will of Man, but of God. And of his own Will begat he us,
by the Word of Truth, says that other Apostle, Jam. 1.17, 18. And he bids not
Err, as this R. B. does, to set up another Fountain or Root; and that this Word
of Truth is not any outward Writing, Voice, or any Creature: John in his first
Chapter tells us, That in the beginning was this Word, and the Word was with
God, and is God: And his Name is called, the Word of God, Rev. 19.13. So this
Word, though it works according to the Witness of the Scripture, which it gave
forth freely, and as it self pleases, in the Children of Men; yet it is not
the Scripture; For search the Scriptures, or ye do search the Scriptures, says
Christ, that witness of me, but you will not come to me that you may have Life;
and these were they that Paul said, He bore them Record that they had a Zeal
for God (and Scripture) but not according to Knowledge; for they being Ignorant
of God's Righteousness, went about to Establish their own Righteousness, and
submitted not to God's: And so, even so this R. B. and many such like, have a
blind Zeal, and a great Talk of the Scriptures without, and of the Spirits
Teaching by the Letter, and humane Helps, and the like; but will not come to
Christ, to know him in them, that they may have Life, and Wisdom, and
Righteousness: But would Establish their own, which is mere Emptiness and
Vanity in the sight of God, and all truly Spiritual Men, 1 Cor. 13.5. Romans 10.3.

And how far this R. B's Language in those other words, where he says, That if
any will pretend to a good Understanding of the Scriptures, without learning
the Languages which they are written in, and the Customs of those Times,
Countries, or without much Reading, and long Study of the Scriptures
themselves, and the Writings of them that better understand them, had need of
some Miracle, or something like a Miracle, to persuade themselves, or others,
that they are not deceived. How far, I say, is this Doctrine and Language in
this R. B. from the Language of the Holy Men of God that writ the Scripture,
let the Spiritual Man, who best understands all things, Judge; for the Holy
Apostles Magnified the free Grace, and the free Teachings of the Spirit of
Grace, and debased Man, and all mere humane Helps, as is said before, and as
the Scripture Witnesses: But this R. B. tyeth the weight and main Stress of
all, upon humane Learning, natural Parts, knowledge of Custom and Countries,
much Reading, long Study, and the like; insomuch, that without them, Man must
not look that any should believe him: Nay, nor he must not own God's Teaching
in his own Heart without these; unless seconded by some Miracle, or the like.

But, Oh the Misery thereof of such poor Souls, as follow such wretched
Teachers, and their unsound Doctrine, as I may well say; And Oh! for ever
Blessed are they who are brought from off such Barren Mountains into the good
Fold, where all the Lambs of Christ lie down in the good Pasture of the
Spirit's Fullness; and walk up and down in the Light of the Lord, under the Hand
of the good Shepherd, Christ Jesus, where none can come to make afraid, nor
deceive; for in the Light of our God, we see all these false Teachers, and
their devouring Doctrines; and by the Holy Power of God are delivered from
them, and made able in the overcoming Spirit of Truth, to declare against them:
Glory to God for ever, Amen.

Again let us review, and consider in particular a little of those words of
his, before set down; where he says, as an Argument to persuade his young
Ones, and Dissenters, to his falsely called Humility.

Especially, says he, If you know your Advantages for Knowledge, have been
less than other Men's; that you are younger, or that it is but a few Years
since you entered upon the Study of the Scripture; or that you have not any
stronger Natural Parts than other Men; or that you have not had that Measure of
Learning, which might further your Knowledge of the Holy Scripture: But that
others, that differ from you, have had much more of all these Helps and Means
than you; and have Prayed more, and Meditated more, etc.

To which I Answer, That by these words it is easily seen, what manner of
Knowledge it is that this R. B. trades in, and would have all Slaves unto; and
what are his Means for obtaining it; to wit, a mere natural Knowledge; which,
by mere worldly Helps and Advantages, may be attained: For a mere Heathen
accompanied with many Years, and much humane Learning, and strong Natural
Parts, that can but talk much of the Scripture; especially having on him a Form
of Prayer, and the like, must needs go for a better knowing Christian with him,
than the dearest Child of God; especially if he be young in Years, and want
those natural Helps, and outward Appearances.

Oh what havoc has such Doctrine, as this of R. B's made amongst his deluded
Hearers and Admirers in this Nation; so that now, let the Man God come to one
of them in the purest Evidence, and most powerful Demonstration of the Spirit
of Truth, if he appear not to them Clothed and Accompanied with these Natural
and Worldly Abilities and Indowments; they are fenced against the Lord's
Messenger with such Arguments as these, You are but young; you have but Studied
a while; you are of slender and mean Natural Parts; and little or no
Schollar-ship, and have Prayed but little, etc. in comparison of our Grave and
Learned Divines, and the like: So that as Christ said, so we find now true:
That Publicans and Harlots enter into the Kingdom of God before such; and now
what a Curer of Church-divisions this R. B. is like to prove is easily seen;
and therefore that Charge, which his Selfcondemned Heart feared would come upon
him, may justly be brought upon him here; which, in his Preface to his Book, he
sets down thus.

They will affirm, says he, that I have clawed with one Party, and have girded
at the other, and have sought to make them Odious, by bringing them under the
Reproach of Separation, of censuring and avoiding the Ungodly; and that, being
Lukewarm my self, and a Complier with Sin, I would have others to do so too:
And that these Reconcilers are neither Flesh nor Fish; and attempt
Impossibilities, even to Reconcile Light and Darkness, Christ and Belial, and
that for the sake of Peace, we would sell the Truth, and would let in
Church-Corruptions, out of an over-eager desire of Agreement; and when they
have all done, neither Parties will regard them. These are this R. B's words,
in that Preface of his to that Book; which is justly come upon him.

And indeed, he may as well go about to reconcile Light and Darkness, as bring
the Children of Light, whom God has delivered out of the Darkness and
Filthiness of Egypt and Sodom Spiritual, into Unity with them again; for there
is Enmity put between the two Seeds, and those words of Christ, in John 17.21,
22, etc. which he deceitfully puts in the Title Page of his Book, are only
proper to the Living Members of the Spiritual Body of Christ, (which he calls
Mystical) and not to any of the World's Churches, or visible mixed Congregations
of People whatsoever; the Words of the Apostle in John 17.21, etc. are
weightier than any Hypocrite can bear, and they are these, That they all may be
one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that thou also may be one in us;
that the World may believe that thou have sent me; and the Glory which thou
have given me, I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are one: I
in them, and thou in me, that they may be made Perfect in one; and that the
World may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them, as thou have loved
me. God is arisen to drive Hypocrites from under all such shelter of words, as
they would hide themselves under; for now is the City and Kingdom truly
Manifested and Witnessed, into which no Uncircumcised or Unclean shall enter;
but only the Redeemed Born babes, and Living Members of Christ. And now to the
Knowledge and Experience, not of the Evil World, but of all that know God, do I
appeal to Judge, whether this R. B. or any of like Spirit with him, can be said
to know any thing of the Oneness betwixt the Father and Son, the Members of the
Holy Heavenly Body, much less can be any of them, who are not afraid to affirm,
That such are not to be disallowed from being Ministers of the Gospel; though
they want Grace totally: And that Gifts are more necessary to the validity of
Ministration, than Grace is; and that he may perform the Office of a Minister,
to the Benefit of the Church, that has no saving Grace at all, (as Page 114.
of his Book aforementioned) and that there is no Man alive that Worshippeth
God, without some Sin: And adds, Do you ever Pray your selves in Secret, or in
your Families without Sin; as in Page 19.5.

And in Page 30. of his Preface to that Book, That there is no Person, Church
or Worship on Earth faultless, and without Corruption; (and says there
further) I Justify not the Faults of my own daily Prayers, and yet I never
Pray without them.

And in Page 34. etc. That Cain was the Firstborn Member in the Church of Adam
's Family: And Cursed Cham was of the Church of Noah: And reckons Lot 's two
Sons-in-law, and Esau; yea, and the Ten Tribes in their Apostasy, to be of the
Church.

And so having reckoned up, and raked together the Faults of the Race of
Abraham, before Christ's coming in the Flesh, and of those called Christians
after that mentioned in Scripture; he wickedly and imprudently says, Page 44.
That no one Member is in all these Scriptures, or any other, commanded to come
out, and separate from any one of all these Churches; as if their Communion in
Worship were Unlawful; Directly contrary to 1 Cor. 5.11. 2 Cor. 6.17. Rev.
18.4, 5, 6, etc. Come out of Mystery Babylon (the false Church) says God to
his People.

Oh the Blasphemy of such Men's Hearts, that dare Entitle wicked Men (for a
bare Profession-sake of Religion) to the Glory of the benefit of this Prayer of
Christ's, who Prays (and his Prayers were always heard) That his might be one,
as He and the Father were, and are one; the Father in Christ, and Christ in
them; and so made Fellowheirs and Partakers of the Glory of Christ by free
Gift: But neither R. B. nor any graceless Minister, nor sinful Praying People,
whom he pleads for, while such, can ever be one, as the Father and Son are one:
Therefore I may safely say to you all, who desire the good of your Souls, and
the Glory of God, Come out from amongst them, and join not with them, No, not
in their Worship Actions (as he calls them) nor be ye Partakers in any of their
Sins, or Sinful Worship, lest ye partake of their Plagues; for the Temple of
God is Holy, and the Worship of God is Holy: And so R. B. with all his own
Corruptions, and all his heaps of Lies, and false Accusations of the Brethren
of Christ are for the Lake; It is so.

And so I return to set down R. B's Unchristian Answer to that former Objection
against the Singularity of Separation; the Objection is as before; The greater
Number are not always in the right; therefore, why should my Singularity
discourage me?

Now to this R. B. answers, Page 17, 18. The greater Number (says he) through
the World, are not in the right about Christianity; for they are not
Christians, and the greater number of vulgar Christians be not in the right
perhaps, in many Points of Learning, and Sch^lastick Controversies; because
they are not Learned in such Controversies; but all Godly Men, and Christians,
are in the right in all Points Essential to Godliness and Christianity: And
therefore they are in the certain way of Life.

And if in any Integral or Accidental Point, you think you are wiser than the
greater part of Men, as Learned and as Godly as your selves, you must give very
good Proofs of it, to your selves and others, before it is to be believed: I
know that in all Ages God gives some few Men more excellent Natural Parts than
others; and he engages some in deeper and more laborious Studies than others;
and he Blesses some Men's Studies more than others; and therefore there are
still some few who know more than the rest of the Country, or Mankind; and it
were well for the rest if they knew these, and would learn of them: But these
are such as come to their Knowledge by hard and laborious Studies, and
Meditation; though also by the Spirits Blessing their Endeavors: and they are
such as give Proof of the Knowledge they pretend to; and they are such as
employ their Knowledge to preserve the Peace and Concord of Believers, and do
not proudly make a stir with it, to set up their own Names, though hereby they
set the World on fire.

To which, by way of reply, I answer and say, That there is not the least Child
of Light, but does truly and easily see the nature of the Spirit, by which this
R. B. is still acted, and the end he drives at; for as for the Spirit by which
he is acted, it still appears plainly to be the Spirit of this World that never
knew God, nor the Mysteries of his Holy and Heavenly Kingdom, by which Earthly
Spirit (by much poring on Books without him) he has attained to a deal of
Unsanctified Graceless Knowledge, (as himself speaks Page 114.) to deceive the
simple People by, who are Ignorant of Satan's Devices; and as for his end, it
is also as manifest to be this, to wit, to bring People (who were in some
measure pressing out of Babylon) back into Egypt and Babylon again; and yet to
cover his Deceit, lest the Simple should see him without an Interpreter, he
brings in the Spirit, as to help his Humane Labor and Carnal Endeavors: But
the Spirit of God, which he strikes at in all his Writing, will be no Drudge or
Slave to any such Vain Self-ended Proud Mind in any.

But of these words, where he says, That all Godly Men and Christians are in
the right, in all Points Essential to Godliness and Christianity; and therefore
in the certain Way of Life, as he says.

Let us consider; As for Godly Men, who ever imagined otherwise? much less
denied it in words that they were in the right way; but as for that he says,
That all Christians, if he means all that were sprinkled when they were
Children, and that so being grown up, make an outward Profession of Christ (for
such in Spiritual manner he seems to mean by Christians) are in the right, in
all Points essential to Christianity, and so in the certain Way of Life. It is
such a notorous Expression, and so bold an Assertion, that no one Saying can
more gratify the Devil, and so help to build up his Kingdom, than it does:
Nay, it certainly gives the Lie to the certain Experience and Testimony of all
the Holy Men of God, both formerly and now; for Paul said in his day, That many
professed, and nominal Christians do so walk, as that they were Enemies to the
Cross of Christ, whose God was their Belly, and who gloried in their Shame, and
whose end was Destruction, Phil. 3. and were these in the right Points
Essential to Christianity, and in the certain way of Life? What Contradiction
and Blasphemy is this? And the same Apostle tells some among the Corinthians,
That they had not the Knowledge of God, Cor. 15. and what, Were these right
also in all Essentials? What is not the Knowledge of God an Essential Point of
Christianity? Nay, without the Knowledge of God, no Eternal Life; and yet this
R. B. is not ashamed to affirm, That such as know not God, are in the certain
Way of Life. And further, To the Experience of all that know God do I appeal,
whether this R. B. does not here in his blindness, justify the very Papist;
Yea, and all other sorts of People, who any way in the outward profess Christ;
especially if they be outwardly sprinkled with Water, young or old: For, says
he, in his Preface, Page 33. Christ has solemnly and purposely made the
Baptismal Covenanting with him (to wit, by outward Washing) to be the Term and
Title to Church Membership and Communion, and the owning of this same Covenant,
is the sufficient Title of the Adult (or those of ripe Years) and the Imposers
that come after, and require another kind of Evidence of Conversion or
Sanctification than this, do confound the Church, and enslave the People, and
leave no certain way of Trial. Thus far R. B. by which it appears whither he,
by endeavoring to keep his Credit with the World, is wandered beyond the Bounds
of Reason. Nay, Mystery Babylon her self (though she be become a Cage of every
unclean and hateful Bird, and a very Habitation of Devils,) seems justified by
his Position, and reckoned to be right in the Essentials of Christianity, and
in the certain Way of Life: For without all Controversy, this Mystery Babylon
is of that Number who in words profess God and Christ, and have a Name to live,
though they be dead, or it were not a Mystery, if it were not covered from the
World's Eye, with a show of what it is not, Rev. 17, 18, 19 Chapters. Yet so
far is this R. B. in the Dark, that he accounts it an Abuse, and false
Interpreting of Scripture, to persuade any by that Command [Come out of
Babylon] to separate from professed or nominal Christians, though full of
Iniquity, Page 32. than which, nothing more can gratify the Wicked One, and
that Adulterous Church of Rome; for though he would seem in some words, here
and there, in his Book, to be no Papist; yet there is never an Argument he
brings, for the Fellowship with Dead and Corrupted Members; and against those
that separate from such; but they will fully serve to prove the Pope and
Papists to be a Church, and all them to blame who have separated from him in
outward Church Fellowship upon any Pretense whatsoever. So foolish is the
World's Wisdom when it is set against Truth: But this R. B. having laid his
wrong Ground; That all that are called Christians are in the right, in all
Points essential to Christianity, and in the certain Way of Life; he may easily
conclude that to be unwarrantable Separation which goes from such. But then I
say, How will the Protestants warrant their first Separation from Popery? Or
how did this R. B. with his Presbyterians in Oliver's time, with their
Directory, excuse their separating from the Bishops, and their Common Prayer?
And how will he salve his old Nonconforming Brethrens Flight into New England
(where since they have shed the Blood of certain Martyrs of Christ) from the
former Bishops?

But now his false Ground and Foundation being overturned, it is most manifest
that that Separation is most lawful, which is from such, who call Good Evil,
and Evil Good, put Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light, as the Wicked
do, from whom the People of God in these days separate: And so in obeying the
Voice of our God, who says, Come out of Mystery Babylon my People, lest ye
partake of her Sins, and so of her Plagues, (we are justified) for the Sins of
the Wicked, (who, in words, profess God and Christ, but in Deeds deny all) is
reached Heaven at this day: And does not the Apostle say, If any Man that is
called a Brother be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolator (and
Covetousness, by the Apostle's Doctrine, is Idolatry) or a Railer, or a
Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such not to keep company, no not as to eat
with them, 1 Cor. 5.11.

And does he not say in another place, Have no Fellowship with the unfruitful
Works of Darkness (nor with the unfruitful Workers in Darkness, as before) but
rather reprove them, Ephesians. 5.14. must we not yet separate from them, yea, yea,
in their very Worship-Actions as well as others; and when even the greater
number are so far defiled and tainted with the Leprosy of Unrighteousness; and
they are so far from amending, that they persecute all that will not be as bad
as themselves: Surely when the Lord has spued out a People, as he threatened to
do lukewarm Laodicea, Rev. 3.16. yea, and cast them off, for their resisting of
his good Spirit, as he did the Jews; it is no time for his People to stay
amongst them then, and to continue with them in their Worship-Actions, as he
calls them; but every one to deliver his own Soul, by coming out of such
Babylonish Worships; whose Prayers are Abomination to God, as all sinful
Prayers are; and neither this R. B. nor any one that he knows upon the Earth,
prays without Sin, as himself before has confessed; and so all of them
together do daily and continually that which they should not do, and leave
undone what the Lord commands them, and so have no Health in them: And so now
that the True Light shines so clear again from under the long Cloud of
Antichristian Apostasy, it is the Wisdom of all that love God and their own
Souls, to join to the Lord in the Covenant of his Light and Spirit, where no
Committers of Sin can join; for Darkness, and the Workers thereof, can never
join with the Light, and the Workers thereof: So now that the Trumpet has
founded, all ought to come to the Holy Worship of God, amongst the Holy
Worshippers, that Worship in the Spirit of Holiness and Truth; (where no Worker
of Iniquity, nor Hypocrite can come) out of all the Defiled Worship of the
World whatsoever, or under what Name soever in the Fall: But this R. B. is in
such love of Hypocrisy, that he makes a Necessity of the Hypocrites being
amongst the true Members of Christ, as though they knew not how to do without
them; as if the good Corn could not grow so well if the Weeds were wanting;
saying, Page 56. It is more for the sake of the truly Faithful, than for
themselves, that the Hypocrites have their Station, and Privileges in the
Church; God makes use of their Gifts and Profession for his Elect, to many
great Services of the Church. To which I answer, That this Language betrays
thee further to be of Babylon, and not of Zion; What R. B. with all his seeming
Zeal for Reformation in Oliver's days, become now a Pleader for Hypocrites, and
their great Service in the Church! But this is but like his Doctrine of his
Graceless Ministers which he pleads for, Page 114 of his Book; so R. B. and his
Hypocrites, and Graceless Brethren, with their Gifts, (or rather Thefts void of
Grace) have been so far from being serviceable to the Elect True Church, that
they have done it (and ever did) all the Injury that ever they can by their
wicked Doctrines, Ungodly Lives, and heaps of Lies and false Accusations, and
cruel Persecutions; insomuch that the Growth of the Heavenly Seed, the Lillies
of God, the true Heirs of the Kingdom, has been, and is, as a Lilly among
Thorns: But Christ and R. B. are directly contrary in their Judgment one to the
other; for Christ would not suffer the Devil in the Man to preach him, but
commanded him to come out, and hold his peace, because Christ never had need of
Devils, or wicked Men, or Hypocrites, to preach him; but says to such, What
have thou to do, to take my Laws and Covenant in thy Mouth, and hate to be
reformed, Psalm. 50.16, etc. and so far are Graceless Priests and Hypocrites
from being serviceable in this matter to his Church, that he says, My Sheep
hear my Voice, and they follow me; but the Graceless Minister and Hypocrite,
who is a Stranger to me, they will not hear, for such come but to rob and
destroy, read John 10. and see if ever R. B. understood Scripture, who talks so
contrary to it: As did those Pharisees of old, whom Christ cried out so many
times Woe against, Matt. 23. Who would neither enter into the Kingdom of Heaven
themselves, nor suffer others. And those in Ezekiel, who sowed Pillows under
Men's Elbows, making glad the Hearts of the wicked Hirelings, by persuading
People that they must not disown them from being Ministers, though they be
totally void of obeying Saving Grace; and that Hypocrites have a Station in the
Church, for great Services with their pretended Gifts to the Elect; and by
pleading for Games, and Fashions of Apparel; yea, and the Opinions in Religion
of bad People, yea to such a measure, that he is not ashamed to say, That many
an Error is taken up, by going too far from other Men's Faults; as is to be seen
in Page 224 of his Book, with many such like Heathenish Sayings up and down his
Book; a few whereof I only touch here and there, that by those the Reader may
see the nature of that wretched Spirit, that has long lurked in him, under a
Cloak of Zeal for Reformation, when the World pretended to such things; but now
that the World is for a manifest Establishing of their old dark Stuff, he turns
about, and is all for them as it were, and against Zeal, against Reformation,
Separation, Immediate Revelation, or any thing that may manifest People to have
a care of their Souls: But Oh the Misery, the Misery, the unspeakable Misery of
such as are not yet redeemed from under the Slavery and Egyptian Bondage of
such Men: But the Lord will break the Rod of the Oppressor, as in times of old,
as in the days of Midian and Egypt, where both Jannes and Jambres, who
withstood the Lord's Servant Moses, in his calling Israel out of Egypt, were
made manifest, and their Folly by all clearly seen, as this R. B's is by every
open Eye: Praised be the Lord for his Infinite Love in all things.

But the Hearts of the Righteous, whom God delights to comfort, he does all he
can to make Sad, by persuading the dark cruel World, that the cause of all the
Miseries of the late years, yea, and at present in these Islands, is much (what
if not mostly) occasioned by those, who in tenderness of Conscience to God,
could not, nor cannot join with, nor uphold the Popish Customs, and Imposition
in Matters relating to Religion, and the Soul, which is more precious to them
that know it, than all the World: And in the Truth we may say, that if we
should come amongst the Steeple-house Worshippers, or any other Company, who
are only separated from them in Form, and not in Life and Power, and their
exercise, not in the Gift, and Heavenly Holy Worship and Service to the Lord
Jesus Christ our God, we should even Sacrifice the Abomination of the Egyptians
before their Eyes; and now would you not Stone us, or Imprison us, or otherwise
evilly i^treat us, even as you do, and ever have done? Yea, yea, and as they
dealt with the Prophet Isaiah for saying (Chap. 66.3.) He that kills an Ox,
is as if he slew a Man; he that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dog's
Neck, etc. and Chap. 1.11, etc. To what purpose is the multitude of your
Sacrifices unto me, says the Lord, I am full of them; and who has required it
at your hands, to tread my Courts? Bring no more vain Oblations, etc. For which
it is said they slew him; so they would deal with us. And what measure have the
dear Servants of God in New England met withal, not long since, for the like
witness against those Hypocrites, but Death and cruel Whippings, and
Banishment; and in old England lately, but most Savage and Cruel Usage? And
would this R. B. yet have us, yea, and those he counts his Brethren, and of his
Flock, who have any Tenderness in them, to communicate with such whose Hands
are full of Blood? If he were as the Mouth of God, he would put a difference
between the Clean and Unclean: But he being of another Spirit, is for leading
People back again into Egypt, not for bringing them out of Egypt into the
Promised Land; which Work and Endeavor is rejected of God, and of all that
know God, who are escaped out of Sodom and Egypt, and Babylon Spiritual, where
our Lord was Crucified: And to us the Lord has said, Let them return to you
(ye Saved People) but return not you to them; For their Pastors are become
brutish, and have not sought the Lord; therefore they shall not prosper, and
all their Flocks shall be scattered, Jer. 10.21. He that has Ears let him
hear, and he that reads let him understand, for the time is at hand, for the
Lord is arisen to plead with all the False Worshippers upon Earth, and with him
is no respect of Persons. And now is the Lord God of ever blessed Power and
love appeared in the Earth, after the long Night of Apostasy, to restore all
things; and now are the Virgins called upon, through the whole World, to trim
their Lamps; for behold the Bridegroom is come and coming, and now the foolish
Virgins, who have been long sleeping and slumbering, in a dead Profession of
Christ and the Scriptures, are found wanting in their Faith, Holiness, Love,
and all other Christian Virtues, and so in their Unholiness shut out; yea, and
though they run to the Hirelings, that set all things to Sale, to Buy, yet
still before they come, the Door is shut; for whilst the Lord stood waiting
upon them, with his pure free and full Grace and Spirit, they would have none
of it; but rather chosed to go their own ways of Carnal Endeavors, and
Man-commanded Religion, and so like the Jews of old, going about to Establish
their own Righteousness, have not submitted to the Righteousness of God, which
is by Faith in Christ Jesus: But the wise Virgns, who are of an honest Heart,
to fear God, and wait for the Lord Jesus Christ, to appear in their Spirits, to
set up his heavenly and everlasting Kingdom in them, they receive daily of his
Fullness, which fills all in all, where the true Oil of the Kingdom is found
in their Holy Lamps, to the Praise of the Glory of the unspeakable Love, and
free Grace of the Almighty Father. So be it.

Again, to that part of this R. B's former Answer, where he says, That in all
Ages, God gives to some few Men more excellent Natural Parts than others, and
he engages some in deeper and more laborious Studies, and he blesses some
Men's Studies more than other; and therefore there are still some few, who know
more than the rest of the Country, or Mankind; and it were well for the rest if
they knew these, and would learn of them.

Query. But how may one know these hard and laborious Studiers, as he calls
them?

Oh, says this R. B. They are such as give proof of their Knowledge they
pretend to; and they are such as employ their Knowledge to the preserving of
the Peace and Concord of Believers; and do not proudly make a stir with it, to
set up their own Names; though thereby they set the World on fire.

To which I answer and say, It is still more and more manifest, that this R. B.
lays the weight and stress upon Natural Parts, and hard Studies; as though the
Kingdom of God were not at all come, nor the Promise of God (concerning the
Free Gifts, and plentiful pouring forth of the Spirit) yet fulfilled; and so a
necessity of learning at the feet of Gamaliel, and earthly Doctors still: But
now that the Spirit of Truth, according to God's blessed Promise, is come, and
witnessed amongst us that believe, praised be God, we cannot go to such as this
R. B. with all their Natural Parts, and hard Studies; for the Spirit of Truth
leads us, and all that obey it, into all Truth; but this R. B. and such as he
leads, are in an Error, as is manifest; for they are of those that lead about a
Company of poor Souls, silly as Women laden with diverse Sins and Lusts, ever
learning, but never able to come to the Knowledge of the Truth, which sets free
from Sin; for that (and nothing else) is the Truth, which sets free from Sin;
for says Christ, If ye know the Truth, the Truth shall set you free indeed.
But this R. B. and all such, teach it for Doctrine, That they are so far from
being free from Sin, that their very Prayers, and best Performances, are not
free from Sin, but Sin is in them all. Oh Sad, that ever they should dare to
pretend to the Ministry of the Gospel, who preach such a Doctrine as make
nothing perfect, but leaves them in Sin all their Lives long: And no wonder
that they and their Doctrine should be void of all good Fruit; for says God,
They have run, and I have not sent them; therefore they shall not profit the
People at all. And yet they would gladly have People know them, and learn of
them, though they can do them no good at all; and this is that sorry and bad
Proof, that the Hirelings make of their great Knowledge they pretend unto,
which they have gotten with their Natural Parts, and hard Studies: And so thy
own words shall witness against thee, Oh R. B. and thy Brethren, who have given
no good Proof of your Knowledge to this day; nor have thereby preserved Peace
and Concord amongst Believers, but done what you can to break it; for that
Doctrine that makes not Men free from Sin, leaves all the Seeds of Discord and
Dissension still in Peoples Minds; for as Sin separated Man from God at first,
so does it to this day keep them, and so keeps them from Love, for God is Love;
and none live or dwell in Love, but such as live and dwell in God: But such as
live in Sin, and never Pray without it, are out of God, as the Apostle said of
People in Unbelief, They were without God in the World. It is not any outward
Conformity, that will or can make them to be at Peace with, or love one
another; for if it were possible to bring Papist, Atheist, and Carnal
Protestants and Professors of all sorts, into one Form of outward Worship, as
for Time, Place, Words, or the like: Yet there would be neither Love, Peace,
nor Concord amongst them, for want of Unity with God and his good Spirit, the
only true Ground and Foundation of all true Love, Peace, and Concord. And so,
Oh R. B. we have known thee this many Years to be a great Enemy, and therefore
we may not learn of thee, nor any such, but of Christ do we learn, ever praised
be his Name, who teaches his People to profit; and so it is only the poor
deluded Multitude that knows thee not, who learn of thee, and suck in such
poisoned Doctrine, as makes them most incapable of the pure Word of Life, and
Doctrine of Salvation; so that Publicans and Harlots, who make little or no
Profession, enter into the Kingdom of God before you.

And as for making a stir with thy Knowledge, and striving to set up thy own
Name thereby, though thou set the whole World on fire by it; Who more Notorious
than thy self in this R.B? as witness all thy lying frothy Words, Books, and
Pamphlets, which thou have spoken and written, against the appearance of Christ
and his Truth, in these late years; but thy Studies and such Works God has
cursed; for no Child of Light will ever buy any of thy Merchandise, nor the
deceitful Wares of any other Merchants of Babylon, for evermore Blessed be God
for his unspeakable Gift, Amen.

But the end of these words, of setting the World on fire, set down here by
this R. B. is easily seen to be this, to wit, To persuade People, that those
who are Zealous for God in these days, in publishing his everlasting Gospel
upon the Earth, in a cross to the World, are such as set up themselves, and
would set the World on fire: And so he is manifest to be one of the old evil
Generation of Priests, who accused Christ for a mover of Sedition, and Paul for
a pestilent Fellow: Oh, it was that good stirring Spirit of the Lord Jesus in
himself, and his Followers, which did so trouble the World, the combustible
World in all Ages, that made, and does make, the Hireling Priests, and their
deluded Followers, so rage and cry out; but as for setting the World on fire,
in a good sense, Christ Jesus says, That he came to set Fire in the Earth: But
for setting the World on fire, in R. B's sense, that is sowing Discord and
Dissension amongst People; this is the Work, and ever was the Work of the
Hireling Priests, who loved to be called of Men Masters, as this R. B. is,
witness not only our own Age, but the Holy Scripture, and the Histories of all
Times and Ages, as those that read may understand: And yet these proud Masterly
and false Teachers, were ever the first, and forwardest that cried against
Christ and his Followers, for disturbing the World's Peace; when as this
Doctrine of Christ's Spirit, though it did always disturb the Devil's; yet it
did always tend to the working of the Hearts and Souls of the People into God's
Peace, and did ever, and does at this day work this glorious and blessed Effect
in all that believe: Whereof we are Witnesses, praised be God, though for the
Testimony of Christ, we are troubled on every side by the wicked World: So that
even now, when the Wicked have no Peace (for there is no Peace to the Wicked)
we whom the World Mock, Stone and Persecute, under the Nick name of Quakers, or
so, have Peace in all our Dwellings: Egypt is full of Darkness, that one may
feel it, yet in our Goshen is plenty of Light, ever praised be God: And when
the World of false Christians are learning War, and preparing Weapons, we are
ceasing from War, and not to learn it any more, as the Lord has said. And
therefore, Oh ye Inhabitants of the Earth, if ye knew us, ye would not hate us,
and persecute us, but love us with your Hearts, because of the good Will of our
Hearts toward you; for our Weapons are not Carnal, but Spiritual: Not for
pulling down, or Destroying of you, but your Enemies, your Sins, which War
against your Souls: And the Reason why we cannot join with you in your
Liturgies, and Worship-actions, is not because we hate you; but because we love
God and your Souls; for if we should join with you in your defiled Worships, as
your selves confess they are, we should strengthen you in an evil Way: But by
our separating from you, because of the Unholiness of your Sacrifices, occasion
may be ministered to you to question your State, and so some of you in time may
come out of your Darkness, into the mavelous Light of the Lord Jesus with us,
and praise the Lord in the Land of the Living. So be it.

Another of this R. B's Follies and false Doctrines, I may here mention, as one
may read it in that Book of his that I have under hand, to wit, in Page 114.
are these words, It may be unlawful, says he, in a Ruler, to command a thing
that will do no good, because it is a Vain Command, and makes Men spend that
time in vain, and yet be the Subject's Duty to do it.

Answ. This is such Doctrine as Paul's Enemies taught, who said, Men might do
evil, that good might come of it, whose Condemnation was just. So to avoid
Sufferings from Men, he would have us to obey Unlawful Commands, which will do
no good, but rather a great Evil; to wit, make People spend precious Time in
vain: Away with such Ant christ an and Heathenish Stuff, for all true
Christians abhor it in their Hearts, as the Lord, the good Shepherd has
Commanded them. And now R. B. to that part of thy feigned Prayer, Page 252.
where in words thou seem to desire, That God would stir up some Faithful
Friend to tell thee, with convincing Evidence, where it is that thou have
Miscarried, that Contrition may prepare thee for the Peace of Remission.

Here the Lord has, contrary to thy will and desire, stirred up one, in
Faithfulness and Love to thy Soul, and the Souls of the poor deluded People
whom thou have deceived, to tell thee plainly of thy Faults, and grievous
Miscarriages; as by what is convincingly in these Lines set down, does appear,
and might be more abundantly, if all the Miscariages in this Book (only to let
pass all thy other) were answered unto in particular; but these in this Answer
of mine, being as it were least of what the rest are, may satisfy at present.
And Oh that the Righteous Judgments of God may come upon thy Heart, and the
Hearts of all them who are in the same false, fleshly Confidence with thy self;
whose very Prayers are not without Sin, that you may never have Peace Day nor
Night, until you humble your selves before the Lord, and Repent of all your
hard Speeches and Evil Deeds that you have spoken and done against him, and his
Servants, for the Truth's sake; that, if it be possible, you may be saved from
the Wrath that will certainly come upon you, if you Repent not; for that old
wicked Paper, full of Lies, as I made manifest before thee, and some of thy
Company in thy Study (to thy Shame) at Kidder minster, which thou writ'st in
the Pride of thy Heart against us in Oliver's Days, when thou wast lifted up;
Entitled, Reasons to Persuade, why no Reasonable Man can be a Quaker, amongst
the rest of that kind, which thou art not Humbled for to this Day, as I
perceive by this Book, do all stand upon Record before the Lord, the Righteous
Judge against thee; for in those thy doings, and all that kind against the
manifest and manifold Appearances of Christ in his People of every degree thou
have plainly declared thy self to be of Rabshekah's Spirit, who Railed against
the Living God, and his despised Israel; and of that Spirit that Jannes and
Jambres, who withstood Moses in his work, under God, of calling Israel out of
Egypt; and as the Lord Pleaded the Cause of his People in those Days, so will
he (as he has) for ever, plead our Innocent Cause against thee, and all his
Enemies; for of a truth the Lord God. Blessed for ever, has raised us up to be
his Servan^, Sons and Daughters, to bear his Name in Righteousness before the
Children of Men, in a pure Holy Witness against all the false Ways and Worships
of false Men; (so be it) and so it will be as hard for thee, and all, to kick
against the Pricks, as it was in Persecuting Saul, Acts 9. Read and consider,
lest the Day pass over you, as it did from the unbelieving Jews, who would not
receive God come and manifest in the Flesh in those days, to whom Christ said,
Ye will not come to me, that ye might have Life; but they would seek it in the
killing Letter, and as it were by the works of the Law, until midnight
Darkness, and utter Desolation came upon them. For, Oh how the Earth is filled
with Violence, because of such Doctrines and Teachings as this R. B. and such
Men brings forth; for behold how the Field of his Followers and Admirers are
all overgrown with Briers and Thorns, and noysom Weeds, as the proper Fruit of
their accursed Doctrines, as this R. B. himself sets down in his 48th
Direction, Page 236. of his Book, in these words, that is to say, Oh Friends,
how bad are we our selves? What Pride is in our Hearts? What Ignorance in our
Minds! So wanting are we even in the lowest Grace Humility, that we have scarce
enough to make us take patiently, as now we are giving out upon others; So
Selfish, as Dishonors our Profession, with the Brand of Contradictedness and
Partiality; so weak, that our Duties are liable to greater Censures than we can
bear; and our inward Graces weaker than our outward Duties [This must needs be
so in the Duties of the Graceless Minister thou pleads for] of such ungoverned
Thoughts, that Confusion and Tumult, instead of Order and Fruitful Improvement,
are the daily Temper and Employment of our Imaginations [This must needs be so
in you that Live in such Opposition to the Life of God manifest in his Children
at this Day] So Passionate, Impatient and Corrupt, that we are a trouble to our
selves and others, [This must needs proceed from such a corrupt Fountain] and a
Dishonor to the Gospel [it is so] and a hinderance to the Conversion of those
whom our holy Exemplary Lives should win to God: So strange to Heaven, as if we
had never well believed it [that is so, and therefore the Sheep of Christ deny
your Voice, you who are such Strangers to him] And to say all in one, so empty
of Love to our dear Redeemer, and to the God of Love, that our Hearts lie
vacant to entertain the Love of Worldly Vanities [ye Hypocrites, what have you
to do to name Christ, who are thus Unbelieving and Unredeemed] and to fly back
from the serious Thoughts of God, which should be our daily Work and Pleasure,
and fly from the Face of Death, as if we should be the worst, when nearest to
our God. Oh Hypocrites! how can you for shame call God yours, when you are thus
beyond measure bad, when Scripture says, He that says, he knows God, and
keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him, see 1 John
2.4. And Repent lest ye all perish together, Priests and People; for the Lord
is arisen to Judgment, and none can stand before him, which has unclean and
filthy Garments, as you are covered with, whom R. B. here puts on to be
Teachers of others, and yet remain your selves with him under such woeful Sins
and Condemnation, as is here spoken of: But surely if you did believe, and feel
inwardly that it were so bad with you, as here in Words is signified, you could
not go away so lightly with your Burdens, as you seem to do, but it would stop
your Mouths, and cause all your Pride and Glory to cease.

For consider but the first thing, that this R. B. would have you his principal
and best taught Hearers to confess, to wit, That Pride is in your very Hearts;
which, if you were sensible of, you would cease calling God your Father, and
Christ your Redeemer in this wretched State; for to you, in this State, it may
be truly said, as Christ said to those unbelieving Jews, Ye are of your Father
the Devil; for Pride of Heart is the chief part of his wicked Image: And
indeed, the main thing in this Day, which hinders you from coming to Christ
(the meek, pure, and lowly Lamb of God) is the Pride of your corrupt Hearts, as
Jeremiah said to the Jews, If you will not give Glory to God, before your Feet
stumble upon the dark Mountains, my Soul shall mourn in secret for your Pride:
It was the Pride of their Hearts, that was the ground of all their Evils, as it
is of yours; for from the Pride of your Hearts, comes your Ignorance of Mind,
and Partiality, and want of all good, to the dishonouring of your Profession,
and what not? So that it may easily be known who sent this R. B. who has
profited you nothing at all: For they have run, and I have not sent them, says
God, Therefore they cannot profit the People at all, Jer. 23. And that this R.
B. might make it fully appear under whose Banner he Fights, and for whose
Kingdom he Pleads, lest the rest of his Book should leave it doubtful: He is
now come forth in his proper shape of an Enemy of God, and good Men, that in
any measure are looking Heavenward, being burdened with the Fellowship of the
Wicked, and instead of helping the Lord's little Ones, against the great Power
of the Dragon in the Persecutors, he has hammered forth Weapons for the Wicked
Persecutors, and against the tenderhearted Ones of God, who are traveling to
the Holy Land, with Egypt left behind; as in that 55 Direction, so called, and
Page 254. of his said Book appears, where he has these words.

Little do many real Separates, who cry out against the Spirit of Persecution,
suspect that the same Spirit is in them; whence is Persecution, but from
thinking ill of others, and abhorring them, or not loving them? And do you not
so by those (says he) whom you causelessly separate from?

Answ. Here by way of Answer, before I set down any more of this naughtiness of
his, I cannot but take notice of this word (Causelessly) which here he puts in
to cover his Deceit; for though, at the first look, one might judge, he
intended only Causeless, or Unwarrantable, or Wicked Separation; yet, Reader,
thou must know, he intends as well the truly Tenderhearted People of England,
who in Conscience to God, and according to his Holy Commandment are come out,
and separated from the Fellowship of the Wicked in these Days, and so cannot
take part in the Offerings of the Dead as well as others; and at these, in a
special manner, he strikes, after his accustomed manner, through the sides of
others; for his main Envy is against the Living Members of Christ: And so
though those that separate without cause, may have the like mind to those that
separate from being different only in Form, but not in Heart from them; yet
such as are separated by the Power of God (as Paul was, whom God separated from
his Mothers Womb, calling him by his Grace) have not; for these stand out of
their own thoughts, and are in the Will, and Work, and Worship of God, whose
Worship is in Spirit and Truth: But to proceed, R. B. says further.

You will say, that though you think them not to be true Christians, yet you
love them as Men, and wish their good, and so will those say by you (says he)
whom you call your Persecutors; though they think you to be Proud and Humerous,
and Disobedient, yet they say, they love you as Men; and do but correct you, to
cure your Self willedness and Humor, and to do you good, and to preserve the
public Peace: They think you to be bad, and therefore Imprison you: You think
them to be bad, and therefore avoid Communion with them.

To this I cannot but by the way speak a word; Who is there that sees not the
very Spirit of the Egyptian Sorcerers acting in this very thing, to the
hardening of Pharaoh's Heart, lest he should let Israel go? But this R. B. goes
on in his Wickedness, and says, They (to wit, the Persecutors) think you so
bad, as to be unworthy of civil Liberty and Privileges: You think them so bad
as to be unworthy of Church Priviledges and Liberties: They think you unworthy
to be suffered in the Land perhaps; and you think them unworthy to be suffered
in the Churches; they cry against you, Away with them, they are Schismatical,
or Heretical; you cry against them, Away with them, they are Profane.

Answ. Now in answer to this, I say, That we who are of the World, Scornfully
called Quakers, have everlasting cause to Praise the Lord, who has redeemed
our Souls from among such devouring Wolves, as this R. B. and from such a
venomous Spirit as he is acted by; What Heathen upon Earth could strengthen the
Hands of the Persecutors against the Righteous more than this, by such
Comparisons or Arguments: What if this R. B. had lived in the Days of the
Apostles, and first Christians, when God separated them from the Congregation
of the unbelieving Jews; surely he could not but have been accounted famous,
and worthy of great Honor amongst those persecuting Jews, for such Comparisons
as these; for never an Argument he brings, for the Persecutors now, but it
would as much have fitted the Persecutors then against the Christians; yea, and
it would formerly, and does at this Day fit the Papists against the
Protestan^s, as well as the Persecuting, Profane, Superstitious Protestant
against them, whom God has drawn by his Mighty Power this Day from amongst
them. For seeing ^e sets but Thought against Thought, the Persecutor's Thoughts
of the Righteous, against the Persecuted Man's Thoughts of him: And seeing all
Thoughts are questionable, he leaves this ground for the Persecuting Jew to
reason, to excuse himself against the first Christians, according to his
Hellish Invention on this wise, viz.

You Christians who separate from us, are of as bad a Spirit as us Jews, whom
you call your Persecutors; for what is Persecution, but a thinking ill of
others, and abhorring them, or not loving them? And do you not so by us, whom
you causelessly separate from? And though you say, though you think us not as
Servants of God, yet you love us as Men, and wish our Good, so do we you; and
that which we do against you, which you call Persecution, is but a correcting
of you, to Cure your Self-willedness and Humor, and to do you good, and to
preserve the Public Peace: And though you think much, you Christians, that we
Imprison you, deny you Civil Liberties and Privileges, and count you unworthy
to be suffered in the Land; yet all this (by R. B's Doctrine) is far less than
you do to us Jews; for you think us so bad, that you avoid Communion with us,
and deny us Church-liberty and Privileges; yea, and think us unworthy to be
suffered in the Churches. Come R. B. Would this have been good and true
Reasoning by the Jews against the Christians, or by the Papists against the
Protestants? Then if it would not (as no sober Man can say it would) then for
Ever stop thy Mouth, and let shame cover thy Face, for Ever speaking any more
of things pertaining to Christian, or Christ's Religion; for an Enemy to Christ
and his People thou art herein manifest to be: And lest thou should want any
thing to make thee complete in Wickedness, thou go on, and in answer to an
Objection, which is to this purpose, That the Persecutors separated from, are
bad, and profane, and he that separates, says he, charges them truly; but he
is not Schismatical, or Heretical, but they accuse him falsely. To this I say,
this R. B. with a Whores Forehead, on the behalf of the Persecutors, answers
and says,

You (to wit, you that separate) say so, and they (to wit, the Persecutors) say
the same of you: They say you are Schismatical; but they are not Profane: Now
how shall a stander-by know, which of you are in the right? doubtless by the
Witnesses and Evidences, [saith he] they try you in some Court, or before some
Magistrate, before they punish you, [saith he] you never try them, nor hear
them speak for themselves; nor examine any Witness publicly against them; nor
allow them any Church-Justice; but avoid their Communion upon Reports, or
pretense of private Knowledge: They judge you Personally, one by one, you
condemn whole Parishes in the lump unheard: They condemn you, as for a positive
Crime, but you condemn them, without charging any one Crime upon them, etc. To
which I answer for the Lord and his Truth, in this Day of Israel's Trouble and
Trials, and say,

The Lord rebuke thee, thou Lying Spirit, in this R. B. Was there ever heard
such Notorious Falsehoods and Abominations come from one professing the Gospel,
yea, professing himself to be a Minister of the Gospel, yea, and taking upon
him to be a Teacher of the Teachers, as is here from this R. B? Oh! the Envy,
Oh! the Malice, the deeprooted Iniquity of this Man against them that depart
from Iniquity in these Islands, and cannot join with the People of this wicked
World, in their Bloody Offerings: Oh! the Patience and Long-suffering of God
toward such, though they continue long in their Wickedness; but the Lord will
certainly plead with thee, O R. B. and all his Adversaries, for your great Envy
to his People and Work in these Days: But come let us see again, if these Lies
of R. B.'s, would not have suited as well for the Persecuting Jews against the
first Christians, or the Persecuting Papists against the Protestants, as it
does for the Persecutors in these Days against those, that in Obedience to God
are separated from them?

For what if Tertullus, or any Jewish Lying Orator had stood up in behalf of
the Jews against the Christians, and said, The Jews try you in some Court, or
before some Magistrate, before they punish you; but you Christians never try
them, nor hear them speak for themselves, nor examine any VVitnesses publicly
against them, nor allow them any Church-Justice, but avoid their Communion upon
report, or pretense of private Knowledge, and so condemn them by the lump; yea,
a whole Nation together? etc. And so if the Papist against the Protestants had
used the like reasoning, would it have been any thing but gross Untruth and
Falsehood in either of their Mouths? Or were either the first Christians, or
first Protestants, any more to be blamed for their Separation, because of such
Liars? Nay, nay, neither are the People of God in these Days any worse to be
thought of for separating from the Wicked, notwithstanding all these gross Lies
of R. B. or any of his Spirit; I say, they are most gross Lies, if they be said
of us the People of God, whom they World in Scorn calls Quakers, that we have
not Tried them, etc. For we have Tried them, and heard them often what they can
say for themselves, and we have by the Spirit of the Lord found them wanting of
the Life and Power of Godliness, like the Heathen, who profess not Christ, and
public Witnesses there are of it, not only their own Works which are daily
manifest in the Face of the Sun, but also their own Words and Confessions when
they meet to Worship; for they say, they have left undone what God commands,
and done what he forbids, and so have no Spiritual Health in them; which
signifies plainly, they have denied Christ come in the Flesh; (for whosoever
receives him, receives God's Saving Health, and are a saved People, spiritually
healthful) they have condemned themselves by their Unbelief and evil Deeds from
the Commonwealth and Inheritance of Israel: And so not only the Spirit of the
Lord in us, but even the Witness of God in their own Consciences charges not
only one, but even many great and grievous Crimes upon them. And so R. B. with
all his Lies, and evil Inventions, (if he Repent not) is for the Lake; and if
ever he be saved, it must be through fiery terrible Judgment, which will
consume the Adversary: For, Oh! how has Satan blinded his Eye, that he should
thus rise up against the People and Work of God in these Days to his hurt? And
when it is objected, that of all Men living, no Man think that a Persecutor is
godly, and fit for Church Communion, he does not like a Christian confess to
the Truth thereof, but after his accustomed manner, Heathen-like, he invents
his sorry shifts to avoid the force of the Truth, by saying, Did all the
Ministers and Common People persecute you? And then asking a Question
concerning the doings of the Soldiers under Oliver, and the like, which are
mere shifts; For what is the doings of any Men, to make void the Truth by it?
For whatsoever any in their Ignorance of the Truth, have done against the
Truth, serves nothing to the making void of this, to wit, That a Persecutor of
the Godly, is not godly, nor fit for Church Communion; but instead of giving
Glory to God, by Confessing to Truth, this R. B. after he has wearied himself
with his words, of what was done in Oliver's time, he sums up his Devilish
Doctrine of pleading for the Persecutors, and against those whom God has
separated from them, (saying to the same wicked purpose as before) It is but
one and the same Sin in Persecutors and the Separates, which causes the one to
smite their Brethren, and the other to Excommunicate them;
the one to cast them into Prison as Schismatics, and the other to cast them
out of the Church as Profane, etc. And so for this thy summing up and
concluding, God has concluded thee with the wicked Persecutors, whom the
Judgment of his great Day will meet. But hold, O! R. B. thou that art thus hot,
and without all fear in pleading for the Devil's Kingdom: I say, when the Lord
bids us, and we obey him in separating from the Wicked; is this all one with
the Sin of Persecution? Oh thou Unjust Man! the Lord will be terrible to thee
in the Day of his Wrath, which is nigh at hand to come upon thee, (if thou
repent not) for all thy Villainy against him, and for all thy daubing deceitful
words, in the beginning and end of this Direction; the Lord sees thee to be a
Fighter against him, and thy Reward will be according to thy Works, as he has
said, and all the Rocks and Mountains of the Wicked World, for whom thou
pleadest, shall not hide thee from his stroke: As testifies the good Spirit of
the Lord Jesus, in his Servant,

Thomas Tailor.

Some more of the strange Sayings of this Richard Baxter in his Book.
Page 219. GODLY Men are much liker to be in the right, than Ungodly Men.

Answ. This shows what a Stranger he is to the certainty of Godliness.

Page 220. Sometimes the worser sort of Men may hold fast the Truth.

Answ. This is a gross Lie; for the bad cannot hold fast the good, unless in
Prison.

If any better Persons deny Infant Baptism, the worser Sort of People would be
all against them, and yet be in the right.

Answ. Thus Sprinkling of Infants, for which there is no Scripture, must needs
be wrong whosoever hold it; and the Corruption of it appears so much the more,
because the worser Sort are so much for it.

Many do take a Form of Prayer, or Liturgy, to be unlawful, merely because the
most of the worser Sort are for it.

Answ. If thy Hearers be so b^dly-taught, yet those that are taught of God,
forb^ar such things as they know he requires not of them, but what Form, or
Liturgy is that, which the most of the worser Sort of the People are for, is it
not that which speaks Peace to the Wicked, by telling them they were
Regenerated by sprinkling a little Water on their Faces, or the like, when
Infants? And that they shall be saved, though they continue in Sin all their
Lives long: But the Hour comes, and now is, that neither in the invented Forms
of the Hypocrite's long Prayers, nor in the short invented Forms and Liturgies
of the Proph^ne, but in Spirit and Truth, as the Lord Jesus enables them, will
God be worshipped, and served by his People; for the Day is dawned, and the
Shadows fly away; and as the Day does more and more arise in its Glory, will
all the things of vain Men pass away.

Page 221. The sum of his 44th Directions, by his own setting down, runs thus,

Ye take the Examples of Religious Men, to be one of your most Perilous
Temptations; and therefore labor to discover, especially what are the Sins of
Professors, in the Age that you live in, that you may especially watch and
fortify your Souls against them: [And adds] That sometimes the strictest Sort
run in a Gang after one Opinion, and sometimes after another.

Answ. Here I Appeal to that of God in all that fear his Name, and are alive to
Truth, whether this do not wholly tend to the hardening of Pharaoh's Heart,
against the People of God in these Days, who are in the Truth it self, and not
in Opinions, as the Hypocrites are? For though such as are begotten into Forms
of Religion (without the Truth) by the Hirelings, do never cease from erring,
yet the truly Religious, who are begotten to God by Christ, walk in the Way
undefiled, which the Fools, who are upright in Heart cannot err in.

But this his telling of running in a Gang, is a filthy and reproachful Speech,
wholly of Ashdod, and the Lord will judge thee, O Enemy! for thy work R. B. and
therefore let all that fear God, take heed of this Man's Soul-defiling, and
Heart-hardning Doctrine; for out of the dark, and wicked Kingdom, wherein he
and all such live, is the Lord calling his People.

And to conclude, If any would see this Harlot in its fine Dress, and the
Crooked Serpent in its glittering Color on the Head which must be bruised, and
yet with his Sting in his Tail, which is full of Venom, let them consider that
44th Direction, which runs thus,

Desire the highest Degree of Holiness, and to be free from the Corruptions of
the Times, but ^ffect not to be old, and singular, from ordinary Christians in
lawful things; for instance, If it were to go in a meaner Garb than others, and
as the Quakers, not to put off the Hat; or with the Friars, to go barefoot, or
in a distinguishing Habit, that all Men may see, and say, This is a singular
Person in Religion; it is easy to see how this gratifieth Pride.

Answ. But now that the Lord is arisen according to his Promise, Isa. 27.1.
which says, In that Day the Lord with his sore, and great, and strong Sword,
shall punish Leviathan the piercing Serpent, even Leviathan that crocked
Serpent, and he shall slay the Dragon that is in the Sea. Therefore, I say, it
is, that the Dragon is so wrathful to pour forth his Floods of Persecution
after the Heavenly Woman, and her Man child: And there fore it is, that the
Crooked Serpent in such Men (as this is) is so at work, every way seeking with
their Cunning and Crafty Deceitful Doctrines, to pierce the Heart, the Life of
Truth, by their Darts; and so with their fair colorable words, as the Apostle
speaks, to deceive the Hearts of the Simple and Ignorant People, but the Lord
takes the Wilely in their own Craftiness, and the Pit they dig for others,
themselves fall into, and the Lord's Spiritual Sword of Truth pierces through
all their Lives; and Dead in the great Sea and Puddle of their own Iniquities
before the Lord, and his Saints, this Day they lie* Glory to his Name, the
Mighty God over all, who is worthy.

For what more glistering and fair-seeming words can the Serpent give, than to
say, Desire the highest Degree of Holiness, and to be free from the Corruptions
of the Time: But that this R. B. intends no such thing, no, nor believes that
any shall ever attain to any such thing, whilst on the Earth, is most manifest
by the whole current of his Doctrine; for not only in his former Books, where
he has publicly declared, That sinless Perfection is the Doctrine of the
Devil, hatched in Hell, etc. But even in this very Book, it fully appears what
an Enemy he is, not only to the highest degree, but even to Holiness it self,
where amongst his other Unholy Doctrines he says, as is before mentioned, from
Page 195. That there is no Man alive, that worsh^ppeth God without some sin,
(and adds) Do you ever pray your selves in secret, or in your Families without
sin? And a better State than this he does not believe, that any shall here come
unto; and for being free from the Corruption of the Times; what have thou to
do, O R. B! to talk of this, who art one with the Corrupt, pleading for
Conformity, even with the Persecutors of Godliness it self? Yea, seeking to
make such, as good and excuseable before the Lord in their Persecutions of the
Godly, as the Godly themselves are, who in Obedience to God do separate from
them: What! Is Praying to God with sin in your Hearts, the highest Degree of
your Godliness? Oh Hypocrites! Yea, it is: And is your Conforming to the
Worship-Actions of the Persecutors, who take God's Name in vain, when ever they
mention it in that State, no Corruption? And not only so, but your Oneness with
the Times in many of their Corrupt Customs of daily Conversation, as every Eye
sees, no Corruptions? But above all, Corruption is gone forth over all the
Land, even from the Teachers, such as this R. B. is, who in words can tell
others of forsaking it; for what greater Corruption, than for the Priests to
love to be called of Men Masters, and to Preach for Hire, and Divine for Money,
and to cry, Peace, Peace to the Wicked; especially such as put into their
Mouths: But if any put not into their Mouths, then they prepare War against
them, as both in Oliver's time, and since, they have done, to the impoverishing
and spoiling them that fear God of their Goods, and imprisoning several to
Death upon the same account: What would Christ, ( Mat. 23.) and the Prophets,
Jeremiah, and Isaiah, and Micah, and the rest, have cried so vehemently against
such things, if they had not been grievous Corruptions of the Times? See Jer.
5.30, 31. Isa. 56. Micah 3.5, etc. And so when the Priests are Proud, and
Covetous, and Cruel; what can their Followers be, but like them? It is not the
Priests telling People, they must desire after Holiness, and forsake the
Corruptions of the Times, that will do any good, so long as the Teachers
themselves live in Unholiness and Corruptions, and smite with the Fist of
Wickedness; for does not that in the Conscience say to such? Thou that teach
another; why do not thou teach thy self: But they have run, and God has not
sent them, therefore (they are such Briars, and Thistles, and) cannot profit
the People at all, Jer. 23. And they say to every one that walks after the
Imaginations of their evil Hearts, ye shall have Peace: But for these things,
the Lord has, and yet will severely judge them, Head and Tail, Root and
Branch, in his great Day.

And now to that which he says to his Disciples; Be not odd and singular from
ordinary Christians in lawful things, if it be to go in a meaner Garb than
others, or not to put off the Hat, or to go barefoot, or in a distinguishing
Habit, this gratifieth Pride.

Answ. To this I may say, Woe be to them that call Evil Good, and Good Evil,
that account keeping on the Hat in simplicity of Heart to God, as we do our
other Garments, without Contempt to any; I say, that account and call this
Evil, and yet account putting off the Hat, in Honor to Proud Flesh, Good; the
Apostle James says, He that has respect to Persons commits Sin, and is
convinced of the Law as a Transgressor, Jam. 2.9. But R.B. in this his pleading
for the Hat, says [it is lawful] but to keep Christ's Commands, in having
respect to Christ, and not to the Persons of Men [oddness and singularity]
though this Man, and his Fellows, condemn us for this, yet Christ justifies us,
and so we have Peace with God: And for going in a meaner Garb than others;
whosoever he intends by this, we know that he, and all such Proud Masterly
Teachers, are far enough from this, for they are quite out in the other
Extreme; for if you will find Pride and Prodigality, who more Notorious in the
Land than the Priests and their Families, who live in Pride, Idleness, Fullness
of Bread, and the poor People see it, though they are forced to labor and
drudge for them, as the Israelites in Egypt: And so they spend their Money, for
that which is not Bread, and their Labors, for that which satisfies not their
Souls, as the Prophet of Old complained; and that which is most sad, they must
do it by force; for if the People do see them to be totally void of Grace in
their Lives, yet according to R. B's Doctrine, they must not take them for no
Ministers, however they must be at cost with them, to maintain them in their
Pride and Idleness, or else look for a Prison, or spoiling of their Goods, or
the like; but the Lord has shaken his Hand at such dishonest Gain. But as for
a distinguishing Habit, which this R. B. Charges upon the Friars; how is it
that he could not see himself, and his Brethren, in their distinguishing Habits
of Black Gowns, Black Cloths, Tippets, Hoods, Surplices, and the like? Oh!
these Unjust Men, who are all Eye abroad, and none at home; but this was ever
the Nature of such as were out of Christ's Doctrine. Also whereas this R. B. by
these words, [That all may see and say, this is a singular Person in Religion]
does endeavor to make People believe, that, our not putting off our Hats,
(which we do merely in Obedience to God, who commands us not to honor proud
Flesh) is done for a selfish End, and in our own Wills, to get a Name, is such
a piece of Haughtiness and Foolishness in him, that nothing but mere Envy could
have taught him such a piece of Unreasonableness; for who is there that sees
not the contrary Effect to come of our not putting off our Hat, to what R. B.
here sets down? For it is so far from getting us a Name of being Religious
amongst Men, that they do as it were with one Mouth cry out against us,
unmannerly Fellows, and the like, for it: And truly, but that the pure Fear of
God strengthens us, it were impossible for us to bear the Reproaches, Finings,
and Beatings, and daily Cross that attends this very same thing; so that to
cross proud Flesh in this one thing, exposes the poor Creature to great Trials
in these degenerate Days, even amongst them that profess Christ, (who made
himself of no Reputation in this World) from whom one might expect better
usage, for so harmless a thing: But as Christ, and his Apostles, and Disciples,
found no better usage amongst the professing Jews of those Days, for doing the
Will of God: So we are even made content to undergo all things for the Truth's
sake from our own Countrymen and Professors in these Days, even from all who
profess the Letter, and want the Life and Virtue of what they do profess: And
praised be God for Ever, who through his Grace gives our Souls the Victory; but
as for this R. B. and his Followers, who are so full of that earthly fallen
Wisdom, which receives Honor of Men, and judges of things according to the
Flesh; I say, for them to seek God's Honor, and glorify him in such low
contemptible things, as this is, is at present far from them; but to put off
the Hat in Honor to proud Flesh, and to love g^eetings in the Markets, and to
go in long Robes, as the Old Pharisees did, and to be called of Men Master, and
the like, which gets Praise and Applause of the World, though Christ forbid it
never so much, I say, these things they like better, the more is the pity; see
Mat. 23. and so it appears who are in the Selfishness, Pride and Hypocrisy,
and who are not; and so is the Scripture fulfilled, which says, In that Day it
shall be seen, who are they that fear God, and who not; Glory to God for his
unspeakable Gift, and not unto us, but to thy Name be the Praise, O Lord.

What would this R. B. (if he had been in those Days) have said of Christ, of
whom it was said, That he taught the Way of God truly, and regarded not the
Persons of Men, (then surely he put not off a Hat in Honor to proud Flesh, as
ye do) I say, would not this Man have called him some odd Conceited, Singular,
Proud Fellow, like as his Predecessors the Pharisees of those Days (who
received Honor one of another) did? No question but he would; for if he do
thus to us his Servants, what would he have done to him our Lord and Master?
But happy are all they in this Day, who choose rather to suffer the Affliction
and Reproach with Christ and his People, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin,
which are but for a Season. So be it.

Also because this R. B. in Page 27. of his Preface says, That People are far
more averse (that is, contrary or against) to Communion or Concord with the
Parish Churches, than the Conforming Ministers are; and yet he seems in his
Epistle to Bryan's Book, to be unwilling that People should think he has
Conformed, though he has pleaded for it, and against Separating from the
Parish Assemblies and Worships, as now managed: And also seeing that Bryan, as
he says, is, or was silenced for Nonconformity himself, I desire all that
reads these Lines, to take notice of what a strange, uneven and unrighteous
Spirit these Men are of, in their creeping, and twisting, and twining to and
fro; yet the Eye of the Lord, and his Blessed Spirit in his Children this Day
does easily spy them out: Sometimes they are all for Conformity, and against
Separation by any means, and plead the Common-Prayer-Peoples Cause with all
their might* as it were; and yet presently they are all on a fire against any
that shall think they are Conformists: Nay, says R. B. How can any judge him to
be a Conformist, who is silenced for Nonconformity? But if this Man, (sometime
a Head to those called Presbyterians at and about Kidderminster) and Bryan of
the same Nature, sometimes a Teacher at Coventry, be not Conformed, or be not
yet Conformists, as well as others of their Brethren, who have long since
swallowed down, the Old Common Prayer Service, as they called it, which they
rejected in Oliver's time, because it hindered them then from devouring the
Peoples Labors; and seeing they plead so shamelesly for it now; and also
seeing this R. B. in express words confesses, That they are not so much
against Conformity with the Common Prayer Service, as the People are; What may
be the Reason of this strange thing, to wit, That they do not in all things
conform, in Deed and Practice, as well as in words, save only, as is plain to
me, this; because they judge that their Admirers are not yet sufficiently
wearied out with keeping off, nor sufficiently molded and fitted in their
Minds for coming in; and therefore they have lingered, and may yet linger a
while longer before they do openly, and before all appear Conformists,
desiring, if possible, to see the People in before them; for these Two Chief
Presbyterian Priests, so called, are already in the Parish Stuff, in their
Judgment, and with their Minds and Hearts already, or at least would be thought
so to be by the wicked World, of whom they are Lovers: Yet they see not how to
vend their flattering Doctrines, if their Admirers Conform not, and come not in
with them, or rather be not in the Pit before them; so weak and wretched a
thing is Man, yea, the best-seeming of the Sons of Men, out of the Truth; Oh!
how truly fulfilled by these Men, are those words of the Apostle, where he
speaking of the False, Hypocritical, Ontside Teachers of that Time, says, With
good Words, and fair Speeches, they deceive the Hearts of the Simple? Therefore
ever-praised be Christ, who has opened our Eyes to see, and persuaded our
Hearts, to avoid such Wolves in Sheeps clothing, as this R B. and Bryan are;
for, what finer and higher Talk, or Skin, or Clothing, can the Wolf get, than
to make Sermons of dwelling with God, and the like, as this Bryan does? When
it is manifest, he neither knows God, nor his Way, nor his Dewlling Place; but
is inwardly ravened, from that Good and Blessed Spirit of Truth and Honesty
which should commend him to God. The Wolves Nature in R. B. is already in this
Writing set down and manifest; and now I come in the Light of the Lord, to make
manifest some of his Brother Bryan's. And first shall set down that Blasphemous
Passage of his, in p. 291, and 292. of his sixth Sermon, in that Book of his,
Entitled, Dwelling with God, etc. where he says, I am not ignorant, that many
of you, whose Habitation, I question not but the Land is; who have your
Habitation in several Countries of this King dom, have drunk a deep Prejudice,
against all the Parochial Congregations, whereof you are Legal Members, and
where all you were Baptized, and thereby were made the Members of Christ, the
Children of God, and Heirs of his Kingdom: I fear some of you will startle at
these Expressions, found in the Common Prayer; but if you consult the Holy
Scriptures, you will find them warranted in a Sacramental Senon; and your
Prejudice has so far wrought upon you, that you have forsaken the assembling
of your selves together with your Neighbors, in the public Meeting-places.
Thus far this Bryan.

Answ. But ever praised be the Lord, who has delivered us from the Mouths of
such manifest Wolves as these are, who in times past were hidden, but are now
fully seen, (who, though his Brother R. B. says, his Mouth was stopped, or
silenced for not Conforming, yet here it seems it is wide open still, according
to his and their Custom, to manifest his Folly and wicked inside against the
Truth, and for Deceit) that the Simple-hearted might for ever be warned from
following such any more; for who would have thought, that ever (him called) Dr.
Bryan of Coventry, and Richard (called Mr.) Baxter of Kidderminster, who were
so promoted in Oliver's time, for Conformity to Oliver's Laws and Religion, in
opposition to the Prelates, and their Common Prayers, should now, with a little
blast of Men's Breath, be silenced (as R. B's Epistle to his Book says) for a
time, and so shattered and confound^d with the Fall, that when they awaked, and
got a little Breath, that they should, for fear of Men, be so transformed into
other shapes, as not to be ashamed to get into their Mouths blasphemous words
[of making People Members of Christ, Children of God, and Heirs of his Kingdom]
by having a little Water sprinkled on their Faces by a Manmade Priest, when
they were Infants, and understood nothing; which passage is contrary to the
Scriptures of Truth, as all sober minded People may well understand; yea, and
this Bryan himself knows in his own Conscience, that they are not sound words,
though he most notoriously and falsely says, to please the present Evil World
[with all] that the Holy Scriptures warrant them in a Sacramental Sense. But I
desire that all People, who fear the Lord, would take heed of such dangerous
Heresies; for the Scriptures of Truth do not allow of Falsehood in any Sense at
all; for it is absolutely false in the sight of God, and to all good Men, that
Infants, by any such outward Sprinkling or doing (as they call Baptism) are
made the Children of God, Members of Christ, Heirs of his Kingdom; seeing the
Scripture now here commands any such thing, but says, That except People be
born from above, they cannot see the Kingdom of God: But the Day is dawned,
that makes all things manifest, Praises to God: And therefore People consider
what a Wretchedness those are under, who follow such blind Guides, as turn and
change with every Time, and can be any thing or nothing in appearance, so that
they can but keep up their Name amongst Men. What, was was the Common Prayers,
and such things, so odious a thing in the Eyes of these Priests in Oliver's
Time? And is it now, yea the worst part of it, become such an Idol in their
Eyes, as that those that dwell in God, must be condemned of deep Prejudice for
not Consormity to it? What, will not that Spirit that climbs over the Door, and
never was sent of God to preach the Gospel, say, or unsay, so as it can but
please the present Times? But Oh thou Blasphemous Bryan, the Accuser of the
Brethren; Can those that dwell with God, deny to conform to that Worship or
Service which is of God? And therefore it is safely and truly concluded, that
the Service thou pleads for, is not of God, because for Conscience to God, with
whom they dwell, they cannot conform to it: But Oh how the Serpent creeps upon
his Belly to do mischief, by seeking to persuade the Conscientious People, That
by their not joining with the Parish-Worships and Assemblies, they open their
Mouths wide, to cast a Scandal upon their Persons, as Profane, and upon the
strict Profession of walking precisely according to the written Word, which
they think (says this Bryan, in that P. 292. of his Book) gives you no warrant
for your Separation, etc. And then down upon his Belly he goes, saying, My
humble and earnest Request to you is, to lay aside your Prejudice, and examine
by the good Word, whether your Separation be not sinful.

Answ. To which I answer in the Word of the Lord, Blessed for ever, that we,
who for the Work and Word of the Lord in our Hearts and Mouths, are by the
sinful Priests of England, and elsewhere, disdained, and scornfully called
Quakers, are not separated from them because of any Prejudice, or the like,
against them; but God, who by his Everlasting Light of Truth, has showed us
the Evil of their Doings, and of our own, when we worshipped we knew not what
amongst them; he, I say, has separated us from them, and joined us to himself
in Christ Jesus, where, with him, our Dwelling is indeed, (though Bryan think
not so) praised be the Name of our most Holy Lord God for evermore. And so we
are not yet to examine, whether our Separation be sinful, or nay; for that is
done, and we do know it to be good, according to the good Word from the
beginning, most certainly. And so the Offense which the Parish-worshippers
take, is Offense without all Canse on our parts given; and so it is no other,
than the Unbelievers took in all Generations, against them that feared God; as
the Jews were offended at Christ and his Apostles, yea, and all Christians in
those days, because they could not worship with their Neighbors in their
Superstitions, as this Bryan would have us; and not only so, but they killed
Christ and his Apostles, and grievously persecuted the Christians for their
Separation then, as they do us at this day; and so the Reproach of Christ, is
to us great Riches, and the Persecutors God will examine and judge: And as
Moses did choose rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to
enjoy Egypt's Glory for a Season, so B^essed are all, that with us are
persuaded in their Hearts, to follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, not heeding
what the Wicked say or judge of them; but as the Apostle exhorts, looking at
Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy that was set before
him, endured the Cross, and despised the Shame; and so through all the Trials
and Persecutions of this World, enter into God's Glory, where none can come to
make afraid.

But if there be any, who through Prejudice (as this Bryan speaks) and not by
the Spirit of the Lord, are separated from the Parish-Worship; it is necessary
for such to see to themselves, and consider, lest their Return be as Shameful,
as their Separation was Sinful, (like this Bryan and R. B) who, it seems, all
this while, have been no real and true Separatists to God; but have been only
in the Self separation according to the Will and Force of Times: For though the
poor deceived Followers of such Men, be at present more averse from joining
with the Superstitions of the Times, than your Hearers are (as R. B. says) yet
if you grow not out of their rotten Root, into the Root Christ Jesus, you will
be weary and faint in your Way before the end: But let all know, that these
Self-separatists, who have not their Birth of God, are not real Dwellers with
God; though this Bryan, it is like, had an Eye especially to such in his words,
and to whom, it is like, in a special manner he applies his fawning flattering
Words and Desires: But what is the Reason, may we say again, that these
Nonconforming Ministers, by R. B's report, are not so much against the Parish
Way of Worship, as now managed, as their Hearers are, save only their gross
Hypocrisy, and self-seeking Nature, and double Mind, as was hinted before? For
they have carried the People in hand, that they would suffer; yea, what would
they not suffer, rather than Conform: And now behold how this Teacher of
Teachers (R. B.) has bewrayed their Nakedness: O People, People, who have been
long deceived by such double-minded ones (who are unstable in all their Ways)
that you would turn your Minds from them, to the true Light of Jesus Christ in
your Conscience, that with it you might first see your selves, and so growing
up in that true Light, you might come to see Jesus Christ, who never fell, nor
never changes, to be your Teacher and Minister; and so come from off the
Barren Mountains, whether these, and the like, deceitful Men ( R. B. and Bryan)
have led you, and left you; for now is the Lord making unto all People a Feast
of Fat things, of Wine on the Lees well refined, ever praised be his Name for
it: And now, if after all the Light that the Lord has set up in this day, you
will not be warned to come into the Liberty of the Sons of God, and so accept
of God's Freedom in his Son freely tendered you; what remains? But if you be
fastened more in the Pit of Darkness with all Unbelievers, it is just.

But whereas this R. B. tells of his Brother Bryan's silencing formerly for not
Conforming, it had been well for him that he had been silent still, rather than
have opened his Mouth thus to the dishonor of God, and strengthening Deceit in
the Deceitful, and so to the Shame and Confusion of his own Face; and all his
raking up something here and there, as he could get hold of it in his dark
Imaginations, for Parish-conformity, it is so nothing to the purpose, and so
well seen to be so, by all that are not wilfully blind, that it serves only to
discover his own Nakedness, and rotten in side, as not only by what has been
already said, but by what also now follows does further appear, as in Page 295
is set down, where he faith,

It is no sufficient Warrant to separate from a Church, because it is guilty of
such Sins and Corruptions as deserves God should forsake, and for which he has
threatened in his Word, that he will forsake it. (Here by the way take notice,
that this Bryan here considered not, that he fully makes manifest the
Hypocrisy of his Brother R. B. who talks of his Hearers forsaking the
Corruptions of the Times, and yet is one with this Bryan, in persuading them to
join with such a Body, as is so corrupt that deserves that God should, yea, and
has threatened that he will forsake them.) But to go on, Bryan says, Yet
People should not forsake that bad Company, till it appear that God has put in
execution that which he justly threatened, we ought to acknowledge it, and
receive it as his House, and not refuse to dwell with him in it, for shall Man
be Holier than God, and hate C^rruption more than he? And we may not
communicate with it, by consenting to any Corruptions that are or shall be
detected, or proved to be in it.

Answ. To which strange Doctrine of this Bryan, to which R. B. in his Epistle
says, Amen; I say, in the first place, it is absolute Blasphemy against the
Holy Name and Nature of God, either to say, or imagine, that God dwells with
such a People as are guilty of such Sins and Corruptions, as this Bryan here
speaks of; and how far unlike this Bryan's Spirit is, to the Spirit of the
Prophets, who said, God is of purer Eyes, than to behold Iniquity; and your
Sins have separated betwixt you and your God: And the Apostle says expressly,
That those that would have God to dwell in them (and it is certain God dwells
with none, but as he dwells in them) they must be separated, and touch no
unclean thing, 2 Cor 6.16, 17, 18. And does the Lord command us to come out
from amongst the Unclean? And will he himself, the Holy One of Israel, dwell
with the Unclean, yea, with such as are guilty of such Sins and Corruptions, as
deserve that God should forsake them for them; yea, for which God has
threatened in his Word, that he will forsake them? And certainly there can be no
Way, nor Means, to stay or hinder the Execution of God's Judgments threatened
and deserved, but by forsaking those Sins and Corruptions which such People are
guilty of, which the People of England (that this Bryan) would have us, and
others, to join with, are far from; for, O England, England, thou and thy
Parishes are polluted that will not come to Christ, that they might have Life;
but persecutes them (with unreasonableness, and cruel Usages) that the Lord
has raised up, to forewarn thee of his Judgments: And so thy House being
destitute of God's Fear and Goodness, we are not more Holy than God, nor hate
Corruption more than he, in our separating from thee, as this wicked Man Bryan
would have thee falsely believe; but in our separating from thee, we do the
Lord's Command, and follow his blessed Example; and so we cannot receive that
for God's House, which he dwells not in: And so thou art a False Witness, O
Bryan, and a Blasphemer of God and his Tabernacle; for the Temple and
Tebernacle of God is Holy; which Temple are his Holy Members and Body the True
Church; not Babylon, the False, Sinful and Corrupted Church, which R. B. and
Bryan pleads for: And if any defile the Temple of God, says the Apostle, him
will God (not call his House, and Dewlling Place, but) destroy, 1 Cor. 3.17.

Again, How shall this gross Contradiction, which this twisting twining Serpent
makes, be salved? For this Bryan one while says, It Is to be Holier than God, to
separate from such a sinful corrupt Sort, as deserves God's Judgments: And yet
with the same Moutli says, We may not Communicate with them, by consenting to
any Corruptions that are, or shall be detected, or proved to be in such a
People. What, join with a manifest Corrupted Body, whose very Prayers (by their
own Confession) are not without Sin, and not so much as consent to any of their
Corruptions? What a Joining is this, when it must not be a Joining; no, not so
much as in the Consent: What gross dark Contradiction is here (and now to bring
this a little home to the business of England) a Doctor (so called) and Pleader
for Conformity, and Communion with the Parish worshippers of England, which are
detected, and manifestly proved; yea, and not only by their words, but by their
own Confession also, to be miserable Offenders against God; yea, so guilty, and
full of Sins and Corruptions, from the Crown of the Head, to the Soles of their
Feet, as that they have no Health nor Soundness at all in them, would have us
conform to them; and yet he says, We may not communicate with them, by
consenting to any of their proved Corruptions. Then I say, If we may not have
Fellowship with them in their Corruptions, no, not so much as by consent; then
we must not have Fellowship with them at all, for they and their Corruptions
are one; for says Christ, Ye are of your Father the Devil, for his Works ye
will do. But says Bryan, Christ was a Member of this Church (as he calls it)
of those wicked Jews; because he was Circumcised, and frequented the Temple,
and eat the Passover; than which Saying of this Bryan, nothing can be more
False; for what, though Christ was Circumcised, and went sometimes into the
Temple, and eat the Passover, which had been Ordinances of God for their time,
and were Shadows of good Things to come; What is that to prove Christ a Member
of that Body, whose House was left unto them desolate, and who were headed by
the Devil, which at length put them on to murder him? O fad, that ever People
in their love of the World should be so blind! But what is Christ's conforming
to the Shadows of the Law, which God gave for that time, and by him to be
fulfilled, and so ended, to your requiring us to conform to you in that, or
those Things which God never ordained? as Sprinkling of Infants; and not only
so, but teaching for Doctrine, That you make them thereby the Children of God,
Members of Christ, and Heirs of his Kingdom; and also your giving David's
Psalms in Rhyme and Meeter, to the wicked World, to sing to God's dishonor:
And to hear a proud Man, and covetous Man (who is an Idolater) Preach and Pray,
whom God never sent; yea, and to maintain him in his Sins, contrary to all
Reason and Religion; also how can we conform to you in your Corruptions of
respecting Persons, and of having Men's Persons in Admiration because of
Advantage? Contrary to the express Doctrine of the Apostle, which says, James
2.1, etc. Have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of Glory, with
respect of Persons: Yea, and plead for their Transgressions: How can we Conform
to such, as under the Name of Christians, do live manifestly in the Sins of the
Heathen; as Fornication, Covetousness, Idolatry, Drunkenness, and are Railers,
and Extertioners, and lovers of Pleasures more than lovers of God: from whom
the Apostle bids us turn away? 2 Timothy 3. and 1 Cor. 5 11, etc. with whom he
forbids us to eat; and yet with such, both R. B. and Bryan, for all their
former seeming hypocritical Zeal, would now have us to Communicate, yet not so
much as consent to their Corruptions, neither as their daubing contradicting
Doctrine seems willing to have. Then I say, We must neither have Fellowship
with them in their Worship-actions, (as R. B. calls them) nor in their ordinary
Conversation, for all is Corrupt: For what greater Assent or Consent can we
give, than by joining with them, or practicing such things openly: But it is
better to obey God than Man, both in this and all things; and as the Lord said
to Jeremiah, so in this case has he said to us: Let them return to thee, but
return not thou to them; for what Fellowship has Light with Darkness, or the
Temple of God with Idols?

And now I come a little to set before you poor People, who have been deceived
by such Men as this R. B. and Bryan are, something of the Answer they give to
the Arguments of the zealous People of old (called Brownists) who could not for
Conscience Sake conform to their Common-Brayer, etc. Their Objection says
Bryan, in Page 297 of his Book was this, to wit,

That the People of England were never rightly called; for in the beginning of
the Queen's ( to wit, Elizabeth 's) Reign, they were by her Command and
Proclamation, compelled to embrace the Protestant Religion, and to conform to
God's Worship; whereas in the New Testament we have no Example of People
compelled to the Service of God: Christ commanding Fisher men to convert Souls
by Preaching, not Princes to make Disciples by Compulsion; therefore the Church
of Christ ( England he should have said; for who ever denied the Church of
Christ) had no right Constitution?

But now see the wretched Answer of this Bryan to the said Objection of the old
Non-conformists.

If we speak (says he) of a Church first planted; the People of such a Nation
are first called by the Word, before they come to be a Church: But it is not so
(says he) of a Country, where for a long time true Religion has been
professed, which is our case. And as to that part of the Objection, That there
is no such Example in the New Testament;

First, The Magistrates were then Enemies to the Christian Religion.

Secondly, (says he) It suffices that we have Examples in the Old Testament,
2 Kings 23.21. 2 Chronicles. 15.13. and 33.16. and 34.33. nor have (says he).
Christian Princes less Power in their Dominion to abolish Idolatry, and by Laws
and Penalties, to compel their Subjects where there is a Parity of Reason.

And after this, Bryan having wearied himself with setting down several words,
to and against, both what the Conformists said for, and the Non-conformists
said against, these Things; he takes breath, and says, he returns to sati^fie
the Objection, to wit, The Objection before mentioned about Separation, with
such words as these,

It is not necessary and generally true (says he) of all the Members of the
Visible Church, that they be called by the Word.

Answ. To which I answer on behalf of Truth: That it is the great Love, and
tender Mercy, of God to our Souls, that he has delivered us from under such
Men, as this Bryan and R. B. are, who know nothing as they ought to know; but
professing themselves to be wise, are become most foolish and brutish in their
Minds and Words, by such false and Soul-destroying Doctrines as these;
affirming, That People may be called into the visible Church without the Word;
and if one ask him, If not by the Word, by what then? His answer is, by
Sprinkling, when Infants, or for fear of Man: But what, are these Calls into
the Visible Church? A strange Church must that needs be for certain, where
People are called into it without God's Word; for certain it is none of God's
Church, into which People are called, without his Word: It Is the visible
Company of such as know not God, thou should have said: For God's Church are
the Faithful, and their Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of
God, and not without it: But, oh the Desolation that such Doctrine as this of
Bryan and R. B. has made amongst the poor People, whose Eyes are not fully
opened to see their Deceits.

Also this Antichristian Doctrine being laid as a Foundation in their House, it
is no Wonder to hear this Bryan say, Page 301. That Ignorant and Profane
Persons have always been in the Church, and ever will be, at lest, till Christ
comes the second Time.

But by all these unsound, unchristian and ignorant Sayings, it fully appears,
that this Bryan is one of them who have neither seen nor known Christ; seeing
he would bring in the Heathen into the Temple without the Word: And so, Who is
more Ignorant and Profane than this Priest Bryan himself, as also his Brother
R. B. who is not ashamed to make such a one a Tutor, or Father of Ministers,
who is ignorant of the very Door and Entrance into the Church, and of Christ's
second Coming? Nay, who is ignorant of his first Appearance, which was for
Judgment, even to whip the Buyers and Sellers, and all Profane ones, out of
his House, as he said himself, For Judgment come I into this World. What
Pastors or Teachers can such Tutor, as are so ignorant of Christ's Kingdom; and
so admit the Ignorant and Profane into their Church, (or Cage of unclean
Birds) for the Church of Christ, which is visibly seen, and known by the
Spiritual Eye to be his Body, is Holy, and into it can no unclean thing enter,
as says the Scripture, Rev. 21.27. but into the World's Church, may both
Ignorant and Profane enter and dwell: But at such dishonest Gain, as is gotten
by such Doctrines as this of Bryan and R. B. has the Lord long shaken his
Hand: Is this your Ware that you sell to the People at so dear a Rate? Is this
your Straw and Stubble that you seed them with? But no Man of any Understanding
in Heavenly Matters, will buy any more of your Merchandise. For God is come to
teach his People himself, and the Spirit of God is felt and witnessed amongst
us, praised be God; yea, and in our very Hearts to teach us, and by which we
feel Christ come again the second Time, without Sin, to Salvation, according to
his Holy Promises, and by whose all-powerful Word of Faith and Heavenly
Presence in us, are we joined together unto him, in one Holy Body; Glory to his
Name over all, for he is worthy.

And for that Saying, That Christian Princes have not less Power to abolish
Idolatry, and by Law and Penalties, to compel the Subjects in Matters of
Religion, where there is a parity of reason, than the Jewish Kings under that
Law had.

I answer and say, That all are not Christians who are so called; and this
crying up the Worldly Magistrates Power in Matters Spiritual, is the only
Inlet into Persecution of the Tenderhearted People of God, who cannot bow to
every thing the World sets up; yea, though it come under the name or show of
Christian Religion; and if the Image be of Gold never so goodly, yet wanting
Life and Power they cannot bow to it. I say, They who Preach up the Worldly
Princes, under what Name soever, to have Power over the Consciences of People
in Matters purely Spiritual (as the whole Body of Christian Religion is) are
Antichristian, and the great Enemies of that Liberty which Christ has
purchased for his People, and which the Apostles sealed unto with their Blood,
saying in such cases, Let every Man be fully persuaded in his own Heart. And
who art thou that judges (much less forcest and compellest as Bryan and R B's
Doctrine would have it) another? to his own Master (to wit, God the Judge of
all) he stands or falls, see Romans 14. at large; but what account will those
Daubers give to the Lord, for all the Innocent Blood they have caused to be
shed these many hundred Years? is Sad to consider: For though such Magistrates
as are evil inclined are not free, yet the False Teachers, who by their Lies
stir up, yea, and bring forth that evil Inclination into real Actings against
the Good, shall receive the greater Condemnation: And yet notwithstanding all
the Evil, both in the one and in the other, the Lord will certainly carry on
his great Work to his own Praise, which he has begun, Glory to his Name for
ever: And the Beast, Whore and False Prophet, shall alive together be cast into
the Lake prepared for them, and into the Pit which they had dug for others.

Also whereas he says, That it suffices that we have Examples in the Old
Testament for the Magistrates Power in Church matters, though none in the New
Testament. I say, It is no more true, than if we should reason for an outward
worldly Temple, Sacrifices, and Circumcision now, because there is Examples of
these things in the Old Testament; and for Revenge and Retaliation now, because
it is mentioned in the Old, contrary to Christ, For though it has been said of
old (says Christ) an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth; yet I say to
you, my Disciples, under the New Covenant, If any Man smite you on the one
Cheek, turn to him the other; and the Apostle says, Dearly beloved, avenge not
your selves; butif thy Enemy hunger, seed him, etc. and so Christ being come,
and all Power in Heaven and Earth given him; Is not he in these Spiritual
Matters, relating to the very Soul and Conscience, the only Lord, Lawgiver and
King, and Supreme, and ought of right to rule in his own House and Temple,
which is in Man, and those that will not that he should Rule, must bow before
him, and be ashamed before his Face.

So that now the Son of God being come, and seated by right of Inheritance, the
true King and Heir upon David's Throne, to Rule in Righteousness for ever in
the Hearts of his Children, he commands the true Seed of Israel to obey his
Heavenly Voice, Law and Doctrine, spoken and written within, as those outward
and typical Kings did, command the fleshly Seed of Abraham to keep Moses's Law,
written without; and as those that obeyed not that outward Law of Moses, were
liable to the Punishment of that Law; so they now that obey not Christ's
Spiritual Law, written in the Heart and Conscience by his Holy Power, are
liable to the Eternal Judgment of Jesus Christ, the Judge of Quick and Dead, as
he says, The Father judges no Man, but has committed all Judgment to the Son:
And as for the worldly Magistrate, he is to Rule in outward things, betwixt Man
and Man, to see that every one, as to the Body and outward Estate, be well
behaved one toward another, and not to bear the Sword in vain, as has been
too much in use, even amongst many called Christian Magistrates, as well as
others; from whence it has come to pass, that for the sake of the Poor, whom
the worldly Powers have oppressed, as well in Temporals as Spirituals, the Lord
has overturned them, one Sort after another, as they were found in the Abuse
of that Power and Trust which was put into their Hands, for the Protection of,
and Encouragement and Praise of the Good, and Punishment of the Evil doers; but
not the contrary, according to that of the Prophet.

I will overturn, overturn, overturn, till he come whose Right it is: And so
until Truth, Righteousness, Goodness, Equity and Justice rule, both in the
Hearts and Lives of the Children of Men, there will neither be Peace, nor
Establishment of any good thing; but as a Wheel will the whole Earth be, from
Generation to Generation, says the Spirit, who is the sweet Orderer in all
things, for the Holy Seed's sake: Glory to his Name for ever.

And so in the Love and Kindness of the Lord God, have I been thus enabled for
the Truth, and the poor Peoples sake, to lay open something of the Deceits, and
gross Hypocrisy, of these two Men, called R. B. and Bryan, who have long,
under a Cover or Vizard of Holiness, deceived the unstable Souls of many: But
now the Covering being rent off, their Wolfish Nature is fully manifest: Glory
to the Lord, the good Workman over all for ever, So be it.

Thomas Tailor.

Some Gentle Remarks on a Book, Entitled, A Discourse concerning the Idolatry
Practiced in the Church of Rome.
A Book coming to my Hands, called, A Discourse concerning the Idolatry
Practiced in the Church of Rome: Written by E. S. Styled D. D. And finding the
Man Zealous against that Romish Idolatry, which is Commendable in him: E. S. in
his Book, Orig. Sacra. Page 4. has these words, God Created the Souls of Men,
not only Capable of finding out the Truth of things, but furnished him with a
Sufficient Teacher to discover Truth from Falsehood, by a LIGHT set up in his
Understanding; which, if he had attended to, he might have secured himself from
all Impostors and Deceit. And also finding in his Principles, toward the
latter end of his Book, such a saying as this, to wit, his fifth Priciple;
There can be no other means Imagined, whereby we are to judge of the Truth of
Divine Revelation, but a faculty in us discerning Truth and Falsehood in Matters
Proposed to our Understandings; which, if we do not Exercise in Judging the
Truth of Divine Revelation, we must be imposed upon by every thing that
pretends to be so. And in Article 13. The Holy Scriptures may be understood
Infallibly by all Persons, who sincerely endeavor to know the meaning of them,
in all such things as are necessary for their Salvation. This is the Scope of
the latter part of that Article. And in Article 13. And there can be no
sufficient Reason given, why that may not serve in matters of Faith, which God
himself has made use of, as the means, to keep Men from Sin in their Lives,
unless any imagine, that Errors in Opinion are far more Dangerous to Men's Souls
than a vicious Life is; and therefore that God is bound to take more Care to
prevent the one than the other. And in his Fourth and Fifth Conclusion, upon
his Articles, says, The more absurd any Opinions are, and Repugnant to the
first Principles of Sense and Reason; which any Church Obtrudes upon the Faith
of Men: The greater Reason Men still have to reject the pretense of
Infallibility in that Church, as a grand Imposture. And so, to disown what is
so Taught by such a Church, is not to question the Veracity of God, but so
firmly to adhere to it; as to what he has Revealed in Scriptures, that Men
dare not, out of Love to their Souls, reject what is so taught.

Yet finding this E. S. making several Reflections upon us, whom the World
Scorn, under the Nick name of Quakers; I say, us whom the Lord has drawn out
of the many Waters of Mystery Babylon, into the Light of his Son, that most
inward Principle, Faculty, and alone Ability in Man, to try all Doctrines and
Works by; I could not but thus write something to him, that he might see his
Mistake of us, and not lose his Reward of standing against Romish Delusions, by
withstanding or Speaking against the Truth of God, made manifest to us in our
Hearts, and Shining forth in our Lives, to the Praise of his Glory, and the
Good of all who do rightly understand us, and receive our Testimony; I say,
that if possible he may understand a little, and feel of that inward Principle,
or Faculty (as he calls it) which he is aiming at, and which, he says, must be
antecedently supposed ( viz. necessarily) to all Divine Revelation, are these
things writ.

Now that part of his Book, where he somewhat smites at us; is, that where he
Treats of the Fanaticism of the Roman Church: As one may see Page 249. where he
says, Who will not take pains to see how Faithfully I have Translated these
Words out of Eymericus, would imagine I have borrowed some of the canting
Language of the Modern Quakers. Look * where he goes on.

Now, What is this some of this canting Language? That part of Petrus
Johannis's Relation of St. Francis (as he calls him) runs thus.

That those who Opposed this Order (to wit, of that Francis) were the Carnal
Persecuting Clergy, in whom the Seat of the Beast is much more than in the
People; that in the time of the Mystical Antichrist, the Carnal Church shall
oppose the Doctrine, Life and Zeal of the Saints, and burn as it were with Fire
against them; but it shall be dried up from all Spiritual Wisdom, and Grace,
and the Riches of Christ; and be Exposed to Errors and Delusion, and as it was
with the Jews and Greeks. Thus far there.

To which I Answer, What is this kind of Language Canting, where it is truly
applied in any Age; do not thou, Edward Stillingfleet, believe that there
both was, and is a Carnal Church, that did and does oppose the Doctrine, Life
and Zeal of the Saints, etc. as is there s^t down. To let Francis and his
Applauders alone, we know both the Holy Prophets and Apostles of Jesus Christ
mentioned in Scripture; as also Christ himself did vehemently Cry against a
Carnal Church, or Fleshly Company of Professors in those days; for he that was
born after the Flesh did always Persecute him that was born after the Spirit,
both before, and in the Apostles Days. And so it has been since, no question,
all along downwards; and as we for certain find it so in these our days, not
only by the Papists, but even amongst them called Protestants also: And was
those many Sharp Reproofs, and large Discoveries of the False Teachers in the
Prophets and Apostles time Canting. O Man! take heed, thou knows not what thou
do, when thou judges our Witness against the False Teachers, and Carnal
Professors of this Age no better than Canting: But certainly, though some of
you may put it off at present, as a light thing, and look at it Scornfully, as
no better than Canting; as they did, who said, He is Mad, and has a Devil, why
hear ye him; but the time will come when it will be otherwise, even then when
the Books are opened, and every one receives a Reward according to their Deeds.
It is strange, this Doctor, who seems to be so much Read, should Read our
Principles no better, and pretending to so much Wisdom, if he have Read our
Books, that he should no better understand us, than to compare us to such as
him, called St. Francis, Ignatius Loyola; or the Upholders of that Rotten and
Superstitious Kingdom of Popery: But we are not greater than our Lord, who was
Crucified between the Thieves, and of whom they said, he is a Samaritan, and a
Friend of Publicans and Sinners: But Wisdom is justified of her Children;
Praised be God, though others, who are not some of the Heavenly Wisdom, speak
ever so ill of it. Also this Edward Stilling fleet, Page 252. of his Book,
says, Their Doctrines (to wit, those of Francis's Order it seems) may be
Reduced to these Four Heads; First, Evangelical Poverty. Secondly, Unlawfulness
of Swearing. Thirdly, The Doctrine of Perfection. Fourthly, Opposition to the
Carnal Church: Which, being joined with that great Degree of Light, which they
supposed themselves to have above all the rest of the World, makes a Sect of
Quakers, after the Order of St. Francis.

Now to this I say, That if such Doctrines as these, not in Francis, or Petrus
Johannis's Sense, but in the Truth of the thing, be plainly found Asserted and
Exhorted unto in Scripture by Christ and his Apostles, then I hope they, who
Revile us for such things, do not do it to us only, but even to Truth it self,
and must be accountable to him in Judgment for it: As for the Order of Francis,
and Dominicus, and Benedict, and Jesuits, or what other of Popish Sects there
be, through the Grace of Christ we are, taught to deny them all, together with
all those Orders amongst them, called Protestants, which would make the
Seamless Coat of Christ of many Pieces, and so spoil all, for Christ's Body is
one, the chosen Ones of God, precious to him. And of his Heavenly ^ody, it is
our Glory and our Crown to he found Members; and our Faith being Builded upon
the Living Rock, Christ Jesus, in Deed and Truth, we know the Gates of Hell
cannot prevail against it: But what art thou against true Gospel Poverty, and
Perfection, and Light; and such a Friend to Swearing, and the Carnal Church,
that those now amongst us that hold the one, and deny the other, must be holden
no less than Papists for it: Our Judgment of these things it generally known,
and of the Lord Jesus allowed, and that is our Peace; and so in particular at
present, I speak not much, but only gladly would let E. S. see how he has
wronged himself, by numbering us with he knows not whom; but however Reported to
him, (if as the Vilest amongst the Vile) it were this Author's Wisdom to weigh
his words better, and be more solid for time to come.

Also I take notice of one saying of this Authors, in Page 256. where he says,
(that some Phanatick Papists held) amongst other things, That every
Intellectual Being (does he not mean Man's Soul) has enough within it self to
make it happy, or (says he) a Light within. These words [or a Light within]
seem to be put in on purpose, that People may take notice whom he would have
them believe they resemble: But it seems somewhat strange, that this Man should
any ways speak slightly of our Testimony to the Light of Christ in Man, seeing
he has Confessed so much as is before set down in his Principles of an inward
Law, necessarily Antecedent to all Divine Revelation, as the Judge thereof in
Man. And is not that inward Law, the Light of God and Christ in Man: For what
other Light can judge aright of Divine Revelation? O how often is this to be
found true amongst Men, that they will seem in words to confess to that which
indeed they are against; for want of a true understanding of their own words?

And whereas he mentions Christ's being Spiritually Crucified in some that
suffered in the next Page, as such a one relates: Whatsoever the thing was to
them, surely the Expression is not Canting; for Christ said to Saul, Why
Persecutes thou me? And some are said to Crucify Christ afresh to themselves;
and the Witnesses lay slain in the Streets of the great City, which Spiritually
is called Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord was Crucified, which he that has an
Ear may hear. But indeed Spiritual Expressions could never be relished by the
Unspiritual Mind.

Also in Page 273. this E. S. telling of one Ignatius Loyola, That it is
reported of him, That it was his Custom not to give Men any Titles of respect,
but to call them only by their Common Names; and particularly, that he would
not put off his Hat when he was brought before a Commander, says, by this we
understand who was the first Founder of that Phanatick Sect among us, which is
distinguished so much from others, by denying Common Civilities to Men. Also
Page 275. telling of this Ignatius further, says, After he was committed to
close Prison, he preached to the People with great Zeal, who now flock in great
numbers to him; and gloried as much in his Sufferings, and talked at the same
rate that the Ringleaders of the Quakers are wont to do among us, and just with
the same resolution; for when the rest of the Prisoners made an escape through
the Negligence of the Keepers, Ignatius and his Companions would not stir; when
they were called to Answer, Ignatius preached at large upon several Points of
Divinity to them, under pretense of answering Questions. And says, They
preached in the Streets and Marketplaces, and on Bulks of Shops for their
Pulpits; and though few understood them, being Strangers, yet all admired and
commended them; and no doubt, faith this Author, they Converted many, as their
Followers have done, from the use of Laces and Ribbands. I answer, then surely
this is more than the Popish Parish Priests then did, or Protestant Priests now
do.

And in Page 281, and 282, concludes, And now let the World judge, whether
there has appeared a greater Enthusiast, or Pretender to Revelations, than
Ignatius was, since the Days of Mahomet and St. Francis? Methinks they might be
ashamed to upbraid us with the Phanaticism of the Quakers, and such Persons,
the Chiefest of whom fall very much short of Ignatius, in those very things for
which they are Condemned by us, yet any who compares them, would imagine the
Life of Ignatius had been their great Exemplar: I know not whether any of that
Innocent and Religious Order of the Jesuits, had any hand in forming this New
Society among us, as has been frequently suggested. Page 258. But if one may
guess the Father by the Child's likeness, Ignatius Loyola, the Founder of the
Jesuits, was at least the Grandfather of the Quakers.

He goes on, saying, That as Vasthi the Queen being cast off from the Kingdom
and Marriage of Ahashuerus, the humble Esther was chosen to succeed in her
place; and the King made a great Feast to his Princes and Servants, so in this
last state of the Church, the Adulterous Babylon, the Carnal Church being
rejected, the Spiritual Church must be exalted, and a great Spiritual Feast be
kept to Celebrate these Nuptials with: That under the Mystical Antichrist there
shall be Overturnings and Commotions, by which the Carnal Church shall be
terribly stirred up and moved against the Evangelical Spirit of Christ, but
that the Whore of Babylon, the Carnal Church, shall fall, in which time the
Saints shall preach, saying, From this time it is no longer the Church of
Christ, but the Synagogue of Satan, and the Habitation of Devils, which before
said in the Pride of her Heart, I sit as a Queen in great Honor and Glory, I
Rule over my Kingdom, I sit at ease, I am no Widow, i. e. I have Bishops and
Kings on my side: That the Roman Church is that Great Whore spoken of in the
Revelations, which has committed Fornication with this World, having departed
from the Worship, and sincere Love and Delights of Christ her Spouse, and
embraced the World, the Riches and Pleasures of it, and the Devil, and Kings,
and Princes, and Prelates, and all the Lovers of this World.

Also Page 285. For if we have no other Helps for the understanding of their
Prayer of Contemplation, than what Mr. Cressy gives in his Preface, we may as
well hope to understand the Quakers Canting as Mr. Cressy 's. And this Author,
Page 289. says, Christ and his Apostles taught Men a plain and intelligible
way of serving God, and bid them look for Perfection in another World.

Also Page 295. telling of some Romish Phanaticks, says, Did not they deliver
this for their Doctrine, that Men ought to harken to the immediate Impulses of
the Spirit of God within them; and that now God does acquaint his own People
with his Mind and Will in a way peculiar to themselves. And says afterward,
That our Enthusiasts do not boast of so many Raptures, Visions and Revelations,
as those of the Church of Rome have done.

Now to this I say, that when any of those that pretend to be Head of the
Protestant Church, are come to such a pass and measure of Darkness, as that
they cannot allow that Christians ought to harken to the immediate Impulses of
the Spirit of God within them, or that now God does acquaint his own People,
etc. I say it is sad, and the Times may well be said to be perilous indeed.
What! Does either the Scripture without, or the inward Faculty, which thou says
must be Antecedent to all Divine Revelation, Dictate to thee, that these
Sayings are Phanatical? What! Are not the Children of God led by the Spirit of
God which is in them? And must they not harken to the Doctrine and Movings of
their Teacher and Leader? And does not Christ say, to you, to wit, my peculiar
People and Disciples, it is given to know the Mystery of the Kingdom of God;
but to others it is not given, to wit, to those that are without, that follow
their Wisdom, and not Christ's Spirit: But both the Carnal Church of Papists
and Protestants deny to harken to the inward Movings or Impulses, as are here
called, of God's Spirit, that they may Establish their own Traditions, some in
one way, some in another, but all in vain; for the Lamb shall have the Victory,
and a little Child shall lead them, and the Meek shall increase their Joy in
the Lord; and he, the Lord, whom the World despises, shall lead them by the
Fountain of Living Water.

But let me ask this Doctor this Serious Question, whether he accounts that
part of Romish Phanaticism here set down, or the Common Tenets of them called
the Orthodox among them, the better Doctrine? Surely of the Two, this he calls
Phanaticism is the more favored by Scripture, and so consequently the more
Orthodox; and may I not say, the more Protestant too? For the first Reformers
pretended to take Scripture for their Rule, though in many things they missed
it sadly. And are not we that go amongst them under the Name of Quakers,
counted Phanaticks at this Day from this very ground, because we Preach
Scripture Doctrine, and Speak Scripture Language at this Day? As for instance,
because we say, Christ lights every man that comes into the World, according
to John 1.9. And because we say, this Light, or Grace, and Truth of God, which
has appeared unto all Men, is the Saints Teacher, and would be a sufficient
Teacher and Leader into Life to all Men, if they did not resist it, and rebel
against the Motions of it: And because we say, that the Saints who are in this
Anointing of the Holy One, know all things (necessary to Salvation) according
to 1 John 2. And because we say, that People ought not to have the Faith of
Christ, with respect of Persons, but such as respect Persons commit Sin,
according to Lev. 19.15. And because we say, the Work of the true Ministry is
for perfecting the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. And the false Ministry perfects
nothing, but keeps People always Learning, and never brings them to the
Knowledge of the Truth. And because we say, thee and thou to a particular
Person, according to Scripture; I say, for these and many the like Doctrines,
does the present evil World of Papists and Protestants, Professors and
Profane, hate us, and deride us, and persecute us to their own shame, who
would be accounted Owners of Scripture.

Thomas Tailor.

The Day is Dawned that makes all Wickedness manifest.
FOR now, even now, the Day is Dawned, which makes all things manifest, Praises
to the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, and now no Worker of Iniquity can be hid
any more; for now the Glory of the Lord fills the Earth, and the Knowledge of
God covers the Earth, as the Waters do the Sea: And now the pure Truth of the
Ever-living God has lift up its Head above all the Clouds and Floods of Error,
and over all the Mists and Fogs of the dark perishing World: Glory to the God
of Truth, our Life and Light this Day, who is appeared in the Riches of his
Bounty, to gather our Souls to himself, and to unite our very Hearts and Souls
unto him in the Covenant of his Life and Love, never to be broken nor forgot.
And now the Kingdom of God is come indeed to the Believers in the Light,
according to the Promise of the Lord, and the Saints Prayer, into which no
unclean thing can enter; but the unbelieving World stand without wondering,
despising and perishing in their manifold Opposition to the Truth, and Light of
this Day of God, the true God over all, Blessed for Evermore. And now all those
who will not take Warning by the harms of such Gainsayers of the Light, as are
gone before them, will fall with a double Destruction, because they would not
apply their Hearts to that pure Wisdom that comes so plentifully from God,
Israel, to bring forth the Heavenly Fruits of Righteousness, to the Glory and
Praise of the Great and Good Husbandman, who is over all God Blessed for Ever,
of whose Holy Reign, Kingdom and Government there never shall be end. But of
the Kingdom of the Man of Sin, and all Antichrists, there shall be an utter
end, and Death and Hell shall be cast into the Lake of Fire, and the Judgment
of the Living and Everlasting Truth of our Heavenly Father shall go forth more
and more for the discovering and consuming the false Hope, and lying Refuges of
all Hypocrites, who have covered themselves, and not with the Spirit of the
Lord; the Zeal of the Lord of Life will perform this, that his Name over all
may be exalted, who is worthy; whose Appearance in Glory this Day the Children
of the Night have greatly withstood; and the Dragon has made great War against
the Lamb, but praised be the Lord the Lamb has got the Victory, and the Lamb's
Followers are this Day with their Feet upon the Holy Mountain, where none can
make them afraid, rejoicing in this, that they have found the Lord whom their
Souls loved, and do love for Evermore. So be it.

Thomas Tailor.

To some of T. Hicks's Friends.
YE Hicks's Hearers of Tixall-hall, and elsewhere, who Read his Defiled and
Defiling Book, called, A Dialogue between a Christian and a Quaker; Fear the
Lord God of Heaven and Earth; for I do affirm in the Truth of Christ, that it
is a mere Work and Invention of the Wicked One, in that Servant of his, called
T. Hicks, who goes under the Name and Profession of an Anabaptist, as they are
termed; I say, this Man was put on by the Wicked One, who is called the Devil
and Satan, who was a Lier and False Accuser of the Brethren of Christ from the
beginning, to Render us, the Servants of the Lord, called Quakers, Odious to
the World: For the very first Words and Title of his Book is an absolute Lie,
for never was there such a Dialogue between a Christian and a Quaker; but it is
a mere Fiction of his own naughty Heart and Head, for Rendering us, and the
Truth we hold, Odious; and it is a False and Wicked Representation of us, and
our Religion, to the World; for the which God will severely Judge him: And
indeed, by this manner of way that he takes, who or what kind of Profession is
there that he can miss grossly to abuse: Seeing he takes upon him, like a
Prevaricator or Stage Player, both to ask the Question, and give the Answer; so
as may serve most for his own wicked End and Purpose, and make his Opposite
infamous. O the Wickedness of such Actors, and their Work; but Praised be the
Lord, we are out of the reach of his Malice; for under the Holy Wing of God's
Power and Protection are our Souls gathered by the Eternal Power of his Living
Word in Christ Jesus our Lord: And you that Read this Book, whether called
Papists or Protestants, if this Hicks had a Mind to Render you Odious, could he
not this way he takes, do it as Plausibly as against us; and so I would not
have you hurt your selves, so as to strengthen your selves against us and the
Truth, which we Live in, by such bad Books and Endeavors, as this Hicks has
come forth in; for if that your Minds stand open to receive them, you will
never want them; for the Enemy of your Souls and ours, yea, of all Mankind,
will never be wanting to furnish you with Lies for Strengthening his Kingdom in
you, and hindering you from entering into the Kingdom of God: And if you would
know the Reason of his thus rising up against us, I say it is, because through
the Grace of God given us, we Preach the Mystery of the Kingdom of God, even
the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, as Scripture speaks: And that Striking at his
carnal Conceptions of things, and his Idolatrous Thoughts of outward
Water Baptism, has stirred up the Venom in him; which, by this his Book, he
has Vented; but the Lord is the Pleader of his People's Cause, which is our
Joy and our Armor against all the fiery Darts of all wicked Ones; for the
Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension; Glorification of Christ, and his
Coming again to us, according to the Scriptures of Truth, and Heavenly
Promises, through the Power of God, to our Souls Eternal Salvation and Comfort,
we Witness Glory to the Lord for ever; whatsoever this Book, or any thing of
like nature can, or may say to the contrary; so as Christ said to one of our
Brethren in times past, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against us: And so
in the Peaceable Habitation of the Love of God in Christ Jesus do we lie down
together, with all Holy Souls and Spirits of Just Men made Perfect; Hallelujah,
for the Lord God Omnipotent Reigns in Mount Zion, and before his Ancients
Gloriously: And so let the Mouth of all Iniquity be stopped for ever, says my
Soul.

Thomas Tailor.

Something concerning that called the Common Prayer.
AND Now all People, that you may see we do not without cause Cry against the
Priests, and deny to join with them in the present Common Service, now in use
amongst the Parish Teachers of England; which you are enjoined upon several
Penalties to submit unto, I shall in the strength of Truth unbowel it a little
unto you, that you may at least in part see the true inside of it, and not be
deceived with the outward Appearance any longer; for the Lord is arisen in his
mighty Glorious Power, to scatter all those Clouds of Ignorance and Error that
have long veiled and covered the Minds of People, and to be himself the Teacher
of his People how to Worship him: For his Spirit is greatly burdened with the
Manners of the People, who take his Name so continually in vain; as such do as
are only Confessors of their Sins, but never forsake them, but all their Lives
long doing what they should not do; and so instead of lessening their Sins, are
daily adding Sin to Sin, covering with a vain, verbal, unfeeling Confession of
Sin, but not with the Spirit of the Lord. The Scripture moves them to confess
their manifold Sins and Trespasses: But when will it be seen that the Scripture
moves them to forsake them; for a Confession of Sin in Words we hear amongst
them, but the time of forsaking them never, as yet, come to be seen: For what
one Sin, O ye People, Teacher or Hearer, that you were guilty of Seven or more
Years since, is there, which you are not actually in at this Day; he that was
Drunken, or Proud, or Covetous, or Lustful, or Pleasurable, or Unjust, or the
like, in times past, is found so still; no Amendment, no Washing of Sin away by
all your Doings from amongst you; for indeed, Words and outside Performances
could never do away Sin. And so in vain is your Worship whilst your Fear is
taught by the Traditions of Men, and not by the Power of the Spirit of God
according to Scripture, for the Kingdom of God stands not in Words, but in
Power; And the Redeemed of the Lord Worship in the newness of the Spirit, and
not in the oldness of the Letter; Heb. 7. Col. 1.
for the Letter-Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of the better
Hope does, which is Christ in Man the hope of Glory. And so you wanting the
Humble, Penitent and Obedient Heart, your Confessions are in vain, and are
rather a Mock-service, than any true Sacrifice to God: And so for want of a
pure Heart, you can neither see God, nor approach to the Throne of his Heavenly
Grace, but stand Self-condemned; your own words being witness against you: And
so you go on, saying after your blind Guides, That you are all your Lives long
Miserable Offenders, following too much the Devices and Desires of your own
Hearts; Offending against God's Holy Laws, doing what you should not do, and
leaving undone what you ought to do, till you are so full of the Leprosy of
Sin from Head to Foot, that there is no Health nor Soundness in you. And then
thus continuing from Year to Year to the end of your Days; what Sacrifice can
God accept at your Hands, for the very Prayers of the Wicked are Abomination to
the Lord. And therefore, whereas in this State you so often call God Father,
you lie, and do not the Truth; For he that does Righteousness is born of God,
but he that commits Sin is of the Devil; both Christ and his Apostle John
being Witnesses; see John 8.44. and 1 Epistle of John, Chap. 3. and Verses 6,
7, 8, etc. And so for the Words of that called the Absolution, which follows,
wherewith the deceitful Priest would doub himself and you over; I declare for
the Lord, they are no (...) fit to either of you, whilst you continue in your
Sins, as it is manifest o^ do; yea, those very Words in that same Absolution,
where it is said, He Pardons and Absolveth all such (and I may add, none but
such) as do truly repent and unfeignedly believe his holy Gospel; shuts you all
out from the Benefit of God's Absolution and Pardon: For such as truly repent
and unfeignedly believe the Gospel, are healed of the Sickness of Sin, and so
have Health and Soundness in them, and are not Miserable Offenders, as you are;
but blessed Believers, yea, a chosen Generation, born of God, as Scripture
says, John 1.13. And he that is born of God, Sins not, for his Seed
remains in him, and he cannot Sin, because he is born of God, 1 John 3.9.
Then certainly such Holy Ones as these, Live not in a Continual Breach of God's
Commandments, as you do.

And so for the Lord's Prayer, it belongs not to you, whilst you continue doing
the Deeds of the Wicked One; for it was taught the Disciples and Followers of
Christ, who had God indeed for their Heavenly Father, because they were really
Born of him, even of the Immortal and Incorruptible Seed of his Living Word,
which abode in them, and they in it, and so were Disciples indeed: But alack
for you, who instead of forgiving, as you would be forgiven, are seeking your
own Revenges, and are learning of the Men of this World, who know not God, nor
his Kingdom, no nor so much as the Door, nor entrance into it: For the Heavenly
Kingdom is still uncome to such as believe not in the Light, which Christ the
Door has Enlightened them withal; but love Darkness more than Light, because
their Deeds are evil. For such as love to be called of Men Master, and are
Proud and Covetous, and live in the daily Breach of God's Commandments, could
never love the Light, nor bring their Deeds to be tried by it, because it is an
Everlasting Reprover of all such: And therefore says Christ, the true Light,
Therefore does the World hate me, because I witness against their Deeds, that
they are Evil.

And so your most Hypocritical Proceeding to say, O Lord open thou our Lips,
and our Mouth shall show forth thy Praise; shows plainly you heed not what you
do; for both the Priest and you have opened your. Sinful Lips times without
number, without God's Spirit of Regeneration opening them, for that as yet you
never waited for; and therefore your Sinful Mouth could not, nor cannot show
forth God's Praise, for the Dead Praise him not: For it is only such as Live in
Christ, as the Saints do, not in Sin, as you do, that Praises him; Glory to his
Name, that has Abolished Death from amongst his People, and has brought Life
and Immortality to Light in them, in this his Glorious Day, wherein he is
Judging the great Whore which has defiled the Earth grievously with her
Fornications; and the Day of God is Glorious which thus brings forth all the
hidden things of Darkness to Light: And Blessed are they, and they only, that
walk in the Light of God's Holy City, into which no unclean thing can ever
enter. So all ye People of the Earth, who are thus found only in the
Confession, but not in the Forsaking of Sin, shut your Mouths, and cease taking
God's Name any more in vain, For certainly the Lord will not hold such
Guiltless as take his Name in vain. And take heed of applying those Scriptures
to your selves whilst you live in Sin, which belong only to such as witness
Redemption from Sin; as those words in that 95th Psalm following do, which say,
O come let us sing unto the Lord, let us heartily rejoice in the strength of
our Salvation, for he is the Lord our God, and we are the People of his
Pasture, and Sheep of his hands, etc. O stand in awe of God, O People, and do
no more so presumptuously, for his Sheep you are not, who are so Deaf to his
Voice, and so Rebellious to his Word, as you have and do daily every way
manifest your selves to be: O what Salvation can such witness, as are so deep
in their Sins; for Christ Saves his People from their Sins, from their
Disobedience, from being miserable Offenders, and is the Saving Health of his
Heavenly Anointed ones, he leaves them not in the Darkness where the Sin is
committed, but brings all his Followers to the Light of Life, where the ever
Blessed, and Holy, and perfect, and acceptable Will of God, is both known and
done; and then of such it is truly said, They are the Sheep of Christ's
Pasture, a Royal Priesthood, a peculiar People indeed, to the Praise of God's
Glory, Amen.

These things are in your Morning Service, as you call it, and your Evening
being so much like it, we pass it over, and proceed to what follows; only this
may be taken notice of by the way in all your Service, whereas there is often
repeated those words, Glory to the Father, Son and Holy Ghost: As it was in the
Beginning, etc. I say, Glory was not so given to God in the Beginning, as it is
by you at this day, that is to say, In Form and Custom, and in a dead Mind; for
in the Beginning living Praises from a living Sense of what God had done for
their Souls, was given to God: And as it was then, so it is at this day, by the
living Members of Christ's Heavenly Body, as is said before, and ever shall be,
by such Saved Ones: But the strange Children will Dissemble, as they do at this
day.

The next thing I may take notice of as a thing of Concernment, because it is
as the very Door and Inlet into your defiled Congregation; and it is that your
Sprinkling, which you call Baptizing of Infants, which is so unscriptural and
corrupt a Custom, both for Matter and Manner, that the Lord's Spirit in these
days (wherein Truth is so gloriously arisen) is so burdened with, that he will
not long forbear to judge you for it. For first, you bring in a little Infant
as the subject of your Baptism, which by your own Confession in your Catechism,
cannot perform the things required of Persons to be Baptized: For it is said,
What is required of Persons to be Baptized? Your answer is, Repentance, whereby
they forsake Sin; and Faith, whereby they believe the Promises of God made to
them in that business. And therefore when it is further demanded, Why then are
Infants baptized, when by reason of their tender Age they cannot perform them?
Your answer is, Yes, they do perform them by their Sureties. And then you bring
in your Sureties, which very unchristianly you call Godfathers and
Godmothers, to promise and vow such things for the Child, as you never did to
this day do for your selves, that is, To forsake the Devil and all his Works,
etc. But I ask, Who has required this at your Hands, that you should so
promise for them? Certainly God never required it of you, for it is contrary to
his Pure and Holy Nature, to lay such an Impossibility upon you, to wit, That
you should promise that for others, which, of your selves, you have no power to
do for your selves; and also because he knows it is against the Glory of his
Christ, who is the only Surety, Undertaker and Mediator betwixt God and Man.
And certainly if you and your Teachers were not utterly given up to Darkness,
you could never adventure your Souls in such a thing; for now it is well known
amongst Men, what the Nature of a Surety is, for he is liable to pay the Debt
if the Principal fail, as if it were his own Debt. Now seeing it is manifest
that there is a Failing in the Infant, as to the Performance of this Bond, to
wit, Of forsaking the Devil and all his Works, Pomps and Vanities of the evil
World, and all the sinful Desires of the Flesh: And seeing that the Wages,
Reward or Punishment for Sin is Death, Are you bold Sureties willing to dye the
Death for the Child? for indeed you deserve it more than the Child, for it
never undertook it, and so never as yet brought it self under the actual and
personal Engagement for the Debt. O! consider, consider, this is a mere Mocking
of God, but God will not be mocked, for if you repent not of this, and all your
other Sins, he will vex you in his Wrath. And then for that other great Error,
whereby the blind Guides would seem to make you believe, that the Infant, by
this sorry doing of theirs, is regenerate, and made an Inheritor of God's
Kingdom: It is such a piece of Popery and Grossness of Darkness, that it is much
they fear not that the Earth should open and swallow them up, for their
Presumption, as it did Core: For where did ever God, by his Son, Prophet or
Apostle, ever give them any ground in Scripture for such Judgment; for
Regeneration is such a worthy Work of God upon the Soul, that it cannot be
done, but though the Incorruptible Seed of the Word of God, which lives and
endures for ever in the Lord Jesus.

But these bold and blind Teachers, rushing like the Horse into the Battle, are
not afraid to say, and that generally concerning every Infant which they
Sprinkle, that they are Regenerated; and so presume to give God Thanks for it;
as though without question it were certainly so; when as indeed they do not at
all know whether any thing at all be done to the Child's Soul by it or no: And
surely this must needs be a high Presumption, to Father that upon the pure and
holy God, which he never promised to do by such a means upon such a subject, as
by the Scriptures and Doctrine of Faith is most manifest. And for those
Scriptures which they would color the Matter over to you with, makes nothing
for it. They allege, Christ took little Children in his Arms, and blessed
them; therefore they are regenerated by the Priest's Sprinkling: Is this good
reasoning, I say this is nothing to the purpose, for Christ did neither Wash
nor Sprinkle them with any outward Water at all, but laid his Hands on them and
Blessed them that came to him. But bringing them to the Hireling Priest, I am
sure no wise Man will say, is bringing them to Christ. And so let the little
Infants alone whilst Infants, and when they are capable of Doctrine, let them
be brought by true Faith to Christ, and he will bless them now as then; for
nothing but the Prayer of Faith can do them any Service at all in this weighty
Matter until then. So this meddling with Children above this measure of Truth
and Faith, is great Presumption. Again says the Priest (who would be Saved
himself by some outward Observation or means of Words or Water, or the like, if
it could be) did not Christ say, Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God
as a little Child, shall in no wise enter therein. So say I also: But what is
this to their Custom of Sprinkling the Flesh with Water, and their Doctrine of
Regeneration thereupon? I say, nothing at all; For the Natural Infant is only
here set forth by way of Similitude, to show what harmless, passive, low-minded
Things those are, who enters into the Kingdom of Heaven, But Flesh and Blood,
says Paul, enters not, neither does Corruption inherit Incorruption, 1 Cor. 15
50. And as for the natural Infants, though they be harmless as to Men, yet they
generally hold, that by Nature they are not Harmless and without Sin in God's
sight, and so as such, are not fit Subjects of God's Kingdom. And Romans 9.6, 7,
8. the Apostle speaking of such a thing as this, says, All are not Israel
which are of Israel (though outwardly Circumcised.) Neither because they are
the Seed of Abraham are they all Children, but in Isaac shall thy Seed be
called. That is, They which are the Children of the Flesh, these are not the
Children of God, but the Children of the Promise are counted for the Seed. Ye
may as well, yea better, conclude, That all who came of Abraham according to
the Flesh, and were outwardly Circumcised, were Saved (because Circumcision was
commanded for the Children to which outward Baptism was not) as that all Coming
of Parents, called Christian and outwardly Sprinkled, are Saved (and that for
the outward sake) as you in your Doctrine most presumptuously do: But here the
Apostle gives all such Car^al Conceits the check. And as he says in another
place, It Is neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision avails any thing in this
great matter, but a new Creature. So may we as truly say to all such this day,
who place no less than Salvation it self upon the outward Baptism, that it is
neither such Baptizing, nor Unbaptizing, that avails any thing to God's
Kingdom, but a new Creature in Christ Jesus, for it is said, He that Believes
and is Baptized, shall be Saved: But he that Believes not, is condemned
already. But he does not say, He that is not Baptized with outward Water shall
be Damned, or is Condemned already. And we, through Grace, know there is a
Baptism of the Spirit, whereby all the Members of Christ are Baptized by one
Spirit into one Body, Glory to God, who has given us Victory over the Beast,
Whore and False Prophet. But you will say, perhaps, then, What shall become of
our Children? I say, if thou know not, stay till God make it known unto
thee; for Secret things belong to God, things Revealed tous. But it is no where
said, That all that come of such as are called Christians outwardly, and are
not Sprinkled after the Custom of England, and dye before they commit actual
Sin, are excluded the Kingdom of Heaven, as the Ignorant and Presumptuous may
imagine; but as they grow capable of Doctrine, we ought to instruct them in
Christ Jesus, and so nurture them up in his Fear, to know him in them, and what
he is to them in their Hearts by Faith, as is in part said before, so shall no
Uncircumcised or Unclean in Heart, be brought into God's Church; neither shall
the Hireling make a Prey upon the People any more; but the Church shall be as
in the Beginning, when it was called the Spouse of Christ, a Royal not a
Defiled Priesthood, a Chosen Generation (not the unchosen and unclean World a
peculiar People (and not the whole World, who in their Uncleanness, can get
into the Talk of Christian Religion, to the great Dishonor of God, who is
burdened with the Manners of such People as cry Lord, Lord, and leaving
continually undone the Lord's Holy Commandments.)

And now that you who read these Lines, may ponder a little further of what I
say, I may here set down somewhat more of the Priest's deceivable words at
their Sprinkling of Infants, as you may find them in the Book: For thus says
the Priest to the People, Dearly B^lived, ye have brought this Child here to be
Baptized, ye have Prayed that our Lord Jesus Christ would receive it, to
r^lease it of its Sins, to Sanctify it with the Holy Christ, to give it the
Kingdom of Heaven and everlasting Life: Ye have heard also how Christ has
promised in his Gospel to grant all these things, which ye have prayed for.
(Stay, I say, and be afraid for this Boldness, for there is no such Promise in
the Gospel, that the Lord Jesus Christ will give Eternal Life to any, much less
to all that the Hypocrites and open Profane Sinners pray for, for their
Prayers sake; who do all with one Mouth and Consent, daily Confess they have no
Health in them, but are Miserable Offenders, living in the continual Breach of
God's Commandments, and even angry in their Minds to hear any profess and
witness a better State; so it was most truly said, God hears not People
living in Sin, but if any be a Doer of God's Will, him God hears, John 9.)
So, People, you may see your Teachers frame Deceit, and would have you believe
their Untruths. But the Priest goes on, and says, Which Promise he for his
part will most surely keep and perform. Wherefore after this Promise made by
Christ (silence Flesh, there is no such Promise made upon this account) this
Infant must also faithfully, for his part, promise by you that are his
Sureties, (until he come to Age to take it upon himself) that he will Renounce
the Devil and all his Works, and constantly believe God's Holy Word, and
obediently keep his Commandments.

So now by this all may see that these Priests, for all their great talk of
Regenerating by their Baptism, it stands only upon a Condition, that the Child
must perform faithfully what is promised on their part. And so they do not
believe their own Doctrine, when they say in their Catechism, without any if or
and, That the Child was in its Baptism made an Inheritor of the Kingdom of
Heaven: And so in Unbelief and Blindness of their Hearts do they presume to
give Thanks, when they say afterward that they give God Thanks that he has
Regenerated the Infant. If they had prayed only that he would do it, and so
have left it, it had been less, but to conclude that it is absolutely done,
only because they have sprinkled it, and said a few words over it, and the
Covenant on the Child's part yet unperformed, this is great Presumption, and a
grievous taking of God's Name in vain. And here also is manifest a grievous
Error, that they cannot stay until the Child can promise for it self, if there
must needs be sprinkling and promising, but they must bring in others, without
all Scripture and Reason, to promise for them: For I do positively affirm as
before, that God never required it at any ones Hand so to do; for besides, that
there is no Scripture for it, it is greatly against Christ, who is the alone
Surety and Mediator betwixt God and Man, but it has been a Custom merely
introduced amongst People called Christians, in the dark Night of Apostasy,
when Popery began, which now in the clear shining of the Sun of Righteousness
upon People again, is done, and daily to be done away, Glory to the Lord for
Ever.

But the Priest goes on, demanding of the Sureties (which oftentimes fall out
to be some wanton Boy or Girl, or some other Notorious Evil-liver of Riper
Years.)

Do thou in the Name of this Child renounce the Devil and all his Works, the
vain Pomp and Glory of the World, with all Covetous Desires of the same, and
the Carnal Desires of the Flesh, so that thou will not follow, nor be led by
them.

And then these Ignorant Sureties, of what sort soever, being foreinstructed by
the Priest, must Answer, I Renounce them all.

What! People, are ye all Dead, or fast asleep, that ye never consider such
things as these, but rush like a Horse into the Battle without fear, into such
weighty Matters as these? Were it not fit that such who promise so boldly so
great Matters for others, were first looked into whether ever they did half,
nay, the hundredth part of so much for themselves, but where the Blind leads
the Blind, what less than such Pits can be expected.

And further, these Bold Sureties on the Child's behalf, being asked concerning
his Belief of the Articles of Faith, called the Creed, go on, and being taught
of Man, are not afraid to say any thing, and affirm, That all that they
steadfastly believe, though in their Heart the Knowledge of God is not.

And being further asked, Whether be will obediently keep God's Holy Will and
Commandments, and walk in the same all the Days of his Life?

The Answer is without stop or let, without asking Counsel of God at all, I
will.

O what a thing is Man left to himself! What a heap of Confusion and
Contradiction is he! O what Taskmasters of Egypt are these Blind Guides, to
bind that on others, which they will not touch with one of their Fingers; for
they themselves neither forsake the Devil, nor his Works, as is manifest; nor
believe in God nor Christ steadfastly; for how should they trust God for their
Souls, who dare not trust him for their Bellies, as their Covetous Practices
shows? And how can they be said to keep God's Holy Will and Commandments all
their Days, who are doing what they should not do by their own Confession all
their Lives long.

And when the Priests have thus far taken God's Name in vain, and deceived
themselves, and the Parents by making them believe that they are what they are
not, by this their sorry doing, they proceed to give Charge to the Godfathers
and Godmothers, (so called) that they bring the Child when it can say (for it
must be noted that their Religion stands in saying) the Creed, the Lord's
Prayer, and the Ten Commandments, in the Vulgar Tongue, that they bring it to
the Bishop to be Confirmed by him. O sad! O sad! that ever Men should thus dare
to trifle with Holy Things. For Regeneration is a Holy Thing, but is neither
wrought by outward Washings, nor vain Men's Words, nor Promises, nor their
Prayers, but only by Jesus Christ, the great and true Baptizer, according to
the working of his Heavenly Power and Spirit of Life in the Will of God, as he
says, The Wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof,
but know not whence it comes, nor whither it goes, so is every one that is
Born of God's Spirit, John 3.8.

And to shut up this Business, that none may be ignorant of the grosness of
Darkness that goes all along in this thing, and so ends it; they say, It is
certain by God's Word, that Children which are Baptized, dying before they
commit Actual Sin, are undoubtedly Saved. Understand thus Baptized, as
aforesaid.

Now to this I say, that if People can be wrought into such Darkness as to
believe this, and to rest satisfied that it is according to the Word of God,
when it is a mere Invention of the Nations in the Apostasy, and so no Scripture
of Truth at all for it, it is no wonder if they can get them into the Belief of
lesser Errors. And also it is no wonder to see the Poor People, thus deluded,
make such haste to get their Infants to the Priest, when they perceive them in
any danger of dying. For these that lay so much stress upon this outward
Sprinkling or Baptism, as they call it, must needs have dismal Thoughts
concerning such as Die without the same, to wit, that they are little less, if
not altogether Damned. And as also may easily be gathered from the Words before
their Burial of their Dead, which runs thus,

Here is to be noted, say they, that the Office ensuing, (to wit, of their
manner of their Burial of the Dead, which they call Christian Burial) is not to
be used for any that Die unbaptized, (to wit, unsprinkled by the Priest, as
aforesaid) or Excommunicate, or have laid violent Hands upon themselves.

O what Darkness, what Destruction and Misery is in all their Ways, who account
not People worthy of Christian Burial, who are either Excommunicate by these
Wretched Men, and that may be for not paying a Groat or two for Repair of their
Steeple house, or high Place! Or will not, nay, cannot for Conscience Sake come
under their Sprinkling. But as for the Man they speak of, who has laid violent
Hands upon himself, what if it prove one that they say has been made Inheritor
of the Kingdom of Heaven, yea, confirmed in it by their Office, and was never
Excommunicated by them, must not he have Christian Burial neither? O strange
confused doings! Then it seems the Gates of Hell may prevail against such as
are of your Faith, though they be confirmed in it never so much. And by this it
also appears, that you are such Sinners as God hears not, as was said before;
for you prayed after your wretched Fashion, in your sprinkling of them, that
the Old Adam might die in them, but lo here he lives, and has laid violent
Hands upon the Body; you prayed for Power over the Devil for them, but lo here
the Devil has overcome them; you prayed that those Dedicated by your Ministry
might be Everlastingly Rewarded with good, but lo here your Child is become a
Man, and a Self-murderer, and not thought worthy of Christian Burial, as you
call it.

But the Lord sees all your grievous doings, your End is come and coming, and
the Lord Jesus Christ himself, the Everlasting High Priest is at Work,
Baptizing with his Holy Spirit and Fire; O! his Fan is in his Hand thoroughly to
purge the Floor. But you Mer-made Priests, who have presumed to speak, and he
never sent you, you are not as his Mouth or Messengers, for you put no
difference, neither know ye how to put difference betwixt the Precious and the
Vile. You bring in the uncircumcised and unclean, you matter not what you do,
you weigh not your Doings nor Words in God's Balance, but the Love of Money
(the Root of all Evil) has so blinded your Eyes, that you will see nothing at
all of Truth, for your Eye being Evil, your whole Body is full of Darkness, as
Christ says; your Skirts are discovered, the Books are opened, and now will
the Lord give you according to your Deeds; as you have grieved and burdened his
good Spirit, so will he burden you with his Plagues and Terrors: And though you
may cry to the Rocks and the Mountains, yet nothing shall hide you from his
Wrath, as Truth has said it is so. Some have been lopping at the Branches, but
now Christ's Axe is laid again to the Root of the Evil Tree, (Glory to his
Name) to cut it up Root and Branch, that the right Heavenly Root and Branch of
his own planting may bring forth Fruit to his Glory and Endless Praise, who is
worthy, who is over all God Blessed for Ever. So be it.

The next thing, after the Children are grown up to Men and Women, at least to
Sixteen Years of Age, or upwards, and have passed the Bishops Hands, as is
beforementioned, they are invited to the Communion, which they call the other
Sacrament, wherein they eat Bread and drink Wine in remembrance of Christ's
Death, as they say, until he come: But here you must understand a great Mystery
of Deceit which has crept in amongst the People called Christians, since the
Apostles time, in the Apostasy and great Darkness of Antichrist; to wit, that
though they tell of remembering Christ's Death till he come, yet they do not
believe, nor would have any others ever to believe, that this coming of Christ
shall be whilst People are in this Body upon the Earth, but they must be eating
Bread and drinking Wine as a Sign, and never come to see it fulfilled to them
in the coming of the Substance, to wit, Christ in Life and Power to dwell with
them, and in them, as he promised to them that looked for him; as Christ said
concerning the Fruit of the Vine, that he would drink it new with his Disciples
in his Father's Kingdom. And as Christ taught them, amongst other things, to
pray that the Father's Kingdom might come; and is not this to be known in
People whilst here? Yea, yea, and so to feel Christ supping with them, and they
with him; and being unto them their daily Bread, as he says in the sixth of
John, I am the Bread of Life; thus, I say, they remain out of the Faith of
Christ; and so without Faith it is impossible to please God.

Also here is to be noted another grand Deceit of the Enemy in this their
Sacrament, so called, in that he makes them believe the Bread and Wine is not
holy enough, and sufficient for that Business, unless the Man-made Priest have
said some words over it, which they call Consecration, and so Consecrated it,
as they speak, with his unholy Hands; unholy I call them, and that appears from
their own Confession, for they daily say they have no Health in them, by reason
of their grievous Offenses, but if they had not in words confessed it, yet
their Lives makes it manifest that they are of unclean Lips, and defiled Hands,
which whilst so, are not fit to meddle with Holy Things, no more than the
Lepers under the Law, were fit in their Leprosy to enter into the Temple, or
meddle with any Holy Thing: And for those words they use unto all that
Communicate Hand over Head, which say, The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ
preserve thy Body and Soul unto Everlasting Life: It is demanded where they had
them, for I never read any such in Christ's giving that Bread and Wine at his
last Supper, nor in Paul's words to the Corinthians, afterward speaking of it,
where then had they them? Surely they have either Invented them out of their
own Heads, or had them out of some Popish Book, or the like: For it is certain
from the Lord Jesus they came not, seeing they are such a Burden to the Souls
of his Redeemed Ones this Day: But again these words, Preserve thy Body and
Soul, signifies, the Blind Priest takes it for granted, that all that he gives
this Bread unto, are in a good and safe Condition at present, though the Lord
knows, and they themselves confess, they remain Miserable Offenders, and have
no Health in them. O what sad work is here amongst them! O what grievous
daubing! First, they tell them, that by their sprinkling they were made so and
so, as is beforementioned, and in their Bishoping confirmed in it; and now
therefore by this eating and drinking they are preserved, though to the Grief
of the Spirit of God they live in their Sins, and in the broad way of the Old
and Evil World, where the true sprinkling of the Blood of Christ is not known;
for says the Apostle, If we walk in the Light, as he, to wit, God, is in the
Light, them have we Fellowship one with another; and the Blood of Jesus Christ
his Son, cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.6, 7. Then it must needs be, that
such as walk in Darkness know not Christ, nor the cleansing of his Blood, for
he is only the Author of Life to all that obey him; but the unclean World eat
and drink Damnation to themselves, whatsoever to the contrary they may Imagine.
But whence came this Custom of Consecrating Bread and Wine, if not from those
of Rome, who falsely imagine the Real Presence, as they call it, to be after
their Consecration? For Christ's giving of Thanks at his last Supper, before
his giving of Bread and Wine, is nothing to your Custom. Also seeing you
pretend to give all the Virtue to the Thing signified, and not to the Signs,
you spoil your own Doctrine of Consecration: But Popery is easilier gotten out
of the Profession than out of the Heart.

It would be long to tell of all the bold and strange Passages they have in
this their Communion, as in the other of their Observations. But this one more
only may be mentioned, and so pass on, and it is this, Therefore with Angels,
and Archangels, and with all the Company of Heaven, say they, we laud and
magnify thy Glorious Name Evermore, praising thee, and saying, Holy, Holy,
Holy Lord God of Hosts, Heaven and Earth are full of thy Glory.

Now all People, whose Minds are tender toward God, I Appeal to God's Witness
in you, whether such words as these do any way suit or agree with the Condition
of the Parishes of England, who thus use them? For what Fellowship have such
Miserable Offenders and Unhealed Souls with Angels, and Archangels, and all the
Heavenly Company? Nay, nay, no more than Light and Darkness has. But here the
Whore that fits upon many Waters (which by Exposition of the Spirit, are
Multitudes of People) has lifted up their Minds into a Conceit that they are
Real Christians, and so of the Heavenly Company, because of Words, when Alas
they are for the most part such as the Apostle wrote unto weeping, Who so walk
as that they are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose God is their Bellies,
and glory in their shame, minding earthly things, Phil. 3.

And what shall I say of their Ring, and plighting of their Troth, and
Worshipping one another in their Form of Wedding, when they say, With this Ring
I thee Wed, and with my Body I thee Worship; but even take up a Lamentation for
the People, whose Eye is so blinded by the God of this World, that they will
not see the things that belong unto their Peace in this the Day of the Lord,
wherein he is so lovingly ca^^ing them out of their Darkness into his
Mavelous Light.

And as for the Visitation of their Sick, and Churching of their Women, as they
call it, (that Mosaical Rite) there is such bold calling of every one, (who can
but say a few words by rote) the Servants of God, and putters of their Trust in
God, and the like, it even burdens the Spirit of the Lord to bear it: And to
hear a poor wretched Man, who has run, and God never sent him; to say, That by
the Authority of God given him, he Absolves the Sick Man from all his Sins:
Such had need take heed lest the Judgments of God fall on them, as it did upon
those Presumptuous Jews, the Priests Sons, mentioned Acts 19.13, etc.

And for their Burials, as they do in the rest, so do they in this, and are
most grievous Daubers and Takers of God's Name in vain; and they are not afraid
to say indifferently of one as well as another, that they have a Hope, yea, a
sure and certain Hope of their Resurrection to Life Eternal, though they have
been never so Notoriously Evil in this Life; yea, though they have said but a
little before in their Commination, Cursed are the Unmerciful, Fornicators, and
Adulterers, Covetous Persons, Idolaters, Slanderers, Drunkards and
Extortioners; and both Prieft and People said Amen to it. And though they be
found living and dying such, yet now at their Burial all must be daubed over
with a Resurrection to Life Eternal.

But here is the Device by which the Hireling lives; for what by their
Doctrines and Words in their Sprinklings, in their Confirmations, in their
Communions, in their Burials, yea, in all their Doings, there is such a
Bewitching of the People, and strengthening the Hands of Evildoers, that none
returns from their Evil Ways, but all lies in Death and Darkness, without
remorse; none smites upon his Thigh, and says, What have I done? But with
Death they make a Covenant, and with Hell are they and their Multitude at
Agreement; but with the Over flowing Scourge of his Wrath, will the Lord sweep
away all Lying Refuges; and the Lord is begun to make a Blessed Separation
between the Precious and the Vile, Glory to his Name for Ever. So be it; so be
it.

O! the set Wages and Hire in every Parish, seconded with an Outward Law to
compel it, and the many stinted Forms of Words and Actions in their Services
made ready to their Hands, and Enjoined upon them, upon Pain of being incapable
of the Wage and Hire appointed for those Doings, is such a Bait to the
Mercenary Minds of the Men of this World, that it even draws and drives by
heaps into the Ministry such as God never sent, nor would never come of
themselves, but for the sake of that filthy Lucre. But God is shaking his Hand
against such Dishonest Gain; and the Lord has, and is restoring to us the
Ancient Ministry as in the Apostles Days, where all was done by the Ability of
God's own Spirit, in such as had freely received the Gift thereof, and
therefore could and can freely give, Glory to his Name for Evermore. Amen and
Amen.

Thomas Tailor.

A Testimony for the Lord, the good Shepherd, and true Minister of the
Sanctuary, and true Tabernacle which God has pitched, and not Man, against all
the false Shepherds, and Hireling Ministers, and Teachers of the World, under
what Name, or Notion, or Form soever, who have run, and God never sent them,
and therefore cannot profit the People at all.
HEAR the Word of the Lod God that is gone forth against you, like a Flame of
Fire, in this the mighty Day of the arising of the Almighty Power of the Lord
God Almighty, who is jealous of his Honor, and who is tender of the poor Souls
whom you have deceived, and do daily make a Prey of for filthy Lucre, your End
is come, 2 Pet. 2. 2 Cor. 3.13. Dan. 5.26 27.
the Day has Revealed you, and in God's Balance are you weighed, and found
altogether wanting; and therefore is your Kingdom departed from you; and now
the Lord God is setting up his own most Heavenly and Everlasting Kingdom in the
Hearts of his People, Dan. 7.
who in the Leadings of his Light are come out from amongst you; and who
through the Blood of the Lamb, and the Word of their Testimony, have gotten
Victory over the Beast, the Whore, and false Prophet, who have desiled the
Earth with their Abominations, Lies and Lewdness, Dan. 7.
and he will yet gather more from amongst you: And now the Kingdom under the
whole Heavens is, and shall be for ever the Portion of the People of the Saints
of the most High God, whose Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom, and all
Dominions shall serve and obey him, who lives for ever; who is arisen in this
his Glorious Day, not only to reveal, but even to destroy to the uttermost the
Man of Sin, that Son of Perdition in all the Earth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
which has sat in the Temple of God, as God, saying he was God, and has long
Exalted himself above all that was called God, which alone ought to be
Worshipped; but the Lord is arisen to dethrone him, even that Wicked One, who
would not suffer the true Seed, the true Heir, Christ Jesus, the true Light, to
Reign; but has always, like an enraged Beast, pushed with his Horns, against
the Lamb in every Appearance, whereby the tender Buddings of Truth in many
People have been often hurt, and the Growth of the good Seed often hindered,
and some of the feeble Ones, even in their comings out of Egypt, have been out
off by this Spiritual Amaleck, the Dragon, upon which the Whore, the false
Priesthood and Ministry Rides, whom God will have War with for ever, and will
destroy him to the End; for now is the Ancient of Days upon his Throne, and the
Thrones of the Wicked are cast down; and One like unto the Son of Man, Acts
9.10, 11.
to wit, the Lord Christ Jesus, in and with his numberless Number is come with
the Clouds of Heaven (for as sure as he went up, so is he certainly come again)
and brough^ near to the Ancient of Days, Dan. 7.26, 27.
and is in the actual Possession of that Kingdom, Glory and Power given him of
the Father, that all People, Nations and Languages should serve and obey him;
for his Dominion is an Everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass away, and his
Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed; and now the Judgment is set, and the
Books are opened, Glory to the Lord for ever; and now is the Revelation of all
Things, Rev. 16.19.
and fulfilling of all Things which has been spoken of by the true Witness,
since the World began: And now the Tything Hireling Priests, and Merchants of
Babylon, who by their Works deny Christ come in the Flesh, run to the Powers of
the Earth; and Cry out, Rev. 18.15, 16.
and say, They will not pay us, they will not put into our Mouths, they will
buy none of our Merchandise any more; Alas, alas, our great City: But for all
their Crying, God will not hear, nor help them, for they have left off to do
good, and God has shaken his Hand at their dishonest Gain; and the Son of God,
in his Ever-blessed Light, is arisen, and is at Work to lead out of Darkness
the Souls of the Simple, that they may know him alone to be their Priest,
Minister and Teacher, and may not be a Prey any longer to the Wolf in the
Sheep's Clothing; the Wolf, who is inwardly gone from God, and ravenned into
the dark Wilderness, and has stolen the Saints and Christ's Words, and makes
a Trade on them, to deceive withal for filthy L^cre: Woe unto them, they have
gone in the Way of Cain, and after the Error of Balaam, for worldly Ends, 2
Pet. 2. throughout. Rev. 12.7, 5, and. 10.
and shall p^rish i^ the gainsaying of the Truth, as Core did. And the Lamb
shall have the Victory; and the Lord is at Work, leading his Flock by the
Streams of Living Waters; Glory to his Name for ever.

And what shall I only complain of the Unrighteousness, and declare of the
Downfall of the Kingdom of false Teachers and Hirelings amongst the Turks, or
of the Proud Imperious Prelates of the dark Seed of Rome? Or shall I not rather
come nearer home, to wit, to the Place of my outward Nativity, the Land of Old
England, who pretend to be neither of the Spirit of Turks nor Papists, but
People of the Reformed Religion, called Protestants, as who should say,
Protesters against Romish Usurpations and Antichristian Innovations? But alas!
to the Shame of thy Nakedness, O England, England, there is found in thee a
Conspiracy, a Company of lewd and treacherous Men, Jer. 13.
who stand over thee as Teachers, covered with black both inwardly and
outwardly, who wear a black Garment now, as the false Prophets of old wore a
rough Garment to deceive, who cry, Give, give, and can never have enough, for
they are as Graves; and if one put not into their Mouths, they bite with their
Teech, and prepare War against them; Micah 3.
Suing People at Law for Wages, for whom they do Work, most unreasonable of all
Men, and contrary to all other People, Reaping where they never Sowed, neither
Spiritual nor Temporal Seed; they claim the Tenth of such Men's Labors and
Increase, as they themselves excommunicate out of their Synagogues, and in
their false Judgment judge to Hell: What! does not the Destruction of their
Souls seem enough, but you must destroy their Estates and Families, and
sometimes their Body and Life also, by long and unheard of Imprisonments and
Plunderings? Shall not the Nations of the World (who profess not, as you the
Priests and Prelates of England do) rise up in Judgment against you? For which
of the Priests in Turkey or Rome are more eager for their Bellies than you are?
What Means do you leave unessayed against those, who for Conscience sake cannot
put into your Mouths? Will any, whose Eyes are open, believe you to be
Ministers of the Gospel, who rather than lose a little of the Earth, will
expose both your selves and your Gospel, to all the Blame and Shame that may be.

The very Name of Tithes, shows you to be Jewish, and of Easter-Reckonings, and
such like, to be Popish; and now where is your Reformation? You may well
confess, there is no Health in you, who have so palpably done (and do) what you
ought not to have done, Isa. 14.5,
and left undone what you ought to have done, as in your Custom you confess:
Health, nay, nay, how should you have any Spiritual Health in you, who live in
such manifest Opp^si^ion to the Spirit of Christ Jesus, the Heavenly Physician.
Christ Jesus says to his Disciples, Freely you have received, freely give; but
you are all for Money, and great Farthly Revenues, that you may live in Pride,
Idleness, and Fullness of Bread. Christ says, Seek ye first the Kingdom of God;
but your Care is, how to get great Livings and Fat Benefices; and as for the
Heavenly Kingdom, Mat. 13.
which Christ compared to a Grain of Mustard Seed, you neither know it, nor are
willing to learn; you will neither enter into it your selves, Mat. 23.
nor suffer others, but by your Traditions you shut it up against Men. Christ
says to his, Swear not at all; but you teach for Doctrine, that Christians may
Swear, Mat. 5.34, 37. James 5.12.
and you do Swear, not only before the Magistrates, but even some of you in
your ordinary Communication; yea, and which is most Abominable, in your very
Church Service, compelling the Men called Churchwardens to Swear (and that
oftentimes with an Unwillingness of Heart, and Condemnation of Conscience) to
perform your Church-Offices, which lays a kind of Impossibility upon them. Oh
sad! may it not be said, The Land mourns because of Oaths? What, have you no
Shame nor Care of your Credit, that can do such things in the open Sun, ^os.
4.2, 3.
and not blush? Will you never open your Eyes a little to see your Works? What
do you mean to do? Or where will you hide your selves in the Day of God's
Judgments, when he calls you to an Account, and pleads with you in Flames of
Fire for all your mighty Sins? Do you indeed believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
as in words you say, That you regenerate the little Infants, by sprinkling a
little Water on its Face; and speaking a ^ew words of your own devising over
it, which it knows nothing of? Go you indeed, I say, believe, That by this kind
of Baptism, they are made the Children of God, the Members of Christ, and
Inheritors of the Kingdom of God? Or do you not rather do these Things to get
Money by? Oh Cursed Covetousness, Mat. 13.15.
the Root of all Evil; Oh, how it has drowned your Souls in Perdition; how it
has blinded your Hearts, that you can see nothing of the Kingdom of God: You
bring in a Company of poor deluded Souls, who follow you blind Guides, to
promise for the little Infant, That it shall forsake the Devil and all his
Works; then what shall these bold Promisers suffer, if the Child do not so?
Will they, or you their Teachers for them, be content to suffer the Pains of
Hell, the Reward of such as break Covenant with God? And when will you see that
this Custom of undertaking for the little Infants, greatly derogates from the
Honor of Christ, who is the only Undertaker for Man toward God: But what if a
Child, through Grace, be so strengthened, when it grows up, as to see your
Wretchedness, and so to forsake and bear Testimony against all the Works of the
Evil One that are done amongst you, Will you not call him Heretic, and put him
out of your Synagogues? Yea, yea; for you can have no Fellowship with any that
have Health in them; for by your own Confession, you are miserable Offenders
all the Days of your Life, and have no Health in you, and so cannot endure to
hear of Perfection or perfect Soundness on this side the Grave: Ephesians. 9.11, 12,
13.
Yea, though you read in Scripture, That Christ's Ministry perfects to God,
Ep^. 4. Yet there is not so much Faith amongst you as a Grain of Mustard seed,
to believe any such thing; for if any come to be healed by Christ, and so made
perfectly found to God, and witness forth the same, they are not for your
Company, even you who have no Health in you, but are miserable Offenders. Oh
you that cry out against Separatists and Separation, Jude 18.19.
what a woeful Separation have you made; you are of them who have separated your
selves from the Lord in Unbelief, and are sensual, not living in God's Spirit,
but in the broad Way of the World. Oh when will you be weaned from the Breasts
of Mystery Babylon, and learn to suck at Truth's Breasts, Zach. 13.1. Rev.
22.1, etc.
and draw Water out of God's Well, which in the Light and Life of Jesus Christ,
is opened to the true Hungerers and Thirsters after Righteousness this day.

But you have transgressed the Everlasting Covenant, and offered Violence to
the righteous Law of the Lord Jesus, and miserably wrested and perverted the
Holy Scriptures, 2 Pet. 3.16.
which witness of him and his glorious Appearance in these latter days; and
this you do, that you may establish your own Traditions, that you may keep your
selves up in the Earth, in the Glory of this World, and esteem of Fallen Man,
John 5.44.
who knows not Christ nor his Kingdom; and therefore has the Lord already
discovered your Skirts, and will yet daily more and more, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
by the bright shining forth of his Light, make you so manifest, naked and
bare, that every Eye shall see the Shame of your Nakedness; Isa. 66.24.
And to the Nations of them that are Saved, who walked in the Light of the
Heavenly Jerusalem, shall you be an abhorring for ever; and the Redeemed of the
Lord shall daily flock to Zion out of your Frozen Land, to offer their
Spiritual Sacrifices to God upon his Holy Altar; and shall see the Smeak of
your defiled Sacrifices go downward as Cain 's did, Genesis 4.5.
which God had no Respect to; And the Smoke of your Torment shall go up for
ever and ever, Rev. 14.11.
for strong is the Lord that judges you, because you have given his Lambs Gall
and Vinegar to drink, Rev. 16.19.
and have pushed them with Side and Shoulder; and therefore a bitter Cup will
God give you to drink.

Oh how has the Lord borne with you? How has his Voice uttered it self
amongst you in your Streets, in your Assemblies? saying in your Ears, O Repent,
repent, Give Glory to God, by giving over to deceive your own, and the poor
Peoples Souls, which are precious to God: O ye that have exalted your selves
into the Place of Teachers, and are untaught your selves, into the Place of
Bishops, and Overseers of others, and have not looked into your own Hearts and
Souls, to see what grows there. Mich. 3.6, 7.
O the deep Sleeps and Slumbers that you are seen to be in this day, even all
you who have ran, and God never sent you, and therefore you have not, nor never
can possibly in that State, profit the People at all. Oh all you that love to
be called of Men Master, and Doctor, and Lord Bishops, and Arch Deacons, and
suchlike worldly Titles, which Christ, Mat. 23.10, 11.
the meek Lamb, and lowly in Heart, did always forbid, and his Spirit is
against for ever and ever, and says, It shall not be so amongst his, but he
that is greatest must be least, and Servant of all, not in feigned Words and
deceitful Shows, Mat. 20.25, 26. Mat. 15.13.
but in Deed and in Truth, Glory to the Lord, who is arisen to root up the
false Ministry, and to bring in his own, as in the Beginning, That the Earth
may be covered with the Knowledge of God, Isa. 11.9. Hab. 2.14.
and Jesus Christ our Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea, Amen and Amen.

O ye Priests and Parish-Teachers! When will ye consider of the Entrance of
your selves into your Offices, and the People into your Church? You have laid
another Foundation than Christ has laid; Christ said to his Messengers and
Ministers, John 20.21, 22. Heb. 7.16.
As my Heavenly Father has sent me, so I send you; But Christ was not made a
Minister by the Law of a Carnal Commandment, but by the Power of an endless
Life. And so you that are Ministers of the Letter, and made Ministers thereof
by the Law of a Carnal Commandment, and your Fittedness for the Work is
gathered not from the Holy Spirit's Ability, 1 Cor. 1.20, 21. Rev. 3.18, 19, 20.
but from some Worldly Endowments, as Natural Languages, Arts and Parts, which
can only fit a Man for a Heathenish Oratory, but could never help in this great
and Heavenly Matter of Christ's Kingdom; and your Bishops being made by the
Humane Powers, could never say, That by the laying on of their Hands, you
received either the Holy Ghost, or any Gift of it: And so you being of the
World, and empowered by the World, how can you claim Audience or Obedience from
Christ's Members, who know not to follow your Voice, which is the Strangers
Voice; and so you Men of the World are heard, 1 John 4.5
upheld and obeyed by the World, who are ignorant of Christ's Voice from the
Strangers; Mat. 15.14
and so being such blind Guides, whether can you lead the People but into the
Ditch? And there you are, Isa. 55.2.
who are always doing what you ought not to do, and so have no Health in you,
and so dangerous to join to, and are miserable Offenders, Isa. 56.10. Isa. 1.4,
5, 6.
for taking the poor Peoples Money for that which is not Bread, and causing
them to spend their Labors for your Traditions and empty Sound of Words, which
are never able to satisfy their Souls: John 10.1.
And you are very miserable Offenders also, in not only coming in by a wrong
Door your selves, but also in persuading the poor deceived Multitude, that you
enter them into the Pale of the Church, by your Baptizing or Sprinkling of
them, when Infants, for which there is no Scripture: Nay more, as your common
Custom is, and as is said before, that you regenerate them by it; for God never
regenerated any by a Means which he never ordained, as this Usage of yours is
manifest to be: So all your Entrances being impure, and your Foundations
Unspiritual and Unscriptural, what Building must needs be builded thereupon,
the wise in Heart do easily see: So you and your Work being Mystery Babylon,
Mat. 7.26. Rev. 17.15. and 14.11.
the Lord God of Heaven is engaged against you, and his Vials of Wrath is he
pouring forth upon you, and he will not fail, nor be discouraged, until his
Judgments be brought forth to Victory over you. And now to you the Magistrates
and Powers, who Rule in this Nation of England, lend not your Power, much less
give it to this dead Image; uphold not this Ministry, which cannot profit you
nor the People at all, lest God plead with you in his Wrath for your Abuse of
it; for though they may persuade you that Christ is not against them, yet such
as God has Redeemed from amongst them, know them to be no Ministers of Christ,
but Hirelings, who have run without Christ's sending; and so not going Christ's
Message, they cannot be content with Christ's Maintenance, but cry unto you,
Acts 21.28.
O Magistrates, help, help, the People will not Pay us their Tithes, and the
like, lend us your Laws, your Prisons, etc. O Rulers! Consider, consider what
Teachers these are, who instead of compelling People to Love, and contribute to
them by the Power of the Word, are glad to run to the Worldly Magistrates
Sword; is not God against them that are thus against him? O leave them! Leave
them to try and prove themselves to the Peoples Conscience, to be true
Ministers by a free and powerful Ministry of the Word, not of Man, but of God,
unto them, or never own them, for Christ's ancient and true Ministers had
freely received, and therefore could freely give; and did Plant before they
Eat, Mat. 10.8.
and Fed the Flock before they had the Milk thereof; but these Buy their Words,
and therefore Sell them like Merchants of Babylon; Ezok. 34.
They eat the Fat, and clothe with the Wool, and kill them that are fed, as
the Prophet speaks; but God's Flock they feed not, but persecute them, calling
them Heretics, and all that is naught, as the Old Jews, who persecuted Christ
and his Followers, did; Acts 24.14.
But after the Way that they call Heresy, so worship we the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, believing his Living Word which perfects us to himself,
and the Scriptures which testify thereof; Glory to his Name for Ever.

And all ye Peopl^y who are Lovers, and Followers, and Upholders of this false
Ministry, which keeps you always learning, 2 Timothy 3.5, 5
and never brings you to the Knowledge of the Truth, as it is in Jesus, which
alone perfects to God; cease from it, and the Masterly Teachers in it, and from
them turn to God; Jer. 23.28, 29.
for what are their Dreams to the Living and Eternal Word of God, which is as a
Hammer and a Fire in the Hearts of all that receive it? Ezekiel. 18.23. Ezekiel.
32.11.
And what are their Inventions to the Ordinances of Christ? The Lord loves your
S^als, he has no Pleasure in your Death; it is not his Will that your Precious
Souls should be lost for the pleasing of vain Men, and answering their ungodly
Lusts: Jer. 30.17.
What is there no Bulm in Gilead? Is there no Christ, no Physician in England,
that the Breach which Sin has made betwixt God and your Souls can never be
made up, Hos. 4.2.
but the Wound must stand open still, like a Bloody-Issue, running out the very
Life of your Souls, so that you have no Power, no Victory over Sin, but Sin
stands still in its Strength and perfect Dominion over you? O when, O when will
you come to the Light, that your Eyes may be opened to see the dangerous Paths
that you are in, Rev. 3.18.
by following these Blind Guides, Mat. 23.13.
who having shut up the Kingdom of God against Men, will neither enter into it
themselves, nor suffer others. Oh! why will ye Die ye People of England? Exodus
10.21, 22, 23. Isa. 11.10. Joh. 3.19, 20 Genesis 31, 4.
Why will ye sit in Egypt's Darkness still, and the Land of God's People so
full of Light? The Lord God has listed up the Standard of his Truth in the
midst of you, but you choose rather to Fight under the Banner of the Power of
Darkness, because of your Love to the World to your Hurt; and so the Old
Dragon, who beguiled Eve, leads you Captive at his Will, who will not have
Christ, the true Light, the good Shepherd and Bishop of the Soul, to rule in
you. The Word of the Lord God unto you all, both Priests, Magistrates, and
People; Awake, Awake, the great and mighty terrible Day of the Lord God is at
Hand, 2 Pet. 3.16. 2 These. 5.2, 3. Prove. 1.27. Mal. 2.1. Romans 1.18.
is very nigh to come upon you, like a Thief in the Night, like an Armed Man,
like a terrible Tempest to scatter you, to spoil you of your Glory, to leave
you neither Root nor Branch: For now is the Lord Jesus Christ Mighty in Power,
arisen to plead with you in his Wrath, because you have made void his Law, and
transgressed the Everlasting Covenant of his Gracious Light, and instead
thereof have set up a dead Image, Rev. 13.14.
a liveless Form of Man's devising, the Image of Jealousy, a Religion and
Worship which makes nothing perfect to God; your Root is seen and judged by the
true Light, Christ Jesus, the Root and Offspring of David. It is so.

And if you still continue in your vain Thoughts, thinking to please God with
such a Life, wherein you are daily doing what you ought not to do, and leaving
undone what God commands you, and never come out of that wretched and miserably
defiled State; but think a customary Confession of Sins, without forsaking of
them, is a Worship worthy the pure God, who is of purer Eyes than to behold
Iniquity; I say, if these Thoughts and this Heart continue in you, Hos. 1.6, 9.
the Lord will cast you off, and will utterly forsake you, and bring his sore
Plagues upon you; and you shall know in that Day that God will not be mocked,
but will be sanctified and exalted in his Judgments over all his Enemies,
especially over such as you, who take his Name daily in your Mouths in vain,
saying, Lord, Lord, and living in a continual Breach of his most Holy
Commandments; and who instead of waiting for his Holy Spirit, to kindle a pure
heavenly Zeal in you toward God and Christ, Lev. 10.1, 2.
do offer the false Fire of your own Blind Zeal, as Nadab and Abihu did, whom
God in his Jealousy consumed with a grievous Destruction.

And now unto you the two Mothers of these Priests of this Nation of England,
called Oxford and Cambridge; Isa. 1.4.
fee what you have brought forth and nourished at your Breasts. O! a sad
Generation it is; O! what a Generation of Evildoers are your Children (whom
you have given Suck unto) become? How have you with your Heathenish Arts and
Sciences strengthened them against the Simplicity of the Everlasting Gospel,
which Christ has restored unto us in this his glorious Day, Col. 2.8. Isa.
1.26. Rev. 14.6, 7.
after the long Night of Apostasy. The Lord Jesus Christ never ordained such
Ways and Means as you use for the furnishing and enabling of his Servants for
the Work of his Ministry: But when he ascended up on high, he gave Gifts unto
Men, some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers,
for the edifying of his Heavenly Body, and perfecting of his Holy Ones, Ephesians.
4. But what can you edify or perfect to God, Jam. 3.15, 16. 1 Cor. 2. from
Ver. 1. to the end.
whose Wisdom is from below, and whose Studies and Exercises for the most part
run in the Channel of the Heathenish Philosophy, and Vain Deceit of the World's
Spirit, which can neither receive in, nor minister forth any Thing of Christ's
Kingdom: And so we are given by the Lord's Blessed Light and Spirit in this Day
of the Lord, to see and declare, That you are gone from Christ, and the Way of
the true Ancient Christians, into the Way of the Heathens, who know not God, as
the Apostle said, The World by Wisdom knew not God: And so the People of the
Country are greatly deceived by you, and their Children extremely wronged and
corrupted by you; for many send up their Youth to learn some Good amongst you;
but Alas, how can you that are so evil, bring forth good Fruit? Nay, nay, for
if any come amongst you, and conform not to the filthy and bad Customs of your
Universities, how are they looked upon as strange Things? How are they hooted
at as Owls in a Desert? You are altogether corrupt, Isa. 1.4, 5, 6.
from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot, no Soundness in you. Oh!
What Lewdness and Debauchery has mine Eyes beheld in you? Isa. 2.17. Isa.
31.4, 5. Jer. 6.15.
The Lord will ease himself of you, your high Looks and high Towers he will
pull down; your Theater that you Glory in shall be a Curse; and the Lord will
deliver his Lambs from your Teeth: What a Face have you that you cannot Blush?
What, will you never give over provoking God with your Acts and Degrees? What
Heathenish Stuff is this, to find you at this time a day telling of, and
glorying in? Your Batchelers of Art, and Masters of the same, Batchelers of
Divinity, and Doctors of Divinity, and such like; but if any come amongst you,
who through the Grace of God, has attained to that Blessed Degree of a true
living Member of Jesus Christ, and Man of God, to Preach the Mystery of God's
Kingdom, Isa. 56.10.
to awaken you out of your deep Slumbers of Sin and Death, him you persecute,
him you disallow, as your Forefathers, the Old Scribes and Pharisees, Mat.
27.21, 22.
rejected Christ Jesus, the true Foundation and Cornerstone of the Heavenly
Building, with his Blessed Followers: And therefore will God's Controversy be
with you for Ever, until you Repent of your Sorceries and great Abominations,
wherewith you have burdened his good Spirit Days without Number: Rev. 1^.6.
But the Everlasting Gospel of God's Light and Love shall spread, and the
Branch thereof shall over all your Walls grow up to his Praise, who is come in
this Day of his Power, to Judge the Great Whore's Works in England, as well as
in other Countries, that the Earth may be swept, Isa. 11.9.
and filled with the Knowledge of God, as the Waters cover the Sea. So be it,
so be it, says my Spirit.

Thomas Tailor.
And now the Heavenly Free Mother, Rev. 21.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Gal. 4.26.
with her Happy Children, is come and coming down from God out of Heaven, to
possess, inherit, and everlastingly to enjoy the Kingdom of his Endless Love,
Peace, Righteousness, and Joy, where Mystery Babylon, with all her false
Mothers, and sinful Children, shall have no Name nor Place at all; for at the
Downfall of Mystery Babylon, does arise in the Saints the pure unspeakable Joy,
which none of the Children of the dark World understand any thing of at all. It
is so. See Rev. 2.17. and Rev. 7. from Ver. 9, to the end; and Rev. 11. from
Ver. 15, to the end; and Rev. 12.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. and Rev. 14. from Ver. 1, to
Ver. 13. and Rev. 15.1, 2, 3, 4. and Rev. 16.17, 18, 19. and Rev. 17.18. and
Rev. 18.24. and Rev. 19. from Ver. 1, to Ver. 10. It is done, HALLELUJAH.



The true Fast from the False
Isaiah 58.4. Ye shall not Fast as ye do this Day.
THE Lord Speaks this to the Ungodly People in those Days, who made a Vain and
Hypocritical Show of Fasting, but the Lord Regarded them not; and the same
Lord, the Everlasting God, who was angry then with that False-hearted People,
is Angry and fore Displeased with the like Generation of Evil and Ungodly Men
at this Day; who, when any Plague or Calamity comes upon the Nation, so that
the Hand of God cannot but be seen against them, then they will call a Fast for
a Day in a Week or a Month, or so, and so make a Show of Humbling themselves in
the outward, but in the mean time the Sin of their Souls, and Evil of their
Lives is not departed from, but in their Words and Deeds they are the same both
in the sight of God and Man after their Fast; Yea, many of them in the very Day
of their Fast, as they were before. Were they Drunkards before, they continue
so still; were they given to Swearing, and taking God's Holy Name in Vain, they
are found the same still, for all their Fasting, as they were before. Were they
Proud and Covetous, given to Oppress, Extort and Overreach the Poor, and
Overreach their Neighbors in their Bargainings and Dealings, that they may be
Rich, and so Live, like the Rich Glutton, in all manner of Excess of Meat,
Drink and Clothes, they are found the same; alas the very same, if not worse,
after the Fast, as they were before: Or were they Guilty of laying heavy
Burdens upon the Tender-Conscienced People: yea, and of Imprisoning such as in
Conscience to God could not Bow to every thing that Man's Will set up, Alas! to
the Grief of God's Holy Spirit, they are found in the same Steps still; and
therefore says the Lord from time to time, Ye shall not thus Fast as ye do
this Day, to cause your Voice to be heard on High: Is it such a Fast that I
have chosen a Day for a Man to Afflict his Soul? Is it to bow down his Head
like a Bull-rush, or so? Will thou call this a Fast, an acceptable Day to the
Lord? Nay, nay, this is not the Fast that God has chosen, but this is only
that which vain deceived Man, in his Ignorance and Blindness, chooses. For the
true Fast, even that which the Holy God in all Ages, and from all People
Requires, is that every one depart from the Evil of his Way, and from the
Violence that is in his Heart and Hands, and so to loose the Bands of
Wickedness, and to undo the heavy Burdens that lie upon Soul or Body; and so in
Deed and Truth to let the Oppressed go free, and to break every Yoke, and to be
Merciful, Pitiful, and Tenderhearted one to another, according to Jesus
Christ. O! this is the Fast that pleases God, that which his Soul, and the
Soul of the Righteous Loves.

But to see People gather together for a few Hours of a Day, and in a few, or
many Formal Words, Confess Sin and Wickedness, and yet Live in it, this is
Abominable in the sight of God and all good Men.

Therefore all Awake, Arise, and stand up to Judgment, O all ye People of the
Earth, who are found in such Deceitful Worship, for God is not Mocked, neither
will he be at all Reconciled to you, until you, from the Heart, put away all
your Sins, whereby his Glory this Day is so much stained, and until you bring
forth Fruits of Righteousness, and such Words and Works daily as are worthy
amendment of Life.

Thomas Tailor.

Something in Answer to some Passages in that naughty Book, called, A
Looking-Glass for Ladies.
HE says in Page 89 and 90. There are two sorts of Love; One Legal, The other
Evangelical.

The First, which is Legal, is to Love God with all our Hearts, all our Souls,
and all our Might.

This, says this Man, no Man can attain unto in this Life, no not the
Regenerate themselves.

To which I Answer, That this Man shows plainly, that he knows not what he
says, but is not only a False Witness against God and his Work in his
Regenerate People, but also a manifest Contradicter of himself, for says he,
Evangelical Love is when a Man begins here truly to Love God. 2. When he does
daily grow and increase in this Love. 3. When he is Constant in the same to the
end, so that nothing can draw him from God.

This he and all that sort will in words confess the Regenerate in this Life
may do, and yet not love God with that Love the Law requires. What
Contradiction is this? Is not this Love perfect and answerable to God's Law,
when one, First, Loves God truly; Secondly, Grows and Increases daily in this
true Love; and, Thirdly, When one is so constant in the same, that nothing can
draw the Soul from it: And therefore, says the Apostle, Romans 8.3, etc. That
which the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the Flesh, God sending
his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin condemned him in the
Flesh; that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.

Now let any who knows God, give in his Witness, if this Man do not deny the
very End of Christ's Coming in the Flesh, which was, as the Apostle says here,
to fulfill the Law in and for his People, that they might love the Lord their
God in Christ Jesus, with all their Heart, Soul, and Might, according to his
Holy Law; as one well said, That which the Law requires, the Gospel
fulfilleth. But such Men as this, who flatters the fallen Sons and Daughters of
Adam, by pleading for respect to their Persons, knows nothing of the Matter in
themselves, but only as they imagine from the Letter without, they tell every
Man his Dream to his Neighbor, and so by their false Doctrines, and
Self-contradictions, as is manifest here, do daily make the shame of their
Nakedness appear, and their Envy to the Servants of God, whom they Reproach
under the Name of Quakers, appears very much in such sayings as he there sets
down saying, This serves to reprove the Quakers who are possessed of Perfection
through Satan's Pride; and adds, O that ever a poor Worm of the Earth, a very
Lump of Sin and Corruption, to think that he dare look God in the Face in a
sinless Condition! These need not a Psalm of Mercy, says the Lying Spirit in
this Sam. Smith that writ that Book, these will not be beholding to Christ.

To which I answer and say, First, It Is Blasphemy to say, That the Regenerate
Man's sinless Perfection is proud Satan's Work: For it is Christ's Blessed Work
to perfect his Saints, as Ephesians. 4.12, 13, 14. and Chap. 5.25, 26, 27. And
Secondly, It Is a false Slander, and unjust Accusation of us, whom the World
calls Quakers, to say, That we either say or think, that any Worm of the Earth,
or Lump of Sin and Corruption, either dares, or ever possibly can look God in
the Face, or ever attain to a sinless Condition; for Earth, Sin and Corruption,
cannot enter into God's Kingdom, or inherit Incorruption: But this we say, That
the Regenerate who are Born again, even Born of God, of the Incorruptible Seed
of his Heavenly Ever-living Word, are sinless and perfect in Christ Jesus, with
whom they are one, and in him do in all Holy Humility and Acceptance with the
Father, stand before his Throne, where no Earth, nor lumps of Sin and
Corruption, nor no false Accuser of the Brethren, nor Respecter of Persons, can
ever come.

Again, whereas this Man Sam. Smith says, The Evangelical Love (before
described) is far short of that Love the Law requires, is a false Witness and
Accuser of Christ, as though he came to destroy or make void the Law; But do
not think, says Christ, that I came to destroy the Law or the Prophets, but to
fulfill: And is not this the great Thing and Sum of all the Law and the
Prophets, thou shall love the Lord God with all thy Soul, Mind and Strength?
And does not Christ the Power of God, fulfill this in his Members? Yea, yea, as
Paul said expressly in Rom 8.4. before mentioned, That the Righteousness of the
Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit: But now such as profess the Letter, and want the Life, and so walk not
after the Spirit, but the Flesh, these do not love wholly, nay, not at all in
Truth, and so with this Smith, are Breakers of the Law of God, and so not at
all in the Kingdom of God.

The next thing observable in this wretched Man's Book aforesaid, called, The
Looking-glass, is his grievous Opposition against the Doctrine of Perfection.

Where he says, That there is none so Godly, Righteous or Religious here in
this Life, or can attain to that Measure of Grace, to be Perfect, but stands in
need of the Exhortation, Prayers, and Godly Advice of others.

To which I answer and say, That though godly Exhortation, Prayers, and Advice
amongst Brethren of Christ be lovely, yet for him to say, There is none so
perfect, but stands in an absolute Necessity of these from Man, is not true;
for the Apostle speaking not to the Teachers only, but to the Brethren of
Christ in general, 1 John 2.27. These Things I have written to you concerning
them that seduce you, but the anointing which ye have of God the Holy One,
teaches you all things, and you need not that any Man teach you, but as that
teaches you, etc. and you know all things: And these things, says another
Apostle to the Brethren, do I write unto you by way of remembrance, (not
absolute Necessity, as this Man speaks) to stir up your pure Minds. And this
Doctrine of the Hirelings, is only to keep up their Masterly Power over the
poor Peoples Consciences; and indeed denies the Gift of God's Spirit, and
coming of Christ in the Flesh, and the very End of his Ministry, which was for
the perf^cting of the Saints, even in this Life. See Ephesians. 4. at large. But the
Hirelings Doctrine, which perfects nothing but Sin, keeps People always
learning, laden with diverse Sins and Lusts, but never brings them to the
Knowledge of the Truth, which sets free from Sin; and therefore from such,
according to Christ's Doctrine, ought all People to turn away.

But what, must this Sam. Smith, and his Fellows, who would be accounted
Masters of Assemblies, be taught of others? Indeed they stand in need of
teaching; for they have run, and God never sent them, and therefore they cannot
profit the People at all, as is here manifest.

The Reasons of this Smith for denying Perfection, says he, is, Because the
Best of God's Saints and Servants in this Life are not capable of Perfection.
And is any Child, says he, put by his Master into the highest Form the first
day he comes to School? Or does he not lead him on by degrees? The Apostles
themselves, that had the Spirit, and so in a Capacity of more plentiful
Revelation than we are, yet Christ tells them, he had many things to tell them,
but they could not bear them then. And for this he brings John 16.12.

To which I answer, That this Man here does manifestly abuse Scripture, and by
that the Nature of his Naughty Spirit in all his Discourse is easily seen. For
here he says, they had the Spirit, and yet could not bear Christ's words,
whereas Christ in that place makes the want of the coming of the Spirit, the
very Cause why they could not then bear his words; and therefore he says in
the very next words, in that of John 16.13. Howbeit when the Spirit of Truth is
come, he will guide you into all Truth, and show you things to come.

And so this Smith is one of them that abuses and wrests Scripture, tending to
his own and others Destruction.

But whereas he says, That the Apostles who had the Spirit, were capable of a
more plentiful Revelation than they are, that is true; for they, to wit, such
Hirelings and Wresters of Scripture, as this Smith is, are Sensual, not having
the Spirit, and so are far from receiving any Vision or Revelation from God,
seeing it is their common Doctrine to deny Immediate Teachings and Revelations
from God, for that is ceased, say they.

But for him to say, as these his words would insinuate, That the Apostles in
those Days were capable of more plentiful Revelation than any are in these
Days, is false; for God is the same to his now as then; and such as are
Faithful in a little now, shall be Ruler over much, as well as formerly; and
says Christ, I pray not for these only, but for all that shall believe on me
through their words, that they may be one, as we are One.

And for his Reason or Proof, That the Best of the Best of the Saints and
Servants of God in this Life, are not capable of Perfection, the very Child, or
Schoolboy he speaks of, may come forth and consute it: For what though a
Scholar be not perfect in his Book at first, does it follow that he never shall
be while he lives? He may as well say so as the other, for his Comparison does
utterly make void his false Doctrine against Perfection, as Experience of all
Men, both Masters and Scholars, proves. But what a Mountain of Enmity is risen
up in these Deceitful Teachers of these Times, (who love to be called of Men
Master) against that Heavenly Doctrine of sinless Perfection, is manifest to
all in this, that though they can allow of a Perfection in all Arts and
Sciences in their kinds, yea, and of a Perfection in the growth of all other
Creatures in this kind, but cannot endure to hear tell of, much less to allow
of a Perfection in the Children of the Everlasting Father, God over all, who is
this Day well witnessed upon his Throne, Ever Praised be his Name, bringing
forth his Heavenly Birth, and Babes, and so making all things new. But who
ever, but this Slanderous Spirit in this Smith, said, That though People have
lived in Drunkenness, Swearing, and open Profaneness many Years, yet if but
once come to be lifted (as he scornfully calls it) into that Society, (to wit,
of such as he and the rest of the World in Scorn call Quakers) that presently
they are perfect, and without Sin? And then like the troubled Sea he foams out
his own Shame, and adds, saying in that forementioned Book,

I Challenge all the Quakers on Earth, and in Hell, to give a sober answer to
these Texts of Scripture, Eccles 7.2. 1 Kings 8.46. Prove. 20.9.

Answer. By these words of this Enemy of God, and his Perfect Work in his
Saints, any who judge in the Light of God in the least measure, may see the
Rancour and Malicious Blind Nature of that Spirit by which he was acted; O!
that ever Men should take upon them to be Ministers of the Gospel (as such
would be accounted) and yet utter such base words: Did ever any Enemy of Truth,
from the beginning of the World to this Day, make such a Challenge? What! must
People come out of Hell to give thee a Sober Answer? What! has Passion and
Envy so blinded thy Heart, as to imagine that the Inhabitants of Hell can
resolve Questions, and that in soberness; nay, nay, they must be Heavenly
People that give truly sober Answers in such weighty Matters as these; and
therefore thy unsober, wild words in these Matters, shows where thy Dwelling
is, to wit, not in Heaven amongst the Saints and Spirits of Just Men made
perfect, but in the Earthly, Sensual and Devilish Wisdom, amongst those who are
Enemies to Truth and Perfection, and so Ministers of Antichrist, who plead for
Sin during term of Life, and not of Christ, who came for that very end to
perfect his Saints, and to present them himself even in this Life, without
spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephesians. 5.25, etc.

And so the Reproachful and Malicious words of this Sam. Smith against the
People of God called Quakers, and their Holy Doctrine of Perfection put aside,
I say concerning those Scriptures he mentions, and first to that Eccles. 7.20.
For there is not a Just Man upon Earth, that does good, and sins not; that
Solomon here speaks of Men under the Law, and of the Generation of the First
Adam in the Fall, amongst whom there is not indeed a Just Man that does good
and sins not; but this does not make void the Covenant of God with his
Elect, in Christ Jesus the Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven; for as is the
Heavenly, so are they that are Heavenly. And so whosoever is Born of God, and
abides in Christ, sins not; for he that sins has neither seen Christ,
nor known Christ, as the Apostle says expressly in 1 John 3.6, 9. And herein is
that saying true, 1 John last, If we say we have not sinned, (to wit, in the
First Adam, or Flesh) we make God a Liar; but now being Translated out of that
Kingdom of Darkness, into the Kingdom of the Dear Son of God, the Light; we put
on Christ's Nature, which is Holiness and Righteousness, without which none
shall see God; Blessed be God for his Unspeakable Rich Gift.

And so though in the First Man's fallen Nature there is Sin and Death, yet in
Christ Jesus there is Life, Righteousness, and Everlasting Peace: And if thou
would not have Death, the Wages of Sin, thou must come out of the Flesh into
the Spirit of Christ, where Life and Everlasting Peace is witnessed. This is
the Day of the Lord's Mighty Working, wherein he is separating the Sheep from
the Goats, and making the difference plain and manifest betwixt such as serve
God, and such as serve Sin.

And for that other Scripture, 1 Kings 8.46. which says, There is no Man that
sins not, it must in like manner be understood as the former, to wit, of Man
in the First Adam, or fallen Fleshly Nature, where all have sinned, and come
short of the Glory of God; and in which state of Sin and Unbelief whosoever
abide, they do sin daily: But this touches not at all the sinless and perfect
state of the Children of God in Christ Jesus, where Sin, which is the Devil's
Work, comes not, as was said before; for the Prince of this World has no part
in me, says Christ: And therefore who art thou that lays Sin to the Charge of
God's Elect? Thy own words shall be thy Burden, but Peace on God's Israel for
Evermore.

And for that third Scripture, Prove. 20.9. Who can say, I have made my Heart
clean, I am pure from my Sin? I say, No Man can say that he has made himself
so, though in Christ Jesus he is so; for not of our selves, but of God's alone
Mercy and Free-gift in Christ Jesus, it comes to pass that the Elect Vessels
are cleansed and made pure in Heart, according to that well-known place, Ephesians.
5.25, 26, 27 Christ gave himself for his Church, that he might sanctify and
cleanse it, with the washing of Water, by the Word, that he might present it
himself a Glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; but
that it should be holy, and without blemish.

Is not here a Company made clean indeed, yea, clean at Heart, and pure from
Sin in and by Christ Jesus: Therefore let all the Enemies of Christ, and his
perfect Work, be silent for ever. So be it.

But above all, it seems strange what he sets down in that Defiling Book called
The Looking-glass, where he says, That Philpot, Bradford and Cranmer
confessed, That they were vile sinful and wretched Hypocrites, even at the
State when to be burnt for their Religion.

I say, either he, or the Printer or Relator of the History, or all of them, do
greatly wrong them Sufferers, or else their Condition is greatly to be
lamented, who had so much Zeal and Boldness as to Suffer for the sake of their
Conscience, and yet had so little Knowledge and Understanding of the Mystery of
God and Christ, as not to know the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the
Holy Ghost no better.

But we leave this, and so proceed to see what there is in those Scriptures,
which he says the Quakers make so much use of, to prove Sinless Perfection.

The first is, Psalm. 37.37. Mark the Perfect Man, and behold the Upright, for
the end of that Man is Peace. The second is, Heb. 6.1. Therefore leaving the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on to Perfection. The third is,
1 Cor. 2.6. Howbeit we speak Wisdom among them that are perfect. The fourth is,
2 Cor. 13.11. Finally Brethren farewell, be perfect.

To all which I say, It Is most plain to every pure Eye, that these Scriptures,
with many more that might be brought to the same purpose, prove sufficiently a
Sinless Perfection, otherwise it is no Perfection at all if not Sinless of
God's working, for every Work of God is Sinless and Perfect; for that
Perfection which is in or with Sin, is the Work of the Man of Sin, and is that
Perfection which pleases his vile sinful hypocritical Members so well. And so
whosoever marks and beholds this imperfect and unbelieving Generation, shall
plainly see their End is Trouble and Misery; and therefore it is that our words
which we speak this day from the Lord, concerning the great things of his
Kingdom, are accounted no better than Folly and Error amongst these sinful
Opposers of God's Work of Sinless Perfection in his Saints; and so these
Opposers are never going on to God's Perfection, but backwards from that of God
in them, which should lead them to God, and so their Back and not their Face
turned to God, they are ever learning, but never able to come to the Knowledge
of the Truth, as it is in Christ Jesus, which perfects to God all that come to
it: And so how can they for shame exhort their Hearers to Perfection, who are
themselves the great Opposers of God's perfect Work in his People, above all
others.

To conclude.
That which remains at present to be spoken to that filthy Lookingglass, is to
wipe off a heap of Lies and Dirt, which he has falsely charged upon the
Innocent and Harmless People of God called Quakers; as in p. 249. where he
says,

That we disown the Ordinances of Christ and his Gospel, the Word preached by
his Ministers, Church Order, Baptism, and Supper of the Lord, Prayer, Singing
of Psalms, the Public Ministry, as no Ministry of Jesus Christ. Albeit, says
he, God has set his Seal thereto in the Conversion of many Souls.

To all which in a word I answer and say, The Lord both has and yet will
rebuke that Lying Spirit by which this Book was written.

And in particular to the several parts of this false and notorious lying
Charge against us, I say, That the Ordinances of Christ, and his everlasting
Gospel, we dearly love and own, and the Word preached by his Ministers, but not
the Ministers of Antichrist, we dearly own and delight in; for the Word of God
which the Ministers of Christ, which he sends, preach, is Spirit and Life, not
the dead Letter, for the dead Letter which the Hirelings preach for filthy
Lucre, we know to be no better than Chaff, compared with that living Word which
the Ministers of Christ preach, for the Letter of the Hireling kills, but the
Spiritual Word of the Gospel of Christ gives Life; the Word of the Lord in the
Mouth of Christ's Ministers which we own, is the Savor of Life to Life, and of
Death to Death. But so is not the false frothy Doctrine of the Hireling and
false Accuser, such as this Sam. Smith, who wrote this Book which we disown is
nothing worth, and therefore cannot profit the People at all: And therefore he
tells a great Lie, in saying, That God has set his Seal to the Ministry of
such as have run and God never sent them; as is manifest by this Man, who is
not ashamed to speak all manner of Evil falsely against whom the Lord has
Blessed for his Name's sake; for those whom God sends, are one with, and not
against, such as are of God. But because he neither knows the Father, nor
Christ, therefore he thinks he does well, to persecute and revile us with all
slanderous words, which will be his own Burden in God's Judgment-day.

And for Church. Order, it is manifest by the Walking of our Members who owns it
most, for they who walk most orderly in Life and Conversation, own Church Order
indeed; but those that live Disorderly and know not so much as a Bridle to
their Tongue, are the Diso^wne^ and Breakers of the Good Order of Christ's
Church and Spirit.

But what is that Baptism he says we disown? For the Baptism o^ Christ, which
is but one, by that one Spirit of Truth into one Body we dearly love and own,
for in it are we presented Clean to God, ever Praised be his Name: But that
Baptism which the Hirelings use and plead for, for which there is no Scripture,
we cannot own, for if we should, then should we disown the Light of Christ,
which makes it manifest to be vain and nothing.

And for the Lord's Supper, we cannot but love and own it with our very Souls,
for it is our Souls Food, and the Lord is known to us, and in us, daily, by
breaking of his Heavenly Bread in the midst of us, as he said, Behold I stand
at the door and knock, if any Man open to me, I will come in and Sup with him,
and he with me.

And for Prayer to God, both Public and Private, those that say we disown
this, do plainly manifest that they know little of us or our Practices, but are
shameless Forgers of Lies against the Innocent; for which, and for all their
Sins, God will judge them, it is so.

But for Singing of Psalms, what has this false Accuser of the Brethren to do
with Singing? For not Singing, but Mourning, is the suitable Exercise for the
Wicked, What will ye yet Sing and Rejoice and make Merry over the Witnesses of
God which ye have slain in your. Streets, and over the Lamb that lies slain in
the Streets of your Spiritual Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord was Crucified:
But the Days of Mourning are at hand to all that now sing in Sin, and the Days
of Darkness to them will be many: But Peace upon the Israel of God, in whose
Book our Names are Recorded by the ever-blessed Finger of our God, ever Praised
be his Name, who has put a now Song into our Mouths, even Psalms of Salvation
to our God, and to the Lamb, for ever more, according as it is written Rev.
14.1, etc. And I looked, and lo, a Lamb stood on the Mount Sion, and with him
an hundred forty and four thousand, having his Father's Name written in their
Foreheads. And I heard a Voice from Heaven, as the Voice of many Waters, and as
the Voice of a great Thunder: And I heard the Voice of Harpers, harping with
their Harps. And they sung as it were a new s^ng before the Throne, and no Man
could learn that song, but the Redeemed from the Earth. These are they that
were not Defiled with Women, for they are Virgins: These are they that follow
the Lamb w^eresoever he goes: These were redeemed from among Men, being the
First fruits unto God and to the Lamb. And in their Mouth was found no Cu^le,
f^r ^^ey are without Fault before the Throne of God.

And what will not all this persuade our Adversaries that there is singing of
Psalms among us, Looking-glafs, was a great Enemy of God, and Blasphemer of his
Heavenly Tabernacle, in charging them with Gross and Absurd Opinions, for
keeping to Yea and Nay, without Swearing, in all things; and holding forth the
immediate Teaching of God's Spirit according to the New Covenant, which says,
They shall all be taught of God, and God is a Spirit, and to be known and
witnessed in Man, immediately to teach him, and to write his Heavenly Law and
Doctrine in his Heart, or he perishes in his Sins and Ignorance; it is so.

Thomas Tailor.

T. T. who was Ten Years and an half in Prison at Stafford, writes a Letter to
a particular Adversary.
J. D.
IF the Wisdom of this World, which is Foolishness with God, had not clouded
thy Mind, thou could not have so ju^ged, as to account it Foolishness in me
to abide in Prison; whereas thou may as well say, That to keep a good
Conscience to God is ^^olishness; for in Obedience to God, and for doing his
Will, have I suffered amongst you these many Years. Also whereas thou tookest
upon thee to be an Instructor, saying, If I did seek unto God, he would deliver
me out of Prison. I say unto thee again as I said then, That the Lord God of
Life and Truth, the True God over all, Blessed for ever, has graciously
delivered my Soul from the Pit of Darkness and Ignorance, Sin and Wi^^edness,
in which the whole World of Unbelieving People, who receive Honor one of
another, and seek not the Honor that comes from God only, do miserably Lie.
And as for my Body, it is offered up to the Lord, to do and suff^^ according to
his Blessed Will^^. And (...) thee plainly, and all People in the Word of the
Lord, (...) for ^oing his Blessed Will, in witnessing in his Holy Power against
the Wickedness of this present Evil World, They hated me without a Cause.

Thomas Tailor.

To the People at and about Stafford, a Testimony for God and his Truth, and
against Deceit and Deceivers, especially the Hireling Priests, as a Warning,
Information and Instruction in Righteousness, to them, (and all People
elsewhere concerned) by the Spirit of the Lord in his Suffering Servant Thomas
Tailor.
Hear, O People, and Fear; for the LORD has spoken.
THE false Teacher, the Hireling, who has run and God never sent him, but
Preaches for Hire, and Divines for Money, can never profit your Souls, O
People, at all; but with their self Dreams, and lying Divinations, and empty
Sounds, they deceive your poor Souls: For what can the dead words of a d^^d
Man, (dead in Sins) raise up your dead Souls from Death to Life? No, they
cannot; they have no Life in them; and such who have no Spiritual Health nor
Soundness (by their own Confession) in them, but are Miserable Offenders, can
they minister any healthful or sound Doctrine to your Souls? Nay, these cannot;
for, what is their Chaff to the Wheat, their frothy Words to the powerful Word
of God? For, sow a Field with Chaff, and what a Crop can you expect? But as the
Prophet says. They sow the Wind, and reap the Whirlwind: So cease from them,
you that love God and your own Souls, and turn to God; for I Testify for God,
That the True Ministry, the Soul-saving Ministry of Christ Jesus, is not with
the Parish-Hirelings of these Days; for neither their long Black Robes, nor
long White Surplices, nor their Humane Learning, nor the Ordination of Man, Men
of like Nature with themselves, does any more conduce to the making of them
able Ministers of the New Covenant, the Gospel of Christ, the Everlasting
Covenant of God, than the Gray or Brown Coat of the Plowman, or Artificer, or
the Skill of the Husbandman in Husbandry; or the Cunning of the Cunning Worker
in Wood, Brass, or Iron, does furnish them for Gospel-service; for the Vision
of God's Kingdom to all the World this Day, both Wise and Foolish, is like a
Book sealed, as the Prophet says, which is given to the Worldly-wise to read,
and he cannot read it, because it is sealed; and to the Foolish, and he cannot
read it, because he is unlearned, Isa. 29.10, 11, 12. so though in the World
there is a difference betwixt the Wise and Foolish, yet as to the Kingdom of
God there is none; for the Wisdom of this World is foolishness with God, 1 Cor.
1.10, etc. for that which lies hid from all Flesh, God reveals to his by his
Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of God, 1
Cor. 2.6, 7, 8. And People, the time of quickening and raising up of many that
were dead in Sins is come again, after a long Night of Darkness, and the Dead
this Day hear the Voice of the Son of God (not of main Man) and they that hear
do live, John 5.25. So People, look to your Souls; for though your
Parish-Teachers, who Preach for Hire, and Divine for Money, and love to go in
their Long and White Robes, do boast of their being come out of Popery, yet
upon the Popish Maintenance of Tithes, Glebe-lands, Easter-reckonings,
Mortuaries, and Moneys for Preaching over and Burying the Dead, and such like
things they live and make a Prey upon, not willing to come to Christ (to this
Day) as the first Christians did, for a thorough Reformation; and so not a
little, but a great deal of the Old, Sour, Popish Leaven, being yet found
amongst them, both in Doctrine and Practice, how should their whole Lump but be
very sour? As appears by their Fruits, and the Fruits of such as follow them:
And so, for witnessing in Christ against them for these evil things (...)
suffer Imprisonment; yet, through God's Mercy inabling me thereunto, I rejoice,
and can truly from my Heart praise the Lord, that has delivered my Soul from
that horrible Pit, that these ungodly Men yet remain in, and will not be helped
out of.

And ye People of Stafford, for your sakes it was that the Lord by my Mouth
rebuked the Hireling, that you might not always be deceived, and kept in Death
with such Dreamers; but that you might turn to the Lord God, from all such, to
know his Word and Spirit, that made you, in you, to teach you, and to lead your
Immortal Souls to the Springs of Living Waters; for you have too long dwelt in
the Wilderness of Sin, Ignorance, and Unbelief, and now it is high time for you
to Repent, and come to know the Baptism of the Holy Ghost and Fire, which is
Christ's proper Baptism, Mat. 3.10, 11, 12. for, alas! you have but hitherto
been carried on by the Pharisees in the outward Shadows and Figures of Things,
which reach not the Soul, to purify and perfect it unto God, and therefore is
the Lord come in Mighty Power this Day, to break in sunder all the Graven
Images of the People, whether under the Profession of the Popish or Protestant
Religion; for the Lord is on his Throne, to make all things new again, as in
the beginning, when all the Sons of God in Holiness sung for Joy, and rejoiced
in the Lord, for the Blessed Victory they had got through the Blood of the Lamb
over all their Souls Enemies.

But Woe and Alas for you, the Poor People of Stafford, and of many other
Places, who are under the Teachings of Worldly-minded Men, Miserable Offenders,
like your selves, always doing what ye should not do, and leaving undone what
ye should do, and so without all Spiritual Health, in the Miserable Captivity
of Sin, my Soul mourns for you, and my Sufferings are for you, and my Soul
prays for you, that you may be recovered out of the Snare of your Soul's Enemy,
by which ye are led Captive at his Will; for many Days and Years has my Soul
mourned for you, and been oppressed, and the Lord has called to you early and
late to Repent, and lay things to Heart; but, O the hardness of many of your
Hearts, and the carelessness of the rest! O, why will ye Die? Why will ye
linger, and remain still in Spiritual Sodom and Egypt, where the Witnesses lay
slain? Rev. 11. So whilst ye have time, prize it, left the Lord lay you upon a
Bed of Sorrows, where no Ease is, and say unto you in his Wrath, I gave them
time to Repent, and they Repen^ed not.

In the Year 1679.

Thomas Tailor.

HEAR the Word of the Lord, all you that fear to offend the Lord, and who
breathe after Righteousness in any measure, and yet in your Ignorance are
seeking the Living among the Dead, the Living God in Dead Observations, which
by Tradition you have received one from another, and not from the Lord Jesus.
The Day is come, wherein by the Spirit of Jesus it is witnessed in and by his
Living Members, That he that was dead is now alive, and lives for Evermore, and
is ascended far above all Heavens, and out of all Figures and Shadows, that he
might fill all things with his Holy Substance: And as in former Days he gave
some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers,
for the Perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the
Edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all (says the Apostle, to wit, the
Heavenly Body, not the Body of Sinful Earthly Flesh) come in the Unity of the
Faith, and the Knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect Man, unto the Measure
of the Stature and Fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. Even so the Lord is
now giving forth of his Spirit to his Children, Born of his Spirit, for
enabling them in this Day of Restoration, for the Work of the Ministry, for the
perfecting of the Saints, and fitting them for Glory; and this now, after a
long Night of Darkness and Desolation, is to the Praise of his Glory, who has
made us, in this his Blessed Day, as he did his Faithful Followers in the
Beginning, accepted in the Beloved, to show forth his Praises to Ages to come,
whom he will also raise up by Christ Jesus, together with us, to magnify his
Mercies for Evermore.

But that the Parish Teachers of these Times, who Preach for Hire, and Divine
for Money, loving to be called of Men Master; and like the Pharisees of old,
love to go in Long Robes, and receive Honor one of another, John 5. are such,
to wit, so given of Christ, and begifted from Heaven, and fitted for so great a
Work, as to perfect the Saints, as those before (in Ephesians. 4.) mentioned were, I
utterly deny, and their Fruits, as also the Fruits of their Hearers make
manifest that they are of another Sort, Seed and Generation, even such as the
Prophet Jeremiah speaks of and declares against, who have run, and God never
sent them: For why? they waited not for the Word of God to speak in them and by
them, but stole the Words from their Neighbor, and used their Tongues to say,
The Lord-saith, when the Lord never spoke by them, (Ier. 23.30.) and therefore,
says the Lord, these Teachers shall not profit the People at all (Verse 32.)
For what are their Chaffy Words to the Word of God? (Verse 28.) So the Teachers
of the Parishes this day get into the Pulpit with the Words of the Prophets and
Apostles in their Hand, and Sin in their Hearts, as those other did, dreaming
over them for Filthy Lucre, and cry to the People, BELOVED, (yea, Beloved,
because they put into their Mouths) Hear the Word of the Lord, as you shall
find it written in such a Chapter, and such a Verse, when the Lord never spoke
to these Hirelings, nor sent them thus to preach; but they are Men made
Ministers, Men of the Evil World, and great Lovers and Pleaders for it, and
therefore the World hears them, 1 John 4.5. But ^^e true Messenger of Christ
says for himself and his Brethren, We are of God, and the whole World lies in
Wickedness. And says Christ. to his Disciples, Ye are not of the World, as I
am not of the World; for if you were of the World, the World would love you;
for the World loves its own; but now I have chosen you out of the World,
therefore the World hates you, John 15.18, 19.

So all People fear the Lord God; for the Name of Christians, without the
Nature of Christ, will do you no good at all; for the Lord is come to search
all that called Christendom with Candles, and to pull down the lofty Hearts and
Looks of all amongst them called Christians first, and then of all the World
besides; for now is the Lord exalting his great Name over all, as in the
Beginning, before the Antichrist, Beast, False Prophet and Whore got up; and
who shall stop the Passage of this mighty Jehovah, in the great Work of setting
up his Kingdom over all the Kingdoms of the Man of Sin, that the Kingdoms of
this World, may become the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ, whose Right alone
it is to Rule and Reign, according to that Saying in the Prophet, I will
Overturn, Overturn, Overturn, till he come to Rule whose Right it is.

And now Woe and Misery begins to take hold of all Hypocrites, and all the
Wicked, because of the arising and appearing of the great God from Heaven this
day, who is on his Throne, judging in Righteousness, and in Righteousness
making War, whose Fiery Word, his Twoedged Sword, goes out of his Mouth, not
only to discover, but also to destroy and consume the Man of Sin in all the
Earth. And now the Hireling Teachers of all sorts, the Merchants of Mystery
Babylon, shall cry, Alas! alas! that great City, People begin to see us, and
they will not Trade with us, nor buy our Merchandise, as in former days, but
declare against it, see Rev. 18.10, 11. O, yea; it cannot be otherwise; for now
the Witnesses that lay slain in the Streets of the great City, Sodom and Egypt,
Spiritually so called, are arisen, and stand upon their Feet, praised be God.
And now Judgment is given to the Saints of the Most High God, Dan. 7.12, 25,
26, 27. So that though the great Antichrist, under many Shapes and Appearances,
has spoken great words against God, his Truth and People, and has oppressed
the Saints; yet now the Judgment of God being set against him, his Dominion
shall be consumed and destroyed, and the Saints of the Most High God shall have
Dominion, and Reign with Christ, whose Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom, and
all Dominions shall serve and obey him, to wit, our Lord Jesus Christ, for
whose Blessed Name and Truth's sake, the Holy Tremblers, who Tremble at his
Word, and follow him in the Regeneration, do this day suffer; it is so.

Thomas Tailor.
In the Year 1679.
Something in Answer to some Passages in that Wicked Antichristian Book written
Catechism-wise, by some Popish Stickler for his Master the Pope, the Romish
Antichrist and his Followers. Printed at Douay, and Subscribed H. T.
IN his second Chapter he says, Faith is necessary to Salvation; and that
Faith is, firmly to believe Matters of Faith, because God has revealed them.
Then say I, Not the Pope. But says he again, It is not enough to believe all
that is written in the Bible, but we must believe also Apostolical Traditions,
citing 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. Now say I in answer hereto, That through wresting and
abusing of this Scripture, have they made way for bringing in all their Filthy
Popish Stuff, whereby Thousands, and Ten thousands, of poor Peoples Souls, both
have been, and are at this day miserably deluded; for certainly the Traditions
which the Apostle there tells of, whether by Word or Epistle, where all of one
nature, and not directly contrary or contradictory one to another: But the
Popish Traditions, though they may falsely call them Apostolical, are directly
contrary to Holy Scripture.

But says he, The Apostles Creed is not in the Scripture, and yet is to be
believed.

To which I answer, If the Apostles Creed (so called) either be not in
Scripture in so many words, or do not wholly agree with it in nature, we are
not to believe it: But the reason why we believe it, is not because the Pope
says it is Apostolical, but because rightly Expounded or understood (but not
with the Popish or other wrong Exposition) we find it, for Substance, agreeable
to Holy Scripture.

But says he, If a Man shall deny, or obstinately doubt of one Point of Faith,
Would he thereby lose his whole Faith? Yes, says he, because true Faith must
always be entire; and be that fails in one, is made guilty of all, by
discrediting the Authority of God revealing it. Then say I, Neither to Pope,
nor General Councils, need People be beholden for their Faith, but to God only,
according to Christ's words, John 6.45. They shall all be taught of God.

But now mark People, under these seeming words of this Sophister, what a World
of Wickedness lies hid: For though he use the words (of God's revealing Faith)
for a Cloak, yet he intends nothing so indeed: For if I, or another Man,
should come and truly say, God has revealed this and the other thing to be his
Will, I should believe, and that by his Spirit I am able to make it manifest,
that it agrees with the Scripture of Truth; yet if the Pope and his Councils do
not approve of it, it shall be no Faith with them; but I shall be accounted an
Heretic, and fit to be Burned, where they get Power, as has been manifoldly
proved in England and other places. And again, this Wickedness lies hid under
his words, That if a Messenger of the Pope, as Jesuit or other Priest or
Teacher of them, say to the poor People, that do in general too much believe
their False Doctrines and Practices, yet if they do not in particular believe
all their Superstitions, then they have lost all their Faith, and so
consequently are Damned. If they be told, I say, that they must say so many Ave
Mary's, so many Paternosters, do such Penance, observe such and such
Saints-days (so called) and their Eves, and Ember-weeks, and receive such and
such for their Ghostly Fathers, though they see and right-well know them to be
Sensual and mere Carnal-minded Men, and what not, that these Priests commend
unto them for Holy. Doctrines and Catholic Practices, (tedious to relate) If
they do not believe all, then by this Man's Doctrine they have lost all their
Faith: And why? Because, say they, the Pope and his Councils (which they
account God's revealing, for no other God they look at to teach them, as
afterward in this his Book appears) have said it must be so. O the miserable
Slavery of all such as are under this Hellish Egyptian Yoke! The Lord deliver
all simple Hearts from it.

And for his Worshipping and Praying unto Angels, as also Saints, which here
and elsewhere he mentions, and brings some Scripture wrested, as their Custom
is, seemingly to prove it: That one Scripture, I say, instead of many others,
which might be brought, shall serve for ever to dash in pieces the Head of that
Venomous and Idolatrous Doctrine and Practice of Bowing and Praying unto Saints
and Angels, where it is said, That to God in Christ, every Knee in Heaven,
Earth, and under the Earth must bow, and every Tongue confess. And when he
brings in his only begotten into the World, he says, Let all the Angels of God
worship him: And therefore the Angel in Rev. 22.8, 9. utterly denied John's
worshipping him, saying, Worship God. And in Rev. 7. The whole Company both of
Saints and Angels fell down according to their Duty and great Engagement, and
did worship God. So that if the Saints and Angels were as ready, and as well
pleased, to receive Honor, as these Superstitious Men are to give it them,
they would lose their Holy Place, and be like them; for says Christ, How can
ye believe, that receive Honor one of another, and seek not that Honor which
comes from God only? John 5.44. But truly Holy Saints and Angels are better
learned than so, and therefore abhor all Honor, but that which comes from God
only, and for that they return to him alone as his due, all Honor, Glory and
Praise; saying, as in Rev. 4 last, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory,
Honor and Power, for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they
are and were created. And so true Heaveny Brethren, and Fellow Servants and
Keepers of the Commandments of God, as all true Saints and Angels, whether in
Heaven or Earth, are, look not for Worship one from another, but gives all to
God their Maker and Savior to whom it is due: But it is the Devil that would
have God's Honor from him to himself, as Matt. 4.9, 10. but none but the
Wicked will give it him.

And then, if the Saints and Angels themselves be not to be worshipped, much
less their Pictures: Also I say, If such living Images of God and Christ, as
Holy Saints and Angels are, are not to be worshipped, much less dead Images of
God and Christ, invented by Man's Brain, and framed by Man's hand, are to be
adored, but to be trampled upon, as Nehustan that little piece of Brass was,
which the Children of Israel Idolized.

And this Popish Book, speaking of the Necessity of the Incarnation, says, If
it had not been, scarce one of a Thousand (and those great Clerks only) would
have known God to any Saving Purpose or so, because of his Spiritual Sublimity,
etc.

By this it appears, how perfectly this great Clerk is ignorant of Truth; and
in this, how diametrically opposite to the Apostle's Doctrine, 1 Cor. first and
second Chapters; for there he makes the World's Wisdom in general, Foolishness
with God; and in particular, the wisest sort of them farthest from the Saving
Knowledge of God: And so attributes all Saving Knowledge to the alone
Revelation of the Spirit of God, and that to Babes and Sucklings, Matt. 11. But
this Sophister imagines, great Clerks can do something more than others in this
matter. And it were well if all Protestants were well purged of this bad
Disease.

In his Fourth Article of the Greed he asks, Is it lawful to honor the Cross?
Yea, says he, with a relative Honor: Because, says he, it is a special
Memorial of the Passion, and is called, the Sign of the Son of Man, Matt. 24
20. he would say, it is like, Verse 30.

To which I say, It Is a mere Dream and Falsehood, to call an outward Cross the
Sign of the Son of Man, for in that Scripture there is not the least Intimation
of a Cross, for the words are these, Then (to wit, as in the former Verse, when
the Powers of Heaven shall be shaken) shall appear the sign of the Son of Man
in Heaven: And then shall all the Tribes of the Earth mourn, and they shall see
the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven, with Power and great Glory. The
Disciples, in the beginning of this Chapter, asked him, What should be the Sign
of his Coming? And here he answers them, (Not a wooden Cross, or any such
thing, but) the fore-goings of Judgment, terrible Judgments, as is here
mentioned, which go immediately before this his appearing. And for the outward
Cross, being a special Memorial of the Passion, The Apostles had other ways of
remembering Christ's Death, than by outward Crosses of Wood, Gold, Silver, or
other Metal or Stone, or so, for they were buried with him into the likeness of
his Death; and they bore in their Bodies the Marks and Dying of the Lord Jesus,
and the Virtue of Christ's Passion, they felt daily to Crucify them to the
World, and the World, with all its Evil, to them: And as they died, and were
dead to Sin, they were made alive, and lived to God; and so Christ lived in
them, and they in him, How could they forget one another? And thus it was not
only with the Apostles, but with all the true and living Members of Jesus,
standing thus in the Faith in those Times, as Scripture plentifully declares;
and neither need, nor mention made, of any outward Cross, to put them in mind
of Christ's Passion, seeing they daily suffered and reigned with him. But
People retaining only the Name of Christians, but falling from the Faith of
Christ, which the true Saints lived in, then came up this Invention of outward
Crosses and Pictures, and suchlike Smoke out of the Bottomless Pit, for
Memorials and Teachers to the poor Carnal-minded People which were out of the
Faith, and so at Enmity against God: But Praises to the Lord, says my Soul,
for this day of his, which after a long Night of Darkness, is restoring to many
the ancient everlasting Truth, which all Holy Men of God lived by: And now
Mystery Babylon; with all her Lovers, must into the Lake prepared for her.

But says this Dreamer farther, The Cross was that blessed Altar on which
Christ offered his Bloody Sacrifice: And to prove it brings Gal. 6.13. Phil.
3.18. Ezekiel. 9.4. In which last Scripture he says, Such as were signed with the
sign Tau (which was a Picture or Figure of the Cross) were saved from the
exterminating Angel, and only such. Now to this I say, it is mere Deceit: And
adding to the Scripture this Saying of his, for there is mention made only of a
Mark Vision-wise, but nothing at all what Mark it was, neither was it needful,
for to mark them there, signifies God's special Care of his in time of
Judgment, and not an outward Cross, as these Dreamers Dream. And for those
other Scriptures, Gal. 6. Phil. 3. they speak not of the outward Cross of Wood
or so, but of the inward Spiritual Cross, the Power of God, 1 Cor. 1.17, 18.
But this Man, by calling the Cross the Altar, makes it greater than Christ;
for says Christ, Matt. 23.19. Whether is greater, the Gift, than the Altar
that Sanctifies it? And thus it appears, how near unto Blasphemy are all
Superstitious and Idolatrous Minds.

In his Exposition of the Fifth Article of the Creed, he says, That his
descending into Hell means, That so soon as Christ was dead, his blessed Soul
descended into Limbo, to free the Holy Fathers who were there. And for proof
brings Acts 2.2, 24, 27. and Ephesians. 4.8. And then asks, Did he not also descend
to Purgatory, to free such as were there? He answers, It is most probable he
did; according to 1 Pet. 3.19, 20.

I Answer, That these dark Imaginations are poor Grounds for People to place
Faith, and so Salvation on. It is probable, says he, that he descended to
Purgatory: And what, is it more than probable that he went into Limbo? Nay,
nay, it is not so much as probable that he went into either, for those
Scriptures he brings, speaks neither of Limbo nor Purgatory; and so there being
no such Place as either Limbo or Purgatory, as Papists Dream, how could he
descend into either? For the true Place of Purging, is through Sanctification
of the Spirit in the Belief of the Truth, as it is in Jesus, in this Life time,
and not afterward: And the Heil which Christ's Soul was not left in, is
understood, when he said, My God, why have thou forsaken me? And for his Body,
it was raised out of the Grave, and so the true Christ saw no Corruption, as
the Scripture there speaks: But your imagined Breaden Christ will Corrupt.

But for this Man's Dream of Interpreting the Prison to be Purgatory, which
Christ by his Spirit went to Preach to them in, in Noah's time, that were
Disobedient, and that not till after he was Crucified, is so gross, that it
needs little other Confutation than the very mentioning of it; for Christ by
his Spirit in Noah Preached to them in that Day, when they were in the Prison
of their Sins; and by the Spirit that raised Jesus from the Dead, have the
Wicked been Warned and Preached unto in all Ages.

And he says, That the print of Christ's Feet are to be seen to this Day upon
Mount Olivet, from whence he was taken up: I say, what if it were, will you go
to Worship it, as you do a Wood or Stone Cross? But I do no more believe that
there are such prints, than I do your other Unscriptural Superstitious
Imaginations and Inventions. But to Discredit this, I have very great ground,
considering that Christ said to Mary, that she should not touch him (in an
outward natural manner, or so) because he was not yet ascended, John 20.17.
because there is danger in such things, how much less would he leave prints of
outward Feet for Superstitious Souls to Idolize? And it is probable, for this
very Cause was the Body of Moses hid from the Jews, lest they should Idolize
it. Therefore says Paul, a Spiritual minded Man, for himself and his Brethren,
Henceforth know we no Man after the Flesh; yea, though we have known Christ
after the Flesh, yet know we him henceforth so no more; for he that is in
Christ is a New Creature, 2 Cor. 5.16, 17. When will Christendom, so called,
learn this Lesson?

And this Book says, That Christ, as God, is equal with the Father, but as
Man, is in the highest Created Glory. I answer, the Scripture says, that
Christ sits, or sat down at the Right Hand of the Majesty on high, Heb. 1.3.
Is this Created?

And he asks, Is there any Merit in our Works? Yea, says he, as in Apoc.
22.12. I say, that Scripture does not say, for the Merit of Man's Work, but
only they shall receive according as their Work is: But pure good Works are
rather God's than ours, and then where is the Merit?

And he says, The Place of the general Judgment shall be in the Valley of
Jehosaphat, betwixt Jerusalem and Mount Oliver. I answer, how knows he that?
How is it he mentions no Scripture for it? So it is mere Imagination: But what!
Must People lose their whole Faith, if they believe it not, as before?

In the Ninth Article, speaking of the Church, he says, The Church is the
Congregation of all the Faithful, under Christ their Invisible Head, and his
Vicar upon Earth, the Pope. But how proves he this? Neither by Scripture, nor
Apostolical Tradition, for which he brings neither, for there is none for
certain; for the Church has not two Heads, the Church is not a Monster with
two Heads, one Visible, to wit, The Pope, or suchlike; and another invisible,
to wit, Christ: Neither is the Church an Adulteress with two Husbands, one
visible and another invisible: For says the Apostle, I have espoused you to
one Husband, even Christ. So all others are Antichrist.

And then this wicked Book farther asks, What are the Essential parts of the
Church? And to that it answers, A Pope or Supreme Head, Bishops, Pastors, and
the Laity. To this I say, It is rank Popish Poison: And what Scripture have
they for this? Surely none, nor Apostolical Tradition-neither, for the Apostles
could not contradict their own Writings, the Scriptures of Truth, as is said
before; And the Scripture does no where make the Church of Christ consist of
such Essentials, for God's Church are his Cleroi, that is, his choice ones, his
Lot, his Heritage, his Flock all of them, 1 Pet. 5.3. God's Flock are every one
of them sound, Sheep and Lambs, and they are Men, God's Cleroi, that is,
Clergy, and not Laity; and the word Laity is Popish and Antichristian, as well
as the Pope. And for the true Overseers and Pastors, Feeders in and of the true
Church, What have you to do with them? unless it be to Persecute them, as your
Custom has been all along, ever since Night and Darkness came upon you for
your great Apostasy.

Then this blind Guide goes on asking, How prove you St. Peter, and the Pope
his Successor, to be the visible Head of the Church? He answers, First, out of
John 21.16, 17, 18. Where Christ (says he) for a Reward of his special Faith
and Love, gave Peter absolute Power to feed and govern his whole Flock, yea,
even the Apostles themselves to be his Sheep, and he their Head and Pastor.

I answer, This is a most shameless Lie: For Christ was so far, in those words,
from giving Peter charge of Feeding and Governing his whole Church in general,
much less the Apostles in particular, who were his Equals, that the same Charge
that is given here, is also given to the rest of the Apostles, though not in
the same express words as here, yet in words of the same import fully; as not
only when he first called them to be Fellow Apostles, but also, and that most
plainly, when he departed from them, as in Matt. 28.18, 19, 20. where it is
said, And Jesus came, and spoke unto them (that is to say, to the Eleven, for
Judas was gone to his place) saying, All power in Heaven and Earth is given to
me. Go ye therefore (not Peter only, but all the rest as well as he) and teach
all Nations, Baptizing them in (or rather into, as the Greek there truly
signifies) the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit: Teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: And lo, I am with you (to
wit, all of you, not Peter only) always, even to the end of the World. Amen.

And whereas this Liar says, It was for Peter 's special Faith and Love; I say,
Peter had no Faith nor Love, but what was common to all the rest of the
Apostles. But if all things may be reckoned, he had but little Faith nor Love
neither, when he denied his Master. And though Christ said, Love thou me more
than these? He was taught by his former forwardness not to say, Yea, I love
thee more than they all, but humbly in the sense of his former weakness, Lord,
thou know that I love thee. And great cause had he to love Christ greatly,
seeing he had Dishonored Christ, and Wounded his own Soul, by Denying and
Forswearing Christ more than they all. And so no Merit in Peter for any thing
can be looked at, but God's great and free Mercy, in not only forgiving him,
but also in employing him in his Service again. So let your unclean Mouths be
stopped for Ever, ye Idolizers of Creatures: For as Paul said to the Corinthians,
so may I say to you, and all the World, who are striving about Men, What is
Paul? Or what is Apollos? So what is Peter, or others that God made use then,
or makes use of now, as Instruments in his Hand for Peoples good, but even as
nothing, seeing Christ is all, and in all? And with him there conclude, Neither
is he that planteth nor waters any thing, but God that gives the increase, 1
Cor. 1.11, etc. and Chap. 3.3, 4, etc.

His other Proof for Peter's Supremacy, is out of Mat. 16.18. Thou art Peter,
and upon this Rock will I build my Church; therefore, says he, the rest of the
Apostles were built on him; and hence it is, says he, as often as they are
mentioned in Scripture he is named first. To which I answer and say, It is no
less than Blasphemy to say, That either the Apostles, or the rest of the
Faithful, were Built upon Peter as a Man; for it contradicts all Scripture,
which every where give the Glory of being the Rock, the Foundation, yea, and
Cornerstone of the whole Building of the Church of God, to Christ alone, and
not to Peter at all as a Man; for what is said here of Peter, has relation
only and altogether to the Faith of Christ the Rock, here confessed only unto
by Peter, but given of the Father. And Peter himself says expressly, that the
rest of the Faithful in those Days had obtained like Precious Faith with him,
and the rest of the Apostles. See 2 Pet. 1.1. And the Apostle blames them
greatly in 1 Cor. 1. beforementioned, for saying, I am of Paul, and I of
Apollos, and I of Cephas, that is Peter, and I of Christ, as though Christ were
divided: For they all should have kept the one Head Christ, without mentioning
any Man's Name in this Matter. For as Peter also said in Acts 4.12. There is no
other Name, but that of Christ Jesus, by which Men can be saved; then say I, of
Necessity there can be no other Rock.

And whereas this Imaginer would make something for Peter's Supremacy, from his
being named first often in Scripture, when the Apostles are mentioned; I say,
though it were always as he says, it makes nothing at all for his purpose, but
is a mere childish empty Conceit, not worthy a Man, much less one professing
Religion, to talk on, for some of them must be mentioned first; but that thus
mentioning Peter in Scripture, had any such Intention in it as he here Dreams
of I, and not only I, but all Saints with me, do utterly deny. And as for the
word Supremacy, it is inconsistent with the Nature of true Christianity; for
says Christ to his Followers, when they were telling of who should be greatest
of them, he Convinced them of their Error, by setting before them a little
Child, and saying, who will be greatest of all must be Servant of all, and
least of all; and that not in Words only, but in Deed and Truth say I.

But what is any thing that is said of Peter in the Scripture to the Pope? O
yes, says he, he is his Successor. To which I say, it is as false as any thing
is true; for Peter was a Holy Man of God, of Christ's sending, but the Pope, an
unholy Man of the wicked World's sending, choosing, and setting up, witness the
Men choosing him, and the manner of their choosing and setting him up, the very
relation of which, in all the Foolish and Antichristian Circumstances of it,
would even make a truly Honest Spiritual Man's Heartake to hear or read it.
Again, Peter was a Humble Man, clothed with Humility, as he exhorted others;
not a Lord over God's Heritage, but an Example to it of Faith and Goodness, as
he exhorted others; but the Pope is a Proud Man, set up at Rome like a Worldly
Prince, Ruling and Lording it over God's Heritage, not only with his wicked
Curses and Excommunications of all that will not bow to his Superstitions, and
Abominable Idolatries, but even Persecuting to Death with worldly Power and
Force, (where he can do it, either by his own or others, whom he can stir up
and persuade to act his wicked Will) all such as deny him, and against him bear
withess, though otherwise they be never so dear and near to the Lord God; and
so instead of being an Example of Goodness to any, he is become an Abhorring to
Nations; and therefore is the Woe come and coming upon him, and his Seat, and
Upholders, and Lovers, from him who is a Consuming Fire, and this Babylon, with
all its Strength and Glory, shall be burnt in his Fire; and Zion shall not take
one of her polluted Stones to put in her Holy Building. It is so.

Thomas Tailor.

There is more by me of this kind, as in Answer to more Passages of that Bad
Book herein mentioned, which in due time may come forth; and it is this.
Again, as concerning the Pope's succceding Peter, and all Successions relating
to the Church of God, (truly so called) I say it is merely Spiritual, as the
Lord said concerning his Prophet, The Spirit that I have put upon thee, and the
Word which I have put into thy Mouth, shall not depart from thee, nor out of
the Mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seeds Seed, from henceforth
and for ever. And so we finding both the Spirit and Word of the Pope to be
quite of another Nature than that which was in Peter, and the other Apostles,
we deny him and his Succession, together with all other Pretenders to the like
Succession, who want that Heavenly Spirit, Life and Doctrine that they were in.

In the Ninth Article, this Bad Book says, But why may not a wellmeaning Man
be saved in any Religion? He answers, First, from Ephesians. 4.5. and Heb. 11.6.
where mention is made of one Faith; and that without Faith it is impossible to
please God. Then I say, well meaning in the Popish Way, without true Faith,
will not save no more than in any other. But then says he, Secondly, because
as in a natural Body, that part which has not a due Connection to the Heart or
Root, presently dies for want of Continuity: So in the Church, (the Mystical
Body of Christ) faith he, that Part or Member that has not a due Subordination
and Connection unto the Head, and Commen Councils thereof, that is the Pope and
General Councils, (thou should have said Christ, as in Ephesians. 4.15, 16.) from
whence under Christ we have our Spiritual Life and Motion, as we are
Christians, must needs be dead, nor indeed can be accounted a Member of that
Mystical Body.

O Profound Antichristian Doctrine indeed! For here thou have pulled off thy
Vizard with thy own Hand; and any one of a very mean Understandstanding may
see, that by this Popish Doctrine, Christ the Living Fountain is thrust out of
Doors, for it must not by this be known, what says Christ and his Spirit to my
Soul, but what faith the Pope and his Councils to mine Ear.

And afterward this Pleader for Baal, to wit, the Pope and his Councils
accounts them Novelists, Heretics, and Idle Brains, that will not submit to
this Tribunal of Christ (he should have said Antichrist) on Earth, to wit, the
Pope and his General Councils, and makes this alone to be the Cause of all
Heresies and Sects, as he calls them, whether Protestants or other; For, says
he, they will not be tried by this Tribunal, but by their own idle Brain, and
the dead Letter of the Scripture. To which I say, God will judge this Man, and
all such, for their Wickedness in coupling an idle Brain, and the Letter of the
Scripture together; for though the Scripture be but as a dead thing to them
that will neither understand nor believe it, yet to an Enlightened,
Understanding, Believing Soul, it is of such Service, that the Apostle is not
afraid to say, That the Scripture is given for our Learning, upon whom the Ends
of the World are come: And the Scripture is of such force in the Hand of such
Enlightened and truly Understanding Ones, that Christ made use of it against the
great Wrester of Scripture, to wit, the Devil; and by the right use of it in
the hands of the Faithful, through the Spirit which gave them forth, all the
Mud-walls of Popery, and Paper Bullwarks of the whole Antichristian Kingdom of
False Professors, both have and daily are beat down; and therefore does the
wicked Popedom keep the Holy Scripture from the poor Slaves under them. But the
great King Christ Jesus, upon his Heavenly Tribunal, is bringing his great Work
to pass in these latter days, against the Beast, Whore, and False Prophet,
under what Name or Notion soever; and by his Spirit, according to Scripture, to
pour Judgments and Plagues upon all their Tribunals, Glory to his Name for
evermore.

Again this Popish Book asks, Is not this (to wit, the want of a Popish
Tribunal) the reason why the Protestants, and other Sects, are so divided, etc.
He answers, Yea, a principal reason; For how can different Fancies (says he)
upon different Principles, be united? I answer, No: The want of this Tribunal
is not the cause: And ask, What was the Reason of Differences amongst the Jews,
that had their Tribunal of the Law outward, and High Priests, and Sanhedrims or
great Councils, for ordering Matters of Religion? Yea, and what was the reason
that there was Divisions and Dissentions amongst the first Christians, when
even Peter and other Apostles were living? Yea says the Apostle, There must be
Heresies among you (even you that all profess Christ) and he gives a Reason,
that these that are approved may be made manifest: He does not say, Heresies
come for want of a Pope and General Council. And I may add another Reason, and
that a main and universal one, and that is, Peoples either not living in the
Spirit, or not walking in the Spirit, and so not keeping the Unity of the
Spirit in the Bond of Peace; And so not keeping the Head, to wit, Christ, in
whom, if the whole Body be coupled and knit together, increase of the whole
Body (to wit, the true Church) is made to the Edifying of it self in Love, and
not otherwise, Ephesians. 4. This is the Cause, and continual Cause.

A Second Reason of those Differences, says that Popish Book, is because the
very Ground work of Protestancy is, That all Men, even the whole Church of God,
are Fallible, and subject to Err, so that they cannot pretend to Certainty or
Infallibility (says he) for any one Point of their Belief.

To which I say, if any Protestant say, the whole Church of God is Fallible,
and subject to Err, if they understand the Church as Paul does in Ephesians. 5.25,
26, 27. and as he does in 1 Timothy 3.15. or as Christ does in Mat. 16.18. where
it is said, The Gates of Hell shall not provail against it; they do not well:
For though all Men, as Men, in Adam the Earthly, are not only Fallible, and
subject to Err, but also really in Deceit and Error; yet in Christ Jesus the
Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, that quickening, preserving Spirit of Truth,
there is no Fallibility nor Error, as the Apostle says, 1 John 3. He that
abides in Christ sins not, Ver. 6. And he that is Born of God sins not,
nor can sin, Ver. 9. But what is all, or any of this Glory to the Pope, or his
Synagogue, which he falsely calls the Church of God? For they do not attribute
the Infallibility to the Eternal Spirit, which is in every true Member of
Christ's Church, which is their Leader into and Preserver of their Souls into
all Truth, but to the Pope and General Councils; as though Infallibility were
annexed to the Dream of Peter's Chair, and not to Christ's Spirit in the
Faithful. O the Abomination of Desolation that is in this Popish Doctrine!

But what, is there such Unity amongst these Deluded Disciples of the Pope?
Surely nay; for as we read there was amongst the Jews, the several Sorts and
Sects of Pharisees, Sadducees, Libertines, Cirenians, Alexandrians, and the
like, yet all against Christ: So in the Popish Hierarchy, there are the several
different and divided Sorts and Sects of Franciscans, Dominicans, Jesuits,
Cappuchins, Carthusians, and others, all agreed this Day, as of long time they
have been against the Blessed Crown, Kingdom, Dignity and Dominion of our Lord
Jesus Christ: But these, with all the rest of Mystery Babylon's Merchants, have
cause to wail, because the Light and Spirit of God in Christ Jesus is broken
forth in Power and great Glory this Day, to judge them all, that the Kingdom,
(not Worldly, but Heavenly) may be given to the People of the Saints of the
Most High God, for an Everlasting Inheritance, as in Dan. 7.27.

Here also I may well take notice of some other words that this Popish Pleader
has in his Book, Treating of this Matter, viz. Since then, says he, to be of
one Religion, is to be of one settled Persuasion in Points of Faith, and seeling
cannot be without Infallibility or Necessity; it is not well possible, that any
two Protestants or Sectaries to be of one Religion, every Man Expounding the
Scripture as he lists, and no one having Power to Control the others
Exposition of it.

I Answer, and in the Power of Christ do grapple with this Beast that arose out
of the Sea, and with his Image also, and do say, That no Humane Conceit, nor
Natural Man's Exposition, with the help of all the World's Wit and Skill,
whether Pope, or other, is infallible, or binding, or controuling: But by the
same Spirit that gave forth Scripture (whether in a Fisherman, Tradesman, or
other, now as well as formerly) is the Scripture rightly Understood and
Expounded. So the true Oneness in Religion stands in the Oneness of that Spirit
that gave forth Scripture, and gives a right understanding of it, and of all
things, as the Apostle says, The Anointing which ye have of the Holy One
teaches all things, and by it you know all things, 1 John 2.20. And he that
has not this Spirit is none of Christ's, Romans 8.9. And he that is guided by
this Spirit is a Spiritual Man, and so not to be judged or controuled in his
Spiritual Concernment, by any Man of this World, (neither Pope, nor other) as
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.10, 15. It is so.

But whereas he tells of every Man Expounding the Scripture as he lists, I say,
this is the Pope and all his Priests Fault, and of all the wicked World
besides, who are not in Heart and Life subject to that one Pure and Holy
Spirit, that is, of Jesus, that leads Spiritually into all Truth, which Truth
is one: And so though they that are of another Spirit may agree never so much,
and in never so great numbers, in their several Ways of Deceit, yet the true
Religion of God's Holy Ones in Light, they still remain ignorant of.

And so his Blindness of imagining, that Protestants and Sectaries, as he calls
them, cannot be two of them of one Religion, does hereby fully appear: For not
only they, but all the People of the Earth, under what Name, Notion, or
Profession soever, are either the Children of Light, or Children of Darkness,
and so not only two, but all of the same sort may, and do agree in the Root in
their Religion, (if it may be called so) though we know there is but one true
Religion, and that is truly and properly the Religion of God's People, the
Children of his Light, even that which in Purity and Holiness binds their
Hearts to God.

And so by this word Controuling, which this Remish Agent here uses, it is
easily seen how the Pope has set up and maintained his Wicked Kingdom, that is
to say, by a Worldly Controuling Power over Men's Souls and Consciences, and not
by the Power of Truth: For if his Earthly Power, with his Worldly Assistants,
were taken from him, his Decretals, Expositions, Bulls, Excommunications and
Curses, for not obeying his Commands, would be of little force this Day in the
Earth, because of the Light that God has raised up in the Hearts of People
this Day to discover him, Glory to his Great Name for Evermore.

And so the true Judge and Controuler of all Judgments and Controulers, is on
his Throne this Day judging in Righteousness, and on his White of Glorious
Power, going on Conquering and to Conquer, the Man of Sin in all Lands, and his
Holy Ones in Light: His Called, Faithful and Chosen follow him with great Joy
of Heart, Rev. 19.11, 12, 13. He that has an Ear let him hear what the Spirit
says.

Again, says this Popish Book, asking this Question, Is the Church visible? He
answers, She is, and must be visible at all times, as consisting of a Hierarchy
of Pastors, Governing, Teaching, and Administering Sacraments to the Worlds end;
and of other People governed, taught, and receiving Sacraments at their Hands,
all publicly professing the same Faith, all which things are visible: And for
this brings Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Mat. 5.14, 15.

Answer, Now to this, I say, that the true Church, the Spouse of Christ, (and
not the Adulterer, the Popedom) are visible and known to God, and its own
Members, but invisible to the World as such, as the Apostle says, 1 John 3.1.
Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed on us, that we should be
called the Sons of God; therefore the World knows us not, because it knew not
him, to wit, Christ Jesus their Head, though he did appear in Flesh; and so the
Flesh was the Vail by which he was hid from the World then, as the Flesh is the
Vail by which the true Saints are hid from the World now: And this makes
manifest that that Scripture Ephesians. 4.11, 12. makes nothing for his Purpose at
all.

And as for that other Scripture, Mat. 5.14, 15. where it is said, Ye are the
Light of the World, a City set on a Hill, which speaks of them that were truly
so, and kept their savor, and not at all for the Pope, or his great Army of
Apostates, nor of any other who have the Name only of Christians, but have lost
the good savor, and so want the true Christian Life, and so having put the
Candle under a Bushel; though they may have a show in outward Observances of
their own devising of a Church, yet still wanting the true heavenly savoury
Life, I say, they are to be trodden under Foot of Men, as unsavory Salt; and
so this Scripture makes nothing for them neither.

But some may say, Though this makes not for the Pope, or any false Church, yet
does it not make something for the visibility of the true Church? I answer, No,
not in the Popish or Worldly Sense at all; for though the good Life of the true
Church be very savoury to that of God in every Man, and the same Holy Life
shining before Men, is of great Service to Men, and Glory to God; and so
because they separate from the World, not only in the inward, but outwardly
also, therefore they cannot be hid if they do any thing contrary to their Holy
Profession and Separation; yet still the Apostle (1 John 3.1.) stands firm in
his Testimony to which my Spirit agrees: Therefore the World knows us not,
because they knew not Christ: For how can the World, who are in the False Life
and Religion, and yet think it is true, know or believe them to be the True
Church of Christ, who separate from them, and bear witness against them. And
this farther appears, if we consider how the True Church, as Christ himself,
was ever hated and persecuted of the World, Rev. 12.6, etc. and many other
Scriptures: And wherefore is all this Enmity, but even because the World knew
them not as they were, but even accounted them, through their great Ignorance,
as the Offscouring of all things. As it is reported also concerning the
Christians in the Heathenish Persecutions after Christ, Sejanus vir bonus sed
est Christianus, Such a one is a good Man, but he is a Christian. So amongst
and by you called Papists; Such a one is a good Man, but he is a Protestant:
And amongst the common Protestants; Such a one is a good Man, but he is a
Quaker. Thus has the true living Seed been veiled from the World, under some
Reproach or other, through Ages and Generations, as at this day.

And so to conclude, I say, That which is here said of the Invisibility of the
True Church, is not as this Popish Book would wickedly Insinuate, Because there
were none called Protestants before Luther's Time, (or because others since
Luther's Time have had other Names) but because the Truth, according to the
Scripture of Truth, so judges, as is here in a few words set down.

But to return the Wickedness of these Popish Pleaders upon their own Heads, it
may be truly said, That the End of their Pleading so much for the Visibility of
the Church, is, Because they have little in their Religion, if any thing at
all, but what the blind and evil World can both see and exercise themselves in,
and yet continue still in their sinful Nature. So that the Pope's Daughter, the
Popish Synagogue, is most unlike the Heavenly King's Daughter, the True Church,
which is all Glorious within; but the Pope and his Daughter, the False Church,
is all Foul within, and only Glorious on the out fi^e, and that not with a true
outside Comeliness or Glory neither, but even with the rotten filthy Rays and
menstruous Clouts of Humane Traditions, and Carnal Ordinances and Observations
of their own Devising, beautiful only to the Adulterous Eye, but not with the
Ornament of a truly Godly Life and Holy Conversation, which is the True
Churches Golden Ornament or Raiment, which is truly Beautiful in the Eye of God
and his Saints. It is so, as says God's Good Spirit in his Servant

A Warning to the Papists at Stafford.
Thomas Tailor, a Servant of the True and Everliving God, in the Everlasting
Gospel and Kingdom of his Son, sends Greeting, and a Warning unto you from
him, in whose Hand is your Breath, and the Breath of all the Living.

I say unto you, who call your selves Catholics, or Roman Catholics, here
about Stafford, Awake, Awake, look into your selves, Trim your Lamps, and see
whether the true Oil be in you, which the first Christians witnessed in them,
which they had of God, whereby they knew all things; for if you would be found
true Catholics, Members of the Universal Church, the Heavenly Body; this you
must have, for the Cry is gone forth, Behold the Bridegroom comes, and it is
none but the Wise in Heart, the pure Virgin Souls can enter God's Kingdom; it is
not enough for you to say, We are Catholics, or Roman Catholics, and our
Religion is old, or so, for it is not how Old, but how Good; for how much old
an Error or Way of Evil is, by so much the worse it is; and to imagine that God
will receive you, because of your many Outside Observations, and Carnal
Ordinances; you are very much mistaken, so long as the inside is unwashed; for
it is a pure Heart, and a right Spiritual Worship from the same, that God
Requires: And did not the Apostle to the Galatians say, He was afraid of them,
because they thought to Please God, in observing Days, and Months, and Times,
and Years, after Christ was come in the Flesh, and Offered up to end all such
Shadows, and all of like Nature, that can be brought in since then, as a part
of God's Worship, and to bring in Everlasting Righteousness, even the true
Standing and ever Continuing Worship of God, which is in Spirit and Truth, For,
says Christ, God is a Spirit, and they that Worship him, must do it in Spirit,
even in his own Spirit and Truth. So then they that are in the Flesh, the
Carnal Mind, cannot Perform this Worship, and so cannot Please God; but a
Carnal-minded One can observe your Days, whether Fasts or Feasts, and say all
your Prayers, and do all your Devotions, which you are outwardly Exercised in,
from the one end of the Year to the other, and so get a Name, yet this avails
nothing to the Kingdom of God: Nay, Paul the Apostle speaks further, If I give
all my Goods to Feed the Poor, and my Body to be Burnt, and have not the Love
of God, the true Charity (Understanding within to Purge thy Heart from Sinful
Self in the matter) it is nothing. For true Christians do not do good Works,
no^ suffer for well doing, that they may merit Salvation thereby, but being
saved freely by Grace through the Redemption which is in Christ Jesus, they do
good Works from the Heavenly Nature of that Holy Root that bears them, and
brings them forth as good Trees to Glorify God in their Bodies and Souls which
are his, Tit. 3.8. And the Apostle Charging Titus to Exhort Believers to good
Works, was not because they were Saviors, but because they were Profitable to
Men, as well as the Prophets.

And as for our Religion, which the World, and all the outside Professors of
it, look so slightly at, and speak so Contemptibly of, we would have you, as
well as the rest, to know that it is truly Ancient Catholic, Christian and
Apostolical, as having its Rise and Foundation in and from the Eternal Word,
which is Christ in us, the Hope of our Glory, whom the Apostle to the
Colossians Preached as a Mystery formerly hid, but then Revealed to the
Gentiles, even Christ in the Flesh, the Hope of their Glory, through Faith in
his Name; and this is God's Foundation, the Foundation of Christ's Church,
another Foundation can no Man lay, than this which God has laid; and this is
the Rock, not Peter, but Christ, who Peter, by the Revelation of the Father,
Confessed unto: And so through Faith in this Word, Christ the Foundation and
Rock of all the Righteous, that ever were, or ever shall be, do we deny all the
false Faiths and Works of all who have gotten the Name, but want the Nature of
true Christian People; and so in the true Faith which gives Victory over the
World, and in the Name of Christ, which is above every Name, do we separate
from them, and meet together to Worship God in Spirit and Truth, as he Requires
us; and his Blessed Presence in the midst of us, according to Promise, do we
abundantly feel and witness, to the great Rejoicing and Establishing of our
Souls in Righteousness, when thus met together. And therefore do we Exhort all
that Name Christ, whether called Papists or Protestants, to have Fellowship
with us, because our Fellowship is thus truly with the Father and the Son.
Therefore Awake, Awake, stand up from your Dead Faculties and Dead Worships,
that Christ, who is the true Everlasting Way, you may walk in, and Worship in,
where no Uncircumcised or Unclean in Heart can come; and if this you do not
believe, and bow your Heart accordingly to obey, let me tell you, as one who
has received Mercy to be Faithful, you can never be Established with the
Establishment of the Righteous; for this is the Day that burns as an Oven,
where in all the Proud, Wicked and False Professors and Confessors must be as
Stubble, and neither Root nor Branch must be left them, because they will not
have him, the true Promised Seed, and Heir of all things, to Reign, and Sway
his Righteous Scepter in them and on them. O! Look up to the Lord in a
Trembling Soul and True Contrite Spirit, to find Favor in his sight, before
the Door be shut, and you stand without, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us, And he
Answer you in his Wrath, because of your Unbelief and Disobedience, saying,
Depart from me, I know you not Workers of Iniquity; for all are Workers of
Iniquity in their highest Performances and greatest Conceits of themselves,
whose Works are not wrought in God, that Spirit and Holy Power that Cleanses
the Heart from all Sin; and so brings Life to Light, for God to be Praised in,
for the Dead cannot Praise him. So consider what I say, and be not Proud, lest
your Bands be made strong, and your Feet stumble, and then Fall upon the Dark
Mountains, where you have been too long Wandering: Neither be so Foolish as to
say, This is but a Quaker, who has gotten some new Upstart Religion, or so;
for in good Earnest, I tell you the Truth, which will stand when all Deceit and
Devices of Men of corrupt Minds will come to naught; for in the true Poverty of
my Spirit has the Lord, according to Promise, manifest his Blessed Kingdom in
me, and the pure Hunger and Thirst of my Soul, which was after him and his
Righteousness that he Graciously satisfied: And therefore am Constrained, in
pure Love to your Souls, to invite you, as well as others, to come out of the
Prodigal State, into the Heavenly Fathers House, Christ Jesus, as himself said,
My Father is in me, and I in him; and as the Apostle said, It pleased the
Father that all fullness should dwell in him; for in this House, and no where
else, is there Bread enough, true Living Bread for the Hunger of the Immortal
Soul, as he said of himself in John 6. before any thing was spoken concerning
the Bread and Wine at his last Supper; I am the Living Bread, the Heavenly
Bread; and when the Hearers Carnally Questioned, How he could give them his
Flesh to Eat; he told them, The Flesh Profi^ed nothing, it was the Spirit that
Quickened. So come away, Come away from your Carnal Conceivings of a Heavenly
Man, the Lord from Heaven, to be Comprehended in a little Earthly Bread or
Wine, seeing the Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens, contain him not, much less
outward Temples and outward Elements of Bread or Wine: For unto his Light that
is night you, which shines in your Dark Hearts, though your Darkness
Comprehend it not, must you come, and there wait for the Day to dawn in you, or
these Mysteries of his Kingdom you can never truly Know, but in your Darkness
grope and stumble for ever, as People without Eyes; and though this Heavenly
Seed, the Word, the Light, appear little in you, yet despise it not, for in it
is the Blessing, and if you receive it, and in it abide, you will know all this
and it will work in you, as Leaven in Meal, till your whole Lump^' Heavenly,
Sweet and Pure, and so as Christ said, If thy Eye be single (to wit, single in
and to the Lord, in his Light to Believe and Walk) then thy whole Body shall be
full of Light; but if you say Nay, but we will do, and say, and Understand, as
we have been accustomed, then know for certain, you are of those that Reject
the good Counsel of God, given you by his Spirit, in his Servant

Thomas Tailor.

Something in Answer to a Paper from a Nameless Author, directed to be left at
Joseph Holt's in Okeham.
BUT Before I speak in particular to it, I cannot but touch a little upon
another Paper, to that part of it where it is said, Perhaps the Man concealed
his Name, on purpose to try the Man's Skill, who said, He had an Unction from
the Holy One, and knew all things. If so be he knows all things, he will easily
inform thee who it was that wrote it.

Now to this I say, that all People may here take notice, what a Scoffing
Profane Spirit lodges in these Men, to wit, Those Priests and their Auditors:
Who but a Julian, or some Gross Heathen, would have made a Mock of the plain
words of the Apostle? For the Man did not say so of himself, but only brought
the Apostles words, which say, 1 John 2.20. Ye (to wit, the Saints) have
received an Unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things. To prove that
the Saints Teacher is the Anointing of God now in them as then: And I may say
therefore, such as have not this Unction, are not of Christ: But does it
therefore follow, That either the Apostles and Saints then, or the Children and
Saints of God now, do know all Natural or Worldly Things? I remember it is said
in Scripture, that when the Jews and Gentiles had blindfolded Christ, they
Smote him, and wickedly said unto him, Prophecy who it is that Smote thee;
(and was not this from the very same ground that this Scoffer speaks)
reasoning, What, if thou be Christ, and a Prophet, thou can tell all things,
and therefore thou can easily tell who Smote thee. Those also did it for the
very same end that this Man supposes this to be done for, to wit, To try his
Skill; But the Lord will Judge for ever, all such his Enemies. But what if one
had gone to the Saints whom John writ to, and said, A Paper was sent to me this
day, and there is no Name at it, and I desire to know it, but cannot, surely
you can tell me what the Man's Name was, if you know all things: Or if a Man
had had his Horse or other thing stolen from him, Would it have been good Work
from any (especially from a Tempting Scoffing Spirit) to have said, you Saints
know all things, therefore what is the Thief's Name, or so? O Impiety! To what
a height Wickedness is grown up in the Unbelievers and Mockers in this Age. But
come ye Teachers of the Parishes, tell me, Do you indeed believe, or you do
not, that John spoke true, when he said, The Brethren had received an Unction
from the Holy One, and they know all things? If you do believe that the
Brethren then did, and that they now do, receive such an Anointing: I ask you,
What are those All things that the Unction taught them, were they Heavenly or
Earthly things? If Heavenly, even things pertaining to Salvation and
Preservation in a Saved State, as without all question the Apostle did intend,
as is plain there; and not such earthly things as this Scoffer speaks of. Then
I say, this Scoffer is either very ignorant of the Scriptures, or he is very
wicked in his Mind, in sinning against Light, to make God's Children Odious.
But the Cause of his Truth God will ever defend, and the Scorner he will Judge.

And for those other words in that little Paper, where it is said to Joseph
Holt, When thou do know me, do not pelt me with Reproaches; call me not
Unrighteous Priest, nor one of the World, as your Phrases are; nor yet be so
rash as that Old Peevish Man at Sommerby was, to tell me I am Damned.

I answer, That I am the Man I suppose thou intends by that Old Peevish Man at
Sommerby, and therefore whoever thou art, that says I said thou art Damned, it
was not so, but a mere Falsehood in thee to say so, for I never said so to any
man that I know of; but what I said at that time at Sommerby against your
Deceit, was not Rashness nor Peevishness, but pure Zeal for God, which caused
me to declare for God against you, for wresting the Scripture, and abusing the
People thereby. What you are, by your Fruits is very manifest, he that runs may
read what your in free is, by your Words and Works, the Day of the Lord has
found you out, and therefore if you repent not, you cannot miss to perish with
all the Wicked that are gone before you, though we should hold our Peace.

And so to call you that are Unrighteous, as by your Fruits is manifest, and
who by your own Service Book are termed Priests, I say, to call you as you
are, is neither False nor Reproachful, when in the fear and feeling of God, it
is so said to or of you. But that you should account your selves either wronged
or reproached, if one tell you that you are of the World, is something strange,
seeing the Course of your Lives is so in the broad way of the World, and your
Spirits so Worldly, as not only by your earnest Pleading for worldly Elements,
so necessary to Salvation as outward Water, that you can hardly be persuaded
that any can be Regenerate or Saved without it; but also at your very Scossing
at the Holy Anointing of the Spirit of God in his People, as is manifest; but
without this Anointing of God, none knows Savingly any thing of the things of
God's Kingdom; but for all that other Understanding, which is not of this Holy
Anointing of God's Spirit, Man may be Brutish. And so I come, in the Ability I
have from the Lord, to refute and make void thy Dark Thoughts, Arguments and
Reasons, for and concerning outward Washing or Sprinkling the little Infants
with Elementary Water, mentioned in that first Paper.

And first, where from Matt. 19.14. thou drawest these Arguments for
Infant Baptism. First, say thou, Those whom Christ would have brought unto
him, it does not at all become us to stop from Baptism, etc.

To this I answer, That by this manner of wild Arguing, thou may deceive the
Simple, and lead the Blind into the Pit; but none, that in any measure are
guided by God's Light, can be deceived with it: For what if I form thy words
into a Syllogism (your Diana) there will no such thing at all as Infant Baptism
arise from them, but only this, that those ought not to be hindered from coming
to Christ, whom he would have come to him. Unless you will say, That Christ
Baptized those Children with outward Water, which if you should either say or
think, it would be most Absurd, and to be exploded by all. Neither was it in
the desire at all of them that brought the Children to Christ, to have them so
Baptized, but as the words are, That he would put his Hands on them and Pray.
But it seems you lay all the stress of the Service that can be done to
Children, on Washing or Sprinkling them with Water, for without this, all your
laying your defiled Hands upon them, and your sinful praying over them, would
do them little service it seems; for indeed how should it, seeing you never
came to witness sinless Duty? For it is the Doctrine of the Highest amongst you,
that you sin in your best Duties; and the words of your daily Service is, That
there is ^o Health in you. And so Christ's Purifying Baptism we own for our
selves and our Children, but yours we deny, for you have run, and God never
sent you, and therefore so little worth are all your doings.

The other Argument from Mat. 19.14. is, Those to whom the Kingdom of Heaven
does belong, and the Covenant of Grace, to those also the Seal of that Covenant
does belong, which is Baptism, say thou, but to Infants does belong this
Covenant, Genesis 17.7. and Acts 2.39.

I Answer, To this Argument much might be said, to show the fallacy and gross
deceit of it, but in a few words it is manifest thus; First, I deny that part
of the first or greater Proposition, where thou Expoundest the S^al of the
Covenant to be Baptism, that is, Outward Waterbaptism. For though Outward
Circumcision was a Seal to the Jews of that Covenant, yet it does not at all
follow, that Outward Baptism or Washing is the Seal of the Covenant of God in
Christ to Believers under the Gospel; neither does Outward Baptism succeed in
the room or place of Outward Circumcision, as you falsely all along suppose; but
Inward Circumcision of the Heart, is that which succeeds that in the Flesh; and
the Seal of God's Covenant with Man in Christ now, is his Holy Spirit of
Promise, as the Apostle expressly says, Ephesians. 1.13. In whom (to wit, in Christ)
after ye believed, ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of Promise: So that now
the Covenant being wholly Spiritual, and the Ministration of it Spiritual, the
Seal of it must needs be so, to wit, the Seal of the Spirit; as it is said in
that place, which thou say we omitted, John 3.5. Except a Man be Born of
Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, which not
at all speaks of Outward Washing or Water, but of the Spirit only of God from
above, as Christ's own words afterward plainly signify, where he says, Ver.
6. That which is Born of the Flesh is Flesh, and that which is Born of the
Spirit is Spirit: And Ver. 8. The Wind blows where it lists, etc. so is
every one that is Born of the Spirit; where Christ leaves out the mention of
Water, as if on purpose to stop such Carnal Conceits of his Work, as thine is;
for the Seed of the New Birth, or Power, or Means, whereby Regeneration is
wrought, is only of God, by the Operation of his Heavenly Spirit, and not by
Outward Water, or any perishing Thing whatsoever, as it is said in another
place, The Children of God are Born of the Incorruptible Seed of the Word of
God, which lives for Ever: And so when Peter had mentioned our being saved by
Baptism, to stop such Carnal Conceivers as thee, he says, Not the doing away
or washing of the filth of the Flesh is it, but the Answer of a good Conscience
in the Resurrection of Jesus saves; which if thou had an Ear to hear thou
might hear

And for the Assumption, or other Proposition of thy Argument, where thou
s^ist, But to Infants does belong this Covenant, and for that brings Genesis 17.7.
Acts 2.39. I say there is a gross fallacy or deceit in the Word Infants or
Children, for it is an ambiguous, Term, and may be either understood of
natural or fleshly Infants, Children or Seed, or of the spiritual. But that
that Covenant of God with Abraham's Seed, was not to the fleshly as such, is
most manifest by the Apostles Doctrine, where he on purpose speaks of it in two
Eminent places, to wit, Gal. 3.8. when he had said, In thee (to wit, Abraham)
shall all Nations be blessed, he subjoins Ver. 7. So then they that be of Faith
are Blessed with Faithful Abraham. And Ver. 16. Now to Abraham and his Seed
were the Promises made. He says not, and to Seeds, as of many; but of as one,
and to thy Seed, which is Christ. And Verse the last, If ye be Christ's, then
are ye Abraham 's Seed, and Heirs according to the Promise. Now may it not on
the contrary be truly said, If ye be not Christ's, then are ye not Abraham's
Seed, nor Heirs according to the Promise.

The next Scripture, is that which I mentioned upon this occasion in my writing
to you, which thou take no notice of; for indeed it judges your Carnal
Conceits of Things, and it is in Romans 9.7, 8. Neither because they are the Seed
of Abraham, are they all Children: but in Isaac shall thy Seed be called. That
is, says the Apostle, They which are the Children of the Flesh, these are not
the Children of God: but the Children of the Promise are counted for the Seed.
Was it not for such Doctrine as this, that the Carnal Jews, like you Carnal
Christians, cried against the Apostle, saying, Away with such a Fellow from the
Earth, he is not worthy to live; as you use to cry against us to the People,
for witnessing to the Truth of Things against your Gross and Carnal Conceits,
and Unscriptural Practices, These People would Damn your Children: Nay, nay, we
Damn none, but could wish that all might be Saved, and come to the Knowledge of
the Truth. But say you, How can our Infants be Saved, if they be not
Regenerate? And how can they be Regenerate, except they be Baptized with
Outward Water? Poor Souls, I pity you in your great Apostasy; Does not the
Scripture say in the forementioned place, The Wind blows where it lists,
and thou hear the sound thereof, but knows not whence it comes, and whether
it goes: So is every one that is born of God's Spirit; And so Regeneration is
not limited to any outward thing whatsoever: And for the little unteachable
Children, thou busiebody, let them alone, till they be capable of Doctrine; and
then, as any is able, let them bring them up in the Nurture and fear of the
Lord, and so bring them to Christ, that he may lay his Hands upon them and
Bless them. But secret things belong to God, not to thee: When things
concerning the Children are known to thee, make good use of it, and answer the
Lord's Mind in it; the Lord knows best what to do with the little Children
Souls, which are hidden from thee; and let God alone with them who made them,
he will have Mercy on whem he will have Mercy: And so let thy Sprinkling of
them alone, for it neither Regenerates them, nor Seals it unto them, but is a
thing of Men's devising, which the Lord never required at your hands: And though
Scriptures be wrested by you to keep it up, and many Reasons brought to prove
it, yet I say, and I, and not I only, but many more, know in the Light it is
proved, that there is not one Scripture rightly understood that is for it; nor
one true Reason from Scripture to keep up your Sprinkling Infants: But it is a
Custom that in the Apostasy had its Rise, and by such as are not recovered out
of the Apostasy, kept up and pleaded for.

Now for the stir thou make about something that was said by one of our
Friends, about the Press that was about Christ, by People that came to be
Healed, and that therefore the Disciples might say something, as tending to
hinder the little Children from coming, and that the Children were brought upon
other accounts to Christ, and not to be Baptized at all with outward Water. I
say, thou wrongest our Friend, in mixing and charging words on him he spoke
not; and therefore now that I see thee make so bad an use of his words, and so
misrepresent them, it is good time to take notice of thee.

And now I may add something more concerning thy ungrounded Reasons thou
bring for Infant Baptism.

1. Thou say, Where the Disease is, there ought the Remedy to be applied; but
the Disease, to wit, Original Sin, is in Children as well as Men: Therefore the
Remedy, which is Baptism, ought to be applied to Children as well as Men.

I answer, That by this both thy self, and all that take part with thee in this
thing, are manifest to be like the Papists in this Point about Infant Baptism,
for they hold that Baptism of Infants washes away Original Sin, and so do these
English Priests it seems. I knew that you were Idolaters from the Womb, giving
that to the Creature which is proper to the Creator: If the Disease be Original
Sin, and the Remedy be outward Baptisin, then it seems those that are so cured,
must certainly be saved; then it is no Wonder, though poor People, that are
persuaded of this Lie, do run so fast to you with their Children to be
Sprinkled; and no wonder that they do so admire you, and worship you, that are
such Saviors; and none must be thought worthy to do it, it seems, but your
selves: O sad Work! But by this Craft you get great Livings, and that pleases
your Carnal Mind well; But God will judge for all such things: And if this
Tradition of yours were true, How can ever any, that have Original Sin so cured
and washed from them, Sin at all? For take away the Cause and Root of a thing,
and the Effect and Fruit which comes and springs from them must needs cease
also. And therefore thy Interpretation of the Remedy against Original Sin, that
it is outward Water Baptism, which thou did mention in thy Argument, I do
utterly deny, and do, with all the Children of Light, pronounce it to be
contrary to the Word of God, for God's Word is Truth, and no Lie is of, but
contrary to, the Word of Truth. And so where the Door or Inlet into your
Church, is such an unsound Doctrine as this, what a Church is that. And now if
thou could convert to Truth, according to thy seeming Promise, it would be
well for thy Soul. Therefore whilst it is called to day, harden not thy Heart.

Thy second Reason is answered already, in showing thy false Exposition of that
place of Scripture, Genesis 17.7.

3. Thy third Reason, No means of Salvation ought to be denied to the Children
of the Faithful, whereof they are capable, but Baptism is an outward means of
Salvation, whereof Children are capable under the Gospel, as well as Children
of the Jews were capable of it under the Law; therefore, etc.

To this I say, Though in a general Sense, Your own grant that Insants cannot
observe the Requisites of Baptism, to wit, Faith and Repentance shows their
Incapacity for it.
the Major Proposition, as you term it, may be granted, but restrained to your
Sense: I say, that before you entitle your Children to Privileges, because of
your Faith, you had need prove your selves to be in the Faith, which yet you
have not done, lest both the Root, Tree and Branches fall all together. And for
the Minor, as you term it, I say it is false, that your Sprinkling is any
means of Salvation either to your selves or your Children, because, as is
proved, it has no ground nor footing in the Truth, but a mere Invention of
Man's wanting both Precept and President in the Scriptures of Truth: And for
Children being capable of it under the Gospel, I ask how capable? Do thou say
they understand what is done to them in it, or can make any Spiritual use of it
in their Infancy? Then I say, The Multitude shall condemn thee, and the least
in the Flock witness against thee: But if thou say they are capable of it, only
so as to suffer it to be done on them without understanding, then I say it is
no Gospel^ Capacity, for in the Gospel Ministration all must be done and
received in and with the Spirit and Understanding, except you will join hands
again with the Papists, and say ex opere operato, to wit. From the Work of the
Priest done upon them they are saved. O sad! That ever we should have occasion
to speak thus to a People, after so long a time of professing the Scripture and
Protestant Religion.

4. The fourth Reason speaks all as it were in one, and does fully make
manifest the Darkness in thee, from whence all thy Unchristian Doctrines have
proceeded, and it is this, All those who receive the thing signified by
Baptism, ought to receive the outward Sign, it is the Argument of St. Peter,
Acts 10.47. Can any Man forbid Water, that these should not be Baptized, who
have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? But Children of the Faithful
receive the thing signified by Baptism, to wit, Regeneration and Remission of
Sins: Therefore, etc.

To thy first Proposition drawn from Peter's words, Acts 10.47. thou might have
left that to others, who Idolize outward Baptism in another Form; for they will
tell thee, it belongs nothing to you at all who Sprinkle before Confession, or
any visible Appearance of any inward Work. But then say thou, If Children be
not Regenerated, and receive Remission of Sins, you must needs hold, that all
Children are damned. I say, thou belies us and the Truth, for there is no
necessity at all for such a wild and falfe Conclusion from our true and
harmless Premises, for what though God please to have Mercy upon Children,
whether some or all, whom and as he pleases; What ground is that for you to
say hand over head, that all that you Sprinkle are Regenerated, when you know
nothing at all of God's Mind in the thing? And for your calling such Children
of the Faithful, who naturally only proceed from such as do but in general only
profess the Christian Religion, though their Lives, even in your Judgment, are
judged to be no better; some, if not many of them, to be, I say, no better than
Heathens, is such a piece of Darkness and Wretchedness, that the Earth groans
under it; and the Spirit of the Lord is burdened with your Doings, as a Cart
under Sheaves. And whereas thou brings that Scripture, Mat. 18.10. to prove,
that by little Children he intends the Natural Infants, is so gross, that it
shows thou will not see; for those little ones, whose Angels, Christ said, did
always behold the Face of his Father, are plainly said to be such as believed
in him; Ver. 6. and humbled themselves like a little Child; and so he still
brought little Children as Figures and Examples to Men, that they might come to
the Birth of God in them which Heirs his Kingdom, according to what is said
before Romans 9.8. and John 3. That which is Born of the Flesh is Flesh, and that
which is Born of the Spirit is Spirit.

Also as to that which thou brings against our Objection from Mat. 28.18.
concerning Infant Baptism, it is nothing but thy groundless Argument drawn from
a falfe Supposition of our understanding of the place, as though we understood
the reason wherefore Teaching is to go before Baptizing, because of the mere
standing of the words in the Sentence, and so troubles thy self to prove by
other Scripture, That Precedence of Action is not always deducible from the
Precedence of Words: For thou may know, that we do not say that Teaching goes
before Baptism, merely because it is placed so in words, (though in that place
that is true) but especially because of the Nature of the Thing, as is manifest
amongst many other Reasons.

1. By your own Confession, that the Sacraments do not beget Faith, but only
confirm; and that Faith comes by hearing the Word Preached.

2. From the Practice of those that Baptized with Water in the first Times, as
is to be seen in Scripture, where none were Baptized with Water, but upon
Teaching first, going to the Understanding of such, whatsoever you imagine to
the contrary, from the Goaler's or Stephana's Families.

3. From the Judgment of those that Compiled that Catechism, which says, What
is required of Persons to be Baptized? The Answer is, Faith and Repentance: And
so because they in their dark Minds and Selfwill, would needs have Children
into that Ceremony, (right or wrong) they devised that strange, and unheard of,
and unreasonable Custom of Sureties, or Godfathers and Godmothers, to Promise
that for the Children which the Lord never required of them, and indeed is most
unreasonable to think possible; for can any Promise for another that they shall
do such things, as forsake the Devil and all his Works, etc. especially for
Infants, whose Minds and Hearts are wholly hid from such Presumptuous
Promisers. But what if the Lord should require the Performance of this Promise
in the Day of Judgment, on behalf of such Infants, that when they come to Years
are found following the Devil and all his Works? Would thou be content to
suffer the Punishment of such Disobedient Ones for their Sin? Were it not just
thou should, seeing thou wast the Surety or Undertaker for them, and they
have failed? Must it not therefore fall on thee, except thou Repent? And so if
thou be Damned, do not say that we Damn thee, for it is thy self that art the
Cause, and God and his Servants are clear of all your Blood: And do not trifle
and say as one of you said, See these Men can bring a Proof out of our
Catechism, and therefore it is so and so; and drew this wretched word forth
from it, The Spider draws Poison out of the same Flower the Be draws Honey.
The Heathens might have said so to Paul, who brought their own Authors against
them: And did his bringing some true words out of their heaps of false, prove
all to be good, and he a Spider for so doing, any more than our present Work
make us Spiders, or allow of all that is written in that Catechism? Nay, nay,
the Lord is Judge between us, and he sees who are in Heart true Lovers of him
and his Truth, and who are not, and will give every one according to their
Works, and that is our Joy, Glory to his Name for Ever; and so at this time
rests the Lord's Servant,

Thomas Tailor.

This Writ upon Occasion of a Visitation, so called.
UNto you who are called Divines,
In Love are sent these following Lines;
And so, if you are Wise, you will not Disdain
A few plain Verses from a Heart that is plain;
They Will serve as Monitors unto that part
In you, which is grown dull with weight of Art,
And evil Customs, in these lazy Times,
Wherein the Truth's Extirpate Prose and Rhimes;
Wherein Ambition, Pride and Cruelty,
Is like a Fiery Flame advanced so High,
That if with Moistning showers it go not out,
It will consume the Tree both Branch and Root.
Woe to the Shepherds that lead the Flock amiss,
And follow Cursed Covetousness, what is this,
Save gross Idolatry, to give to the Earth
Your Hearts, which is the due of him that gives you Breath?
And Woe to People, when even for a Word,
A Man's Offender made, then comes the Sword:
Then comes the Plagues of God upon that Land,
To cut off Sinners who against him stand.
And Woe to People, when their Bishop's Blind,
That neither sees nor knows their Sores to Bind;
Who feeds himself with Thoughts of Worldly Glory,
And knows not that his Life's an empty Story;
And knows not that the Holy One Beholds,
How such the Sheep impound in dirty Folds;
How they the Fleece, and not the Flock, do seek;
Howl, howl, ye Shepherds, Roar, Lament and Weep;
The Day of your Dispersions is at Hand,
You shall no more the Lambs Tear, Kill and Rend:
But Heaven and Earth shall Joy the Day to see,
Wherein the Sheep from Bondage shall go free:
Weep, Weep and Wall, all strong and stout of Heart,
Who, with Proud Babel's Whore, have taken part;
Upon a Bed of Sorrow you must lie,
Because the Cursing thing you come so nigh.
What Madness is in Men in these bad Days?
That will not heed what Christ and Scripture says;
That will not once believe that God will come,
And give upon your Deeds a Righteous Doom.
What are your Ears and Eyes so closed, that ye
God's Truth will neither Practice, Hear nor see?
Has Midnight Darkness all your Senses drowned,
That of God's Truth you will not endure the Sound?
Must every vain Invention Suffered be,
And with a Brazen Face in the Land go free;
And only such, as do Proclaim God's Day,
Be stopped, and from your presence sent away
Into some nasty Prison, or such Place,
To spend their Days in Sorrow with Disgrace?
As though the Great and Holy One of Heaven,
Would not pour out his Vials Seven times Seven,
Upon the Seat of that proud Beast and Whore,
Who hate his Truth, and would his Lambs devour;
And would set up that Worship which he hates,
And all that Bow unto it Desolates:
And will not suffer Light and Life to Reign,
But Preach and Pray, and all for filthy Gain:
God shakes his Hands against you for such things,
And He Is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings;
Who will not be o'er-top'd by Mortal Birth;
Whose Origin and Root is from the Earth,
But will be Honored as a Heavenly King,
Or else his Judgments through the Earth shall Ring;
With Terrors great, he will his Foes Confound,
Who have wrought all their Works as under Ground.
And in their Hearts have said, Tush, none does see,
But we shall Rule and Reign, and only we.
O turn your Ears, and listen then a while,
Let not the Serpent always you Beguile:
He that deceived the simple one at first,
Does after all your Souls and Spirits thirst;
He leads you out to love the Perishing things,
Which swiftly fly away with Eagles Wings;
Which answer not the Heavenly Minds desire,
But leaves your Spirits scorched as with a Fire.
You seem to Eat, and sumptuously to Fare,
But when awake, you Lean and Hungry are:
You spend your Money for poor empty Shells,
And go to Drink at Springless empty Wells:
And when your Minds with Wind and Air are filled,
And you a little in School-Learning Skilled,
Then do you Jude your selves fit Guides to be,
Unto the poor Unskilful Commonalty,
Who do not know the difference 'twixt the Wheat
And Chaff, which, to the Soul, was never Meat:
But hark, what is it now my Mind does see,
Sad Oaths imposed on Men that should be free,
That should their Office do as Christians did
In former times, as great Jehovah bid;
And not as Worldly Men, whose Will's their Law;
Who, with their Fines and Threats, still kept in A we
The silly Multitude, which knows not God,
But are more Fearful of the Tyrants Rod;
And are in Earthly-mindedness so deep,
That they will lose the Soul before their Sheep:
And are so Ignorant of things Divine,
That they will part with Truth before their Swine.
And what Religion is it that such Men,
For Worldly Ends, will not Profess, but when
The Tide of Times does turn, and changes Face,
Then they will leave you all unto Disgrace:
And that which now seems as an Iron Post,
Will then forsake you, and be gone and lost;
For it is their Bodies that by force is gained,
When as their Souls in the change of Sin's detained.
So that a perfect Man you cannot bring,
Of all your Number, unto God, to Sing,
And Sound forth Holy Praises, amongst the Choire
Of Holy Ones, who burn in pure Desire,
Of setting up the Lamb, upon his Throne
Of Highest Glory, and all Sorrows gone;
Then what is your Work, and where will you appear,
When you have Slept and Slumb'red Year by Year?
And in mean while have suffered Souls to Pine,
For want of Heavenly Bread, and Spiritual Wine;
And would them neither Feed, nor suffer such
As God has sent to Feed them, but do grutch
That any, but your selves, should have a share
In The Work of Feeding such as to God precious are:
But this be known unto you all this Day,
That Israel's Holy One none limit may;
If Christ, an Amos, or a Peter will
Have in his Vineyard Work, his Word's their skill;
By which, without Book-Learning, they do know,
Against Satan's Kingdom, how to bend their Bow;
And if proud Scribes and Pharisees Disdain
Their mean Appearance, and their Language plain,
Then does their Master plead their Innocent Cause,
And soon delivers them from Tyrants Jaws,
And makes the Earth to know, that maugre spite,
He Is able to secure the Harmless Wight,
Who trusts unto his Strength, and walks the Ways
Of Truth and Holiness unto his Praise.
And that the Earthly Man, with all his Power,
Shall not secure himself from Heaven's sharp Shower
Of Hailstones, which upon the Wicked must
Be Rained down, as thick as any Dust.
But stay a little, to the present Work,
A Word or two in Love, that does no hurt;
A Visitation's talked of in these Towns,
Wherein the Priests must come with Long Black Gowns,
To make Appearance, but whose Will to do,
They best can tell, who perfectly do know:
Then I demand in plainness, that you may
Prove by the Scripture, what you do this day;
Why does your Bishop Ride in so great State,
As if to Kings and Princes he were Mate?
And yet will say to others, they must Dye
To Worldly Pomp and Earthly Vanity:
Why are you Teachers now called Masters? when
Christ says, Be ye not Masters called of Men;
And why your Courts (which Spiritual are by Name)
Do Trouble Men for carnal Things? O shame!
That you should Read so long the Scripture Letter,
And yet your selves and Business do no better:
Why is your Maint'nance forced, when the Gospel's free?
And God's pure Day is dawned, that all may see,
That those that dare not trust the Lord for that,
Are such as Minister they know not what:
For such, in the Beginning, that did Preach
The Everlasting Gospel, and did Teach
Men to observe Christ's Doctrine, knew not how,
At all, by outward force, to make Men Bow;
But said, Our Weapons are not of the Earth,
But Spiritual, Powerful, from that Heavenly Breath.
That Fans and Winnows, and does not beguile,
But separates the Precious from the Vile;
And so into Subjection they did bring,
By force of Truth, unto their Holy King:
They sought not Earthly Honors, nor did crave
The Earthly Riches, but the Soul to save.
You have received freely, freely give,
Says Christ, who took the Care how they should Live
And be maintained, and did not bid them take
Wages of Heathens, who the Truth do hate.
But now you have a Custom, sad to see,
To force your Wages both from Bond and Free;
You force your own Disciples; yea, and those
That are as Heathens Judged by your Laws;
Which, if your Spirit were not over-base,
You would soon reckon it a foul Disgrace:
Can any Man that is Noble in his Heart,
Take Hire of such as from the Lord depart?
And not Require it only, but compel
Them to Maintain you; Judge, is this done well?
May not such truly say, You Love your Pride
More than the Gospel, and all things beside?
For sure, a little will serve Natures turn,
But what can satisfy where Lust does Burn?
For when in Pride and Fullness Men will Live,
Then comes the Horse-leach Daughters, crying, Give,
Give, give; yea, which is ill; yea, worst of all,
We'll have it, or we'll bring you into Thrall,
We'll have your Tithes, we'll have your Easter's Dues,
We'll have them all, you's neither Will nor Choose.
And thus old Eli's Sons are still alive,
Which in this World, nor that to come, will thrive.
What! Preach the Gospel, and yet Sue to such
For Maintenance, as Christ his Honor grutch;
And do not rather such rebuke and say,
If you will not Hear, we'll quickly turn away,
And shake your Dust from off us, we'll be free
From you and yours, that all may truly see,
We are not such as would our selves advance,
Nor Men's Estates, of any sort, inhance;
But seek to set up Christ to be the Head
Of all things, in all Worlds, with Fear and Dread.
And thus it was with Good and Godly Men,
In the beginning of the Gospel, when
The Spirit of the Lord did teach them what to say,
And Men did walk in the Sunshine of the Day;
Before, I say, that Pope and Turk arose,
Who, to Christ's Kingdom, are Professed Foes,
And would themselves set up over the Sons of Men,
To Rule as Gods, that neither Tongue nor Pen
Might Publish ought, but what their Heads devise,
Whose Wisdom out of the dark Pit does rise;
And which for Ages has spread over all,
To bring the Souls of many into thrall:
But now the Lord of Great and Endless Power,
Is making bare the skirts of that great Whore,
And giving double of his Furious Cup,
To such as of her Wine still dare to Sup:
It Is her strong Poisoned Wine that makes Men mad,
In Persecuting of the Just; O sad!
That ever any, who do Christ Profess,
In Words, should seek his Members to Distress:
So then, if you be Wise, you will search and see,
How from that Monst'rous Ha^lot you are free;
For if in Hand or Head her Mark you bear,
The Lord amongst his Enemies will you tear;
If you your Ways Reform not, which are ill,
He will not spare, he will your Glory spill;
He Will Fight against you with his Fiery Word,
Which Kills and Slays as does a two edged Sword,
Live in Deceit, and turn which way you will,
His Sword will reach you, and your Cup will fill
With Woes and Sorrows, and sad Acclamations,
The just Reward of the Wicked in each Nation:
Yea, though the Name of Christians you may bear,
Yet it is his Nature must the Laurel wear;
For Christ your Persons does not now Regard,
But as your Works are, he will you Reward:
If you will not give a Reason of your Faith,
But Trample under Foot what any says
Concerning things that are amiss amongst you,
And to the Powers cry out, they hate and wrong ye;
And thus, with Fig Leaves, seek from Men to hide
Your Crying Sins of Avarice, and Pride,
And Persecution; and instead of mending,
Still Harbor Evil Thoughts, which tend to Rending;
Then know for certain in a Moment, God
Will Visit you with his Almighty Rod:
And you who have not Visited in Love,
His suffering Servants, will his Enemies prove;
And when his Peoples Sufferings are Complete,
Then they shall Feed when you shall pine for Meat.
So be it.
And if the Writers Name in Writing you would see,
A Lover of God, a Lover of Man is he;
This is my Natures Name, which shall Remain,
When Sinful Men are Dead, and all Disdain;
And God, the Worker of my Souls Salvation,
Shall Rule and Reign as Head in every Nation;
And though the Devil fret, yet Truth shall stand
Over all, and be the King in every Land,
for evermore, Amen.
And to you called Churchwardens and Side^men, how weak is your Hearts, and
how slavish are your Minds (through unbelief) become, that you cannot withstand
and avoid such a manifest Temptation and Danger, as to come under, and Swear to
the Bishops Articles; for which of you either do, or can, or intend to Perform
according to what you seem therein to engage your selves unto. And that which
is sad to consider, the more ready you are to Engage, and the more observant in
the Performance, the more Miserable oftentimes are you, for thereby you must
not only accuse the Drunkard and Swearer, your own Mothers Sons, but even the
People of God also, for their pure Consciences sake; and so you had need all,
and every one of you, Repent, lest the Lord Swear in his Wrath against you,
that you shall never enter into his Rest; as he did against those that had
grieved him Forty Years in the Wilderness.

Thomas Tailor.

Certain Queries Propounded to the People called Anabaptists, especially to
such as believe, and hold forth, that Water Baptism is an Ordinance and Command
of Christ Jesus, the Door of Entrance into the True Church, and so of such
Absolute Necessity, as that there can be no True Gospel-Church-Fellowship
without it.
1. WHAT do you believe concerning the Baptism of John, the Son of Zacharias
the Priest, who was sent to Baptize in Water? Was he in and under a pure
Evangelical Office and Ministration, and his Baptism in Water a Gospel
Ordinance to continue to the end of the World? If yea, prove it by plain
Scripture.

2. What do you believe concerning the Witness or Prophecy of John, Recorded
John 3.30. I must decrease, but he (to wit, Christ, who was to Baptize with the
Holy Ghost, John 1.33.) must increase? Did he speak this of his own Person, and
of the Person of Christ, or of the Office and Administrations which they
respectively were sent to Execute and Administer? If of the Persons, then tell
us how and wherein the Person of John decreased, and how and wherein the Person
of Christ increased; and whether that saying, Recorded Mat. 11. He that is
least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater than John, was spoken of or in
relation to John's Person also, and not concerning his Office or Ministration?

3. Is that Baptism which you Administer, and so earnestly press People unto,
John's, or Christ's, seeing John himself did expressly distinguish betwixt his
Baptizing in Water, and the Baptism which Christ was to Baptize in? John 1.26.
And Christ also and his Apostles did distinguish betwixt John's Baptism, and
the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, ( Acts. 1.5. Luke 20.4. Acts 13 24 and Chap.
18.25, 26. Chap. 19.3, 4.) into which Christ Baptized, Mark 1.8. And are these
distinct, diverse, or several Baptisms? Or do you believe that they are but one
Baptism, and so no distinction to be put betwixt them? If yea; then tell us
upon what Ground and Certainty you would have us believe you, seeing therein
you agree not in Doctrine with John, nor with Christ and his Apostles.

4. Is that Baptism which you Administer, a Figure of the Spiritual Washing
away of Sins by the Blood of Christ, and of Plunging into his Name, Spirit and
Life? Or is the outward Water, in which you Baptize, and your Act of Baptizing
(that is, Plunging or Dipping) in it, really Sanctified to the doing of it (and
so consequently does) that Work, and so no Sign, Type nor Figure? Tell us
plainly what you your selves believe concerning it?

5. Do you believe, that those mentioned, Acts 19. (on whom Paul laid his
Hands, and the Holy Ghost came upon them) who were Baptized in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, and had before that been Baptized in or unto John's Baptism, (who
Baptized in Water) were they then again plunged or overwhelmed in Outward
Water? If yea, then tell us upon what Scripture Proof your Faith is grounded,
seeing there is no Water there mentioned: And if some were then Baptized in
Water a second time, why then may there not be as much Necessity now, unto such
as have not received the Holy Ghost at their first plunging into Water, to be
Baptized again in Water a second time? And why was the Name of the Lord Jesus
there only used, and not the Form of words which you use and plead for, seeing
it was after that Commission? Mat. 28.19. Let us know your Faith concerning
these things; and whether the most Orthodox amongst you be of one and the same
Judgment concerning them.

6. Why do you call you Dipping or Plunging People into Outward Water, Sacred
Baptism? What Scripture President and Rule have you for that Term? Did John
the Baptist call his Baptism Sacred? Or did Paul call it so? ( Acts 19.3, 4*)
Or was it not the Pope of Rome in his Decretal Epistle, that called his
Baptizing in Water Sacred Baptism, and the Water in which he Baptized, Holy
Water? And do not you use the same Term for yours? But tell us plainly,
whether it be your Act of Dipping in Water that you call Sacred, or the Water
in which you Dip or Plunge People? Or where you had that Term to call your
Water Baptism Sacred, if not from the Pope of Rome.

7. Wherefore are you offended at us for calling your Baptizing in Water,
Dipping or Plunging, seeing that we understand to be the import or
signification of the Word in plain English.

8. When you Dip or Plunge People into Elementary Water, whether do you Dip or
Plunge them in reality of Truth, in, or rather into the Name of Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit, yea, or nay? For if not, do you not deceive them, in making
them believe that you Baptize or Plunge them (according as Christ commanded his
Disciples) into the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, when in reality you
do but only Dip or Plunge them into Outward Water.

9. Do you believe, that the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, is
Elementary Water, seeing I find in that Scripture, Mat. 28.19. (so often quoted
by you, to prove your Mission to Baptize in Water) that Christ gave his
Disciples Commission to Baptize in, or rather into, (as it is in the Greek,
(...),) the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, but nothing said of
Baptizing in Water? Or do you believe, that the Father, the Word, and the
Spirit, are one? Is not his Name Spiritual, representing his Nature, yea,
Spirit, Power, and Life? If yea, why then do you seek to introduce and impose
your Baptizing in Water from that Scripture? And why do you presume beyond what
is there written, especially seeing that you your selves Confess, that the
Scriptures are the Ground and Rule of your Faith? Why do you seek to impose a
Faith upon us from that Scripture, beyond what is there written? What Ground
and Rule have you for that? And what Ground and Rule have you for your
Baptizing in Water from that Scripture, seeing Water is not in the least
mentioned in it? Tell us plainly.

10. Did not Jesus Christ who gave that Commission, Mat. 28.19. Command his
Disciples to tarry at Jerusalem until they were Endued with Power from on High?
Luke 24.49. And whether did they go forth to Baptize all Nations, before they
had waited at Jerusalem, and received that Power? Answer plainly.

11. Have all you that go forth to Baptize in Water under pretense of that
Commission, Mat. 28.19. obeyed Christ's Command, Recorded Luke 24.49. Acts 1.4.
And have you received that Promise and Power? If yea, what is it? A Book, or
Books, or Writings without, or the Spirit, Power, and Life of Christ revealed
within? But and if you have not obeyed Christ's Command as aforesaid, but run
before you have received that Power, are you not therein manifest Transgressors
of the Doctrine and Command of Christ, even in that which you pretend to be the
Ground and Rule of your Faith and Mission? And if so, are you not thereby
plainly manifested to be Intruders, and false Apostles, who are not to be owned
nor received, but to be denied and judged by all that live in the Power of God,
and true Gospel Fellowship?

12. Was the Apostle Paul any whit inferior or behind the very Chief Apostles?
And was not that Commission, Mat. 28.19. as much his as yours? And did not he
know the Mind of Christ in it, as fully as any of you the Counsel of God, being
revealed to him? Notwithstanding which, did not he expressly testify that
Christ sent him not to Baptize, (1 Cor. 1.17.) but to Preach the Gospel? Now if
you have a Mission or Commission to Baptize in Water, which belongs not to him
as fully as to any of you, tell us plainly who gave it when you received it,
and your Scripture for it?

13. Do you believe that Paul was Called and fully Endued for the Ministry? And
was his Commission, Acts 26.17, 18. Evangelical and Full, for the Gathering and
Planting of Churches according to Gospel Order, seeing we find nothing in it of
Christ's sending him to Baptize? Or do you think his Commission insufficient
for the End aforesaid, because he was not sent to Baptize in Water, and that
yours now is more Full and Evangelical? If you do, tell us what Scripture have
you for the Ground and Rule of your Faith in that Matter.

14. Whether do you believe that the One Baptism spoken of Ephesians. 4.5. be that
of John's in Water, or that of Christ's in the Holy Ghost, seeing both John,
Christ, and his true Apostles, did distinguish betwixt them as aforesaid? Now
if you say, that that One Baptism there mentioned is the Baptism in Water, then
I Query, whether you do believe that the Baptism of or in the Spirit is now
ceased, or not of such Absolute Necessity as that in Water, seeing the Apostle
speaks but of One Lord, even so of One Faith, and One Baptism? And whether you
do believe, that any now are or can be really made Members of that One Body,
and true Church of Christ, by Water Baptism, or any other way, than by being
Baptized by that One Spirit, into that One Body? Answer plainly.

Thomas Tailor.

Christ Exalted above Moses, and the Spirit above the Letter.
MANY are and have been in all Ages the Enemies of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
of the Blessed Truth and Life Immortal, which he has brought to Light by his
Appearance in and through his Servants, both in the Days of his Flesh, and
since his Ascension, by the pourings out of his Spirit according to his Holy
Promise, whereby it has come to pass, that many simple Minds have been greatly
hindered from receiving the Truth for a time, until it pleased the Lord, by the
Arm of his Mighty Power, to Consume the Adversaries of his Glory, and so to
remove the Stumbling Blocks out of the way of the Simple and Upright in Heart,
that all Pure Holy Praises, in a Living Obedience of his Gospel, might be given
to him. And amongst those Enemies of God, thou Tho. Hall have risen up in great
Malice, and Wickedness, through the hardness of thy Impenitent Heart, heaping
up Wrath against the Day of Wrath upon thy own Soul, and doing despite against
the Spirit of God's Grace, that has sought by all means possible to win thee
to Repentance; but thou have closed thy Eye, and stopped that Ear in thee, that
should see and hear the Things of God, and so instead of believing in, and
following the Lord Jesus and his Gospel, thou have in pretense chosen the
Killing Letter of Moses's Law to thy own Confusion, and has set at naught the
Son of God, by Mocking and Scoffing at his Light and Spirit in these Days, as
the Rebellious Jews did at him of Old, who derided him and his Doctrine,
saying, They were Moses's Disciples, but as for that Fellow Christ, (as they
Blasphemously called him) they knew not whence he was: So thou would be
accounted a Disciple of Moses, and Pleader for his Law and Ordinances, which
never did, nor never can, make any thing perfect, as the Apostle shows at
large in his Epistle to the Hebrews; but as for Jesus Christ, he is of little
Value to thee, nor has any room in the Inn of thy Corrupt Heart, but thou
would make him a Drudge to thy unclean Will, that when thou have done him,
and his Spirit and Light all the Despite thou can, thou would have him to
Save thee for a feigned Profession sake, which stinks in his Nostrils; for from
the Lord I do here again declare unto thee, that all thy Prayers, Performances
and Pleadings, are Abomination in his sight: And as I have often said, his Hand
is lifted up against thee, and will assuredly in his own due time fall heavy
upon thee, and will grind thee to powder, except thou speedily Repent; for in
the Wages of Balaam thou art, in the great Captivity wandered far away from the
Everlasting Gospel of the Son of God, and a mere Stranger to the Law and
Covenant of his Peace, not knowing neither what thou say, nor whereof thou
affirmest, when thou Talkest and Writest of Moses Law and Ordinances, and
would set them up as the Jews did and do, to vail and hide Christ (the End
of the Law) from the Minds of the People: For even as the Apostle said of the
Opposing Jews in his Day, so I may truly say of thee, That even to this very
Hour, for want of Faith in Christ, the Vail of Darkness and Ignorance is upon
thy Heart, for all thy Reading and Talking of the Letter of Scripture, for thou
wanting Faith in Christ, (the Light, who has the Key of David in his Hand,
which is his Light and Spirit) thou gropest like a Blind Man for the Way, and
can not find it; nay, though it be most plainly witnessed unto in the
Scriptures, and declared of to thee by us the Servants of Christ in these Days;
yet for all that can be said or writ to thee, thou (though the Wickedness of
thy Unbelieving Heart) remainest as Ignorant of Christ, and his Covenant, and
Spiritual Law of Life, as if thou had never heard nor seen any thing thereof,
as by what now follows, I know to every seeing Eye, will most plainly and
easily appear.

And now to his purpose, (God willing) I shall set down some of thy Errors, as
I find them in thy last Papers, which are so gross and manifest, that little
more than the bare setting of them down, will be needful to discover that
filthy Puddle of Enmity, and deep Sink of Sin that lies hid in thy Corrupted
Heart against the Lord Jesus, and his Blessed Spirit of Truth, the only Guide
of all Believing Souls in these Gospel Days.

And first, thou T. Hall says, See whether a Man ought not to give his Ears,
and Heart, and Soul, and Body, and Eyes, to harken to and believe, as duly to
the Moral Law, as to Christ the Prophet. Nay, there is more Charge and Command
lies upon the Observation of the Law, than for the Gospel, as by Moses 's
several places of Warning, and in respect of several Dangers; though it be
said, He that harkens not to the Prophet Christ, shall be cut off, there is as
much spoken of the Law.

I Answer, Who but an Unbelieving Jew could ever thus have gone about to
Undervalue and Dethrone the Lord Jesus Christ, as this Tho. Hall does, who lays
more weight upon the Observation of Moses's law, which had the Shadow, than
upon the Everlasting Gospel of the Son of God, and so he neither believes
Moses, nor the Prophets, nor Christ, and so he is captivated in the great
Captivity of the Spiritual Assyrian, the Devil, who has blinded his Mind, lest
the Light of the Glorious Gospel should shine unto him. See 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. For
Moses writ of Christ, saying, Deuteronomy. 18. The Lord thy God shall raise thee up a
Prophet like unto me, him shall thou hear in all things, etc.

Now the Lord Jesus being this Prophet when he appeared in the Days of his
Flesh, he made manifest to such as believed in him what was necessary for them
then, and the rest of the Fathers Mind and Will after his Ascension, by his
Blessed Spirit, as he said John 16.12, etc. I have yet many things to speak
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now; howbeit when he the Spirit of Truth is
come, he will guide you into all Truth; for he shall not speak of himself, but
whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak; and he will show you things to
come: He shall glorify me, for he shall take of mine, and shall show it unto
you. All things that the Father has are mine; therefore, said I, he shall take
of mine and shall show it unto you.

So by this it is evident, that this T. H. speaks not by the Spirit of Truth,
for he would set up Moses the Servant above Christ the Lord of all; and so
instead of glorifying Christ, dishonours him exceedingly.

And as Moses had so plainly writ of Christ, and ^^ected all to harken to him
when he appeared, upon Pain of Eternal Death, so did also all the Prophets
write of the Glory of Christ's Day, and pointed to him as the Sum and Substance
of all, over all God Blessed for Evermore. And so in the Transfiguration, when
Moses and Elias the Servants were gone, Christ only was left with an Eternal
Witness of God out of the Bright Cloud, saying, This is my Beloved Son, hear
him, Mat. 17.1, etc.

And so this Tho. Hall is a grievous Liar, who says, There is more Charge and
Command for hearing Moses than Christ; for even then when the Law was in use
amongst the Jews, yet Moses as from God, does Charge all upon Pain of Death, to
hear and obey the Voice of Christ in his Appearance, as is said before.

And as for the danger, the Apostle reasons in his Epistle to the Hebrews
quite contrary to this T. H. for says the Apostle, Heb. 12.25. See that ye
refuse not him (to wit, Christ) that speaks; for if they escaped no^ that
refused him that spoke on Earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away
from him that speaks from Heaven. Also see Heb. 2.1, etc.

See what thou have chosen, Tho. Hall: How thou have chosen the Earthly before
the Heavenly, the Killing Letter before the Heavenly Spirit of the Lord Jesus,
which gives Life; and the Shadowing Law of the Servant before the Living Law
of the Master Jesus Christ, who was counted worthy of more Glory than Moses, in
as much as he that Builded the House, is more worthy than the House. See Heb.
3.3.

But when we say, that Moses's Law is a killing Letter, and made nothing
perfect, this T. Hall, like a wicked Man, is ready to cry out of us, as though
we broached some new or strange Doctrine, when as it is no other than the plain
downright Doctrine of the Holy Apostles, and Servants of the Lord Jesus, set
down in Scripture, as you may read, without our adding or diminishing any thing
at all. And to this purpose see 2 Cor. 3. where are these words Verse 6, etc.
Who also has made us able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter,
but of the Spirit; for the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives Life. But if
the Ministration of Death, written and engraven in Stones, was glorious, (Mark
this, though he calls the Law glorious in its time, yet he calls it the
Ministration of Death) so that the Children of Israel could not steadfastly
behold the face of Moses, for the Glory of his Countenance, which Glory was to
be done away: How shall not the Ministration of the Spirit be rather Glorious?
For if the Ministration of Condemnation be Glory, much more does the
Ministration of Righteousness exceed in Glory. For even that which was made
glorious, had no Glory in this respect, by reason of the Glory that excels.
For (...) that which is done away was glorious, much more that which remains
is glorious. Seeing then that we have such hope, we use great plainness of
Speech. And not as Moses, which put a Vail over his Face, that the Children of
Israel could not steadfastly look to the end of that which is abolished; But
their Minds were blinded: For until this day remains the same Vail untaken
away in the reading of the Old Testament; which Vail is done away in Christ.
But even unto this day, when Moses is read, the Vail is upon their Heart.
Nevertheless, when it shall turn to the Lord, the Vail shall be taken away. Now
the Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.
But we all, with open face beholding as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the
Lord.

Here this T. Hall might as well have condemned Paul as us, for I say, that
here is more spoken for a Jewish Spirit to catch at, than in our Writings; for
I say, nothing comparable to this can be brought out of our Writings, for a
seeming denial, and making void, of Moses's Law, for here he calls it, not only
a killing Letter, but even a Ministration of Death and Condemnation, done away
and abolished, and never able to remove the Vail of the Heart from any in
reading of it. And so whereas this Hall is used to bring Psalm. 19 4, 7, etc.
for establishing his Dreams about Moses's Law, where it is said, The Law of the
Lord is perfect, converting the Soul: He might easily see it was not Moses's
Letter, Ministration or Law, which Paul here says, was K^lling and Condemning
to all that came under it, to get Life by it. But David speaks there, of the
Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, which opened the blind Eyes of his
Mind, and wrought the Holy Fear of God in his Heart, and so converted his
straying Soul, to follow the Lord through Faith in his Name, as it is with the
Faithful at this day, as the Apostle says Romans 8.1, etc. There is now
therefore no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: who walk not after
the Flesh, but after the Spirit. For the Law of the Spirit of Life, in Christ
Jesus, has set me free from the Law of Sin and Death. For that which the Law
could not do, in that it was weak through the Flesh, Christ does in us and for
us. And that the Law of Moses made nothing perfect, it is the Apostles express
words also, Heb. 7.18, 19. For there is verily a disanulling of the Commandment
going before (that is, as he reasons all along in this Chapter, the Law of
Moses in the Letter) for the Weakness and Vnprofitableness of it: (suitable to
that before mentioned in Romans 8.3.) For the Law made nothing perfect, but the
bringing in of a better Hope did; by which we draw nigh unto God.

Now if any be ignorant of what this Better Hope is, which makes perfect, and
by which Believers draw nigh to God, they may know it is Christ Jesus the Lord
of Life and Glory, that quickening Spirit also, by which the Vail of the Heart
is rent away in them that believe, which the Old Covenant made with the Jews at
their coming out of Egypt could not do, because it was weak through the Flesh,
as is said before.

And so thou T. Hall, and all the Unbelieving World going out from the Spirit,
into the Letter in your Fleshly Minds and Wills, which is Enmity to God, and is
neither subject to the Law of God, nor indeed can be as Paul says Romans 8. you
bring in nothing but Condemnation to your poor Souls, for you are so proud in
Heart, that you will not come to Christ that meek lowly Lamb, to be taught by
his Light and Spirit, which shines in your Consciences, reproving you daily
for your Unbelief: But you think, by your exercising of your selves in your own
Wills and Times, in some outward Observations of your own devising, called
Religion, to get Acceptance unto God in them (though to his Son you are utter
Enemies.) But truly, instead of Life, you bring Death, for the Wages of these
your sinful Doings, and defiled Worships, is Death.

And that thou, T. Hall, art an Enemy to Christ and his Blessed Spirits
Teaching, thy words in thy Papers will still fully and more abundantiy show,
which are these which I shall now set down, for thou, T. Hall, in Page 11.
wickedly say, Be it known unto you Quakers, God and Christ had no such an
intention to answer the Question of the Man in the Gospel, in any such like
manner, to seek to the true Worshipping of God in Spirit and Truth; but Christ,
instead of directing the Desire of the Man for the good of his Soul, and Glory
of God, Christ dees not send him or bid him go to the Spirit of Truth, and wait
for it: Had Christ done so, he might then have sent or directed the Man out of
the way to get Life Eternal, and so further from God than before, for then the
Man had not come through the Father to him, according to John 6.44, 45.

And Page 15 further erroniously thou say, You Quakers cannot find as that
Christ the Prophet did give any Command to any People, as was in ignorance of
the Ways to Salvation, or Life Eternal, that they should leave off to be taught
of Moses, or his Law, or Precepts, and go to learn of the Spirit of Truth, and
let that teach or lead them, God forbid.

O miserable Blindness and Ignorance! That ever any Professing God or
Scripture, should thus belch out their Enmity against the Spirit of Truth. The
glorious Promise of the Father, without which all Knowledge, and all
Profession, is a mere Nothing, but a heap of Darkness and Confusion, and
without which there had never been any true Prophet, nor Scripture of Truth;
for Holy Men of God spoke not in their own Wills or Times, but as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost (the Spirit of Truth) without which never Man did, nor
never Man can, come to any Saving Knowledge of God or Christ, or the Mysteries
of the Kingdom of God and Christ; and therefore says Paul (after many Years
zealous Profession of Moses's killing Letter) That which the Eye has not seen,
nor the Ear heard, nor has entered into Man's Heart to conceive, God has
revealed them to us by his Spirit; for the Spirit of God (that Spirit of Truth)
searches all things, even the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. And
therefore says the same Paul, 2 Cor. 3.6. God has made us able Ministers of
the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit, for the Letter
kills, but the Spirit gives Life. And therefore says Christ, John 16.7. It
is expedient for you that I go away, that the Spirit of Truth, which leads into
all Truth, may come, who is the Saints Comforter. And this is that means by
which the Father draws to Christ, even the Spirit of Truth (and not as thou
ignorantly Dreamest) the Letter of Moses's Law, John 6.44, 45. And so, T. Hall,
thou art not far from that unpardonable Sin of Blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost, who says, That if Christ had directed the Man in the Gospel to go to the
Spirit of Truth, and wait for it, he had directed him out of the way of Life. O
sad! that ever such a Monster of Men should appear in these days, when the Lord
is so graciously arising with his Healing Wing of Light, Life and Spirit, to
save his Israel out of the Hands of their Souls Enemies.

And thou, T. Hall, say farther, God forbid that Christ should send or
direct People that were in Ignorance of the ways of Salvation, to go and learn
of the Holy Spirit of Truth, to be taught of it, and not at Moses 's Law.

I say again, This proceeds from the same bitter Root of Error and Blasphemy in
thee that the former did; and so Woe, Woe, Woe, to that Nest that hatches such
Venomous Birds, and Cockatrice Eggs, as thou do: And if that People, of whom
thou professest thy self a Member, should see these things, and not deny thee
for them, they would be as much to blame as thy self, who have plunged thy self
so deep into the Pit of Destruction, that no less than a Miracle of Mercy can
help thee to see and acknowledge the Truth of God whom thou have Blasphemed.
For O thou full of all Unrighteousness! What must ignorant People come to know
the things of God by, but only by the Spirit of Truth? as Paul says, No Man
knows the things of God, but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.11. And says Paul,
Gal. 3.2. to some of like mind with this T. H. concerning Moses's Law, This
only would I learn of you, Received ye the Spirit by the Works of the Law, or
by the Hearing of Faith? And Verse 3. Are ye so foolish? having begun in the
Spirit, are ye now made perfect by the Flesh? Thus he shows, That the Spirit of
God is received into the Believing Soul, through the hearing of Faith preached,
and not by any fleshly conforming to Moses's Letter of that Law; for says he
in Ver. 10. of that Chapter, As many as are of the Works of the Law, are under
the Curse: For it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things which are written in the Book of the Law to do them. See T. Hall, what
thou have done for thy self (and would do for others) by pleading for Moses's
Letter of the Law to be over Christian People; thou have brought thy self under
the Curse; for they that come under that Covenant of Works, must not only do
all things written in the Book, but they must continue therein without Sinning
or Offending against it, otherwise they are Cursed; as the Apostle James in
another place says, He that keeps the whole Law, and sins in one Point,
is guilty of all. And so, as I instanced to thee in that of the Sabbath day,
for though in thy blind Mind thou would be a Teacher of the Law, yet thou
neither know what thou say, nor whereof thou affirmest, for the
Sabbath Day, which Moses commanded to the People under that Covenant, was the
Seventh day of the Week, which thou neither keep thy self, nor any of thy
Fellows, and so you are guilty of breaking the whole Law, and so under the
Curse. And whereas you think to save your Heads, by saying, You keep the next
day, being the First day of the Week, for a Sabbath; that will help you nothing
at all, for the Law admitted of no change of the day (which was the Seventh
from the Creation) into another day: And so the Apostles meeting together on
the First day of the Week, was so far from establishing the legal Sabbath, that
it was on purpose done, to show that Christ, the end of the Law, and
everlasting Sabbath of Rest to his People, was come. And so to thee T. Hall,
and all of like mind with thee, I say as Paul to the Galatians, Chap. 4.21,
etc. Tell me, ye that desire to be under the Law, Do ye not hear the Law? For
it is written, Abraham had two Sons, the one by a Bondwoman, the other by a
Free. But he who was of the Bondwoman, was born after the Flesh; but he of the
Free woman, was by promise. Which things are an Allegory, for these are the two
Covenants, the one from Mount Sinai, which gendereth to Bondage, which is Agar.
For this Agar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers to Jerusalem which now
is, and is in Bondage with her Children. But Jerusalem which is above, is free,
which is the Mother of us all. For it is written, Rejoice, thou barren, that
bear not, break forth and cry, thou that travellest not, for the Desolate
have many more Children than thee which has an Husband. Now we, Brethren, as
Isaac was, are the Children of the Promise. But as then, he that was born after
the Flesh persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now.
Nevertheless, what says the Scripture? Cast out the Bond woman and her Son;
for the Son of the Bondwoman shall not be Heir with the Son of the Freewoman.

So see Tho. Hall where thou art, a Child of the Bondwoman, Born after the
Flesh, Persecuting us whom God of his Free Love in Christ Jesus, has Begotten
and Born Spiritually unto himself, to Serve and Worship him in his own Free
Spirit, and so in the same to bear witness for him, against thine, and all the
Slanderous Lying Tongues and Pens, who will not have Christ by his Eternal
Spirit of Truth to Rule, yea, to be King, Lawgiver and Savior in his People:
But this Wicked Antichristian Spirit of yours, as the Lord both has and will
by the Brightness of his Appearing discover, so he will likewise, by the Spirit
of his Mouth, utterly consume, and for Ever destroy.

And thus the Lord Jesus, the Son of the Father, shall Triumph over thee and
all his Enemies in Righteousness; for though the Law and Covenant of Moses, was
for the time until Christ came to the Jews, of great use, yet Christ being
come, the Promised Seed, Grace and Truth, yea, Life and Immortality in its
Glory was made manifest and enjoyed in the Believers both then and now, and did
as far, yea, much more transcend the Glory of the Law, as the Sun does the
Moon; and therefore the Jews, the whole Fleshly Seed of Abraham, had their
New Mood Feasts, to signify the shadowy Night Dispensation they were under,
short of the Day; and therefore says Malachi, the last Prophet under the Law
save John Baptist, in his last Chapter, To you that fear my Name, shall the Sun
of Righteousness arise with healing under his Wings: so though in the Law there
was Condemnation against Sin, yet the Life and Healing Virtue is only in Jesus
Christ. And this is the very thing that John, Chap. 1. says, The Law was given
by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ: So that the Offender under
Moses died without Mercy; but the Believer in Christ, and the Abider through
Faith in Christ, is Healed by the Mercy that is in him, to all that so are
found in him. And so you that daily Confess you do what you ought not to do,
and leave undone what you ought to do, and have no Health in you, you show
plainly that you never yet knew Christ, but are yet in your Sins under the Law,
which makes nothing perfect; and so all your Righteousness in this state, is
like menstruous Rags indeed, and your best Works Sin; and so you being ignorant
of God's Righteousness, and going about to establish your own Righteousness,
have not submitted to the Righteousness of God, which is Christ. For that no
man is justified in the sight of God by the Works of the Law is evident, for
the Just shall live by Faith. And the Law is not of Faith; but the man that
does them shall live in them, Gal. 3.11, 12. Romans 10.2, 3, etc.

Now T. H. What would thou have judged of Paul if thou had been in his
time? Surely the same that thou do of us, who are of the same Holy Faith with
him, and so would have Condemned the Just, and Chosen Barrabas.

Obj. But say thou, Paul says, Gal. 3. That the Law was our Schoolmaster to
bring us to Christ: And from thence would infer, That Moses 's Law in the
Letter is to be a Schoolmaster to all People now, to bring them to Christ.

Answ. To which I say, first, as I said before; and it is most certainly true,
that those words, [to bring us, Gal. 3.24.] is not in the Greek Copy out of
which the English was taken, but put in by the Translators who did it, as
supposing those words made up the Sense: But these words, to wit, [to bring us]
are so far from helping the Sense, that they quite alter it; as though the
Letter of the Law of Moses, were the Means or Instrument by which the Father
draws People to Christ under the New Covenant, as this T.H. foolishly Dreams,
as is manifest by his often thereupon bringing in that of John 6.44, 45. where
it is said by Christ, That no man can come to him, but whom the Father, that
sen him draws, and they shall all be taught of God, as it was written in the
Prophets. This Drawing of People to Christ by the Father is by Moses' Law,
says he, and this Teaching of God, spoken of by the Prophets, is by the La^ of
Moses, says he, which was a Law in the Letter. Now that this Interpretation of
this T. H. is an Absolute Wronging of Christ, and Wresting the Scripture, all
may see, who do consider the drift of Christ's Words, with the Parties he spoke
unto in that place; for there he is speaking to a People that were under the
Law; who for all that the Law in the Letter could do for them, remained still
ignorant of the Great Mystery Christ; for Christ in Man, the Hope of Glory, was
the Great Mystery which Paul was sent to Preach, Col. 1.28. And therefore when
Peter said to Christ, that he was the Son of God, Christ tells him, That Flesh
and Blood had not revealed it to him, but my Father that is in Heaven: And how
did the Father reveal Christ to Peter? What, by the Letter of the Law, as this
Man says? By no means; but even as Paul says, 1 Cor. 2. By the Holy Spirit.
And as he says in another place, 1 Cor. 12.3. No Man can call Jesus Lord, but
by the Holy Ghost. And received ye the Spirit, says he, Gal. 3.2. by the Deeds
of the Law, or by the Hearing of Faith? And this is that Glorious Promise of
the Father, spoken of by the Prophet, and recited by Christ, which was more
manifest in the Gospel Day, according to that well known place in Joel, and
mentioned by Peter, which says, I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh, Acts
2^ And so this being so; and the Foundation of this Tho. Hall being removed,
his Building will fall.

And now again to the Business of the Laws School mastership, That it was never
intended by God to be so any longer than until Christ, the very next words, to
wit, there in Gal. 3.25. show: For when he had said that the Law was their
Schoolmaster, (to wit, unto or until Christ) he presently adds, But when Faith
is come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster; and this he Illustrates in
Chap. 4.1, etc. by a Comparison taken from an Heir in his Nonage, and at full
Years; saying, The Heir while he is a Child is in one Condition, but when at
full Years in another: So the Church of God under the School-mastership of the
Law, was in its Childhood; but when the Fullness of God's time came for the
Manifestation of his Christ, and the Pourings forth of his Glorious Spirit,
according to Prophecy and Promise, then came the Church to be like the Heir at
full Age, entering into the Blessed Possession of the Father's, Kingdom, the
Inheritance of Saints in Light. And therefore, says Christ, the Law and the
Prophets were unto John, since which time the Kingdom of God is preached, and
People press into it. And amongst them that are Born of Women, there has not a
isen a greater Prophet than John B^p^^st; but he that is least in the Kingdom
of God is great than he: Therefore Woe is unto thee Tho. Hall, and all such
Jewish Spirits, that would shut up this Blessed Kingdom of God from Men, and
you will neither enter into the Kingdom of God your selves, nor suffer others.

Obj. But what then was the Law for?

Answ. Paul answers, The Law was added because of Transgression till the Seed
(which is Christ) came, to which the Promise was: And so (says he) before
Faith came we were kept under the Law, shut up unto the Faith afterward to be
revealed, Gal. 3.23.

Then says he, Verse 24. (...). The Law was our Schoolmaster unto Christ; but
never a word of bringing us to Christ by Moses's Law, but a shuting up. We were
shut up, schooled, says he, (or hard kept to our Task, and Whipped). But he
that reveals Christ to the Soul, and draws the Soul to Christ, is the Father,
by the Living Power of his own Eternal Spirit, whom the Fleshly World knows not.

Obj. But must not the Soul be humbled in the sight and sense of its Sin,
before it can receive Christ for Salvation?

Answ. I say, yea, but this is the Work of Christ also, who by his own Eternal
Spirit, (which ministers his Fiery Law) does Convince the World of all their
Sins of Unbelief, and mighty Transgressions, whereby they have dishonored him,
and slighted all his Love; and so that which now makes all the Sins of People
so Damnable, is their Sin of not believing in and receiving Christ, the Light
of the World, into their Hears, to dwell, guide and rule there; and so he that
believes not is Damned already, says Christ; and this is the Condemnation,
that Light is come into the World, and Men believed it not. And ye search the
Scriptures, (says Christ to those Jews that boasted of being Moses's
Disciples) for in them ye think to have Eternal Life, and they are they that
testify of me; but ye will no^ come to me that ye may have Life. Also
consider, that Paul for all his Zealous Profession of Moses's Law, and
Letterknowledge, was never truly sensible of, nor truly humbled for his Sins,
until Christ appeared from Heaven, and struck him down.

See Tho. Hall how Christ here sets forth the Nature of Carnal Professors of
the Letter of Scripture, and Boasters of Moses's Law, they are dead from God,
because they will not come to Christ, in whom only is Life. They thought to
have had Eternal Life in the Scriptures which test fi d of Christ, but they
sticking in the Form, and dead Profession of the Letter, without Christ, (the
Living Power of God to Salvation) they could not have Life Eternal; For he only
that has the Son of God has Life; and he that has not the Son has not Life,
but the Wrath of God abides upon him. For you being under the Law, as is said
before, are under the Curse; and the Law works Wrath, says Paul, and that is
the reason that the Carnal Professors of the Letter are Persec tors of the Life
of Christ wherever it is made manifest, in Son or Daughter, in all Ages, as
Paul says in that forementioned place, Gal. 4. He that was Born after the
Flesh, Persecuted him that was Born after the Spirit, even so it is now: But
the Lamb shall have the Victory, and the mouth of all Iniquity shall be
stopped, Glory to the Lord our God over all for Evermore.

Another Piece of thy Enmity (Tho. Hall) against Christ and his Spirit, is
manifest in thy Paper, where thou say, That there is no Scripture that
warrants Peoples going from the Law as Moses taught, though it is a Law written
in the Letter, to hear and learn at any other, either a Christ Called a
Lawgiver, or the Spirit of Truth, as you call it.

Answ. So here all may see, that thou art so full of Enmity against Christ,
that thou can not endure to have him honored with the Title of Lawgiver;
and thou art so full of Darkness, that thou knows not, nor wilt believe, that
God's People have any such thing indeed, as the Holy Spirit to guide and teach
them; but comes forth with thy scornful Words (like the Jews that Crowned him
with Thorns, and Spit in his Face) saying, A Christ called a Lawgiver, or the
Spirit of Truth, as you call it. So it is high time for all People to take heed
of falling into the Error of these Men, to wit, Tho. Hall, and his Fellows, who
have chosen the Killing Letter of Moses's Law, and denied the Son of God, and
his Blessed Spirit; and so have Builded the Babel of their Rotten Profession
upon a Foundation of Sand, to wit, their own Righteousness, which in the Day of
God will utterly fail them; for every Man's Works must be tried by Fire: And so
all such as have not Christ for their Foundation must Perish. For other
Foundation can no man lay, than that which is laid, even Christ, who is our
ALL, and will Reign over all his Enemies for Evermore.

And so let no Man trouble us any more, for we bear in our Bodies the Marks of
the Lord Jesus: And Ever-praised be his Name, who has given us an
Understanding to know him, the Salvation of God, to be in us, and we in him;
and so to be Witnesses for him before Men, that the time of the fulfilling of
his Scriptures is come, which says, Jer. 31.31, etc. Heb. 8. Behold the Days
come, says the Lord, that I will make a New Covenant with the House of Judah,
and with the House of Israel, after those Days; not according to the Covenant
which I made with their Fathers, in the Day when I took them by the Hand, to
lead them out of the Land of Egypt, which my Covenant they broke, although I
was an Husband to them, says the Lord; but this is the Covenant that I will
make with them, after those Days, says the Lord; I will put my Laws into their
minds, and write them in their hearts: and I will be to them a God, and they
shall be to me a People. And they shall not teach every man his Neighbors, and
every man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from
the least to the greatest. For I will be merciful to their Unrighteousness, and
their Sins and their Iniquities will I remember no more. Now in that he says,
A New Covenant, he has made the first Old. Now that which^d cayeth and waxes
old, is ready to vanish away. This is the Apostle's Conclusion from the former
words, as is to be seen in the last Verse of that 8th Chapter to the Hebrews.

Now mind, whoever thou art, that reads these words, that the Covenant which
here he calls Old, was that which God made with the Fleshly Seed of Abraham at
their coming out of Egypt, which is mentioned in the Writings of Moses, as you
may read; and part of this Covenant was the Two Tables of Stone, which the Lord
by his Angel delivered Moses for that People to observe and keep, with the rest
of what Moses had in Charge for them, and set down in the outward Book, to be
done, and which the Children of Israel did Promise and Covenant that they would
observe and do, but they broke Covenant with God, (as all Flesh ever did, and
does at this Day) and so the Lord regarded them not; for no Flesh can do what
the Pure Spiritual Lord God commands them, having no more help thereto, but
what a Law or Letter without can furnish them withal; and therefore the Lord
God in love to Man's Soul sent Christ into the World, to be his own Arm and
Power to and in Man, to bring forth that Righteousness and Holiness which he
required; and therefore says Paul, after he saw his own utter unableness to do
the Will of God, with all the outward Helps that ever he had, he concludes,
that they that are in the Flesh cannot please God, let them turn which way they
can; for the Enmity against the Law, whilst in that Principle, (and in that
thou T. H. art) still remains against the Spiritual Law of God, as he says,
Romans 8.7. For the Carnal Mind is not subject to the Law of God, nor indeed can
be.

And therefore as Paul, so must all come to Christ, the Lord that Spirit, to
know him in them, to destroy the Enmity out of them; that so the Will of God,
and Law of his Mouth, which is Spiritual, may be done in them; and so come to
witness as Paul there in Romans 8.2. did, That the Law of the Spirit of Life in
Christ Jesus, has made them free from the Law of Sin and Death. And the Ground
or Reason of the Lord's gracious Dealing with Man, in the next Verse e sets
down, saying, For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the
Flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin
condemned Sin in the Flesh. And the end of all this he shows in the next Verse,
saying, That the Righteousness of God's Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk
not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. And thus he stops the Mouths of all
the Enemies of Christ, who with Tho Hall would object, That with Preaching of
Christ, and his Light, and hi Spirit in Man to be all in all, they make void
the Law.

Answ. Nay, nay, I say, By Preaching Christ we establish the Law to the Glory
of God in Christ over all.

And so thou Tho. Hall have been he which has not hitherto either truly heard
Moses, nor the Prophets, nor Christ, nor his Apostles, or his Spirit in these
days, and so can not in that wretched Mind believe, though one come from the
Dead.

And so for the Truths sake, and to stop the Errors and Blasphemies of this
Thomas Hall, who cease not to pour forth his Ignorance against the Lord Jesus
Christ, and his blessed Spirit of Light and Life in Man, the only Teacher of
God's People in these Gospel days, have I writ these Lines, that the Truth of
the Gospel, against his, and all such Unbelieving, Jewish, Persecuting Spirits,
in these days, may stand cear, over all their Heads, and triumph for ever in
the Hearts and Consciences of all tender and honest-minded People, whose
Desires (...) continually after the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness
thereof, whose Kingdom is everlasting, and the Righteousness thereof is Pure,
Spotless and Undefiled of God, and endures for ever. And this is our
Righteousness, and the Righteousness of all Saints, Praised be God for ever;
and for whose Name and Truths sake, and for bearing Testimony thereof in this
World, do we suffer Reproach and Persecutions from the present evil World, not
only of the Profane, but even of many such unreasonable professing vain
Talkers as this T. Hall, who would be Teachers of the Law, not knowing what
they say, nor whereof they affirm, as Paul the Apostle of Christ witnessed of
such in his days, who would never be quiet from opposing the Gospel with their
False Interpretations of the Law, until God cut them off, and cast them away
for their Wickedness: But we know, says the same Apostle in that place, to
wit, 1 Timothy 1.5, 6, 7, etc. that the Law is good, if a Man use it lawfully. I
nowing this, that the Law is not made for a righteous Man, but for the Lawless
and Disobedient, for the Ungodly, and for Sinner, etc. So say we; and so the
Law of God we love and honor, ^s God's Ordinance, for good, to restrain, limit
and condemn such ungodly and unreasonable Spirits, as this T. Hall is; for
those that will not believe nor obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, must
be ruled, and bruised, and condemned, with the Iron Rod of God's righteous Law;
which whatsoever it says, it says to them that are under it; that every
sinful Mouth may be stopped, and all the World of wicked unbelieving Men, may
be found guilty before God, Glory to his Name for ever, who gives us the
Victory by Jesus Christ our Lord, who is our Light, Life, Wisdom, Righteousness
and Salvation for ever, whose Grace alone is able to keep us, and preserve us,
and present us (and all that believe in his Light, and know him in them) unto
himself, without Spot and Wrinkle, and unreprovable in everlasting Peace, Rests
a Lover of the Soul of Man, which is in great Captivity, until it come to the
Liberty of God's Sons; and, who in a patient quiet Suffering way, do wait to do
it good, as a Servant of God, wherein I may be known amongst Men by the Name of
Thomas Tailor, but in the New Name, which is of God, and not of this World,
which the Father has given me, does my Soul rejoice. And though I be set
apart for Sufferings, amongst the reproached despised People of God called
Quakers by the World, yet we are Happier than our Persecutors, in that the Lord
is on our sides, and justifies us in his way, which is Christ, while his Holy
Spirit testifies against our Adversaries, because they are his Adversaries.

He that has an Ear to hear let him hear, and give Glory to God by believing,
for these words are Faithful and True.

Thomas Tailor.

FINIS.
A Testimony for the Lord God,
HEar O EARTH, and hearken ye HEAVENS, for the Lord has spoken, even the Lord
God mighty in Power and excellent in Wisdom; Loving Kindness and Mercies have
appeared, and are made manifest in the Children of men, and the Isles of the
Gentiles do feel his Power and partake of his Promise in the Light, in the
Life, in the Eternal Covenant of his Peace and Truth, whereby Japhat is
persuaded in the Tents of Shem to dwell: And this is the Lords own doing, and
it is mavelous in the pure eyes of all that behold it, and the eye that sees
is Blessed, and the Soul that hears and beleiveth is Blessed, and shall be
Blessed; for the Lord the faithful God is Arisen, and his appearance is like
the Sun when it Arises and Shines in the Brightness of its Glory; and
therefore are we refreshed and caused to live in his sight, and to bring forth
the living fruits of Righteousness to his praise and glory; Glory, glory for
ever, for the Heaven gives now its dew, and the Earth yields its increase, and
the blessing is upon the People and the Nations of the World shall bow, and the
Inhabitants of the Earth do tremble at the Glory of the Lord, at the Majesty of
his Appearance in this his glorious day, wherein he has Visited, and his
Visiting his Seed, and calling his Servants out of Egypt, and delivering his
Beloved out of the hands of him that was too strong for them, and putting a new
Song into our Mouths; And his Rest is Glorious, and his Praise is Holy, and his
Renown is spread abroad, and his Foes become his Footstool; and the Ransomed
of the Lord do unto Zion return, and in the Light of the living God do all the
day rejoice and praise him upon the truly Spiritual and well tuned loud Cymbals
in the heights of Israel, in the Holy Temple, in the Promised Land, in the
Purchased Possession in the Holy Mount, even the Mountain of God's everlasting
Love in CHRIST JESUS, where his eternal Arm of Power and Faithfulness is truly
witnessed; And this is the Mountain of Gods House and Holiness indeed, which is
now on the top of all Mountains; and here the Lord is fully seen, and his
living Power daily felt, and his everlasting Love continually enjoyed, for
watering and refreshing the Babes and living Plants of the New Jerusalem; glory
glory for ever, glory to the Righteous, for this is comely.

And now is the day of the Lords gathering, and his Angels are gone forth, and
his Trumpet has sounded the Alarm out of the holy Mountain, [Place these
Sheets after Page 130.]
unto all the Inhabitants of the Earth; And now if any Old or Young, High or
Low, can come forth and stand before the God of the whole Earth; they are
warned and called upon to bring their deeds to the LIGHT, to the day of the
Lamb, that true Light that lights every man that comes unto the World, John
1.9. For now indeed is the day of the Lord God appeared; and the Lamb is come,
and who may stand before him? who can abide this day of his coming? for he
comes in the thousands of his Holy Ones to Judge the World, even all that are
Proud and do Wickedly in his sight, and to convince them of all their ungodly
deeds and hard speeches, which they ungodlily have spoken against him, and
whereby they have slandred the foot steps of his Anointed Ones, and blasphemed
his Heavenly Tabernacle, which he has pitched amongst men that he might dwell
amongst them and be glorified for evermore.

So WOE is to the Wicked, and much Wrath will be upon the people who now stand
out and strive against the Lord, even the Lord, the habitation of Justice, in
whose hands is their ^^eath, who are careless Children and do not regard this
day of their Visitation.

So all having time, prize it, and bow to the Lord God, and know this day of
your Visitation; for the Lord in his Glory is Arisen, and his Eye beholds, and
with his own pure Light is trying the children of men: And now, even now shall
the Mouth of Iniquity be stopped, and the Righteous shall rejoiyce and be glad,
as the Scripture has said; Yea, the high praises of God is already heard in
their Mouths, and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, is felt
going forth Conquering and to Conquer; And the Mountains are moved, and the
lesser Hills are afraid, and the hearts of the Hypocrites do melt for fear at
the presence of the Lord, at the appearance of our God, the true God, the
everlasting Father who is exalting his own Name, and seting up the Kingdom of
his dear Son, and shaking terribly the earth; glory, glory to him for ever and
for ever, for he is good, and his Mercy endures for ever, and of his
faithfulness there is no end.

All flesh is grass, but that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit, and shall
inherit and sound forth the living Praises of the living God for evermore, as
it is at this day. So be it.

Given forth, in the movings of the Lord, as a Witness to his Truth in this his
Day, by one who bears the Reproach of Christ (amonst many Brethren) by he evil
World, under the name of Quaker.

Thomas Tailor.

Ignorance and Error REPROVED: BEING AN ANSWER TO SOME QUERIES That one JOHN
REYNOLDS Wrote to Two of the People called QUAKERS.

By THOMAS TAILOR.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, next Door to the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street; and at the Bible in Leaden-hall-street
near the Market, 1697.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
WHEN the Lord God of Eternal Power began, by his Spirit, to move in these
Nations, in the late times of Trouble, and there was an Opening in the times
for the Zeal of the Heart to work out it self, then every one betook themselves
to that Fellowship and People that agreed most with the Working-Principle that
was in them, and so there came a distinguishing and knowledge of those seeking
Souls, according to some thing most obvious to the Eye of the World, and so
they called some by the name of Presbyterians, some Independent, and the like:
For, as for those called Prelatical, they were not of such a pressing Nature,
as to seek forward much after the Spiritual Kingdom, but rather Breathed after
their Old Form, how they might come to that again, (without the former
Troubles) to lie down in that: But those called Presbyterian or mixed
Independent (in answer to whose Queries, or one of them, the ensuing sheets
are) they seemed so Zealous while the Worlds Power countenanced them, as though
they would have taken Heaven, as it were by force; and not only so, but even of
late also, since the Second Charles came in, and they began to be put out of
their high Places by some old Incumbent, as they call them, or upon some other
Account, as Zealor so, yet did some of them keep up their Custom of Preaching
amongst People in public, where they could get place or audience, in so much
that the boasting Spirit began to get up in some of them, as in this John
Reynolds, as though nothing should stop their passage, and so would have all
accounted Liars that had said to the Contrary: But behold the Wisdom if God in
suffering things so to come to pass, that all things might be fully manifest:
And so an Act of Parliament must come out against them, unless they will
Conform. And then lo, behold this shower of Rain forces in their tender Heads,
as not being able to endure the sharpness of the Storm, for want of the true
Spiritual Armor: For Words and Profession could never secure any from the
Fiery Trials that are still ordered in the Wisdom of God for the manifesting of
every Seed: So if these ensuing answers may be serviceable unto any of these
Zealous Hearts to provoke them to a further search of themselves, and be a
means now when they are something low, to give them a sight of any thing
wherein they have Sined against God, and Erred from his way of Life, and so to
move them to Repentance, it will be well, and a gladding of my Heart, and of my
Brethren, who cannot but desire and endeavor, not only theirs, but even the
good of all Men; yea, of them, that either in times past have, or at this day
do show the greatest Enmity against us; for we know, they none of them
understand aright the Innocence of our Hearts to them, and the Fear and Love of
our Souls to God and his Truth; for if they did, how could they forbear to Love
us: But Glory to God for ever, that has given us, not only to believe, but
even, as need is, to suffer for his Name and Truths sake, and to pass by great
Offenses done to us, which in Love to the Soul we could desire might be also
the Portion of all that name Truth, Rests God Servant,

Thomas Tailor.

Ignorance and Error REPROVED, etc.
JOHN REYNOLDS, A Paper of Queries (coming to my hand) as seems from thee to
John Finch, and John Payton of Dudly, and weighing it well, I could not but in
obedience to God write something to it, not so much for the use of these two
young men, who by the Light that God has raised in them do see thy deceit
therein, as for the sake of some simple people who are as yet admirers of thee,
and deceived by thee, and such like who under a pretense of zeal for the letter
of Scripture, and things you have set up in your wills under the name of
Ordinances, not knowing nor considering that Christ is come, the end of all
things to them that believe: Though you may sometimes unwillingly light on
Scriptures, that speaks the thing; and so if by what here may be said, the
Truth may more appear, and their simple Souls be helped, God will be Glorified,
and that will be Reward sufficient: But before the Queries themselves be
answered, something may be said, to that which goes before them in that Paper,
and from that I have noted the nature of thy Fawning, Flattering,
Self-contradicting and Confused Spirit; but to hide that from the Light, thou
backs thy sayings with quotations of Scripture, as though mentioning what the
Holy Men of God spoke by the true Spirit, could prove that to be a true Spirit
which acts in thee: Nay, nay, the day is dawned Praised be God; and the
Sheepskin no longer can hide the Wolves from being seen of the Lambs of Christ,
for such hear Christ's Voice and follow him, and so are Children of the Light,
but the Stranger they will not follow, though he may Paint him self over never
so cunningly with words, but all your fair words in the beginning of your work,
ye Fair-sayers, whether in Pulpit or in Press, is but to make way for your
sting that follows, for you resemble the Scorpion whose sling is in his Tail,
mentioned in Revelations: for the end of all thy fair words here, is but to
draw these young men from the simplicity that is in Christ, and his Light that
Lights every man that comes into the World, for the great Malice of thy
Heart, is against the sufficiency of Christ's Light in every man; and so would
have something to be added to it from without, that so thou may bring in thy
own traditions; but what condition shall one gather by thy words, these two Men
John Finch, and John Payton, were in at the writing of these Queries to them,
for one while thou seem to apply Scriptures respecting the conditions of the
unbelieving Jews to them, and another while thou applies those that respect the
condition of pretty well-grown Christians: But however the sum of all is, to
persuade them from following the Light of Christ in them, as not being
sufficient, and so thy love is not testified unto them in Deed and in Truth, as
thou say it is, but in mere Hypocrisy and Deceit, as may further appear:
But what is that Soul enlightening Commandment Psalm 29.8. Whereby thou seem
to desire they may be enlightened? Is it this letter without, or the Light of
Christ within? If thou say the letter, as thou must say, or else thwarts the
whole current of thy Doctrine, and then all that have Eyes may see thee to be
an outward Jew only: But if thou say with us, it is the Light of Christ that
shines in Darkness, John 1. which at the Commandment of God shines out of
Darkness, 2 Cor. 4. to give the knowledge of Gods Glory to Man in the Face of
Christ, then the business about Sufficiency of the Light between us is at an
end, and the Truth stands over the from thy own words. The next is, when thou
hear the Scripture mentioned thy Windy, Slightly, Crafty Doctrine of
Deceivers, Ephesians. 4.14. then thou shoots thy Sting at the Innocent, and
would have People believe that is to be applied to us who Preach Christ and
his all sufficiency in, and for every one that can Receive Him, who is near
every Man, and by his Light shines to Conviction and Judgment in every Man,
who would have all Men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of his Truth,
which is nigh in the Heart and in the Mouth; but this was the Apostles
Doctrine, and so not to be condemned in us, but thou go on, telling of two
ways of Deceiving, the one thou namest the upper way (which thou say) is by
Philosophy, the Traditions of Men, Rudiments of the World, and Sciences falsely
so called: And Praised be God, thou art as it were forced by the Light in thy
Conscience to acquit us from being of this Number; but truly the Light in our
conscience tells us expressly, that thou John Reynolds art one of them that
arei^n this upper way, as thou call it, of deceit, for of Philosophy,
Traditions of Men, Worldly Rudiments, and false Sciences is the Body of thy
Divinity made up, as well as other of thy Brethren the Hirelings ^^ou would
condemn, for the difference is not in the nature of your Doctrine, but in the
form. And so though an Idol of Gold appear more beautiful than one of baser
mettle, yet it is an Idol still, and so you are both in the Fighting and
Persecuting nature, as all Idolaters are; Ephraim against Manasseh, and
Manassch against Ephraim, but both against Judah; one for the Common Prayer,
another for the Directory, but neither will own the Lambs Light in you, to
Teach and Guide you; and so though you may have a Form of Godliness more
Painted than they, yet denying the Power (Christ in man) you are all alike to
be turned away from: And so John Finch, and John Payton in turning from thee,
as well as the other Formalists, are excuseable; and though thou go about to
persuade them from the Truth, by telling them of a lower way of deceiving by a
voluntary Humility, and neglecting of the Body, and wearing a rough Garment to
deceive, which thou would intimate to be our condition, yet this will not
deceive their minds, if they keep to the true Light of Christ in them, for in
that they feel our Garment to be smooth and sweet, through the Fathers Love,
not rough or hairy, as the Hypocrites is, who kill one another about their ways
of Worship; but for voluntary Humility in the will offered up by heaps, which
is no better than filthy smoke in the nostrils of a pure God in this day; and
Praised be God that has brought us from this into the true Humility: but how
thy words of accusing us here of neglecting the Body, and afterward of
Drunkenness, can agree, let the wise in Heart consider; but all in thy
changeable nature and unstable must needs be Self-contradictors; and so who be
the Thieves that Christ in this day is Crucified between, is thus far in part,
and will afterward God willing more appear. Also it is observable from that
Preface of thine further, where it is said that this latter, viz. Namely, the
lower way of deceiving may possibly prevail, though not with the present
Multitude, yet some unstable Souls that have been none enlightened and have
tasted the good Word of God, and the Power of the World to come, but are not
yet rooted and settled in the Truth and grace of the Lord Jesus Christ; then I
say, thou need'st not fear any of thy followers to be deceived on this manner,
for none can be savingly enlightened who denies the sufficiency of Christ's
Light, the Grace of God, which has appeared to all Men; yea, in their Darkness
shines, though the Darkness comprehend it not, as thou do not; and none can
say in Truth they have tasted the Good Word of God who puts the Letter for it,
and denies the sufficiency of Christ's Light, which is his Word nigh in the
Heart and Mouth, as thou do; nor none can truly be said to taste the Powers
of the World to come, who deny to bow their Hearts to the least Measure of
Christ's Light in them, accounting it insufficient, as thou do: And so it is
the real Believers that had need to take heed of being Deceived, with fair
Shows and rough Garments, for the Hypocrites are deceived already: But what
Doctrine John Reynolds does judge in these he calls filly Seducers and Quakers,
to be amiss, and by these two men he writes unto to be taken heed of, may
gathered out of these Queries, to instance some.

1. Because they say Christ Lights every man with a sufficient Light that
comes into the World

2. Because they say, That the Measure of the Spirit of God in man is the true
and certain trier of all Spirits.

3. Because they say, Christ himself and not the empty declaration without, is
the Word of God.

4. Because they say, Christ the better hope, being come, sinless perfection
thorough him is attainable here.

5. Because they say, Judgment is committed to the Saints even whilst they are
in the Body, and therefore such may Judge; and yet, say they, it is not flesh,
but Spirit that Judges all things.

6. Because they make Conscience of saying Thou and Thee to a particular, which
is the plain Language.

7. Because they say, that all Honor, and Glory, and Worship is to be given to
God alone, and not to any Creature.

8. Because they say, The true Church is in God, and so no Unrighteous One in
it, or of it, and so can neither call the Wicked God's Church, nor a House of
Wood and Stone his Church.

9. Because they cannot own the Worlds Sprinkling of Infants with a little
outward Water, for Christ's Baptism; and because they cannot own that for a
right Communion, which is in Sin, and who eat Bread and drink Wine in
Remembrance of a Coming of Christ, which they say shall never be while they are
here, and the like.

But now something, the Lord assisting, may be spoken particularly in Answer to
the Queries themselves; and the first of them is this,

Query 1. First Question; If that Light which is within every Man that comes
into the World, be sufficient without the Preaching of the Gospel, how is it
that Heathens know little or nothing of the True God?

Answ. To this I answer, That thou run'st here upon a false Ground, and so
draws this and the rest of thy stumbling Consequences from thy own
Imaginations, not from our Words, for we do not Exclude the Preaching of the
Gospel from the Light, nor the Light from it; but say, That is the true Light
that Lights every Man that comes into the World; one loves the Light,
believes it, and follows it, and is led to God, and so saved by it
sufficiently; the other hates it, and it is his Condemnation: And this is the
Gospel Preaching, and this Light of Christ in every Man is the Light of the
Glorious Gospel, whether it be declared of to the outward Ear in Words or not;
but he that Preaches not this True Light, Preaches another Gospel, though there
be not another Gospel: And I say unto you, all People, if a seeming Angel
Preach not this Gospel of Light, this Grace of God which brings Salvation,
which has appeared to all Men, and is the Saints Teacher and Keeper, he is to
be accursed: But whereas thou tell of Heathen: Answer, All are Heathens now,
and Ignorant of the True God, who know nothing of the sufficiency of the Light
that Lights every Man that comes into the World; but thou ask in the end
of that Query two very Childish, Questions: The first, Why we exhort all Men to
follow the Light within, if that be sufficient? I answer, Because it is
sufficient, therefore do we Exhort all Men to follow it, for that which is not
sufficient is not safe to follow: And so you that are so full of words, and
ignorant of the Sufficiency, beat the Air and deceive the People, keeping silly
Women ever Learning, and never able to bring them to the knowledge of the
Truth, which perfects to God all the comers thereunto. Thy second Query there,
How could the Word of God be called a Mystery hid from Ages and Generations,
but now is made manifest, if the Light within be sufficient? And then quotes
Ephesians. 3.9. Col. 1.25, 26. Mat. 11.25. I answer, That it was within, and
sufficient when it lay hid as a Mystery, till God's full time came of revealing
it; and therefore Christ compares it to many Powerful and Precious, though
hidden things, and of little account to the outward view, as to a Grain of
Mustard Seed in the Earth, to a little Leaven within much Flower, to Treasure
hid in the Field; and Christ said to the Pharisees, that God's Kingdom was to
be found in Man, he excludes none, and those Scriptures thou sett'st down prove
for this Truth, and against thy roving Mind which is in the outward observings,
thinking to find the Kingdom there, when Christ says, it comes not that way,
see Luke 17.20, 21. What, will thou conclude it was not, because it lay hid?
What Logic is this? Does not Paul there say, that the Mystery which was so
hid, and which he by the Spirit now Preached, which was Christ in the Gentiles
the Hope of Glory? And Christ was Light, and to this Light he warned every Man
to take heed; but the little Children, not the Masters, obey the Voice, and so
are led into the Understanding of the Mystery.

Qu. 2. In the next general Query thou ask, Are not the Scriptures the Words
of the Lord, whose Words are they? And why is the Scripture so often called the
Word of God, and the Word of the Lord? And for this thou brings many
Scriptures, as Exodus 24.4. 2 Kings 20.26, 27, 28, 29. Psalm. 12.6. Jer. 36.4, 6,
8, 11. Acts 19.10. 2 Cor. 2.17. 1 These. 1.8.

Answ. To this I say, First, That the Holy Scriptures were given forth by Holy
Men of God, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, and so they may be called the
Words of God, or of the Lord, not that Spirit and Living Word, but that those
Scriptures prove what thou bring them for; to wit, that the Scriptures or
Writings without, is there called the Word of God, is not true; it is said
indeed in that of 2 Kings 20.16. That Isaiah said unto Hezekiah, Hear the Word
of the Lord; and Hezekiah said, Good is the Word of the Lord; and in other
places of Scriptures, that the Word of the Lord came to the Prophets; and that
in the forementioned place of Acts, and Corinthians, and Thessalonians,
mention is made of the Apostles Preaching the Word of God, all this is true;
but of Exodus, and Psalms, and Jeremiah, mention is made of Words; but what
does all this prove, but only that the Word came to Holy Men, this Word was
God, and as this Word moved in them, and gave them Wisdom and Utterance, they
writ or spoke forth Words as a Declaration of what was in the Mind, or Word of
God, or what God was; and what, though the Scriptures may be thus called, The
Words of the Lord, or his Prophets, or Apostles, Acted by his Power, which we
never denied; this is nothing to the Hypocrites, who use their Tongues to say,
The Lord says, when he never spoke by them, but make a Trade of the Scriptures
for filthy Lucre, and by their much pressing the Declaration to be the Word of
God, have quite clouded the Word it self (Christ, from whence true Words come)
from the Peoples Minds, so that scarce any have any true Living Feeling after
God in his Word Christ; for in the beginning was the Word, before all
Declarations, and shall be after all the Peaceable Life of all that Believe for
ever: So that the Lord saw it good to stir up a People in these days to be True
and Living Witnesses of the Word, for the stopping of the Mouths of all such as
have gotten the Words, as Thieves from others, and so kept People in the form
with themselves, always Professing, but never Possessing the Power which the
Scripture Witness unto, and so the Letter and empty Words killed and do kill;
but now the Living Spirit and Living Word being Witnessed, the Scriptures is
owned in its place; and Resurrection to Life being felt, the Crown is set upon
the King's Head, whose Name is called The Word of God, who was, and is, and is
to come, over all God Blessed for evermore; and it is considerable, that the
Ministers of Christ are never called Ministers of the Letter, or Words, but of
the Word and Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. and that Christ and his Apostles mentioning the
Prophets Words, usually called them Scripture, and not The Word of God, as the
custom of Hypocrites is now; All Flesh is Grass, and all outward Sounds and
Signs vanish, but the Word of the Lord that endures for ever; and this is that
Word which, by the Gospel, (the Power of God) is Preached, and by nothing else
savingly; which, when understood, People are One, but not before; for it is the
weakness which is like the Woman's speaking, makes Dissension; so let the
Scripture have its due, and the Word of God its due, and all is Beautiful in
its place.

Query 3. In thy third, thou ask, How shall we know whether the Spirit that
speaks in us be the Spirit of God, or an evil Spirit, but by trying them by the
Scriptures? And for this thou bring 1 John 4.1. Isa. 8.19, 20. Acts 17.11.
John 5.39. then thou replies, and as it were says, If you say we know the
Spirit to be of God, because it convinces of Sin; then I ask, how do you know
that to be Sin, but by the Scripture? For this thou bring 1 John 3.4. Sin is
a Transgression of the Law; and afterward says, If we say that Spirit tells us
it is of God, or that we know it but by its Fruit, how do we know it not to be a
lying Spirit; or how do we know the Fruits of the Spirit but by Scripture?

Answ. Now, I say, by all this it plainly appears, that thou art no
Gospel-Minister, no Minister of the Spirit of God at all, but art a mere talker
of the Letter and Law, not knowing what it faith, nor whereof it affirms; for
does not the next Covenant run thus, I will put my Law in their Hearts, and in
their Minds will I write it, Jer. 31.31. and Heb. 8.8. and the Apostle that
said unto his Brethren, Try the Spirits, in that place 1 John 4, 1. did not
say, you have a writing without by which you know all things, but you have an
Anointing from the Holy One, and this abides in you, and by this they know all
things, 1 John 2.20, 27. according to what Paul in 1 Cor. 2.15, 16. says, The
Spiritual Man judges or discerns all things, but is judged or discerned of
none; for the Natural Man knows nothing aright, though he may have all the
Scriptures to talk of without him; and though he may cry up in appearance, even
as Isaiah said to the Law and to the Testimony, yet he never goes to the Law or
Testimony at all, for the Law is Spiritual and Inward, and the Testimony of
Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy, as says Scripture Declaration; and by that
Spiritual Law Paul came to the knowledge of his Sin, to Humiliation; but while
he was but a Professor of the Law in the Letter, he was alive without Law; but
when the Commandment in Spirit came to be felt nigh in the Heart, then Sin
Revived and he Died: And so will John Reynolds dye when the Law indeed he comes
to feel, but he is yet alive without Law, and from that Ground comes all these
Queries of his to stop, if possible, the Holy Seed from coming out of Egypt;
but the Lord will break all Bonds for his Elect sake; so that in a few words,
take away from this John Reynolds the Letter, and by his own words he is as
blind as a Beetle; for he Questions how a Man can either know the true Spirit,
or Sin, or the Works, or Fruits of either good Spirit or bad, but by the
Letter, so that his Eye is in the outward Book, and so no Letter, no Preacher.
For, John Reynolds, did the Apostles hold forth a Letter without them to be an
Eye to the World? Nay, nay, they were to turn the People to the Light of Christ
within them, that thereby they might see the Light out of all Darkness and
false Worships; For in thy Light, says David, we shall see Light: O the Riches
of the Grace of God that has delivere^ John Fince and John Payton from this
Blind Guide John Reynolds, whose Eye within is yet shut by the god of the
World! 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.

Qu. 4. Thou Queriest, whether the Saints in your times are more perfect than
Saints in Scripture times? And the rest of this Query is to plead for Sin, and
against sinless Perfection; and in the Conclusion of it, thou say, we cannot
show you one Man that ever attained it.

Answ. Yea, to this I say, Through the Lord's great Love we are able to hold
forth to thee, and all the World, one perfect Man; yea, such a One, in whose
Mouth there was and is no Guil; who did, and does good, and sinned not, nor
does sin; who was in a sinless Perfection, and of such a Man will we glory, not
of Self, nor of Flesh, but in him who is made unto us of God, Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, who is more perfect than
Thousands under the Law were. Go to then, to stop all Mouths, the Gospel-day is
Witnessed, Praised be the Lord, and in Perfection of Beauty do true Believers
now Worship, and the Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in such who walk not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; so John Reynolds to thee, and thy
Company, I say, Arise, stand up from the Dead, come out of your own times where
there is none perfect, for your times pass away into nothing; but for Scripture
times (that is large, it is not, as thou would Insinuate) ended yet, for the
Scripture is the Lord daily fulfilling, and will do it until time shall be no
more; which he that has an Ear to hear, ^et him hear; and not only they, but a
Hundred Forty Four Thousand sinless perfect Ones are mentioned Rev. 14.25. with
many more; see also Chap. 7. Verse. 9.14. an Innumerable Number.

Qu. 5. And for thy fifth Query, where thou say, If those that are called
Quakers esteem themselves the only true Christians in the World, then would I
know where has been their Church this 1600 Years.

Answ. To this, I say, here thou manifests thy self again; what stumbling is
here in thy dark Mind? This is like the Papists Arguments to Protestants; but
to this may be easily answered, that if it be manifest to the Conscience of
any, as Praised be God it is to many, that we are of God, such a one will never
ask such a Question as this: But now to you who cannot own the Light in your
Consciences, we cannot be manifest, because the World knows us not; and then
ask, where has your Church been? I say, it has been ever where it is at this
day; to wit, the Church which is in God and Christ; which, when thou come to
the Light of Christ within thee, then thou will see, but till then we must be
content to lie hid from thee, and all Dark Minds, and so to bear Christ's
Reproach; but to all my dear Brethren in Christ, I say, Behold what manner of
Love the Father has bestowed on us, that we should be called the Sons of God,
Fellow-Citizens in the Heavenly Jerusalem with all the Church of God,
Firstborn of God, whose Names are written in Heaven, therefore the World knows
us not, because it knew not our Head first, 1 John 3. Heb. 12. But as for thy
telling of Esteeming Self, and the name Quaker, and the like, thou may take
those words in again from whence they came, for Self and Names of Men's giving
we deny; and Glory in the Cross of Christ, where the Name of God is known; and
as for the rest of thy Queries, which tell of our unableness to give a Proof of
such People as we, before the last twenty Years, or so; who placed Religion in
Thouing and Theeing, and refusing to put off their Hats, and wear Decent
Ornaments in their Apparel, and it is such frothy stuff that it Shames thee and
thy Profession; but thou may know, that though you may do what you will that
are without Law to God, yet we are taught to fear the Lord, and whatsoever is
pure, to mind that, and so our Religion stands in Christ, not in outward
Appearances, though the outward be all thou can see, and so stumbles at the
meanness of it; but what are those Decent Ornaments in Apparel thou tell on?
Is needless Points, and Laces, and Ribonds, and such filth? Then surely all
Saints are one with us here; but for that thou say, we Rail against Priests
Tithes, Idols Temples, and Idols Worship, being such as yours; I say, though
Railing we deny, yet we can easily prove by Scripture, that Holy Men Cried
Vehemently against false Worships and Worsh^ppers, who were guided as you are
in all Ages; but as for that, thou say, We Rail against Baptism and the
Lord's Supper, and Singing of Psalms, thou art found a great and false
Slanderer in this, for to let pass the word Railing, we deny that we so much as
speak against Christ's Baptism, or Supper, or his Singing, or that we take upon
our selves to condemn any to Hell; but this we say, That no Unrighteous One, or
Hypocrite has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of God, or of Christ, and he that
is not with us is against us; which Words will-be hard and heavy for many to
bear; and as for Christ's Baptism, and Supper, and Singing in and with the
Spirit we dearly own, but the Hypocrite and their Leaven we deny.

Qu. 6. The next Query is something to the former purpose, and so that which is
said may serve for that; but thou addest a great and wicked Lie and Slander, in
saying, we condemn the most Eminent Saints and Martyrs, for thou say, they
were not of our Minds; and thou seem much Troubled, that thy self also (whom
thou have so high an esteem of) could not pass the Censure of those thou
scornfully calls Quakers, have any of them called thee Deceiver, and the like?
I say, see if it be not true that might be thus spoken unto thee, for it is no
Derogation to the Honor of Truth, to say, the Truth it self may call a
Deceiver, false Accuser, and Reproacher, by their proper names: For in Matt.
23. and John 8. see Christ's Language to the Hypocrites of those Days; so the
Error was not in Christ his calling them so, that were so, but in those
Pharisees there calling Christ a Deceiver, and Devil, when he was not so, nor
could be; and for the most Holy and Zealous Christians amongst you, that thou
say, had the like Names from us: I answer, if any under the Name Quaker
called thee or any of thy Company otherwise than they, in the Light, saw true,
or could make good, they were to blame; but if any in Truth have declared your
Inward Condition to you, though under such Terms, you ought rather to repent,
than to kick and spurn at it in your hard Hearts; for it will be hard for you
to kick against the Pricks; and for Spewing, you may take that to your selves,
whose Throat is an open Sepulcher, wide opened against all that are Holy and
Zealous in Christ, to separate from you, and witness against your Deceit: And
so if those thou call Holy and Zealous Christians amongst you, together with
thy self be weighed in the Balance of Truth, it will appear you are as far
from that State, as the East is from the West.

But I demand how thou know the Saints and Martyrs were not of our
Persuasion and Practice? for thou do not judge with the Light that is Pure
and Spiritual, as is manifest, nor see with a single Eye, but only judges with
thy Evil Thoughts and False Imaginations; for we say in a few words, that our
Mind and Practice is to believe on the Name of the Son of God, that true Light
that Lights every Man that comes into the World, and to love one another,
and to labor to keep a Conscience void of offense toward God and all Men: And
I Read that the Saints and Martyrs were of this Persuasion and Practice with
us, and so we have a Cloud of Witnesses, both Ancient and Modern, of the Truth
of this our way; and so if thou have Books that tell of other manner of Saints
or Martyrs, I deny both them and thee, in calling them Saints, who are not; for
the Saints of God and Martyrs of Jesus are one Body in all Ages, not loving
their Lives to death, that so they might always keep to God's manifest Truth in
them without denying it before Men; and this is that which the Lord God has
wrought in us poor Despised People, to the Glory of his Grace in this his day,
that no Flesh might Glory, but as it is written, Let him that Glories, Glory
in the Lord, who alone is worthy.

Qu. 7. But in thy seventh and next Query, thou think thou have gotten
something against us, because, say thou, we use to cry against you as
Hirelings, and that you would Preach no longer than People put into your
Mouths; but now, say thou, it is manifest that many of these are ready to
lose all for the Testimony of Jesus, and to Preach the Gospel freely though it
be in danger of Imprisonment.

Answ. To which I answer and say, That the Testimony of those thou scornfully
call Quakers, against you, stands firm and true, for all these thy high
swelling Words of Vanity; for we know none of you Preaching freely as yet, and
the reason why you talk in the form, you do it because you cannot keep your fat
Benefices; O Hypocrites! What Whining and Complaining is there by you in these
days for your Belly? But for Preaching the Gospel, you have manifested your
selves to be Ignorant both of Christ and of the Gospel, by denying the
sufficiency of the Light which Lights every Man that comes into the World,
John 1.9. and then put the Letter for the Light, and so fight and strive with
your Brethren about your form and several Imaginations of the Letter; one cries
up a Bishop, another a Presbyter, and both of you Ignorant of the true Bishop
and Elder. But John Reynolds, would not thou and thy Brethren be at the Gain
from your Quarter again, if Common Prayer could be dispensed withal? Oh if you
be brought into such a suffering Frame! How is it that we have no more of your
Company in Prison? Nay, nay, your old Heart is in you yet, and ye would be
sucking Lambs Blood still if you had Power, and that the God of Heaven sees,
and will take Vengeance on you for it; and that which you cannot do with your
Hands, you are doing with your Tongues and Pens, as is manifest. But I have
often said, if you could Preach freely; that is, without a set or forced
maintenance, in the state where you are, that would not at all commend you to
God or his People: For you have run, and God never sent you; and therefore you
remain so ignorant of him, and profit not them that follow you; for when did
Christ bid you go to the Universities of the World to learn him there? And when
did he bid you go to such a place, and such a place, and there sit down and Eat
the Fat, and Cloth with the Wool, and Preach the Thoughts of your vain
Hearts, as you have done, and would do, and be guarded by the Magistrates
Power, that none should speak to you in your high Places, nor going nor coming
from thence? O call to mind the day of your fullness, and of your Pride; the
same measure you mete to others is God measuring to you; you must be broken to
pieces, because you turn not to the Lord for all this: And to the despised
thing, the Light in your Conscience, you must come and bow before it, as others
have done, before you be healed; and if it give you a word to speak, you may
speak it; otherwise you must be silent, or you perish: The Lord is arisen, and
so if indeed you can kiss his Rod, you may find Mercy; but if you still go on
justifying your selves in his sight, you shall certainly moulder to nothing;
the Lord has said it, who is daily gathering his Lambs out of the Mouths of
all Devourers, Glory to his Name for ever. But what Testimony of Jesus can you
either give or suffer for, who have so Vilified and Reproached the Spirit of
Prophecy in Sons and Daughters, in Servants and Handmaids in these Days? For
the Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy.

And now all People, I shall lay before you, a little more, the Condition of
this John Reynolds, and such like boasting Men, who now thus cry up themselves
for suffering Ministers of Christ, as to this particular thing. In the former
times, before the Wars when the Bishops had Rule, there were some such that
could not conform to all the Fooleries of those Days, and so could not enjoy
their fat Benefices (though they loved them well enough) and so instead of
suffering in Old-England fled into New England to avoid the Cross, and so in
process of time it came to pass that they got the Magistrates on their side
there; and then their Old Wolfish Hearts being still in them, they fell on
Persecuting the Servants of God that came amongst them to witness to Truth,
insomuch that of late Years they have sucked the Blood of several of our Dear
Members in Christ; Three they hanged on a Tree, cut the Ears of others,
Tortured the Bodies of many with cruel Whippings, spoiled the Goods of many,
and Banished others for no other thing, but for owning the Truth as it is in
Jesus, and meeting to wait upon him.

Qu. 8. The Eighth and next Query is such a vain and empty one, that the very
setting of it down will be in great measure an answer to it, and it is this.

If there be no honest Men in the World that are not Quakers, then is it not
certain, that no honest Men ever turned Quakers? Then is it not certain, that
none but the Wicked ever turned from us, and then where is our shame? Again, if
all are Graceless Persons that are not Quakers, then how can any Man turn
Quaker if he will not first acknowledge himself a Wicked and Graeeless Wretch?

Answ. O Crooked, Twining, Twisting Serpent! How Cunning and Crafty would
thou here appear in thy vain Philosophy, and false Science, to cast a Mist
before the Eyes of the Simple? Yet, Praised be the Lord, the least Child of
Light sees thee well, and the Seed of the Woman shall bruise thy Head, and thou
shall not proceed far, but thy Folly shall be manifest to all, as the Sorceries
of Jannes and Jambres, thy Fathers were; for the Lord is already at work the
second time to deliver his Israel out of Egypt, and no Weapon formed against
his Seed shall ever prosper; but the Horse and his Rider shall fall, and the
Beast and False Prophet shall be taken alive and cast into the Pit, and
Everlasting praises shall be Sung to the Lord God Almighty by the Lambs of his
Holy Fold, as it is in Zion this day.

But let us see how this reasoning of thine would have helped the Jews and the
Gentiles in the first times of the Gospel against the Christians, and so
setting down thy words for them, only instead of Quaker putting in the word
Christian thus:

If there are no honest Men in the World that are not Christians, then is it
not certain, that no honest Man ever turned Christian; and if so, where is
their Glorying? And if all are wicked that are not Christians; then is it not
certain, that none but the Wicked did ever turn from us; and where is our
Shame? Again, If all are Graceless persons that are not Christians; then is it
not certain, that none but the Wicked did ever turn from us; then where is our
Shame? Would this have been good Reasoning, either to have disproved the
Christians Doctrine withal, or to have kept the unbelieving Jews and Gentiles
in a safe Condition where they stood? Nay, all must bow to the Son of God in
his rising and going forth; for his going forth is prepared as the Sun in the
Morning, who rejoices as a Giant to run his Course, and to this Just One must
every Knee bow, and Tongue confess; for his Way is in his Light Shining more
and more until it be high Noon and perfect Day: And the Gentiles, though as
honest as Cornelius, Acts 10. and the Jew, though as blameless concerning the
Law as Paul in his first state was, Phil. 3. must bow to him: Yea further, Let
all the Angels of God Worship him. But as for the Worlds Inhabitants, both
Honest and Wicked, we know that the whole World lies in Wickedness: And so,
before you turn such Christians as quake and tremble at God's Word, and work
out their Salvation in Fear and Trembling, you must be content to own your
selves to be little less than Dishonest, Wicked, and Graceless Wretches, though
into the Truth Sinful Flesh and Blood cannot enter; and though you will not now
own the Grace of God to be your Teacher, and so in that respect may be called
Graceless; yet you will one day know, that the Grace of God which brings
Salvation, and would have taught you, did appear unto you all; and so God will
be clear of all your Blood, and your Destruction will be of your selves; and so
because you have not received this manifest Truth, the Grace of God to be your.
Teacher, therefore are you given up to believe Lies, as is manifest.

Qu. 9. Thy Ninth and next Question is about Ordination; and then Queries, To
what purpose did the Apostles, Evangelists, and Presbyters ordain Elders in
every City with Fasting, Prayer, and Imposition of Hands, if every Person that
will, may run and ordinarily Preach without any such Ordination? And thou
say, you may see how Persons were sent forth to Preach in Scripture, Acts
13.23. and 14.23 1 Timothy 4.14.

Answ. To which I say, that the purpose of God in ordaining Elders in every
City, as is mentioned in that Acts 14.23. was not that proud and covetous Men
(who have a little Worldly Wisdom only to talk of the Letter and wrest
Scripture by) should perk up and set up themselves in the place of God's Elders
in God's Church: But that in this Church, by his Spirit in those Elders, the
Body might be Edified, and all kept in good order amongst them through Love:
Mind, this was the Church of God which was in God, 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. the Body of
Christ, of his Flesh, and of his Bone, Ephesians. 5.23, 24. Not a Worldly People
gathered in the Will of Man into a vain Form without the power; not I say, the
Synagogue of Satan, who denies Perfection, and the Sufficiency of Christ's
Light: And that there is none knows any thing aright, but by the Letter, as
this John Reynolds pretends is not true; for the Church of God was taught of
God, and the Elders in this Church were not brought up at the Worlds Schools of
Learning, nor called of Men Master, nor Hirelings, nor Persecutors of the
Innocent, as the Presbyters of these days are; but they were Holy Men of God,
of mean account in the World, raised up merely by God's Power, out of the
Heathenish and Jewish Worships, to know Christ's Spirit, and his Anointing in
them which taught them all things; and they were not such as got the Magistrate
to help them to great Livings and fat Benefices, and compel all by his Iron
Sword to come in to them, but they were Sufferers under the Powers of the
World, as we are at this day.

But whereas thou speak of every Man that is not so ordained, thy self, and
your selves, who never were ordained by the Holy Ghost, as they were; for when
did the Holy Ghost in your Assemblies say, as in Acts 13.2. Separate such and
such, for the work I have appointed them unto. Nay, nay, you have run and God
never sent you; for you never heard his Holy Voice at any time; and therefore
you profit not the People at all, but make them more Cunning to Dispute against
the Truth, than they were before they followed you.

But what Ordination of Man had Paul at his first going out to Preach? See Gal.
1. he received not the Gospel by Man, and went not to Man, no not to the
Apostles themselves for Ordination and Commission to Preach, but immediately
Preached Christ, as many have done, and do at this Day, who go under the
Reproach of the name Quaker. And so God is Restoring his Church to its
Primitive Purity and Power, to the stopping of the Mouth, and confounding the
Wisdom of all Flesh, whether called Pope, Cardinals, Bishops or Presbyters that
the true Eldership and Body of Christ, to God's Glory, may again appear: And
what Rules and Orders are, and shall be in this true Church, is known to God,
and by him Manifested, and to be Manifested to the Body it self, and not to the
World; for the World must neither have the right Understanding nor Management
of those things, no more than they had in those Days, when it was said, I stand
not to Man's Judgment; for the Holy Anointing must be all in the Church of God
for ever.

Qu. 10. Thy Tenth and next Query, is a plain discovery of thy Folly, and of
thy manifest Enmity against the simple Appearance of Truth in any discovery;
and though thou say, the Scripture is thy Rule, yet by it thou can not endure
to be Ruled, but plain Language it self is thy Burden; and therefore thou
ask, how it can be said that ever Christ, or his Apostles, or Patriarchs, or
Prophets used the words Thou and Thee, when they never spoke English? And how
can it be unlawful for us to use the word You to each other, since the same
words in Hebrew, Greek and Latin that signify Thou, signify You in the
Singular Number also, and may be Translated You as well as Thou, and so it
seems thou say, 2 Samuel 15.27.

Answ, John Reynolds, Did thou Read this Query twice over? Or did thou at
all Consider what thou said in it? Was either the Fear of God, or Care of
thy own Credit before thy Eyes when thou writest it? Surely neither. But thou
have judged in thy self with thy vain Thought, that because thou have used to
blind thy poor Hearers, and make them believe any thing for Truth thou speak
or writest; therefore it will be so with others: Nay, nay, the Day is dawned,
the Lord has given his People an Eye whereby all Covers are seen through; and
to this Light thou have manifested as much Nakedness and Blindness to be in
thee, as in the grossest of them that say Mass at Rome, or read Common Prayer
in English: Nay, I do believe many of them would be ashamed to argue thus, as
thou do; to wit, because Christ, his Apostles, Patriarchs and Prophets did
not speak in the English Tongue, that therefore they used not the words Thou
and Thee: How came the Translators to Translate their Words, when they speak to
a particular Person, Thou and Thee, and never You, as may all over Scripture be
easily found; thou may as well say, Christ, his Apostles, Patriarchs and
Prophets said nothing at all that is Recorded in Scripture in the English
Tongue, because they spoke not English; so the Lord has catched the Wise in
his own Craftiness; but thou go on, and say the same words in Hebrew,
Greek and Latin, that signify Thou, signify You, in the Singular Number also,
and may be Translated You, as well as Thou; which, I say, is altogether false;
for You is not at all Singular, but Plural altogether, and so the Translators
of the Bible knew, and therefore never Translated their Singular Term in the
foreign Language to you in English, but Thou and Thee, as is before mentioned;
and for that place in 2 Samuel 15.27, thou set'st down, and says, it seems that
You is used to a singular there, it shames thee; for if envy to the Truth had
not Blinded thee, thou might (...) fee that the King speaking to Zadock, and
saying, Your Sons and you, speaks not of Zadock and his Son, but of Zadock and
Abiathar and their Sons, as the very words next after; and in Verse 29. plainly
show, and so here thou have committed that great Error thy self, that thy
Generation use to Charge falsely upon us; to wit, in taking a piece of a Verse
that seems to make for thy purpose, and leaves out the rest that shows fully
the Sense.

Qu. 11. Thy Eleventh and next Query is for the World, where thou undertakest
the part of an Advocate for Flesh; not only pleading for the Honor that is
below, but also for the Manner of it. Thy Doctrine is very pleasant to the
fallen Man, and the World cannot hate such Preachers as thee; for ye are not
only of the World, but chief Master Builders of the old House of the fallen
Adam, who loves the Earthly Honor. But now that Christ the second Adam is
come, the Lord from Heaven, above the Earthly Man, let all Flesh bow before
him, and give up his Honor to him; otherwise this shall be fitly applied unto
you that Christ said unto the Jews, How can you believe, that not only receive,
but also seek, and plead for Honor one of and from another? John 5.44. For
Christ received not Honor from Men, Verse 41. So that though there was a time
that Angels were bowed unto, which were greater than Flesh, Genesis 19.1. yet a
time came that Angels denied that Honor, Rev. 22.9. For now the Son himself
was Glorified, of whom it was said, And let all the Angels of God Worship him,
Heb. 16. And at his Name shall every Knee bow, Phil. 2.10. And Christ said to
the Devil, who was like his Children, that would now be Worshipped, Thou shall
Worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: The Devil and Haman
would be bowed unto, but the true Jew will bow only to God: But thou queriest,
and say:

Qu. Whether did the Saints in Scripture-times Sin, in giving Honor; that is,
(say thou) A Civil or Inferior Honor unto Men, and upon occasion
Testifying the same by Honorary Words or Deeds?

Answ. To which I answer and say, Sam. 20.9, 10. Jude 16.

Thus Children being in the Lord, do, through the Lord, Honor Parents aright;
thus Servants in the Lord, Honor their Masters after the Flesh aright; and so
Church Members the Elders, Wives their Husbands; the Ruled the Rulers: Yea,
thus they Honor their Faithful Brethren aright; and in a Word, all Men; and so
the Scripture is fulfilled in them: But what Honor do these Faithful Ones look
for from Men? Nay, nay, they believe and seek for that Honor that comes from
God only; and so the Scripture will not help the fallen Man now to his Honor,
which is his Life; but as the Scripture says, He that would save his Life,
must loose it. And so all you, Hypocrites of the World, who are giving Honor
to Proud Flesh, and receiving Honor from it, cease your Work, and let Christ
have his due, or verily he will break you all in pieces with his Iron Rod. But
in the end of thy Query, thy Conscience a little checking thee for this vain
Work, thou would daub over the matter, by telling People the Honor from
below, which thou have been pleading for, must not be in Opposition to, but in
Subordination to God's Honor: Nay, nay, I say, the true Christ, the Son of God
is come, and all Power in Heaven and Earth is given to him; and so all Honor,
and Glory, and Worship is his due (and the due of none else) to whom be it
given of all his Angels and Servants, both now and for evermore. So all People,
hearken and hear a word for your good; would ye be Honored? Then Honor the
Lord by obeying his Voice, and he will Honor you in due time, though for doing
his Will you loose the Worlds Honor, as assuredly ye will, if once ye be
Faithful.

Qu. 12. The next Query Consists of a great Boast of the Ministry, as though
it were Unrebukeable. And thou queriest, whether that Ministry can be lawfully
Condemned as Antichristian, which the Lord has owned and sealed with the
Conversion of many Souls.

Answ. But Men cannot gather Grapes of Thorns, nor Figs of Thistles; so thou
being such an Evil Tree, as thou have manifested thy self in these Queries to
be, how can a true Convert be expected from such a Ministry? But thou say,
its in Power, etc. and that many stubborn Sinners have been brought down unto
their Faces, and to confess that God is in you of a Truth: But I say, it will
be hard for thee to bring forth such a Man; for when I use to come amongst you
to declare Truth against your Deceit, as the Lord ordered me, I found a heap of
hard-hearted Sinners, more like to destroy the Creature, than to be Witnesses
of Truth. O shameless Men that bring forth such bad Fruit! And yet, with a
Whores Forehead, dare take the Scripture which speaks of Prophets in God's
Church in God's Power, and apply it to your selves, who deny the sufficiency of
Christ's Light in Man; and know nothing but merely by the Letter without, as
thou for thy own particular have made manifest, and so are sensual, not having
the Spirit, as was noted in the third Query.

I observe also, in this present Twelfth Query, the Ignorance of the Grace of
God; for when thou have falsely Boasted of your Ministry what it has done, thou
say, is not this the Grace of God that brings Salvation? Tit. 2.11, 12. I
say no; your Ministry, not being the true, is far from being the Grace of God
there spoken of: But if it were the true Ministry, it were not that Grace there
spoken of; for the true Ministry is but a service to that Grace, not the Grace
it self; for the Grace of God is that which has appeared unto all Men, and
that which brought Salvation to Jew and Gentile, as God's Gift without Words or
Works, and which was the Teacher of the Apostles themselves, as well as others:
And so when People would have been setting up Paul for his Ministry's sake, he
denied it, as nothing in comparison of the All Sufficiency of the Grace of God,
and the Word thereof, to which only at best he was but a Servant. But if it
could be manifest, that any under or amongst you were Convinced of the Evil of
their Ways in some measure; and so in their Dark Minds set upon a seeking after
the unknown God, which is the most can be found amongst you, and that rarely
neither; this is no warrant, either for them to stay with you, who are Ignorant
of the Way out of Sin unto God, neither is it any proof for you to be
Gospel Ministers, nor your Ministry to be a Gospel Ministry: For the
Gospel Ministry is not only Convincing, but Converting and Perfecting, Ephesians.
4.11, 12, 13. which work ye have utterly denied, and so shut out your selves
for ever from the Gospel Ministry; and amongst the Priests of the Letter, Law
at best, must you be reckoned, which made nothing Perfect; and hence it is that
you are such bitter Enemies to the Spiritual Ministration, or New Covenant
mentioned, Rev. 8. And such earnest Contenders for the outward Shadows, outward
Law, Tithes, Temples, Days, Priests, etc. as is now every where found. But for
the True Power, and Gospel-Ministration, it is risen above all your Languages
and Tongues, and has darkened the Glory of all your Fleshly Forms and
Likenesses: And the Babes of God are in Obedience to God turned, and turning
from you unto this his Power that perfects to God for ever: And Pharaoh and all
his Host will not now be able to hinder Praises to the Lord God for ever.

Qu. 13. In this next Query thou go on seeking false Covers to hide thine
and your Nakedness, asking; How can the Quakers Condemn your Congregations,
because of some Wicked Unprofitable Hearers, when Christ himself (say thou)
did not Convert all his Hearers? And for this thou bring, Mat. 11.20. and
Mat. 23.37. and Isa. 49.4. I say, all this will not cover your Nakedness, Oh ye
Teachers! nor your Congregations; for what have you to do to compare your
selves with Christ and his Holy Prophets? You that deny the Immediate
Revelations and Teachings of God's Infallible Spirit in these Days, and instead
thereof, set up Schools of Humane Learning to make Ministers by. O Hypocrites!
When will you give over perverting the right Ways of the Lord, and leading the
Blind into the Ditch? You that love to be called of Men, Master, Greetings in
the Market, uppermost Rooms at Feasts, chief Places in the Synagogues, as the
Pharisees did, all which Christ dis-allowed: What have you to do to compare
your selves with Christ and his Prophets? They are not Hirelings, and Fighters,
and Pleaders for the Worlds Gain, as you are: And so, though all that heard the
outward Declaration, or Sound of Christ, or his Prophets Words were not
Converted, yet that makes nothing for you, who have only a Sound, and so
Convert none to God: But, as I said before, beget them into your own Images,
making them more able to Dispute against the Life of Truth than some others,
and so greater will be your Condemnation: But now your Sheeps-Cloathing being
pulled off, the Lord will be Glorified in his Power, in the Conversion of many
to himself without you: For he has rejected your Confidence, and laid waste
your Mountain, and the Mountain of the Lords House is on the top of all your
Mountains in this great Day of the Lord, wherein in all the Children of the
Lord are taught of the Lord, and walk only in his Light, which comprehends and
teaches to avoid all the cunning crafty Ways of the Serpent; and now, not in
your Congregations, but in that Holy Assembly, is the Swords beaten into
Plow-shares, and the Spears into Pruning Hooks, and no War any more learned,
but under the Vine and Fig Tree all sit eating their pleasant Fruits, and
taking the Cup of Salvation, and both Praying unto, and Praising the Name of
the Lord.

But thou say, we have Drunkards, Fornicators, etc. among us, as well as
you, and that they are with us at out Prayers (if we have any) and that they
are not so severely dealt withal as yours are; for, thou say, some of yours
cast them out, which we do not.

Answ. Yea, thou false Accuser, such are cast out from us, and from the Church
of God, and with us they can neither Eat nor Pray, but with such as are
Ignorant of Christ, and the Sufficiency of his Light, and know no Light nor
Teacher but a Letter without (as thou have manifested in thy Queries) they may
both Eat, and Preach, and Pray; and when you cast out Drunkards and Fornicators
from amongst you, you must cast out your selves, for in that Nature you and all
Hypocrites are; and so some of you are Drunk with Wine and strong Drink, and
some with the Cup of the great Whore, some in the outward Fornications, others
in the inward, and some in both; so that your Tables are full of Vomit, and
every Bed defiled amongst you. And for the outward Drunkards and Harlots, and
such like (though we cannot but reprove and cast them out in that State) yet
this we say of them, that they may sooner enter into the Kingdom of God than
you that judge your selves free, and are not; for you are so Painted and
Conceited, that it is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of Needle, than
for you to enter in, and this makes your Wound more Uncureable; for you neither
enter in your selves, nor suffer others.

And for those words in thy Parenthesis, whereby thou questionest, Whether we
have any Prayer amongst us, shows thee to be a great stranger to us and our
Practice; for Prayer with the Spirit, and with Understanding we allow, and are
taught to practice, and say with the Apostle, Pray continually; but the wicked
Hypocrites the Lord rejects, whose Prayers to God are Abomination; and so it
would have become thee to have said less of us, and to have judged more soberly
and moderately of us, until thou have known us better than thou have done; for
thou have little knowledge of us, it seems, by coming into our Assemblies, but
only judge by Here-say, and false Reports, which brings thee under
Condemnation and Shame, when the Light now searche^h all things; but your Ways
and Practices are well known to such as are now come from amongst you, and so
in that they cannot be deceived. And now, John Reynolds, to proceed, I see much
of the Wisdom of God in bringing thee forth thus to manifest thy self in thy
Queries; and the next three Queries that follow, do, with those already
mentioned, fully manifest thy great Ignorance of the Reformation of things
brought to pass in Christ; for the Law had but a Shadow of the good things, and
yet thou stickest not to plead for it; and so thou had need learn the first
Principles of the Christian Religion, which thou remainest Ignorant of, before
thou be a Christian thy self, much more seeing thou take upon thee to be
Teacher of others; but to set down thy Queries themselves, or so much of them
as is the substance of the whole.

Qu. 14. And thy fourteenth Query is, Had not the Saints, in Scripture-times,
their set places for public Worship as well as we? Had they not their Temple,
1 Chronicles. 6. which Christ calls his Fathers House of Prayer, and whips the
Buyers and Sellers out of it? etc.

Answ. To which I answer, You have indeed an outward Temple or House made with
Hands to Worship in of your own devizeing, the Old Popish Mass-house, and so
cannot be called the Fathers House of Prayer so well as the Jews was; for the
Temple at Jerusalem was made by God's Appointment for the outward Circumcision
to Worship, in during the Law, as a Figure of Christ's Body to be Magnified,
and therefore he whipped Buyers and Sellers then out of the Figure, as he does
now out of the Substance; but you have not only the Enemies Nature in you, but
you have brought forth his Work into open view in your outward Temples also,
which were never Built by God's Command, and so there is Buying and Selling
amongst you, as was amongst them, as every Eye sees: For there you Men made
Priests, sell Words, the Words out of dead Books to the People, and they give
you their Money, Glebe-land, and Tithes for them: O filthy Merchandise! The
Lord has shaken his Hand at your dishonest Gain, and is whipping out such
Merchants by his Powerful Truth out of his House; and your dead Works, which
you sell at so dear a Rate in your Stone-houses, which you call Churches, shall
no Child of Light ever buy of you: For the true Bread of God, his free Gift, is
now witnessed, Praises for ever: One sort of Merchant Priests sell their
Sermons and Mass to the People for Money, another sort their Common Prayer and
Sermons, and the third their Sermons and Directory.

And thou, John Reynolds, pleadest also for Synagogues and Pulpits, and when
thou have set down Scriptures that tell of the Jewish Temple, Synagogues, and
Pulpit, thou ask, if Christ and his Apostles did not resort to these places
to instruct the People? To which I answer, First, That whilst the Jewish People
stood, Christ and his Apostles did sometimes go into their Temple and
Synagogues to Preach the Gospel of the Kingdom, and so an end of those things,
and to bring them out of these things which they and you so much dote on; and
plead for: but they did never Command Christians to Build such amongst them,
but told them, Their Bodies were the Temples of God, 1 Cor. 3. and that those
that abide in the Faith, were the House of God, Heb. 2. And these Christians
never so confined themselves or others to any such place for the Exercise of
their Conscience in the Worship of God, but met as the Lord Jesus and his
Apostles did; much less did they stir up the Magistrate, and drive the Jews out
of their Temple and Synagogues, and the Gentiles out of theirs, that so they
might creep into their Houses, and under another Form of Worship live upon the
Jewish Priests Tithes, Offerings, etc. nor upon the Maintenance of the
Idolatrous Priests of Diana, and the like Idols; as you Priests, to the shame
of your Profession, have done, and do at this day: What, have you driven the
Papists out of their Mass-houses, and do live upon their Priests Maintenance of
Tithes, Glebe-lands, Smoke-mony, Garden-pence, Handmony, and the rest of their
Foolish things? What, cannot a Man be Born, Marry, Live, nor Die, but you must
have Money for it! O Horrible and Filthy thing! stop your Mouths for ever, for
your Folly is manifest to all, and you can proceed no further: And so you
Priests of the last Order, called Presbyters, did not you drive out the
Prelates out of their Houses, which they had gotten from the Papists, and there
you sat down Feeding upon the Spoil of the People, as your Fathers had done,
and now think much that you are driven out again? And thus you fight with, and
drive out one another like wild Beasts, striving each of you to get Power of
others to be great in the Earth, and do what you will in your fat Pastures.
But, as I said, the Lord is arisen to whip you all out, and to pull down your
Nests, and to restore all things to their Primitive Purity, as in the beginning
before the Temples, Tithes, Pulpits, and such things were.

Secondly, I consider, that though I read that Christ and his Apostles went
amongst the People in their Temple and Synagogues, as we do at this day, to
Preach the end of these things, and so to bring People to the Word that was in
the Beginning, before all things, that the Worship might be in Spirit and
Truth, as it ought to be, John 4. Yet I never read, that either Christ or his
Apostles got up into their Pulpit, nor ever Commanded his to perk up into a
Pulpit of Wood over the People, as a Master of a Synagogue, to tell his
Thoughts of the Letter, as you do: For though Ezra, a Priest of the Law, had
his Pulpit or Tower of Wood to Read or Expound the Letter in, in those days,
before the Life was manifest; yet now the Life Christ Jesus is arisen, whose
Voice in the Heart, and in all places is to be heard, without a Pulpit, and
without Money, and without Price; and the Apostles Preached this Gospel in Towns
and Countries, where neither Temple, Synagogue, nor Pulpit was, but Tumults
rather; and so the Gospel is not a thing that will set up its Servants in
Worldly Honor, but indeed the contrary, which he that has an Ear may hear,
but the Wicked is so Proud in Heart, that neither Preacher nor Professor
amongst them will stoop to the simplicity of it.

The next thing Considerable in this Query is, thy twisting and striving to
keep up the Honor of the old Mass-house, however, if it be but a Name, though
it want the Nature, yet if thou can save that, thou think better that than
nothing; and say, What, though the Saints of God are called the Church; yet
that cannot hinder the House, where the Church meets, from being called a
Church? A Profound Reasoning! What, is this the Fruit of your cried up
Universities? What, must every Place, where any People meet, be calledby the
Name of that People? What Logic is this? Surely the Wisdom of the World makes
haste into its Nothing again; God is utterly Confounding it. Do you call the
place where the Parliament or Privy Council sit, the Parliament or Privy
Council? Do you call a Barn, or such a mean place, where the Saints of God now
adays often meet, by the Name of a Church? If we should Reason for the places
where we meet, as you do for yours, surely you would Laugh at us, and might
then well call us filly Women and Seducers indeed.

But, to go on, thou bring a Scripture as though thou would prove the
thing, and it is Acts 19.37. but the place being well weighed shames thee the
more; for the words in that place are the words of a Town-Clark, a Worshipper
of Idols, and they are these, For you have brought hither these Men, which are
neither Robbers of Churches (as K. James's Translators of the Bible have it,)
but in the Translation of the Bible by Beza, it is, You have brought hither
these Men, which have neither committed Sacrilege; nor, etc. if Paul had
spoken to him or others, and called a Stone-house a Church, as ye do, it had
been something to the purpose; but the Heathen speaking there of Sacrilege,
improperly Translated Robbing of Churches, can neither be understood to speak
of a Christian Assembly, nor the place where they Assemble; for the Covetous
and Idolatrous Copper-smith, and his Rude Fellows, matterr'd little what Paul
had done to these; but this Sacrilege, whatever it was, it must needs respect
something that the Heathen had in great Esteem: But thou bringing this to prove
that a House may be called a Church, because of the Church that may meet in it,
is nothing at all to the purpose; for thou will not say, it is like that the
Worshippers of Diana were the Church; for he that runs without Light must needs
stumble, if not fall often. So J. R. walk more soberly, and take some Light
along with thee, when thou have to do in such things.

Then the last thing in this thy Query is a secret Confession of a weakness of
thy own Arguments in this matter; and thou say, What though the Worship of God
be not so tied to any place, as formerly; yet there should be convenient places
for the Church to meet in?

Answ. I answer, The Worship of God now is not tied to any set place at all,
and so all your set places, that you plead for, are in the will of Man; and the
true Church God both has and will order it, and provide convenient places for
it to meet in, though the World cannot hardly afford it on Earth a place to
meet in at all. And for that thou concludest and say, What though our
Churches have been formerly Abused to Idolatry; So were the Temples and
Synagogues abused to Idolatrous and Superstitious Worship, yet nevertheless did
Christ and his Apostles make use of them: I answer, What use Christ and his
Apostles made of the Temple and Synagogue of the Jews, is in part before
declared: To which this may be added;

As for Christ, he was, according to the Flesh, of the Jews, made under the
Law, and so he was to cleanse the Temple, a Figure of his Body, and fulfill the
rest of the Laws, Shadows and Customs; and so end them all, and through the
Gospel bring Life and Immortality to Light, and to Consecrate the New and
Living Way through the death of all old things; for he Nailed them all to his
Cross, and they died with him; but he arose from the Dead, and not to bring up
the old Dead things again, as thou J. R. and thy Generation would have, but to
make all things New; for says he that sits on the Throne, Behold, I make
all things New, Rev. 21.5. Glory to his Name for ever; but none can see God in
his Throne, but in the Light that comes immediately from him, which Lights
every Man that comes into the World; which the Worlds Builders did always deny
and reject, as they do at this day: And for the use the Apostles made of the
Temple or Synagogues of the Jews, it was, as is formerly set down, to reason
with them there of things pertaining to the Kingdom of God; the Jews, not the
Christians, being Assembled there, as the Servants of God, called by the World
Quakers, do at this day, to bring People both then and now from the Shadows
unto the Substance Christ Jesus, who has said of his Body, Destroy this
Temple, and I will build it again in three days; and so the three days being
come and finished, the Temple that is Holy was built again, and God Worshipped
and Glorified in it; but nothing that is defiled or loves a Lie can enter into,
or be joined unto it: But the Jews were more reasonable in one thing than you
Priests of England are, for they suffered Paul, it seems, to Reason with them
several of their Sabbath Days in their Assemblies quietly; but now, if any come
amongst you upon the liek account that Paul did, it is hard for such to escape
your Furious Hands, or a Prison in these days: Whereby it appears your time is
but short, you are so unreasonable and full of rage.

But the use that those Gospel Ministers the Apostles made of the Jewish
Synagogues, will not serve your turns, O Parish-Masters! for unless you may
have them in your own dispose to bring the World into them, to call you Master,
and put into your Mouths, it will not answer your lustful Mind: And so indeed,
with you that have put the Name of Church and Saints upon the Wild World; a
great Stone-house Fashioned to Solomon's Temple, with an addition of an high
Steeple ( Babel-like) with Bells in it, seems most convenient, though it was
not only abused too, but even built for Idolatry so much: But for the little
Flock of Christ in Cities, Towns and Villages, a less House when they they need
one, will be as much, if not more convenient: And to conclude, whereas thon
intimatest, that your great Stone-houses, which thou call Churches, though
formerly used to Idolatry, yet now they are free; I say, thou will want proof
for this, so long as you continue in the Worshipping and Serving of Creatures;
(and Paul's Doctrine continues true, which says, Covetousness is Idolatry;)
unless you repent and bring cleaner Vessels into your Temple than you do.

Qu. 15. Thy Fourteenth Query was for Set-places, now this the Fifteenth is for
Set-times; and thou ask, Had not the Saints in Scripture their Set-times for
Public Worship as well we?

Answ. Yea, I say, the Saints amongst the Jews had their Set-times for their
Worship better than you; for they were under the Law, and that was their
Warrant; but you are neither under, Law nor Gospel in Truth, but any Carnal
Imitators in your Will, sometimes of the one Customs, and sometimes of the
other, as your Self-willed and Self-ended Hearts in your blindness Prompts you
unto; and so for this, I say, Love the Light which Christ has lighted you
withal, and it will lead you to Repentance from all your vain Observings; and
in the Light wait, that God's good Spirit you may know, and receive to Teach
you, and lead you into all Truth, according to the Promise; and so wait in the
Light that lets you see your wants, that is the Holy Place, and wait there for
him in his Fear, that comes in his own, not Man's time; and be not as the
Heathens, that think to be heard for their much wording of it, nor spread
abroad the Sails of your vain Imaginations, when you Pray as the Hypocrites do,
lest Satan Transformed carry you about, and fill you with the Wind of his
Frothy Spirit, making you believe you Pray with Gods Spirit, when it is his own
lying Spirit, as his Custom is amongst you to work.

Qu. 16. So thou having spent thy Strength in Pleading for your Set-Places and
Times, in Imitation of the Jews, thou go on in this Query, endeavoring to
prove your Work on these times, in those places, from the likeness of them, to
theirs then. And thus as you do, so do the Papists for their Customs, for they
Reason as thou do: For had not the Jews, say they, a Temple and Synagogues;
So we: Had not they One High Priest? So we, who is called a Pope, had not they
an Altar, and Sacrifice outward? So we; Had not they their Set-Fasts, and
Music in their Temples, and Quiristers, and Tithes, and Offerings, and such
things? And so have we, say they: So says John Reynold here in this present
Sixteenth Query: Had not the Saints in former Times the Scriptures Read in
their Congregations, Acts 15.21. Luke 4.16. and sometimes Expounded, Neh. 8.7,
8. and Prayed there, Verse 6. and Singing David's Psalms there, 1 Chronicles. 16.7.
etc. and Blessing the People in the Name of the Lord, Number. 6.23. etc. Well,
this was so under the Law, but what will thou infer from this, that you may
continue the Customs of the Jews in such things; that follows not, unless you
will deny the Ascension of Christ, Ephesians. 4. from 8. to 17. for the Jews were
under the Law, and so they had a Worldly Sanctuary, and a Worldly Service, with
diverse Ordinances of that Nature, until the time of Reformation by Christ
raised up, and come again in Spirit, and then says God, Behold I make all
things New; and so he that is in Christ is a New Creature, Old things passed
away, all things become New; New Temple, New Offerings and Service, New
Prayers, Singings, Preachings, which no Worldly Man can get into, but all with
the Holy Spirit and with Understanding: But thou bring several places out of
the Writings of the Apostles, and Luke, as in Acts, Corinthians, and Hebrews,
to prove that the Apostles and Saints use Praying, Preaching, Psalms, and
Blessing amongst them: Yea, but what is that to you, that deny that Infallible
Spirit of God to be Head in you that guided them; and so get the Worlds Wisdom,
Acts, and Helps instead thereof, to make you Ministers and Saints by. You have
indeed in some things a Form of their Works, but the Power being found, not
only wanting amongst you, but denied by you; the Children of Light are
necessitated to turn away from you, and thus to witness against you.

But thou say, Christ did not only Read the Letter in the Jews Synagogues,
but also Preached from a Text of it: To which I answer, For his Reading, he did
upon account of being a Jew, to fulfill all that Righteousness of the Law in his
day till his Offering up; but that he Preached from a Text, as you Priests do,
I utterly deny. For his doing at that time was only this; He being Reading in
the Prophet, as is mentioned in that Fourth of Luke, and in providence meeting
with that place, which said, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, for he has
Anointed me to Preach the Gospel, he has sent me to heal the broken hearted,
etc. And the Spirit of the Lord arising in him in Life and Power, and
Witnessing in him to the fulfilling of that Scripture in himself, He was
overcome with Love and Glory, and so closed the Book, and gave it again to the
Servant, and sat down; and so the Eyes of the People were fastened on him
through Admiration, and Ravishments of Love and Spirit that was upon him; and
so as that Living Spirit gave him Utterance in the Silence of all Flesh, he
spoke to them, and Preached in many Gracious Words the fulfilling of that
Scripture in the Ears of that Day: And this was Christ's doing there.

But, O you poor naked Teachers of England! etc. What have you to do to boast
of this Example for warranting your Practice? There was no choosing a Verse in
a Chapter in the Will of Man, which you think you can raise most words from,
and so consult with your own Imaginations and old rusty Books, how you may
raise an Hours Discourse from it, and so divine to please the itching Ears of
Carnal Professors, that they may give you outward Honor, Glebe-lands, Tithes,
Augmentations, Easter-Reckonings, and the like to please your Lusts; and if
need be to Fight for you, and lay their Sword and Law upon all that will not
hold you up, and Cry Peace to you: O Hypocrites! How have you deceived the poor
People with your long wrestings of Scriptures? But now that the Spirit of Truth
is come, it is leading us into all Truth without your help, Praised be the Lord
for ever.

And so for Christ his Expounding out of Moses and the Prophets, and opening
the Understanding of the Disciples to know the Scripture mentioned, Luke 24.
And Paul's Expounding and Testifying of the Kingdom of God, and Persuading the
Jews concerning Jesus, both out of the Law of Moses, and out of the Prophets
mentioned, Acts 28. is nothing to you who now adays (instead of Testifying to
the Kingdom of God, and opening the Understanding to know Scriptures, and the
Light of the World, which they witnessed unto) do Testify of this World,
Pleading for your Carnal Ordinances, Set Places, Set Times, Bowing one to
another, and the like, as is manifest in these Queries; and so instead of
opening, shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men, and so with these of old,
will neither enter into the Kingdom of God your selves, nor suffer others; but
are under the Woe, as you and the People, may Read all along in Mat. 23. And for
Singing of Psalms, it does not say, that the Saints Sung the very words of
David, and no other, and that in Rhyme and Mee^er, in Worldly Tunes, after Men's
Inventions, or with Organs, or so; but they S^ng as the Spirit gave them
utterance in plain words, as thou may Read in Acts. 4.24. etc. Which thou
bring for Singing, if that may be called Singing, this was a Song by the
Persecuted, not the Persecutors, which in the Persecuted Church of God at this
day is often Sung, worthy Consideration, but a shame for all Persecuting
Priests and Professers to take these words into their Mouths: And the same
Apostle in that place, 1 Cor. 14.26. that says, every one has a Psalm, says,
I will Sing with the Spirit and with Understanding; so then a Psalm was a Gift
of the Spirit spoken forth from the Understanding to the Edifying of the
Hearer; and they were to be silent when that Gift was Exercised as well as
others; but your Confused Noises and Temple-songs is but as Howling in God's
Ears, and his Childrens Ears in this day; for there the Proud and Scornful Sing
Falsely, and say, that they are not Proud and Scornful, because David said so,
Psalm. 131. and so with, and amongst you is David's Psalms in words used, but
the Holy Life and Innocent Love that he Lived in, in Deeds denied, and so the
Lord can take no Pleasure in you.

And for that Scripture thou bring of Aaron and his Sons Blessing the Tribes
of Israel in the Name of God: And Paul's commending of the Churches in the
closure of his Epistles to the Grace of God, makes as little for your customary
Blessings of, and speaking Peace to the Wicked for self ends, as the Preaching
of Christ does for your Daubing and Divining for Money; for you are neither of
Aaron's Order, nor of Christ's Anointing; and so wash you, and make you clean,
and put away the Evil of your Doings, and God will Bless you, but not
otherwise; and better will it be for you to have the lowest place in that
Blessing, than the uppermost Room where you stand in the Cursed Ground.

Qu. 17. Thy Seventeenth and next Query is; Has not Christ Jesus sent out his
Ministers to Disciple him all Nations, and to Baptize them in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and Promised to be with them to the end of the
World? Mat. 28.19, 20. Is not that Baptism with Water? And having set down some
Scriptures that speaks of washing with Water, thou criest, Are not they then
contrary to Christ and his Apostles that deny Water Baptism?

Answ. To which I answer, That all this, if it were granted thee, is nothing at
all to thine and thy Brethrens Practice, who take a little Water and sprinkle
it on a Child's Face, calling it Christ's Baptism; for there was Discipling, and
Confessing of Faith, and the Holy Ghost, before Baptizing, which cannot
groundedly, by you, be said of Infants of a day old, or so; and this thou
saw, which made thee so busy in the words of that Query there following, to
pro^e Infants sprinkling: And first, Thou go about to prove it, by saying,
The Scripture intimates that the Children of Believing Parents are Disciples,
Acts 15.10. I say to the Children of Light, this Scripture intimates no such
thing at all, but plainly holds forth the contrary; for the words there are,
Why tempt ye God to put a Yoke upon the Disciples Necks, which neither our
Fathers nor we were able to bear? Now these Disciples here spoken of, were not
Natural Infants, but grown Men, Christian Believers, as the First, and the
Twenty-third, and Twenty-fourth Verses of that same Fifteenth Chapter do
plainly show; and so if thou had not bee^ a Blind follower of the Blind Guide
Richard Baxter, whose Argument this is, thou would not, it is like, have
offered to bring this for this purpose, for it shames you all for ever: But
this Argument being too weak for thee, thou endeavourest by another Argument,
as little to the purpose, to prove the Natural Infants Subjects of
Water Baptism, because, say thou, they have received the Holy Ghost, or else
how could the Kingdom of God consist of such? To this I answer and say, But
which of the Natural Infants which you sprinkle has the Holy Ghost, and which
not? How come ye to see this difference? Or, you will say, that all have it; if
so, then may People have the Holy Ghost ordinarily by Natural Birth, without
hearing; then where is your great Glorying of your Words or Sermons? But to
proceed, thou say, Can we imagine that God will give them the Kingdom, and
deny them Water Baptism? I answer, God will give the Kingdom of Heaven to whom
it belongs, and it consists not in outward Observation or Washings, as
Dipping, or Sprinkling, or so, but in Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy
Ghost: And thou that, with the Papists, attributes so much to Water Baptism,
how comes it to pass, that after all your Sprinkling the Children, as they grow
up in Years, many grow up in so much Wickedness and Vanity, as is every where
manifest? And as concerning Children of Believing Parents, we deny them to be
Believers that hate the Light, and believe not in it, but say, it is
Insufficient, as before is declared. But as for that Mat. 28. which thou and
thy Brethren usually bring for your Custom of Preaching and Sprinkling of
Infants; I say, it makes nothing for you, who sit down in some Fat Benefice or
other, as times favor you, and there Divine from the Letter, as is said, an
Hours Discouse or two in a Week to the People for Money: Why go you not into all
Nations, as they did, and Disciple the Turks and Indians, if you will be
warranted by this Scripture? But whereas you take the Apostles for your
Example, I query first, When did ever the Apostles go to the Schools of the
World so many Years to be made Ministers? Did ever the Apostles seek to the
Magistrates to compel People to pay them Wages, as you do, or compel People by
their Sword to conform to Christian Doctrine? Or when did they sprinkle
Infants, receive Tithes of the People, or Sing David's Prayers, Quakings in
Rhyme and Meeter, as you do? When were they called Master, as you are? And many
the like things, wherein you differ as much from the Apostles, as Darkness from
Light, whereby you show your selves to be Guided by a contrary Spirit, (to wit)
the Spirit of Error: So for ever be silent, and stop your Mouths, for you are
both out of the Apostles Doctrine and Practice, as your Fruits make you
manifest.

Qu. 18. Thy Eighteenth Query is concerning the Supper; and thou ask, Has
not Christ Jesus given us his own Example for the Celebrating of his Last
Supper? And has not the Apostle Paul delivered it to the Church, and Commanded
the Saints to do it in Remembrance of Christ, and thereby to show forth the
Lord's Death till he come again?

Answ. The Lord's Supper we own; for Behold I stand at the Door and knock,
says Christ, and if any Man hear my Voice, and open to me, I will come in and
sup with him, and he with me: And for the Doctrine of Christ, his Eating and
Drinking with his Disciples, so we own it in its place, and for its time; but
what is that to you, who are both out of the Doctrine and Practice of the
Apostles, as by your Fruits is manifest? And so you Eat and Drink unworthily,
and thereby are guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ; and so Eat and Drink
Damnation to your selves, and do not discern the Lord's Body: And so in
witnessing against you and your Practices in this State, we neither Vilify
Men, nor Jesus Christ. And thou say, What a vain pretense is it to say, We
Eat Christ Spiritually? I say, it it vain, if it be but in Pretense; but if it
be in Truth, it is the greatest thing, for it is Eternal Life; and he that thus
Feeds upon Christ's Body is Alive to God: But you in all, your other Eatings
and Drinkings, are Dead whilst you Live: And so of you, that would keep People
always in the Figures and Signs, saying, The coming of Christ, spoken of 1 Cor.
11.26. is never to be witnessed here: I demand, Whether that Cup which the
Apostle said, The Cup of Blessing which we Bless, is it not the Communion of
the Blood of Christ; And the Bread which we Break, is it not the Communion of
the Body of Christ: For we being many are one Body, and one Bread; for we are
all Partakers of that one Bread, 1 Cor. 10.15, 16, 17. I say, Whether was this
outward Bread and Wine, yea or nay.

Qu. 19. And in the next Query thou come over with these things again,
saying, How can those Persons be Faithful to Christ Jesus, and Obedient to his
Gospel, that refuse to Pray, and Sing Psalms, and Baptize with Water, and
re^eive the Lord's Supper?

I answer and say, If any disobey God in any thing he commands them unto,
whether in any of these things, or in any other, they are not Faithful to
Christ and his Gospel; but those People thou here secretly shoots at, are
taught to obey God in all his Requirings,
and so to Glorify him in their Bodies and Spirits, which are his; and so are
we clear before the Lord from this thy Charge, and also from that which
follows; for we Revile none, much less those that in Conscience of their Duty
to God observe them or any thing else: And so the Reviler must lodge in thine
own Bed, who fears not to Revile and speak Evil of such in these days, as in
Conscience to their known Duty to God, Worship him in Spirit and in Truth.

But you whose Fear toward God is taught by the Precepts of Men, in vain is
all your Worship; for I Testify for the Lord, that whatever you do, though it
had the very Form of the Saints Practice of old, which yours have not, and not
led thereinto by the Motion of the Eternal and Infallible Spirit of Life, it is
nothing but the Precepts of Men, and Will Worship, and no better than Offering
Swines Blood, or cutting off a Dogs Neck: and for the endeavoring to keep up
your Custom of Praying, and Singing in mixed Congregations, from the Example of
Jews, or them that follow Christ; I say, your Hypocritical Praying and Singing
is good no where, but Rejected of God; and I see thy P^ide all along, that
would be computing your Congregations to those that followed Christ: Nay, nay,
for though there was One Devil, yet there was Eleven Saints; but when you are
searched, scarce One of many Twelves that has any true Fear of God before
their Eye^ is to be found amongst you.

Qu. 20 And whereas in thy last Query thou ask, Whether those Persons that
have Experienced the Operation of the Spirit of God in the Gospels Preaching
and Administrations, Convincing their Consciences, Melting the Hearts, Humbling
the Spirits, and Turning them from Darkness to Light, and have afterward
Tasted much Sweetness, and have felt Soul-Ravishing Comforts in the Enjoyment
of God in Ordinances, have not the Witness in themselves that God does own
these, and Bless these Privileges to them. I answer, Yea, it is thus with all
that, in Truth, have the Witness in themselves, that God does own these, and
Bless these Privileges to them. But those People that go under the Name
Quakers, have, to the Praise of God's free Love, the Witness in themselves of
such Fruits as th^se amongst them, from the Virtue of the Everlasting Gospel,
and its Administration. And therefore we can Witness, that John Reynolds, and
all such as Condemn this Ministry and Work of God amongst us (as Heresy, or
so) are Deceivers, and that they are Strangers to Spiritual Communion with God,
John Reynolds, or any other Seducer or painted Sepulcher talk, before ever they
can persuade these whom the Lord has so loved, not to believe their own
Spiritual Senses and Experiencies? But to conclude, Whereas this John Reynolds
in his high swelling Words of his last Query, and the 12th, boasts much of his
own and his Fellows Experiencies of Spiritual things, I refer the Reader to the
rest of his Queries, and especially the 3, 5, 8, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, and to the
answers to them all; and to weigh all in the Balance of Just Judgment, and it
will appear to him beyond words what may be Judged of them and us.

Thomas Tailor.

A Testimony to the True and Spiritual Worship: And a Word of Consolation to
the Children of Light.
GOD is a Spirit, all Pure, Holy, Just and True; and therefore in Spirit,
Purely, Holy, and Truly, will he be Worshipped of all that come to him; and
therefore all that Worship, which stands in the Impure and Unholy nature of the
flesh is of no acceptance with him; Cain may Sacrifice, and Israel may be
Circumcised, and Judas do something like an Apostle, but so long as the
Murderous, Scoffing, Covetous, Traiterous Nature of the Flesh stands, all is
nothing.

The Lord God Blessed for ever, has in this day of his Powerful Love made
manifest himself, amongst the Children of Men on Earth; and now Sons and
Daughters do Prophecy, and Old and Young do Sing of his Praise, and Sound
forth with Joyful Hearts of the worthy noble Acts of his Right Hand; because
his Kingdom is come, and his Glory in Sion is appeared; and the Tabernacle of
God is indeed with Men, and he himself (not a Shadow, or a Figure, or ontward
Representation of him) but he himself, who is over all God Blessed for ever,
dwells in, and with his People, his dearly beloved S^ed, who have believed in
Light, that true Light, that Lights every Man that comes into the World, and
have not despised the day of Small Things, but have waited in the Light, in the
Faith of his Holy Power, for the fulfilling of his Promises, and so through
Faith and Patience, have received the Promises of Everlasting Life, and
Salvation fulfilled in them; whereby the Mountains are thrown down, and Valleys
lifted up, and all made Plain, Pure, and Perfect for the Holy God and Father of
all Mercy, and Goodness to dwell in, and walk in: Glory, Glory to his great
Name, who has not left himself without a Witness of his Faithfulness this day,
nor left the Throne of David's Kingdom without an Heir to sit upon it, to Order
and Establish it in Righteousness: And now, even now in this our Day, the Day
which the Lord has made, is the Blessed Fountain of the great Depth of the
Love of God in Christ Jesus truly opened; and the Waters of the Heavenly Temple
are so deep that a Man may swim in them; and it is not now as sometimes in
times past, here a line and there a line, here a little and there a little, but
now has the Lord our God, according to his excellent Loving Kindness, fully
opened to Judah, and the Children of the Heavenly Mother Jerusalem, the Mystery
of his Will, and Fountain of his Eternal Goodness, in Christ Jesus the Light,
whereby our Souls are satisfied, and Sin and Transgression done away, and the
Everlasting Righteousness (which makes Pure and Perfect the very Heart, Soul,
and Conscience to God) brought in; ever Blessed be his Glorious Name for his
unspeakable Gift, Amen, and Amen.

And now are all false Religions seen, and by the Light, which makes them
manifest, Judged; for the false Births, which are of the great Whore (Mystery
Babylon) whose Religions are carried on by the will of the Flesh (as by the
Fleshly Wisdom they were Invented) stand all in the Curse, where nothing is
perfect, but their own Misery and Wretchedness Remains; and therefore it is
that both Priest and People, in this Wretched State, do all with one consent
cry out against the perfect Work of Jesus Christ in his People, saying, None
can be Perfect here; And so do in a Word deny the very End for which Christ
came, and the End for which the Ministry of Christ was given; for Christ gave
himself for his People, That he might wash them in the Word of Life, and so
present them to himself a Glorious Congregation, without Spot or Wrinkle, or
any such thing, Ephesians. 5.25. etc. And thou art all Fair my Love, says Christ
to his Spouse, And there is no Spot in thee. And the Law made nothing Perfect,
but the bringing in of a better Hope ( Christ in us the Hope of Glory, Col.
1.27.) Heb. 7.19. And the very end of the Ministry was, for the Edifying and
Perfecting the Saints, who are Christ's Body, Ephesians. 4.12. And we labor to
present every Man Perfect to God in Christ, Col. 1.28. And John 17.23. I in
them and thou in me, that they may be made Perfect in one. But now the false
Ministry, which stands in the Flesh, in which no good thing dwells, keeps People
always learning, and never brings any to the Knowledge of perfecting Truth of
the Lord Jesus; for how should it? For they have Run and I never sent them,
says God, therefore they shall not profit the People at all. Jer. 23. And
under this woeful Condition lies all the World of unbelieving People, who
believe not in the Truth, Christ Jesus, but follow their own dark Spirits,
which see nothing of the Kingdom of God, nor the Holy Worshippers therein.

A long and dark Night of Apostasy has passed over the World since the
Apostles time, wherein the Spirit of Antichrist and Devils has wrought
effectually in the Children of Disobedience, as was foretold to the blinding of
their Minds, and hardening their Hearts against the Everlasting Gospel of Truth,
the Heavenly Light and Power of God unto Salvation; and has so deluded them,
that they have thought they were doing God service, when they were Persecuting
his Truth, and Members of his Body, as many in the same dark deluded state do
at this day; but now the Lord is lifting up his Standard against that great
Whore, Dragon, false Prophet, and their Armies, who Gog and Magog like, would
devour the Lambs of Christ.

And now no Weapon formed against Christ, his Truth and People, shall ever
prosper any more at all, but the Lamb shall have the Victory; and the Kingdom,
Dominion, and Greatness of it shall be given to the Saints of the Most High
God, whose Kingdom is Everlasting, and that Nation, Kingdom and People, that
will not bow to Truth, will moulder away and come to nothing, as the Lord has
said: For now is the effect of every Vision fully to come, and no more at all
to be prolonged. And therefore, Woe, Woe to the Inhabitants of the Earth, and the
Sea, who are putting the Day of the Lord a far off, crying Peace, Peace, when
there is no Peace; for there is no Peace to any who will not have Jesus Christ
(the true Light, that Lights every Man that comes into the World) to rule in
them, and over them; for his is the Kingdom, Glory and Power, and he will Reign
for Evermore, in the midst of his Enemies. Glory to his Name without ceasing,
Amen and Amen, says my Soul, whom thou have Redeemed, O Holy One of Israel, to
set forth thy Praise amongst the Living in Jerusalem, thy Holy Hill, so be it.

So now, O all ye that love Righteousness, and daily wait to see the Heavenly
Kingdom thereof, set up in you, and in all People I T. T. your Brother, in the
Joys and Sufferings of the Gospel; having had through the Mercifulness of our
God and Father, perfect knowledge of his Good Way from the beginning of this
Day of his Love, which has dawned upon his Beloved Seed in these Islands, and
in all the World, Jerusalem, which is free for evermore, from all the false and
imbondaging Impositions of the Man of Sin whatsoever.

And so also because this Heavenly Gift of God, Christ Jesus the Light, who
Lights every Man, John 1.9. is perfect, and shines in the Heart, therefore it
does of its own Nature, make perfect every Man that wi^h their Hearts receive
it, and so come to God by it: It makes perfect to God, as pertaining ^o the
very Heart and Conscience of all its Lovers; for if you Love the Light you Love
God, from whence it comes; for he that Loves him that is sent, ^oveth also him
that sent him.

And therefore I say unto all People upon the face of the Earth, that all that
Faith, Hope, Worship, Religion, or whatever it may be called [That stands not
in (and is not carried on in) this Power of God the Light, which Lights every
Man] is nothing worth. Every good, and perfect Gift (says James) comes down
from the Father of Light, who is Unchangeable; and it shines in the Heart of
every Man, though the Darkness, which through the Full has gotten place there,
comprehends it not; yet the Light is there a sure Foundation, a tried
Cornerstone, Elect and Precious; Blessed are all that fall upon it, so as to
be broken into Godly Sorrow, and Tenderness of Heart; and Blessed are all that
Build upon it; they shall be called the Elect of God, Precious Sons and
Daughters of Zion, and their Building shall never fail them, nay, the Gates of
Hell shall never prevail against their FAITH, because it stands in the Power
of God Christ Jesus, the Light that ever Lives, to keep them in a good and
safe Condition, that thus come to God by him.

The Day is dawned, which makes all things manif^ll, Praised be God forever;
even the Spirit of Truth, which leads into all Truth, is come; and the Holy
An^i^ting is witnessed (in all that believe in the Name of the Living
Unchangeable God) which Teaches all things, and it abides in the Faithful
Hearts, and is sufficient. And he called the Light Day; and so the joyful Day,
which the Lord has made, being come, we will Rejoice and be Glad in it, though
the Children of Darkness be never so Angry; For the Lord, our Strength, will
maintain our Cause against all his Foes for evermore; so be it.

And now, though the Children of the Night be many, and Professors of the
Letter of Scripture, that want the Life of it, come forth as so many Armies, to
plead for, and contend for their several formed Ways, and invented Worships,
against the Children of God this day, who Worship God in Spirit and in Truth;
yet Greater is he that is in us, then he that is in the World; and so, though
we are forced to Build, in this our Holy City, New Jerusalem, with our
Spiritual Sword in our Hand, yet we are all well content, finding the Lord
still with us in this Day of the Restoration of all things: And so though
Tobiah and Sanballat, with all the Heathen, Mock and carry false Reports,
concerning us, to the Rulers of the Earth; yet through the Help of our God we
are enabled to go on in our Holy Spiritual Work, in the Lord's Holy City and
Temple; and the Word of the Lord Prospers in our Hand, and in our Hearts. And
though they say we deny the Ordinances of God, because we cannot plead for, or
put confidence in a Shadow or Figure; yet holding the Head Christ Jesus, the
Light and Life Eternal, we are safe enough, and have the Witness of God in our
Hearts Justifying us and Sealing in our Hearts our Acceptance with his Majesty,
which is our Peace and Assurance for ever; for Praised be the Name of God for
ever, who has given us an understanding to know him that is true, the Son of
God, and we are in him that is true; who is the Everlasting Ordinance of God;
and in him are we Baptized, with a Baptism made without Hands; and our Supper
is with the Lord in Spirit and Truth where we are daily given to feed freely at
his Table, whose Body is Meat indeed; who said, I am the Living Bread that
gives Life for ever, John 6. And he that Believes in me, and feeds on me,
shall never Dye, chap. 6.50, 51. God gave the Children of Israel Manna in the
Wilderness, and they died notwithstanding, but my Father gives you the true
Bread; For God so loved the World, that he gave his Son to be the Light and
Life of Man; and so to as many as Received him then, and do Receive him now, to
dwell in their Hearts by Faith, to them he gave, and daily does give, Power to
become the Sons of God, whose Birth is not of the Mortal Seed, of Flesh and
Blood, nor the Mind or Will, or Words thereof, but of the Incorruptible Seed of
the Word of God, Eternal, Real, and Essential, which Lives and Endures for
Ever, which perishes not with Using, as mortal thing do; but it Lives and
Triumphs in its own Creating, saving Sustaining, Upholding, Comforting, and
satisfying Virtue and Power for evermore, well witnessed in the Hearts of
Spiritual Believers this day; For in the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God, and by it wore all things made, and it was
and is the Light and Life of Man; and he Delighted and does also this day
greatly Rejoice and Delight in the habitable parts of his Creation; For I will
dwell in them, and walk in them, who open unto me, says the Lord, who by his
Servant said, Behold I stand at the door and knock; and by his Servant also now
says, Behold the Lord stands at the door of your Hearts [all People and
whosoever opens unto him, he will come in unto them, and the pure in Heart
shall see the pure and Holy God supping with them, and they with him; and they
shall drink abundantly of the Heavenly Wine with Jesus Christ in the Fathers
Kingdom, fresh and Living, for now is the Lord rending away the Vail, the
Covering that has been upon the hearts of People, and making to all People the
Feasts of fat things, full of Marrow, and of Wine upon the Lees well Refined.

And now is the Lord God Blessed for ever fulfilling the Promises of his Great
Love in Christ Jesus, which have been since the World began, in this day of the
pouring forth of his Holy Spirit, whereby the Holy City, New Jerusalem, is felt
come down from God out of Heaven, and God himself dwelling with Men, even the
Tabernacle of God with Man, as was said before; all Holy Praises to his Name:
Yea, he that sits upon the Throne has made, and is daily making all things
New; and now the Lamb is known to be the Light of his People, and they need no
other; for the Anointing which they have of him Teaches all things; and now is
Jerusalem a rejoicing indeed, and her People a joy; but now the Uncircumcised
in Heart and Ear, who do always resist the Holy Ghost, are greatly troubled and
offended by reason of the great Darkness and enmity of their Hearts, because
they cannot in their unclean mind enter in; for into this City no unclean
thing, nor any that loves or makes a Lie can enter; for now the Serpents meat
is Dust, and his Head is bruised, Glory to God for ever. See Isa. 65.17. etc.
Rev. 21.1. etc. Acts 7.51, 52.

And now are all the Climers (who have not come in by the door, but are Climed
up another way, in their unclean minds, whom Christ calls Thieves and Robbers
^seen, and by the same that discovers them Judged and Condemned; these are they
that have taken away the Key of Knowledge, and will neither enter into the
Kingdom of God themselves, nor suffer those that are entering into enter: These
are they whom Christ-cries woe against, who love to be called of Men, Master;
heady and high minded Men, with the great Train of their seduced Followers, who
Plead for them, and Fight for them, because they cry Peace to them in their
Sins, and tell them they must never be Perf^ct whilst they are here, but must
carry about them a Body of Sin, without all Hope of ever being freed from it,
whilst on Earth; and so in effect deny the end of Christ's coming, who came to
set free the Soul, by destroying the Body of Sin; also they deny the very end,
the very end of Christ's Ministry; for when he Ascended up on High, he gave
gifts to Men, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of
Christ, and for the Perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians 4. Come ye Contenders
against Truth, Is not the Perfecting of the Saints in Holiness, by bringing
them out of Unholiness; and in Faith, out of Unbelief; and into the Spirit, out
of the Flesh, and all Fleshly and Perishing Observations? And does not the
Ministry of Christ, which is the true Spiritual Ministry, attain its end, and
do its work to the utmost? Yea, yea, though the Ministers of Antichrist Fret,
and Foam, and Gainsay, and Contradict, and Blaspheme, and spend their strength
in Vain, and perfect nothing but their Sins; yet the Work of the Lord goes on
and Prospers, and the Body of Christ is Built up, and the Songs of Sion Sung in
the Holy Land; and none can take part therein but the Redeemed of the Lord, who
are redeemed from the Earth, into the Heavenly Society, and Church of the
Firstborn, whose Names are written in Heaven, and who follow the Lamb whither
soever he goes; these are not Defiled with the Cup of the great Whore, for they
are Virgins, and have Oil in their Lamps, and so need not go to the Merchants
of Babylen to buy. And so all People bow to Truth in the inward parts, for
obedience to that is the Sacrifice which God requires, and better than all
other Sacrifices; all your Sabbath out of this, are but mere Druggeries; and
all your Will worship, Ceremonies, and Traditions (being out of this) are but
mere mock Services; yea, out of this (to wit, the Light and Truth in the inward
parts) your very Faith is vain, and your Hope of none effect, and your Prayers
Sin; for unto thee who wilt not have it to rule in thee, the Lord has no
respect, nor to thy Offering: So prize your Time O all ye Strangers to the Life
of God, and make supplication to your Judge Christ Jesus, that Lights every Man
that comes into the World; for this is the condemnation, that Light is come
into the World, and Men Loved, and do Love, their evil deeds, and hate the
Light; for every evil Doer hates the Light, says Christ, yea, it is so,
whatsoever the Hypocrite, the Evil-Doer, with his Mouth may say to the contrary.

And all ye Children of the Light, walk in the Light, and be thankful, for the
Lord is Arisen in Mighty Power to Crown you with his Glory; his Glorious,
Righteous, Wisdom, Holiness, and Salvation; he is come indeed to fulfill all his
Promises in you, and for you, to the Glorifying of the Arm of his own Power,
and for your Souls endless comfort; and why should any of you be afraid of what
Man can do against you, seeing you fear God, and love the Children of Men, and
you are not of them that seek to destroy Men's Lives, but to save them, as much
as in you lies?

Arise, Arise, break forth into singing, ye Sons and Daughters of the Heavenly
King, the Lord our Righteousness: for thy Light is come, and the Glory of the
Lord is risen upon thee: And thou shall no more be termed desolate; for thy
Maker is thy Husband, and thy Land is married indeed: And thy Plants grow, and
thy Gardens cast a Sweet Smell: Oh! Happy are they who Believe in thy Light,
and walk in the clear Sunshine of thy Day: No Stumbling nor ocasion of
Stumbling is on thy Mountain, nor in thy Valleys; but on the Dark Mountains,
whereon the Haters of Christ walk, is all the Stumbling of this present World.
Thou who art come in at the true Door, Christ Jesus, the Light of the World,
thy Kingdom is not of this World, but is a Kingdom without End, which cannot be
shaken, wherein dwells Righteousness indeed; and thy Pasture is Fresh and green
all the Year bong, being wet with the Dew of Heaven, yea, in thy Happy Lot are
both the upper and nether Springs, and Bread of Life, for evermore, where rests
with thee (in the Purest Love) thy Brother in the Joys and Sufferings of the
Gospel,

Thomas Tailor.
In the 12 of the 6th Month, 1669.
A Message of Truth to Professors.
WOE to the Teachers of the People, that daub with untemper'd Mortar, and cry,
Peace, Peace, when the Lord has not spoken Peace; For the Lord speaks Peace to
none in their Sins; but they Teach for Doctrine, That none can Live out of Sin
whilst on this side the Grave; and so they Minister for Antichrist, the Man of
Sin; and not for Christ, who is without Sin, in Gods Righteousness.

And he that keeps Christ's Commandments dwells in him, and he in him; and
his Commandments are not Grievous, says John: And again, He that is Born of
Christ Sins not; for the Everlasting Father of the Unspotted Generation it
he. And herein (says the same John, and all the Living Members of Christ) is
our Love made Perfect, that we may have Boldness in the Day of Judgment;

But the Masterly Teachers of this world cry out, O the Commands of Christ (who
is God) are hard, none can keep them, we must ^ive in Sin whilst on Earth, no
Perfection here, no Victory over all, while on this side the outward Grave.

These have their Eyes abroad, and Judge after the Flesh; and the things of
Gods Spirit are Foolishness to them: The Grave of Sir (...) lie dead in, and
know not the Resurrection from it; and so (...) norant of Christ, who is the
Resurrection and the Life: And the ^^r in such is shut, as yet, that should
hear the Sons Voice, whose V^^^e raises the Dead.

O Foolish and Slow of Heart to believe all that Christ and his Prophets have
spoken! Does not Christ say, The hour is coming and now is, when the Dead shall
hear the Voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall Live? For as the
Father has Life in himself, so has he given to the Son, to have Life in
himself, John 5.26. And in another place, He that Lives and Believes in me,
shall never die, for God is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living; for the
Dead cannot Praise him. And And I will Ransom them from the Power of the Grace;
I will Redeem them from Death; O Death I will be thy Flagnes, O Grave I will be
thy Destruction, Hos. 13.14.

And again, Ezekiel. 27.12, etc. Thus says the Lord God, Behold, O my People, I
will open your Graves, and cause you to come up out of your Graves, and ye
shall know that I am the Lord; and I will Place my Sanctuary in the midst of
you for evermore. These Words are Faithful and True, and the Israel of God, who
are risen with Christ, know them; and in the Birth Immortal being passed from
Death to Life, do set to their Seal, That God is a Faithful Performer of his
Promises this Day: For Life and Immortality is brought to Light through the
Gospel, which is the Power of God to Salvation, in all that believe in God, and
know his Christ in them, who is the Death of Death, and Destruction of Sin, and
Life Eternal to enjoy; Glory to his Name for ever: And against this Living
Faith and Quickening Power the Gates of H^ll shall never be able no prevail.

But as any said before, Woe to the Teachers of the People, who Daub with
Untemp^^ed Mortar; who look outward, and judge of things according to the Fles^
and outward appearance of things; and plead for the Life of Sin during, the
whole time of Man's being upon Earth, and look at the Grave without, and Death
without, and so lie Dead in Sin, and Buried in the Grave of their Spiritual
Wickedness themselves; and so le^d about a People, filly as Women in Matters
Spiritual, laden, like themselves, with diverse Sins and Lusts, always learning,
but never able to come to the Knowledge of the Truth: For who know the Truth,
as it is in Jesus, are set free by it; For if you be set free by the Truth then
are ye free indeed, says Christ. This is more than all outward Knowledge and
Profession, to be so free, as not to be under the Power of any Sin, Lust,
Temptation, Will of Man, nor any of the Powers of Darkness whatsoever; but
Free, as Christ is Free, who is over all, God Blessed forever.

But now that Christ is come, to set up this his Holy Glorious Kingdom in the
Hearts of the Children of Men; where is this Faith to be found on Earth? But
the Multitudes of Earthly Professors cry, the Kingdom of Heaven hereafter; the
Kingdom of Glory hereafter; no Perfection on this side the (outward) Grave;
none can overcome, or put off the Body of Sin, whilst here; and the like: Not
knowing what they say, nor whereof they affirm, when they speak of such things;
because, to the Kingdom of Heaven within, in Man, they are Strangers; Eyes they
have but see not; and Ears but hear not; for the inward Eye, which should see,
have they fast closed; and the Ear, which should hear, have they shut, lest
they should see and hear, and be converted, and be saved. But Blessed is the
Eye that sees the Kingdom of God, which he has set up, and is setting up in
his Trembling People; and the Ear that hears the unutterable Word of the Living
Father, which raises the Dead; they shall ever be Prasing of him in the
Congregation of the Righteous, where none can come to make afraid; for these
Love and Fear the Lord, and that frees them from the Fear of Vain Man, whose
Breath is in his Nostrils.

But all whose Religion stands upon the Sandy Foundation of Man's Wisdom, and
Thoughts, and Doings, which Perfects not to God, these will be like the Chaff,
which the Wind scatters to and fro; the Regenerating Power of Gods Eternal
Spirit they being ignorant of in themselves, all their show of Religion is mere
Hypocrisy, and the Religion of Hypocrites shall never be established; for all
who gather not with Christ shall scatter; and every Plant that his Heavenly
Spiritual Hand has not Planted, shall be rooted up.

O! What Darkness have you wrapped your selves in? and how is the Understanding
Part clouded in you, that you will neither see nor learn to know the things
that pertain to Everlasting Life? Can you say the Branches of the fallen Tree,
the first Adam, are Unholy and Corrupt, because of the Unholiness of the Root?
And will you not see that the Members of the Heavenly Man, Christ Jesus, who
never fell, are Holy, because of the Holiness of the Root? For if the Root be
Holy so are the Branches. Anoint your Eyes with Eye Salve, that if possible you
may see, and know a better Root in you, than the fallen Man's Nature, to grow
on, that the Kingdom of Holiness you may feel come near you; For they that are
in the Flesh cannot please God, whatever they may profess: And this adds to
their Misery, that when they have brought forth the Deadly Works of the Flesh,
they would charge them upon Gods Elect, and make their Works like their own:
These Fleshly ones are great Enemies to Christ, and his Righteousness, and his
Members; for they that are in Christ are New Creatures; and to Abel and his
Offering God has still Respect, though Cain and his Offering was always
Rejected, because Polluted with Sin; as the Prayers and Performances of all
Hypocrites are at this day: Therefore for this purpose was the Son of God
manifested, and is at this Day Received of the Faithful, even to destroy Sin,
which is the Devils Work. And in him, to wit (Christ Jesus the Light) is there
no Sin, nor Sinsul Narure.

So they that Love Christ, and Walk in his Life, and Light, please God; for he
is that Way Undefiled, wherein no Unclean can Walk: but the Redeemed are here:
And what if I should set down the words of Jesus, to wit, Whosoever abides in
Christ, Sioneth not; whosoever Sins, has not seen him nor known him, 1 John
3.6. Can you believe it? I know you cannot whilst you stand reasoning with
Flesh and Blood, not Believing in the Light, that Lighteh every Man that comes
into the World; but call the Light of Christ in Man Natural; and th^n put the
Letter (which only witnesses to the Light) instead of it: And then the Enemy
works in your Natural Earthly Wisdom, causing you to wrest Scriptures to
Establish your Empty Forms, which maks nothing Perfect; and this was the Sin of
the Old Jews, who though they talked of the Messiah, yet when he appeared they
would not come to him, that they might be saved; and so under the Dead
Profession of the Letter, they lay Slain: And though they had a Zeal for God, as
you have now, yet it was not according to Knowledge, and so stumbled at the
Stumbling-Stone; and so in their dark minds would needs keep up the Forms and
Shadows of things, in opposition to the Substance (the thing it self) Christ
Jesus, when he appeared; as you do now. O! that you could be persuaded of this,
how well would it be for your Poor Souls in time to come.

Therefore now that the True, Heavenly, Everlasting, All-sufficient Light is
broken forth again, from under the Clouds, after the long Dark Night of
Apostasy; turn your Minds in, to know a measure of it in you, and wait therein
to be led out of all the Dark Paths of Sin and Error by it: For I am the Way,
says Christ, the Light, that true Light which Lights every Man that comes
into the World; and I will send my Holy Spirit of Truth to lead into all Truth:
He is come, and his Promise fulfilled; Glory to his Name forever. And do you
not know that Christ is in you, except you be Reprobates, says the Apostle?
And if we walk in the Light as he is in the Light, then have we fellowship one
with another, and the Blood of this innocent Lamb cleanses from all Sin, and
washes from all Unrighteousness all real Comers thereunto, says the same
Spirit: Therefore go not forth, for without are Dogs, and all Liars; but Truth
and the Kingdom of it, is to be found within, nigh in the Heart.

O how Beautiful is the Way of the Just! Holiness is the Girdle of their Reins
continually, their Hearts ponder deep things in Holiness; they do no Iniquity
who walk in this Everlasting Undefiled WAY, Christ Jesus, the Light; for, by
the Light are they led out of all Defilements; and to such there is no occasion
of Stumbling.

O stoop down low with your minds to the Light of Christ in you, that
convinces you of Sin and Evil, that through the Light the true Door, and
Daily-Cross to the Carnal Mind, you may come into the Sheepfold; for all who
clime up another Way, are but as Thieves and Robbers, and must be judged as
Goats, and set on the left hand, because they would not hear Christ's Voice,
the Light in the Conscience, to be led by it. Great Woe to the Climers over the
Door; such neither receive Christ, nor his Servants whom he sends; but choose
rather to follow such as love to be called of Men, Master, and live in the
respect of Persons, and Persecuting Nature, and daub over an old Heart with
fair Promises of Life, as it is amongst you this Day; for what though some in the
outward stand against you for your Form, and Words sake, as the Heathen of old
did the outward Jews, yet both those outward Jews then, as you outward
Professors do now, stood and do stand, against Christ, and us for his Truths
sake: For we find it true from you all, that whosoever walks in Christ, and
holds forth his Life, and so Worshippeth God in Spirit and Truth, shall be
hated of all men, whether Professors or Profane, who are out of that Life and
Holy Worship, even for Christ's very Name and Life's sake, because it is a Cross
and Offense to all the World, who are in their own Wills, under what Form or
Profession soever, who are gotten into a Profession of Christ, without Christ,
and the daily Cross which his Followers bear. Therefore all who are climed up
into the Tree of an outward Profession without the true real seeling and
Spiritual acquaintance with the daily Cross, and fiery Law of the Lord, and
flaming Sword (which Guards the Tree of Life) which is in the Hand of the Angel
of the Covenant, for the cutting down of the Man of Sin (that the Birth
Immortal, which is Holy, may onter in and possess the Inheritance) must come
down again; I say they must come to the beginning, from which in their fallen
Wisdom they are wandered, to learn of him in Silence, who speaks from Heaven,
whose Word is nigh in the Heart, before ever they be established; for except
you become as little Children, not in Talk, but in Truth, ye cannot enter God's
Kingdom.

O ye People, hearken awhile, whether Teachers or Hearers; You who have been
feeding upon the Tree of Knowledge, and never came through Gods Judgments, the
Flaming Sword, to the Tree of Life: Your Food is Death, your-Works will Burn,
and your Fig leaf-Covers will fall off you, and you be left Naked and Bare to
the shame of your Nakedness, as in the day that you were Born: For what is any
Covering unless it be that of the Spirit of Christ? The Lord God, who is of
Purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, will bring your Deeds to the Light of his
Judgments, from which you cannot flee; and before him will nothing stand but
that which is Pure.

Your defiled Preachings, Prayings, Singings, Hearings, Readings, will be
rejected, and cast out as Dung from the Presence of the Pure Holy God, that is
a consuming Fire: You have multiplied words without Knowledge: Ye have not
been, neither yet are ye Doers of Gods Will (to the Witness of God in your
Consciences, I speak) therefore in vain do you say, Lord, Lord; and he will not
hold them Guiltless that take his name in Vain. Your Garment is not of the Pure
White Linen, which is the Saints Righteousness; but Linen and Woollen is your
Covering, a thing forbidden by Gods Law. Your Field is not sown with the one
Heavenly kind of Grain (the Good Wheat) but another Seed have you mingled with
it, and the mixture is so great, that the Bad has almost choked and covered
the Good in you: If you will work you must into Gods Vineyard, and be exceeding
Diligent and Laborious (in Spirit) in plucking up the Weeds by the Roots in
you; the Light of Christ in your Conscience waiting in it will give thee
Understanding: But Woe will be to them who call the Light Darkness, and put
Darkness for Light; and so suffer the Good in them to wither, and nourish the
Bad Part in them (which is like the Grave, that never has enough) but is
always learning at Man without, and not at Christ within, and Ministering from
the outward Dead Spirit of the World, and not from the measure of the Living
Spirit of Christ; and so not taking heed to the Word of Faith, which is nigh in
the Heart (the Word of Christ which is Spirit and Life) they never get Victory
over their Sin, as is manifest, but go laden, Teacher and Hearer, all their
Life long, with diverse Sins and Lusts, as was said before. So Woe to the selfish
Workers, who speak their own words, and think their own thoughts on this the
Holy Sabbath Day of the Lord God, wherein he has given his People rest from
all their weary Labor and Burdens: The outward Day, the first Day of the Week
shall not Cover you; nor be a Sabbath to you, but in the breach of Gods Holy
and Everlasting Spiritual Sabbath of Rest, you being found, you must bear his
Judgment. Behold, all ye that kindle a Fire this Day, and that compass about
your selves with Sparks, walk in the Light of your Fire, and in the Sparks that
ye have kindled; yet know, that your reward from the Lords Hand, is to lie down
in Sorrow. I say, all you who feed upon, and whose Faith stands in, the wisdom
of Vain Man's words, raised up in the subtility to please the itching Ear, and
not in the Power of God, which washes the inside; a Day of Scattering comes
upon you, it comes, and a grievious Whirlwind from the Lord; and the Pleasant
Breasts of Mystery Babylon, which you so much delight in, shall be dried up;
for the Lord has rejected your Confidence, because you have rejected his Good
Word and Counsel, and chosen your own Delusion, and evil entreated his
Servants, whom he sent, rising up early, and sending them time after time, to
warn you to come out of all your Dead Forms, and Dead Faith, into the Living
Virtue and Power of his eternal Spirit of Truth, to Worship him there, and to
know it in you; but you would not; therefore the Lord will yet do that Great
Work and Wonder amongst you; he will confound the Wisdom of your Wise, and
bring to naught the understanding of your Prudent Men, and they shall be as
Women, weak and feeble; the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it; and the Songs of
your Temple shall be Howlings in that Day, because of the Vine of Sodom, that
will bear no more Grapes; but so many as have drunk of the Wine of her
Fornication, must Drink of the Cup of Gods Wrath. And all you who talk of your
Faith and suffering Condition, and yet Live in your Sin, you know not what
Spirit you are of; for the same mind, that you think to suffer in, is it which
by Transgression grieves the Spirit of God, and stands against the setting up
of his Kingdom in your selves, and the Testimony thereof in his redeemed Ones
this Day: And so, if you could give your Bodies to be burnt, in this your
Unsaved and Unsanctified Condition, it would prosit you nothing at all.
Wherefore come out from amongst them, all you that would be happy, and touch no
unclean thing, but give your Hearts to the Lord, to know his Light in you, to
teach you; and he will receive you, and hide you from the Wrath that is to come
upon all that are not in him, as says his Spirit in his Servant.

This is a Message of Truth to all you in and about Stafford, and those of like
Spirit with you elsewhere, who go under the Name of Presbyterians, Teachers and
Hearers, to Read and Ponder in the cool mind, that you may know what the Lords
Mind is concerning you in this his day, wherein he is manifest with his Fan in
his Hand, to purge the Floor, that he may gather to himself the good Wheat, and
burn up the Chaff: For we knowing the Terrors of the Lord, persuade you, and
all People, in Love to your Souls, to take heed of dallying with God, who is a
consuming Fire; for his Judgments are manifest, and who can stand before his
Wrath? O be not Proud, lest your bands be made strong; but be Meek and Lowly,
and Gentle in Heart, to Learn of him that is so, that you may find rest for
your Souls; for there is no Peace to the Wicked, says my God the true God,
that made Heaven and Earth, whose Wrath from Heaven is perfect, revealed
against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men (without respect of Persons
or Professions) who hold the Truth in any manner of Unrighteousness, So be it.

In the 2d Month, 1670. Thomas Tailor.

WEEP thou England, Houl, Houl ye People; for the Dreadful Day of the Lord God
is at Hand, it is at the Door, as an Armed Man, coming swiftly upon you, to
break down and tread under feet thy Pomp, Glory, and Strength.

Thou have exceeded in thy Sins, and art grown Monstrous in thine Iniquities;
so the Lord will be exceeding Terrible unto thee. Thou have suffered the Wicked
in thee to have Liberty, and to take their fill of Sin, when the Voice of the
Righteous cannot be endured in thee; but he that departs from Iniquity, and
would persuade others so to do, is even made a Prey of by Ungodly and
Unreasonable Men; their Bodies Imprisoned and Banished, and Estates spoiled,
and many Injuries done them for God's Name and Truth's Sake. And therefore will
the Lord God arise to take Vengeance for these things; Yea, his Soul will
certainly be avenged on such a Nation as this, says his Spirit in his Servant,
if they do not repent and amend.

AND moreover, because you have said in your Hearts, We have compassed them
about with an Act, and none shall Worship God but as we please: Therefore will
the Lord, the mighty God, compass you about with his Terrors, and you shall
find no place to hide your selves in from his Wrath, because of the Pride of
your Hearts, and Evil of your Doings, O all ye People of the Land (says the
Lord God) who are guilty of these things.

Thomas Tailor.

THE Lord, even the Lord God, of infinite, endless, Glorious Power and Truth,
plead our Cause, our Innocent Cause, against you the Rulers of this Nation, and
of all the World, who hate us, and Persecute us without a cause. The Lord has
raised us up in Righteousness, ever Praised be his Name, to bear our Testimony
for God and his Christ, against all the Ways and False Worships of Fallen Man;
and therefore it is that such as are in the fall, through the Ignorance and
Evil that is in them, number us with the Transgressors, and account all manner
of Punishments and Grievances too little for us; Yea, Banishment, Imprisonment,
Spoiling of our Goods, and Death it self is Judged not less than we deserve: So
the Scripture is fulfilled, see John 16.2, 3. And all this for no manner of
Evil at all, but merely because we cannot cease to Worship and Serve the Living
and True God, our Father, as he has taught us, and does teach all that come to
him: For our Worship to God is pure in Spirit and Truth: And this is the True,
Standing, and established Worship for evermore; and God is now Mightily seeking
such to Worship him. And so the Lord, the Ever-blessed and True God, Plead our
Holy Cause against you, who hate us without a Cause. We have laid before you
the Truth and Righteousness of our Cause, and our Good Will to all men, and how
it is not in our Hearts and Hands in the least to injure you, or any; but to
this Day you will not hear, but stop your Ears to our Innocent Cries, and
therefore to the Lord God of Heaven and Earth do we call, and before him who is
KING of Kings, and LORD of Lords, and RULER of Rulers, and JUDGE of Judges, do
we lay our Innocent Cause.

O that you had known at least in this your Day, the things of your Peace! but
you will not, and therefore how can ye expect less than a Forsaking and Casting
off by the Lord, as the People of Old (called Israel) found, who would not hear
the Voice of the Lord and his Servants, Crying and Calling unto them in those
Days: Read the Prophecy of Hosea, Hos. 1.6, 8, 9. and see what Lo-ruhamah and
Lo-ammi signify, and humble your selves greatly before the Lord; for assuredly
great Wrath is gone out from the presence of the Eternal Majesty of Heaven and
Earth against you; and nothing can stay it, but your ceasing from Persecuting
the Blessed Truth of God, which we, the People of God, in Scorn called Quakers,
do Love, and Live in. It is so.

Thomas Tailor.


