TO THE People at and about STAFFORD, A Testimony for God and his Truth, and
against Deceit and Deceivers, especially the Hireling Priests, as a Warning,
Information and Instruction in Righteousness, to them (and all People elsewhere
concerned) by the Spirit of the Lord in his Suffering Servant Thomas Tailor.
Hear, O People, and Fear; for the LORD has spoken:
THE false Teacher, the Hireling, who has run and God never sent him, but
preaches for Hire and divines for Money, can never profit your Souls, O people,
at all; but with their false Dreams, and lying Divinations, and empty Sounds,
they deceive your poor Souls: For what can the dead words of a dead man (dead
in Sins) raise up your dead Souls from Death to Life: No, they cannot; they
have no Life in them; and such who have no spiritual Health for Soundness (by
their own Confession) in them, but are miserable Offenders, can they minister
any healthful or sound Doctrine to your Souls; nay, those cannot; for, what is
their Chaff to the Wheat, their frothy Words to the powerful Word of God; for,
sow a Field with Chaff, and what a Crop can you expect; but as the Prophet
says, They sow the Wind, and reap the Whirlewind: So cease from them, you that
love God and your own Souls, and turn to God: for I testify for God, That the
True Ministry, the Soul-saving Ministry of Christ Jesus is not with the
Parish-Hirelings of these days; for neither their long black Robes, nor long
white Surplices, nor their humane Learning, nor the Ordination of Man, men of
like nature with themselves, does any more conduce to the making of them able
Ministers of the new Covenant, the Gospel of Christ, the Everlasting Covenant
of God, than the gray or brown Coat of the Plowman, or Artificer, or the Skill
of the Husbandman in Husbandry, or the Cunning of the cunning Worker in Wood,
Brass or Iron does furnish them for Gospel-service; for the Vision of Gods
Kingdom to all the world this day, both wise and foolish, is like a Book
sealed, as the Prophet says, which is given to the worldly wise to read, and
he cannot read it, because its sealed; and to the foolish, and he cannot read
it, because he is unlearned, Isa. 29. 10, 11, 12. so though in the world there
is a difference betwixt the wise and foolish, yet as to the Kingdom of God
there is none; for the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, 1 Cor. 1.
10, etc. for that which lies hid from all flesh, God reveals to his by his
Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God, 1 Cor.
3. 6, 7, 8. And people, the time of quickening and raising up of many that were
dead in sins is come again, after a long Night of Darkness, and the dead this
day hear the Voice of the Son of God (not of vain man) and they that hear do
live, John 5. 25. so people, look to your Souls; for though your
Parish-Teachers, who preach for Hire, and divine for Money, and love to go in
their long and white Robes, do boast of their being come out of Popery, yet
upon the Popish Maintenance of Tithes, Glebe-lands, Easter Reckonings,
Mortuaries, and Moneys for preaching over and burying the Dead, and such like
things they live and make a Prey upon, not willing to come to Christ (to this
day) as the first Christians did, for a through Reformation; and so, not a
little, but a great deal of the old, sour, popish Leven being yet found amongst
them, both in Doctrine and Practice; how should their whole lump but be very
sour? as appears by their Fruits, and the Fruits of such as follow them: and
so, for witnessing in Christ against them for these evil things I suffer
Imprisonment; yet for God's Mercy inabling me thereunto I rejoice, and can
truly from my heart praise the Lord, that has delivered my Soul from that
horrible Pit, that these ungodly men yet remain in, and will not be helped out
of.

And people of Stafford, for your sakes it was that the Lord by my Mouth
rebuked the Hireling, that you might not always be deceived and kept in death
with such Dreamers; but that you might turn to the Lord God, from all such, to
know his word and spirit, that made you, in you, to teach you, and to lead your
Immortal Souls to the Springs of living Waters; for you have too long dwelt in
the wilderness of sin, ignorance and unbelief, and now it is high time for you
to repent, and come to know the Baptism of the holy Ghost and Fire, which is
Christ's proper Baptism, Mat. 3. 10, 11, 12. for, alas! you have but hitherto
been carried on by the Pharisees in the outward shadows and figures of things,
which reach not the soul, to purify and perfect it unto God, and therefore is
the Lord come in mighty Power this day, to break in sunder all the graven
Images of the people, whether under the Profession of the Popish or Protestant
Religion; for the Lord is on his Throne, to make all things new again, as in
the beginning, when all the sons of God in holiness sung for Joy, and rejoiced
in the Lord, for the blessed victory they had got through the Blood of the Lamb
over all their souls Enemies.

But Woe and Alas for you, the poor people of Stafford, and of many other
places, who are under the Teachings of worldly-minded men, miserable Offenders,
like your selves, always doing what ye should not do, and leaving undone what
ye should do, and so without all spiritual health, in the miserable captivity
of sin; my soul mourns for you, and my Sufferings are for you, and my soul
prays for you, that you may be recovered out of the snare of your souls enemy,
by which ye are led captive at his will; for many days and years has my soul
mourned for you, and been oppressed, and the Lord has called to you early and
late to Repent, and lay things to heart; but, O the hardness of many of your
hearts, and the carelessness of the rest! O, why will ye dye? why will ye
linger, and remain still in spiritual Sodom and Egypt, where the Witnesses lay
slain, Rev. 11? So whilst ye have time, prize it, lest the Lord lay you upon a
Bed of Sorrows, where no Ease is, and say unto you in his Wrath, I gave them
time to Repent, and they Repented not.

In the year 79. T. T.

HEAR the Word of the Lord, all you that fear to offend the Lord, and who
breath after Righteousness in any measure, and yet in your Ignorance are
seeking the Living among the Dead, the Living God in Dead Observations, which
by Tradition you have received one from another, and not from the Lord Jesus.
The Day is come, wherein by the Spirit of Jesus it is witnessed in and by his
living Members, That he that was dead is now alive, and lives forever more, and
is ascended for above all Heavens, and out of all Figures and Shadows, that he
might fill all things with his holy Substance: And as in former days he gave
some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers,
for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the
edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all (says the Apos^le) to wit, the
Heavenly Body not the Body of Sinful Earthly Flesh) come in the Unity of the
Faith, and the Knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect Man, unto the Measure
of the Stature and fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. Even so the Lord is
now giving forth of his Spirit to his Children, born of his Spirit, for
enabling them in this Day of the Restitution of all things, for the Work of the
Ministry, for the perfecting of the Saints, and fitting them for Glory; and
this now after a long Night of Darkness and Desolation, is to the Praise of his
Glory, who has made us in this his blessed Day, as he did his Faithful
Followers in the Beginning, accepted in the Beloved, to show forth his Praises
to Ages to come, whom he will also raise up by Christ Jesus, together with us,
to magnify his Mercies for evermore.

But that the Parish Teachers of these times, who Preach for Hire, and Divine
for Money, loving to be called of Men Master; and like the Pharisees of old,
love to go in Long Robes, and receive Honor one of another, John 5. are such,
to wit, so given of Christ, and begifted from Heaven, and fitted for so great a
Work, as to perfect the Saints, as those before (in Ephesians. 4) mentioned were, I
utterly deny, and their Fruits, as also the Fruits of their Hearers make
manifest that they are of another Sort, Seed and Generation, even such as the
Prophet Jeremiah speaks of and declares against, who have run, and God never
sent them; For why? they waited not for the Word of God to speak in them and by
them, but stole the Words from their Neighbor, and used their Tongues to say,
The Lord says, when the Lord never spoke by them, (Jer. 23. 30.) and
therefore, says the Lord, these Teachers shall not profit the People at all
(Verse. 32.) For what are their Chaffy Words to the Word of God? (Verse. 28.) So
the Teachers of the Parishes this day get into the Pulpit with the Words of the
Prophets and Apostles in their Hand, and Sin in their Hearts, as those other
did, dreaming over them for Filthy Luere, and cry to the People, BELOVED, (yea,
Beloved, because they put into their Mouths) Hear the Word of the Lord, as you
shall find it written in such a Chapter, and such a Verse, when the Lord never
spoke to these Hirelings, nor sent them thus to preach, but they are Men made
Ministers, Men of the Evil world, and great Lovers and Pleaders for it, and
therefore the world hears them, 1 John 4. 5. But the true Messenger of Christ
says for himself and his Brethren, We are of God, and the whole world lies in
Wickedness. And says Christ to his Disciples, Ye are not of the World, as I am
not of the World; for if you were of the World, the World would love you; for
the World loves its own; but now I have chosen you out of the World, therefore
the World hates you, John 15. 18, 19.

So all people fear the Lord God; for the Name of Christians, without the
Nature of Christ, will do you no good at all; for the Lord is come to search
all that called Christendom with Candles, and to pull down the lofty Hearts and
Looks of all amongst them called Christians first, and then of all the World
besides; for now is the Lord exalting his great Name over all, as in the
Beginning, before the Antichrist, Beast, False Prophet and Whore got up; and
who shall stop the Passage of this mighty Jehovah, in the great Work of setting
up his Kingdom over all the Kingdoms of the Man of Sin, that the Kingdoms of
this World may become the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ, whose Right alone
it is to Rule and Reign, according to that Saying in the Prophet, I will
Overturn, Overturn, Overturn, till he come to Rule whose Right it is.

And now Woe and Misery begins to take hold of all Hypocrites, and all the
Wicked, because of the arising and appearing of the great God from Heaven this
day, who is on his Throne, judging in Righteousness, and in Righteousness
making War, whose Fiery Word, his Two-edged Sword, goes out of his Mouth, not
only to discover, but also to destroy and consume the Man of Sin in all the
Earth. And now the Hireling Teachers of all sorts, the Merchants of Mystery
Babylon, shall cry, Alas! alas! that great City, People begin to see us, and
they will not trade with us, nor buy our Merchandise, as in former days, but
declare against it; see Revel. 18. 10, 11. O, yea; it cannot be otherwise; for
now the Witnesses, that lay slain in the Streets of the great City, Sodom and
Egypt, spiritually so called, are arisen, and stand upon their Feet, praised be
God. And now Judgment is given to the Saints of the Most High God, Dan. 7. 12,
25, 26, 27. So that though the great Antichrist, under many shapes and
appearances, ha^h spoken great words against God, his Truth and People, and
has oppressed the Saints; yet now the Judgment of God being set against him,
his Dominion shall be consumed and destroyed, and the Saints of the Most High
God shall have Dominion, and Reign with Christ, whose Kingdom is an Everlasting
Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him, to wit, our Lord Jesus
Christ, for whose blessed Name and Truth's sake, the Holy Tremblers, who
Tremble at his Word, and follow him in the Regeneration, do this day suffer; it
is so.

In the Year 16^7 T. T.

THE END.

