A Warning Piece TO ENGLAND, OR THE WRATH of GOD Revealed against SINNERS, His
Judgments being already entered upon the NATION.

By S. T. G.

A Lover of Peace and Truth.

Psalm. 40. 10. I have not hid thy righteousness within my Heart: I have
declared thy faithfulness and thy Salvation, I have not concealed thy loving
kindness, and thy truth from the great Congregation.

London, Printed for D. Newman at the Kings Arms in the Poultry, 1676.

THE PREFACE.
Christian Reader,
AS far as the Author knows his own heart, the main end of righting this small
Treatise, is that God may have all the glory; and this Sin sinking Nation may
have some benefit, and so undoubtedly they will if they hearken to Gods
Counsel, to repent and turn from their evil ways to the Lord with their whole
heart: the consideration of the present confused state of this poor Nation,
caused me seriously to mind the next way how they might be brought into a
better condition; and I know no other way that God has showed us, but by
humbling our s^lves before the Lord, to escape destruction and ruin. For God
will not always bear, but then the Anger of the Lord will break forth in fury,
if a people do not amend their ways and doings which are not good. God has
been earnestly calling unto us, and lifting up his voice, and by his Word and
Dispensations, persuading us to return unto him. He has tried all sorts and
all ways, both Mercies and Judgments. Surely it is very sad, that the hand of
the Lord has been so greatly lifted up, and that England should be so blind,
as not to take notice of his displeasure, in afflicting us, with Sword,
Pestilence and Fire, and threatening Famine, but graciously holding his hand,
like a tenderhearted Father, unwilling to destroy us, except by our persisting
in Sin, we as it were force him utterly to consume us from the face of the
Earth. I humbly beseech you seriously to read and ponder, what is said in this
little Book. And let not Satan persuade you to throw off those wholesome
Exhortations, and Instructions contained therein. So with my earnest prayers at
the Throne of Grace, for Rulers and Ruled, that the God of all Grace and Mercy
would enable us to see the filthy nature of every Sin, to repent of all our
false ways, as David says in in the 119. Psalm. Through thy Precepts I get
Understanding therefore I hate every false way.

I remain thine in all truth and righteousness. S. T.

A Warning piece to England; or the wrath of God revealed against Sinners, his
judgment being already entered upon the Nation.
IT is very certain, out of the Scriptures of truth, that sin brings the
judgment of the great God upon Nations, Families, and Persons; Sin cries aloud
for Vengeance, Wrath, and Desolation, upon wicked and ungodly men: Oh! let
every one seriously consider the dreadful effects of sin; it destroyed the old
world, Genesis 6. 5, 6, 7. And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the
Earth, and that every Imagination of his heart was only Evil continually. Verse.
the 6. And it repented the Lord that he made man on the Earth, and it grieved
him at his heart. Verse. the 7. And the Lord said, I will destroy man, whom I
have created, from the face of the Earth, both man and beast, and the creeping
thing, and the fouls of the air: for it repents me that I have made man.
Likewise those five Citys in the plain, were destroyed by fire. Genesis 18. 20.
And the Lord said, because the cry of Sodom is great, and because their Sin is
very grievous. Chap. the 19. 24, 25. Then the Lord rained upon Sodom, and upon
Gomorrah, brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven; he overthrew those
Citys, and all the plains, and all the inhabitants of the Citys, and that which
grew upon the ground. Consider what desolations and depopulations sin did bring
upon Gods beloved People, as you may read Lament. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8. verses.
She weepeth sore in the night, and her tears are on her cheeks; among all her
Lovers she has none to comfort her; all her friends have dealt treacherously
with her, they are become her enemies. Judah is gone into captivity, because of
affliction, and because of great servitude; she dweleth among the Heathen, and
she finds no rest; all her persecutors overtook her between the straits; the
ways of Sion do mourn because none come to her solemn feasts: All her Gates are
desolate; her priests sigh, her virgins are afflicted, and she is in bitterness.

Her adversaries are the chief, and her enemies prosper, for the Lord has
afflicted her for the multitude of her transgressions, her children are gone
into captivity before the enemy: and from the Daughter of Sion all her Beauty
is departed, her Princes are become like Hearts that find no Pasture, and they
are gone without strength before the pursuer.

Jerusalem remembered in the days of affliction and of her miseries, all her
pleasant things that she had in the days of old, when her People fell into the
hand of the enemy, and none did help her, the Adversaries saw her, and did mock
at her Sabbaths; Jerusalem has grievously sined, therefore she is removed; all
that honored her, despise her, because they have seen her Nakedness, yea, she
sighed and turned backward; her filthyness is in her skirts, she remembers not
her last end: therefore she came down wonderfully, she had no comforter. Chapt.
the 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. verses, and 3, 4, 5. Chapters of the book of the
Lamenta. as in the 5. Chapt. 16, verse. The Crown is fallen from the head, and
woe to us that we have sined. I might multiply Scriptures to show the
displeasure of God against Transgressors, and after those many premonitions
when they would not be forwarned, God cast them off, making them a byword to
all the Nations round about, Oh England, hear and tremble, for the fiery anger
of the Lord will burn like an Oven, and none shall be able to quench it, see
Malachi 4. 1. For behold the day comes that shall burn as an Oven, and all the
proud, yea, and all they that do wickedly shall be stubble, and the day that
comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them
neither root nor branch.

Qu. What sins bring National judgments?
Ans. 1. Slighting and rejecting the Law and the Prophets, and especially Jesus
Christ in the time of the Gospel. 2. The sins of Rulers. 3. Idolatry. 4.
Adultery, 5. Pride, 6. Swearing and Cursing. 7. Murder. 8. Drunkenness and
excess.

1. Sin. Slighting the Law and the Prophets, which God complains of in the 1.
of Es. 2, 3, 4. verse. I have nourished and brought up a People, but they have
rebelled against me. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib,
but Israel has not known me. Ah sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, a
seed of evil doers, children that have corrupted themselves. So the judgments
are threatened in the ensuing verses, and God makes very great complaints of
them, in several of the Prophets, as Jer. and Ezekiel. etc. and they proceeded to
reject Jesus Christ in the Gospel, and this is a very great sin, and brings
desolation upon all those to whom it is sent, and they reject it. Heb. 2. 2, 3.
How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation: and when Israel slighted
Jesus Christ and his words, they were left to the hardness of their hearts, and
the blindness of their minds, That hearing they shall hear, and not understand,
and seeing they shall see, and not perceive, and then God wholly left them, and
sent his Ministers to the Gentiles; Lo we turn to the Gentiles says the
Apostle.

2. Sin. Is the sins of Rulers, as David numbering the People. Sometimes God
plagues the people for the Rulers sake. 2. Sam. 24. 11, 12. The word of God
came to Gad the Seer, saying, go and say unto David, thus says the Lord, I
offer thee three things, choose thee one of them, that I may do it unto thee,
verse. the 13. So Gad came to David and told him, and said, shall seven years of
Famine come untothee, in thy Land, or will thou flee three Months before thy
enemies while they pursue thee: or that there be three days pestilence in thy
Land, verse. the 15. So the Lord sent a pestilence upon Israel from morning even
to the time appointed, and there dyed of the people from Dan to Beersheba,
seventy thousand men. Now God plagues a people for the sins of the Rulers,
especially when the people follow the sinful examples of Rulers. Oh my people
they that lead thee cause thee to err, as Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, which made
Israel to sin, which was a great brand of infamy, recorded to after ages; so
Ahab, that sold himself to do wickedness, and Manasseth, and all those wicked
Kings that provoked the Lord, 2 King. 21. from the 9. to the 14 verse. to bring
desolation upon the people; Oh then let Rulers be wise and serve the Lord with
fear. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the right way; if once
his wrath be kindled but alittle, blessed are they that put their trust in him.
Psalm. 2. 10, 11, 12. Let all therefore consider, both Rulers and Ruled in this
Nation, that if God spared not the old world, nor those citys in the plain that
were destroyed by fire, nor his beloved people Israel when they sined against
him, how then can England escape when they follow the same way of sining,
nothing can be expected but desolation, God can quickly hiss for his three
executioners, which are the sword, pestilence, and Famine.

3. Sin. Is Idolatry, which strikes at the very Being of God; how full of wrath
was God against Israel for their Idolatry. 3. Judge. 7, 8. and the Children of
Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and forgot the Lord their God, and
served Baalim and the Groves; therefore the anger of the Lord was hot against
Israel, and he sold them into the hand of Cushan-Rishathaim King of
Mesopotamia. Deuteronomy. 13. 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. with diverse other places which I
shall not mention, because it will make it larger than I intend this
Warning-piece.

But certainly Idolatry is a land-destroying sin, which above all sins will
draw down the wrath of God upon a Nation to root it out, and utterly to destroy
it, for he is jealous of his name, and his glory will he not give to another,
not his praise to graven Images.

4. Sin. Is Pride. Here I might write a large volumn; but to omit several
particulars in relation to this sin, I shall speak of that which is more
obvious to the sense, as first Pride in apparel. Can the oldest man remember
such excess of apparel, especially in this great City, yet notwithstanding the
eminent hand of the great God has been so lately upon them, that most part of
this City was consumed into ashes, that the inhabitants are but poor to what
they have been heretofore, yet what a fair outside do they make when the Nation
is sinking. Oh what horrible folly is this, it is like one that Paints his pots
and trims up his shop, and suddenly it is shutup. Secondly pride in their
houses, in their furniture; and how costly is it, with very much excess, so
that the superfluities in clothing, and diet, and furniture, would refresh the
bowels of the poor which are some of them ready to perish for want of bread;
few seriously consider the great distresses and wants of the poor; some that
heretofore could have administered to the necessities of others, are forced to
beg their bread; consider what God says in the 2. of Isaiah from the 10. to
the 18. verse. Enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust for fear of the
Lord, and the glory of his Majesly; The lofty looks shall be humbled, and the
haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in
that day; for the day of the Lord of Hosts shall be upon every one that is
proud and lofty, and every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low,
and upon all the Cedars of Lebanon that are high and lifted up, and upon all
the Oaks of Bashan; and upon all the high Mountains that are lifted up, and
upon every tower, and upon every fenced wall, and upon all the ships of
Tarshish, and upon all the pleasant pictures: verse. the 17. And the loftiness
of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of man shall be laid low, and
the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. Chapt. the 3 from the 16. to the
end. Moreover the Lord says, because the Daughters of Sion are haughty, and
walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they
go, and making a tinkling with their feet. verse. the 17. The Lord will smite
with a scab the crown of the head of the Daughters of Sion; In that day the
Lord will take away the bravery of their tinkling ornaments about their feet,
and their cauls, and their round tires like the Moon etc. verse. 26. And her
gates shall lament, and she being desolate shall sit upon the ground.

The 5. Sin is Swearing and Forswearing, likewise Cursing, which are Sins of a
very high nature, very much displeasing to the great God, and provoke him to
bring swift judgment upon the Nation; especially that wicked divelish Oath of
the Dam'es, that desire God to damn their souls, whereas God and Jesus Christ
would have them to be saved. See the 1 of Timoth. 2. 4. Who will have all men
to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. Do thou desire God to
damn thee; oh poor miserable Sinner, that my heart could bleed for thee that
art so ignorant; do thou consider what it is to be damned; to be damned, is
to be separated from the presence of the Lord and the glory of his Majesty, and
for ever to be cast into that lake that burns with fire and brimstone, in
those easeless, endless, and remediless torments, where there is weeping and
gnashing of teeth. Math. 25. 41. Then shall he say also unto them on the left
hand, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels: Isa. 66. 24. And they shall go forth and look upon the carkases
of those that transgressed against me; for their worm shall not die, neither
shall their sire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring to all flesh.

1. Vain Swearing, when men so commonly swear that they cannot ordinarily
discourse but they must swear; nay it is the fashion to swear, and if a man
cannot swear, he is not fit company for some Gentlemen. Oh poor miserable man,
is it thy common practice and delight to blaspheme and take the great and
dreadful name of God in vain. Oh what will thou do when thou shall appear
before him at the last Day, as thou certainly must; surely thou will tremble,
and desire mountains and rocks to fall upon thee, to hide thee from him that
sits upon the throne, and from the Lamb; Revel. 6. 16. See those Scriptures
that prohibit vain Swearing, James 5. 12. But above all things, my brethren,
swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath;
but let your yea, be yea, and your nay nay, lest ye fall into condemnation.
Mat. 5. from the 33 to the 38 verses. Surely such words are nothing but the
speakings of the Devil in thee.

2 Sort of swearing is for-swearing thy self when thou art called before a
Magistrate; this is a great sin, that brings judgments upon the Nation; for
oaths the Land mourns. How many poor creatures are hired to for-swear
themselves, and how many do it to pleasure great men; and others wickedly
for-swear themselves for to get their Neighbors goods, and to defraud their
neighbor of his right. Levit. 6. 3, 4, 5. chap. 5. 1. Jere. 23. 10. For the
land is full of Adulterers; for because of swearing the land mourns, the
pleasant places of the wilderness are driedup, and their course is evil, and
their force is not right: Hose. 4. 1, 2. Hear ye the word of the Lord ye
children of Israel, tell: for the Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants
of the land, because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the
land. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing
Adultery, they break out, and blood touches blood. Chap. 10. verse. 4. They
have spoken words, swearing falsely in making a covenant. Zach. 5. 3, 4. Mal. 3.
5. And I will come near to you in judgment, and will be a swift witness against
the Sorcerers, and against the Adulterers, and against the false Swearers.
Doubtless this is a very great sin, that brings judgment upon the nations,
families and persons.

3. That wicked sin of Cursing, parents cursing their children, and servants;
some children curse their parents, servants curse their Masters. Nay I have
heard wicked men curse themselves and their cattle. Oh how common is it for men
to bid the pox take them. Foolish, ignorant persons, they cry out with pain and
anguish, and several of them yield up the ghost, and if they do not repent, go
quick down to hell: they that curse themselves and their cattle, at last bring
a curse upon all they have. Math. 15. 4, For God commanded saying, honor thy
Father and Mother, and he that curses Father or Mother, let him die the death.
Romans 3. 14, 15, 16, Whose mouth is full of cursing, destruction and misery are
in their ways, and the way of peace have they not known: verse the 18, There is
no fear of God before their eyes. Jame. 3. 10, Out of the same mouth,
proceeds blessing and cursing: my brethren these things ought not so to be.
Several other places of Scripture I might produce, but these may suffice. Oh
what mad blindness is this, that rational men, and those that have lived under
the sound of the Gospel so long, should be so ignorant and wicked, as to desire
the plagues of God to be poured upon them and theirs. Oh that my head was
water, and my eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep night and day for the
sins and sorrows of poor distressed sin-sinking England.

7. Sin is Adultery, and had I time and a heart, I might be very large to
enumerate the multitude of transgressions of this nature, and surely this sin
is grown so common, that it is open before the Sun, and men plead for it, and
very much extrenuate it. Nay I question whether some are not so notoriously
wicked to urge Scripture for their abominable uncleanness. Know O thou profane
Atheist, the Scriptures give thee no liberty, but will judge thee for thy sins
at the last and great day of account; when you shall certainly give an account
for all your actions done in the body; and how will you answer the taking your
neighbors wife from him; it may be thou will instance David's adultery; but
consider if thou will commit David's sin, then thou must expect David's
punishment, which was very severe. See Psalm. the 32, from the 1, to the 6,
verse. verse. the 3, When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my roaring
all the day long. verse. the 4, For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me; my
moisture is turned into the drought of summer. verse. the 5. I acknowledge my sin
unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid: I said I will confess my
transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Psalm.
51. from 1, to the 13. verse. Have mercy upon me O God according to thy loving
kindness, according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out all my
transgressions: verse. the 2. wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse
me from my sin; for I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before
me. verse. the 4. Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy
sight, that thou might be justified when thou speak, and clear when thou
judge: verse. 5. Behold, I am shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother
conceive me. verse. the 7. Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean; wash me,
and I shall be whiter than snow. Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the
bones that thou have broken may rejoice. verse. the 9. Hide thy face from my
sins, and blot out all mine iniquities. verse. 10. Create in me a clean heart, O
God, and renew a right spirit within me. verse. 11. Cast me not out of thy
presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me. verse. 12. Restore to me the joy
of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit. See what misery this sin
of Adultery brought upon King David, that made him cry out in the bitterness of
his soul, and almost brought him to the grave. For his radical moisture was
turned into the drought of the summer. Surely sin brings death, both a natural,
spiritual, and eternal, The wages of sin is death, Romans 7. 23. without true
unfeigned repentance, and turning from it as David did. But how many
perplexities of heart had he, and how many chastisements were inflicted upon
him, driven from his kingdom; he that came out off his own bowels, rose up
against him, the hearts of the people were alienated from him. 2 Samuel 15. from
the 13. to the 18. verse. 23, 30. And so you see his great distress, by reason
of those sins of Murder and Adultery; and in his flight he was so despised,
that Shimei, one of his Subjects cursed him, and threw stones at him, chapt.
16. from the 5 verse. to the 9. O the confusion and distress that sin brings
upon a people, and how foolish are the Sons and Daughters of men, to delight in
that which will utterly destroy them both soul and body; and hate those things
that would preserve them in peace and prosperity; that is, they hate Christ and
his ways and people. Prove. 8. 35, 36. For who so finds me finds life, and
shall obtain favor of the Lord. verse. 36. But he that sins against me,
wrongeth his own soul: all they that hate me love death. Very well may wicked
men be called in the Scriptures mad men and fools, because they destroy
themselves, and esteem of things of no value, more than those things that are
exceeding precious, and to be most highly valued in the superlative degree. So
God complains of the people of Israel, in the 5 of Jer. 8, 9. They were as fed
horses, in the morning every one neighed after his neighbors wife; shall I not
visit for these things says the Lord; shall not my soul be avenged on such a
Nation as this. Several other Scriptures I might produce which declare the
wrath of God against a sinful people, that will not be persuaded to break off
their sins by repentance. O consider how many rules thou breakest by committing
this sin of Adultery and Fornication. 1 The 7. Command. Thou shall not commit
Adultery. 2 the 10 Com. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbor's wife. 3. The rule
of Equity, that Royal rule. Do as thou would be don by. Would you be
contented that another should take your wife and defile her, why then will you
be so injurious to your neighbor, as to covet that which is none of yours,
contrary to the rule of God's holy word. Jer. 5. 9, 10, 11. For the house of
Israel, and the house of Judah, have dealt treacherously against me, says the
Lord; they have belied the Lord, and said it is not he, neither shall evil come
upon us, neither shall we see sword nor famine. verse. 13. And the Prophets shall
become wind, and the word is not in them; thus shall it be don unto them. verse.
14. Wher^fore thus says the Lord of hosts, because ye speak this word, behold
I will make my words in thy mouth fire, and this people wood, and it shall
devour them. verse. 15. Lo I will bring a Nation upon you from far, O house of
Israel, says the Lord: it is a mighty Nation, it is an ancient Nation, whose
language thou know not, neither understandest what they say. verse. 21. Hear
now this O foolish people, and without understanding, which have eyes and see
not, ears and hear not, verse. 22. Fear ye not me? says the Lord, will ye not
tremble at my presence? which have placed the sand for the bound of the Sea by
a perpetual decree that it cannot pass, though the waves thereof toss
themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet cannot they pass
over it; and so to the end of the chap. verse. 28. They are waxen fat, they
shine, yea they overpass the deeds of the wicked, they judge not the cause of
the fatherless, yet they prosper, and the right of the needy do they not judge.
verse. 29. Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord? shall not my soul
be avenged of such a Nation as this? verse. 30. A wonderful and horrible thing
is committed in the land. verse. 31. The Prophets prophecy falsely and the
Priests bear rule by their means, and my people love to have it so, and what
will ye do in the end thereof. And thus you see how sin provokes the Lord to
destroy Nations, Families and Persons. Thou that art so injurious to take away
thy Neighbors wife, God does many times take away all that such wicked persons
have, and they are brought to a morsel of bread. For a whore is a deep ditch,
and a strange woman a narrow pit. Prove. 23. 27, 28, 29. She lies also in wait
as for a prey, and increases transgressors among men. Who has woe? who has
sorrow? who has contention? who has babbling? who has wounds without cause?
who has redness of eyes? Surely Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge,
even in this life without true repentance, and assuredly in the life to come.
It is very sad to see the impudence of the femal sex. How many of them have
harlots behavior: yea Professors, and those that would be thought sober
women; yet go naked-neck'd from shoulder to shoulder, and their breasts seen
which parts should be covered in modesty, and that because it is the fashion,
and their Relations go so: and this is their foolish excuse, that when they
come among them, they shall be contemned by them: no matter, for it is but by
the wantons and Hectours of this age. Drunkards count such as will be drunk
with them, honest men and Good-fellows; but they are never the honester for
their esteem. Away then with the nakedness and cover your breasts and shoulders
for shame, or else what ever show of modesty thou make, it will be esteemed
by sober persons vain and foolish. And seeing thou give way to uncover thy
nakedness, and so allurest wicked men, thou may be overcome at last by lewd
men to commit the sin of uncleanness. O avoid all appearance of evil; for
Christians are to be adorned with modesty, and to use sobriety in all their
actions. O poor vile sinner, thou that excusest thy self, by being a great man
or woman in this world, and therefore thou must not be controuled: what art
thou, but a lump of clay, a heap of sinful dust and ashes? That is but a
greater aggravation of thy condemnation, for the more mercies thou have
received from God, the greater is thy Punishment; if thou abusest these good
mercies of God, as riches, honor, that thou receivest from his bountiful hand
more than others: and because it is more exemplary and prevalent to draw
others, therefore it is accompanied with more aggravations: in regard thou
receivest more kindness from God than others, and so take God's weapons to
fight against him. How can thou escape great condemnation, that sinnest
against so much light and so much love. Oh foolish and unwise; do ye thus
provoke the Lord to bring judgment and desolation, until he has consumed you
from of the earth. Job, 24. 15. The eye also of the Adulterer watches for the
twilight, saying no eye shall see me, and disguiseth his face, 16, 17, 18,
verse. Jer. 10. 11. For the land is full of Adulterers, for because of Swearing
the land mourns; the pleasant places of the wilderness are dried up, their
course is evil, and their force is not right, Mala. 3. 5. And I will come near
to you in judgment, and will be a swift witness against the Sorcerers, and
against the Adulterers, and against false Swearers, and against those that
oppress the hireling of his wages, the widow, and the fatherless, and turn
aside the stranger from his right, and fear not me, says the Lord of hosts.
And thus you may see, how God does threaten judgments against these sins, and
against all sin: likewise see what the Apostle says in 1, Corin. 6. 9, 10. Be
not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor
Effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind; nor Thieves, nor Covetous,
nor Drunkards, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. So Heb. 13.
4. Marriage is honorable in all; but Whoremongers and Adulterers God will
judge. Rev. 22. 15. For without are Dogs, Sorcerers, and Whoremongers,
Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie. I beseech you
consider seriously, what God would have you, in these Scriptures; for they are
sharply reprehending your sins. You that are guilty of these abominations take
heed; for it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the great and
dreadful God, who will be a consuming fire to all rebellious sinners. Psa. 50.
22. Now consider this ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there
be none to deliver. Oh let thy heart tremble within thee, when thou considerest
that although thou art in thy secret chamber with thy minion, yet God sees all
thy wickedness, and will judge thee at the last and great day of account, when
all the Adulterers and Adultresses shall desire the rocks and mountains to fall
upon them to hide them from him that sits upon the throne, and shall not have
so much favor, but shall be severely judged and condemned, and cast into the
lake that burns with fire and brimstone, in those endless, easl^ss and
remediless torments.

7. Land destroying Sin is murder, this is a great crying Sin, that cries aloud
for vengeance, upon the Persons that are guilty, and those that pass by willful
Murder and upon all those Juries, that find many Murders but manslaughter,
surely this Sin of murder is frequently committed in this great City and
Suburbs, and in all other parts of the Nation; what a horrible shame is it,
that the City of London and Westminster, that should be the best governed,
being the chief place of the Nation, that there should be so many outrages
committed, where the Gospel is so powerfully preached, beyond all the places in
the World; that which God has so much prohibited in his holy word, Exodus 20.
13. Thou shall not kill. Genesis 1. 9, 6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall
his blood be shed, for in the Im^ge of God made he man; which is given as a
reason of this prohibition, and this is confirmed by the Lord Jesus. Matthew. 5.
21, 22. Chapt. 19. 18. thou shall do no Murder, thou shall not Steal, thou
shall not bear false Witness, etc. See Number. 35. 16. And if he smite him with an
Instrument of Iron so that he die, he is a Murderer, and the Murderer shall
surely be put to death. verse. the 31. Moreover ye shall take no satisfaction
for the Life of the Murderer which is guilty of Death, but he shall surely be
put to Death. verse. the 30. whosoever kills any person shall be put to Death by
the mouth of his Witnesses. Oh the corruption of this wicked age, that if a man
be a great man, or have great Friends, or a plentiful Purse, how is justice apt
to be perverted; and it may be the Prosecutor a poor man, how shall he be
brow-beaten, and not suffered to speak, if the Murderer be in his drink, or be
distempered, there will be some excuse or other made for him; Oh do not think
these poor sorry excuses will serve you, be not deceived God is not mocked,
that which you sow, you shall reap to your great sorrow, and those that are
instrumental in saving Murderers, from the highest to the lowest you shall
smart for it, when a Gentleman has committed or Murdered a Man, he flies to
France, and then his Friends procure a Pardon, or else the Judge and Jury must
be spoken unto, and I wish they do not find plain Murder is Manslaughter,
especially if he be a Cousin, or related to a great man, what shifts will there
be to save this Murderers Life, and it may be instead of repenting, this
Hector goes and kills another man, judge you who kill*d that man, whosoever it
be that saves a Murderer unjustly, I must needs be plain with you, and declare
unto you that the wrath of God is against all unrighteousness: and thou Sinner,
by sinning against God, treasurest up wrath against the day of wrath and
revelation of the righteous Judgments of God, who will reward every man
according to his works. Romans 2. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

8 Sin, is Drunkenness and excess, this is a beastly swinish sin; what to take
those creatures which God has graciously given to satisfy and refresh Nature,
thou by taking excess do express and destroy Nature. Oh how foolish and
unwise are poor desperate sinners, that by your practice, speak forth as if God
had made you to drink and swill and take your fill, till you disgorge your
selves, and be an anusance and disturbance to all sober persons near you, nay
sure God has made you for more noble ends, viz. to glorify him, and to know
your interest in him, and to do good in your Generation; what benefit is a
Drunkard to Church or Commonwealth, nay he is very injurious to himself, his
Family and all other sober good men, that cannot endure to see God dishonored
and his good mercies abused, Oh what great shame is this, that where the Gospel
is so powerfully preached, and so much light, that such an abominable vice as
this should reign and be so frequently practiced, that is against the very
light of Nature. I might be long upon this subject to show you the sad effects
of this beastly Sin of drunkenness, what a big bellyed Sin is this, which is an
occasion sometimes of Murder and uncleanness, when men are deprived of their
reason, then they are mad, and sit for any mischief to themselves and others,
some men when they are drunk have broken their Necks off their Horses, fallen
down off some steep place, not being able to stand, and so destroyed
themselves, others committing uncleanness, Ravishing their Neighbors Wives and
their Daughters, many sad effects does this sin of drunkenness produce; it fits
men to do all manner of evil, and unfits them for any thing that is good,
either for Soul or body. Now I shall show you the Scriptures wherein the great
God prohibits this beastly Sin, to see that if by any means you may be
prevailed upon to leave this silthy dirty abominable Sin. See Es. 5. 11. Woe to
them that rise up early in the morning and follow strongdrink, that continue
till night, till wine inflame them. verse. 22. Woe to them that are mighty to
drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong-drink. verse. 23, 24. Chap. 56.
12. Mica. 2. 11. Nah. 1. 10. For while they be folded together as thorns, and
while they are drunken as drunkards they shall be devoured as stubble fully
dry. Joel. the 5. Awake ye Drunkards, weep and howl all ye Drinkers of Wine. 1.
Cor. 6. 9, 10. Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolators, nor
Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor
Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Revellers, nor extortioners shall inherit the
Kingdom of God. Es. 19, 14, Luke 21. 34, 35. Romans 13. 13. Let us work honestly
as in the Day, not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and
Wantonness, not in strife and Envy. There are several other places I might
mention, but these may suffice; if God would be pleased to set any one of them
with power upon the heart of a Poor Sinner.

Now I shall speak a few words to all those that in a great measure are the
causes of the growth and increase of these evils, and they are Magistrates,
Ministers, and Parents, and Masters of Families. There are some Magistrates
that are so far from punishing these Enormities, that they are Presidents and
ringleaders of all these vices, as Swearing, Whoring, and Drunkenness, nay they
are like those spoken of by the Prophet. Jer. 3. 12. Oh my Prophet, they that
lead thee cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy Paths. verse. 13, 14.
Surely they are most fit to be Magistrates according to the Scripture, that
fear God and hate Covetousness, and every evil way. Oh says the meaner sort
that would have Figleaves to cover their Nakedness, use to such a Magistrate or
Minister, do such things, and they are learned, if it were so sinful they would
not do it; such kind of Magistrates and Ministers cause them to Sin, extenuate
and are great examples to encourage to evil. Oh what a sad thing is this, that
men are not content only to go to Hell themselves but draw others after them,
therefore their condemnation will be the greatest at the great day of account.

2, Ministers, those that call themselves Ministers of the Gospel, Oh what
wickedness are they arrived unto, that some of them reel in the Streets; and
make nothing of swearing, cursing and uncleanness; do not you think that Gods
Soul will be avenged on such as you are, who are like Jereboams Priests, the
vilest of the People, you that pretend to be leaders of others, should be such
bad examples as to lead the people toward Hell, what will your account be when
both Ministers and Magistrates shall appear before the judgment seat of Jesus
Christ, what can you say here, am I one of those have lead to Hell, surely your
condemnation will be very great, that will not only answer for your own Sins,
but for others, whom you have by evil examples drawn to Sin; how can you bear
the weight of this great burden of Judgments that will certainly fall upon
you, if you repent not and turn to the Lord speedily? here I might be very
large, but I shall forbear at this time, hoping that some may be awakened,
which is the main end of this small discourse.

3. To Parents and Masters of Families, who are very bad presidents to their
Wives, Children and Servants, who are so far from instructing them in the ways
of God, according to gods injunction in the holy Scriptures, that they are the
Ringleaders of them to all manner of evil, Oh sinful Parents and Masters, that
should with all your might instruct your Children and Servants, how will you,
how can you escape great condemnation, when you shall be called to a strict
account for leading your Children and Servants to great destruction, how sad
will it be with you, when your Children and Servants shall curse you, and say
we might have escaped these flames had our Masters and Parents instr^cted us,
and had they not been wicked examples to us, but now woe and alas we are
tormented with the Devil and his Angels in everlasting burnings.

Now let me give you a few inst^uctions to poor Sin-sinking England, I beseech
you hearken to the counsels of Gods holy word when he threatened destruction
upon the People of Isarel. Joel. 2. from the 1. to the 22. verse. Blow the
Trumpet in Zion and sound an alarm in my holy mountain, let all the
Inhabitants tremble, for the day of the Lord comes, for it is nigh at hand, a
day of darkness and gloomines^, a day of clouds and thick darkness, as the
Morning spread upon the mountains, a great People and a strong, there has not
been ever the like, neither shall be any more after i^, even to the years of
many Generations. verse. the 3. A fire devoureth before them, and behind them a
flame burns, the land is as the Garden of Eden, before them and behind them a
d^solate Wilderness, yea nothing shall escape them, and so forward to the 12.
verse. but consider in the 12, 13, 14. verses, you have that blessed counsel
given to them as the only means to escape this dreadful judgment, where you
have very much of the bowels of Gods compassion expressed like a tender hearted
Father, unwilling to strike, if it may be avoided. Therefore also now says the
Lord, turn ye even unto me with all your heart, and with Fasting, and with
Weeping, and with Mourning. verse. the 13. And rent your hearts and not your
Garments, and turn unto the Lord your God, for he is gracious, merciful, slow
to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil. verse. the 14.
Who knows if he will return and leave a blessing behind him, even a meat
offering and a drink offering to the Lord your God; and so you may read unto
the end of the Chapter. These latter verses have in them contained the forcible
arguments to press on and enforce the exhortation, surely there is no other way
for England to escape total ruin, but by following the blessed advice, and very
wholesome counsel of repenting and turning to the Lord with your whole hearts,
and who is able to give us counsel that may do us good but God, whose counsel
shall we adhere unto that may be effectual but his, but if we obstinately
persist in the rebellions against the great God of heaven, he will surely
plague us seven times more for our Sins, and so may root us out from being a
people, now the Cup of trembleing by our neighbor nations, who knows but we
may drink the dregs and bottoms of the Cup that such a stubborn, impudent,
brazen-faced, rebellious People, as have sined against so much light and love;
we know that ingratitude is counted one of the worst evils, as your Latin
Phrase is, Si dixeris ingratum est omne malum.

There is no true Christian desires the evil day, but does pray earnestly to
your Lord for the aversion of his judgments from the Nation, and however they
are lightly esteemed amongst men, and called Phanaticks, yet they are the
pillars of the Earth and the best friends to the King and Kingdom, allthough
they are slighted and persecuted for cleaving close to Gods word, which they
dare not, nor will not swarve from what ever they suffer, and knowing the
terror of the Lord, we do persuade men to turn from their evil ways to the
Lord, that so they may not bring ruin upon themselves and others, surely it
will be a very terrible day upon all those that persecute the people of God,
and I pray you what do you persecute them for, I conceive you do not understand
what is written against those that sit at ease, and eat the fat, and drink the
sweet, and think they do well if they can procure the Ministers of the gospel
and Christians to be put in Prison. But all you that are of that spirit to
worry the precious harmless Lambs of Jesus Christ, I would not be in your cases
for ten thousand worlds; mark what our Lord Jesus says to such; Mat. 18. 6.
But whosoever shall offend one of these little ones, which believe in me; it were
better a mil-stone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the
depth of the sea. Mar. 9. 42. Luke 17. 1, 2.

And thus I conclude with my earnest prayers to the God of all grace and mercy,
beseeching him rather to glorify his mercy in the reformation of this poor
sinful Island, then his Justice in the confusion and desolation of it, now as I
was concluding, I was looking for that place of Scripture In Jer. Where the
Prophet says Lord thou know I do not desire the evilday. These Scriptures
were presented unto my view, Jer. 18. from the 9. to the 12. verse. And at what
instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to build
and to plant it, verse. the 10. If it do evil in my sight, and obey not my
voice, then will I repent of the good wherewith I said I will benefit them.
verse. the 11. Now therefore go to speak to the men of Judah, and to the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, thus says the Lord, behold I frame evil
against you, and devise a device against you; return ye every one from the evil
of his way, and make your ways and your doings good. Chap. 13. 18, 19. Say unto
the King and to the Queen humble your selves, sit down, for your Principalities
shall come down, even the Crown of your glory. verse. the 19. to the end of that
Chapter. The Citys of the South shall be shut up, Judah shall be carried away
Captive, all of it shall be wholly carried away Captive. Thus you see the
denuntiation of Gods threatenings of terrible judgments against a rebellious
People that walks in a way that is not good after their own thoughts. Oh
therefore I humbly beseech you hear and fear, and turn to the Lord with your
whole hearts.

9. Sin, That is a Land destroying Sin, is Sabbath breaking, which is first a
breach of the 4th Commandment. Exodus 20. 8. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it
holy. This is the law that was given in thundering and lightning. Exodus 19. 16.
And it came to pass the third day in the Morning that there were thundrings and
lightnings, so that all the people that were in the Camp trembled. One reason
may be why the Law was given in that terrible manner, that the people might
fear to break that righteous Law, for that God which showed himself terrible in
the giving of the Law, can also show himself as terrible on them that violate
this righteous Law, which appoints a time for his worship, in pouring down his
wrath and indignation upon Nations that break this righteous and just Law, so
that if there be a God to worship, (as doubtless there is) and certainly there
is a time that he has set apart; which ought to be kept holy, then woe be to
all those that dare adventure to prophain his holy day, as in this well
governed City and in the Suburbs thereof, is Coster-Mongers and others selling
their fruit on that holy day, and other things on that day: Friends it is not
altogether so much the matter done which makes the breach of the Sabbath, as
any thing done which ought not to be done, picking of sticks was but a small
business, and yet see how God was displeased, see that he destroyed those that
did it, nothing but works of necessity and mercy. Nehem. 10. 13. And if the
people of the Land bring ware or any victuals on the Sabbath day we will not
buy it, we will not buy of them on the Sabbath, or on the holy day. Chapt. 13.
from the 15. to the 23. Where good Nehemiah testified against them that sold
victuals. verse. the 17. Then I contended with the Nobles, and said to them,
what evil thing is this that ye do and profane the Sabbath day. verse. the 18.
Did not your Fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this evil upon us,
upon this City, yet ye bring more wrath by profaning the Sabbath. See the Zeal
of a good Governor, he contended against evil, and encouraged them in that
which was good, which is the duty of all Magistrates; but e contra with us in
England, there be some Magistrates that discourage virtue and encourage vice,
what a sad thing is this, those Magistrates that do so are not appointed nor
set up. Exodus 16. 23. Chapt. 31. 15. Six days may work be done, but in the 7th
is the Sabbath of rest, holy to the Lord, whosoever does any work on the
Sabbath, he shall surely be put to death. so in the 14. verse. Chapt. 35. 2.
Levit. 23. 2. Number. 15. 32, 34. verse. the 35. And the Lord said unto Moses, the
man shall be surely put to death, and the Congregation shall stone him with
stones. and verse. 36. And they stoned him with stones and he dyed, as the Lord
commanded Moses. Deuteronomy. 5. 12, 13, 14. John 20. 19. Es. 56. 2. 6. And thus you
see the Scriptures Enjoining us to keep the Lords day, and the denuntiation of
threatenings against those that break this holy day; although the day be altered
from all the Scriptures, you may safely conclude that there is a time set a
part by God for his worship and service, and if the least breach were punished
with death, what shall be the violation of the whole day, and that is much by
traveling on the Lords day, which is the Market day of your Souls, and do you
think a wise man will be diverted from his Markets by trifling gewgaws,
especially when his livelihood lies upon it; another way how Persons break the
Sabbath is by spending their time in needless adornments of the Body, and after
Sermon either to stand gazeing at their Doors, or talking impertinently
contrary to the work of the day, of worldly things, of vain and lascivious
things, and how do thou rest when thou art employed with thy thoughts and
tongue, though thou art not with thy hands, which is as it were one and the
same, for when the heart is gone from the service of God all your life is gone,
and there is little lest but a dead Carkase, which is no Keeping of a day to
the Lord. Another way how Persons break the Lords day, that after several
Gentry and others have carelessly heard the word, then they must recreate
themselves by walking in Gray's Inn walks or in the Fields, with vain and
unsavory discourses, and so Satan steals the word they have heard, and they
are never the better, but as ready to go to their Lusts all the Week after, and
so drive a sad trade of Sin which brings great judgments, Temporal, Spiritual
and Eternal. I might urge many Scriptures both in the Old and New Testament,
and several Arguments might b^ produced, but famous Mr. Dod, that worthy
servant of Jesus Christ, and others have done so learnedly, that it is but the
Widows mite that I can cast into the treasury by way of confirmation of what
has been formerly spoken, I shall end this particular, with two things, first
to show you briefly how the Sabbath ought to be kept, and secondly speak
something of the alteration of the day.

1. How a Sabbath day of rest ought to be kept holy, remember to keep holy the
Sabbath day, it is set a part from all servicable works, but works of mercy and
necessity may be done; thou art to prepare to keep the Lords day. Secondly
begin in the Morning withprivate Prayers and meditation, pray for the presence
of God in all his ordinances, praise God for the great work of redemption, and
for the resurrection, for in that day Jesus Christ rose from the dead, and now
sits at the right hand of that glorious place on high, ever living to make
interce^sion for all that believe. Secondly bless God for his holy word, and
beg that it may be to thee as it was to David sweeter then honey and the
honycomb, and that it may be so blessed, that it may do thy Soul good, and that
the instructions of the word may teach thee, and the reprehentions of the Word
to weaken Sin in thee, and that the exhortations may persuade thee, and the
consolations comfort thee, and when thou have been hearing the word thou must
examine what word it was that met with thy Soul, and make much of that, and if
thou would spend thy time in hearing and praying and praising their would be
no spare time for walking up and down unnessarily. Now to you that are Masters
of Families, it is your duty to pray privately to your Families every day, but
begin with prayer on the Lords day in the Morning, and then pray with thy
Family, and so bring thy Children and Servants to the hearing of the word
powerfully preached, and after repeat, and so to Prayer, and thus spend the
Lords day in holy exercises, then thou will undoubtedly be more sit to serve
God in thy particular calling in the Week, and then thou may expect a
blessing from heaven upon all thou have, for it is the blessing of God makes
rich, and adds no sorrow with it.

But those Scriptures that you have brought are for keeping of the seventh day.
It is true, the seventh day was the Jewish Sabbath, but we find a change of the
day after the resurrection, and the gospel ordinances were administered on that
day, it was that day in which Jesus Christ rose from the dead, we see what
Christ says Math. the 12. from the 1. to the 9. A^^^. 20. 7. Rev. 1. 10. It is
said that some greek Coppies do render it thus, John was ravished in the Spirit
on the Lords, day being the first day of the Week, but I am not now to
intermeddle with that controversy, but am fully satisfied in my own mind, that
there is sufficient warrant in the New Testament for keeping the first day of
the Week or Lords day, in which we are to celebrate the praises of God in the
great work of redemption.

10. Sin, Which is a Land destroying Sin, is Covetousness and oppression, first
covetousness is a greedy desire of that which is none of their own, secondly
covetousness is against the righteous Law of God. In Exodus 20. 17. Hebrews. 13.
and the 5. Let your conversations be without covetousness, and be content with
those things that you have. 3. Col. 5. 6. Mortify therefore your members which
are upon the Earth; Fornication, Uncleanness, Inordinate affection, evil
concupiscence and covetousness which is Idolatry, for which things sake the
Wrath of God comes on the Children of disobedience. See Es. 57. 17. For the
Iniquity of his covetousness I was wrath and smote him. Several Scriptures that
reprehend this evil, and Arguments might be urged, but in regard many worthy
Servants of Jesus Christ have demonstrated this evil of Covetousness at large,
I shall as it were but briefly touch upon it, and speak something to that which
is obvious to the practice of the men of our age, it very much reprehends some
trades men and Userers, that when men that have got into their debt, they feed
them with money, and so on a sudden call for their Debt, and if the Debtor has
not money to pay, then they must have a Mortgage upon his Land, and if it be not
redeemed in such a fixed time, then they cease upon the Land for half the worth
of it, and so they ruin them and their Posterity, although it is very true that
every man ought to pay his Debt, but the Creditor must not raise it in a
Sinister way, Preying upon others necessities, and taking advantage upon men
when they are in a Low condition but it is honest, to give every one the full
value of his Land, as any other Purchaser would do, but they have clandestine
ways to eat up men's Estates, before they are aware, and so forcibly throw them
out; this is a horrible shame, and a great fruit of covetousness, and that
which the Creditor gets by such ways will consume as Butter in the Sun, for God
will blast, and not bless, what is contrary to his will.

2ly. I shall briefly show you how covetousness may be said to be Idolatry; f^r
whatever thou love or trustest in more than God, that undoubtedly thou make
thy God. For consider if a man have lost a beast or any outward thing, how
exceedingly will he complain and bewail his loss, but when thou losest the
presence of God and the enjoyment of communion with himself thou make no
matter of that which is the chiefest good, and surely this is a clear
demonstration that thou love these creatures more than the Creator blessed
for ever.

2ly. That which thou art so much cast down in the absence, and so exceedingly
lifted up and rejoicing in the presence of, and in the enjoyment, must needs be
thy chiefest delight, and so closest with thy Idol, instead of the true God,
and in this thou art certainly to blame.

2ly. Oppression, when men oppress the poor and needy. Psa. 12. 5. For the
oppression of the Poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise says
the Lord, I will set him in safety from him that puffs at him. The rich
oppress the poor, as Masters oppress their servants and prentices, and
Magistrates oppress their subjects. Then Masters oppress their servants, when
they do not that which is equal to them, they break the Royal Rule, do as you
would bedon by. For Masters to detein their servants wages, and not to give
that which is necessary and convenient for them, this is a great oppression.
See Job 35. 9. By reason of the multitude of oppressions, they make the
oppressed to cry, they cry out by reason of the arm of the Mighty. Eccles. 4.
1. So I returned and considered all the oppressions that are done under the
Sun, and behold the tears of such as are oppressed, and they had no comforter,
and on the side of their oppressors there was power; but they had no comforter.
Is. 33. 15. So when Governors of Nations lay any heavy burdens upon the people
contrary to the rule of Gods word, and contrary to the Law of the Nation, this
is great oppression as Pharaoh made the people make Brick without straw. See
Exodus 5. from the 7. to the 19. verse. 15. Then the Officers of the Children of
Israel cried unto Pharaoh, saying, wherefore dealest thou thus with thy
servants, there is no straw given unto thy servants, and they say unto us make
Brick, and behold thy servants are beaten, but the fault is in thy own people,
verse. 17. But he said ye are idle, ye are idle, therefore ye say let us go and
do sacrifice unto the Lord. ver. 18. Go therefore now and work, for there
shall no straw be given you, yet shall ye deliver the tale of bricks. Job 15.
20. With many other places I might allege. So that you may see, how oppressors
have been formerly, and so are to this day, and how the holy Scriptures condemn
that sin, and it brings judgments upon the guilty, on them and their posterity.
Therefore repent of this great, unlovely, uncharitable, self-destroying sin;
for else it will bring the swift judgments of God upon all those that practice
this abominable evil, both upon them and their posterity. See Job 57. from the
13, to the end of the chapt. This is the portion of wicked men with God, and
the heritage which they shall receive of the Almighty; if his children be
multiplied, it is for the sword, and his offspring shall not be satisfied.
verse. the 15. Those that remain of him shall be buried in death, and his
widows shall not weep. verse. the 20. Terrors take hold on him as waters, a
tempest steals him away in the night. 21. The East Wind carries him away and
he departs, and as a storm hurleth him out of his place. 22. For God shall
cast upon him and not spare, he would fain flee out of his hands. 23. Men shall
clap their hands at him. and shall hiss him out of his place. And this is the
portion of wicked men from the Lord. I beseech you, let every one examine
himself whether he be not guilty of this sin. Prove. 3. 31. and 28. 16. Jer. 21.
12. and 22. 3. And see the danger of and avoid it, and turn to the Lord from
every evil way, that so iniquity may not be your ruin.

11. Sin, is the sin of Professors that profess Religion, and do not practice
what you profess. Surely when we make a scrutiny into our own hearts, and
behold the practice of other Professors; it is evidently to be demonstrated,
that there is so little love to God and Jesus Christ, that have deserved all
our love; that we may be ashamed. See what little love there is to Saints, that
bear the Image of Christ. Surely we are fallen into the latter days that our
Lord Jesus speaks of, Math. 24. 12. And because iniquity abounds, the love of
many shall wax cold. The great reason that Christ gives why the love of many
waxes cold, is because iniquity abounds. Therefore now it must needs wax cold,
because there was never greater abounding of iniquity in all sorts as at this
day. There is no man that loves God aright, but he must love his Image where
ever he see it. 1 John 2. from the 9. to the 12. Loving our Brethren is made a
certain character of a Christian. 1 John 3. 10. and 4. 20. that Epistle is
spent in treating of Faith and Love. And therefore I desire all Christians
seriously to read and weigh those five chapt. of 1. of John, it does very much
reprehend our defects in this thing especially; and exhorts all to believe. Oh
examine thy heart, and be earnest at the throne of grace, that God would make
thee sincere, that thou may avoid the evils of the day thou live in, and do
the duties of the day, which is especially (1) Love to God and Jesus Christ,
(2) Love to the Saints; (3) Watchfulness and keeping thy garments clean, lest
thou be found naked, I shall end with this Scripture which is our Lord Jesus's
reprehension of and counsel to, the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2. 4, 5.
Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first
love: Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy
first works; or else I will come against thee and remove thy Candlestick out of
his place, except thou repent. Oh let us every one consider what is said, and
the Lord give a right understanding in all things. Oh the lukewarmness and want
of love to God, and Christ, and Saints. Oh the carnality of Professors: a
Laodicean frame, is the worst frame in professors. Mark what the spirit of God
says in the 3 of the Re. 3. And unto the Angel of the Church of Laodicea write
these things says the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the Beginning of
the Creation of God. verse. 15. I know thy works that thou art neither hot nor
cold, so because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee
out of my mouth. Are not your expectations very great, the accomplishing of all
those faithful promises which God has made in these latter days; and therefore
Christians should be diligent, and be up and doing, and be servent in the
spirit, serving the Lord with much vigilance and sincerity; preparing for the
day of the Lord which draws nigh: And blessed are all those servants, whom
their Lord shall find doing their Masters will; he will make them sit down and
he will serve them. Take heed of spiritual pride for that poisons Angelical
perfections. Take heed of a carnal, formal frame of spirit, for that will make
thee unfit for doing or suffering. Oh awake thou that sleep, and rise from
the dead and Christ shall give thee life: for thou have a great work to do and
a very little time to do it; and therefore up and be doing, and the Lord be
with thee. Labor to exercise faith and patience, faith in God, and love to
God, and very much longing and ardent desire after God.

2. A patient waiting for God, For he that shall come, will come and will not
tarry, but the Just shall live by faith; but if any man draw back, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10. 35, 36, 37, 38. Now with my earnest
prayers at the Throne of grace for you, desiring the God of all grace and rich
mercy, to preserve us blameless, and to keep us by his mighty power through
faith to salvation: that we overcome to the death, and so enjoy a Crown of
life; which the righteous Lord will assuredly give to all those that love and
long for his appearance.

FINIS.

