THE True Light Shining in Darkness, And dispelling the Mists of Error arising
from the Darkness of Man's heart, etc. promoted by the Prince of Darkness
against the Truth of God; in the matter of our JUSTIFICATION: Showing, That by
the deeds of the Law, or Man's own Righteous^ess, no flesh can, or shall be
justified in the sight of God.

The First Part.

By THO. TAILOR, the meanest and unworthiest of the Servants and Ministers of
Jesus Christ; and now Pastor to a small Congregational Church in Cambridge.

Romans 1.21, 22. Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God,
neither were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish
heart was darkened; professing themselves to be wise, they became fools.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.
1693.

TO THE READER
WHoever thou art, that Read this small Treatise upon so great a Subject as
the matter of man's Justification, before God know that thou art concerned to
consider seriously and weigh well in thy mind what is here written, without
prejudice; forasmuch as thou art the man, to whom this word is sent, either for
the informing and undeceiving thee in this matter, if thou be'st deceived. Or
for the confirming thee in the truth and strengthening thy Faith in Christ. If
thou be'st already by the teachings of Gods holy Spirit, one that know him
that is true, and ar^ in him that is true even in his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John
5.20. And we know the Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding
that we may know him that is true: and we are in him that is true, even in his
Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal Life. And it is immediately
added: Little Children, keep your selves from Idols. And though there be many
Idols in man's heart; yet this is one of the greatest, and most dangerous, and
hardest to be departed from; a man's own righteousness, if it be, but as it
were, by the works of the Law: And as we know that an Idol is nothing but the
Image and Likeness of that which it is not: So verily; this, (man's own
righteousness) is nothing; a mere Imagination of Man's own heart exalted against
God: which is not, nor cannot be in Gods sight, and so it should be in thine:
Abominable to thee, and abhorred by thee, as it is to him, Job 15.14, 15, 16.
What is man, that he should be clean? And he which is born of a Woman, that he
should be righteous? Behold, he putteh no trust in his Saints; yea, the heavens
are not clean in his sight. How much more abominable and filthy is man, which
drinks iniquity like water? And 9.30, 31. If I wash my self with Snow-water,
and make my hands never so clean; yet shall thou plunge me in the ditch, and
mine own clothes shall abhor me. And Luke 16.15. And he said unto them, Ye are
they which justify your selves before men; but God knows your hearts for
that which is highly esteemed amongs^ men, is abomination in the sight of God
Read therefore this small Treatise, pray t^ God that thou may read it
without preju^dice. To help thee so to do, as much as in me lies, I declare
unto thee three things, namely,

1. That I am not engaged in Spirit, worldly interest or design with any party
now engaged, disputing and contending one against other about these matters;
further than for the truths sake, and so far as the truth of the Gospel
obliges me to defend and bear witness to the same, as it may be found to lodge
and dwell on the one side or on the other, in any part of it: And perhaps it
will sufficiently appear that I am not of that party, that may boast much of
this Doctrine which is most true in it self: and yet did not give proof and
assurance of hope, that themselves are sincere and sound in the Faith of
Christ. The Doctrine may be true in its self, and yet their Faith in the
receiving of it be but a dead and a vain Faith; which will never save them, as
James 2.17, 18, 19, 20. Even so Faith, if it has not Works, is dead being
alone, Yea, a man may say, Thou have Faith, and I have Works; show me thy Faith
without thy Works, and I will show thee my Faith by my works. Thou believe
that there is one God; thou do well: The Devils also believe, and tremble.
But will thou know, O vain man that Faith without Works is dead? And ungodly
men still; though boasting of the Grace of God in works, yet denying indeed the
only Lord God and our Savior Jesus Christ; by turning the grace of God into
lasciviousness, Jud. 4. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were
before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of
our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ.

And too many such Professors we have now, (who in Spirit and Practice, Course
of Life and Conversation practically deny, what they verbally profess) as they
had there, Tit. 1.15, 16. Unto the pure all things are pure: But unto them that
are defiled, and unbelieving, is nothing pure; but even their mind and
Consci^nce is defiled. They profess that they know God; but in works they deny
him, being abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. But
let not this offend thee, for truth is truth still, and will be for ever,
Hebrews 13.7, 8. Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken
unto you the word of God: whose Faith follow, considering the end of their
conversation. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Phil.
3.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Brethren be followers together of me, and mark them which
walk so, as ye have us for an ensample. (For many walk, of whom I have told you
often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the Cross of
Christ; whose end is destruction, whose God is their Belly: And whose glory is
their shame, who mind earthly things) For our conversation is in Heaven, from
whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall change
our vile body, that it may be fashon'd like unto his glorious body, according
to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself.

2. Here thou will find no carnal weapons, as Oratory, enticing words of man's
wisdom, excellency of speech; fiery, if not perverse, disputings of men of
corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth. No reasonings after the Flesh and
the Wisdom of the World, which comes to naught: But evidence and demonstration
of the Spirit, with power, 2 Cor. 10.3, 4, 5. For though we walk in the Flesh,
((i. e. in the body;) we do not war after the Flesh: i. e. after the carnal
mind, which is corrupt and weak.) For the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds) Casting
down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ. 1 Cor. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And I, brethren, when I came to you, came
not with excellency of speech, or of wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony
of God. For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ,
and him crucified. And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much
trembling. And my speech, and my preaching was not with enticing words of men's
wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power: That your Faith should
not stand in the wisdom of men but in the power of God. Howbeit we speak wisdom
among them that are perfect: yet not the wisdom of this World, or of the
Princes of this World that come to naught.

3. That the great truth herein declared, opened, demonstrated and applied; is
not mine, nor of mine own; but is the truth of God in Christ Jesus, ministered
by the Spirit to the holy Prophets of old, and witnessed by them, who spoke not
of themselves, but as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. For the
Prophecy came not in the old time by the will of man: but Holy men of God spoke
as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. And declared in the fullness of time by
the Son of God, who came from the bosom of the Father, John 1.18. No man has
seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the
Father, he has declared him. And John 3.31, 32, 33, 34. He that comes from
above, is above all: he that is of the earth, is earthly, and speaks of the
Earth: he that comes from Heaven is above all. And what he has seen and
heard, that he testifies; and no man receives his testimony. He that has
received his testimony, has set to his seal, that God is true. For he whom God
has sent speaks the words of God: For God gives not the Spirit by measure
unto him. And also witnessed by the Holy Apostles chosen of God to that end.
Upon which testimony of the holy Prophets and Apostles as the Foundation,
Christ himself being the Chief or Head-corner stone, the whole Church of God is
built, Ephesians. 2.20. And are built upon the foudation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself be-the chief Cornerstone; so that he that
refuses, despises and rejects this truth in the ministry of us poor, weak,
earthen vessels, despises not man but God, as Luke 10.16. He that hears you,
hears me: and he that despises you, despises me: and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me. And 1 These. 4.8. He therefore that despises,
despises not man, but God who has also given unto us his holy Spirit.
Therefore thou art obliged to pay all honor, reverence, obedience and
subjection to truth, because it is Gods truth and not man's; and to receive the
word, because it is Gods word and not ours; And to receive the Word as it is
indeed the word of God and not as the word of Man, is the mystery of effectual
or saving Faith: Whereby the Faith of Gods Elect is distinguished from the
common and temporary Faith of Hypocrites and temporary professors, 1 These.
2.13. For this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because when ye
received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word
of men, but (as it is in truth) the word of God, which effectually works also
in you that believe. Therefore whatever infirmities thou see or may see in
us, and whatever temptations in our fles^, weaknesses, wants, necessities,
emptine^s, nothingness; let not the the word of God be refused or despised: But
receive it as if Christ himself was present on Earth in human shape to speak to
thee, with his own mouth, Gal. 4.13, 14, 15, 16. Ye know how through infirmity
of the flesh I preached the gospel unto you at the first. And my temptation
which was in my Flesh ye despised not, nor rejected; but received me as an
Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus. Where is then the blessedness you speak of?
for I bear you record, that if it had been possible, ye would have plucked out
your own eyes, and have given them to me. Am I therefore become your enemy,
because I tell you the truth? Therefore ask thy heart this question? is this
the truth of God or no? If thy heart answers, No: I do not like it, nor the
persons that preach it: Then to the Law and to the testimony; to the holy
Prophets and Apostles and to Christ himself; Whose testimonies are all
distinctly recorded: and then ask thy heart this question again: Dare thou
with a stiff neck and uncircumcised heart always resist the Holy Ghost; as thy
Fathers did, so do thou dare to do; Acts 7.51, Ye stiff necked, and
uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost: as your
Fathers did, so do ye. If thou should dare to refuse all the Prophets and
Apostles who spoke on earth, yet there is one more, who speaks from Heaven,
even the Son of God himself, and dare thou refuse him also? Heb. 12.25. See
that ye refuse not him that speaks: for if they escaped not who refused him
that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him
that speaks from Heaven: Consider therefore in thy heart; that whatever we
are or may be esteemed to be, who are the poor Ministers of Christ; yet though
we be nothing, let the Holy Prophets and Apostles be esteemed as something: for
they shall sit upon twelve Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, Mat.
19.28. And Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, that ye which have
followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in the Throne of
his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel. And the true Church of the living Ged which is clothed with the Sun,
and the Moon under her feet, does wear them, as a Crown of twelve Stars upon
her head: And will thou trample them under thy feet? Rev. 12.1. And there
appeared a great wonder in Heaven, a Woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon
under her feet, and upon her head a Crown of twelve Stars: But however though
we be nothing, yet let the Son of God, Jesus Christ himself be something! For
verily God the Father thinks him to be something: When he has given him a name
that is above every name, that is in Heaven, and that is on the Earth: That
every Knee shall bow and every Tongue confess to him; as Phil. 2.9, 10, 11,
12. Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is
above every name: That at the name of Jesus every Knee shall bow, of things in
Heaven, or things in Earth, and things under the Earth; And that every Tongue
shall confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.
Wherefore my beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but
much more in my absence; work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling.
And verily he shall appear to be something at the great day when he shall come
to judge the World, and before him shall be gathered all Nations, as Matthew.
25.31, 32, 33, 34. When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the
Holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his glory. And
before him shall be gathered all nations; and he shall separate them one from
another, as a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats: And he shall set the
Sheep on his right hand, but the Goats on his left. Then shall the King say to
them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you before the foundation of the World. And thou thy self also
must appear before his judgment seat, 2 Cor. 5.10, 11. For we must all appear
before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done
in his body, according to that he has done, whither it be good or bad. Knowing
therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men; but we are made manifest
unto God, and I trust also, are made manifest in your Consciences. And Rev.
6.15, 16, 17. And the Kings of the Earth, and the Great men, and the Rich men,
and the Chief Captains, and the Mighty men, and every Bondman, and every
Freeman hid themselves in the Dens, and in the Rocks of the Mountains; And
said to the Mountains and Rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him
that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: For the great day
of his wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand? And Rev. 20.12, 13, 14,
15. And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were
opened: And another book was opened, which is the book of Life: and the dead
were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to
their works. And the Sea gave up the dead which were in it; and Death and Hell
delivered up the dead which were in them: And they were judged every man
according to their works. And Death and Hell were cast into the Lake of Fire:
This is the second Death. And whosoever was not found written in the Book of
Life, was cast into the Lake of Fire. And this day will come as a Thief in the
night, 2 Pet. 3.10. But the day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the night;
in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements
shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also with the works that are therein
shall be burnt up. And Rev. 22.11, 12. He that is unjust, let him be unjust
still: And he which is filthy, let him be filthy still: And he that is
righteous, let him be righteous still: And he that is holy, let him be be holy
still. And behold, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, to give every man
according as his work shall be. Well then Reader, whoever thou art; know that
the word Kingdom is good Seed, and the Sower is the Son of man, Matthew. 13.37.
He answered and said unto them, He that sows the good seed, is the Son of
man, We are but his under Servants, to minister from him this good seed, and
our great Lord is able to bless the seed sown though we be nothing, as 1 Cor.
3.5, 6, 7, 8. Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but Ministers by whom ye
believed, even as the Lord gave to every man? I have planted, Apollos watered:
but God gave the increase. So then, neither is he that planteth any thing,
neither he that waters: But God that gives the increase. Now he that
planteth, and he that waters, are on^: And every man shall receive his own
reward, according to his own labor. With 2 Cor. 9.10. Now he that ministers
seed to the sower, does minister bread for your food, and multiply the seed
sown, and increase the fruits of your righteousness. And the ground into which
we must sow this seed is the heart, though through the ear, Matthew. 13.9. Who has
ears to hear, let him hear. The good ground is the good and honest Heart: The
Lord make thine such; and then there will be good fruit brought forth with
patience and to perfections, though in different measures and degrees, as,
Matthew. 13.23. But he that received seed into the good ground, is he that
hears the Word, and understands it, which also bears fruit, and brings
forth some an hundredfold, some fifty, some thirty. Luke 8.15. But that on the
good ground, are they which in an honest and good heart having heard the word,
keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience. To thy salvation and God's glory
which the Lord grant unto thee: And pray for us his poor Ministers and
Servants, and particularly for the meanest and most unworthy of them all,

thy Servant for Christ's sake in the Work of the Gospel, Tho. Tailor.

To my many Worthy and Beloved Friends of diverse Congregations in and about the
City of London; the Town of Hackney, and other Towns, within and without the
Lines of Communication, where I have occasionally Preached this Gospel: Grace
and Peace.
MOST Dear and Precious Friends; Precious I say, for the late Precious Faith
obtained by you, with us, 2 Pet. 1.1. Simon Peter, a Servant and an Apostle of
Jesus Christ, to them that have obtained like precious Faith with us, through
the righteousness of God, and our Savior Jesus Christ: By which Faith, the
very Faith of Gods Elect, Christ is precious indeed to you, 1 Pet 2.7. Unto you
therefore which believe he is precious: But unto them which be disobedient, the
stone which the builders disallowed the same is made the head of the corner:
when to others a stumbling stone; even to them that stumble at the word being
disobedient: Your Names are too many to be prefixed to this short Epistle, and
besides in the matter of truth I like not to go to the Poll, as if truth needed
a Muster-roll of names to carry the voice against such as are the opposers of
it. It is enough that Christ has a few names in Sardis, who have not defiled
their Garments, and which shall walk with him in white, for they are worthy: It
matters not how many the names of others in Sardis were, Rev. 3.4. Thou have a
few names even in Sardis, that have not defiled their Garments: and they shall
walk with me in white: for they are worthy. It is enough that wisdom is
justified of her Children: When true Wisdom neither in John Baptist the
forerunner, who was greater than all the Prophets; nor in Christ the Head and
Lord of them all, could have a testimony from an evil and adulterous
Generation: Or if they had any thing like it for a time, they quickly recanted
and recalled it, Mat. 11.16 -- 19. But whereunto shall I liken this Generation?
It is like unto Children sitting in the markets, and calling unto their
fellows. The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold, a man
gluttonous and a wine bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners: But wisdom is
justified of her Children. And John. 5.35. He was a burning and a shining
light: And ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his light.

I have been greatly refreshed and comforted in you all, by the grace of God,
bringing Salvation to you, and which ye have not received in vain: But as ye
have heard him and been taught of him, as the truth is in Jesus Christ; this
grace has taught you effectually to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and
live soberly, righteously and godly in this present World, looking for that
blessed hope and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus
Christ; who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity and
purify unto himself a peculiar People zealous of good works: And am still
comforted in the remembrance thereof. And that these poor labors of mine in
the Ministry of this Gospel has had any effect upon your Souls, either in
drawing you to Christ, or confirming or comforting you in Christ at any time,
is and will be my rejoicing above all the esteem I have in your hearts, and all
the help I have received from your hands by your Free, Kind, Liberal ministering
to my necessities from time to time; and that my temptation which was in the
Flesh through these necessities and wants and reproaches for Christ's sake ye
despised not, but received me and embraced me, (I will not say) as an Angel of
God, or even as Christ Jesus; But one far greater than I can own my self to be:
I can truly say I have rejoiced much more because of the Grace of God given to
you, than in all the gifts to me; though I had need of them all, and do
acknowledge them to be more and greater, than I am worthy of: But Christ is
worthy, for whose sake only ye have counted me so, Mar. 9.4. And whosoever will
offend one of those little ones that believe in me, It is better for him, that
a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the Sea. And
though I put not your names to this my Book, for reasons above mentioned, yet I
hope they are all of them in the Book of Life. And this small Treatise, which
is but a taste of some more that may follow in due time, if the Lord please; I
do more especially Devote and Dedicate to the Use and Service of you all and
yours; not doubting that whither I live or die, you will find out it, or it
will find out you by some providence or other: I say I Dedicate it to you; not
for Patronage or Protection; but for Debt: for it is much due to you who have
been my fellow helpers in the Gospel, some of you for many years. And two
things I have to say to you all and leave here upon record as the greatest
testimony of my thankfulness, love and care to and for you in the Lord. Namely,

First, That you beware and take heed of of a loose conversation, and that ye
use not your liberty at any time, or in any thing for an occasion to the Flesh,
or to the World; For we are not debtors to the Flesh, to live after the Flesh;
for if ye live after the Flesh ye shall die, but if ye by the Spirit do
mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live, Romans 8.12, 13. And Jam. 4.4. Ye
Adulterours and Adulteresses, Know ye not that the Friendship of the World is
Enmity against God? Whosoever therefore will be the friend of the World is the
enemy of God, 1 John 2.15. Love not the World, neither the things that are in
the World. If any man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him. 16.
For all that is in the World, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Lust of the Eyes,
and the Pride of Life, is not of the Father, but is of the World. 17. And the
World passes away and the Lusts thereof: But he that does the will of God,
abides tfor ever. The power of Christ's Death is within you, therefore let
your Old Man be crucified with Christ: That henceforth ye may not serve Sin;
and let the World be crucified to you and you unto it, otherwise you cannot
glory truly in the cross of Christ, Gal. 6.14, 15. But God forbid that I should
glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the World is
crucified unto me, and I unto the World. For in Christ Jesus neither
circumcision avails any thing* nor uncircumcision, but a new creature. You
cannot be alive with Christ through Union with him; but you must be dead, and
die continually both to Sin and to the World, Romans 6.1. What shall we say then?
Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound?

Secondly, That you shine as lights in the World, and be as the Sons and
Daughters of God; without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation holding forth the word of Life, that I may rejoice in the day of
Christ, that I have not run in vain, neither labored in vain, Phil. 2.14, 15,
16. Do all things without murmurings, and disputings: That ye may be blameless
and harmless, the Sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and
perverse nation, among whom ye shine, (or shine ye) as lights in the World:
Holding forth the word of life; that I may rejoice in the day of Christ, that I
have not run in vain, neither labored in vain. And our Lord has said, Matthew.
5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven. If the time will come when ye shall
shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of your Father, Math 13.43. Then shall
the righteous shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father. Who has
ears to hear let him hear. Surely ye should shine as lights more in this State
of imperfection, and whilst you are in this World; and thereby show you are not
of it, Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they, that do his commandments, that they may
have right to the tree of Life; and to enter in through the Gates of the the
City. 15. For without ar Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers,
Idolaters and whosoever loves and makes a lie.

To the Church or Congregation which is at Cambridge; unto which I stand as a
Pastor or Overseer in the Faith, Fellowship and Order of the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ: And to many others my Constant or Occasional hearers, of whom I
am persuaded such things as do accompany Salvation. Blessed be God.
Dearly Beloved,
I Do greatly rejoice in you all, as my crown and my joy in the Day of Jesus
Christ: And though I cannot say of you all, that I have begotten you by the
Gospel; no, blessed be God that you were in Christ before my coming amongst
you, and that others labors were blessed for that end to you; yet this also I
can say of some of you, now in the Church, and of others not yet joined to it;
that I have begotten you through the Gospel unto Jesus Christ, and that you are
the seal of my Ministry, and the proof of Christ speaking in me, and by my
Ministry unto your Hearts effectually; yet in you all and concerning every one
of you; I do rejoice in three things, Namely,

1. Your Election of God known of us, and manifestly appearing in you by the
Sanctification of the spirit unto Obedience and sprinkling of the Blood of
Jesus Christ, as 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the foreknowledg of God the
Father, through sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of
the blood of Jesus Christ, and 2 These. 2.13, 14. But we are bound to give
thanks always to God for you, brethren, beloved of the Lord, because God has
from the beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the
Spirit, and belief of the truth: Whereunto he called you by our gospel, to the
obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. Your abiding in the Truth, and the Truth abiding in you, and that you stand
fast both in the Faith and love of the Truth that you may be saved: When so
many have departed from the Faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and are,
(as is to be feared,) given up to strong delusion to believe a lie, that they
all might be damned who believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness: as, 1 Timothy 4.1. 2 These. 2.11, 12. Which shows the unction of
the holy one to be in you, as 1 John 2.20.21. But ye have an unction from the
holy One, and ye know all things: I have not written unto you, because ye know
not the truth: But because ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth; and
again, v. 26, 27. These things have I written unto you, concerning them that
seduce you: But the anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you:
and ye need not that any man teach you: But, as the same anointing teaches you
of all things, and is truth, and is no lie: and even as it has taught you, ye
shall abide in him, 28. And now, little Children, abide in him; that when he
shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his
coming. And in this I do rejoice, and will rejoice in and over you all, your
steadfast, abiding and walking in the Truth, when there are so many deserters,
as 2 John 1. Whom I love in the truth: and not I only, but also all they that
have known the truth, for the truth sake which dwells in us, and shall be
with us for ever. And 3 John 4. I have no greater joy than to hear that my
Children walk in truth; and again, John 8.31, 32. Then said Jesus to those Jews
which believed on him, If ye continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples
indeed: And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.

3. Your order in the Faith and fellowship of the Gospel as a Church, which
appears in your professed and declared subjection to the Government which
Christ has set in his Church, and that because it is Christ's appointment, that
so it should be, and his Spirit works in you, that willing and ready subjection
and obedience, as a fruit of your Faith, upon which depends and follows,
that blessed Peace that ye now have, both in your own Consciences, and among
your selves; it is prophesied of Christ, Isa. 9.7. Of the increase of his
government and of his peace there shall be no end; upon the throne of David and
upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with
justice, from henceforth even for ever: This belongs to the Kingly Office of
Christ, to whom only it appertains to give and appoint Laws for his Church,
and they must not appoint Laws for themselves; nor can Man, or any sort of Men
in the World, appoint or give Laws to the Church of Christ, it is Christ
prerogative Royal, and he alone sits and rains as King in Zion, as Ps. 2.6. Yet
have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion. Now this Government which Christ
has set in his Church, is by a Faithful and approved Ministry, as Pastors and
Teachers, freely chosen by the whole Church according to Christ's mind, and
rightly set over them in the Lord as he has appointed them to be, Ephesians. 4.11,
12, 13. And being so set, as Acts 14.23. The Church and all the Members are to
obey such, and to have them in high esteem for their works sake, and to be
subject unto them; in the true light and conduct of the word, shining in their
Ministry; and therefore they are called Stars and Angels, or Messengers, from
the Ministerial light and conduct they give to the Church from Christ himself,
the Sun of Righteousness, and the Angel of the Covenant; as Rev. 1.20. The
mystery of the seven stars which thou saw in my right hand, and the seven
golden candlesticks. The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches: and
the seven candlesticks which thou saw, are the even Churches. The Churches
therefore I say, are to be subject to them, and to obey them in the light of
Truth shining in their Ministry from Christ the head, as the Stars do shine in
the Firmament with their lesser lights all borrowed from the Sun; and for the
proof of this let these Scriptures be considered and well weighed, Heb. 13.7,
8. Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the
word of God: whose Faith follow, considering the end of their conversation.
Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. And again, v. 17.
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves: for they watch
for your souls, as they that must give an account: that they may do it with
joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. And 1 Timothy 5.17, 18,
19. Let the elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor,
especially they who labor in the word and doctrine. For the scripture says,
Thou shall not muzzle the Ox that treads out the corn: and, The labourer is
worthy of his reward. Against an elder receive not an accusation, but before
(or under) two or three witnesses. Where the rule of the Ministry is secured of
the double honor of Maintenance and Reverence, and 1 These. 5.12, 13. And we
beseech you, brethren, to know them which labor among you, and are over you in
the Lord, and admonish you; And to esteem them very highly for their works
sake. And be at peace among your selves* This is the order and Government which
Christ has set in his Church; upon which their peace does depend: And where
thi^ Government of Christ is not submitted unto, and kept, but is rejected and
broken, there is an end of Peace; there follows nothing but confusion, and
every evil work, as James 3.16. To prevent which Christ has set Order and
Government in the Church, yea in all the Churches of Christ; as 1 Cor. 14.33.
As it is in a Man's Heart, if the Government of Christ be not there, if Christ,
rules not there by his Word and Spirit, there is no Peace to that Man; There
is no Peace says my God to the wicked: Even so it is in a Church; if Christ's
Government be not there, there is no Peace, but strife and bitter envying,
confusion and every evil work. And I will therefore Rejoice, and do Rejoice in
this, concerning you all beholding and seeing your order, and the stedfastness
of your Faith in Christ, as Col. 2.5, 6. For though I be absent in the flesh,
yet am I with you in spirit, joying and beholding your order, and the
stedfastness of your faith in Christ. For this order flows from the
stedfastness of your Faith in Christ (as the breach of it in others does emerge
from the unstedfastness of their Faith.) As ye have therefore received Christ
Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him, v. 7. Rooted and built up in him and
stablished in the faith as ye have been taught, abounding therein with
thanksgiving. Beware lest any man spoil you: Keep therefore and hold fast this
Faith and order, and this will be your wisdom and understanding in the sight of
all Men, as Deuteronomy. 4.5. Ephesians. 5.17, 18, 19, 20. And this is the salt or true
wisdom commended to us by Christ himself, which will preserve you in purity and
peace, and keep you from Corrupting; as Mark 9.50. Salt is good: but if the
salt have lost his saltness, wherewith will you season it? Have salt in your
selves, and have peace one with another. And this, as it is, and will be your
glory, so it will be our rejoicing in the Day of Christ, Heb. 13.17, And 1 John
2.28. That we ( i. e. we your Elders and Ministers,) may rejoice in the Day of
Christ. As ye have therefore obeyed, and in a great Conflict and Trial of your
Faith and Patience, have testified yout obedience to the Truth through the
Spirit; So I beseech you work out your own Salvation, with fear and trembling:
For it is God that works in you both to will, and to do, of his good
pleasure: And be in nothing terrified by your adversaries: which is to them an
evident token of perdition; but unto you of salvation, and that of God. For to
you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but als^
to suffer for his sake; Having the sam^ conflict which ye saw to be in me,
Phil* 1.28, 29. Now whether I live or die whether I be present in the body and
so absent from the Lord, or whether I be absent from the body, that I may be
present with the Lord; st^and fast in one Spirit, with one mind, striving
together for the Faith of the Gospel; and so fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like
minded, having the same love, of one accord, and of one mind. And the God of
peace shall be with you, and shall bruise Satan under your Feet shortly; and
shall make those, that say they are Jews and are not; but are the synagogue of
Satan, to come and worship before you feet, and to know that he has loved you,
as Rev. 3.8, 9. Amen.

THE True Light In the matter of our Justification before GOD.
Romans 3.20. Therefore by the deeds of the law, there shall no flesh be
justified in his sight: for by the law is the knowledge of sin.


THIS Text is an Epiphonema or closing speech, wherein the holy Apostle Paul
gives us the just and right conclusion or result of the whole matter, with
respect to Man's justification before God, and does Peremptorily determine in
the negative, that by the deeds or works of the Law, no flesh can or shall be
justified in his sight, and brings it in with the illative note therefore, as
the undeniable consequence and true result of his whole Argument in the two
foregoing Chapters, wherein he has fully proved, as he says, v. 9. of this
chap. that Jews and Gentiles are all under Sin.

1. The Gentiles he clearly proves in the first Chapter to be under Sin, in
that when they knew God, or might have known him by the light of Nature in his
works of Creation and Providence, as Romans 1.19, 20* they did not glorify him
as God, but contrary to the light of nature, debased and changed the glory of
the incorruptible God, into the Image of corruptible Man, v. 23, 24, 25. Had
they but used their poor dim light of nature aright, to have paid some suitable
Veneration to the glory of the Godhead, in worshipping of him, they might have
escaped many vile affections and actions amongst themselves: For which they
could not so much as pretend light or nature, and of the wickedness or danger
whereof they could not so much as pretend ignorance but as a punishment of
their impiety toward God, God gave them up to vile affections and unseemly
actions amongst themselves, as v. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, And these Sins they
not only committed against the light of nature but delighted in, though
convicted in their own Conscience that the issue thereof could be no less than
eternal Death and Damnation, as v. 32. Who knowing the judgment of God, etc.

So severely, but justly does God punish wilful Idolatry and false worship, a
Sin against the first Table, by giving such a person or People up to all manner
of Sins, and most horrible lusts, and abominable practices, even against Human
Nature to their own Destruction: Nothing being more righteous and just, than
that they who will not give unto God the glory of his own worship, should be
given up of God to work their own Damnation and Destruction, see 2 These. 2.10,
11, 12.

2. The Jews he as clearly proves to be under Sin in the second Chapter; For
whereas they rested in the law and made their boast of God, as Romans 2. v. 17,
18, 19, 20. yet they transgressed that law, which they so much boasted of, and
through transgressing thereof, dishonored God and caused his name to be
blasphemed amongst the Gentiles, as v. 21, 22, 23. And therefore the Jews as
well as the Gentiles are left without excuse, and the mouth of them both
equally stopped, being become guilty before God. The Gentiles by Sinning
without law, yet against the light and law of Nature, as Romans 1.20.32. etc. The
Jews by Sinning under the law, and whilst they judged the poor Gentiles, became
more obnoxious and inexcusable themselves, in that they did the same or worse
things, as Romans 2. v. 11, 12. And therefore both Jews and Gentiles are all
under Sin and Condemnation, and that by the law: The Gentiles by the light and
law of nature, and the work of it written in their Hearts, Romans 2.14, 15, 16.
And the Jews by the law written in tables of Stone by Gods own hand, and given
unto them by Moses at mount Sinai, which law was added by reason of Sin, and
Sin in the Jews taking occasion by the commandment, became exceedingly more
Sinful in them who were Jews by nature, than in the Gentiles, as being against
more clear light and greater Obligations, than the poor Gentiles were indulged
with. And thus is fulfilled the design of God by Moses in giving the law, which
was not that any Man should be justified and obtain righteousness and life
thereby; but that the offense against it might so much the more abound and be
made to appear. And Man be instructed from the desperateness of his case and
the utter impossibility ever to get righteousness and life by works and the
law, to seek it only by Grace and Faith in Jesus Christ, as Romans 5.20, 21. This
position being already proved, that Jews and Gentiles are all under Sin, Romans
3.9. the Apostle does further confirm by a text out of the old Testament, Romans
3. -- 19. where he concludes that quotation. Now we know that whatsoever the
law says, it says to them that are under the law, intimating that the Jews
must needs be concerned in this charge as well as the Gentiles: And that the
Prophets of the old Testament, did plainly declare and confirm this truth, that
by the works of the law, no flesh should be justified: For both David and
Esaias, whose words these are, (if they would have understood them) in saying,
there is none righteous, no not one, there is none that understands; there is
none that seeks after God; they are all gone out of the way, they are
together become unprofitable; there is none that does good, no, not one, etc.
do both testify from God by whose Spirit they speak; that in the sight of God
all Men are Sinners and transgressors, by the law, both Jews and Gentiles, and
that there is not one righteous Man by the works of the law, in the whole
World. (for Jew and Gentile comprehended the whole world.) And if so, and this
be true, that Jews and Gentiles are all under Sin, and that there is not one
righteous Man by the works of the law in Gods sight, then it follows as a
necessary consequence, that by the works of the law there shall no flesh be
justified. Therefore we conclude, etc.

And thus I have done with the context.

In the text it self we have a great foundation truth or point of Doctrine ready
prepared to our Hand, in words which the Holy Ghost teaches, together with the
reason of it; And therefore we shall take the point, as it lies in the Text,
etc.

That by the works of the law, there shall no flesh be justified in the sight
of God.

The truth of this doctrine is expressly testified also, Psalm. 143.2. For in thy
sight shall no Man living be justified, i. e. by his own works and
righteousness, for otherwise there were then, and are now many Men justified in
Gods sight by the free Grace of God through Faith in Jesus Christ.

And again, Gal. 2.16. Knowing etc. For the opening this position or point of
Doctrine we shall take it into parts, and Enquire

1 Who or what is meant by ( Flesh.)

2 What is meant by ( Justified.)

3 What is mean by ( the works of the law.)

1 What is meant; Or, What we are to understand by ( Flesh) (...). not any
Flesh, or as it is Translated, ( no Flesh.)

In answer whereunto, ( Flesh,) is sometimes taken in Scripture, for the Human
Nature separate from the sinfulness thereof, so John 1.14. And the word was
made flesh, (...). Flesh is here put for the Human Nature separate from Sin as
Adam had it in the state of innocence. And Christ the second Adam took it in
the Womb of the Virgin Mary, and Heb. 10.20. Through the vail, i. e. his Flesh,
put for the whole Human Nature, which was a vail to his Godhead, and which he
offered upon the Cross, for our Sins and so consecrated a new and living way
for us into the Holiest, i. e. Heaven it self.

And though in propriety of Speech, the Flesh or Body is but a part of the
Human Nature; the Spirit or Soul being the other and more noble part, yet is by
a figure Synechdoche, put for the whole, as 1 Peter 2.24. where Christ is said,
to have born our sins in his own (body) on the tree: Body is there put for the
whole Human Nature, and so the Soul or Spirit is also sometimes put, as Isa.
53.10. When thou shall make his Soul an offering for Sin; yet it is manifest
both Soul and Body were offered for Sin, and the Soul of Christ is there put
for both; but in this sense of the Human Nature separate from Sin, the word
Flesh is not to be understood in this Text* And therefore,

2. Flesh is also, and indeed most frequently, put for the Human Nature as it
is corrupt and depraved by Sin since the fall of the first Adam, and so Romans
8.3. where the law is said to become weak through the (Flesh,) i. e. Man's
Nature now corrupted by Sin; and so not able to rise up unto that true and
perfect holiness, which the law does require. And in this sense the word Flesh
is to be taken and understood in the text* Shall not any flesh, or shall no
flesh be justified, i. e. no Man that is a Sinner and corrupted by Sin, as all
Men now are by Nature: And there is a kind of vehemence in the expression: The
Holy Ghost thereby casting a holy contempt upon Man that is called Flesh, i. e.
an unclean and a corrupt thing, so Eliphas in Job 15.14, 15, 16. What is Man
tha^ that he should be clean, etc. And thus shall n^ flesh be justified, i. e.
no Man, no Person of Mankind, Man, Woman nor Child.

2ly. What its meant? And what i^ to be understood by the word justified (...)?
Shall no Flesh, (be justified?)

In answer hereto, 1. To be justified in the proper significancy and notion
thereof is to be made righteous, to become righteous or to stand righteous
before God, justificari is justum fieri, to be justified, is to be made or to
become righteous; and so to stand a righteous Person in Gods sight: It is a
foreinsick term, and here is an allusion to courts of Judicature amongst Men,
wherein the person arraigned, is in the issue of the Plea, either Condemned, i.
e. found Guilty, and then we say such a Man is cast, that is, in his Plea; or
else is acquitted and discharged, and so justified in the sight of the Court as
an Innocent and righteous person, and so he is said to stand, as Psam 130.3.
And therefore it is added, in his sight, to show, that whatsoever Man may be in
his own sight, or in the sight of other Men like himself, yet in Gods sight no
flesh shall or can be justified by the works of the law. And as in Condemnation
there are two things, First, a fixing of the Guilt, and therefore we say, when
a person is found guilty, he is condemned, so Romans 3.19. That every mouth may
be stopped, and all the world become guilty before God.

2ly. A binding or Obligation unto the punishment, which is Death, and
therefore we say of a Criminal when he is brought in guilty, that he is a dead
Man, because the obligation unto punishment, is now fixed upon him, and he must
inevitably suffer death, which is the punishment due to his offense.

So on the other hand, there are two things employed in Justification; first a
just discharge and acquitment from the guilt of Sin; he that is justified is
not guilty in Gods sight, his Sin is not imputed to him, and Ps. 32, 1, 2.
where David describes the blessedness of a justified person; saying, Blessed
is he whose Transgression is forgiven, whose Sin is covered, unto whom the Lord
imputes not iniquity.

3ly. There is also a dissolving and making void, and null the Obligation unto
punishment; so that a justified person is no more in danger of that death which
is the wages of Sin, nor of the curse of the law and the infinite and eternal
wrath of God, which is the punishment due to Sin, to every Sin, the least Sin
as well as the greatest; therefore as Condemnation is called Death, because of
the Obligation unto punishment, so justification is called Life, because of the
dissolving and making void that Obligation: So John 5.24 where the believer is
said to be passed from death to life, i. e. from a state of Condemnation which
is Death, to a state of Justification which is Life; and Romans 5.18. It is
called justification of Life. And upon that account it is Written, the just
shall live by Faith, i. e. be justified by Faith, for justification is his life.

3ly. But there is yet somewhat more employed in this word Justified, and that
is a positive righteousness answering to the perfection of the holy law of God
in the utmost extent and demand of it; for though non imputation and pardon of
Sin makes a Man no more a Sinner nor guilty before God, yet to make him a
righteous person in Gods sight, there must of necessity be a positive
righteousness; for as it cannot consist with the perfect justice of God, to
justify a Man without righteousness, so it cannot consist with his veracity
and justice to justify any Man without a perfect righteousness, such as is
commensurate and adequate to the perfection of his law, for otherwise the law
should be made void even by faith itself contrary to Romans 3.31. And to speak
with holy reverence, as it is impossible for God to lie, so it is as impossible
for him to be unjust, which he should be, should he justify any Man by an
imperfect righteousness; it is therefore a foolish, vain and wicked imagination
in any person to think or affirm that a Man may be justified in Gods sight
without a perfect righteousness; and this I may be bold to say from the clear
light of Gods holy word, that he which has not a better righteousness than his
own, neither is, nor ever shall be justified in the sight of God; and whoever
he be who affims the contrary, let him answer it; for sure I am, the judgment
of God is according to truth, as it i^ written Romans 2.2. and again, Romans 3.4*
Let God be true and every Man a liar tha^ thou might be justified in thy
sayings, an^ might overcome when thou art judged*

3. What is here meant and what are we to understand by the deeds or works of
the law*

Ans. (...) By the needs of the law* of, or by, or upon the account of the
deed* of the law. (...) works, operations or deed^ do imply all sorts of works,
deeds or operati^ons, Internal and External.

1 There are internal deeds and operati^ons, deeds of the mind and of the
spirit with^in, works of the inward Man; wherein the inward faculties of the
Soul, the Mind, the Conscience, the Understanding, the will and affections are
operative and working in the sight of God; before whom our spirits ar^ naked
and bare, Heb. 4.13. And there ar^ internal virtues and habits, and these are
op^^rative within, and the holy law of God is Spi^ritual and reaches the
inward Man, yea, the very thoughts and imaginations of the Hear^ and than
inward disposition, enclination and habits, Romans 7.7. I had not known lust, if
the law had not said, thou shall not covet.

2. There are external deeds, the outward actions and deeds and operations of
the light and Conversation which should all be regulated and are judged by the
law, which is the rule of righteousness, to the inward and to the outward Man;
to the inward frame of Heart, with all the Imaginations, Thoughts, Principles,
Habits, Affections, Intentions and Designs thereof; and to the outward Man in
all a Man's external Actions, words and deeds, together with the nature and
tendency of them, whether they be good or evil, true or false, sincere or
feigned, so Acts 5.3, 4, 9. and Acts 8.20, 21. 2 Chronicles. 25.2. Ezekiel. 33.31, 32.

So that by the deeds of the law, we are to understand all the inward
qualifications and inherent virtues and goodness of a Man's Heart, together with
all the external actions of his life done in the utmost conformity and
Obedience to the law, that Man can reach unto; by these deeds of the law
whether internal or external, there shall no flesh be justified in his sight.

Quest. But the greater question is, what law is here meant? whether the
Ceremonial law only, or the Moral law also? Those that are unsound in the
Doctrine of Justification, do contend that by the law here, is only meant the
Ceremonial law. And that the Apostle Paul here and in other places contending
with the Jews in this point of Justification, speaks only of the Ceremonial
law, and so far they yield that by the works of the Ceremonial law indeed no
flesh shall be justified, but the works of the Moral law are not here excluded
from the matter of Man's justification; insinuating thereby, that a Man may be
justified in Gods sight by good works done in confirmity and obedience to the
Moral law.

Ans. In answer whereunto we do affirm and shall plainly prove, that not the
Ceremo^nial law only, but the Moral law also, ye^ mainly and principally is
meant by the Apostle. And that law unto the works or deed whereof justification
in the sight of God i^ denied to every Man, is the Moral law and not the
Ceremonial law only, though it i^ true also of the Ceremonial law. And this w^
prove by two Argumenrs,

1 Argument; It is most plain from the contex^ v. 19. That it is the same law
by which every mouth is stopped, and all the World i^ become guilty before God.
Now the Gentile^ could not have their mouth stopped and be^come guilty before
God by the Ceremonia^ law: For the Gentiles had no knowledge o^ the Ceremonial
law, neither could they; there being nothing in the light or law of nature,
directing them to any such law; nor were the Gentiles under any Obligation unto
that law; otherwise than as any of them were proseylites to the Jewish Church,
neither could their Consciences either accuse or excuse them in observing or
not observing the Ceremonial law, they could have no Conscience of Sin in that
respect, for where no law is there is no Transgression: But the Moral law, they
having the work of it written in their Hearts, as Romans 2.14, 15. did bind the
Consciences of the very Gentiles, and did leave them without excuse before God,
as has been already proved, Romans 1.19, 20, 21. to the end of the Chap. So that
it is the Moral law only by which every mouth is stopped and all the World, i.
e. both Jew and Gentile are become guilty before God. And therefore it is not
the Ceremonial law only, but the Moral law principally of which the Apostle
speaks when he says as in the Text; by the works of the law there shall no
flesh be justified in his sight.

2 Argu. It is also as plain from the latter part of this Text, that it is the
same law by which is the knowledge of Sin: For so the Apostle brings it in
immediately and in one and the same breath; For by the law is the knowledge of
Sin; therefore whilst the Aposte says, by the deeds of the law shall no flesh
be justified in his sight, and then adds, that by the law is the knowledge of
Sin, it is plain, what law he means: Namely, the same law by which is the
knowledge of Sin.

Now the knowledge of Sin is not by the Ceremonial law; for though in the
Ceremonial law, there is an acknowledgment of Sin; in that all the sacrifices,
washings and typical services, did take it for granted, and every Man attending
the services of that law did ( ipso facto), acknowledge himself a Sinner, or
else to what end was his Sacrifice if he had no Sin to be purged? Yet the
Ceremonial law neither did nor could convince the Conscience, and show a Man
wherein he had Sinned; for this is the peculiar work of the moral law, and the
light thereof shining in the Conscience, and so the Apostle, Romans 7.7. Nay, I
had not known sin but by the law: For I had not known lust except the law had
said, thou shall not Covet: Now the law which says thou shall not covet, is
not the Ceremonial law, but the moral law, as Exodus* 20.17. And therefore the
Text must be interpreted and understood, not of the Ceremonial law only but
also and more especially of the moral law, for as much as by this law, is the
knowledge of Sin, and by this law every mouth is stopped, and all the World
become guilty before God. So that Justification in the sight of God is denied
to Man not only by the deeds of the Ceremonial law, but also by the deeds of
the moral law: And a Man can no more be justified now by good works, either
Internal, or External, or both, done in obedience and conformity to the moral
law, than the Jews then were by their observances of the Ceremonial* And as it
became Sin in the Jews, to seek justification and righteousness by the works of
the Ceremonial law, and moral law both, and the stumbling stone to their
perdition and damnation, as Romans 9.31, 32. So it does as much now become Sin to
any Man under Heaven, to seek righteousness and justification by the works of
the Moral law, as they are or can be performed by him, and if persisted in will
prove the stumbling stone to his perdition, Gala. 5.2, 3, 4, 5.

Having thus done with the opening of the Doctrine, we proceed to the reasons
of it, namely, to show why by the deeds of the law no flesh can be justified in
God's sight; and they are these two.

First Reason; Because by the law is the the knowledge of Sin, and this is one
reason subjoyned in the Text, (...): For by the law is the knowledge of Sin:
(...) which here is rendered knowledge, is a thorough and convincing knowledge
which leaves a Man under such a conviction as he must needs acknowledge himself
a Sinner and to have Transgressed the law of God: For Sin is the transgression
of the law, and the knowledge of Sin is the knowledge in the Conscience of a Man
that he has transgressed the law, and no Man can have this conviction and
knowledge but by the law: And the Conscience of Sin is nothing else but his
knowing by the light of Gods holy law that he has transgressed, and that he is
a transgressor of the law, as Romans 7.7. I had not known Sin but by the law; and
again, Romans 7.8, 9. For without the law, sin was dead, that is, it stirred not,
it troubled not my Conscience. But when the commandment came, Si^ revived and I
died, i. e. I was in a whole and safe condition once without the law, and
nothing troubled my Conscience, but all was quiet and secure, as if I had no
Sin, and wa^ in no danger; But when the Commandmen^ came, i. e. God brought the
law home to my Conscience, so that I saw the convincing light, and felt the
terrifying Power of the holy law of God in my Conscience, then Sin revived, i.
e. lift up it self, and made me find and feel my guilt and the condemning power
and strength that Sin had over me by the law: For the strength of Sin is the
law, 1 Cor. 15.56. And I died, i. e. As to all my hopes and confidence of being
justified by the law and the works thereof, so that I became as a dead Man
without any life or hope of being justified by it: And the Argument lies
plain, that law, by which every Man is convinced that he is a Sinner and
condemned as a guilty Person before God; by that law and the deeds of it can no
Man be justified in the sight of God; for condemnation and justification, are
as directly contrary and inconsistent each with other as life and death are;
therefore by the deeds of the law, can no flesh be justified, because by the
law all flesh is Condemned and found guilty before God; upon this account the
Ministration of the law is called the Ministration of death and of
Condemnation, 2 Cor. 3.7. and 9. v. And therefore cannot be the Ministration of
life and justification: Now if there were any Man found since the fall of Adam,
that were not a Sinner and guilty by the law, and unto whom by the law there
could be no knowledge, or conviction of Sin, then such a Man might be justified
by the deeds of the law, but forasmuch as there is no such Man in the World
since the fall of Adam, there can no Man be justified by the deeds of the law
in Gods sight.

Second Reason. Because by the deeds or works of the law, there is no Man
righteous in Gods sight, it has already bin showed that it cannot consist with
the perfect justice and veracity of God to justify any Man without
righteousness and without a perfect righteousness, commensurate to the
Perfection, Purity and Holiness of his law; but no Man under Heaven since the
fall of Adam ever had or can have such a righteousness by the deeds of the law,
as they are or can be done and performed by Man; therefore by the deeds of the
law, can no Flesh be justified in his sight, as Gala. 3.21. Is the law
therefore against the promises of God? God forbid, for if there had bin a law
given which could have given life, verily, righteousness should have bin by the
law. The Argument is plain, namely, that the law is not against the promises of
God, i. e. the free promise of Justification by Grace through Faith in Jesus
Christ, therefore the law cannot justify, because if it could justify any Man
it would be against, i. e. frustrate and make void the free promise of
justification by Faith; for if a Man could be justified by the works of the
law, there could be no need of the free promise of righteousness and
justification by Faith; so that the promise is made void if righteousness be,
or could be, by the law: And then it is added, If there had been a law given
that could have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the law:
if the law could have given life i. e. Justification, verily, righteousness
should have been by the law; supposing and taking it for granted that if there
had been a law that could have given Life and Justification, the same law
should have given righteousness also, for without righteousness, there can be
no Justification and Life to any Man in Gods sight. But there is no Man
righteous or can be righteous in Gods sight by the deeds of the law, therefore
no Man can be justified or have life thereby.

Now that there is no Man righteous or can be by the works of the law, is plain
from the context, Romans 3.10 -- 19. Where the words of the Prophet David and
Isaias, are quoted out of the Old Testament, that there is none Righteous, no,
not one; there is none that does good, no, not one: Now, as at the 19. v.
Whatsoever the law says, it says to them that are under the law, i. e. to the
Jews as well as to the Gentiles, that there is not in the whole World, both
Jews and Gentiles, one righteous Man by the deeds of the law, no, not one, no,
not one that does good, no, not one, i. e. according to that which the law does
require.

And this will more clearly appear by a just consideration of the obedience
which the law does require, in these Four particulars.

1. The law does require personal Obedience to the Holy and just commands
thereof: And every Man is under Obligation to fulfill the law in his own Person,
and therefore it is said, Romans 10.5. The Man which does them shall live by
them, and here is one essential difference betwixt the law of Faith, and the
Law of works; that the law of Faith accepts the Obedience of another, but the
law of works requires thee to obey and fulfill in thine own Person, and if thou
failest of Personal performing and fulfilling, the law does curse thee
Personally, as it is written Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues
not, etc.

2ly. The Law does require perfect Obedience in all things: So that if a Man
keep the whole law and fail but in one point, he is guilty of all, as James
2.10. and the least Sinful thought, or idle word, cuts off and forfeits all a
Man's hope of righteousness by the Law.

Now, forasmuch as there is no Man that ever did, or (since the fall of Adam,)
ever can come up unto perfect Obedience in all things, which the Law does
require, so as not to fail in any one point: (For if such a Man were found,
there should be found a just Man upon Earth, that does good and sins not.
Yea, there would a Man be found that might say, I have not Sinned; which would
be to make God a liar, as 1 Kings 8.46. Eccles. 7.20. 1 John 1. v. 10.) It is
plain that there is none righteous, by the works of the law, no, not one; there
is none that does good, no, not one; i. e. as the Law does require.

3ly. The Law does require perpetual Obedience, i. e. the Perseverance,
Persisting and Continuance in all things that are written in the law, as Gal.
3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written in
the Book of the law to do them: So that if a Man could perfectly keep and
fulfill the whole law, so as not to fail in one point to his very dying Day; and
yet at last though in the Moment of Death, should commit one Sin, or once fail
in his Obedience, he has lost all his righteousness; and is become a Sinner
and Transgressor of the law in Gods sight.

4ly. The law does require a Sinless Person; the law does suppose and require
every Man to be such as Adam was, in the estate of Innocence; to have the same
rectitude, and perfect integrity of Nature, that Adam had, which we call
Original Righteousness, and is directly contrary to Original Sin: And the want
of Original Righteousness, as well as least the tincture of Original Sin, is a
Sinful defect of conformity to the law, and renders a Man incapable of
fulfilling the righteousness which the law does require; so that by the law it
is impossible for him that is once a Sinner, ever to become righteous by all
that he can do or suffer afterward.

Now, that the want of Original righteousness, as well as Original Sin, is a
Sinful defect of conformity to the law is plain, Romans 8. To be carnally minded
is Death, and the reason is added, v. 7. For the Carnal Mind is enmity against
God, and is not subject to the law of God neither indeed can be: That which we
render the Carnal mind is (...) the mind of the flesh, i. e. of Man's Nature
now corrupted by sin, and destitute of Original righteousness; this mind of the
flesh is enmity egainst God, and is not subject to the law of God, neither
indeed can be, (...) so that it is impossible to a man in the carnal mind or
mind of the flesh to be Obedient or subject to the law sincerely, and much more
impossible to fulfill or keep the law perfectly: And thence it is further
inferred, v. 9. so then they that are in the flesh cannot please God: The
person being Sinful, all his deeds and works are Sinful also, and neither his
person nor his deeds or works can be pleasing or acceptable unto God by the
law; and therefore it is written also Heb. 11.6. But without Faith it is
impossible to please God; which it would not be if a Man could be righteous by
the works of the law and without Faith, i. e. Faith in Christ; he might then
please God by the works of the law, and and without Faith.

Now let all these particular Considerations, be brought together into one;
namely, that the law requires personal, perfect and perpetual obedience
continually, and that in all points, and does also require a sinless Person;
and it will easily appear that it is become absolutely impossible to every Man
since Adam, (as it was also to Adam himself after the fall,) ever to become
righteous by the works or deeds of the law: And therefore as impossible for any
Man to be justified in the sight of God by the works of the law, seeing he
cannot by the works of the law be righteous; for this were to suppose that a
Man might be justified without righteousness, which to suppose is a
contradiction and absurdity. And thus having done with the Reasons of the
Doctrine; namely, that by the deeds of the law, no Flesh shall be justified in
Gods sight: We proceed next and further to enquire,

Q. Why the infinitely wise and holy God, who created Man such an excellent and
glorious creature after his own Image, and put him under such an excellent law,
so holy, just and good, should suffer this excellent creature, and this
excellent law of his, (by the interposition of Sin) to be so frustrate and
disappointed; that it is now become impossible for Man to be justified by the
law and the deeds of it.

Answ. This must be resolved ultimately into the Sovereign will and pleasure of
God, as our Lord Christ upon another occasion; Father, I thank thee Lord of
Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise and from the
prudent, and have revealed them unto babes; Even so Father, for so it seemed
good in thy sight; Mat. 11.25. A stupendous Mystery it was; And can be
resolved ultimately into nothing less than the Sovereign will of the blessed
God and Creator, who may do what he pleases; his own will being the most
perfect Rule, and his own glory the highest and ultimate end of all his works.
Certain it is, that the holy God could easily have prevented Sin, and have
preserved his Creature Man under the Conduct of the pure and holy Law of his
unto Eternal Life and Glory; but it seemed not good in his sight so to do;
Knowing how to overruled so great an evil as Sin, and the Transgression of his
holy Law, to the further manifestation of his own greater glory and the greater
good of his own Elect: And therefore we further find by inquiry into this
matter by the Light of the Holy Scriptures; That this so stupendous and
mysterious a work of his Providence with respect to man was necessary in order
to the manifestation of his own greater glory and man's greater good, in five or
six things.

1. Namely first; That thereby he might take occasion through Sin and the
Transgression of his Law to bring to light and give forth the manifestation of
his Eternal Election of Grace both amongst Angels and Men before the World was;
which was a Mystery hid in God, till the discovery and manifestation thereof
now began to apppear.

1. Amongst the Angels of Heaven, amongst whom Sin entered, and so great a
number of them leaving their first habitation, and were cast down to Hell, for
their transgression; whilst a remnant of them were preserved and were confirmed
of God in Christ, as Ephesians. 1.10. Gods Election of Grace toward some became
manifest, and apparent, and his severity toward the rest that Sinned, whom he
spared not, but cast them down to Hell; and 2 Pet. 2.4. So that here is a
difference and a discrimination made betwixt Angels and Angels, some cast down
to Hell, others preserved and confirmed in Heaven. And that which made the
difference was, not any natural goodness, and excellency of Endowments in the
one more than the other; but the free Grace and Election of God in Christ,
preseverd and confirmed some, that they did not, that they should not Sin,
whilst the rest sinned and were cast down to Hell: Hence the elect Angels on
the one part, 1 Timothy 4.21. and the Angels that Sinned, on the other, divide the
whole World of Angels. And as vast a difference and distance is put betwixt the
one and the other, as betwixt Heaven and Hell; as betwixt Light and Darkness:
Hence of the same lump of the Angelical Nature, are made Angels of Light, as 2
Cor. 11.14. and Angels of Darkness, 2 Pet. 2.10. Angels of Heaven as Mat.
24.36. and Angels of Hell, as Mat. 25.41, the Holy Angels, as Mat. 25.31. And
the wicked or Apostate Angels, as Jud. 6.

2ly. Amongst Men in this World, God took occasion by Sin and the trangression
of his Holy law, to manifest his Election of Grace, even amongst Men on Earth,
as he had already amongst Angels in Heaven. And now a difference is put betwixt
the seed of the Woman; (namely, Christ as the head of this Election, and all
the Elect amongst Men; whom the Father had chosen in Christ before the
foundation of the World, Ephesians. 1.4.2 Tim. 1.9. and whom the Father had given
to Christ out of the Would, John 17.9. These all are one in Christ by virtue of
this Election, and are to be brought unto actual conformity to him in Grace
here, and Glory hereafter. Christ the first Born, and they all brethren to him,
and one to another in him, as Romans 8.29.) And the seed of the Serpent on the
one hand, that is, all the Children of the Devil or wicked One, who are now
distinguished and made manifest by the admission and entrance of Sin, as 1 John
3.9, 10. And as Sin took occasion by the law, for if there had been no law,
there had been no Sin or transgression; so the Grace of God took occasion by
Sin, and by the transgression of the law, to manifest it self both amongst
Angels and Men, to Gods greater Glory, and the greater good and glorious
advantage of his Elect. Oh the depth both of the Wisdom and knowledge of God!
How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! How has the
Election of Grace taken occasion by the Sin and misery of Mankind, to show and
manifest it self in glorious triumph over all Man's sinfulness and unworthiness,
as well as over all Man's works and righteousness by the law, in over ruling the
one, and excluding of the other; that the purpose of God according to Election,
might stand not of works, but of him that calls; as Romans 9.11. and again,
Romans 11.7. The Election has obtained it, and the rest were blnded.

2ly. That so he might make way for the coming of his Son Jesus Christ into the
World; for his coming forth into and in the Human Nature, and being made, and
manifested in Flesh both to Angels and Men; This Mystery of Godliness, as the
Apostle has it, 1 Timothy 3.16. (God manifested in the Flesh,) had never been
exhibited in the sight of Angels and Men, had not the transgression of the law,
and the utter inability in the law to give Man life and righteousness in Gods
sight; first prepared and opened a way for it: had there been no Sin, there had
needed no Sacrifice; no need of God manifested in Flesh; could righteousness
have been by the works of the law, there had been no need of a Christ, to take
away Sin, to make an end of Sins, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, as
Dan. 9 24. Romans 8.3. And as the Apostle has it, Gala. 2 21. If righteousness
come by the law then Christ is dead in vain. Christ coming in the Flesh, his
being made of a Woman, made under the law, his being made a curse for us; yea,
all that he did and suffered for us in his life and death; yea, his
resurrection from the dead, his Ascension into Heaven, and his intercession for
us there has been altogether in vain, if Sin could be expiated and
righteousness obtained by the deeds or works of the law: But Christ is not dead
in vain, his coming into the World is not in vain: Now consider what a glorious
work, the work of redemption is above all the works of Gods Creation, and above
all the other works of his mighty, wise and holy providence, and be filled with
admiration, and wonder at the infinite wisdom, power and Grace of God in
Christ, who has thus overruled, so great an evil as Sin is; and the
frustration of the hope of righteousness by the law for the manifestation of
the riches of his glory, and Grace in his Son Christ Jesus, and the greater
advancement and good of his own Elect, who are no losers by their
disappointment and loss of the hope of righteousness by the deeds of the law;
having now obtained a better hope of a better and greater righteousness by
Faith in Christ, than could have been obtained by the law, if they had never
Sinned, and if they had fulfilled the righteousness of the law in themselves:
Glory be to the triumphant Grace of God in Christ.

3. That so also just occasion might be offered for the promulgation and making
known amongst Men the everlasting Covenant of Grace; Now consider what a great
blessing the Covenant of Grace is, above the Law and Covenant of works; which
the Apostle says, Had no glory in comparison of the new Covenant of Grace
which so far excelled, 2 Cor. 3.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. verses. And consider how the
manifestation and revelation of this better Covenant has filled Heaven and
Earth with a greater light and manifestation of the Divine glory than any the
World knew before or could ever have known without it, and you will fall Down
and worship before the throne of God, and of the Lamb; saying, Blessing, Glory,
and Praise be unto the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; who has thus
blessed us with the blessings of such a Covenant: all Spiritual blessings, all
Heavenly blessings, all Spiritual blessinngs in heavenly places in Christ;
Ephesians. 1.3. This Covenant of Grace is called the New Covenant; but only with
respect to the promulgation of it; forasmuch as it was not promulgated till
after the fall of Man, and the frustration and making void the law or old
Covenant, as a Covenant of works, and utter incapacity of that Covenant to give
Man righteousness and life by the deeds or works of it, as the Apostle argues,
Heb. 8. v. 7, 8, 11, 13. But the Covenant of Grace is also called the
everlasting Covenant with respect to the institution and establishment of it
betwixt the Father and the Son, not only because it is to everlasting, and
endures for ever, but also because it is from everlasting, and before all
time, and is therefore said to be given us in Christ before the World was, Tit.
1.2. In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie, promised before the
world began; that this is the Covenant of Grace is plain, because it is that,
upon which the hope of eternal life is builded, and it is called the promise,
as it is often called in Scripture, as Gala. 4.28. Now we Brethren, as Isaac
was, are the children of the promise, i. e. of the new Covenant, for this is
the new Covenant, which is compared to that Jerusalem which is above, and is
the Mother of all the children of God, as Gala. 4.22, 23, 24, 25, 26. Upon this
account they are called heirs of the promise, i. e. of the new Covenant or
Covenant of Grace, and not of the old Covenat or Covenant of Works, as Gala.
4.31. So then brethren, we are not children of the Bondwoman, but of the Free,
i. e. not of the old Covenant, but of the new. Now of this promise, viz. this
promise of God that cannot lie, it is said to have been before the world began,
i. e. given us in Christ the Mediator of this Covenant, and unto whom this
promise was given for us, before all time, before the World began, i. e. from
Eternity. And if any shall enquire why then was the law or Covenant of works at
all added and promulgated; The Answer is ready, as the Apostle, Gala. 3.19. It
was added, because of transgression; i. e. that by the occasion of Sin and
transgression of that Covenant, Men might be prepared to entertain and embrace
the Promise and Covenant of Grace, and so look unto the free Promise and
Covenant of Grace in Christ for Life and Salvation, and so Romans 5.20, 21. The
law entered that sin might abound, etc.

Now as it was for the further manifestion of Gods greater glory, and for Man's
greater good, that this new Covenant, or Covenant of Grace should be declared,
so it was necessary that Sin should first enter, in the transgression and
frustration of the law as a Covenant of works, that a fit occasion, and season
might be offered for the declaring and making known this blessed Covenant, this
new and everlasting Covenant of Grace. And thus by the disannulling and making
void the old or first Covenant as a Covenant of works, which could not have bin
without the entrance of Sin, is way made for bringing in the Covenant of Grace!

4ly. That God might cut off all occasion of boasting from Man, and that no
flesh might glory in his sight; had Man been justified by the works of the law,
and his own righteousness, he should have had whereof to boast, as the Apostle,
Romans 4.2. For if Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to Glory; but
not before God; Now therefore God in his infinite wisdom has ordered and
overruled things unto this issue, that by the work^ of the law no flesh should
be justified in his sight, that so no flesh might glory in his sight, no, not
one amongst the many Sons which are and shall be brought unto glory; that as
Abraham the father of the faithful, so none of the children of Abraham might
have whereof to glory before God: God is very jealous of his glory and will not
have any creature in Heaven or Earth, to come in as a sharer with him in that
glory, whcih is his own peculiar, and appertains unto himself alone. And
therefore has so wisely disposed things in the aeconomy of Salvation, that Man
being raised from the lowest degree and Abyss of Sin and misery to the highest
pitch and height of Grace and glory, should have nothing to boast of, nothing
to glory in before him; but to cry, Grace, Grace unto this spiritual
Workmanship and building of God by Jesus Christ even from the first foundation
stone to the topstone thereof, as Zech. 4.7. So that now boasting is here for
ever excluded and, glorying cut off from all flesh, as Romans 3.27. Where is
boasting then? It is excluded, by what law? of works? Nay, but by the law of
Faith. The law of works, had it carried the glory of giving life and
righteousness to Man, could not have excluded boasting, but had admitted
boasting even amongst the Sons of glory; every person amongst them would have
had something of his own to boast of; his own free will against Gods free
Grace; his own works and righteousness against Gods free promise and Grace in
Christ Jesus: But now by the law of Faith boasting is utterly and for ever
excluded. And that this was Gods design is plain, from 1 Cor. 1.29, 30, 31.
Ephesians. 2.9. And thus, as Gods own glory is his highest end, (as in all his other
works, so also in this great work of justification by Faith, and not by the
works of the law,) so his own most Holy and Sovereign will is the most perfect
Rule in order to that end, as Ephesians. 1.11, 12. Who works all things after the
counsel of his will, That we should be to the praise of his Glory. There is
nothing more hateful to God than Pride. The Angels for Pride were cast down to
Hell; God resists the proud, but gives Grace to the humble; a proud
professor is most hateful to God; for a professor to make himself his end in
his Religious works and duties, as Zech. 7.5, 6. and to make his own will his
rule, as 2 Pet. 2.10. is to make himself a God to himself: And is the highest
contradiction to the Divine will, which is the most perfect rule of his
obedience, and to the Divine glory, which is his highest end; now therefore God
has so provided, that amongst all those that are justified, (not by the works
of the law, or their own righteousness, but by Faith in Jesus Christ,) no flesh
should glory in his sight either by ascribing to his own free will in
opposition to Gods free Grace or in his own works and righteousness in
opposition to the free promise and the righteousness of God, which is by the
Faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe.

5. It has seemed good to the most wise and holy God, by the interposition of
sin in the transgression of the first Covenant, and the frustration thereof as
to any possibility of giving Righteousness and Life to any man under the
Heavens (under which all are concluded, and shut up) to order things unto this
issue, that so occasion might be given to glorify his justice in the punishing
of sin, and to Reveal his wrath from Heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of Men; as Romans 1.18. Had there been no sin, there had been no
wrath; and so no manifestation of Gods righteous judgment, no revelation of his
wrath from Heaven against all unrighteousness of men upon this Earth. Now it
was absolutely n^^^ssary with respect to Gods greater glory, that as his mercy,
grace and Love should be manifested toward some; as has been already showed;
so his just wrath and the power of it should also be made manifest against
others who upon that occount are called Vessels of wrath and fitted to
destruction; as others are called Vessels of mercy, and aforehand prepared unto
glory; as, Romans 9.22, 23, v. What if God willing to show his wrath and to make
his power known, endured with much long suffering the Vessels of wrath fitted
to destruction^ There are amongst men in this World Vessels of Wrath as well as
Vessels of Mercy: As amongst men, Vessels have their denomination from that
which they contain and are filled up with: So Vessels of Oil, Vessels of Wine,
Vessels of Water, etc. So here some are called Vessels of Mercy, because they
are filled with Mercy, Grace and Love from God in and through his Son Jesus
Christ; and by this mercy, grace, and love of God in Christ to them, they are
aforehand prepared unto glory: So on the other hand, others are called Vessels
of wrath, because they are the objects of Gods wrath, and by the fullness of
Sin, when it is finished and grown ripe in them, they are fitted to
destruction, and shall be filled with the infinite wrath of God, and that for
ever: For their worm dies not, and their fire is not quenched; as Mark 9.44.
Now such was the will, the sovereign will of God, that this warth of his, and
the Power of this wrath should be manifested and showed forth in the glory of
it toward these Vessels of warth, what if God willing, (...): as much as
determining, resolving in ^he Council of his will: For here the word (willing)
does not signify barely a consent of the will, that such a thing shall be
done; but a fixed purpose and Counsel of the Divine will determining and
decreeing: To show his wrath and to make his power known on the Vessels of
wrath fitted to destruction. Now there had been no occasion for the revelation
of this part o^ the Divine will, and the showing forth his wrath, and the
making of his power know toward these Vessels of wrath, if sin had not once
entered, and the Law by transgression been disabled as to the giving Man Life
and Righteousness by the works of it; yea, if there had been no sin, there had
been no Vessels of wrath, nor any fitting of them to destruction. And thus the
wise and holy God has overruled Sin and the Transgression of his holy Law to
his own glory, in the manifestation of these Vessels of wrath amongst Men in
this World, and in the fitting of them to destruction; and in taking occasion
thereby to show his wrath, and to make his Power known partly in this World,
and more abundantly in that which is to come: So that all the patience and
long-suffering of God toward these Vessels of Wrath, has no other issue than
by their continuance in Sin, and filling up the measure of their Iniquity, to
ripen and fit them to destruction: And after the hardness and impenitency of
their hearts to treasure up to themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and
the revelation of the righteous judgment of God, as Romans 2.5, 6. And thus have
we done with the Doctrinal Part: I proceed to the Application.

Use 1. Hence we may infer and be informed that no Man can be justified by the
light within him and by his obedience to that light; there has been a
Generation of Men, amongst us, that have made a greater noise about the light
within, and which they say is in ever Man in its measure and degree, and that
by harkening to the light within, and obeying the same, a Man may be righteous,
yea, become perfect, and (as they have affirmed) to be without Sin; but let us
a little examine the matter, and we shall quickly find the falsehood of this
boasting and confidence; for this light, as they call it, is either true or
false; if false and not warranted by the Holy Scriptures, then it is not light,
but darkness; and as our Lord says, Mat. 6.23. If therefore the light that is
in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness? But we will suppose that this
light which they speak of and affirm to be in every Man be true light in its
measure and degree; and if it be so, then at best it can be but the light of
Gods Holy law, as the works of it is written in the Conscience of a Man: It can
pretend no higher; and then no Man that can pretend to the highest degree of
that light, and of obedience thereunto, can possibly become righteous and be
justified in the sight of God thereby: For then a Man might be justified by
works of the law contrary to the clear light of the Holy Scriptures: But
forasmuch as no Man shall or can be righteous and justified before God by the
law and the deeds or works thereof in whatsoever manner or degree they can be
performed by him: It is most clear, certain and plain, that no Man can be
justified in the sight of God by the light within, nor by all his obedience
thereunto.

2. Hence we may also infer, and be certainly ^formed, that no M^n can be
justified in the sight of God by Morality or Moral Virtue; Morality or Moral
Virtue, is nothing else but obedience and conformity to the Moral law contained
in the Decalogue or Ten Commandments, though generally it is restrained to the
Duties of the Second Table: And many of the Heathens, (who knew nothing of
instituted Religion and Worship, which depend only upon Divine Revelation) have
attained unto diverse Moral Virtues, and have therein excelled many called
Christians, and many amongst the professors of Christianity, have made little
pretense unto or Conscience of instituted worship further than the bare name of
Religion, yet have been found amongst Men more Morally honest and virtuous than
some others that have had a greater name and fame for Religion; and thereby
have attained more reputation and esteem amongst Men, than multitudes of loose
pretenders to instituted Religion: Yet when all due encourgement and praise is
given and allowed to Moral Virtue and Honesty wherever it is found; It must be
affirmed and is certainly true; that no man under the Heavens can be Justified
in the sight of God by Moral virtue; for then a man might be justified by the
deeds of the Law: and that by the deeds of the Law in one part of it only, i.
e. by the deeds of the second Table, when the deeds of the first are omitted.
But for as much as by the deeds of the Law no flesh shall be justified in his
sight; it follows as a necessary and undeniable consequence that moral virtue
cannot justify a man; nor that any man can be justified by moral virtue in the
sight of God; and although there have not been wanting amongst the Philosophers
of old, and amongst false Christians of latter times, who have by Disputing,
Preaching and Printing, both with their Tongues and Pens endeavored to exalt,
magnify and cry up Morality against the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
the righteousness of Faith; yet have not been able to prevail in that attempt.

3 dly. Hence also we may as certainly infer and be informed that those that
are justified in the sight of God, are not justified by inherent grace and
sanctification: It Is a great and a blessed truth, that all that are justified
are also sanctified, as Titus 2.11, 12. For the grace of God that brings
Salvation, has appeared unto all men; teaching us that denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
World: We will suppose that the Grace of God, is taken for the Doctrine of the
Grace of God in Christ which has appeared to all men, i. e. to Jew and
Gentile; by the Gospel that brings Salvation, i. e. the glad tidings of
Salvation, and Salvation it self when it is believed and embraced in the heart
of any man by Faith. Now this grace of God does teach us,

1 st. Doctrinally when it is received only by a common and not saving Faith;
as Historical or Temporary Faith is such Faith as Devils, and wicked Men, and
Hypocrites may have; as James 2.19, 20. Mat. 13.20, 21, 22. When it is thus
received, it teaches us Doctrinally, i. e. the Light of the Gospel of the
Grace of God, that teaches men the Doctrine of Salvation; the righteousness of
Gods Justification by Faith in Christ, teaches us also To deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
World. Which particulars do expressly contain the whole and complete
Sanctification of the Heart and of the Life, i. e. in Mortification of Sin; and
all manner of Holy and Godly walking and conversation amongst men in this
World: So that if any person pretending to this Doctrine of Justification, and
righteousness by faith in Christ be otherwise than a Truly, Holy, Mortified,
and Sanctified person he is self-convict and left without excuse; as the
Gentiles were by sinning against, and walking contrary to the light of Nature:
So these loose Christians by sinning against and walking contrary to the Light
of Grace, the fault is not in the Grace of God but in their own selves; who
hereby proclaim to all the World, that they have received this Grace or
Doctrine of the Grace of God in vain.

2 dly. But then when this Doctrine of the Grace of God is embraced sincerely
and with a saving Faith, such as is the Faith of the operation of God; as Col.
2.12. And the Faith of Gods Elect, as Tit. 1.1. And Like precious Faith, 2 Pet.
1.1. Then it does effectually teach, and certainly work by the same Faith, all
that Sanctification and Holiness of Heart and Life here mentioned: And so
again, 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God: So that the same holy Spirit of God which applies Christ to
our Faith for righteousness and justification, does also apply Christ to us as
and for our sanctification: And every person that is truly justified in the
Name of the Lord Jesus, is also as truly sanctified by the Spirit; and it is as
impossible for a justified person to be distitute of inherent Grace and
Sanctification, as it is for a man living in the body to be so, without the
Soul, James 2.26. Nevertheless Justification and Sanctification, Righteousness
imputed and inherent, are distinct and different things, and must fall under a
distinct consideration; and must not, cannot, be confounded; They differ as the
cause and effect, as the antecedent and consequent: and though inherent Grace
and Sanctification does always accompany the person justified; yet inherent
Grace and Sanctification is not that Righteousness by, or upon which any person
is or can be justified in the sight of God: For inherent Grace and
Sanctification is no more, can rise no higher than the writing of the Law in a
man's heart, and so it is described and set out by God himself, Heb. 8.10.
Quoted out of Jer. 31.33. I will put my Laws into their mind, and write them in
their hearts: The work of grace inherent, is but the writing of the Law in the
heart; and all Sanctification and Holiness is but the outward expression of
this Law internally written in the Heart: Now if a man could be justified in
Gods sight by inherent Grace and Sanctification, he might be justified by the
Deeds and Works of the Law; and that by imperfect Deeds and Works too; for such
is sanctification, but the imperfect writing of the Law in the Heart; and such
are all even the highest seize of inherent righteousness and acts of new
and holy obedience in the Saints, but imperfect, Phil. 3.12. And Romans 7.22, 23,
24, 25. Now forasmuch as No flesh can be justified in his sight by the Deeds of
the Law; it is manifest and follows, by necessary ^^nsequence that no man can
be justified by inherent sanctification and obedience; seeing all inherent
Sanctification and Obedience is but the writing of the Law in the Heart, and
the Deeds of that Law so written. And that which some men have imagined and
endeavored to maintain (that a believer is justified in the sight of God by
Evangelical righteousness, i. e. his sincere obedience, or obedience of Faith:
And that having obtained remission of sins through Faith in Christ's blood, his
Sincere or Evangelical obedience is accepted of God as if it were perfect) will
plainly appear to be a false, and unsound assertion, and most contrary to the
truth of the Gospel; for although both parts of this assertion be true in sensu
divisio, i. e. in their different sense, and with respect to the different
matters to which they do relate; yet in sensu conjuncto, as they are confounded
and referred to one and the same matter, they are utterly false and corrupt; as
namely, That a believer is justified by Evangelical righteousness is a blessed
truth, if referred to the right subject and matter of justifying righteousness
which the Gospel does reveal: But this righteousness then is no other than the
righteousness of God, i. e. the personal and perfect obedience and
righteousness, which Christ who is God Man has performed for us, and in our
stead as the Second Adam and Head of the whole Church of the Elect; And is
therefore called, The righteousness of God, in opposition to all a man's own or
inherent righteousness, Romans 10.3, 4. Phil. 3.9. And that this is the only
Evangelical righteousness, i. e. that only Righteousness which the Gospel does
reveal. For Justification is clear from Romans 1.16, 17. I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto Salvation to every one that
believes to the Jew first and also to the Greek: For therein is the
righteousness of God revealed from Faith to Faith; as it is written, the just
shall Live by Faith, i. e. not in his own, but in the righteousness or another;
which is Jesus Christ: Who is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one
that believes, Romans 10.4. But if you will understand Evangelical righteousness
of, and refer it to inherent grace and sanctification, then it is utterly
false; for then a man is justified by the Law and the Deeds of it; Seeing
inherent Grace and Sanctification is no other as has been already showed, And
again, as to the other part of this Assertion, namely, that God does accept the
sincere Obedience of a Believer as if it were perfect; is also a blessed truth,
if you refer it to Sanctification only; but if you refer it to Justification,
it is utterly false: for no Righteousness of Man is or can be accepted of God
as the matter of his Justification in his sight, as has been already proved;
for that were for a Man to be justified by the Works of the Law, or his own
Righteousness, which is contrary to the Scriptures: Now therefore, the sum of
the matter is; that no Righteousness can be mentioned or accepted of God in
Justification, but the Righteousness of Christ only; and although Inherent
Righteousness, namely, Sanctification of Heart, and Holiness of Life in a
Believer is accepted of God through Christ, as if it were perfect; yet it is so
accepted as the truth and matter of his Sanctification, but not as the matter
of his Justification, wherein none but Christ and his Righteousness can or
ought to be mentioned.

Use 2. Let the consideration of this truth caution and warn every man to
beware and take heed how he goes about directly or indirectly to establish his
own Righteousness, or to seek Righteousness in and of himself by the Deeds and
Works of the Law, i. e. by his own inherent qualifications, and internal or
external acts of Obedience, and so become disobedient, and not submit himself
to the Righteousness of God by Faith in Christ. The carnal Jews of old (called
Israel) fell under this woeful mistake; Romans 9.31, 32. But Israel which followed
after the Law of Righteousness, has not attained to the Law of Righteousness;
wherefore, because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the Works of
the Law: for they stumbled at that stumbling-stone: they followed after the Law
of Righteousness; i. e. they served God instantly day and night, as Acts 26.7.
they attended to all the services of the Law in Sacrifices, and costly
Offerings, and toilsom as well as chargeable observances, in which they spared
no cost, nor pains, but continued day and night, and that with zeal and
fervency; for so was that Service carried on by Sacrifices and Offerings of
diverse sorts and kinds, which were day and night made, and some of them
continually before the Lord; and when the old were (...) moved, new were
brought in and placed (...) their room; so that there was no vacancy no
cessation, but a continued service day an^ night, from one years end to
another, an^ this for the space of 2000 years; and upon this account, as they
did, so they suffered much from the Nations round about, both near an^ far off,
and that with much constancy, no^ shrinking, nor turning away from the servic^
of their God in times of greatest danger an^ tribulation, as the Histories of
Ezra, Nehemiah, Daniel, and the 11th of the Hebrew^ do abundantly declare: And
yet they attained not to the Law of Righteousnss, wherefore? because they
sought it not by Faith, but as were by the Works of the Law: those words, as it
were, are of great significancy; showing, that in the nature and scope of their
Sacrifices they were directed unto Christ, and to seek Righteousness not by
their own Works, and in themselves, but by Faith in Christ; and this was their
common Profession and Prophecies they had, and promises of Salvation by the
Messiah, whom had they looked unto by Faith, and sought Righteousness by Faith
in him, they had been safe: But they sought it, i. e. Righteousness, not by
Faith, but as it were by the Works of the ^aw; so that whilst they professed
Christ, and Faith in him for Righteousness, they closely and underhand pursued
their own Righteousness, and rested in the Law, and ^he Works thereof, and so
miscarried; and this was their stumbling-stone under so bright a Profession as
they made to the contrary.

Note. That these things are mentioned and quoted out of Heb. 11.32 -- 37. not
to impeach, or once to question the right Faith of those Worthies there
mentioned; or as if they obtained not the Righteousness of God; for it is said,
verse 39. These all obtained a good report through Faith; but to show what
things were done and suffered by the body of that People for many hundred
years, and yet resting upon, and trusting to their own Works and Righteousness
by the Law, they attained not unto the Righteousness of God; i. e. the
generality of them, most of them, through all those Generations, as is expressly
declared, Romans 9.31, 32. For a Person or People may do much, and suffer much,
and yet all in vain, when by a fleshly mind, resting upon these things as their
own Righteousness, they submit not themselves to the Righteousness of God;
which is the same that the Apostle takes for granted, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3. and
which he also plainly declares, Gal. 5.2, 3, 4. and herein appealeth to
themselves to be their own Judges, Gal. 3.3, 4.

And God grant that it be not our stumbling-stone also under so great a
Doctrinal^ Faith, and Profession of Justification by Faith, and not by the
Works of the Law, that we may not secretly and underhand closely pursue, and
go about to establish our own Righ^teousness, if not directly, yet as it were
by the Works of the Law: And it is that which the Nature of Man is very prone
and strongly inclined unto, and therefore has great need of caution and
warning in this matter; for God, who is jealous of his Glory, will search out
this close Hypocrisy, and punish this dissimulation in us, as well as he did
in them: And this new and late covering, which some have found out to hide
their nakedness, will not be sufficient; for what does it avail them to say,
that we are justified by Evangelical Righteousness, when this Evangelical
Righteousness, as they call it, is not Christ's, but our own Righteousness; our
sincere, but imperfect Obedience; this is to blind our selves, and mock God;
whilst we look one way, and row another; this is as it were by the Works of the
Law, to seek Righteousness, and not by Faith: And it were to be wished, that
these men who make their boast, and talk so much of sincere Obedience under the
notion of Evangelical Righteousness, and thereby darken counsel by words
without knowledge, and confound the Doctrine of Justification with that of
Inherent Grace and Sanctification, would first show sincerity in submitting
themselves to the Righteousness of God which is by Faith in Christ, and as
sincerely deny their own Righteousness in point of Justification: And this
would be a better evidence of their sincere Obedience to the Gospel of ^^sus
Christ, than any they give without it: ^e not deceived, God is not mocked; He
that made the Eye, shall not he see? and he that made the Ear, shall not he
hear? and he that formed the spirit of man within him, shall not he understand?
and search out this Idol hid amongst the stuffed? as it were by the Works of the
Law. This is new Protestant Popery, whilst men glorying in the name of the
Protestant Religion, condemn those of the Church of Rome for their Doctrine of
Justification by Works, and they themselves are guilty of the same thing, Romans
2.1. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whomsoever thou art that judge:
for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that
judge, do the same thing.


Turpe est Doctori quem culpa redarguit ipsum. Now to back this caution, and
(if it may be) to fix it upon your spirits with the greater force, I shall add
three Arguments against this attempting, or going about to establish your own
Righteousness; namely;

1. This is certainly a vain and foolish attempt; we may allude to Psalm. 2.1,
2. Why do the Heathen rage? and the People imagine a vain thing? the Kings of
the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel togethe^ against the
Lord, and against his Christ.

There have been those, who from the be^ginning of the World, and in all Ages
an^ Generations thereof, as they have had advantages, have attempted by all
Humane Forc^ and Policy against the Lord, and against hi^ Christ, to oppress
and exclude his Gospel and Spiritual Kingdom among men in thi^ World; but they
have not succeeded; they have been still frustrated and disappointed therein:
For yet Christ sits as King upon his holy Hill of Zion, and there he shall sit
and Reign by his Word and Spirit maugre all opposition of Hell and Earth: So
that they have imagined a vain thing which they were never yet able to
accomplish, nor ever shall be. So, let me tell you from the sure Word of God,
that all such as have gone, and do go about to establish their own
Righteousness, and not submit themselves to the Righteousness of God, have
imagined, and do imagine but a vain thing, which they shall never obtain: For
God has said, and will not repent, that by the deeds of the Law no flesh shall
be justified: And, God is not as man that he should lie, nor as the Son of man
that he should repent; has he said, and shall he not do it? or has he spoken,
and shall he not bring it to pass? Numb. 23.10. There have been those under the
Old Testament that tried this attempt to the utmost, but were miserably
disappointed in the Issue; Romans 9.31. They attained not to the Law of
Righteousness; and shall any think to succeed better under the New Testament,
where the Light is more clear, and the utter impossibility of this attempt so
plainly declared, that he that runs may read: And what a foolish and absurd
thing is it, to attempt that which a man knows, or may know beforehand he
shall never be able to accomplish?

2. This is also a sinful as well as a vain attempt, and therefore beware and
take heed of it, it is disobedience in the highest degree; 1 Pet. 2.6, 7, 8.
Verses This is Spiritual wickedness, and therefore greater Spiritual wickedness
is that which has in it spirits of wickedness, and therefore more strong and
vigorous. We see by experience a little quantity of Spirits extracted by Art,
has much more vigor and strength in it than a far larger quantity in the
common bulk. Where the spirits are not united but dissipated in the common
matter; vis unita fortior: Here are the spirits of many sins united in one, in
this going about to establish a man's own righteousness in opposition to the
righteousness of God. For,

1 st. Here is the Sin of ignorance, not (...) invincible ignorance, for that
cannot be i^^puted as Sin to any; but of willful or willin^ ignorance, as the
Apostle Peter reproves the scoffers of the last times, 2 Pet. 3.5. (...) this
they are willingly ignorant of, etc. The^ might have known if they would, but
the^ were not willing to know; they were willing to be ignorant; that so they
might scoff the more freely at the promise of his coming* And so here men are
willingly ignorant o^ Gods righteousness, that they might establish their own;
So Romans 10.3. For they being ignorant of Gods righteousness and going about to
establish their own righteousness; have not submitted themselves to the
righteousness of God. And v. 2. For I bear them record, they have a zeal of
God, but not according to knowledge. This ignorance and want of knowledge (...)
them is no extenuation or excuse of their sin, but an aggravation of it; as
that whereby they, i. e. the Jews, are left without excuse, because they might
and ought to have known better; seeing the whole dispensation and aeconomy of
the Ceremonial Law was in the proper scope and tendency of it to lead them out
of themselves unto Christ, to seek righteousness by Faith in him, and upon this
account they are as much without ^xcuse as the Gentiles were, Romans 1.19, 20.
Who when they knew God or might, have ^nown him, yet did not glorify him as
God.

2 ly. Here is the Sin of Enmity and Rebellion of the Will against God; They
submitted not themselves to the Righteousness of God; '^is a Meiosis wherein
more is employed than expressed: They submitted not, but rebelled and set
themselves against the Righteousness of God, from the enmity of their Carnal
mind: And Christ says unto this Generation of Men, John 5.40. And ye will not
come unto me that ye might have Life.

3. Here is the Sin of Pride: Going about to establish their own, they
submitted not themselves to the righteousness of God; Going about to establish
their own Righteousness; here is the Pride of man's Heart, he will exalt
himself, he will have somewhat of his own; he will exalt his own Righteousness
against the Righteousness of God; and such is the Pride of man by nature, that
if he cannot have Righteousness and Life in himself, he will not be beholden to
another for it; and if left to himself, will rather perish eternally than go
out of himself to seek Righteousness and Life in Christ.

4 ly. Here also is the Sin of obstinacy an^ willful re^using and rejecting the
Righteousness of God in Christ, though infinitely be^ter than their own; and
persisting therei^ in opposition to all the clear Light of God Word, and those
convictions of the Spirit fastened thereby upon their minds: As the holy man
Stephen tells them plainly, Act* 7.51. Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised i^
Heart and Ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost: As your Fathers did, so do
ye. So that all these things with some others which might be mentioned, do make
it plainly appear to be a very sinful and wicked attempt in; man to go about to
establish his own Righteousness. But,

3. It is also a very dangerous attempt, none can engage in this attempt but
with the utmost peril and loss of his Soul, if persisted in a man's own
righteousness is a stumbling stone, at which they stumble; and so fall and
perish eternally: So fall upon that stone which breaks them to pieces, and
provoke till it falls upon them and grinds them to powder: Namely, Christ the
Foundation stone in Sion; So Romans 9.32. For the^ stumbled at that stumbling
stone, as it is written, Behold I lay in in Sion a stumbling stone and rock of
offense. But who are they that stumbled? But those that sought not
Righteousness by Faith in Christ, but as it were by the works of the Law: And
wherefore did they stumble at Christ and his Righteousness? But because they
went about to establish their own: Their zeal, their madness for a
Righteousness of their own made them blind and not able to see the
Righteousness of God, made them enemies unto, and haters of Christ, and his
Righteousness; and in all the world none such enemies to Christ, and the
Righteousness of God as these; none such inveterate Persecutors of Christ and
his Holy Apostles, and that spoke against the things Preached by them, as these
men did contradicting and blaspheming, Act. 13.45. 1 These. 2.15, 16. Their Zeal
for their own Righteousness and made them exceedingly mad, raging and foaming
out their own shame against the truth of the Gospel, viz. The Doctrine of Free
Grace and Justification by Faith in Christ alone, without the Deeds or Works of
the Law.

Use. 3. This Doctrine speaks by way of Exhortation, and that first to
Sinners, and secondly to Saints; first to them that are out of Christ, and
secondly to them that are in Christ.

1. To Sinners and such as are out Christ; if there be no hope for you, no
po^sibility for you to obtain Righteousness an^ Justification by the works of
the Law in the sight of God; then be Exhorted to escap^ for your Lives, and fly
for refuge unto Jesus Christ the hope, the only hope, the (...) hope set before
you in the Gospel: Yo^ have no hope by the Law, but there (...) hope for you in
Jesus Christ: Grace for the greatest Sinners in the World. There i^ hope in
Christ for the Jew and for the Gentile: There is no man upon Earth so holy that
can be justified by the deeds of the Law* And there is no man upon Earth so
sinful and wicked but he may obtain Righteousness and be justified by Faith in
Jesus Christ* Romans 9.30. What shall we say then, that the Gentiles who followed
not after the Law of Righteousness, have attained unto righteousness, even the
Righteousness which is of Faith Oh therefore make haste and fly for refuge unto
Jesus Christ. The true Heirs of Promise, Heb. 6.17. are described by this
Character, ver. 18. Who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hop^ set
before us. And all that are or shall be Heirs of Promise must and shall fly for
refuge to lay hold upon this hope, which is Jesus Christ, who is entered within
the vail; who when he had by himself purged our sins and brought in everlasting
Righteousness for us (as Dan. 9.29. To make an end of sins, and to bring in
Everlasting Righteousness,) sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high,
Heb. 1.3. Now here is hope set before you in Christ, fly for refuge and lay
hold upon it by Faith; and so lay hold on Eternal Life, and lay hold on
Everlasting Righteousness; for Christ is Eternal Righteousness, and Eternal
Life to all that lay hold on him by Faith; Who have fled for refuge. Here is a
reference and allusion to the Cities of refuge set apart by Gods special
appointment from amongst the Cities of Israel; which were in number six, in
convenient places, and at convenient distances from all parts: To the end that
he that had slain a man at unawares might fly, and there find refuge and safety
from the Avenger of blood, Numb. 35.10. -- 16. These Cities of refuge were
Types, and did point unto Jesus Christ; the Holy Ghost thereby signifying and
testifying beforehand Christ the True and Spiritual Refuge to Sinners amongst
men, from the Avenger of Blood; with the vindictive and revenging Justice of
God, and his Infinitive Wrath gone out in pursuit of all guilty and bloody
Sinners, and Violaters of his Righteous and Holy Law: And the benefit of these
Cities of Refuge was not only extended to the Jews but also to the Strangers*
as v. 15. The Holy Ghost plainly testifying hereby the extent of this true
Refuge in Christ unto the Gentiles as well a^ to the Jews; and that all that
fled unto him should be safe, and escape the pursuing Vengeance and Wrath of
God due unto Sin and the Transgression of his Holy Law; and the assurance of
Safety and Refuge to Sinners flying unto Christ, both of the Jew and of the
Gentiles, is laid in Christ, bearing their Sins, and fulfilling the
Righteousne^^ of the Law for them: It being an Act o^ Glorious Justice as well
as an Act of Sove^raign Mercy and Grace in the Father to just^^fie him that
believes in Jesus, as Romans 3.26 and Isa. 53.11. That he might be ju^^ and the
justifier of him that believes in Jesus* And my Righteous Servant shall
justify m^^ny, for he shall bear their iniquities. O^* therefore Sinner thou
need not fear Refug^ in Christ! Seeing not only the Grace an^ Mercy of God,
but his Justice also, to which I may add his Faithfulness and Truth in (...)
Word and Promise are thy security: O^* therefore Sinner fly for Refuge to lay
ho^^ upon this hope which is set before thee, and which is sure and steadfast,
and enters in within the Vail: And for the setting home this Exhortation, I
shall add three Motives and give three Directions, and so conclude this first
branch of the Exhortation.

Motive 1. Sinner know that necessity is upon thee; thou must fly, or die; and
therefore I may say to thee as the Angels did to Lot when Sodom was destroyed,
Genesis 19.17. Escape for thy Life, look not behind thee; neither tarry in all the
plain: Escape to the Mountain lest thou be consumed. There was an absolute
necessity upon Lot in his present case to escape out of Sodom, to escape to the
Mountain, or to be consumed in the Fire of Gods Wrath that was kindled against
Sodom and the Cities of the Plain: And so it is with thee Sinner, Escape for
thy Life, and haste thee unto Jesus Christ; for if the Avenger of Blood in
pursuit of thee, does overtake thee out of Christ thou art a dead man, a lost
and undone man for ever, and wilt be consumed in the Fire of Gods Wrath and
Holy Indignation that is already kindled, and will burn Eternally to the
consuming all Unbelieving and Impenitent Sinners who live and dye out of
Christ; and are not found in him, i. e. united to him by Faith, sprinkled with
his blood, and cloath^d with his righteousness. Oh! therefore fly unto Christ
and get into him, and so keep the blood of sprinkling lest he that destroys
the firstborn should touch thee, Heb. 11.28.

2 Motive. Here is Refuge prepared and provided for thee in Jesus Christ: How
miserable were Man, guilty Man, fallen under Sin, and under the Curse of the Law,
and the Wrath of God, if there were no Refuge for him, no way to escape? The
condition o^ Man, of every Man, would then be desperate; as helpless and
hopeless as that of the Devils; but blessed be God the case is no^ so with fallen
Man as it is with the fallen Angels; Grace, free Grace has put a difference; oh
let us adore God in it, and cry* Grace, Grace to it! there was no Christ to
take the Nature of Angels, or to take hold o^ Angels, as the word signifies,
Heb. 2.16. Bu^ blessed be God there was a Christ found to take the Seed of
Abraham, to make an en^ of Sins, and to bring in Righteousness t^ fallen Man; and
now Salvation is ready* Righ^eousness and Eternal Life is ready: O^ therefore
fly unto Christ, and take Refuge i^ him, and lay hold upon the Hope that is in
Christ for thee!

3 Motive. Yea this Refuge is not a Refuge afar off, but a Refuge near, a
Refuge at hand; it is but st^pping out of thy self, and thine own Righteousness,
and thou art presently in Christ, in this sure Refuge. Great care was taken by
God's Appointment, that the Cities of Refuge should be in convenient places,
not too far off, lest the distance should discourage the guilty Manslayer, and
give advantage to the Avenger of Blood to prevent his escape thither: But the
Cities of Refuge were near both to them that lived in the Land of Canaan, and
also to them that lived beyond Jordan; on the one side of Jordan, and on the
other, that all might have opportunity and encouragement to fly thither; Numb.
35.14. Yea these Cities of Refuge, as they were to be near, so the way was to
be prepared and made plain, that there might be no letts or hindrances in the
way of the poor guilty Man slayer, that was to fly for his Life; Deuteronomy. 19.3.
Thou shall prepare thee a way, and divide the Coasts of the Land (which the
Lord thy God gives thee to inherit) into three parts, that every Slayer may
flee thither. Even so it is with respect to the true Spiritual Refuge in
Christ, it is a Refuge near at hand, and not afar off, that every guilty Sinner
may fly unto it: So that no Sinner has reason to complain and say, Who shall
ascend up into Heaven? i. e. to bring Christ down from above? or who shall
descend into the deep? i. e. to bring Christ back from the dead? No Sinner, say
not in thine heart, nor think that this Refuge is far off; for the Word is nigh
thee, even in thine heart, and in thy mouth; i. e. the Word of Faith that we
preach, Romans 10.6, 7, 8. And if thou will yet ask and further enquire, what
this Word of Faith is; read Romans 10.9. That if thou shall confess with thy
mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart, that God has raised him
from the dead, thou shall be saved. What is nearer than that which is in thy
heart and in thy mouth? Well, so near is Christ unto every Man, unto whom the
Gospel is Preached: Christ that came down from Heaven into the Humane Nature;
the Word that was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and did in the flesh of
Humane Nature bear our sins, and die for us, is risen again from the dead,
received up into Glory: I say, this blessed Jesus is brought near to us in the
Gospel; that if we believe in him we shall be saved; in him, i. e. even Jesus
who has delivered us from the Wrath to come; 1 These. 1.10. And as Christ who
is our Refuge is near; so the Way is prepared, the Valleys are ex^lted, and the
Hills are laid low, the Stumbling blocks are gathered up long ago; Isa. 40.3,
4, 5. compared with Luke 3.4, 5, 6. So that Sinner, here is now no Valley,
whose depth should affright thee; no Mountai^ whose height should discourage
thee; no Stumbling Block left to hinder thee in this flying for Refuge unto
Christ; therefore Sinner, take courage and fly to Christ, and lay hold upon the
Hope set before us; and as God has levelled all that was betwixt Jew and
Gentile, and prepared his way, that every guilty Sinner, both of the Jew, and
of the Gentile, might have free access unto, and acceptance with his Son Jesus
Christ; lay no Stumbling Blocks and put no difficulties in your own way, when
God puts none; but fly for Refuge unto him, and be safe; be happy for ever: But
take along with thee these three Directions.

Direct. 1. First of all; Be speedy in your flight, make no delay; tarry not;
delays are dangerous and opportunities, blessed opportunities, are many times
thereby lost. To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts; as Heb.
3.15. And again, To day, while it is called to day; Heb. 3.13. And again, Now
is the accepted time; this is the day of Salvation; 2 Cor. 6.2. And again says
the Voice of God by his own Son to Jerusalem; Oh that thou had known, at
least in this thy day, the things that belong to thy peace; but now they are
hid from thine Eyes; Luke 19.41, 42. Commonly men fly in haste, and take hold
of the present opportunity to avoid the danger feared; so must thou do Sinner,
if thou art upon thy flight to Christ for Refuge; take hold of the present
opportunity, which if lost, may perhaps never be recalled or recovered; you
know what folly it was in him, who said call Time again; no, Time past cannot
be recalled: The motion of Time is not retrograde, like the Wheels in Ezekiels
Vision; which Went straight forward and turned not as they went: So does Time,
Vestigia nulla retrorsum. Well Sinner, thou have a Day now, a Blessed Time now;
a Day of Grace, a Time when Light shines into thy Heart, Convictions are upon
thy Conscience; thou have a sense of Sin, and feeling of thy Guilt; tremblest
under awakened Apprehensions of the Wrath of God justly due to thy Sin; see
thy Refuge to be only in Christ; have some kindlings of Divine Love and
Affection, some warm Desires unto and Breathings after Christ and Grace: Oh
Sinner make use of this Blessed Time, and lay hold of this Precious Season; and
now or never, take thy flight and speed thee away to Jesus Christ who calls
thee! And let thy Heart answer, Behold, I come unto thee; for thou art the Lord
my God. Lose this Season, and lose all; lose this Season, and lose thy Soul;
lose this Season, and thou art Lost for eve^; for ought thou know: Thou
can not assure thy self, nor can any Man under the Heavens assure thee of
another Day, of a Morrow: No, no, To Day if you will hear his voice; there is
no Morrow mentioned in all the word of God in this case; there is no m^rrow in
the Promise, therefore thou can not expect it; no Morrow in the command,
therefore thou can not work in it: Thou may repen^^ and believe the Gospel
whilst it is called to Day; but if thou staiest till to Morrow it may be it
will be too late; there is but a Day of Grace, and there is no Morrow to
succeed: Jerusalem had her Day, and Esau had his Day; but no Morrow, no
afterward: No, no, then it was too late; read Luke 19.4. Heb. 12.17.

Direct. 2. Be steady in thy flight and persist in thy course; hold on thy way
till thou arrivest at, and be got into the City of Refuge: The guilty
Manslayer, was not safe till he got to the City of Refuge; he was as liable to
fall and perish by the hand of the Pursuer and Avenger of Blood at the Borders
of the City of his Refuge, as he was when further off. It Is not his being not
far off that would do; Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God, says Christ
to the Lawyer that answered well; but he was not in the Kingdom of God for all
that. And whether he ever went on and got in afterward we do not find. You know
who said unto Paul, Thou almost persuadest me to be a Christian; but we find
not that he ever became an altogether Christian. It Is not thy making some
progress toward Christ that will secure thee; but they getting into Christ, and
they being in Christ, 1 John 5.20. Romans 8.1. They that were near the Ark,
perished in the Waters of the Flood as well as they that were further off; none
were saved but they that entered in: Multitudes there are that seem not far off
from Christ, yea many that seem near unto him; but none can be saved but such
as are in him.

Direct. 3. Those that fled to the City of Refuge, were to abide therein, and
not to venture out of it, at least till the death of the High Priest; for if
the Avenger of Blood found him afterward wandering abroad, he might fall upon
him and slay him, Numb. 35.25, 26, 27. Even so Sinner, thou must not only
refuge thy self in Christ for a time, and then wander away after thy own lusts,
worldly interests, or thine own righteousness afterward, but thou must abide in
Christ all the days of thy life, and never draw back through an evil heart of
unbelief; as Heb. 3.12. And thou must persevere in thy Faith, and in thy course
of Holiness; and hold fast the rejoicing of thy hope unto the end; or else thou
must lose all at last; Heb. 10.38, 39. It Is a dangerous thing, when thou have
put thy hand to the Plough, to look back, and remember Lot's Wife, who escaped
out of Sodom, and yet afterward looking back, was turned into a Pillar of Salt:
It Is ill for them that begin in the Spirit, and do afterward end in the Flesh:
It Is dangerous turning back from Christ, and tacking about again to the World
as Wind and Tide serve: We read of many that did so, but never recovered their
former Faith and Profession; Joh. 6.66. From that time many of his Disciples
went back, and walked no more with him. And the Apostle Peter tells us; It had
been better for them not to have known the way of Righteousness, than after
they have known it, to turn aside from the holy Commandment delivered to them;
2 Pet. 2.20, 21. For it is happened to them according to the true Proverb; The
Dog is turned to his old vomit again, and the Sow that was washed to her
wallowing in the mire; v. 22. And ill it is for those that have sought to be
justified by Faith in Christ, to go back again to the Works of the Law; Gal.
5.4. Christ is become of none effect unto you whoever of you are justified by
the Law, ye are fallen from Grace; therefore having fled for Refuge unto Christ,
abide in him as your Refuge.

2d Branch of Exhortation. This Doctrine speaks by way of Exhortation unto
Saints, unto Believers, unto them that are in Christ, and as true Heirs of
Promise have fled for Refuge to lay hold upon the Hope that is s^t before them,
which is Christ; I say it speaks unto them by way of Exhortation, unto three
things.

1. To rejoice in Christ Jesus. The poor guilty Manslayer, when he had fled
and got into the City of Refuge, rejoiced in his Refuge, because there he was
safe and quiet, and the Avenger of Blood could not touch him there: So it
becomes you much more to rejoice in Christ Jesus, your Refuge; for here in
Christ you are safe and quiet, the Guilt of Sin, the Curse of the Law, and the
Avenging Justice and Consuming Wrath of God cannot touch you here in your
Refuge; Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them that are in
Christ; Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us, from the Curse of the Law, being
made a Curse for us; and 1 These. 1.10. Even Jesus, which has delivered us from
the Wrath to come. Oh therefore rejoice in Christ Jesus, because ye are safe
and quiet; your Souls are safe; you are now safe for ever, for ever! Psalm.
107.30. Then are they glad, because they are quiet or safe, i. e. from their
former dangers and fears. Oh Believers! be glad because ye are safe arrived in
Christ your Harbor, your Refuge, and now ye are quiet and safe from your
former dangers and fears; we which have believed do enter into rest; Heb. 4.3.

To rejoice in Christ Jesus, does imply three things; namely,

1. Thankfulness: The poor guilty Manslayer is thankful for the City of
Refuge, and for that he is got into the City of Refuge; he bows and worships
God in thankfulness, and blesses God who appointed the City of Refuge, and
blesses God that he is now got into it: So ye that are got into Christ, your
spiritual and heavenly Refuge, bless God, and be thankful for Jesus Christ, and
that ye are now got into Christ; all is of grace, of free grace, that Christ
was given to be a Refuge to guilty Sinners pursed by the Law and Curse, and
that ye were enabled to flee unto him in your distress; oh give the praise and
glory to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ* who has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ: And again, Col. 1.12, 13, 14.
Giving thanks to the Father, etc. And Rev. 1.5. Unto him that has loved us,
and washed us from our sins in his own Blood!

2. Satisfaction, complete satisfaction and content; the Lot is fallen to you in
a pleasant place; ye are now in the best state that ever you were in, or that
you can be in on this side Heaven. The poor Manslayer has perfect
satisfaction and content in his City of Refuge; and though he may want many
things, yet he has that which is better than all, which is best of all, and
upon that account he rejoices in full contentation, satisfaction and
well-pleasedness with his condition: So ye that are in Christ, have infinitely
more reason to be satisfied, and rejoice in a holy contentation and
well-pleasedness in Christ; for though you may want many outward comforts; yea,
though you may suffer many afflictions and troubles in this world, yet you have
that in Christ which is better than all worldly comforts; and which will
infinitely weigh down and out-ballance all worldly afflictions and troubles.
Oh! therefore rejoice in Christ Jesus in a holy contentation and
well-pleasedness in Christ. Oh Christian! let thy heart in this answer to the
heart of God; for the heart of the Father does rest in Christ in a perfect
satisfaction, complacency and delight; Mat. 3.1. This is my beloved Son in whom
I am well pleased. If the heart of God thus rests in Christ, and is well
pleased, let thy heart do so too.

3. Rejoicing in Christ Jesus does imply a holy relyance upon him alone, and
resting upon him for all, and that with firm trust, and u^most dependence. The
poor guilty Manslayer trusts in his City of Refuge makes it his strong Tower
and Rock of defense to save him, and in confidence thereof he bid^ defiance to
Death it self, and to all danger, and triumphs in this confidence over all his
Enemies, and says, Who is he that shall harm me? Here he can look upon, and
talk with his Enemy, the Avenger of Blood, without danger, and without fear:
Why even so ye that are in Christ should rejoice in Christ Jesus in a holy
relyance and resting upon him alone for all your Salvation; upon his Blood to
cleanse you, and his Righteousness to cloth you, his Wisdom to direct and
conduct you, his Power to preserve you, his Merit to obtain all for you, and
his Spirit to work all in you: Oh thus live by Faith, and rest upon Christ for
all: Oh Christian! this is indeed right living by Faith, and walking by Faith,
when thou live out of thy self upon another, i. e. Christ, and when thou
walk through all the darkness and wickedness of this World in a steady and
firm dependence upon Christ thy Refuge, thy Rock and House of defense to save
thee, thy Righteousness, thy Wisdom, thy Sanctification and Redemption! here
thou may talk with all thine Enemies, and throw the Gantlet to them all in a
holy triumph and rejoicing against That they can do against thee, and say as
Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? And as verse
34. Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died! And as verse 35. Who
shall separate us from the Love of Christ? shall tribulation, etc. As verse. 35,
36. and conclude as a Conqueror, (yea more than a Conqueror through him that
has loved thee) as verse. 38, 39.

2. Next to rejoicing in Christ Jesus, be exhorted from this Doctrine, to put
no confidence in the flesh; Phil. 3.2. Rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no
confidence in the flesh; these two must go together in the heart and walking of
a Christian: You cannot rejoice in Christ Jesus, if you have, or put any
confidence in the flesh; and ye cannot have confidence in the flesh, if ye do
aright rejoice in Christ Jesus: To have confidence in the flesh, is to have
trust and confidence in the Law, and in the Deeds and Works of the Law, done by
you either before or after your laying hold upon Christ as your Refuge; the
internal Deeds of the Law, which are the qualifications, virtues and graces of
the mind, and the external Deeds of the Law, which are the external actions of
thy Life and Conversation, both with respect to God and Man done and wrought in
conformity to the holy Law of God, so far as thou art able to reach it: The
Duties of the first Table and of the second; those which respect Religion
toward God, and those which respect Righteousnes^ toward Man, as they are or
can be performed by thee; these all are comprehended in the word flesh; as
appears plainly by the Apostle; Phil. 3.4. Though I might also have
confidence in the flesh, if any other man thinks that he has whereof to
trust in the flesh; I more: And then he adds all his Legal qualifications,
privileges and performances before his Conversion; v. 5, 6. Circumcised the
eight day, etc. and then he adds all his own Righteousness of the Law in the
internal and external Deeds of it after his Conversion and Faith in Christ; v.
9. And be found in him, not having mine own Righteousness, which is of the Law;
but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of
God by Faith: So that all his own Righteousness both before and after
Conversion, he sets in opposition to the Righteousness of God by Faith in
Christ; and this, all this that is, a man's own Righteousness, he calls flesh,
and forbids and denies any confidence or trust to be put in it, either by
himself, or by any other man; so as that he or any other person should think or
judge, or reckon himself righteous and justified in Gods sight by his own
Righteousness, either of inherent qualifications or external obedience; no, no,
this is abominable; this the Apostle abhors in himself, and deters all others
from: But on the other hand, to trust alone unto Christ, and rely and depend
upon the perfect Righteousness of Christ, which is the Righteousness of God,
and is made ours by Faith, and not by Works; this is to rejoice in Christ
Jesus; but to have confidence in our own Righteousness; this is to have
confidence in the flesh: And there are two reasons why all a man's own
Righteousness is called flesh; 1. Because it is weak and unable to bear the
weight of man's hope and confidence as touching his being righteous thereby, or
justified before God; and thus the Horses of the Egyptians are said to be
flesh, not spirit, because of their weakness and inability to answer the sinful
trust and confidence which the Jews had in them; Isa. 31. v. 3. And 2. Because
it is polluted, sinful and unclean by the infirmity and imperfection of grace
in the best, and by the mixtures of sin and corruption that attend us in our
best Duties; as Isa. 64.6. But we are all as an unclean thing, and our
Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags, and therefore not to be trusted in and
relied upon when we come before, and have to do with God. Now therefore, ye
that are in Christ, and desire to rejoice in Christ Jesus, have; see that ye
have no confidence in the flesh: covet earnestly the best gifts; strive after
the highest seize of inherent grace and holiness, but trust not to, put
no confidence in your own Works and Righteousness; for by the Works of the Law
there shall no flesh be justified in his sight.

3. And last of all; See that ye worship God in the Spirit; Phil. 3.2. For we
are the true Circumcision which worship God in the spirit, rejoice in Christ
Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh: So that to your rejoicing in Christ
Jesus, and having no confidence in the flesh, you must add this also; To
worship God in the spirit. Now to worship God in the spirit implies these
three things; namely,

1. To Worship God in the Spirit, is to Worship God in Christ; those of the
Concision spoken of in the beginning of Phil. 3. Who trusted to Circumcision
and the Works of the Law, or their own Righteousness, Worshipped God in the
Deeds and Works of the Law, which the Apostle here calls Flesh; and so they
Worshipped God not in the Spirit, but in the Flesh: They rested in their own
Deeds and Works, and looked not to Christ Jesus who was the End, Perfection,
and Substance of the Ceremonial Law. And so indeed their Worship terminated in
their own Righteousness, and they did not by Faith go out of themselves unto
Christ and his Righteousness; and so they did not Worship God in the Spirit, i.
e. Evangelically and by Faith in Christ; but legally and presuming upon their
own Merit and Worthiness without Christ; and so all their Worshipping was
Carnal and in the Flesh, after the Old Covenant and Works; but not Spiritual
and Evangelical, i. e. after the New Covenant and Grace. To Worship God
therefore in Christ, and by Faith in him as your only Righteousness, and always
to come unto the Father by the Son; this is indeed to Worship him in the Spirit
relying upon his Mediation, Merit, Blood, and Righteousness as the Mediator of
the New Covenant, and not upon the Old Covenant and Works.

2. To Worship God in the Spirit, is to Worship him sincerely and with a true
heart; and thus to Worship God in the Spirit, is to Worship him in truth, Joh.
4 23, 24. But the hour comes and now is, when the true Worshippers shall
Worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth; for the Father seeks such to
Worship him: God is a Spirit, and they that Worship him, must Worship him in
Spirit and in Truth. These Concisionis^ did Worship God not in Truth, but i^
outward Show and Hyporisie; for they Worshipped him in the outward Circumcision
o^ the Flesh,; but the inward Circumcision of the Heart, which is in the
Spirit, and Soul* and Mind, that was wanting, that they looked not after: Thus,
whilst they doted upon, and boasted of the external Sign, they lost, they
minded not the thing signified, i. e. the internal Grace and Spirit; and there
was not that in the Heart and Spirit within, that might accord and stand with,
and answer to Circumcision without, i. e. the Answer of a good Conscience; no,
the Conscience was neither sprinkled with the Blood of Christ, nor sanctified
by his Spirit; and hence they did not, they could not draw near to God with a
true heart, nor in that full assurance of Faith that God would either hear or
accept them in their Worshipping of him: A guilty Conscience, and an
unsanctified Heart is always hypocritical, and plays false and loose in
worshipping God; hence Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full
assurance of Faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and
our bodies washed with pure water; and the heart must first be sprinkled from
an evil Conscience, and body washed with pure water, by the Blood and Spirit of
Jesus Christ, before any Man can worship God in Spirit and in Truth; and I do,
and dare too affirm it from the Word of God, that there is not a true and
spiritual Worshipper of God in all the World, but such as are so inwardly
sprinkled and washed with the Blood and Spirit of Jesus Christ; all others do
worship God carnally and hypocritically, not in Spirit, and in Truth, not
sincerely and inwardly: Oh therefore, you that are in Christ, see, look to it,
that you worship God in the Spirit, and in Truth, for else there is none in all
the World to do it.

3. To worship God in the Spirit, is to worship him in and according to his own
holy Institutions, Ordinances and Appointments, and not according to Humane
Inventions, not according to Men's Traditions; there is neither Spirit nor Truth
in that Worship that has not the stamp of Divine Authority upon it: Voluntary
Humility and Will Worship, and all things of man's devising in the Worship of
God, and that hold not the Head Christ Jesus, can minister no grace or
spiritual nourishment to the Members and Joints of the Body; Ephesians. 4.16.
compared with Col. 2.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. A little Leaven will leaven the
whole lump, and a little Superstition and Will Worship, after the Doctrines and
Commandments of Men, (...) render the whole Worship vain and fruitle^^ to your
selves, as well as displeasing, provoke^ing and unacceptable to God; and so
whe^^ all the ends of Worship are lost, it becom^ altogether vain; as Mat.
15.9. But in va^^ they do worship me, teaching for Doctrine t^^ Commandments of
men; and who has ^^^quired these things at your hands? will (...) day dash in
pieces the confidence of all suc^ Worshippers, and evidence the vanity, as we^^
as the impiety of all such Worship: Human^ Traditions and Impositions of Men
under what name or pretense soever, whether of E^^clesiastical, or of holy
learned and judicio^ persons, or the Authority of the Civil Magistrate, are not
sufficient to warrant us i^ our worshipping of God: No, no, we mu^^ to the Law,
and to the Testimony; and i^ they speak not according to this Word, ther^ is no
light or morning in them: And whe^^ men have once rejected the Word of the
Lord, what Wisdom is in them? yea wha^ Holiness is in them? what Learning is in
them? yea, professing themselves to be wise, they are become fools; and why
then should you that are in Christ follow them, or be led by them, wherein they
do not follow Christ, or are led by his Word and Spirit? It Is time for us to
leave them who have left the Head Jesus Christ, and have gone a whoring from
under their Gods: What though all the World wander after, and worship the
Beast? yet those whose names are written in the Lambs Book of Life, must not
comply with them; Rev. 13.7, 8. Ye that are in Christ are the Temple of the
Living God; for God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them: What
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? wherefore come out from amongst
them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; 2
Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. And again, Rev. 18 4. And having therefore, dearly Beloved,
these promises, viz. of God's receiving us, and of being a Father to us, and
our being his Sons and his Daughters; as before; Let us cleanse our selvet from
all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear
of God; 2 Cor. 7.1. And let it be considered by you, that if you be rejected of
the World for not worshipping with them after their Rudiments, ye shall be
received of God in Christ, as the true Worshippers, that worship him in spirit
and truth, i. e. that worship him in Christ sincerely, and according to his own
Institution; and whether it is better to please God or Men; to be rejected of
Men, and to be received of God; or to be received of Men, and rejected of God,
judge ye; for to be j^stified by Works and our own Righteousness; and to
worship God by Humane Inventions, are equally hateful and abominable with God,
though highly esteemed amongst Men; Jer. 44.4. Oh do not this abominable thing
that I hate! And Luke 16.15. Ye are they, which justify your selves before
Men, but God knows your hearts; for that which is highly esteemed amongst
Men, is abomination in the sight of God: And for us to think within our selves,
that we can be justified in the sight of God by our own Works or Righteousness;
or that we can worship God by Humane Inventions, or Men's Traditions, is to
think that God is altogether such an one as our selves, for which certainly he
will reprove us; Psalm. 50.21, 22. And there is a secret* yet strong connection
betwixt these two grand Errors* viz. to be justified by Works, and to worship
God by and after our own Inventions; for they commonly go together, and stand
and fall together: And those that are corrupt or loose in the Doctrine of
Justification, are accordingly as corrupt and loose in Worship: And therefore
when a Professing People grow loose in the Worship of God, it is an ill Omen,
and just ground of godly jealousy and fear, that such are unsound and loose in
the Point of Justification: Hence Gal. 4.8, 9, 10, 11. And that they are not
fast knit by a sincere Faith unto Christ the Head; Col. 2.19, 20, 21, 22. Let
us therefore, as many as are perfect, be thus minded; to rejoice in Christ
Jesus; have no confidence in the flesh; and worship God in the Spirit; then,
and not till then are we the true Circumcision; then, and not till then, do we
walk after the spirit, and not after the flesh: As therefore ye have received
Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him: And the God of Peace shall be with
you. Amen.

The Second Part of the True Light Shining in Darkness: To give to us the
knowledge of Salvation, and to guide our feet into the way of Peace.

OR, The Righteousness of God Manifested, opened and declared as the True and
only Matter of our Justification before GOD, through Faith in Jesus Christ.

Being one Sermon or Doctrine of five more remaining upon Romans 3.21, 22. But
now the Righteousness of God, without the Law, is manifested, being witnessed
by the Law and the Prophets: Even the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith
of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe; for there is no
difference.

Preached first in and about the City of London, and now more lately in the
Town of Cambridge.

By Thomas Tailor.

London, Printed for Nath. Crouch, 1693.

The True Light shining in Darkness.
Romans 3.21, 22, But now the Righteousness of God without the Law is manifested,
being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets; even the Righteousness of God,
which is by Faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that Believe; for
there is no difference.


IN the foregoing Verse, and the Discourse thereupon you have heard that there
is no Righteousness of man whereby he can be Justified or Stand before God. Now
lest you should Object and say; If the case be thus with Man, with all Men,
since the fall of Adam; that there is an utter failing of a man's own
Righteousness: so that it is now become impossible for him to be Righteous and
to be Justified in the sight of God by the Deeds of the Law; Then is the case
desperate with him, and there is no hope; I say to obviate such an Objection as
this, and to open a door of hope, o^ a better hope to man, thus desperate in
himself; the Apostle presently adds; But now the Righteousness of God, etc. As
if he had said, Oh! ye lost and un^one Children of Adam, cheer up your Spirits
and let not your Hearts sink; for though there is no hope for you by the Law and
the works of it, yet there is hope for you in Christ: And though there is no
Righteousness of man that can be the matter of your hope for Justification
before him, with whom ye have to do; yet there is a better Righteousness which
you may attain unto by Faith, i. e. the Righteousness of God; But now the
Righteousness of God, etc.

In the Text you have this Righteousness described and set out unto you by six
Characters, each one of which will afford a distinct point of Doctrine, and
deserve a particular Consideration. Namely, 1. It is the Righteousness of God.
2. It is without the Law. 3. It is manifested, being witnessed by the Law and
the Prophets. 4. It is obtained by Faith of Jesus Christ. 5. It is by way of
imputation, (...), unto all and upon all that Believe, i. e. by way of
imputation. 6. It is extended equally and alike unto all them that Believe, for
there is no difference, i. e. betwixt one Believer and another in respect of
Justification and this Righteousness of Faith.


The points of Doctrine accordingly, are or may be these six, Namely, Doct. I.
That the Righteousness which (...) by Faith of Christ to all them that Believe,
i^ the Righteousness of God. Doct. II. That the Righteousness of God which is
by Faith of Christ to them that Believe is without the Law. Doct. III. That the
Righteousness of God without the Law, is manifested, being witnessed by the Law
and the Prophets. Doct. IV. That the Righteousness of God without the Law is
dispensed and brought down to us, and can be obtained by us only by Faith.
Doct. V. That the Righteousness of God which is by Faith of Jesus Christ, is an
imputed Righteousness. Doct. VI. That the Righteousness of God which is by
Faith of Jesus Christ, is extended equally and alike to all them that Believe:
so that there is no difference.


We shall begin with the first of these Namely,

Doct. I. That the Righteousness which is by Faith of Jesus Christ unto all
them that believe, is the Righteousness of God; for so the Apostle calls it in
the Text, (...), The Righteousness of God: And again v. 22. Even the
Righteousness of God; and it is not in vain and without special reason, that
this Character is repeated and inculcated again and again in the Text, as also
in other places; for herein lies one Essential difference and characteristical
distinction betwixt all other Righteousnesses that can be pretended to amongst
Men, and this Righteousness, which is by Faith, namely, that this Righteousness
only and above all others by way of eminency, is the Righteousness of God.

And this will appear and be made plain in these four general Heads.

1. In that God alone is the Author of this Righteousness; and as he is the
Father of Lights from whom every good gift and every perfect gift comes, and in
whom is no variableness nor shadow of turning; Jam. 1.17. So this good gift,
this perfect gift of Righteousness by Faith in his Son Jesus Christ, comes
down from above, from him who is the Father of Lights: And God is the Author of
this Righteousness in a special and peculiar way. Indeed as all things of the
first Creation are of God; Romans 12. ult. so all Righteousness amongst Angels
and amongst Men is of God, and he is the Author and given thereof: The
Righteousness that is found in the Elect Angels, who obey his Word, and do his
Will, whatever it is, is of God, and he is the Author thereof; for he planted
that rectitude and integrity at first in the Angelical Nature, and he has
preserved the same in the Elect Angels that sinned not, and them in it, of his
own Will: And if there be any Righteousness to be found amongst Men, it is
still of God, and he is the Author of it. The Original Righteousness that was
found in the first Adam before the Fall, was of God as the Author of it; for
God made him after his own Image, and planted that Original Righteousness,
Rectitude and Integrity in the Humane Nature, conformable to that holy and
righteous Law under which God put him: And if there be found in Fallen Man any
thing that may be called Righteousness amongst Men, as namely, that which Men
call Moral Righteousness, it is certainly of God, and God is the Author of it,
as it shows forth the work of his Law written at first in their hearts,
though now to be found only in the broken remains of it: So that all
Righteousness, Angelical and Moral, that is found amongst Angels or Men, is of
God, and God is the Author of it, as it is a part of his first Creation; for he
made all things very good; Genesis 1.31. and Man expressly, after his own Image;
verse 26, 27.

But this Righteousness which is by Faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon
all them that believe, is of God after another manner, and God is the Author of
it in a more especial and peculiar way, and by way of eminency above all that
is called Righteousness amongst Angels or Men besides this; for this
Righteousness is of God, and he is the Author of it, as it is indeed the
foundation of his new Creation, and the whole Fabric and Building of the new
Creation is founded upon it; and look as God's new Creation of Grace in and by
his Son Jesus Christ, is a more excellent Workmanship than that of his old
Creation, and God is the Author of the new Creature in a more especial manner;
so also is God the Author of this Righteousness; 2 Cor. 5.17, 18. Therefore if
any man be in Christ he is a new Creature; old things are passed away, behold
all things are become new; and as old things are passed away, and all things
are become new; so particularly the old Covenant and old Righteousness by the
Deeds and Works of the Law is passed away, and a new Covenant and a new
Righteousness brought in, not of Works, but of Grace; not by the Deeds of the
Law, but by Faith in Jesus Christ; and all things are of God; as verse 18. i.
e. all things of this new Creation, and so this Righteousness which is by Faith
of Jesus Christ, is of God in a new and more peculiar and glorious way, under a
new head, i. e. not Adam, but Jesus Christ, and by a new Covenant, not of
Works, but of Grace; and by a new Birth, not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit; not of the Will of Man, but of God; Job. 1.13. Jam. 1.18. Gal. 4.28,
31. And so this Righteousness is called by a new Name, The Righteousness of
God; as God is the Author of it, and has created it, and brought it forth
after a more peculiar manner; and this will appear more plainly in the
consideration of these three particulars; namely,

1 Particular. First, In that God of his infinitely free and sovereign Grace
has in and through his Son Jesus Christ, designed and conferred this
Righteousness upon us by Faith in his Son. I say, God of his free Grace has
conferred this Righteousness by Faith upon the Heirs of Salvation, and that
from all eternity the purpose and counsel of his Grace designed and conferred
this Righteousness by his Son before the World was; 2 Timothy 1.9, 10. But
according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ before the
World began: But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus
Christ, who has abolished death, and has brought immortality and life to
light through the Gospel: What is that which is made manifest by the appearing
of our Savior Jesus Christ, but this Righteousness of God? as in the Text, But
now the Righteousness of God is manifested: Now by this Righteousness of God is
death abolished, and immortality and life brought to light through the Gospel.
Now whence is this Righteousness of God, and so immortality and life brought to
light? was it from, or according to Works? no, but according to his own purpose
and grace, which was given us in Christ before the World began; so that it was
not our Works, but God's free purpose and* grace which designed and conferred
this Righteousness; and if you will know when this purpose and grace, or this
purpose of grace in God moved him hereunto; it was from all eternity, before
the World began; and this Righteousness of God, is not a Righteousness of Work
or by Works, but a Righteousness of Grace, given us in Christ, not as a reward
of Works and of Debt, but as a gift of free and sovereign Grace; and so it is
called; Romans 5. v. 17. Much more they which receive abundance of Grace, and of
the Gift of Righteousness, and all that are justified by this Righteousness,
which is by Faith in Christ, are said to be justified freely; Romans 3.24 Being
justified freely by his grace through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ:
And it is very much to be considered, that Man's Works are always excluded, and
the Grace of God, and the Gift of Righteousness magnified and mentioned in the
business of Justification; Titus 3.5, 6, 7. And for as much as this purpose and
grace, or this gracious purpose of Righteousness by Faith was given us in
Christ before the World began, it is manifest, that Man not having then a
Being, or having done good or evil, not Man's Works or Worthiness, but Gods own
free Grace and Goodness moved him to confer and bestow this gift of
Righteousness; as the Apostle argues concerning Esau and Jacob; Romans 9. v. 11.
For the Children being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that
the purpose of God according to Election might stand; not of Works, but of him
that calls: So that this Righteousness which is by Faith of Jesus Christ, is
the Righteousness of God, as his Grace, his free and sovereign Grace in Christ
has created, designed from all eternity, and freely conferred the same on all
them that believe: And thus no other Righteousness, but this of Christ's only,
is or can be called the Righteousness of God, because whatever other use there
may be of other Righteousnessess, either Original* Legal or Moral amongst men
in this World, yet certain it is that this Righteousness only was designed and
conferred as the Gift of God's free Grace in Christ, as that wherein only Man
can be be justified in his sight.

2 Particular. This is the Righteousness of God, as his Infinite Wisdom alone
has contrived and found it out: For considering the case of Man now fallen under
sin by the transgression of the first Covenant, and the first Adam, and every
individual person of Mankind comprehended in him, were now become sinners, and
had lost all hope and possibility of Righteousness by the Law; it was above the
reach and understanding of all created Wisdom; and would have put to a nonplus
all the Wisdom of Men and Angels, to have found out a way, how Man, that had
lost his own Righteousness, and all hope of it by the Law, could ever become
righteous again, and be justified in the sight of God; and that God might be
just in justifying Man that (...) once a sinner and transgressor of his (...)
Law: And had God put the question Adam, who had as much natural Und^^^standing
and Wisdom, as any Man ever ha^ I say, had God put the question to him; (...)
me Adam, now that sin and death have (...) the dominion over thee, and all thy
Poster^^^ by thy transgressing of my Law, how sin (...) death may be destroyed,
and Righteousn^^^ and Life brought in, my Law be fulfille^ my Justice
satisfied, and Glory preserv^^ and thou saved; his mouth had been stoppe^ and
his tongue silent without any answer; could not have entered into the heart of
Man to conceive such a Mystery of Grace as th^^ is: And as there was none
amongst Men, (...) none amongst the Angels in Heaven tha^ could have been his
Counselor in this matte^* or have first given unto him; as Romans 11*34, 35. Who
has been his Counselor? and wh^^ has first given unto him? No; no, God has
been his own Counselor in this matter; his own Wisdom has contrived this way
of Righteousness by Faith in his Son Jesus Christ; as Romans 11.33. Oh the depth
of the riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his
Judgments, and his Ways past finding out! For I had not ^he Wisdom, as well as
the Grace of God ^revented Man with the revelation and ma^ifestation of this
Righteousness, it had never entered into the understanding of Men or Angels to
have conceived thereof; 1 Cor. 2. v. 9. But as it is written, eye has not
seen, ^or ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart ^f man the things that
God has prepared for them that love him; which is quoted out of Isa. 64.4. For
since the beginning of the World, men have not heard nor perceived by the ear,
neither has the eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he has prepared for him
that waits for him: And doubtless this Righteousness of God by Faith in his
Son, is one, and not the least of those things, and these words of the Prophet,
neither has Eye seen, O God, besides thee, does not only exclude the Eye and
Wisdom of Man, but of Angels also: So that it is the Eye of God only that has
seen, and his Wisdom alone that has contrived this wonderful thing: And it is
therefore called not only the Wisdom of God; as 1 Cor. 1.24. but also the
Wisdom of God in a Mystery; as 1 Cor. 2.7. And the hidden Wisdom, ordained
before the World for our glory: And the Wisdom, which none of the Princes of
this World knew; as verse 8. For had they known it, they would not have
crucified the Lord of Glory.

3. Parti. This Righteousness is also the Righteousness of God, and he is the
Autho^ of it. As his Infinite Power has effect^^ and performed it in and by
his Son Jesus Christ, as his Infinite Grace alone has de^signed and conferred;
and his Infinite Wi^^dom alone contrived and declared, so also (...) Infinite
Power alone has effected and broug^^ it forth; and therefore Christ in
bringing in this Righteousness is called The Wisdom (...) God and the Power of
God, 1 Cor. 1.2^ And admirable indeed it is and worthy (...) serious and
particular consideration to observ^ how the Infinite Power of the Godhead
m^^nifested it self, and wrought in Christ f^^ effecting and bringing forth of
this Right^^ousness; and this we may consider in (...) particular Instances
thereof; As namely.

1. Inst. In the bringing forth of h^^ Son Jesus Christ into the Humane Nature^
what an emanation and irradiation of the Divine and Eternal Power of the
God^head was therein manifested; to the admi^ration and wonder of Angels and
Men Namely,

1. In that a Virgin should conceive an^ bring forth a Son, as the Prophet had
foretold, Isa. 7.14. This was impossible with men, but things that are
impossible with men, are easy with God: And therefore here was a manifestation
of the Divine and Infinite Power in effecting that by its own immediate
operation which in the course and order of things as to men was impossible.

2. In that a man should be brought forth of the Seed of the Woman, and
partaker of Flesh and Blood, i. e. of all the Infirmities of the Humane nature
and yet without sin; this also was a further manifestation of the power of God:
And as things stood with Adam after the fall, was altogether as impossible as
that a Virgin should conceive! For Adam being first corrupted, and the Humane
Nature depraved by Sin; it became impossible in the way of ordinary Generation,
which God had ordained for the propagation and continuation of man in the
World, that ever any particular man, or person of mankind should be born of a
Woman, and in that respect be truly the Seed of the Woman, who was first in the
Transgression; and yet be clean from the corruption of the Humane Nature and be
without Sin; as Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing ^ut of an unclean? Not
one. That is, not one amongst all the Creatures: It Is above and beyond the
Power and Energy of any Creature in Heaven or Earth to effect such a work; To
bring a clean thing out an unclean: And so again, Job 15.^^* What is man that
he should be clean? A^^ he which is born of a Woman, that he sho^^^ be
Righteous? But here behold a Miracle i^^deed! A wonder of Divine Power and
E^^ficacy! A man, one in the Humane Nature and brought forth in the fullness of
Tim^ that is perfectly clean, and free from all the Original and Inherent
Corruption of Man Nature, and one which is born of a Wo^man, and yet Righteous!
Righteous above what Adam was in Innocence, and abov^ what the Angels of Heaven
were in the sta^^ of Original Purity: one more holy tha^ Saints, more holy than
Angels, and yet ^ Man, with all the Infirmities of Man's N^^ture, and yet born
of a Woman! a clea^ thing indeed, brought out of an unclean And therefore this
holy, this clean, and harmless Son of Man, and separate from Sinners, was not
brought forth in a way of ordinary Generation, but by the immediate Energy and
Power of the Most High, working i^ a miraculous and extraordinary manner, a^
was expressly declared by the Angel to the Virgin Mary, Luke 1.35. The Holy
Ghost shall come upon thee, and the Power of the Highest shall over-shadow
thee; therefore als^ that holy thing, which shall be born of thee, shall be
called the Son of God; and therefore his generation was peculiar to himself,
the miraculous and extraordinary manner of which, Thoughts are wanting in us to
conceive, and Words much more to express, as it is written, Isa. 53.8. And who
shall declare his Generation? And surely herein that old Serpent the Devil was
greatly deceived and disappointed of his expectation; for as (when he tempted
Cain to Murder Abel he thought he had thereby made all sure: the Seed of the
Woman in the Person of Abel being now cut off; But little did he think then of
another Seed appointed by God to the Woman instead of Abel whom Cain slew, but
when Seth was born, the mystery of God was revealed, to the Faith of the Woman,
and the Confession of her Mouth plainly declared the Faith that was in her
heart, as to another Seed, in whom the Genealogy and Line was to descend down
even unto Christ, as Genesis 4.25. For God, said she, has appointed me another
Seed instead of Abel, whom Cain slew. So also in the first Temptation; here was
the subtilty and malice of the Devil to cut off and murder all Mankind at once,
for understanding that this glorious Creature Adam, was brought forth as a
public person, and by the Covenant G^^ had made with him, was to stand or
(...) the common Head and Root of all Manki^^ designed, and in his Serpentine
Wisd^^ concluded, that if he could prevail upon this Adam to sin and transgress
t^^ Covenant, he should at once murder (...) whole Race of Mankind, murder him
(...) them in him, spiritually and eternally (...) well as bodily: and having
effected this h^^ rid murder, he now triumphs over Ad^^ and all Mankind, as a
mighty Conquer in the spoils he had made of so glorious Creature, supposing he
had now made all sure, that God himself according to his ow^ Law was not able
to deliver this Capt^^ Adam, and the Spoils of Mankind out (...) his hand;
Little did the Devil then think (...) a second Adam, of a more glorious Person
to be brought forth in the Humane Nature and of the Seed of the Woman, or that
th^^ could possibly ever be, that a clean thing should be brought forth out of
an unclean* But behold here the Wisdom of God defeating the subtilty, and the
power of God defeating the malice and power of the Devil; who had now got the
Power of Death in his Hand, as Heb. 2.14. had got the Keys of Hell and Death,
and had as he thought lo^^ up Adam and all Mankind with him so fast ^ithin
these Gates, that none could come to ^eliver him: but behold the second Adam
Christ Jesus, by the Power of God, of the ^eed of the Woman, holy, harmless,
and ^eparate from sinners being conceived in the Womb of the Virgin, and born
of her without sin, according to the Promise made to Adam, and now declared
immediately after his fall, Genesis 3.15. The Seed of the Woman shall bruise thy,
i. e. The Serpents Head; And here as the Serpent had deceived the Woman, and
brought her first into the transgression; so this old Serpent the Devil was
deceived by the Woman, of whose Seed by the Power of the highest is brought
forth this second Adam, this man Christ Jesus; who is made a quickening Spirit,
1 Cor. 15.45. to quicken or make alive that which was dead, as ver. 22. who
also was not, as the first Adam, of the earth, earthy, and therefore easily
overcome, as he was; but the Lord from Heaven, as ver. 47. and therefore able
to raise up all his, after his own Image, to bear the Image of the Heavenly, as
ver. 49. and to triumph over Death and Hell, as ver. 55, 56, 57. Oh Death where
is thy Sting! And thus the admirable Power of God was manifest in bringing
forth such a person as Jesus Christ, in the Humane Nature; Jesus Christ, the
Righteous, and the propitiation for our sins, and our Advocate with the Father;
whose office and work it was to bring down this Righteousness of God from
Heaven to us.

2. Instance. The Infinite and Eternal Power of God, was also as much seen and
manifested in Christ, bearing our sins in this Humane Nature, in his own Body
on the Tree: and first let us consider what a burden, what a weight sin and the
guilt of sin is, when it is charged and laid upon the Conscience by the Power
of God; and this may be considered in the Angels that sinned; Angels are
greater in power than we, as 2 Pet. 2.11. Angels that excel in strength, or
Psalm. 103.20. Angels, who are Spirits, i. e. not flesh and blood as we are,
weak and feeble; Angels that are not hay and stubble as we are, but a flaming
Fire, Psalm 104 4 yet these high and mighty Angel, these strong and powerful
Angels, that were naturally the firstborn of Gods first or old Creation, and
the excellency of Creature strength, when they had once sinned, and God comes
to charge them with Folly, and lay the guilt and punishment of sin upon them,
how does it sink and break all the Powers and Spirits of the Angelical Nature;
and casts them down into the deepest darkness and despair, and that from the
highest light, glory and confidence of their First and Heavenly state, and
presently cast them down from Heaven to Hell, 2 Pet. 2.4. so unable were they
each of them to bear the burden, i. e. the guilt and punishment of their own
Sin.

And 2. Let us consider sin in man, and how unable man is to stand when God
shall mark Iniquity, as Psalm. 130. 3. If thou Lord should mark Iniquities, O
Lord who shall stand? i. e. none shall or can stand, no Nation or Kingdom, no
House or Family, no Person under Heaven, no not the Church or People of God can
stand; if God should mark Iniquity, and punish Sin but with his Temporal Wrath
and Judgments in this World, there is none could possibly stand, for who can
stand when God is Angry? And who knows the power of his Wrath? The Sinners of
the old World did know something of it, but they could not stand before it, it
swept them all away with the Waters of a Flood; And whither did it sweep them?
It swept them down to Hell, 1 Pet. 3.19. The Spirits now in Prison; and that
Prison is the Prison of Hell, Luke 16.23. And in Hell, etc.

The Sinners also of Sodom and Gomorrah did know somewhat of this Wrath: but
they could not stand before it; They could no longer (as stout and hard hearted
as they were) bear up under this burden and weight of their own Sin, for it
brought a dreadful shower of Divine Vengeance upon them; a Shower of Fire and
Brimstone from the Lord out of Heaven, by which they all perished, as Genesis
19.24, 25. Francis Spira also knew somewhat of this Wrath, and Burden of his
own Sin, when God laid it upon his Conscience, in the guilt and punishment due
to it, but he could not stand, but went despairing out of this World, and
without any hope or comfort as to the next, as to what did appear.

And it may be some of you here present, and if you have not, I am sure others
have known something of this matter, when God has been angry but for a moment;
and has laid sin in the guilt of it, upon Conscience; It made them sink
immediately under utmost despair, and bereaved them of all hope, comfort and
patience, that had not Infinite Mercy stepped in to their relief, they had gone
despairing down to Hell.

The damned Spirits in Hell know more of the Power of Gods anger, and the
weight and burden of Sin laid upon their awakened and terrified Consciences,
than any in this World have done or can do, and their Torments are
intolerable, Luke 16.24. There the Worm dies not, and the Fire is not
quenched; They are for their sin, a Sacrifice to Divine Wrath, and they are
salted with Fire, and salted with Salt, and so are eternally Roasting in the
Fire of Hell, Mar. 9.48, 49. and yet they do not know all the Power of Gods
Wrath, nor feel all the tormenting Power of the Fire of Hell: they feel much
and fear more; They suffer that which is intolerable, and yet they fear what
they have not yet felt: but must further feel and suffer to all Eternity. Oh
Eternity! Eternity! Oh the Wrath of God, that is not only eternal, but
infinite! They know not the utmost, they know not the end of it, nor can know!
For that which is Infinite, has no bounds or limits; and that which is Eternal
has no end.

Therefore last of all, Now consider this second Adam, the Man Christ Jesus,
who though he had no sin of his own, to answer to God for, for he did no sin,
nor was guile found in his Mouth, Isa. 53.9. He knew no sin, as 2 Cor. 5.21.
yet he had the sin of the World, i. e. Jew and Gentile laid upon him and did
bear it in his own Body on the Tree, John 1.29. The Lamb of God which takes
away or bears the sin of the World; For he did take away sin by his bearing
of it, i. e. both the guilt of it, and the punishment due to it: for thus was
the Iniquity and Sin of all God's Elect laid upon him, Isa. 53.6. And Jehovah
has laid upon him the Iniquity of us all; Now therefore the Sin of the World
being laid upon him to bear, what an infinite burden and weight was it? and how
impossible for created strength whether Angelical or Humane to bear; as has
been showed. And yet that this one man, this second Adam should bear such an
infinite weight as Sin and the Wrath of God due to sin is; what a wonder of
Divine Power was manifested therein? The strength of Angels could not, the
strength of Man could not bear such a Burden and Weight, as ye have heard; yet
they had but their own sin charged upon them, but here is a Man, the Son of
Man, the Man Christ Jesus, the Lamb of God, that bears and takes away, by
bearing, the Sin of the World; oh admirable and wonderful Power of the
Godhead; by which this man was enabled to bear such an infinite and eternal
weight as Sin and the Wrath of God due to Sin is; And therefore it is said of
him, that by the eternal Spirit he offered himself to God for us, Heb. 9.14.
for nothing less than the Power of the Godhead it self, could have enabled the
humane nature to bear such an infinite Weight and Burden, as Sin is, even the
Sin of the whole World, and the whole, and complete Wrath of God due unto it;
The Flesh or Humane Nature was but a Vail to his Godhead, as Heb. 10.20. but
the Eternal Power and Godhead within this Vail, was that which enabled this
second Adam, this man to bear the Sin of many: oh therefore behold with wonder
and admiration the working of Divine Power in bringing forth such a Man into
the World, and also in strengthening this Flesh and Humane Nature, to bear that
which no Creature in Heaven or Earth could, neither Angels nor Men.

3. Inst. But then again thirdly, Consider the Infinite Power of God, and the
Energy or working of it in the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead. And this
also was necessary in order to, and for the manifestation and declaring this
Righteousness of God for our Justification; which Righteousness, though it was
wrought by what this Man, th^^ Jesus Christ had done and suffered in his Life
and Death in obedience to the Law, under which he was made; yet this complete,
perfect and everlasting Righteousness of his as our Head and Surety, did not
fully appear, nor was manifested until his Resurrection from the Dead, when he
was visibly discharged out of the Prison of the Grave, and could no longer be
holden of Death, having satisfied Divine Justice to the utmost demand upon him
for our sins, and having paid the full Price of our Redemption; and therefore
now by his Resurrection from the Dead, he is declared to be the Son of God with
power, according to the Spirit of Holiness; or by the power of the Holy Spirit
which raised him from the Dead; as Romans 1.4. and Romans 8. v. 11. By this
Resurrection of his from the Dead, he was justified as our Head; 1 Timothy 3. v.
16. justified in the Spirit, i. e. in or by the power of the Spirit or Godhead
dwelling in the Humane Nature; and by his Resurrection from the Dead, we, i. e.
all that believe and are in him by Faith, were vertually justified in him, and
together with him as our spiritual Head; so that all Gods Elect were vertually
justified by his Resurrection; and therefore, Romans 4 ult. he is said, to be
delivered (i. e. by Death) for our Offenses, and to be raised again for our
Justification. Now consider what a manifestation there was of the mighty Power
of God in the raising of this Man from the Dead, unto which he was delivered
for our Offenses: See how the Apostle does set it out, Ephesians. 1.19, 20.
According to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought i^ Christ when
he raised him from the dead: Here is Power, his Power, his mighty Power. (...),
the energy or working of this his mighty Power; so that the mighty Power of God
did work and show it self at a wonderful rate, when he raised him, i. e. Christ
from the Dead: And indeed the Power of God was more seen in the raising of
Christ from the Dead, than in raising all the Men in the World besides; for no
Man ever had the sin of the World in the guilt and punishment of it laid upon
him, but this Man Christ Jesus: And by virtue of this Resurrection of his, all
the Elect, the general Assembly and Church of the firstborn, shall also be
raised unto the Resurrection of Life at the great day; as 1 Cor. 15.22, 23.
Therefore the Power of God, and the energy or working of it is greater and more
glorious in Christ's Resurrection, than in raising all the Men in the World
besides.

4 Inst. But then 4thly; What a working of the mighty Power of God was
manifested in Christ's Exaltation, and the setting of this second Adam, this Man
down at the right hand of God in the heavenly places: And this also was
necessary as a Reward of hi^ Death and Sufferings, of that Obedienc^ which he
performed to the Law for us, and that Righteousness which he brought in to us;
as Phil. 2.9. having before spoken of his Humiliation and Obedience; v. 6, 7,
8. Who being in the form of God, etc. Adds, v. 9. Wherefore God has highly
exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name, that at the name
of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and
things under the Earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus is the
Lord, to the glory of God the Father. Now this Exaltation of Christ was the
Reward of his Righteousness, even his, with which the Father was so well
pleased; as Isa. 42.21. And thereby is this Righteousness visibly declared and
manifested in the sight of Angels and Men, being crowned, and in the most
solemn manner declared at his inauguration or being received up into glory,
which was the ultimate and finishing Testimony and Witness from the Father that
he is righteous; and as such, and upon that account he sits in Heaven; as 1 John 2.1. We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and
Joh. 16.10. Of Righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more:
So that Christ's going to the Father, and sitting down in the heavenly places,
so as to abide there in a perpetual Advocateship, and as Intercessor for us
with the Father, is the highest evidence and demonstration of this
Righteousness beyond all contradiction; and therefore upon this Argument it is
said the Holy Ghost shall reprove or convince the World of Righteousness, i. e.
this Righteousness of Christ; because, says he, I go to my Father; for he went
as a public person and second Adam, the Head of the Church, and there is set
down, in our Nature, and in our stead, as he that has wrought out for us, and
brought in to us perfect and everlasting Righteousness, in whom, as such, all
the Seed of Gods Israel shall be justified and glory, Isa. 45.25. Now that this
Exaltation of Christ, and the setting of him down at the right hand of God in
the heavenly places, is a wonderful and glorious work of Divine Power; see Ephesians.
1.19, 20, 21. According to the working of his mighty Power, which he wrought in
Christ when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in
the heavenly places. Now consider this work of Divine Power, and it will appear
admirable; for God to take this Creature Man, made by Nature lower than the
Angels, a Creature of the Earth, earthy; as Psalm. 8.5. For thou have made him a
little lower than the Angels; and 1 Cor. 15.47. The first man is of the earth,
earthy: Now I say, to take this Nature, and to advance it to Heaven, and to set
it above Angels, both in its Union with the Godhead in the Person of the Son,
and in its Superiority, Authority and Power over all the Angels in Heaven, and
over all things in Heaven and in Earth, and under the Earth; as Phil. 2.10, 11.
and Ephesians. 1.21. far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion,
and every name that is named, not only in this World, but also in that which is
to come; and thus to put all things under his feet; as v. 22. And has put all
things under his feet. This I say is such a work of glorious power, as fills
Heaven and Earth now, and will fill Eternity hereafter with wonder and
admiration: But then consider again, that this Creature Man was now fallen under
sin, the Curse of the Law, and the Wrath of God; stripped of its Original
Righteousness, which it was created in conformable to the Law of God, and
utterly incapable of Righteousness by the Law and the Works thereof, and so
separate from the Actual Union which he had with God his Creator, and set by
sin at an infinite and eternal distance from God as to what this Creature Man
could now do; and for God to take this Creature Man, and by a new Creation of
it in Christ, to make all new, to purge and separate it from sin, take it into
Union with the Godhead it self in the Person of his own Son, raise it from
under sin and guilt, cloth it with perfect and everlasting Righteousness, and
receive it up into glory above the highest Angels in Heaven: Oh what a work of
divine and glorious Power was this! beyond whatever was seen in the Works of
the old Creation, or in all the Works of Providence from the Foundation of the
World.

5. But then again fifthly, What a manifestation is there of the Power of God,
and the working of it toward all them that Believe in order to the making of
them partakers of this Righteousness of God by Faith in Christ; Divine Power
has not done in bringing forth and accomplishing this Righteousness by Christ
for us. But there is a further work of the mighty power of God required and
manifested in applying this Righteousness to us, and working that Faith in us
by which alone this Righteousness of God is made ours, and we are made
partakers of it unto Justification of Life: For this Righteousness of God is
unto all, and upon all them that Believe; and as Romans 10.10. For with the Heart
man believes unto Righteousness: Now this Faith is not a work of a man's own
Heart, nor is it of a man's self to believe in Jesus Christ unto Righteousness:
No, no, this Faith is not of our selves; It is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. And
as this Faith is the gift of Divine Grace, or the Grace of God in Christ to us,
so it is also the work of his mighty power which works in us; and therefore
it is called the work of Faith with power, as well as the good pleasure of his
will, 2 These. 1.11. And fulfill all the good pleasure of his will, and the work
of Faith with Power. And without the mighty power of God put forth upon a man's
Heart in the hearing of the Word; there is not one man in the whole World that
would or could believe in Jesus Christ unto Righteousness, Isa. 53.1. Who has
believed our report? And to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? The Arm of
the Lord is his Power, his Mighty Power, and unless the Arm, i. e. the Mighty
Power of Jehovah be revealed or manifested in the Heart of a man; he does not,
he cannot believe the report which the Holy Prophets gave Christ; Who testified
before hand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow; 1 Pet.
1.11. And this I may say from the word of God, there are no more men in the
World that have believed this report; than there are persons in whom this Arm
of the Lord has been revealed. Now that there is a Mighty Power of God put
forth upon them that believe: See Ephesians. 1.19. And what is the exceeding
greatness of his Power to usward who believe; according to the working of his
Mighty Power which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the Dead, and
set him at his own Right hand in the Heavenly places! Now look what
manifestation there was of the exceeding greatness of his Power in raising
Christ from the dead, and setting of him at his own Right hand in the heavenly
places; (as has been showed) the same manifestation of his Power, the
exceeding greatness of his Power; and the Energy or working of it, is to be
seen in and toward all them that believe: For indeed no less Power can be
sufficient to raise a Dead Soul from Death to Life, than to raise a Dead Body
from the Grave; i. e. no Power less than the Infinite, no Power less than the
Mighty Power of God; and therefore it is so expressed (...): The superlative or
exceeding greatness of his Power, and according to that which he wrought in
Christ when he raised him from the Dead: For no less instance and pattern of
Divine Power, and the working of it could reach and set out the working of this
Power in and toward all them that believe; than this of its working in the
raising of Christ from the Dead. And indeed to raise a man from the Death of
Sin and Unbelief, (under which all are shut up as in the Grave, Rom, 11.32.) is
no less a manifestation of Divine Power, than was the raising of Christ from
the Dead: And when this comes to be fully known and understood by the Saints,
it will fill them with deep wonder and admiration to all Eternity; as 2 These.
1, 10. When he, i. e. Christ shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to
be admired in all them that believe; because our testimony was believed among
you in that day. So that it will be the matter of admiration to the Saints
themselves when they come to the perfect knowledge of this Power of God toward
them: That ever the testimony given concerning Christ by the Prophets first and
the Apostles afterward; the Prophetical and Apostolical Testimony: Our
Testimony was believed among you. And thus you see the mighty Power of God
which wrought in Christ in performing and effecting this Righteousness for us;
and also as it works in us that believe; that by Faith in Christ we might
partake of this Righteousness of God. Now therefore it appears that God is
the Author of this Righteousness as his Infinite Free Grace in Christ has
designed and conferred it; his Infinite Wisdom has contrived, and his Infinite
and Eternal Power has performed and wrought it out in Christ for us, and in
bringing down this Righteousness by Faith in Christ to us. And so much may
suffice to have been spoken to the first* General Head: Namely, That God is the
Author of this Righteousness in a special and peculiar manner, as it is his
work of the new Creation, and is therefore called the Righteousness of God.

2 Head. And secondly, it is called the Righteousness of God, because it is the
Righteousness of the glorious and wonderful Person Christ Jesus, who is God
Man, and whose name alone is Emanuel, i. e. God with us, or in our Nature; this
glorious Person, whose name is Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the
Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, and yet is the Son of Man, the Child
born to us, and given to us; Isa. 9.6. was brought forth in our Nature and in
our stead, to bring in everlasting Righteousness, as has already in part, and
shall be more fully showed in its proper place; and he has done it, he has
finished the work that the Father gave him to do; Joh. 17.4. and therein he
glorified the Father; and the Lord is well pleased for his Righteousness sake:
Now this Obedience which he has performed to the Law for us, both in that part
of it which we call Passive, and also in that part which we call Active, makes
up to us and for us this everlasting Righteousness; and therefore this
Righteousness which he in his Person wrought out for us, is called the
Righteousness of God, because it is the Righteousness of that Person who is
both God and Man in two distinct Natures, and one Person for ever; and hence it
is that in this wonderful Person, what is more properly appertaining to one
Nature, is oftentimes ascribed to the other; as Act. 20.28. To feed the Church
of God which he has purchased with his own Blood. Here the Blood of Christ is
called the Blood of God, though in propriety of speech it was the Blood of Man,
i. e. of the Humane Nature; for the Godhead is impassible, and cannot suffer,
but by reason of the Union of the two Natures in one Person that suffered, it
is called the Blood of God; even so the whole and complete Righteousness of
Christ both in his Active and Passive Obedience, though properly it was not the
Divine Nature that obeyed and fulfilled all the Righteousness which the Law
required, but the Humane Nature, which was made of a Woman, and made under the
Law; yet the Person who thus obeyed and fulfilled all Righteousness for us,
being God and Man, his Righteousness, which ^e performed to the Law for us in
the Humane Nature, is called the Righteousness of God; as in the Text; but now
the Righteousness of God; and Romans 10. v. 3. have not submitted themselves to
the Righteousness of God; and then it is added; for Christ is the end of the
Law for Righteousness to every one that believes: So that this Righteousness
of God, which the unbelieving Jews submitted not themselves unto, is plainly
the Righteousness of Christ, i. e. of that glorious Person who is God-Man, or
God in our Nature Emanuel, God with us; and so an infinite dignity and merit is
found in this Obedience, this Righteousness of Christ from the glory and
dignity of his Person; and herein is also another part, and that no small part
of the Mystery of Godliness; that as God was manifest in the Flesh or Humane
Natrue; so God, thus manifested in the Flesh, i. e. the Humane Nature, should
(being thereby made under the Law) become obedient, and fulfill all the
Righteousness of the Law for us; and in this respect is also this Righteousness
of God manifested, as the Person that performed it was God manifested in the
Flesh, or Humane Nature.

3 Head. And then thirdly; This Righteousness is also called the Righteousness
of God in opposition to all Righteousness of Man, either of the first Man Adam,
or of all other men in the World pretending to a Righteousness of their own,
and by the Works or Deeds of the Law, as they are or can be performed by them:
And as it has been showed, the Holy Ghost casts a contempt upon Man, when he
calls him flesh; as Romans 3.21. There shall no flesh be justified in his sight,
i. e. by the Deeds of the Law, or his own Righteousness; and also casts a
contempt upon all a Man's own Righteousness and Works, in that he calls them
flesh; and the putting confidence therein, to be putting confidence in the
flesh; as Phil. 3.3, 4. So the Holy Ghost does put a glory upon this
Righteousness of Christ, when he calls it the Righteousness of God, and the
putting trust and confidence therein, our rejoicing in Christ Jesus; and so
this Righteousness which is by the Faith of Christ unto all, and upon all them
that believe, is the Righteousness of God in opposition to all Righteousness of
Man, or a Man's own Righteousness. And as the Apostle speaks of the true, i.
e. the heavenly Tabernacle, Heb. 8.2. which the Lord pitched and not Man; so he
speaks of this Righteousness, which Jehovah has provided in his Son Christ
for us, and not Man; and therefore is Christ called, Jehovah our Righteousness,
by the Prophet Jeremiah, c. 23. v. 6. Not Adam our Righteousness, or a Man our
Righteousness, but Jehovah, or the Lord our Righteousness; and so it is
frequently expressed in the holy Scriptures, the Righteousness of God, in
opposition to, and contempt of that Righteousness which is of Man, or which is
our own Righteousness; so Romans 10.3. For they being ignorant of Gods
Righteousness, and going about to establish their own Righteousness, have not
submitted themselves to the Righteousness of God. Here is Gods Righteousness
mentioned again and again in opposition to their own Righteousness! And so
also, Phil. 3.9. Not having on mine own Righteousness, but the Righteousness
which is of God: Where the Apostle calls it Gods Righteousness, in opposition
unto, and contempt of that which is or may be supposed or pretended to be his
own Righteousness.

4 Head. And then Fourthly; It is called the Righteousness of God, as it is
that Righteousness which only is and can be accepted of God in the matter of
our Justification, i. e. that Righteousness by which, and upon the account
whereof only a man may be Righteous and Justified in his sight: For there is no
other Righteousness by which a man may or can possibly be Justified in the
sight of God: Or that God accepts of, and is well pleased with, but this as the
matter of our Justification, as has been already proved; So that this only is
the Righteousness of God, as his Heart does rest in it, is well pleased with
it, and does always accept it by Faith in his Son Jesus Christ; and is not, nor
can be well-pleased without it: And as a broken Heart is called the Sacrifice
of God, Psalm. 51.17. The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit; a broken and a
contrite Heart, O God, thou will not despise. Properly or in propriety of
Speech, a broken Heart or Spirit is no Sacrifice; but it was that God expected
with all the Sacrifices which the People offered according to Gods appointment:
For the Sacrifices for Sin were always slain, and so were offered up to God by
Death, and shedding of their Blood. The Holy Ghost hereby signifying, that as
the wages of Sin is Death; so every person that sacrificed and brought his
offering for Sin, did deserve Death. And therefore, though this Death was
transferred and laid upon the Sacrifices, which Typically did look unto Christ;
and so required Faith in Christ, the Lamb or Sacrifice of God, Which takes
away the Sin of the World; as John 1.29. Yet the very Nature and Import of all
the Sacrifices did plainly declare and imply, that Sin was a bitter and a very
evil thing that could not be expiated with less than Death: And whosoever did
present his Sacrifice to be slain, and offered up for Sin; did ipso facto
acknowledge himself a Sinner, to have deserved Death, and to be Consumed in the
Fire of Hell; as the Sacrifices were either wholly or in part burnt and
consumed in the Fire after they were slain: And so were offered up, not by
Death only but by Fire also till they were consumed. Now for a man to bring his
Sacrifice to be slain and burnt in the Fire, and salted with Salt; and yet to
have no inward sense and feeling of his Sin, no feeling of the wrath of God due
to Sin, and so no inward Repentance toward God. This was most hateful and
abominable in the sight of God, and so the Sacrifice of that Person was not
accepted, but despised of God, as a piece of mere Hypocrisy and outward
Formality; for in this Man there is neither Faith in Christ, nor Repentance
toward God: And therefore all the Sacrifices that Men did or could offer,
signified nothing as to Divine acceptance, without this inward sense of sin,
and brokenness of heart: This one thing, a broken heart, did signify more than
all Sacrifices without it; and so it is put for, and by the Holy Ghost,
preferred to all Sacrifices whatsoever; the Sacrifices of God are a broken
spirit; and why was a broken spirit more than all Sacrifices, and alone is
called in the plural number, not Sacrifice, but Sacrifices; the Sacrifices, yea
the Sacrifices of God, but because of the Divine acceptance, because God does
always accept this broken heart, this contrite spirit: A broken and a contrite
heart, O God, thou will not despise: The words are a holy Meiosis, there is
more implied, than is expressed; thou will not despise, i. e. thou will certainly
accept, thou will graciously accept and be well pleased with. Now therefore the
Mystery is opened, the meaning of this expression, The Sacrifices of God are a
broken spirit, is abundantly made clear and plain: It is in this respect that a
broken heart alone is called the Sacrifices of God, that, or upon the account
thereof God is well pleased, yea more pleased, than with all outward Sacrifices
without it: Even so this Righteousness, which is by the Faith of Christ unto
all, and upon all them that believe, is called, The Righteousness of God,
because that this Righteousness only, and above all others, is that which
carries the glory of the Divine acceptance; God will not despise, but will
certainly, will graciously accept this Righteousness, whenever it is presented
unto him upon the Faith of a repenting, believing Sinner, upon the Faith of him
that works not, i. e. that has no Works or Righteousness of his own, which
he dares to offer or bring unto God, but believes on him that justifies the
ungodly; as Romans 4.5. His Faith is counted to him for Righteousness; and God is
well pleased with this Man for this Righteousness sake which is alone by Faith
in his Son Jesus Christ. Now that God is well pleased with this Righteousness
of his Son Jesus Christ, is most clearly testified by the Voice from Heaven;
Mat. 3. ult. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; which Voice from
Heaven was heard by John when Christ was baptized of him in Jordan, and was now
entered upon his work of fulfilling all Righteousness; as v. 15. Then comes
this Voice from Heaven, etc. And again, when Christ was transfigured upon the
Mount a little before his Death and Translation into Heaven: Now when he was
about to finish his Obedience and whole Righteousness of the Law for us; I say,
then again comes this Voice from Heaven; Mat. 17.5. This is my beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased; and this Voice was heard from the most excellent glory
by Peter, James and John; as 2 Pet. 1.18. Which Voice from Heaven we heard when
we were with him upon the holy Mount. Yea this is also testified by the su^e
Word of Prophecy; Isa. 42.21. The Lord is well pleased for his Righteousness
sake; meaning Christ, as is manifest; verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7. of that chap. And
it is not Christ alone, or as a single Person, but Christ considered as the
Head and Root of the whole Church; and so Jehovah is well pleased for his
Righteousness sake with all them that believe, and do bear and present this
Righteousness of Christ in the hand of their Faith before the Father, as that
wherein only they desire to be found and stand before him: Now that God is well
pleased with all such, and does graciously accept them as just and righteous
before him upon the account of this Righteousness, is also as clearly testified
unto by the holy Scriptures; Act. 13.39. And by him, that is, Christ, all that
believe are justified and accepted as such; as Romans 5.19. For as by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, or became sinners; so by the obedience of
one shall many be made righteous, or become righteous in his sight. And again;
Ephesians. 1.6. To the praise of the glory of his Grace, wherein, or in which
Grace, he has made us accepted in the Beloved. We were not so by Nature, or by
our own Works and Righteousness; but we are made so by Grace through this
Obedience or Righteousness of his Son, who alone is the Beloved; and that you
may see it is through this Righteousness that we are made accepted, and stand
before him as righteous; it is added in v. 7. immediately following; In whom we
have Redemption through his Blood, the forgiveness of sins; for though
forgiveness of sins, or non-imputation of sins, is only expressed, which is but
a part of our Redemption and Justification; yet imputation of Righteousness is
also implied, and necessarily inferred; as Romans 4.6, 7, 8. The Apostle does
infer the imputation of Righteousness out of David; Psalm. 32.1, 2. Blessed are
they whose transgressions are forgiven, whose sins are covered: Blessed is the
man to whom the Lord will not impute sin; for unto this man the Lord does
impute Righteousness without Works; as v. 6. for else the Apostles Argument
were of no force; and that the Lord is not well pleased with, or accepts any
person as righteous, but in and through this Righteousness of his Beloved Son
apprehended by Faith, is also as clearly testified in Heb. 11.6. For without
Faith it is impossible to please God: Where he proves that Enoch was a
Believer, and an Heir of the Righteousness that is by Faith; because he had
before his Translation received this Testimony, that he pleased God; which he
could not do without Faith; nor can any man else under the whole Heavens be
able to please God without this Faith; for the Scripture faith it is
impossible. And thus have we finished the doctrinal part, namely, That the
Righteousness which is by the Faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them
that believe, is the Righteousness of God: 1. As God is the Author of it. 2. As
it is the Righteousness of that wonderful Person who is God-Man. 3. In
opposition to a Man's own Righteousness: And 4. As God is well pleased with it.
The Use of this Doctrine is by way of Inference; and hence we may infer;

1. That this Righteousness which is by Faith of Jesus Christ unto all* and
upon all them that believe; is a perfect and complete Righteousness: The
perfection of this Righteousness is argued from its Author, which is no less
than God ^^mself; and that as it is the design and gift of his own free and
Sovereign Grace in Christ; and as it is the admirable contrivance of his
Infinite Understanding and Wisdom, and also as it is the effect and product of
his Infinite and Eternal Power manifested both in Christ and also in and
toward them that believe; as has been showed: Now if it be the Righteousness
of God in such a special and peculiar manner as it is the Foundation of his New
Creation, and making all things New in Christ; and that the New Creature is
raised and stands before God in his Son Christ; upon this Foundation of
Righteousness by Faith in Christ and not by the works of the Law: Then
certainly it is a most perfect and complete work of God: For He is a Rock, and
his work is perfect; as, Deuteronomy. 32.4. And sure I am that none can come after God
to mend what he has so curiously wrought, either by adding to, or taking ought
from it: And if the question be put, as Eccles. 2.12. What can the man do that
comes after the King? Much more may it be put, What can the man do that comes
after God? And the answer is at hand; i. e. just nothing at all; he cannot take
ought from or add ought unto that which God has done. No, no, Man cannot add
one cubit to his Stature, or make one Hair of his Head White or Black; as Luke
12, 25. and Mat 5.36. And this is the perfection of Gods works of Creation and
Providence, that there nothing can be added to, or taken from that which God
made: No, that which is crooked, cannot be made strait; that which is wanting,
cannot be numbered: All Created Wisdom and Power in Angels or Men, can^not reach
the works of God so as to add the least thing which God has left out, or
diminish that which God has put into it. And as all Gods works of the First or
Old Creation were perfect in their kind, Genesis 1.31. And God saw every thing
that he had Created and Made, and behold it was very good. And the goodness of
the work lay in the perfection thereof according to its kind; every Creature
being wrought after the counsel of his own will, which is his rule in working,
Ephesians, 1.11. Who works all things after the counsel of his own will. And
being wrought in a tendency and subserviency to his own glory; which is his end
in working: All things that God had made, answering exactly in their kind to
the perfect rule of his will and pleasure; and to the perfect end of their
Creation, viz. The Glory of their Great Creator and Benefactour: This was
their goodness, this was their perfection; and in this respect they were all
very good and perfect as they were the works of God; He is a rock and his work
is perfect. Now if it be thus with all Gods works of the First or Old Creation;
how much more must it be so in the works of his New Creation in Christ! which
do as far exceed, and are as far above the works of the Old Creation; as Heaven
exceeds and is above the Earth. Now this Righteousness of God by Faith in his
Son Jesus Christ, is the glory of his Grace in Christ; it is the curious and
admirable contrivance of his Infinite Wisdom, it is the product and work of his
Infinite and Eternal Power; all the Divine attributes shine forth together in
joint luster and glory in the face of Christ, and the work of Righteousness by
Faith in him: Oh! what a perfect work then must this needs be; that is and
shall be the admiration of Angels and Men to all Eternity! As has been showed.
And the perfection of this work of Righteousness by Faith in Christ will
appear, if we consider it is wrought exactly after the Counsel of his own will,
i. e. the will of his own Sovereign Grace in Christ; and it answers perfectly
his highest end, i. e. his own glory: It gives all the glory to God in and by
his Son Jesus Christ, and cuts off all boasting^ and glorying from man, as has
been declared: And therefore there must needs be a glorious perfection in this
Righteousness of God unto which nothing can be added by man, or by the Sons of
men; and in which there is nothing wanting. Now the perfection of this
Righteousness of God is expressly declared in the holy Scriptures, and
celebrated to the Faith of Gods Elect; being proposed as an object not only
most true, and so worthy of their firm assent unto it as it is a great and
glorious truth of God in Christ, but also most sure and steadfast and worthy of
their utmost trust and confidence, their inward relyance and dependence upon it
as to their hope of Justification and Eternal Life in Christ; yea, an object of
their Spiritual joy and delight; their rejoicing in Christ; their inward peace
with God and comfort does flow from it, Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we
have peace with God; and v. 2. We rejoice in the hope of the Glory of God.
Which we could not do if we had not perfect and complete Righteousness by Faith
in Christ; as it is written, Col. 2.10. And ye are complete in him, who is the
head of all principality and power. Now it has been showed how Jesus Christ as
the Author of this Righteousness is exalted far above all principality and
power; and is made head thereof: Angels and Men and all things in Heaven and
Earth being made subject to him as a reward of his obedience; by which exaltion
he is declared in Heaven and Earth to be Jesus Christ the Righteous: And
therefore ye are complete in him, says the Apostle, i. e. ye have that perfect
and complete Righteousness by Faith in him; by which ye are now Justified
before God the Father. The perfection of his Righteousness which ye have by
Faith in him, renders you complete and perfect; ye are complete ^n him; which
you could not be, if ye had not a perfect Righteousness in him by Faith to
stand before God in. The force of the Argument lies in this, ye are completely
and perfectly Righteous in him, i. e. in Christ your Head; and need not any
thing of man's Wisdom or Works to make addition unto this Righteousness which ye
had in him: No, no, all the Wisdom of Angels and Men can add nothing to your
perfection in Christ; ye are complete in him: And therefore Beware lest any man
spoil you, through Philosophy and vain deceit; after the traditions of men,
after the rudiments of the World; and not after Christ: as verse. 8. And let no
man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility, etc. as verse. ^8. As
if he had said, there are many pretenses amongst men, both Philosophers and
false Christians to invent and find out a Righteousness of their own; after
their own wisdom, and after their own traditions, and each striveth to exceed
other in their inventions of this sort; and some place their Righteousness in
this, and others in that work; and esteem of their own superstion according to
the strictness of their order and way: But beware ye, and let no man spoil you
of your reward: Spoil and Rob you of your hope of Righteousness by Faith in
Christ alone, without works; either works of the Law or works of man's
superstition; f^r ye are complete in him: And therefore adhere unto, and rely
upon, yea also rejoice in this perfect Righteousness which is in him, and by
Faith in him alone: And be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel upon any
pretense whatsoever; for ye are complete in him: And such is the perfection of
this Righteousness which is by Faith in Christ, unto all, and upon all them
that believe; that as, Romans 10.3. It Is written; for Christ is the end of the
Law for Righteousness to every one that believes. The end of the Law (...).
Now there is a twofold end of a thing; there is finis extensionis; the end unto
which any thing is or may be extended; and there is finis perfectionis, the end
by which any thing is perfected and consummated; now Christ is the end of the
Law for Righteousness in both; he is, (...), both finis extensionis, and finis
perfectionis. 1. He is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that
believes: He is (...) finis extensionis; the utmost end which the Law does or
can extend or be extended and stretched out unto: Now the Law is of great and
large extent, as, Psalm. 119.96. I have seen an end of all perfection; but thy
commandment is exceeding broad. Creature perfection is that which a man may
easily search out and see to the end of, he may search out and see the utmost
extent thereof; how far it can go, and how far it does extend: So here says
the Psalmist, I have seen an end of all perfection; but thy comandment is
exceeding broad. A man cannot so easily see to the the end of the commandment,
and find out the extent thereof: No says the Psalmist again, It is exceeding
broad. The Law and Holy Commandment extends to all within, as well as to all
without; it extends to the Soul and Spirit of a Man within; to all the Internal
Faculties: The Mind and Conscience, the Understanding, Will and Affections; and
to all the Internal motions and operations thereof, whether they be good or
evil. It extends to all the thoughts and imaginations of the thoughts in the
heart of a man; as Genesis 6.5. It extends to the Principle and End of a man's way
and work; as Zech. 7.5, 6. It extends to the most Secret thoughts and
intentions of the Heart, and divides asunder betwixt the marrow and the bones,
Heb. 4.12, 13. It extends to all the words and actions of a man's Life and
Conversation, to all his religion and religious performances, Mat. 5.23, 24.
and v. 27, 28. and v. 40, 41, 42. and v. 43* 44. to the end. The Law in the
Spirituality and purity of it extends to all that a man is every way, as a man,
and as a Christian, as considered in his place, station and relations; and it
extends to all that a man has, and to all that a man does. Oh! well might the
Psalmist say, But thy Commandment is exceeding broad. But yet as broad as the
Commandment is, and considered in the utmost extent of it; the Obedience and
Righteousness of Christ; extends its self to the utmost breath and length;
yea to the utmost extent of the Law in the Spirituality, and Purity, and
Diffusiveness thereof; yea it does exceed and go beyond the Law: For the Law
required but a man's Righteousness and Obedience; as, Romans 10.5. The Man that
does these things, shall live by them. But lo here is a Righteousness brought
in, and an Obedience performed to the whole Law in the utmost extent of it; by
him who is God, as well as Man, even the Righteousness of God! And thus Christ
is The end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes; as the end
of the Law is finis extensionis.

But then again; Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one
that believes; as (...), the end of the Law is finis perfectionis, i. e. the
perfection, accomplishment and finishing of the Law in the spirituality,
purity, universality and perpetuity of it. And in this sense also Christ is the
end, i. e. the perfection of the Law, as it has its accomplishment and
fulfilling in him.

First; And first for the Ceremonial Law, that had its accomplishment, and was
fulfilled in Christ: All the Types and Figures; all the Sacrifices, with the
sprinkling of their Blood; all the Services and Ceremonies, looked and pointed
unto him who was the substance of them all, and in whom they had their
accomplishment, perfection and end; as Job. 1.17. For the Law was given by
Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ; Grace, i. e. all that Grace of
Justification typified by the Sacrifices and the Sprinklings of Blood, and all
that Grace that was shadowed out by the National Election, Adoption and Glory;
all that Grace of Sanctification typified and shadowed out by Circumcision, and
the various washings under the Law; all this Grace was given unto us from the
Father by Jesus Christ; and the truth and substance expressed and darkly
figured in that Law of the heavenly things themselves, was performed and made
good to us in Christ: So Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ in opposition to
works, and man's righteousness and trurh in opposition to the shadows and
appearances; so Dan. 9.24. To seal up the Vision and the Prophecy, and to
anoint the most holy; so that the anointing of the most holy, was to be the
sealing up the Vision and the Prophecy of the Old Testament, i. e. the
finishing and accomplishing thereof; for sealing up does signify and imply the
finishing and completing of the things therein conveyed to us: And accordingly
all that was seen, though but darkly in the vision of the Old Testament, and
all that was testified aforehand in the Prophecy was fulfilled and finished in
Christ, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. Of which Salvation the Prophets have enquired and
searched diligently, who prophesied of the Grace that should come unto you,
searching what or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them
did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the
Glory that should follow; So that the Vision and Prophecy of the Old Testament,
pointed to the most Holy, i. e. Christ, and had their end of Perfection and
Accomplishment in him: The Old Testament, Tabernacle, Odinances of Worship,
Priesthood and Service was a Shadow of good things to come, but the Body is
Christ, Col. 2.17.

2. And then again Secondly, As to the Moral Law, which was added in that
Mosaical Law and Dispensation, and that because of Sin or Transgression, as
Romans 5.20. and Gal. 3.19. and was not the Covenant of God with that people
particularly, as that by which they should expect righteousness and life, for
the covenant of God with that people in the Mosaical Dispensation, was though
more dark and shadowy, a Covenant of Grace. But I say the Moral Law was added,
because of Sin; now as to the Moral Law, Christ is also the end of it, and it
has its perfection and accomplishment only in Christ actually, and also in all
them that believe virtually: now that the Moral Law is here mainly and
principally intended is plain, in that it is said, that Christ is the end of
the Law for Righteousness; Now there is no other Law that is the measure and
rule of Righteousness, but the Moral Law first, and then such other positive
Laws as God superadded: for as sin is nothing else but the transgression of the
Law, so Righteousness is nothing else but the fulfilling of it; So that for as
much as Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness, it is plain that he did
fulfill the Moral Law, by giving that perfect obedience thereunto, that whole
obedience, which the Law did and does require of Adam and all his Posterity,
and that as a Covenant of Works; I say this Law was fulfilled by Christ, for us
in the perfection and utmost extent and demand of it, as shall be more
particularly set out in the opening of the next Doctrine; for otherwise he
could not be the end of the Law for Righteousness to them that believe, if he
had not perfected and filled up the Righteousness of the Law for them and in
their stead; Therefore the Righteousness of the Law is perfected and fulfilled
by Christ actually and personally: and he is the end or perfection of it.

And then the Righteousness of the Law is also fulfilled, and has its
perfection in all them that believe virtually and in Christ their head; as Romans
8.3, 4, For what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh,
God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for sin condemned
sin in the flesh, that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us:
So that the Righteousness of the Law has its perfection and accomplishment
also in them that believe: they having fulfilled the Law vertually and by Faith
in Christ their Head; So that as the Apostle puts the question, Romans 3.31. Do
we then make void the Law through Faith? The answer is full; God forbid! yea we
establish the Law. So that this Righteousness of God which is by the Faith of
Christ, unto all and upon all them that believe, is a most perfect and complete
Righteousness, both with respect to Christ, and also with respect to all them
that believe; who have better fulfilled the Law in Christ their Head, than
could have been by the first Adam, if he had never sinned: but of this more
fully under another inference.

2. Hence also we infer the stability and duration of this Righteousness; for
if it be the Righteousness of God, and that as he is the sole author of it, as
the Foundation of his new Creation in Christ conferred freely by his Grace,
contrived by his Wisdom, and effected by his mighty Power, manifested in
Christ, and also in all them that believe, as ye^ have heard, then it is a
steadfast Work that abides unalterably and unchangeably the same, for ever: for
such is the nature of all God's Works; Even the Works of the Old and First
Creation, that they are established and stand fast for ever, as Eccles. 3.14. I
know that whatsoever God does it shall be for ever. i. e. it shall stand and
remain as God has made it: and neither man nor any Creature can alter or
change that which God has done; For Solomon explains himself in the following
words, nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it; and God does it,
that men may fear before him, i. e. that men may pay a due reverence to the
works of God, and subscribe with a holy submission thereunto: Now if this be
the nature of all Gods Works, even in the first and old Creation, that
whatsoever God does, abides for ever, and cannot be changed by man, or by the
Sons of men: then how much more is it so in his works of the new Creation in
Christ which must and shall stand fast forever? for as the Will and Wisdom of
man cannot alter or change them; so God has declared that he will not; as
James 1.17, 18. Every good and every perfect gift is from above, and comes
down from the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness neither shadow of
turning; Of his own Will begat he us, by the word of truth, that we should be a
kind of first fruits of his Creatures. And again Romans 11.29. For the gifts and
calling of God are without Repentance, meaning the gifts of his Grace in
Christ, all the Gifts and Works of his new Creation, are without Repentance;
God will not Repent, nor alter, or change what he has done therein.

Now that this Righteousness of God which is by the Faith of Jesus Christ unto
all them that believe is such, plainly appears and is particularly declared,
in that it is called Everlasting Righteousness, Dan. 9.24. which plainly
refers unto Christ the Messiah, the most holy, whose work it was to make an
end of sins, and to bring in everlasting Righteousness; this Righteousness of
God therefore brought in by Christ, is everlasting Righteousness, and remains
unalterably and eternally the same through all ages and generations; and
through all Nations, and Tongues, and Kindreds of Men; So that all which have
been, are, or shall be justified in God's sight; have been, are, and shall be
so justified by Faith in Christ, and by this Righteousness of God, which is
unto all and upon all them that believe: for there is no difference betwixt
Nation and Nation, betwixt Jew and Gentile; no difference betwixt them that
were justified under the Old Testament, and those which are justified under the
New Testament; no difference betwixt them that have been justified from the
beginning of the World to this day, and those that shall be justified in the
Ages and Generations yet to come; let them be never so many or never so long;
this Righteousness of God remains unchangeably the same by the Faith of Jesus
Christ only, and not by the works of the Law unto all, and upon all them that
believe in all Nations and in all Ages; So in the old World, all that were
justified and saved, were justified and saved by this righteousness of God,
which is by the Faith of Jesus Christ, so express^y it is testified of Abel,
Enoch and Noah, Heb. 11.4.5, 6, 7. They obtained Witness from God, that they
were righteous and pleased God, and became Heirs of the Righteousness which is
by Faith; And that is this very Righteousness of God and none other; and so all
that were Justified in this World, and since the Flood, both before and after
the Law of Moses, were justified by this very Righteousness of God by the Faith
of Jesus Christ as is plainly declared, Heb. 11. from ^he 8. ver. to the end of
that chapter; where ^peaking of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and Sarah, yea of
Joseph, who all were before ^he Mosaical Law and Dispensation, about 400 and 30
years in the revolution of time, and afterward speaking of Moses, of Joshuah of
Rahab the Harlot, yea of Gedion, of Barak, of Sampson, of Jephthah, of David,
of Samuel also, and all the Prophets, says that these all obtained a good
report through Faith: And what was the good Report which they obtained? Namely
this, that they were Righteous and pleased God, and were justified in his sight
by Faith in Christ, and became the Heirs of the Promise and of this
Righteousness of God, which is by the Faith of Christ unto all, and upon all
them that believe: And then for the times of the Gospel or New Testament, there
is no need to say much, only take a text or two, namely, Romans 8.29, 30. For
whom he did foreknow he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of
his Son, that he might be the first born among many brethren; Moreover whom he
did predestinate them he also called, and whom he called them he also
justified, and whom he justified them he also glorified; So that look now into
God's Eternal Purpo^^ and Counsel of Grace in Christ, and consider how God has
fore-known, and fore-knowing has predestined to be conforme^ to the Image of
his Son, all those many Brethren among whom Christ is the first born: and
consider also how all these are called in the dispensation of the fullness of
times, as Ephesians. 1.10. for whom he did predestinate them he also called; and
whom he called, them he also justified; i. e. by Faith in his Son Jesus Christ,
who is therefore the first born among all these Brethren; so that they are all
(as they come to be called according to this purpose) justified in the sight of
God, by this Righteousness of God through Faith in Jesus Christ, as Romans 8.33,
34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that
justifies who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died yea, rather that
is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us. And as before ver. 30. Whom he justified, them he also
glorified. So that all that are elected of God in Christ, and are, or have been
and shall be called according to Gods purpose, are, have been and shall be
justified in this Righteousness of God through Faith in his Son, and being thus
justified shall be glorified; And what shall we say then to these things? God
be for us, who shall be against us?

And thus in the dispensation of the fullness (...) times he does gather
together in one, all ^^ings in Christ, both which are in Heaven (...) which are
on the Earth, even in him; (...) gathers them into or under one head, which is
Christ, by one and the same Faith, under one and the same Righteousness, which
(...) not their own, but the righteousness of God by Faith: and into one and
the same glorified estate in Heaven, as Job. 17.20, 21. Neither pray I for
these alone, but for them also, which shall believe on me through their word,
that they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they
also may be one in us, and ver. 22, 23. And the glory which thou gave me, I
have given them, that they may be one even as we are one, I in them and thou in
me, that they may be made perfect in one: In these words Christ prays for
them that already believed in him, and also for all those that should afterward
believe in him through their words, i. e. the Apostolical word, the everlasting
Gospel to be preached unto all Nations, and to the end of the World, as Mat.
28.19, 20. and that which Christ Prays for, with respect to them all, is;
that they may be one, and that they may be made perfect in one; that as the
Father is in Christ and Christ in them, they also man be one in him, and in the
Father through him: now this union is founded in the^^ Justification by this
Faith: for here, by the Spirit on Christ's part, given to the^ and working
Faith in them by the (...) preached, and by Faith on their part, they come into
this actual union with Christ, an^ the Father in Christ, and are now made
perfect in this union, in respect of their Justification by Faith, and stand
completely and perfectly justified and righteous before God, even the Father,
in this Righteousness of Christ, and so shall be made perfect also in that
which does follow, and depend upon their Justification, which is Adoption and
Glory: For whom he justified, them he also glorified, is before, Romans 8 30. And
the glory which thou gave me, have I given them, that they may be one, even
as we are one; John 17.22. So that upon the whole argument it does plainly and
fully appear, that this righteousness of God which is by the Faith of Christ
unto all, and upon all them that believe, is an everlasting righteousness,
remaining unalterably one and the same in all Ages and Generations, in all
Nations and Kindreds of the Earth, and to all persons that have been already,
are now, or shall be hereafter justified before God. (...) Infer. 3. And then
again thirdly, we ^nfer the greatness, excellency and glory of (...)
Righteousness, above all other Righ^eousnesses that might have been, or may be
mentioned, or pretended unto amongst Men ^or Angels; for as the Apostle says
of Christ, Heb. 1.4. That he has by inheritance obtained a more excellent name
than they, i. e. the Angels; and argues from thence the greatness and
excellency of his Person and Office; So we may say concerning this
Righteousness, that it has a more excellent name than any other Righteousness
of Men or Angels; for it is called the Righteousness of God, which none other
is; And therefore it is a better, greater, and more excellent, and glorious
Righteousness, than any other that might have been or may be pretended unto by
Men or Angels: for it has a more excellent name.

1. Now let us consider man in the first place, and what righteousness he might
have pretended or may pretend unto: And certainly Adam in the state of
innocence was an excellent and glorious Creature, the highest and top of Gods
Creation in this lower World; He was made after the image of him that created
him, in Knowledge, Righteousness, and Holiness, and God had (...) him under an
excellent Law, Spiritual, Holy, Just and Good; and this Law was written in his
Heart, he had an original righteousness and integrity of nature conforme^ and
agreeable to this Law, and, an abili^^ thereby to have kept and fulfilled all
the Righteousness thereof: now if this excellen^ person had kept and not
transgressed this excellent Law; He and all mankind in him had been Righteous,
and lived thereby, a Romans 10.5. For Moses describes the righteousness which is
of the Law; The (...) which does these things shall live by them* But yet this
Righteousness which is by the Faith of Christ unto all, and upon all them that
believe, is a greater, better, more excellent and glorious Righteousness, than
that of Adam could have been, if he had not sinned, but fulfilled the
righteousness of the Law; For that could have been but a man's Righteousness:
it could have risen no higher, it could have been called by no greater name
than the RIGHTEOUSNESS of MAN; But now here is a Righteousness brought in by
Christ, the second Adam, and to us by Faith in him, which is the righteousness
of God; The person working out this righteousness for us, being God in the
humane nature, has added an infinite dignity and glory to it by the dignity
and glory of his person, as has been showed; So that as Christ is a more
excellent person than the first Adam; His obedience and righteousness in
fulfilling the Law must needs be a more excellent righteousness, than that of
Adam, or all other men could have been, if Adam and they in him had kept the
Law; For that had been but the Righteousness of Man, but this is the
righteousness of God. Oh the admirable work and contrivance of the free Grace,
Wisdom and Power of God, in and through his Son Jesus Christ, toward his
Elect, that (having lost righteousness in the first Adam, and all hope and
possibility of it by works) they have gained a greater, better, and more
excellent righteousness by Faith in Christ; they lost that which would have
been at best but a man's righteousness, but they have gained by that loss, and
obtained by Faith, that which is the righteousness of God; So that the poorest
believer have a better righteousness by Faith in Christ, than Adam had or could
have had in innocence, or that themselves could have had, if they had never
sinned.

And hereby indeed it is manifest that the Seed of the Woman has bruised the
head or head-plat of the Old Serpent the Devi^ in bringing in a better
Righteousness.

2. And let us also consider the gloriou^ Angels of Heaven, the Elect Angels,
an^ what righteousness they are justified an^ stand before the holy God in: And
so far a^ we can look into this matter, in the ligh^ of the holy Scriptures; it
does not appea^ that they are justified by Faith in Christ a^ we are, for they
never sinned as we all did (...) Adam, and needed no Redeemer to re^eem them by
his blood as we did; And christ took not upon him the nature of Angels, ^^at
the Seed of Abraham, as Heb. 2.16. and therefore as Christ took not their
nature, (...) stood not in their stead to fulfill the righ^^ousness of that law
for them, under which (...) were put; But they have fulfilled and ^ne the Will
of God their Creator, as Psalm. ^3.20. Bless the Lord ye his Angels, that (...)
in strength, that do his commandments, ^^^kning to the voice of his word; And
again ^^.21. Ye Ministers that do his pleasure; (...) that for ought that does
appear, these ho^^ Angels stand before God and are justi^^^d by their own
personal and perfect obe^^^nce to the Law of their Creator, and in (...) own
Righteousness; indeed they needed a Savior, to prevent their falling, and to
confirm them in that state of innocence and glory, wherein they were at first
created and made, and in this respect they have their confirmation in and by
Christ, and from their election in Christ the common head of all Gods Elect
both amongst Angels and Men, Ephesians. 1.10. and in this respect they are our
brethren and fellow Servants, as Rev. 22.9. Brethren they are, though indeed
our elder Brethren in Christ their head and ours, and had their election and
confirmation in Christ, apparently manifested before us, for their Election and
Confirmation in Christ appeared upon the fall of the Angel^ that sinned, and
before the Fall of Adam, whereas our Election and Redemption in and by Christ,
was not manifest nor did at all appear till after the Fall of the first Adam,
and then it began to break forth, and appear in the first Promise, Genesis 3.15.
So that they are our elder Brethren yet our Brethren in Christ, but so, that
Christ has the pre-eminence, and is the first born amongst the many Brethren,
both Angels and Men, being the head of the Election; Yet as has been said, it
does not appear that they have any other or greater Righteousness than their
own; And as they are by nature greater and more excellent than we, so their
obedience may excel the obedience of man, if he had also obeyed and fulfilled
the Law of his Creator as they did; Yet still the obedience of Angels, and the
righteousness wherein they are justified and stand before God, is but the
obedience and righteousness of Creatures; though it be never so excellent,
though it be Angelical; yet it is, and can be but Creature righteousness; And
this righteousness which we have by Faith in Christ, is God's Righteousness,
and therefore as God is more excellent than his Creatures, so his Righteousness
is greater; and more excellent than theirs can possibly be. And here see, and
behold again the triumph of Grace over sin and death; that fallen man is raised
again and advanced in Christ, to a greater, better, and more excellent and
glorious hope of righteousness by Faith in Christ; not only, than Man had in
innocence, or could have had by the works of the Law, but also than Angels in
Heaven have: So that as they were preferred before us, and set above us by
nature, we that believe are preferred before them by Grace; for Christ took not
Angelical but the humane nature into union with the Godhead in his own glorious
person: and is sat down in that nature, at the right hand of the Majesty on
high: and we are said also to be sat down together with or in him in the
heavenly places, Ephesians. 2.6. Whereas the Angels are not said to be sat down,
but to stand before the Throne and in the presence of God, as Ministers and
Servants, Luke 1.19. Rev. 5.11. Heb. 1.13, 14. And the humiliation of Christ
who was made a little lower than the Angels in our Nature, has exalted us with
or in Christ above the Angels, and we have a better righteousness than they.

Inf. 4. Again fourthly, hence we infer how much it is the duty and interest of
every man under these Heavens (to whom the word of Salvation comes) to believe
in Jesus Christ and submit themselves to this righteousness of God; The very
name it carries (the righte^^sness of God) is enough to bow every (...) to
stoop to the authority of it, and submit himself unto it; For it is the
righteousness of God, as he is the Author of it, his Free grace has conferred,
his Wisdom has contrived, found out, and appointed, and his Power has wrought
out this Righteousness for us, in his Son Christ, and he is only and infinitely
well pleased with it, and we are under the highest obligation to submit to it.
For,

1. He has commanded us so to do, 1 John 3.23. And this is his commandment,
that we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ. And when the Jews
put the question to Christ, John 6.28. What shall we do that we might work the
works of God? The answer is, verse. 29. This is the work of God, that ye believe
on him whom he has sent. And when the voice came from the most excellent
glory, and testified from the Father out of Heaven concerning Christ; This is
my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. The same voice also adds the
command; and says, Hear him, Mat. 17.5. So that the command of God declared
makes it every Man's Duty to submit to this Righteousness of God, by believing
in his Son Jesus Christ.

2. It is a greater and more excellent Righteousness than that which is (...)
be supposed to be a man's own Righteousness; for it is the Righteousness of God:
And what comparison is there betwixt the one and the other? What is man? That
is a Worm compared with God, whose name is I Am: What is man? Of the Earth
Earthy, compared with the Lord from Heaven? 1 Cor. 15.47. And what then is the
Righteousness of man, or thine own Righteousness poor Worm? compared with this
Righteousness of God? Surely thy own Righteousness is but* filthy rags; and
thou thy self but an unclean thing, Isa. 64.6. And why should thou not be
willing to part with thy rags, thy filthy rags; that thou may put on the
Royal Robes of Christ's Righteousness? Should not a poor filthy beggar be
willing to put off, and throw away his rags, that he may be washed and cleansed
and put on the Royal Apparel which the King of his Grace has provided for him,
and commanded him to put on; that he may stand before him with acceptance? Had
Mordecai refused to have put off his mournful and dirty weeds of Sackcloth and
Ashes, the emblems of his shame and sorrow for the destruction designed by
Haman, and confirmed by the Kings Seal for this Mordecai and all the Jews, and
now ready for Execution: Had I say Mordecai refused; what a contempt* would it
have been of the Royal favor, and Rebellon against the Royal command of so
great a King? How justly then might the King upon such a contempt of Mercy and
Grace, and his Royal Authority and Command withal; have abandoned Mordecai and
left him and all his People to the destruction aforementioned? Oh man! this is
thy case, and thou art the man here concerned: Has God of his Grace and Favor
in his Son Christ conferred and provided such Royal Robes of Righteousness for
thee, and commanded them to be brought unto thee, and commanded thee to put off
thy rags of Self, or thy own Righteousness? And will thou dare to reject this
Royal Grace and Favor; and rebel against this Royal command of the great God?
How justly may thou for this contempt be abandoned of God for ever, and left
to perish in thy sins, and the rags of thine own Righteousness? And how can
thou think to stand before God in these rags? Before him, whose name is holy?
And who is of purer Eyes, than to behold Iniquity? With whom evil shall not
dwell, and in whose presence no unclean thing shall enter? Can thou dwell
with everlasting burning? O^ can thou, clothed with Hay and Stable, stand
before consuming Fire? Heb. 12. ult. When Joshuah the High Priest stood before
the Angel clothed in filthy garments; Satan stood at his Right hand to resist
him, Zech. 3.1, 2, 3. And he could not st^nd with acceptance, till they took
away his filthy garments, and clothed him with change of raiment, verse. 4, 5.
And then The Angel of the Lord protested unto him, as verse 6. Saying, thus
says the Lord, the Lord of Hosts; if thou will walk in my ways, and if thou will keep my charge: Then thou shall also judge my house, and shall also keep
my Courts; and I will give thee places to walk among these that stand by. Man,
know, thou can not stand, nor walk before God, the holy God with acceptance,
till thy filthy garments and filthy rags be taken away from thee, and thou
be clothed with change of Raiment, i. e. the perfect Righteousness of Jesus
Christ: Which unless thou put on by Faith, neither thy person nor service
can be accepted of him. For as there is no salvation out of Christ, so also out
of Christ and his Righteousness, there is no acceptance to any person under
Heaven.

And that thou, Oh man! may yet be more fully convinced that thou can not
stand before God in the best of thine own Righteousness, but only and alone in
this Righteousness of God; which is by the Faith of Christ unto all, and upon
all them that believe: Consi-that thou can not stand before thine own
Conscience in the best of thine own Righteousness: And if thy Conscience be an
awakened and enlightened Conscience, it will witness against thee; yea, it will
judge and condemn thee, in the best of thy Inherent Righteousness of inward
qual^ficat^ons, and external performances: We will suppose, and thou may
say, thou have Faith; but have thou not unbe^ief as well as Faith? And is not
thy unbelief more than thy Faith? And many times do thou not act, at least in
some case^ as if thou had no Faith? And does not thy Conscience reprove and
judge as Christ does his Disciples? Mat. 4.40. Thou will say also* thou do
repent, and thou hate tha^ which is evil; well, but do thou not find also
impenitency and hardness of Heart, at least some times and in some cases? Do
thou not find thy Heart sometimes to be without all tenderness? And to be even
hardened from Gods fear; so that neither the Word of God, nor yet the Rod of
God do make impression upon thee? Isa. 63.17. Yea neither the Mercies nor the
Judgments of God, do thou lay to Heart as thou ought to do? Isa. 42.24,
25. Thou will say thou art Humble, but is there not Pride also in thy Heart?
And does not Pride prevail many times in thy Heart as it did in Hezekiah? 2 Chronicles. 32.25. And does not thy Conscience reprove thee for thy Pride as his
did, verse. 26? Thou will say also that thou do Love God, but do thou love
him withal thy Heart, and all thy Soul, and all thy Strength? Do not thou
love thy Carnal Self also, and the Creature more than God; at least sometimes
and in some particular cases? And does not the love of thy Self and of the
Creature prevail above all the love of God in thy Heart? And so of the rest of
all thy Inherent Qualifications. And then for thy external performances; thou will say that thou prayest and call upon God in thy Close^, in thy Family,
in and with the Congreation of the People of God? And thou hear the word,
and that with joy and delight thou receivest the seals of Gods Covenant; and
thou joynest fasting with thy Prayers, and chastenest thy Soul therewith: Well
but Oh Man! does not sin mix it self with thy best duties, and iniquity creep
into all thy holy things? And does not thine own Conscience tell thee and
reprove thee for these things? And thou art put to it after all, to cry out,
Lord be merciful to me a Sinner, a Wretch, an unclean thing. Now if this be
true, and these things be so; that thou can not stand before thine own
enlightened and awakened Conscience in the best of thine own Righteousness,
either of inherent qualifications or external duties: How can thou think to
stand before God, who is greater than thy Heart or Conscience, and knows all
things, as, 1 John 3.20. Yea he knows more evil by thee, and sees more sin
and iniquity in thee, and in thy holy things than ever thou did or can do,
Psalm. 19.12. Jer. 17.9, 10. Therefore he is greater than thy Heart and knows
all things; as thine own Heart condemns thee in all those things, he will
condemn thee also; for thou can not stand before him in these rags, in these
filthy rags: Is it not therefore, Oh man! whoever thou art, that hear the
word of God this day: I say is it not thy duty and thy interest also to comply
with and submit unto this Righteousness of God; and seek a better Righteousness
out of thy self by Faith in his Son? Is not this Righteousness better than thy
own? Are not the royal robes better than filthy rags? Can thou stand before
the great King of Heaven and Earth in filthy garments, And will he accept thee;
Will not his Wrath burn against thee, and Say, friend how came thou in
hither, not having on the wedding garment? and will not he say? Take him hence,
bind him hand and foot and cast him into outer darkness? There shall be wailing
and gnashing of teeth. And wilt not thou be left speechless and without excuse,
as Mat. 22.11, 12, 13, 14. Oh therefore put on this wedding garment, and wear
i^ always when thou come before the King, and treadest in his Courts; and be
sure thou be in it, having it on, and never dare to look God in the Face
without it; as, Phil. 3.9. But be found in it whilst thou live, when thou
come to die, and at the Day of Judgment; That the shame of thy nakedness do
not appear to thy everlasting confusion.

Infer. 5. But then again fifthly; Hence we may also Infer and A^gue how
greatly it is the duty and work, and as well the interest also of every
Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ to be himself well instructed in the
knowledge of this Righteousness of God; and understandingly, faithfully and
clearly to Preach and declare this Righteousness of God which is by the Faith
of Christ unto all and upon all them that believe.

And that it is your Duty and Interest to understand and know this
Righteousness of God, and to be well instructed in and acquainted with this
Mystery of Faith; and to Hold it in a pure Conscience; as the Apostle does
command, 1 Timothy 3.9. will appear by the Considerations following,

1 Consid. This Righteousness of God by Faith in his Son Jesus Christ, is the
great foundation truth of the Gospel; and as it concerns every wise and skilful
builder to look well to his foundation, upon which the whole building and his
success therein, and also his reputation as a workman does depend: So it does
greatly concern every Gospel Minister, that he may be a skilful builder in the
Church of God, to look well to the foundation of the Faith and Hope not only of
himself, but also of the whole Church of Gods Elect: For other foundation can
no man lay than what is already laid, which is Jesus Christ; the same
yesterday, and to day and for ever, as 2 Cor. 3.11. If a Minister lay his
foundation in the works of the Law, and man's Righteousness, it will never hold;
whatever hope or confidence he builds upon this foundation in himself or
others, will certainly fall, when his work shall come to be tried; and himself,
and all those that hear him, and whom he builds upon this foundation will
certainly perish; unless another better foundation be laid: For by the works of
the Law, there shall no flesh be justified in his sight: As has been showed.
No, no, man's Righteousness will not; no less than this Righteousness of God can
be a sure foundation to build upon for Justification in his sight, and for
Eternal Life.

2 Consid. The building must be uniform and answerable to the foundation in all
parts of it, and bear a true proportion to, and agreement with the foundation
to the very topstone; that the beholders may cry, Grace, Grace, to it; and that
with shoutings as, Zech. 4 7. There is a blessed harmony in the Gospel, and all
Gods attributes do harmonize and shine forth in a joint luster and glory in
Jesus Christ. So all man's duty is consistent with this principle of the
Righteousness of God, and does sweetly flow from it; Grace is manifested, and
yet the Law is established and not made void by it: Gods Justice is fully
satisfied, his wrath is pacified, the Gospel is glad tidings, Peace on Earth,
and good will to men; the Enmity is slain, and the handwriting of Ordidinances
that was against us is nailed to the Cross, and taken out of the way; all good
works are established upon better Principles, and Man's duty encouraged and
rewarded. And if once you that are Ministers have obtained this Key of
Knowledge, the whole Mystery of God, of the Father, and of Christ will be
opened unto you; and your Preaching will be clear, uniform and harmonious; so
that you will never contradict your selves in whatever Point you Preach upon,
and the Faith of them that hear you will be clear and sound; but if you fail
here, and, through ignorance of this Righteousness of God, go about to
establish your own, or Man's Righteousness, your Preaching will be confused,
and you will contradict your selves at one time, in what you Preach, or Print
at another; and your Hearers will be of doubtful minds, and wavering betwixt
Works and Grace; betwixt the Law and Faith. Thus you will build again at one
time, or other, what you have sometimes destroyed; and so make your selves
transgressors, as Gal. 2.17, 18. And for want of a clear light in the knowledge
of this Righte^^ of God, some, though otherwise men of eminent Learning, Zeal,
and personal Holiness, have most shamefully contradicted themselves, and
exposed their labors to that just censure and scorn even of adversaries, and
the sorrow and shame of their friends: Whilst their hearers and admirers are
unstable and wavering, and so in danger after some time to fall into error: And
how far the Church of God may be prejudiced thereby time will show: For this
one Article, is Articulus Stantis and cadentis Ecclesiae. The Church of God
Stands or Falls, Lives or Dies as this one Article of Justification by Faith in
Christ, and this Righteousness of God, stands or falls amongst men.

And Lastly, That it is greatly the duty and interest of Ministers to Declare
and Preach this Righteousness of God; appears from this one consideration;
Namely, That they cannot Preach savingly without it: If they have all the
Wisdom and Learning of this World, and have Tongues of men and Angels, and draw
multitudes of Admirers and Followers after them; Yet this I say from the word
of God, that whilst they do not know, or knowing do not Preach this
Righteousness of God, their Ministry cannot be powerful to the saving of their
own Souls, or the Souls of those that hear them: For the Apostle does assure
us, Romans 1.16, 17. The Gospel of Christ is ^o nomine, and upon that account,
The Power of God unto Salvation, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek; as it
does Reveal and Declare this Righteousness of God: For I am not ashamed, etc.
For therein is the Righteousness of God revealed, as it is written, the just
shall live by Faith. i. e. Faith in this Righteousness of God. And take away
this Righteousness of God out of the Gospel, it would be no Gospel, nor could
it be unto Salvation: And take away this Righteousness of God out of your
Ministry, and it will be no Gospel Ministry; nor can it be a Saving Ministry to
your selves or them that hear you.

(...).

OR, A DISCOURSE Of, or Concerning, The Time and Season, wherein God does
Justify his Elect, through Faith in his Son Jesus Christ, according to the
Scriptures.

WHEREIN, I. The Doctrine of Justification from all Eternity. II. The Doctrine
of Justification from the time of Christ's Death and Resurrection. Are fairly
and truly tried and confuted. III. The true time searched out and stated
according to Scripture.


By THO. TAILOR.

Searching what and what manner of time, the Spirit of Christ which was in them
did signify,

1 Pet. 1.11. The Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto a man that sowed good seed
in his Field; But while men slept, his Enemy came, and sowed Tares and went his
way,

Mat. 13.24, 25. LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch. 1693.

Romans 8.30. And whom he called, them he also justified*


HAving already opened and explained this Justification wherewith God does
justify them whom he calls, in the nature of it: we now proceed to speak of,
and open, and explain the same as to the time of it; because not only the
things themselves, but the time or times are to be searched into, when and
wherein the things are, and are to be ministered unto us, 1 Pet. 1.11, 12.
Searching what or what manner of times the Spirit of Christ which was in them
did signify.

And concer^ing this enquiry or search, there are and have been of late two
several Doctrines or Opinions grea^l^ cried up, and as confidently affirmed by
some, and violently imposed upon their unwa^y hearers, and with the same Spirit
of violence as furiously contended for by them, who are so imposed upon; As the
Ephesian worshipers of Diana contended for her Goddess ship, as the Image that
fell down from Jupiter out of Heaven, Acts 19.27, 28, 34, 35.

1. The first Doctrine and Opinion so cried up and contended for is; The
Doctrine of Justification from Eternity; Or that Gods Elect were justified from
all Eternity.

2. The second is like unto it; Which at least must be admitted without the
least scruple or question: Justification from the time of Christ Death, or
Resurrection: or that all Gods Elect were and are justified from the time of
Christ's Death or Resurrection, because the price was then paid by Jesus Christ,
and he as Head of the Church discharged by his Resurrection, according to the
Interpretation they give of Romans 4. ult. Who was delivered for our offenses,
and raised again for our Justification; Which they suppose and take for
granted, must needs imply the time as well as the thing of Believers
Justification.

We shall therefore fairly and truly try both these Doctrines by the Holy
Scriptures according to what we are commanded. 1 John 4.1. Beloved believe not
every Spirit, but try the Spirit whether they be of God; for many false
Prophets are gone out into the World. And we shall first try the first of these
Doctrines; As namely,

Quest. 1. Whether Gods Elect, or any sort of men were justified from all
Eternity, as some do say and affirm?

And unto this we answer affirmatively in two things. Namely,

1. That there is and was a gracious purpose, which God had purposed in himself
from all Eternity, to Justify and save his Elect through Faith in his Son
Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.9. According to his good pleasure, which he has
purposed in himself. And again, 2 Timothy 1.9. But according to his own Purpose
and Grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the World began. And the
Apostle in the Context does not only plainly imply, but expressly declare the
same, when he says, Romans 8.28. To them, who are the called according to his
purpose; and then, ver. 30. Whom he called, them he also justified; Therefore
there is and was such a purpose in God before the World began to call and
justify them.

2. That all that have been, are now, or hereafter shall be justified through
Faith in Jesus Christ, from the Foundation of the World, to the end thereof,
have been, are now, and shall be Justified according to this Purpose, which God
has Purposed in himself before the World began, and no otherwise, as Ephesians.
1.11. In whom also we have obtained an Inheritance; (And this Inheritance
cannot be obtained without free Justification by Grace, as Tit. 3 7. Being
Predestined according to the Purpose of him, who works all things after (or
according to) the Counsel of his own Will; For in that he says all things,
it is manifest, that he works this one thing amongst all the rest, even his
Justifying his Elect through Faith in his Son Jesus Christ, after or according
to this Counsel of his own Will; and Ephesians. 1.3, 4. Who has blessed us with
all spiritual blessings in Heavenly places in Christ; Amongst which Spiritual
Blessings, that of Justification must be acknowledged to be one, and none of
the least or last of those blessings; It follows, ver. 4. According as he
has chosen us in him, before the Foundation of the World; And again 2 Timothy
1.9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling; not according to
our works, but according to his own purpose and graee, which was given us in
Christ Jesus before the World began. And this also is plainly declared in the
Context, Rom 8.30. Whom he did Predestinate, them he also Called, and whom he
called them he also Justified; And if you will ask how? The answer is,
According to his Purpose, as ver. 28. According to this Purpose, he calls
them, and according to this Purpose he justifies them: So that thus far we do
consent and agree.

1. That there is and was a purpose in God from all Eternity to Justify his
Elect, through Faith in his Son Jesus Christ, And

2. That all that are justified, are justified according to this Purpose, which
God had purposed in himself.

But then we distinguish betwixt, being under a purpose of Grace from all
Eternity to be justified: And being Justified from all Eternity, and therefore
though we grant and affirm the former, yet we deny the latter. Namely,

Neg. That Gods Elect, or any person in this World, are* or is, or ever were,
or was justified from all Eternity. This Doctrine of Justification from
Eternity, I say, we truly reject, disown, and deny, as a false and unsound
Doctrine, and contrary to the Holy Scriptures: all which will more than
sufficiently appear in these following Particulars.

Part. 1. This Doctrine in the consequent of it, does deny, destroy and
overthrow the truth and true Doctrine of Gods Election and Predestination,
which the Holy Scriptures do establish, and which is one fundamental point of
the true Christian Faith, and from whence does spring as from a Fountain, all
the parts of our Salvation; This is called, The Foundation of God which
stands sure, 2 Timothy 2.19. And this is that from whence as from a Fountain all
the parts of our Salvation do spring, and proceed, Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12. There are two parts of this Election of God, namely,
foreknowledge, and predestination. Romans 8.29. For whom he did foreknow, he also
did predestinate; Now there neither is nor can be any foreknowledge or
fore-ordaining of that which is from Eternity, for nothing can be said to be
before Eternity: And foreknowledge and predestination must be before the things
foreknown and predestined, and therefore if Justification were from Eternity,
there could be no foreknowledge, or predestination thereof; To speak with a
holy reverence, God cannot be said to foreknow himself, or to fore-ordain his
own blessedness, and enjoyment of himself alone, it is true, the blessedness of
God does consist in that knowledge and enjoyment of himself, which he has in
and of himself eternally; But he could not foreknow himself, or fore-ordain
himself this blessedness, because he has and had this eternally, and nothing
can precede, or be before eternity. Even so God could not be said to foreknow
and predestinate his Elect to Justification and Salvation, through Faith in his
Son Jesus Christ, if they were J^stified from all Eternity. And besides, it is
^ritten, Gal. 3.8. For the Scripture foreseeing tha^ God would justify the
Heathen through F^^^h, preached the Gospel beforehand to Abraham; saying, in
thee shall all the Nations be blessed. Now the Scripture could not foresee that
which was from Eternity: the Scripture may and does declare that which was from
Eternity, as John 1.1, 2. and 1 John 1.2, 3. but the Scripture cannot be said
to foresee that which was from Eternity, yet the Scripture did foresee that God
would justify these elect Heathen through Faith: therefore these Heathen were
not Justified from Eternity, though they were elected from eternity: he
therefore that says he was justified from eternity, and does teach men so,
does by consequence overthrow the Foundation of Gods Election, and deny that
himself and those he so teaches were either fore-known or predestined of God
to Justification and Salvation through Faith in Christ.

Part. 2. This Doctrine of Justification from Eternity, does by necessary
consequences destroy and overthrow the Doctrine and Faith of reconciliation,
which is also another fundamental point of the Christian Faith: Reconciliation
must go before Justification, at least in the order of Nature, though not of
time; God must be first reconciled to that person in Christ whom he justifies
in Christ, as 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. God was in Christ reconciling the World to
himself: and then their justification follows, not imputing to them their
trespasses; Reconciliation must be first, and then Justification follows, for
God Justifies a sinner upon the account of the price paid, and satisfaction
made by Jesus Christ, as Romans 5.10. If when we were Enemies we were reconciled
to God by the Death of his Son, etc.

Now reconciliation was not nor could be from Eternity, because reconciliation
supposes a breach first made by sin, now the breach made betwixt God and Man
by sin, was not from Eternity but in time, and therefore reconciliation could
not be from Eternity* and without reconciliation by shedding of blood there is
no remission, as Heb. 9.22. i. e. No Justification to the Church of Gods Elect,
for Remission of sins is their Justification.

Part. 3. This Doctrine of Justification from Eternity, destroys and
overthrows the true Doctrine of Justification it self also, which is another
fundamental point of the Christian Faith: and therefore this Doctrine of
Justification from Eternity cannot be true. Now the true Doctrine of
Justification is, that Act of Gods Grace passed or put forth upon the person
Elect, whereby of a guilty, ungodly, and unrighteous person before, he is
really made and does become, a righteous person in Gods sight, through Faith in
his Son Jesus Christ given unto him. I say, he is made and does become a
righteous person in Gods sight, and that really, and not by opinion only as
some would imagine; and here are two things to be cleared, as namely,

1. That every man in this World is really made and does become a guil^y and
condemned person in Gods sight by the first sin of Adam justly imputed to him
by the Law, so Romans 3.9, 10 and again ver. 19, 20. which the Apostle plainly
affirms by a comparison of the two Adam's, Romans 5.19. For as by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, etc. ver. 18. Therefore as by the offense
of one judgment came, or it came upon all men to condemnation, in Gods sight;
So that it is plain the many ver. 19. is all men, ver. 18. even the Elect of God
as well as others.

2. That as in the first Adam all men did become and were really made sinners
in Gods sight, by the just imputation of Adam's sin to them by the Law, even so
in Christ many as v. 19. or all men, as ver. 18. i. e. all that believe are
justified, i. e. are made and do become righteous in Gods sight, through Faith
in Christ, by the righteousness of one, or by the obedience of one, justly
imputed to them by the Law of Faith and Grace. So that as before Justification
every man was really a guilty and unrighteous person in Gods sight; So now that
Faith in Christ is come, every man that believes is justified, and does
become, and is made a righteous person in Gods sight; So that Justification
makes a real change of State, from a state of sin and unrighteousness, and
death, to a state of Grace, Righteousness and Life.

Now therefore he that is Justified from Eternity, was from Eternity in a state
of Grace, Righteousness and Life, and never was in a state of Sin,
Unrighteousness and Death: he never was a Sinner, Ungodly, and condemned in
Gods sight, and Sin had never reigned in him unto Death, in whom Grace had
reigned unto Life, through Righteousness from all Eternity; but the contrary is
true in all them whom God Justifies, as Romans 4.5. Now to him that works not,
but believes on him, that justifies the ungodly, his Faith is counted for
Righteousness and Romans 5.6. For when we were yet without strength in due time
Christ died for the Ungodly, and v. 21. That as sin has reigned unto death,
even so might Grace reign through Righteousness unto Eternal Life, by Jesus
Christ our Lord; So that we who are now Justified by Faith in Christ, were
without strength, were ungodly, were under the reign of Sin unto Death: but he
that was Justified from Eternity, was never any of these: and therefore no man
was or could be Justified from Eternity; there is a contradiction in the things
themselves; and therefore this Doctrine is inconsistent with the truth: for Sin
did not reign unto death in any from Eternity, but in Time: therefore Grace
could not reign through Righteousness unto Life in any from Eternity, but in
time.

Part. 4. This Doctrine of Justification from Eternity, destroys also the
Doctrine of Adoption, which inseparably follows Justification, and is another
inseparable point of the Christian Faith; I say Adoption follows, and is an
inseparable companion of Justification by Faith in Christ; he that is Justified
by Faith in Christ, is also adopted and taken into the number of Gods Sons or
Children by the same Faith, as Gal 3.24.25.26. That we might be justified by
Faith, v* 24. But after that Faith is come, v. 25. Ye are all the Children of
God by Faith in Christ Jesus: by the same faith by which any man is Justified,
by the same Faith also he is Adopted and made a Son or Child of God, and so
again, Gal. 4 4 5, 7. Now no man was Adopted from Eternity, and therefore no
man was Justified from Eternity; And he that was Adopted from Eternity, was
never a Servant but a Son; was never a Child of Disobedience, a Child of Wrath,
as Ephesians. 2.2, 3. but a Child of God from eternity: and then there never could
be any Predestination to the Adoption of Children, as Ephesians. 1.5. that the
Adoption of Children had been from eternity.

Part. 5. This Doctrine of Justification from Eternity denies, destroys, and
overthrows by consequence, the truth and doctrine of discrimination or making
a difference betwixt the state of Nature, and the state of Grace, which the
holy Scriptures do every where establish; The state of Nature according the
Scriptures is a state of Sin, and so of Death and Condemnation, as has been
already showed: But the state of Grace, is a state of Righteousness, and so of
Life and Justification, as has also been declared, through Faith in the Son of
God, Romans 9.30. and Romans 10.4. John 5.24. and 1 John 4.14. Now he that says he
was Justified from Eternity, says that he was in a state of Life from
Eternity, and by consequence never was in a state of Sin and Death: for
Justification is Life, as Condemnation is Death, Romans 5.18. but most certain it
is that all were dead, and in a state of sin and condemnation, before they
believed on Christ even the Elect of God as well as others, as 2 Cor. 5.14. And
the death of Christ for all the Elect does prove that they were all dead, and
in a state of Death Jews and Gentiles; for else Christ needed not to have died
for them, and the love of Christ does constrain all them to acknowledge, that
they were dead, and therefore are debtors to Christ for their Life and
Justification, through Faith in him, and so no more to live to themselves, but
to him that died for them and rose again. The words are most plain, and the
sense most genuine: For the love of Christ constrains us* because we thus
judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead: And that he died for all,
that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him
which died for them and rose again; Therefore seeing they were once dead, and
in a state of Death and Condemnation, they were not justified from Eternity, no
not one of them, that Live and are Justified by Faith in Christ, for they all,
and always thus judge, that they were all dead, i e. condemned, and not
justified before they believed in Christ, and do freely confess the truth, and
therefore not one of them does profess, or can profess any such Faith, that he
was Justified from Eternity.

Part. 6. This Doctrine of Justification from Eternity, denies and
overthrows the Doctrine of Regeneration or new Birth, and the necessity
thereof; which Christ himself does plainly affirm and urge upon every man in
this World, John 3.3, 5, 8. and so do all the holy Prophets and Apostles, as
may be easily proved if there were any so bold as to deny it. Now he that is
Justified by Faith in Christ, and has this power and privilege given unto him
to become a Son of God, as every true believer has, John 1.11, 12. he also is
born of God, as John 1.13. which were born, not of blood, nor of the Will of
the Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God, as James 1.18. Of his own Will
begat he us by the Word of Truth: not one Believer (and so Justified person in
this World) but he is born of God and begotten of God, and so is born again, as
1 Pet. 1.23. being born again not of corruptible seed but of incorruptible, by
the word of God, which lives and abides for ever, ver. 25. And this is the
Word which by the Gospel is Preached unto you: so that not one person is or can
be justified by Faith, but at the same time and by the same word of Faith,
Preached to him and Believed by him, he is also born again: he therefore that
says he was justified from Eternity, says also that he was born of God from
Eternity: and he that was born of God from Eternity, needs not; nor can be
born again: for Regeneration is but once; and those that were born of God from
Eternity, are far from being new born Babes, as all true Believers are after
their first Conversion and Calling, and as the Apostle Peter calls and
styleth them. 1 Pet. 2.2, 3.

Part. 7. This Doctrine of Justification from Eternity denies, destroys, and
overthrows the Doctrine of Repentance and Conversion to God by Christ, and by
consequence takes away the necessity thereof: the holy Scriptures do every
where establish, both in the Old and New Testament the necessity of Repentance
and Conversion to God, as Isa. 55.6, 7. Act. 3.19. Act. 26.17, 18. Luke. 24.45,
46, 47. But he that says he was justified from Eternity, by consequence says,
that he had remission of Sins from Eternity, and that his Sins were blotted out
from Eternity, for Justification is Remission of Sins, as Psalm 32.1, 2, 3. And
blotting out of Sins, as Isa. 43.25. And so he needs not to Repent and be
Converted, for as much as he had his sins blotted out from Eternity, and was
Righteous from Eternity; and well it is if men of these notions and traditions,
which they have received to hold, do not become as the Pharisees of old; so
Whole as they need no Physician, and so Righteous in their own Eyes, that like
the 99 Just Persons, they need no Repentance or Conversion, as Luke 15.4, 8.
And if the name of Repentance and Conversion shall still be pretended to, and
boasted of amongst them; it shall only consist in making Proselytes to this
their Tradition of Justification from Eternity, which they call the Gospel, and
a more glorious Light than former Ages have enjoyed: And some have not blushed
to affirm, than perhaps the Apostles had. But let them take heed, lest that Woe
come upon them spoken by the Mouth of Truth himself, Mat. 23.15.

Part. 8. This Doctrine does frustrate and make void all the ends of Christ
Death and Suffering, which are the Justification and Salvation of Gods Elect;
for if they were Justified from Eternity, what need was there of Christ's dying
to obtain that for them, which they had from all Eternity? So that if this
Doctrine be true, as they affirm: then as the Apostle says in another case,
Gal. 2.21. Christ is dead in vain.

Part 9. This Doctrine of Justification from Eternity, destroys and
overthrows the Doctrine and Order of God's new Creation in Christ, and making
all things new in him; which the Holy Scriptures do every where establish both
in the Old and New Testament. This is certain the Old Creation was first and
before the New, else it were not new; Adam was before Christ, or the first Adam
before the Second, as Romans 4.12. and 1 Cor. 15.45, 46, 47. And so it is
written, the first man Adam was made a living Soul, the last Adam was made a
quickening Spirit, howbeit, that was not first, which is Spiritual but that
which is Natural, and afterward that which is Spiritual. The first or old
Creation in Adam is the natural, and the second or new Creation in Christ the
Spiritual, now that was not first which is Spiritual, but that is first which
was natural, therefore the Workmanship of God in the natural or old creation
was first; And the workmanship of God in the new Creation in Christ, is the
Spir^tual and therefore last: the second must be after the first, or else it is
not second, the new must be after the old, or else the old is not old, nor the
other new. Now Justification by Faith in Christ, is Gods Workmanship in the new
Creation, as 2 Cor. 5.17, 18. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new
Creature, old things (i. e. the things of the first Creation in Adam) are
passed away, behold all things are become new. And all things are of God, who
has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ. And therefore Reconciliation and
Justification by Jesus Christ, as ver. 19. are parts of the new Creation in
Christ as also is most manifest, Ephesians. 2.8, 9, 10. it is manifest I say, that God
at first settled all things: So the first Adam and all men in him upon the
foundation of the Law, or Covenant of Works, which settlement was broken or
dissolved by the first transgression, and Death entered upon all men by Sin, and
no hope or possibility of Righteousness or Life, by that Law or Covenant any
more, therefore now God brings forth Christ the second Adam, and settles all
things again upon a new Covenant of Grace, restoring Righteousness and Life by
Jesus Christ to all that believe, this is the new Creation, that which is
Spiritual; Now therefore Justification and Salvation by Faith in Christ, was
not from Eternity, because it is Gods new Creation in Christ; And forasmuch as
the Old Creation, and that which is Natural, was not from Eternity but in Time;
It Is manifest that Gods new Creation in Christ to any man in this World, was
not from Eternity, but in Time, for the first must be before the second, and
the old before the new; Therefore Justification and Life through Faith in
Christ, was not from Eternity but in Time, though these things were laid in the
purpose, and counsel of God from Eternity; yet they were not nor could be but
in time; And if any will say, God calls things that are not as if they were,
it is most true but let such consider that all those things are still things
that are not, till God brings them forth in time.

Thus have we tried this Doctrine, and find it most contrary to the holy
Scriptures; As the Apostle Paul ^ryed the Doctrine of them who denied the
Resurrection, under pretense that it was past a ready: whom he convinces and
confu^eth, by the necessary consequences of their Doctrine, as 1 Cor. 15, 12*
-- 20.

And having finished the trial of the first opinion or doctrine of
Justification from Eternity: we now proceed to the second, namely.

2. Doctrine That they that are Christ's were all justified in Christ their head
from the time of Christ's Death or Resurrection, when the price was paid, and
satisfaction made by Christ, and he as head, was justified and discharged by
his Resurrection, the question therefore is;

Quest. Whether the Church of Gods Elect were Justified at, from, or in the
time of Christ's Death and Resurrection?

Or whether Believers may and ought to dte^he time of their Justification from
the time of Christ's Death and Resurrection?

Answ. To this we answer by distinguishing, and that truly betwixt the Time and
the Thing it self and accordingly,

1. We do affirm and conclude, and (that most surely) according to the
Scriptures, that all that are Christ's* the whole Church of Gods Elect are
^ustified from, by, through and upon the satisfaction, Merit, Virtue and
Efficacy of Christ's Death declared by his Resurrection, as Romans 3.24, 25, 26.
and again Ephesians. 1.7. Romans 4 ult. and Romans 5.8, 9. and Luke 24.46, 47. Thus it
is written and thus it behoved Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead the
third day: that repentance and remission of sins should be Preached in his name
among all nations beginning at Jerusalem. And this is certain that Remission of
Sins or Justification cannot be preached to any but upon the account of Christ's
Death and Resurrection; viz. The satisfaction, merit and efficacy of his Death,
manifested and declared by his Resurrection according to Romans 1.4. and 1 Timothy
3.16. Manifested in the Flesh, Justified in the Spirit.

2. We do also affirm and conclude according to the Scriptures, that all that
have been, are now, or shall hereafter be Justified, from the beginning of the
World to the end thereof; have been, are now, and shall hereafter be Justified
by the same satisfaction, virtue, merit and efficacy of Christ's Death declared
by his Resurrection, and no otherways, as Heb. 13.7, 8. Whose Faith follow,
considering the end of their Conversation. Jesus Christ the same yesterday and
to day, and for ever. It Is evident from the context, that he sets before
them, the doctrine and example, the faith and conversation of such as had
spoken the Word of God to them, in which expression he comprehends all the
Holy Prophets, under the Old Testament, and those Holy Servants of God whom he
had mentioned, chap. 11. particularly, and then more generally referred them to
chapter 12.1. as so great a Cloud of Witnesses: I say all these of the Old
Testament, as well as the Apostles under the New Testament, together with their
present Ministers: when he says Remember them which have Rule over you, (or
which are the guides and so rule by way of conduct, for other rule the Servants
of God have none or ever had) who have spoken unto you the Word of God, whose
Faith follow, considering the end of their conversation. Jesus Christ the same
yesterday and to day and for ever: by yesterday, is meant all the time that is
past, by to day the present time, and by forever, is all the time yet to come
from the foundation of the World to the end of it: And if so, the same Christ
Jesus was promised, prophesied and preached to them, as truly as unto us, and
was believed on by them, as well as by us, and by the same Faith, which they
had in this Jesus Christ, they were justified and saved, and became the Heirs
of the same Righteousness of Faith as well as we, Heb. 11.1. This Faith is
described, and then Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Sarah, Isaac and Jacob, the
heirs (with Abraham) of the same promise; and the promise was Christ,
Justification, and Salvation in Christ with Eternal Glory, and then mentioning
Joseph, Moses, Rahab also a Heathen; And then Gideon, Barak, Sampson, Jeptha,
David and Samuel the Prophet, with others, Men and Women: tells you, These all
obtained a good report through Faith: before Christ the Seed of the Woman, and
the Seed of Abraham and David promised, was come in the Flesh or Humane nature;
before his Death and Resurrection; and yet believed on Christ embraced him and
were justified and saved by Faith in him all along, as well as we are now,
Christ is come, has died and rose again, so Romans 4.23, 24, 25. So that it is
most plain Christ is the same yesterday, as he is to day, and so forever, i. e.
in all Ages and Generations yet to come, as John 17.20 Neither pray I for these
alone, but for them also that shall believe on me, through their word, that
they all may be one. This (shall believe on me) reaches to the end of the
World so long as Christ shall be Preached, and men shall believe on him through
their word, of whom Christ says, Mat. ult. ult. and lo! I am with you always
even to the end of the World: So that Christ Jesus is the same yesterday and to
day, and forever; And all that are justified to day, as well as all that were
justified yesterday, and all that shall be justified for ever, i. e to the end
of the World have been, are and shall be still justified by the satisfaction,
merit, virtue and efficacy of Christ's Death* declared by his Resurrection; who
was the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World* Rev. 13 8. as all the
sacrifices, types and prophecies did there concerning him, that he should be
slain and ri^e again, and in that respect was both the Goat for our Sin
Offering or Sacrifice, and likewise our Scapegoat, let go and escaped from
Death (when he had born our Sins) I say let go and escaped by a glorious
Resurrection: and so as the Lamb of God did bear away, or take away the Sins of
World, John 1.29. Did bear or carry them away into a Land of forgetfulness, i.
e. where none of them shall be remembered.

And thus far we do affirm and consent concerning the justification of the
whole Church of Gods Elect from the death of Christ, i. e. from and upon the
satisfaction, merit, virtue, and efficacy of his death; and that none are
justified or have redemption but through his blood, and faith therein, for the
propitiation of their Sins: as Romans 3.25. whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through Faith in his blood, to declare his Righteousness for the
Remission of Sins: and v. 26. to declare, I say, at this time his
righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier of him which
be^elieveth ^n Jesus.

Neg. But as concerning the Doctrine of Justification from the time of Christ's
Death and Resurrection more or rather than any other time; or that the Church
of Gods Elect are justified from the time of Christ's Death or Resurrection; we
do utterly deny and reject, and say the justification of his Body the Church
does no more commence from, or depend upon the time of his Death and
Resurrection than upon any other time before or after: for,

1 st. If the justification of Gods Elect did commence from, and depend upon
the time of Christ's Death and Resurrection, so that they were not, nor could be
justified before that time, then all those that were fallen asleep in Christ,
before the time of Christ's Death and Resurrection are perished, as 1 Cor 15.18.
Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished. The Consequence
is plain and invincible; for if they were not justified their Sins were imputed
and not forgiven* and if so, then they died in their Sins and so are perished
as John 8.12. If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins; and
this is eternal perdition, or to perish for ever; if they were not justified,
they were not righteous, righteousness was not imputed to them, and so they
neither did not could inherit the Kingdom of God, as 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not
that the Unrighteous (or Unjustified) shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? And
so Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Moses and Samuel, and all the
Prophets until John are perished and excluded out of the Kingdom of God: yea,
John Baptist ^lso is perished, and good old Simeon that took the Babe in his
arms and blessed him, and said, Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in
peace according so thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation, Luke 2.29,
30 and Anna the Prophetess also, v. 36. are perished. For all these died before
the time of Christ's Death and Resurrection, as is most plain and manifest: But
now these are not perished, but were justified by Faith in their Life time, and
blessed in their death, and live now unto God eternally in the Mansions of
Heavenly Glory: and for all this we have a sure word of Prophecy. Abraham lived
430 years before the Law of Moses, and above 2000 years before Christ came in
the flesh, and 30 years more before Christ's Death and Resurrection, and yet was
as much justified by Faith in Christ as any man ever since, or that will be to
the end of the World, and so were all the rest aforementioned; and therefore
justification is not reckoned from the time of Christ's Death and Resurrection,
seeing all these were justified so long before that time.

2. Then Christ himself is found a false Witness, who came from the bosom of
the Father, and could declare and did declare the truth, as John 1.18. I say
then Christ himself is found a false Witness who testified of Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, and all the Prophets to be in the Kingdom of God, Luke 13.28, There
shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth; when you shall see Abraham and Isaac
and Jacob and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you your selves
thrust o^^: Now who are these, ye and your selves? these are many such as lived
in and after the time of Christ's Death and Resurrection, and great Professors
too, as appears v. 26. When they shall say we have eat and drank in thy
presence, and thou have taught in our Streets; and also in that parallel place,
Mat. 7.22. Have we not Prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out
Devils? and in thy name have done many wonderful works* all which must be after
the time of Christ's Death and Resurrection, for the Spirit was not given for
these extraordinary works and miracles till Christ was glorified; and yet says
Christ ye shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the
Kingdom of God, and ye your selves thrust out: so that those that lived before
the time of my Death and Resurrection, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all
the Prophets, ye shall see them hereafter, when that day shall come which
reveals all things: ye shall see them in the Kingdom of God, and ye your
selves, who lived, professed my name, Prophesied and did miracles in my name
after the time of my Death and Resurrection, ye shall see your selves thrust
out: and though you cast out Devils in my name, yet ye did not cast him out,
nor was he cast out of your own hearts. But Christ's Witness is most true, and
will be found so at the great day; therefore let men take heed how they make
him a Liar, who is Truth it self; for certainly Christ did not bear false
witness, when he testified to the Sick of the Palsy, Mark 2.5. Son, thy Sins
be forgiven thee, and when he testified in the House of Simon concerning the
Woman that was and had been a great Sinner, when she washed Christ's feet with
her tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head, and brake so costly a Box
of Ointment and poured it upon his head, that all the room was filled with the
odor thereof: I say when he testified to Simon and all that were in the house
concerning her, Luc. 7.47. Wherefore I say unto thee; her Sins which are many
are forgiven, for she loved much: and when he testified to her, v. 48. And he
said unto her, thy Sins are forgiven: Forgiveness of Sins is justification, and
they had Faith in Christ wrought in them; for Mark 2.5. when Jesus saw their
Faith, and Luke 7.50. And he said to the Woman, thy Faith has saved thee; and
yet the time of Christ's Death and Resurrection was not yet come; so that
justification and Salvation through Faith in Christ was as sure and certain,
and as full and complete to them that believed before the time of Christ's Death
and Resurrection, as ever it was to any since or shall be to the end of the
World: therefore the justification of Gods Elect is no more dated or does
commence from the time of Christ's death, than from any time before or after.

3. If the justification of Gods Elect should commence and bear date from the
time of Christ's Death and Resurrection, then thousands of Gods Elect that were
Born, were Converted and called, and have believed on Christ since the time of
Christ's Death and Resurrection, in Ages and Generations until now, were
justified before they were Converted and Called, before they received the
Spirit by the hearing of Faith, before they believed God or his word, before
they had any Faith wrought in them; for they were justified from the time of
Christ's death, according to this Doctrine; so that they were as much and as
truly justified in their unbelief, impiety, unregeneracy and enmity, as ever
they were or came to be justified afterward when they believed and embraced
Christ, which is most contrary to the Scriptures, Acts 13.38, 39* Romans 4.23
Ephesians. 2.11, 12, 13. and Romans 8.30. Whom he called, them be also justified.

Paul, when Saul a Blasphemer, Persecutor, and Injurious, was as truly
justified as Paul when called, a Convert, a Believer and a Preacher of Jesus
Christ, contrary to the Scriptures, 1 Timothy 1.13, 14, 15, 16. and Acts 22.16.
For Saul continued Unconverted, Uncalled, a Blasphemer, a Persecutor, and
Injurious, Ignorant and an Unbeliever long after Christ's Death and
Resurrection; and yet according to this Doctrine must be justified when he
lived, and continued in impenitency and unbelief and disobedience till that
time; yea and all those Corinthians mentioned, 1 Cor. 6 11. And such were some
of you: But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the
name of the Lord Jesus; and by the Spirit of our God. Now look back into the 9.
and 10. verses; Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God? Be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers,
nor efeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor
covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the
Kingdom of God: And such were some of you. Plainly implying that when ye lived
in these sins uncalled, unconverted, impenitent and unbelievers, then you were
not washed, nor sanctified, nor justified; but now since you were called, and
converted it is otherwise with you than it was before: But ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. Ye were not justified before, but now ye are justified in
the name of the Lord Jesus, i. e. since ye believed on that name; then ye were
not washed, nor sanctified while ye wallowed in the mire of these sins, but now
ye are washed, ye are sanctified by the Spirit of our God: Therefore they were
not justified from the time of Christ's death and resurrection, but from the
time of their calling to Faith ^n Christ who dyed and rose again long before.
And that this must be the true sense of the Apostle, appears in that he tells
them, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus; He thereby concludes
and that truly, they were not justified before; though the time of Christ's
Death and Resurrection was past before.

And thus have we finished also the trial of this second Opinion or Doctrine of
Justification from the time of Christ's Death and Resurrection, and find it not
to be a true Doctrine; a Doctrine not of God.

All therefore which now remains to be done, is to show and assign the true
time and season of Gods Justifying his Elect; and from whence the truly
justified person may humbly date his own Justification according to the holy
Scriptures, and have the seal of God in the true witness of his holy Spirit in
the word for the proof it.

Lastly therefore, The due time and season of Gods justifying his Elect,
through Faith in his Son Jesus Christ, according to the Scriptures, is the time
of their respective believing, embracing, receiving and entertaining Christ;
Christ in the promise, or the promise in Christ: for all the promises are yea
and Amen in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20. Not a promise alone without Christ, for that
is to be suspected; the promise when given by the Father, and applied by the
Spirit is never alone or separate from Christ, but always in Christ and
together with him: Even as Abraham is said to have received the promises when
he offered up his only Son, Heb. 11.17. But Abraham did not receive the
promise, or promises alone, i. e. without Christ, the substance of all the
promises; but he received the promise in Christ* or Christ in and through the
promises. For as God made no promise of Eternal Life out of Christ, but in
Christ and through him, so we can receive no promise or promises of Eternal
Life and Salvation but in Christ, and Christ in and together with the promise.
And therefore Abraham is said to have received the promise of God in Christ, as
God gave it to him, so he received it in Christ; as Gal. 3.16, 17, 18. He
therefore that believes with a justifying and saving Faith, receives Christ
in the promises, and embraces not the promises alone, but Christ in the
promise: and therefore union with Christ, and receiving Christ into the heart,
and promises, and all things else together, is the true Faith of Gods Elect,
and the Faith of the operation of God, as 1 John 5.11, 12. This is the reward
that God has given to us, Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son: He that
has the Son has Life; and he that has not the Son of God has not Life; and
Joh. 1.11, 12. He came to his own and his own received him not. But to as many
as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name. So that in short, Faith is receiving Christ, and
without Christ be received there is no believing, and where there is no
believing there is no justification.

The true time therefore of God's justifying his Elect, is the time of their
believing, i. e. of their receiving and embracing Christ; then, and not before,
and thence ever after God does justify his Elect: And they may from thence
date the time of their justification acccording to the Scriptures. As it was
with Abraham, so it is with all the Children of Abraham; as it is written again
and again; Abraham believed God and it was counted to him for Righteousness,
Romans 4.3. Now from the time that Abraham believed God from that time was he
justified and ever after; even so it is with all the Children of Abraham; as,
Rom 4.23, 24, 25. Now it was not written for Abraham's sake alone that it was
imputed to him, but for us also to whom it shall be imputed: If we believe on
him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the Dead; who was delivered for our
Offenses, and raised again for our Justification. Now therefore Christian, the
time of Gods imputing Righteousness to thee, and justifying thee in Christ; is
not the time of Christ's dying and rising again, but the time of thy be^ieving
on him and embracing him by Faith in thy heart who was delivered for thy
offenses, and raised again for thy justification.

And to produce this Faith in thee, and this believing God as Abraham did;
these three things must necessarily concur, all which did concur in the Faith
of Abraham: as namely,

1. There must be hearing; The word of God must be truly preached to thee, and
thou must hear it* or there neither is, nor can be th^s Faith that justifies;
as, Rom 10.17. So then Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God;
and as v. 14, 15. How then shall they call on him, in whom they have not
believed? And how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? And
how shall they hear without a Preacher? And how shall they Preach except they
be sent, i. e. sent of God? And thus God himself Preached the Gospel to
Abraham, Saying in thee and in thy seed, shall the Families of the Earth, or
Nations, be blessed, as, Gal. 3.8. compared with Genesis 12.3. and Genesis 2^.18. So
then Abraham's Faith came by ^^aring Christ Preached.

2. The Spirit of God mu^t be given of God to thee, and received of thee by
hearing the Faith or Doctrine of Faith Preached, as Gal. 4.2. Without which
thou can not receive the Spiritual things which the Gospel Preaches, but
they will seem foolishness to thee because they are Spiritually descerned, 1
Cor. 2.13* 14. and 1 Cor. 1.21, 22, 23, 24. Joh. 6.44, 45. and again verse 60
-- 66. The word preached I say, will never be rightly understood till God by
his Spirit opens thy Heart to understand, as Luke 24.45, 46. Acts 16.14. And
thus God opened Abraham's Heart to understand the Gospel or the promise in
Christ preached to him by the gift of his holy Spirit.

3. This Faith must be wrought in thee by the same Spirit, for this is the
Faith of the operation of God, as Col. 2.12. The gift of God; as Ephesians. 2.8.
Produced by the exceeding greatness of his power, as when he raised Christ from
the dead; Ephesians. 1.17, 18. Which was done by the power of the Holy Ghost, Romans
1.4. Romans 8.15. And thus was Abraham's Faith wrought in him and it was given him
to believe, his Faith was not of himself, but was the gift of God; otherwise
Abraham might have had whereof to boast, but not before God; as, Romans 4 2, 3.

And thus Abraham's believing God, was as much of the Sovereign will of Gods
grace and favor to him, as his imputing Righteousness to him upon his
believing. And thus it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but
of God that shows mercy. So it was with Abraham, and so it is with all the
Children of Abraham; and the Lord grant it may be so with thee: Abraham belived
God and it was counted to him for Righteousness. That was the time of Gods
justifying him through Faith in Christ; do thou believe God as Abraham did and
it shall also be counted to thee for Righteousness, and this shall be the time
of Gods Justifying thee through Faith in his Son Jesus Christ: Even then when
all these things concur in thy Faith, as they did in Abraham's. 1. The hearing
of Faith or the word of Faith preached to thee: 2. Gods giving and thy
receiving the Spirit through this hearing of the Faith Preached: 3. Faith
wrought in thee by the same Spirit to receive Jesus Christ: This time I say
again, and no other is or can be assigned according to the holy Scriptures for
thy Justification in Gods sight. When this Faith comes into thy Soul, then
comes this Blessedness of thy Justification, whether it be in Circumcision or
in uncircumcision, Romans 4.8 -- 12.

(...).

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
BY the inadvertency of the Printer these few Errata's have happened in the
first sheet of this Book. In the rest more care has been taken, so that there
are no faults but what are unavoidable. In Page 3. of the first Epistle, Line
15. for did Read do. in p. 4. l. 2. for works, r. words. l. 14. r. did then. in
p. 5. l. 17. for fiery, r. feirce. in p. 13. l. 29. r. the Kingdom. in p. 4. of
the 2d. Epist. dele* the 42. ver. of Mar. 9. and r. 41. in p. 6. l. 17. r. 2.
v. of Romans 6. in p. 7. l. 19. r. into the City.

A Catalogue of Books Printed for Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultrey;
near Cheapside.
History.
1. ENglands Monarchs: Or, A Compendious Relation of the most remarkable
Transactions, from Julius Caesar to this present; adorned with Poems, and the
Picture of every Monarch, from K. Will. the Conqueror to K. Will. and Q. M.
With a List of the Nobility, and the number of the Lords and Commons in both
Houses of Parliament. Pr. one shilling.

2. THE History of the House of Orange: Or, a Brief Relation of the Glorious
Achievements of his Majesty's Renowned Predecessors, and likewise of His own
Heroic Actions, till the late wonderful Revolution. Together with the History
of K. W. and Q. M. Being an impartial Account of the most Remarkable Passages
from Their Majesty's Happy Accession to the Throne, to this time. By R. B. Pr.
1s.

3. THE History of the two late Kings, Charles the II. and James the II. being
an Impartial Account of the most remarkable Transaction, and observable
passages during their Reigns* and the secret French and Popish Intrigues and
Designs managed in those times. Pr. one shilling.

4. THE History of Oliver Cromwell being an Impartial Account of all the
Battles, Sieges, and other Military Achievements, wherein he was engaged in
England, Scotland and Ireland; and likewise of his Civil Administrations, while
he had the Supreme Government, till his Death. Relating only matters of Fact,
without Reflection or Observation. By R. B. pr. 1 ^.

5. THE Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland, containing a particular and
impartial Account of all the Battles, Sieges, and other remarkable
Transactions, Revolutions and Accidents, which happened from the beginning of
the Reign of K. Charles I. With his Trial at large, and last speech; and the
most considerable matters till 1660. With Pictures of several Accidents. Price
one shilling.

6. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and Present State of
London and Westminster, showing the Foundations, Walls, Gates, Towers, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Schools, Inns of Courts, Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with
the most remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and other
occurrences, for above 900. years past, Pr. 1 ^.

7. ADmirable Curiosities, Rarities and Wonders in England, Scotland and
Ireland; or an account of many remarkable persons and places; likewise of the
Battles, Sieges, Tempests, Inundations, Thunders, Lightnings, Fires, Murders
and other Occurrences and Accidents for many hundred years past: Together with
the Natural and Artificial Rarities in every County in England. With several
curious Sculptures. Price one shilling.

8. THE History of the Kingdom of Ireland, being an Account of the Ancient
Inhabitants, and of all the Battles, Sieges, and other considerable
Transactions both Civil and Military in that Country, from the first Conquest
thereof, under King Henry II. till its entire Reduction by K. W. Together with
the most remarkable Passages, that have since happened there to this time. By
R. B. Price one shilling.

9. THE English Empire in America, or a prospect of His Majesty's Dominions in
the West Indies, namely, New Foundland, New England New York, New Jersey,
Pensylvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina, Bermudas, Barbuda, Anguilla,
Monserrat, Dominica, St. Vincent, Antego, Mevis or Nevis, St. Christophers,
Barbados and Jamaica: With an account of their Discovery, Situation and
Product: The Religion and Manners of the Indians, etc. Illustrated with Maps
and Pictures. Price one shilling.

10. A View of the English Acquisitions in Guinea and the East Indies: With an
Account of the Religion, Government, Wars, strange Customs, Beasts, Serpents,
Monsters and other Observables in those Countries. Intermixed with Pleasant
Relations. Price one shilling.

11. THE English Hero: Or, Sir Francis Drake Revived. Being a full Account of
the dangerous Voyages, admirable Adventures, notable Discoveries, and
Magnanimous Achievements of that Valiant and Renowned Commander. By R. B. Pr.
1 s.

12. TWo Journeys to Jerusalem, Containing first An Account of the Travels of
two English Pilgrims some years since to Jerusalem, Grand Cairo, Alexandria,
etc. 2. The Travels of 14 English Merchants in 1669. from Scanderoon to
Tripoly, Joppa, Ramah, Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Jericho, the River Jordan, the
Lake of Sodom and Gomorrah, etc. Beautified with Pictures. Price one shilling.

13. EXtraordinary Adventures of several Famous Men: With the strange Events,
and signal mutations and changes in the Fortunes of diverse Illustrious places
and persons in all Ages; being an account of a multitude of stupendous
Revolutions, Accidents, and observable matters in diverse States and Provinces
throughout the World; with Pictures. Price 1 s.

14. THE History of the Nine Worthies of the World: Three whereof were
Gentiles; 1. Hector Son of Priamus. 2. Alexander the great. 3. Julius Caesar.
Three Jews. 4. Joshua. 5. David. 6. Judas Maccabeus. Three Christians. 7.
Arthur K. of Britain. 8. Charles the Great. 9. Godfrey of Bullen. Illustrated
with Poems and the Picture of each Worthy. By R. B. Price one shilling.

15. FEmale Excellency, or the Ladies Glory, Illustrated in the Worthy Lives of
nine Famous Women, who have been renowned in several Ages of the World: As 1.
Deborah the Prophetess. 2. The valiant Judith. 3. Queen Esther. 4. The virtuous
Susanah. 5. The Chaste Lucretia. 6. Voadicia Q. of Britain. 7. Mariamne Wife of
King Herod. 8. Clotilda Q. of France. 9. Andegoua Princess of Spain. The whole
adorned with poems and pictures to each History. By R. B. Pr. 1s.

16. WOnderful Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy discovered in above 300.
memorable Histories; containing, 1. Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists, etc. 2.
The miserable ends of Magicians. 3. Remarkable predictions and presages of
approaching Death. 4. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Tyrants. 5. Admirable
Deliverances from dangers at Sea and Land. Lastly, Divine goodness to
Penitents. Pr. 1s.

17. Unparalleled Varieties, or the matchless Actions and Passions of Mankind;
displayed in near 400. notable Instances and Examples. Pr. 1s.

18. THE Kingdom of darkness: Or, the History of Demons, Specters, Witches,
Apparitions, Possessions, Disturbances, and other wonderful and supernatural
Delusions, Mischievous Fears and Malicious Impostures of the Devil. Containing
near 80 memorable Relations, Foreign and Domestic, both ancient and modern.
Price one shilling.

19. MEmorable Accidents and Unheard of Transactions, containing an account of
several strange Events: As the Deposing of Tyrants, Lamentable Shipwracks,
Dismal Misfortunes, Stratagems of War, Perilous Adventures, Happy Deliverances,
with other remarkable Occurences, and select Historical passages, which have
happened in several Countries in this last Age. Printed at Brussels in 169^.
And Dedicated to His present Majesty K. William Published in English by R. B.
Pr. 1s.

20. MArtyrs in Flames, or Popery in its true Colors, being a Brief Relation
of the horrid Cruelties and Persecutions of the Pope and Church of Rome, for
many hundreds of years past, to this time. Price one shilling.

Miscellanies.
22. DElights for the Ingenious, in above Fifty Select and Choice Emblems,
Divine and Moral, Ancient and Modern, curiously engraven upon Copper Plates,
with 50 delightful Poems and Lots, for the more lively Illustration of each
Emblem, whereby instruction and good counsel may be promoted and furthered, by
an honest and pleasant Recreation. Collected by R. B. Price 2s. 6d.

23. EXcellent Contemplations Divine and Moral, written by the Magnanimous A.L.
Capel Baron of Hadham; with some account of his Life, and his affectionate
Letters to his Lady the day before his Death. As also the Speeches of D. Ham.
and the E. of Holl. who suffered with him. Price. 1s.

24. WInter Evenings Entertainments, in two parts, Containing, 1. Ten pleasant
Relations of many Rare and Notable Accidents and Occurrences: 2. Fifty
Ingenious Riddles, with their Explanations, and useful Observations and Morals
upon each. Enlivened with above 60. Pictures. Price one shilling.

25. DElightful Fables in Prose and Verse, none of them to be found in Aesop,
but collected from diverse ancient and modern Authors, with Pictures and Morals.
By R. B. Pr. 1s.

Divinity.
26. THE Divine Banquet, or Sacramental Do^^^tions, consisting of Morning and
Eveni^^ Prayers, Contemplations and Hymns for every day (...) the Week, in
order to a more worthy Receiving (...) the Holy Communion, representing the
several ste^^^ and degrees of the Sorrows and sufferings of our ble^^sed
Savior, till he gave up the Ghost. Pr. 1s.

27. A Guide to Eternal Glory: Or, Brief Direc^^^ons to all Christians how to
attain Eve^^lasting Salvation: To which are added several oth^^ small tracts.
Price one shilling.

28. YOuths Divine Pastime; Containing Fo^^^ Remarkable Scripture Histories,
turned (...) to English Verse. With Forty Pictures. Pr. 8d.

29. THE Young Man's Calllng, or the whole (...) of Youth, in a serious and
compass^^^nate Address to all young persons to remember th^^ Creator in the
days of their Youth. With the (...) of several excellent young Persons of both
Sexes; (...) twelve curious Pictures. Price 1s. 6d.

30. MOunt Sion, or a draught of that Church (...) shall stand for ever.
Together with view of that World which shall be broken in pieces (...)
consumed. By Will. Dyer, Author of Christ's Famo^^ Titles. Price one shilling.

31. JACOB Wrestling with GOD, and prevailing^ Or, a Treatise concerning the
Necessity an^ Efficacy of Faith in Prayer; Wherein diverse weig^^ty Questions
and Cases of Conscience about prayi^^ in Faith, are stated and resolved. By
Tho. Tailor formerly at Edmunds Bury, now Pastor to a Congregation in
Cambridge. Price one shilling.

FINIS.

