A Loving and Friendly Invitation TO ALL SINNERS TO REPENT, AND A WARNING to
all Backsliders to Return unto the Lord, while they have Time and Space given
them, With a brief Account of the Latter Part of the Life of John Perrot, And
his END, etc.

Also, a Testimony against Robt. Rich and John Perrot their filthy Books lately
printed against God's People in Scorn called QUAKERS.

With a Postscript by Another Hand.

LONDON, Printed by John Bringhurst, at the Sign of the Book in
Grace Church Street, 1683.

A Loving and Friendly Invitation to all Sinners to Repent. And a warning to
all Back-sliders to Return unto the Lord while they have time and space given
them; Lest they Persh from the Right way forever. With a Brief account of the
latter part of the Life of J. Perrot, and his End, etc.
WHEREAS it is very plain and evident unto all whose Eyes are clearly open,
that this is a day of great Brightness and Glory, wherein the Great and
Invisible God has appeared in a most Glorious, and Heavenly manner: And the
Light of Heaven has so shined that it exceeds the very Light of the Sun, and
all other natural lights whatever: And great and Glorious Revelations from the
Great and Almighty God, is seen and witnessed through the Glorious appearance
and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: Whose coming to as many as Faithful are,
have experienced to be in Power and great Glory; which gives us the true
knowledge of God the Father, whom to know is life eternal: And thus we come to
the true understanding of the great Mystery of Godliness: Through the
inspiration of the Almighty. So that now we being as men awakened out of the
great sleep of sin, wherein we were in times past, with many more, held in
great Captivity and darkness; but being turned to the light, in it we come to
see our way to God: And so come to wait upon him, to be taught by him; who is
the best teacher that ever man had for by his teachings, who is pure and holy:
we that were unlearned, come truly to learn and know the great Mysteries of
Godliness: and such as were ignorant, and knew not the things of God, comes to
be made wise unto Salvation; and thus we come to have good and sound experience
of the good work of God upon our Hearts and Souls; for it is the Lord alone
that works the Change in us; and that fits and prepars us for his own Service,
and for the performing that duty that he requires of us; for the Lord God is
the good Husbandman, and we are of his Husbandry; and he is the good and
perfect workman, and we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good
works: So that here is the Effects of the Husbandry and workmanship of this
good and perfect workman; which is no other then the most Holy God, working in
us through his beloved Son Christ Jesus the works of Salvation, Sanctification
and Redemption; all which are the good and perfect works of God in his Son
Christ Jesus: And all these good and perfect works they are wrought in the
light (where the Devil, the imperfect worker cannot come, nor his Ministers,
without tnrning from sin) and by walking in the light as Christ our Lord is in
the light, we come to see more light, by which the Thief, this wicked one, the
Devil, that would steal our Hearts and minds away from the pure God who is
light; he comes to be seen over and to before he was: and by Christ the Light,
the works of the Devil are destroyed; and so he is discovered in all his wiles,
although he appears never so fairly and speciously in what disguise
transforming or pretense soever; yet in the light by which we see, discover and
distinguish, all Colors and things whatever he is seen and discovered in all
his Ministers and Messengers to be as he is, Antichrist, against Christ Jesus,
opposing and gainsaying his coming and appearance in all his Servants,
Ministers and Messengers; for how has he risen up in all sorts of Professors
and people in whom (he) this wicked and imperfect worker had any power and rule
against the Blessed appearance and second coming of our Lord Jesus, whose
coming is without sin unto Salvation: And with what Bitterness, Cruelty and
Enmity has all Nations, Tongues and People who are crying out against
perfection, (and who have not the mark of God in their foreheads) how have
they been stirred up and inflamed with Rage and madness against the Saints of
the most high, and against the coming and Reign of the Lamb who takes away the
sins of the World, and whose Right it is to Reign: And he must and will Reign,
until he has put down all Rule and Authority under his feet; and he alone must
be Exalted, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and Head of his Church
through all the World: I say his coming has been and is as with thunderings
and lightenings and terible Earthquakes, not only to shake the Earth, but the
Heavens also, and he caused the Firmament to melt before him and pass away as a
scrole; and so his coming is in Light, in Power and in great Glory: by whom all
the wicked, the disobedient and Rebellious ones must be called to an account,
and must answer before him the great and Just Judge of all the Earth; who will
Judge both Quick and Dead: I say, before his great Tribunal Seat of Judgment,
must all the scoffers and scorners, with all the rest of the whole rabble of the
wicked, the Rebellious and gainsayers too, to give an account for all the
hard, wicked and ungodly speeches that they have wickedly spoken, and for all
the cruel wicked and ungodly deeds that they have wickedly done against the
Lamb and his followers: and amongst the many opposers of the Gospel and
gainsayers of the Truth and Power of Godliness, I find not one more ripe in
envy, and that wicked work of the Serpent, then John Pennyman, who once was
convinced in some measure of the pure Truth of God; but finding the way too
straight, and not being willing to bear the yoke of Christ; nor yet liked to
retain God in his knowledge, so he is given over to a Reprobate mind, and is
led away with many strange delusions; that the Evil Spirit that went out of
him, and walked in dry places is returned to his house again; and finding it
swept and garnished has taken with himself seven other Spirits worse than the
former, and the last Estate of that man is worse then the first; and in this
bad State and Condition, he is fretting, laboring and scribbling against the
pure and Blessed Truth, speaking evil of things he knows not, Revileing the
Saints of the most high, uttering many Blasphemies against them that dwell in
Heaven; and this does not satisfy him neither; but he must Rake into the Ashes
of the dead; and gather together the old Letters and papers of strife and
contention which Rob. Rich and John Perrot gave forth in a time when great
darkness was over them both: for they went from the Light into darkness; having
been once convinced of the way of Life and Truth they like Hipocrites (turned
from the grace by which they were called) into wantonness, and so went out from
us, that it might be known they were not of us, and turned again with the dog
to his vomit, joining with the Rotten Principles of the Ranters.

And as for John Perrot who had once tasted more then the other of the good
work of God, and of the Powers of the World to come: Yet he with Corah and his
Company gainsayd and withstood the Spiritual appearance of Christ among the
Saints and people of God, and with his strange Principles and whimsies, (as the
keeping on his Hat in his Prayers to God and the like) he grieved the People of
God, and proved a great trouble amongst the Faithful, because with his
flattery and feigned humility he deceived the hearts of the simple; the which I
can speak by experience. So when he saw that he was seen through here in
England, then he would needs go over into Barbados contrary to the good
Counsel and advice of Friends; he having been a long time, yea several years
from his Wife and family before, and then had but been a little time with her;
And not having sufficient of his own to maintain his Wife and Family, and bear
his own Charge and great Expense in traveling, some Moneys he borrowed here in
England, and when come to Barbados he got into the affections of some Friends
there, who gave him very Liberally and bought him a Sloop, which came down to
Iamaica sull Fraighted with the Gifts of Friends from the Barbados, (for him
and Robert Mailins, who was too much tainted with the Rotten Principles of the
Ranters, and proved a Castaway as well as he) and thus from time to time he was
even Loaded with the Love and Kindness of Friends, in hopes he would become a
Reformed Man again but he like an unhappy and unworthy Man abused all the
kindness of Friends and the very Mercies of God unto him (for I was at Iamaica
when he came there, and while he lived and dyed there and when he came down
thither first, he made a great show of love to us, and of Humillity and
self-denial, and the like: but it was soon manifest what his Heart run after:
for he loved and delighted in the Company of the Loose, Debaucht and Profane
People of the World more then ours. Ah! many a night have I and others sat up
with aching hearts waiting for him, being desirous to a had his Company from
amongst such a Lewd Crew, which would be so loud with Singing, Leaping and
Danceing, etc. that we could hear them at a great distance off; so then he
having gotten several hundred pounds worth of goods that Friends from other
parts had given him and trusted him with together, Poor Man! he Bragged and
Swaggered too much what great matters he would do for the Island and Planters,
etc. and went to them into the Fields of a General Muster day, when that part
of the Country was generally met together in arms, and there at the Head of the
regiment he made a Large Speech, What he would do for the Country, and withal
gave them directions, How they should Plant their Tobacco for him, Note, The
Tobacco of that Country was generally Bad, and a great Drugg.
and he would take it off their Hands: but alas! alas! all came to nothing, or
worse in the End; although whilst he let them have Goods a Trust, and to
Receive pay for it when the Tobacco was Ripe, and fit for Sale, Oh! they Cried
him up for a Brave Man, and none like him; and he loved it as well: but when
the time of payment came, then it proved quite another thing; then their
Tobacco was Bad, and not done according to His order: And their pay was bad:
and indeed the people were many of them bad too; Insomuch that he Entered Sixty
or Seventy Actions against them at one Court, of which he was the Clerk; it
being a small petty Court for the business of that part of the Country; but
could determine nothing of above 20 l. value: well, but many of these Debts
which he sued for were proved there in the Court to be paid, so he was put by
all the Rest for that time: And then he that was so Brave a man before with
them, was now accounted as the very worst of men; And so having this great
occasion given them, they Raild on him exceedingly, and the whole Country Cried
out against him very much: and so like an unstable man that had lost his guide,
and as its said of the wicked, grew worse and worse every way: for one while he
would have a Plantation and be a Planter: Another while he would Build a house,
and talk as if he would have a Fish Pond a top on it, although it was about
three miles from any springs or wells of water, and he would go and live there:
but that when it was almost built, was all CONSUMED BY FIRE IN ONE NIGHT
ALTHOUGH NO OTHER HOUSE WAS NEAR IT, OR ANY WAYS JOINED TO IT. And so the Hand
of the Lord turned against him Every way in every thing he took in hand. And
then he went and got liberty of the Governor to turn Lawyer and plead in the
Courts, which he did; and as a Justice told me, Note his place to give the Oath
to men was as he was Clerks of the Court.
If a man would go to the Devil, my Friend John Perrot would send them
headlong; for he never saw one swear men so closely as he did in all his life:
but I answered, he was not my Friend in that for we d^d disowne him and his
practices. And thus he Run into the Worlds ways of swearing men and Drinking
and Riding about of any day: without regard either to worship or fear either of
the Form or Power of Godliness; and so ended his unity and amity: Many other
strange Fancies and delusions which he Run into might be mentioned, but I judge
these may be sufficient to manifest and discover unto all what a fearful thing
it is for any to oppose the Lord God in the Order of his working, in and among
his people, and break out from the unity of the Faith and bond of Peace, who
died as he lived, without manifesting a return by repentance, as this poor
miserable man died; for as he went from the Truth in himself, and became a
troubler and an opposer of them that lived in it; so he going from the Light
into the darkness, proved a withered branch, and so was cut off from the true
Vine (Christ Jesus) and lost the unity of them that kept their first Love: and
of all Friends in General indeed who had done so much for him; and not only so
but he lost his Credit and repute among men: And the very world spewed him out,
and so he ended his days miserably, for soon after he was dead and buried in
an old Popish Mass-house all that he had left (which was not much) was seized
on for Debt, yea the very Bed that was under his wife when she lay sick upon
it; and as this gain-sayer did so did Robert Rich before mentioned, if not much
worse, as to his life and Conversation; for he turned with the sow after she
was washed to the wallowing in the mire again; who Demus-like embraced this
present world, and went out from us, and so became a Man-pleaser and a
time-server: And these are John Pennyman's Innocent men: But these and he too;
Considering their ungodly Life and Death, may be a warning to him and all
back-sliders and gainsayers to repent and return unto the Lord while they have
a day and time afforded unto them, lest they be cut off in their sins as these
two men with R. Ma^lins were, and their blood be upon them: For I can say, by
the experience that I have had in my Travels, that woe from the Lord is to them
that do oppose the good Order that is settled and established by the Power of
the Lord among Friends in several Countries: for my Soul well remembers how it
was hurt and in some measure betrayed by this I. Perrot's spirit and writings:
But this was before I had any acquaintance with him, but afterward, when I
came to know him, I soon see (through the great love of God unto my Soul) that
he was not the man I took him for; And then I sent a paper to Friends in
England to testify against his spirit; and that he was not Really in that
unity and true love that he had talked so much off, but was out of the
possession of it, as his fruits before mentioned did soon make it manifest: And
then I was moved of the Lord to bear my testimony against his Spirit, Principle
and Practices many times; yea I have been made to go many miles to places where
he was, to reprove, exhort, and admonish him to repent and return to the Lord,
and to be reconciled to the Brethren; but all would not prevail with him; for
he grew past feeling, the Lord having Left him, and he was past feeling even as
Trees twice dead plucked up by the Roots: And thus like a withered branch, he as
well as R.M. and R.R. Ended their days: Oh! That it may be a warning to all
that are living, who are Couvinced of the pure Truth, and have any desires
after the Lord: that they may follow after Peace, Love and unity therein, which
is very Comely amongst Brethren: and the God of Peace and Love Bless all such in
all things that you take in hand Uprising and Downlying, in your goings out and
commings in, in the Basket and in the store: that so ye may be Holiness to the
Lord, is the hearty desire of your Real Friend and Brother in the Truth.

John Tailor.

A Testimony against Robert Rich and John Perrot, and their filthy Books lately
printed against God's People in Scorn called QUAKERS.
IS it not an Unworthy thing for R. Rich to publish in print the private
Discourse that G.F. F.H. E.B. and others had with John Perrot, in which Friends
did admonish him about his Extravagant Expenses, and Wearing of his Hat in time
of Prayer, and other private Discourses, and he to publish the same many Years
after? And did not I.P. manifest in the End, that he had great Need of such
Admonition?

And as for I.P. and R.R. laying his and their Keeping on their Hats in Prayer
( Ranter-like) upon the Lord, in time of Prayer; was it not known in Iamaica
and Barbados, how I.P. could afterward follow the Complements of the World,
and put off his Hat, as others did, to Men, and R. Rich also in Barbados? Who
made a great Pudder because we judged I.P. for not being Uncovered in time of
Prayer to the Lord. And did not John Perrot keep on his Hat in Prayer; and then
did not he turn again to the World, and put off his Hat to the World? And
therefore such unstable Spirits we never could have Unity and Fellowship withal
in the Light of Christ, when they go from it.

And it is well known, that it was not only the Paper concerning the Hat, which
Friends desired I. Perrot to call in, but also another Paper, which for
Modesty's sake we cannot mention. And whereas he says, We denied him a
Meeting: That Is False; for we had a Meeting with him at Wm. Travers his House,
and other Places. And a many Lies has I. Perrot uttered, which are not worth
speaking of: And he said, It was contrary to his Conscience to put off his Hat
in the Sight of God; and then presently after, he altered his Conscience, and
could put it off to Men.

And as for I. Perrot's Justifying himself; and Boasting of his Dispute with
the Papists, and Challenge to the Pope; the End of that did manifest it self,
which was not for his Credit; and he needed not to have boasted of it.

And did not I. Perrot undo himself, his Wife and Children, and run out, so
that Friends were fain to Keep his Children; who boasted of Restoring Friends
the Money laid out for him? And Friends had more Compassion and Tenderness to
his Wife and Children, than he had; who were fain to take Care for them because
of his Extravagancy. And did not the Prophecy become true upon him in the End?
For did not he turn like the Worst of Men? And because we dealt Plainly,
Honestly and Truly with I.P. he falsely calls us Persecuting Spirits; for he
says, G.F. waited to see pure Fruit in the Life: But what was his Fruit and
his Life in the End?

And R. Rich publishes a Letter of I. Perrot's, and says, It was written a
little before his Death. And are not these horrid Lies? Was he not run into
Drunkenness and Swearing of People long before he dyed? And why could not I.
Perrot send his Letter to G.F. and others, as well as to R. Rich? much of which
were Discourses of Friends, which they had in private with I. Perrot in London?
where he has added many Perversions and Lies to their Words, and sent them to
R.R. but never to them that were concerned; which R.R. has basely done to
print and publish them; for they never came to them that were concerned therein
while I.P. was living.

Further, R.R. says, G.F. endeavors to Limit the Life of God in others: Which
is a Horrid Lie, that we are sorry he should Dye unrepented of. For G.F. would
have all People come to the Light of God and Christ in their Hearts. And many
such Lies are uttered in his Book, which are not worth the taking notice of.

And People may see, that I. Perrot was turned from the Truth the Quakers
profess, when he had got Gorgeous Apparel and a Velvet Coat, a Staff tipped with
Gold and a Carnal Sword, and was shooting off Gunns on Shipboard, and making
of Feasts; which R.R. seems to justify. And G. F. and others might very well
send Papers after him to Reprove him, who at last ran into Swearing and
Drunkenness; yet R.R. queries, Whether those were not the Floods of the Dragon,
cast out of his Mouth to Devour the Manchild that must Rule? We say, Nay; for
he that ran into Swearing and Drunkenness, was not like unto the Manchild,
that must Rule.

And R.R. has manifest a great deal of Maliciousness and Enmity in his Papers,
which is not according to the Government of Love, as he speaks of. And R.R.
says, Why should G.F. be Angry at I. Perrot's Velvet Coat, and wearing a
Sword, and for his Gunns and Carnal Weapons? But I.P. pretended to go and
preach the Gospel when he went to Barbados and Virginia; not to get Gunns, and
Swords, and a Velvet Coat, and a Staff tipped with Gold, etc. and so he changed
from his Gospel, as he deceitfully pretended to.

And it is utterly false both in R.R. and I.P. that G.F's Name was to any
Papers for naming of Sober Justices in the other Powers days, that would not
Persecute us: For G.F. was out of London when the Parliament desired such a
thing of Friends; and never was his Name to any such Papers. These are
Forgeries of R.R. and I.P's. And those Ten Thousand and Fifteen Thousands
Hands, presented to the Parliament, were the Sufferings of Friends, which R.R.
prints, and makes an Ill Construction of. And as for I. Harwood, he has
manifested his End sufficiently, who Opposed Friends with his Hat on in Prayer,
and manifested his Bad Life, Ranter-like, as I. Perrot did.

Again R.R. says, Seven of G.F's Friends were chosen for a Committee, etc.
G.F. knows nothing of that; therefore he was not like to Exalt himself in that.
And G.F. does not meddle with the Carnal Sword of the Civil Magistrate: In
these things R.R. has belied G.F. and Friends, besides many other Scoffing and
Reproachful Words, which are not worth mentioning, are in his Book. And he
says scoffingly, What is the Name Quaker thou give to thy self? R. Rich
knew, it is a Scornful Nickname given unto us: And Thee and Thou is the true
Language, which he makes a pudder about, and he himself did once use it. And
Swearing I.P. I.H. and R.R. once denied it; but R.R. makes little of it now.
And also I.P. did not he Swear, and tender the Oath to others at Iamaica? which
G.F. and other Quakers always denied. And Christ and the Apostles forbid All
Swearing: But Verily, Verily, and Calling God to record, as R.R. speaks of, is
no Swearing. And the Quakers Sufferings are not as other Sects, as R.R.
scoffingly speaks. And what have been the Forms and Figures of Good Things to
come among the Quakers, that thou speak of?

And over and over R.R. says, That G.F. exercised his Cruelty over J. Perrot
and I. Nailor; which is false, the Lord knows; for he had nothing in his Heart
but for their Good; and I.N. has confessed it, and given forth a Recantation of
all his Runnings out; which R. Rich did feed upon. And I.N. never bowed down to
G.F. its a horrid Lie for R.R. to say he did (p. 37.) neither did he ever
desire it. So we are sorry that R.R. should dye before he had Repented of his
Lies. So as for Arrogance, Pope, Lucifer, etc. are these R.R's Words of Love,
as he calls it? And these words he had better applied to himself.

Further, R.R. says, The Lord found him in Innocence, wherewith he had clothed
him. But his Fruits in his Book from his Lying Spirit have not manifested it;
neither are they the Fruits of a New Heart (as he speaks of in his Epistle
printed 1680.) but the Fruits of a Railing Spirit against G.F. and others. As
for Enmity, Self exaltation, Division, Rending, Tearing, and Bitter, Wrathful,
Envious and Persecuting Spirits; with such like words he rails against G.F. and
others; they were but the Fruits of his own Spirit, which he casts upon G.F.
and others.

And R.R. says, That J.N. was led into the Wilderness to be Tried and Tempted
by G.F. and others. This was horrible Enmity and Malice in R.R. for it is well
known, that G.F. was in Prison in Cornwall when I.N. run out.

And R.R. says, ( Epist. page 4.) The great Offense that G.F. takes at John
Perrot's Book, is, That I.P. owned the Spirit of God's Grace and Light to be in
the Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, Seekers, and others; and also,
that he has Unity and Amity with all that walk therein. We are sorry that R.R.
should Belie G.F. and others; for it is known, that G.F. and others own the
true Light and declare it, which enlightens every man that comes into the
World, and haeve Unity with them that walk in it; yea, have Unity with the
Light in them that hate it. But its known, that these beforementioned have
Printed against Friends, and both Anabaptists, Presbyterians and Independents
have called the Light, which enlightens every man that comes into the World, a
Natural Light: And so its clear, that R.R. Belyed G.F. and Friends.

And many other Books R.R. has given forth against the People of God called
Quakers, which are stufft with known Lies, Scoffs and Slanders, which are not
worth mentioning; for he was well enough known what he was in his-Lifetime

Another writes against the People called Quakers, calling himself, Phil. Ang.
who says, A man, etc. his Strength is to sit still, deny himself, and his own
Life too, or else he cannot be Christ's Disciple. But he should have taken his
Advice to himself, then he would not have brought forth his Confused Work. He
makes a great pudder against Images, Forms and Shadows, which Delude men; but
has not told us, what those Images, Forms and Shadows are. And he tells of
Peoples pinning their Faith upon other men's Sleeves, and boasting of things
without their measure: If he applies this to the Quakers, he is deceived; for
Christ is the Author of our Faith; for our Faith stands in God and Christ: but
he does not declare his own Faith, nor what it is pinned upon. And the Fruits
of his Book are not the Fruits of the true Light; nor does he manifest, that he
stands in it, or that he is one that fears and trembles at the Word of God:
For he says, Let Men and all the Womanly Weakness in Man Decrease, etc. If the
Author of this Epistle had done so, then his own Mouth would have been stopped;
if he had taken that Counsel to himself, then he would not have manifest his
Weakness, Enmity and Folly to the World.

And there is another Book printed by Ieffery Bullock (or some body for him)
with his Epistle to it, wherein are published the Papers that some Friends writ
to John Wilkinson and John Story, with their Answers: And I.B. writes a railing
Epistle to those Friends, wherein he justifies I.S. and I.W. Some of his
Railing Words are, viz. Antichrist's Teachers called Quakers, etc. and says,
Judge not, and ye shall not be judged; yet in Contradiction to himself he has
falsely judged the Quakers, and so brought Judgment upon himself. Moreover he
says, -- such things as are of a Spiritual Concernment, which things alone do
belong to the Light and Measure of the Spirit in every ones own particular to
judge of, and it does not belong to the Light in others to judge others in
Matters of Conscience, etc. What! is the Light divided? Is it not the same in
one as in the other? What a Contradiction and Confusion is this! Did not the
Apostle see such as made Shipwreck of Faith and a Good Conscience? Were not
They and the Children of Light able to judge who walk in the Light, and who
walk contrary to it? And those Eleven Elders he speaks of, that did give forth
a Testimony: if others did not own it, and gave a Testimony against it, what is
that to the purpose? And what can I. Bullock tell, what those Eleven did say to
them, that did not own their Testimony? They are not bound to give him an
Account, nor Print it to the World, as he has foolishly done.

And I.B. says scoffingly, We should first have drawn a Bill of Indictment
against I.S. and I.W. before we had judged them. But I.B. should have asked
I.S. and I.W. in the North for those Articles that were given forth against
them, and what part of them they condemned. But he goes over and over in his
Book, and tells of Orders and Decrees Imposed by G.F. and other Teachers (as he
calls them) but what these Orders and Decrees were, he has not mentioned: So
these are but his Calumnies.

And John Pennyman has published several Pamphlets with a Reviling Language
against several of God's People, as his Pamphlets declare his dark spirit, and
what it is, though he does pretend Love: but One Fountain does not send forth
Sweet Water and Bitter. Neither does he show, that he is of a Lowly and Meek
Spirit, nor in the Love of God, that he much talks of; his Railing Language
bewrays him. And as for his words, Hypocrisy, Falsehoods, Temporizing
Hypocrites, Babylonish Worship, Pride, Envy, and laying all his Railing
Expressions upon God: his spirit and work does manifest, that they are not of
God; and these Revilings of his are like his own spirit. And why is I.P. in
such a Rage? because we cannot receive his false words. And he makes a great
Noise against our Forms, Prescriptions, Laws, Orders, Moods, Impositions, etc.
but tells not what they are. But all these he may apply at home, who
stigmatizes God's People with Black Names.

And whereas he says, G.F. betrayed his Trust concerning Abiah Trott: That Is
false; and its no great matter what he says. And R. Cannon denies thy false
Charge thou bring'st against G.F. and says, To his Knowledge he did not speak
such words [Witness Tho. Tanton.] And here thou art a Busie-body in other
Peoples Matters; and it seems thou wantedst something to Print against G.F. and
others; but thou had better study to be quiet, and to mind thy own Condition.

And then I.P. says, If the publishing thereof (viz. of his Abusing Railing
Pamphlet) be not according to the Will of God, etc. then let his Gray Hairs not
go down to the Grave in Peace. Be sure the Lord will reward thee according to
thy Works (thy Lies) and thy Words, though thou may cry Peace, Peace; but
take heed, lest sudden Destruction does not come upon thee unawares, for the
spreading of all thy Lying Scandalous Pamphlets, both of thy own writing and of
others, against God's People; for be sure what thou do Sow, thou must Reap,
and God will reward thee according to thy Works.

A Postscript by Another Hand.
I Having seen the aforegoing Account of I. Perrot and Robt. Rich, which is
given by one that has been conversant with them, and well knew them, the which
I therefore Credit; and by this Account its Evident, that though they professed
the Light of Christ: the Word, Spirit and Grace of God in the heart, in words,
yet in their Life and Conversations, walked contrary thereunto, in a Spirit of
LOOSENESS and RANTERISM, even the very Spirit that T. Crisp. F. Bugg, and them
of that Company with them, in this Day are found in, and would bring into, who
Nickname, Scoff at and Oppose Friends, and those things, and Practices that the
Lord by his Eternal Spirit has led them into the Practice of, in which they
have and do find peace and acceptance with the Lord in the Performance of. Now
observe T. Crisp, as a busy agent, and I. Pennyman have printed and reprinted
R. Rich's rambling Testimony, and something of others that opposed Friends and
T.C. calls them such weighty Truths, Testimonys, and sound Doctrins, that being
kept, the Enemy had no opportunity to Enter by Divisions etc. and the same 24.
page of several Testimonys he says, mind what is aforesaid by these Servant's
of God, for they are such needful things in this day that could not he let
pass; for its believed many among them never read them, therefore in love they
are here Imparted to you, and who Acts or Teaches contrary thereto may be said
to bring in another Gospel, and are going into the Separation, and gain saying
Spirit, having a form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof, etc. Now
observe T.C's Directory, who opposes and vehemently cries out against for
writing or giving out that he Scoffingly calls Orders, Forms and Prescriptions;
and yet is crying up his own, or R.R. I.S. and I.W's. And the man that is
against Judging, at once passes Sentence, Judges and Condemns them who act or
teach contrary to his Directory, or R.R's Testimony, etc. as gone into
Separation, and Gainsaying Spirit, and charges them with bringing in another
Gospel, and denying the Power of God. Yet presently to manifest what he is, viz
a Ba. Builder -- He says, The Kingdom of Heaven is within, and consists in
Righteousness, etc. -- and not in speaking one sort of Speech or Language, and
conforming to Orders and Prescriptions from without: And yet all must be judged
iu Separation, Gainsaying Spirit and Denying the Power of God that acts or
teaches contrary to T.C's Directory, or R.R's prescribed Form, etc. Oh! what an
exquisite Babel-Builder is here! and yet F. Bugg his Brother in that ungodly
Work of Opposing Friends, etc. quotes him, as if his Babels were to be taken
notice of, though the very Deeds and Works of Darkness, Enmity and Folly; but
as the Proverb is it may be said, Like to Like, and Birds of a Feather Flock
together: But seeing T.C. so highly cries up this Directory, or R.R's Testimony
or Prescription, let him examine and search whether it be according to
Scripture; for I am of the mind, that there is not any danger or fear of
incurring those Sensures aforesaid, if they be not complied with (except from
such who call Evil Good, and Good Evil) but rather an incurring of them, by
acting or teaching according to it. Now R. Rich pretends (in his highly
applauded little worth Testimony, printed by T.C.) to see that daily more and
more will fall off from that Body [viz Friends] page 23. -- and that some that
separate from them, will with Daniel stand in their Lot: And though T.C. calls
R.Rs, etc. Testimony, Weighty Truths, Sound Doctrines, and R.R. etc. Servants
of God, and says (as before) that who acts or teaches contrary thereto, may be
said to bring in another Gospel, and are going into a Gainsaying Spirit, and
denying the Power of God: but notwithstanding all this, T.C. says, page 26.
(in his Testimony following R.R's) Take no Delight in the Greatness of your
Number -- because the Body Grows Great, and Number Increases. So I shall leave
the Candid and Christian Reader to consider, whether T.C. has not (after his
great Applaud of R.R.) gain-sayed R.Rs Testimony; and whether, according unto
his own Sentence, he is not gone into the Separation, Gainsaying Spirit,
Denying the Power of God, etc. So having thus in brief hinted at these things,
to show the enquiring Reader, that T.C. I. Pennyman, W.R. F. Bugg, have
received the same spirit them poor miserable Men I. Perrot and R.R. were of,
notwithstanding their great Pretense and high Title they give themselves, who
would be accounted Christian-Quakers, etc. though as certainly departed from
the Power of God, and gone out of the Unity of Friends (whose unity is in the
Light, Spirit and Power of God) as the aforesaid J.P. R.R. etc. And if they,
viz. T.C. J.P. W.R. F.B. etc. do not return unto the Lord by unfeigned
Repentance, they will certainly end their days in Misery. So heartily desiring
the Lord by his Eternal Power may preserve all them, that in any measure truly
fear him, from the Infectious Venom of that Spirit by which the aforesaid
Persons have been acted to Oppose Truth, the Friends in it, and the Order it
has brought forth among the Lord's People, I conclude.

5 NO 58 JOHN FIELD. jun.

THE END.

