A TESTIMONY FOR THE LORD GOD, And his WORK in the EARTH.
HEar O EARTH, and hearken ye HEAVENS, for the Lord has spoken, even the Lord
God mighty in Power and excellent in Wisdom, Loving kindness and Mercies has
appeared, and is made manifest in the Children of men, and the Isles of the
Gentiles do feel his Power and partake of his Promise in the Light, in the
Life, in the Eternal Covenant of his Peace and Truth, whereby Japhet is
persuaded in the Tents of Shem to dwell; And this is the Lords own doing, and
it is mavelous in the pure eyes of all that behold it, and the eye that sees
is blessed, and the Soul that hears and believes is blessed, and shall be
blessed; for the Lord the faithful God is Arisen, and his appearance is like
the Sun when it Arises and shines in the brightness of its glory; and
therefore are we refreshed and caused to live in his sight, and to bring forth
the living fruits of Righteousness to his praise and glory; Glory, glory for
ever, for the Heaven gives now its dew, and the Earth yields its increase, and
the blessing is upon the People, and the Nations of the World shall Bow, and
the Inhabitants of the Earth do tremble at the glory of the Lord, at the
Majesty of his Appearance in this his glorious day, wherein he has Visited,
and is Visiting his Seed, and calling his Servants out of Egypt, and delivering
his Beloved out of the hands of him that was too strong for them, and putting a
new Song into our mouths; And his Rest is Glorious, and his Praise is Holy, and
his Renown is spread abroad, and his foes become his footstool; and the
Ransomed of the Lord do unto Zion return, and in the Light of the living God do
all the day rejoice and praise him upon the truly spiritual and well-tuned loud
Cymbals in the heights of Israel, in the holy Temple, in the Promised Land, in
the Purchased possession in the holy Mount, even the Mountain of Gods
everlasting Love in CHRIST JESUS, where his eternal Arm of Power and
Faithfulness is truly witnessed; And this is the Mountain of Gods House and
Holiness indeed, which is now on the top of all Mountains; and here the Lord is
fully seen, and his living Power daily felt, and his everlasting Love
continually enjoyed, for watering and refreshing the Babes and living Plants of
the New Jerusalem; glory, glory for ever, glory to the Righteous, for this is
comely.

And now is the day of the Lords gathering, and his Angels are gone forth, and
his Trumpet has sounded the Alarm out of the holy Mountain, unto all the
Inhabitants of the Earth; And now if any Old or Young, High or Low, can come
forth and stand before the God of the whole Earth, they are warned and called
upon to bring their deeds to the LIGHT, to the day of the Lamb, that true Light
that lights every man that comes into the World, John 1. 9. For now indeed
is the day of the Lord God appeared; and the Wrath of the Lamb is come, and who
may stand before him? who can abide this day of his coming? For he comes, for
he comes in the thousands of his Holy Ones to Judge the World, even all that
are Proud and do Wickedly in his sight, and to convince them of all their
ungodly deeds and hard speeches, which they ungodlily have spoken against him,
and whereby they have slandred the footsteps of his Anointed Ones, and
blasphemed his Heavenly Tabernacle, which he has pitched amongst men, that he
might dwell amongst them and be glorified for evermore.

So WOE is to the Wicked, and much Wrath will be upon the people who now stand
out and strive against the Lord, even the Lord the habitation of Justice, in
whose hands is their breath, who are careless children and do not regard this
day of their Visitation.

So all having time, prize it, and bow to the Lord God, and know this day of
your Visitation; for, the Lord in his Glory is Arisen, and his Eye beholds, and
with his own pure Light is trying the children of men; And now, even now shall
the mouth of Iniquity be stopped, and the Righteous shall rejoice and be glad
upon their Beds, as the Scripture has said; Yea, the high praises of God is
already heard in their mouths, and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word
of God, is felt going forth Conquering and to Conquer; And the Mountains are
moved, and the lesser Hills are afraid, and the hearts of the Hypocrites do
melt for fear at the presence of the Lord, at the appearance of our God, the
true God, the everlasting Father, who is exalting his own Name, and setting up
the Kingdom of his dear Son, and shaking terribly the earth; glory, glory to
him forever and for ever, for he is good, and his mercy endures for ever, and
of his faithfulness there is no end.

All flesh is grass, but that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit, and shall
inherit and sound forth the living praises of the living God, for evermore, as
it is at this day. So be it.

Given forth in the movings of the Lord, as a Witness to his Truth in this his
Day, by one who bears the reproach of Christ (amongst many Brethren) by the
evil World, under the name of Quaker. THO. TAILOR.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Windmill in Martin^ le Grand, 1660.


