A DISSVVASIVE FROM Contention. BEING A SERMON Preached and Designed for the
last Itineration of the King's Preachers in the County Palatine of Lancaster.
By Zachary Tailor. A. M. Vicar of Ormskirk, and one of the King's Preachers in
that County.

St. James chapter 3. v. 14.16. If you have bitter Zeal, (...) and Strife in your
Hearts, glory not, and lie not against the Truth. For where Zeal ((...)) and
Strife is, there is Sedition, ((...)) and every Evil Work. LONDON, Printed by
John Gain, for William Cadman, at the Pope's Head in the New-Exchange, 1683.

To the Right Honorable Lawrence, Earl of Rochester. Sir John Ernle,
Chancellor, and Under Treasurer of the Exchequer. Sir Edward Dearing. Sidney
Godolphin, Esquire; Sir Stephen Fox. The Lords, Commissioners of his Majesty's
Treasury.
My Lords,
IT is an Aspersion cast peculiarly on our County, by a Diotrephes of the
Faction, That the Growth of Popery among us, is for want of an able Ministry to
Instruct and Settle the People. A Suggestion, truly Fanatical, (i.e.) it wants
both Charity and Truth. The first: for who learnt the Detractor to blemish the
Reputation of Persons, whose Abilities he is altogether unacquainted with. And
for the latter, there has more Converts been gained to the Church, within
these last five Years, than the Key for Catholics has opened the Heart of.
But the Solicitations which your Honor, we hope, will favorably admit, in
behalf of some Convict Recusants, who having Legally joined our Communion,
labor to be discharged from the Exchequer, will be a more ample Confutation of
so Infamous a Scandal, than any thing I can expect to Offer.

And for this my present Essay, I foresee it will be construed rather an
encouraging, than weakening of the Papists. For though there would be no such
Fatal Stroke unto the Tripple Crown, as our uniting in the Bond of Peace; which
is my Prayer as well as Province. Yet, when ever we design to reduce these
wandering Sheep unto their Folds, they exclaim, as if we were giving Indulgence
for Beasts of Prey to Forage. Reputing it the Property of a good Shepherd, to
be always in pursuit of Wolves, not considering, that in his absence the ninety
nine may go astray, and perish in the Wilderness.

And never more need to project this Union, than at this Season, when the Sheep
have exchanged with the Wolf, their Clothing, for his Ravenage, and we are
exposed to as much danger from the Sword of the Lord, in the hand of the
Saints, as that of Peter's in his degenerated Successors.

The just Apprehension of these Fears (which by Virtue of my Cure, I take my
self obliged as much to obviate, as any other) together with a prospect of that
Advantage which their Adherene would afford against the Common Enemy, gave
Being to this Disswasive from Contention. Which I entreat the Dissenters, who
shall be pleased to read it, to peruse with something more Coolness, than their
Brethren Auditors who heard it. For the Calumnies they spread, and the Mischief
they designed me for it (as if they meant to let us understand, they were so
little Edifyed by our Correptions, that, If the Righteous should smite them,
they would not take it for a Kindness, nor allow of his Reproof to be healing,
as an excellent Oil; but the rather grievous, as what does break their Head.
This constrained me in my own Vindication, as well as for the Benefit of
others; who by their supercilious Censures, were prejudged in their Opinions
about it, and by that means prevented from the hearing of it, to send these
Papers on the Itineration, in the Room of their Master. And I humbly beseech
your Lordships to favor it with a Protection; for then, though it may chance
to feel, it will not fear their Obloquies.

In Duty, no less than Prudence, was I bound to seek a Sanctuary under the
Vmbrage of your Honor, from whose Influence these our Labors are quickened,
and our Industry animated. For we duly value our selves as those happy
Instances, by the Countenancing of whom, your Lordships do resolve to convince
the World, how falsely and unjustly our Dissenting Brethren Prophesy of the
Regress of Popery.

My Lords, this Provident Establishment, of which, your Honors be the
Guardians, founded by the late Queen Elizabeth, of happy Memory, is the only
Relic of that mature Deliberation, which by our firct Reformers was found the
best Expedient to propagate the Gospel. I mean, the Commanding their Majesty's
Chaplains to Itinerate the Kingdom, and in their respective Divisions, to
Preach the Reformation. Which, how successful it was, the Event demonstrated.

Though we confess our selves much their Inferiors for Ability, we are
unwilling, to be thought behind them in our Duty. And therefore, in all due
Gratitude acknowledge your Lordships Generous Candor on so Charitable a
Settlement, and so good a Work: Whom to Revere as our Patrons, is the Ambition
of,

My Lords, Your Honors most Humble Client, and obsequious Servant Zachary
Tailor.

A Disswasive FROM Contention, etc.
PROVE. 17. V. 14. The beginning of Strife is as when one lets out Water:
therefore leave off Contention before it be meddled with.


THAT there are Divisions among us needs our Lamentation more than Proof: and a
Rupture so visible, requires a Healing Hand, more than a Weeping Eye.

My Design therefore is, to invite all those, that are the Sons of Peace, to
Peace and Unity, Uniformity and Charity, by exposing the Dreadful Consequences
of Animosities and Divisions: and by admonishing them of some Wasting
Impieties, which are the Inseparable Adjuncts of their Separation. For when
they apprehend the Guilt, we may hope they will be wise enough to avoid the
Danger.

Our Savior gives us this Characteristick to distinguish of False Prophets;
You shall know them by their Fruits, Mat. 7.16. i. e. by such Emergencies as
are the natural Effects of their Principles, or unreproved Practices. The
common Effects, I say, for I acknowledge it (and I wish our Brethren would do
so to) an injustice to charge Impiety upon a Party, which neither favor it by
their Positions, nor connive at it in the Execution. But where the Fruit is
Evil, the Tree must be Corrupt, Mat. 12.33. And what the Guilt of our
Dissentions are, unto that Faction that foment them, will appear in the
Discussing of this Aphorism. The beginning of strife, etc.

The Words are a Disswasive from Dissension, and by representing the Original,
Progress and Effect thereof, advise us to leave off Contention before it grow
Tumultuous, which is the Importance of our Translation, (...) In Hithp.
antequam immisceatse. Jun. and Trem.
Before it be meddled with; For it is not properly Contention, till the adverse
Party meddels or joyneth Issue, till there be, what the Original implies, A
reciprocation of the Quarrel; that it Ferment and grow Impetuous. For,

1. Tho the Original be, But as the letting out of Water, which in it self is a
small and trivial thing, and may be done by Unwariness and Imprudence; yet in
the close, it may become no less pernicious, than if it were willful and
advised; For,

2. In the Progress, passage being made, it spreads alike; The Sluice cut, or
the Flood gates drawn, on what occasion soever, gives equal Liberty to the
Violence of the Current; which,

3. In the Event is fatal, may overflow, and Deluge the Country; and so
Theodotion renders it, (...), The beginning of Strife is an Inundation of
Waters.

I shall not insist upon the Propriety of the Holy Spirits resembling Sects and
Parties unto a Confluence of Waters; nor the Madness of the People, to the
Raging of the Sea. Psalm. 89.9. but apply my self,

1. To enquire into the Original of our Divisions, which being like the Letting
out of Water, a trival, and inconsiderate Action (for I would have the Charity
to believe, that our Difference was no design of Malice) implies the matto be
light and small of little moment, or importance. And so indeed it is. Vterum
horum.
We are agreed as to the Substance of Religion, and our Brethren Glory, Adam on
the Short Cat.
that they can prove their Doctrine by the Authority of our Articles and
Homilies. They come nearer yet; and acknowledge, That they may Communicate with
our Churches, Mr. Nigh.
without sin; and as God said of his People so we, Oh that there was such an
heart in them! Deuteronomy. 5.29. Indeed occasionally they can join our Communion, but
is not this an evidence against them; or does not the Peace of Christ's Church
oblige us constantly to adhere, to what occasionaly we can comply with.

Whence then come our Divisions. Dear my God! that Christ body should be rent
and torn upon such poor pretense. The Quarrel is De lana Caprina, even in the
literal sense about Habits and Vestments, Whether a Cloak be not more Decent in
the worship of God then a Gown, or Surplice.?

Whether it be not greater scandal to kneel at the Communion with the Papist,
then sit, or lean as does their Head the Pope?

Whether Set Forms of Prayer composed to the mind of Holy Scripture have not as
fair a Claim unto the Spirit as unpremeditated Extemporary Effusions?

Whether a Liturgy in which the People bear a part (whence it is called the
Common Prayer, being performed in Common, by the Flock, and Pastor) be not a
Worship, full as Edifying, as that which may betray men to the surreption of
Wandering thoughts, having no Office to recall their Roving mind, but what
concludes the last, Amen.

Whether it be a Super-erogation of Devotion, to set apart and consecrate some
Common Days to the Worship of God, in which we may Commemorate what was therein
transacted, the more Eminent instances of the Mystery of our Redemption?

Whether the Religious Education of Infants, may not be prudently secured, by
requiring Parents to provide Sponsors; either to Rebuke their negligence, if
themselves should be slack, or supply their Office, because they are Mortal?

Whether Confirmation, the Laying on of Hands, or the Blessing of the Bishop,
upon the Confession of a Novices Faith, be not an Advantageous Expedient for
the Grounding Youth, in the Princeples of the True Religion?

Whether the Signing Infants with the Cross in Baptism, can make us more
Superstitious than others, whose Aversion looks, as tho they were ashamed of
the Cross of Christ?

In short, Whether the Communicating with the Primitive Christians, in such
Rites, and Ceremonies, as they duly practiced before the Sea of Rome usurped
upon the Western Church: can be a Symbolizing with the present Papacy? Or if
you please,

Whether the abuse of things in themselves most Significant, be a sufficient
reason to reject their Use?

These, and such as these are the things, which make men shun our Communion,
Flock into Conventicles, and Divide into Factions. These were the beginings of
that Breach, now grown into an open, and a dreadful Schism. And is the Peace of
Christ Church so mere a Cipher that men may be excused, who are less tender of
it, then tenacious of their own Opinions. One of the last Legacies that Christ
bequeathed unto his Church was Peace, my Peace I leave with you, my Peace I
give unto you Joh. 14.27. One of the last Prayers, that he offered to his
Father was for Unity, Holy Father keep them, That they may be one as we are
one, Joh. 11. The first descriptcion, that you meet with of the Church; is
taken from her Uniformity, and her Disciples Unaminity Act. 2.42. and c. 4.32.
Such Inclinations has the Religion, Christ came to settle unto Peace and
Unity, that it is most Emphatically styled, The Gospel of Peace; Ephe. 6.16.
The Title that he bears, is, The Prince of Peace, Isai. 9.6. The Majesty we
Worship is the God, the Lord, 2 These. 3.16. Romans 15.13. Heb. 7.2. Luke 10.6.
Prove. 12.20. Isai. 33.7.
the King of Peace. Disciples, the Sons of Peace. Apostles and Ministers, the
Ambassadors, the Counselors of Peace. In a word, so important, this Duty, that
God does seem, as if he need to promise to his Church no more, than to make her
Officers Peace, Isai. 60.17. Nor did the Apostles know to pray for more, then
the Peace of God; so large a Blessing, that it does pass all Understanding,
Phil. 4.7. And can there be a Zealot that would unravel all this, frustrate
God's Promise, and dispense with this Christian Duty; for the Sake of a few
Rites, and little Ceremonies. I am sorry, that we have occasion to lament there
should be such: But rather, then reflect on their Infirmity; I shall entreat
their Devotion, to join with us, in Praying for the Peace of Jerusalem, Psalm.
122.6. For alas! though we have discourst it long enough; we have had no better
Success, then what the Psalmist complains off; For when we labored for Peace,
and spoke unto them thereof, they made themselves ready for Battle, Psalm.
120.7. which, how they have promoted comes to be considered under.

2. The Progress of these Divisions, Quae veris addere falsa gandet, et e
minimo sua per Vestigia crescit.
which Spread like Water, speedily, and dangerously. What that may be, the
common Noise will tell you, that gives false Rumors, Wings, to fly abroad, and
spread her Poison.

I know, I shall incur the Censure of a Discontented Party: For some there be,
whose Actions are so bad; that Truth is a Scandal; and the Relation no better
than a Libel. All the Favor that I expect, is this: That where their
Conscience tells them, that I speak the Truth; they would receive the
Admonition peacably, and consider it seriously: and to requite this Candor, if
in any thing, I chance to mistake them; I do promise to make them Satisfaction,
as public as the Injury. And on the Hopes of their Ingenuity, either admitting
the Truth, or informing my Ignorance; I take the Freedom to tell them, that
Misrepresentations, and Mistakes, Falsities, and Fictions were the Incentives
of these Divisions. for,

1. They seek to justify their Nonconformity by venting False; at least,
dubious, and unsound Positions. Such are these,

That our Ceremonies are Parts of Divine Worship. But where do they find this,
or do we teach any such thing? No surely; for are Parts of Divine Worship
alterable according to the difference of Time, and Place? Art: of the Church of
England, 24.
May they be ordained, changed, or abolished by Authority of Particular
Churches, as we assert of these. They might be ashamed of such a Calumny: And I
desire, they would advise with Casuists, of their own Denomination, Latae a Deo
Ceremoniae sunt Cultus Dei: ab omnibus institutae non sunt Cultus Dei; sed si
bonae sunt, cultui divino serviunt. Vrs. Cat. par. 3: Q. 92. Ab Ecclesia
Institutae Ceremoniae non sunt Cultus Dei. 16. Q 103.
and these will tell them, That Ceremonies which God establishes, are indeed
the Worship of God; but what men institute, are not the Worship of God. Though
if they be good, they are Subserviceable to the Worship of God. And again,
Ceremontes instituted by the Church, are not the Worship of God. And I wish
this may satisfy them.

But they pretend the same Reason to separate from us, that we had to forsake
the Church of Rome. How implacable is Malice! Were bare Ceremonies the cause of
our Desertion? or what do you mean by these Notorious Falsities? Do we frame
New Articles of Faith, or equallize Tradition unto Scripture? Do we subject the
Scepter to the Crosier, or arrogate Infallibility unto our Church? Do we offer
Sacrafice for the Quick and Dead? or do Transubstantiation, Purgatory, and he
like, come out off our Mint? Or do you meet any of our Church, that will
justify Rome, as you do us; and confess, that she is sound in Doctrine, and
Morrality. So gross the Untruth, so apparent the Envy; that I admire that any
one, can have, either so great Impudence, for to averr it, or so little Sense
to be deceived by it.

Yet, the Imposers you will say were Culpable, and the Guilt, if there be any,
lies at their Door. By the same Example, Malefactors may cry out upon the Law:
Traitors at the Prince: and Sinners against their God. But let us scan it
seriously: And though you would mischieveously insinuate, as though, our
Governors should have designedly contrived these, for so many Snares, and Gins
upon the Conscience. Be informed my Brethren; for all they did was this. When
other Rites were abolished, they reserved these, unabrogated. They made no
Positive Act, whereby they did create, or Originally enact them; but only
suffered them for to continue: and that, at a season (as you shall hear anon)
when no man scrupled, but all had used them. So far were they from a thought of
Burdening Men's Consciences thereby. And have we not now Reason to complain,
as Bishop Bilson does. Epist. to the Reader, before the Gov. of Christ's Church.
This is an endless Quarrel of theirs, declaring they either do not, or will not
understand the matter, for which, we chiefly contend.

But their Conformity would make them guilty of betraying that Liberty,
wherewith Christ made them free. God forbid, that you should be again entangled
in the Yoke of Bondage, Gal. 5.1. But mistake not Submission unto Governors as
inconsistent with your Christian Liberty To withdraw is Extravagancy: it is
Licentiousness, and not Liberty. That very useing of it for a Cloak of
Maliciousness, which the Apostle reproves, 1. Pet. 2.16. Christian Liberty, is
an Exemption from the Jewish Paedagogy; a Manumission from that Yoke, that our
Fathers could not bear, Gal. 4.5. And beside this, I know no Liberty appositely
appropriated to the Christian: for as it implies our Freedom from the Slavary
of Sin, and Satan; it is Judaical, as much Christian. A Branch of that Oath,
which God swear to Abraham, That we being delivered from the hands of our
Enemies might serve him, in Holiness, and Righteousness all the days of our
Life, Luke 1.74.75. And so far is our Submitting unto Rites, and Ceremonies;
from trespassing upon our Christian Liberty: that each one of these, is an
Instance of that Freedom, which, Christ purchased for us. For whereas it was
the Jewish Yoke, that they were so determined in their Modes, and Forms, that
they could not alter, nor dispense with Proselites, in such Rites, and
Ceremonies; as with Men of disserent Climates, meet with as diverse a
Construction. Christ, to obviate that Infelicity, which, had been an
unremoveable Impediment unto the Gospel; has wholly delegated this Authority
to the Pleasure of his Church; requiring no more, then that all things be done
Decently, and according to an Order, 1 Cor. 14.40. (...), by a Canon, or
Injuncton; for so the word, without the least Impropriety of Signification,
does import: Whence they to whom this Language was Vulgar, term their Rules of
Discipline, (...), And so the English that follows Beza's Traslation, renders
the Text; Let all things be done Honestly, and By Order: which cannot but
respect some Rule established by Authority. So far is our Christian Liberty
from Interfering with Authority, that whosoever extends it beyond these Limits,
is no other than the Advocate of Confusion.

But their Conscience will not suffer them to comply. I might churlishly
return, and with a sting of Truth, What is that to us? See you to that. But, is
it your Conscience? Be not mistaken. Perhaps, it is but some over-weeldy
Opinion; or, if it be Conscience, show me the Rule, on which it does proceed:
for Conscience, as your own Guides will tell you, does not Accuse, or Excuse,
but according to some Rule, Jus. Div. Roy. Ecc.
Principle, or Law of God, that is above the Conscience. Now, the Work is
short; produce any thing above the Conscience, to justify your Pretensions,
and we are silent for ever. But I would gladly ask, Did your Conscience, of it
self, frame these Scruples; or, were they instilled by Education, Converse,
Interest, Affection? etc. If the former, is not your Conscience defiled, and
erroneous? Tit. 1.15. For, if it be, you cannot expect, that out of Christian
Sympathy, we should defile our selves, and err too. Besides, some of your own
Casuists resolve, Errans Conscientia liganda, rather than ligat. Lightfoot's
Ser. to Comm.
That such a Conscience is so far from binding, that it ought it self the
rather to be bound. If the latter, Woe be to them, by whom the Scandal comes,
Mat. 18.7. For this is that very Case, to which that Woe is threatened. The
Scandal there, is not an aversion, or dislike of something that we see, is
practiced; but, the being ensnared thereby, Consul. Ames. de Cons.
into an occasion of Sin. Which is the misery of our Dissenting Brethren. If
they Conform, they act against an Opining Conscience, and they conclude that
Sinful. If they refuse, they become Disobedient, in not submitting to the
Ordinance of Man, for the Lord's Sake, 1 Pet. 2.13. And how a Contracted Error
should excuse our Nonperformance of a Necessary Duty, is beyond my Divinity,
to apprehend. In short, if this Plea of Conscience would justify, there is not
a Sect in Christendom, but has a plausible Evasion. It remains therefore, that
you get your Conscience informed; and if you come with that Indifference which
Epictetus requires in all that seek for Truth, even the same that is in
Travelers, who matter not, whether their way be to the Right, or Left, or
Forward, so that it leads them to their Journy-End. You have this Promise, That
wherein you be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even that unto you, Phil.
3.15. But if the prospect of Interest, or Ambition, or such By-Considerations,
incline your Will, it is possible, from desiring that an Opinion might be true,
you may believe it is true; your Well-wishes may overcome your Reason. For it is
no such uncouth thing, for Affection to advance into Assurance; and the Passion
for a Problem, to grow as strong as Demonstration; and then you are lost for
ever.

These are the common Topics, which the Dissenters use; how successfully, I
must refer to your own Judgment: only I observe, that our Divisions do
gradually advance; for as yet, they do but justify themselves, and apologize
for their own Dissentions. Let us take cognizance of their next Artifice, which
is somewhat more Unchristian; for, when Arguments fail,

2. They endeavor to succeed, by creating Jealousies, and conjuring up
Suspicions. A Fright may drive men past their Wits, and Dreams have more
Influence on Superstitious Souls, than the most Feeling Verities of Sense and
Reason. Just so it sares with us; Men cry out of Popery, Popery, Pelagianism,
Superstition. For it is neither Miracle, nor Monster with them, that a
Churchman should carry a Pope in his Belly. But, pray what do you mean by
Popery? Nay, to this day, they never yet would tell us: and is it not a shrewd
Suspicion, that there is no Truth in their meaning, when there is no Light in
their Words; for, He that hates the Light, is a doing Evil, and dare not come
to the Light, least his Deeds should be reproved, Joh. 3.20.

But where is the Danger, that you storm so loudly? Have we Innovated in our
Articles? Are our Homilies disowned? Or our Liturgy rejected? No, this would be
joyful News unto the Brotherhood. But do not these accord with Popery? As much
as Light with Darkness; or Christ with Belial. And be awaked, my Brethren; Is
it we, that refuse to subscribe the Ordinances of the Reformation? Or, do we
withdraw from the Oath of Supremacy, the Hanniball of Antichristian Usurpation?
Where then is the Charity, to represent us such Prostituted Wretches, as value
neither Promises, nor Protestations; Oaths nor Subscriptions: whilst others,
that decline such Tests, as these, must pass for Godly Men. Have we not Cause
to speak, when we cannot but hear a Celeusma, Hue and Cry sent after us, as
Renegadoes of the Reformation? When we meet with Remonstances of the Growth of
Popery, one Part after another: as if nothing was wanting in our Reunion to
that See, but only the Formality of a Reconciliation. For God's Sake, remember,
these groundless Fears brought one Prince to the Block (whose Innocent Blood is
perhaps now visited upon that Party; God in his just Judgment, upon their
Impenitency, giving them up to return to their Old Treasons, and in his
Infinite Mercy toward our Loyalty, defeating their Conspiracy, and punishing
their Rebellion) and, unless Men had designed to make the Son succeed his
Father, to the Block, as well as Crown, they stand in Duty obliged, to check
these false Surmises, to cast out the Scorner, (...) the Calumniator, that
Contention may go out; yea, Strife and Reproach cease, Prove. 22.10. And I
cannot but observe, that their Exclamations against his late Majesty, and the
Clergy, By Andreas ab Haberfield.
was in that very Juncto, when a Plot of the Papists, against his Sacred Person
was discovered: an unanswerable Sign, that they dispaired of what the
Phanaticks dissembled, that they feared; his Inclination unto Popery. I dare
scarce run the Parallel.

Were the Papists Plotting against his Present Majesty, an Evidence, what cool
Affections he carried for their Superstition? and can there be another Faction,
that would obtrude themselves into their Guilt, and wrest the Infamy out of
their hands! It troubles me to believe, there was.

The same Decoy, the more Jealous Privilegionists, by dreading an Invasion of
their Liberty and Property. And though no Assurance is equal to Experience; not
the many Solemn Declarations published, nor the Experience of more than twenty
Years (in which, not so many Arbitrary Inadvertences have passed, as Violations
of the Prerogative been endured) is sufficient to balance the conceited Omens
of a Restless Faction. Indeed, amidst that multitude of Business, which they
that hold the Stern of Government, do manage, it is not possible, but
Inconveniences will happen; and there is not wanting Cursed Chams, who are
pleased with the Discovery of their Father's Nakedness; Men, who improve and
magnify all their Mistakes; and because the Oracles have said, That
Magistrates are Gods, Psalm. 82.6. they will not suffer them for to slip as Men.

Now, where lies the Christianity of this Censorious Humor? Charity, that Bond
of Peace, (...), covers all things, 1 Cor. 13.7. Inclines men to conceal the
Weakness of their Brethren; much more, of their Fathers; and is officious to
hide a multitude of Sins, unsanctified Reason, that cries out, Humanum est
errare, will become their Advocate. And how can you, that are not without Sin
your selves, dare to throw a Stone at the Head of Majesty.

Thus having calumniated both Church and State, Desinant tandem maledicere, ne
malefacta exaudiant sua. Ter.
they show how little they are pleased with the one, by the Coolness of their
Affections to the other. For, whereas at first, they did but justify their
selves, in not advancing to the height of Conformity. Now they begin to gather
into Conventicles, to hear Doctrine, and exercise a Discipline more Pure; that
is, more Arbitrary (whence they are named Puritans) But neither as yet, do they
forsake our Communion, but Halt betwixt God and Baal, 1 King. 18.21. Press a
necessity of Fellowship with us, though among themselves, they afterward (as a
Bigot of their own, with as great Rudeness as Ignorance expressed it) would
Serve God BETTER. Yet, they stop not here, The Water that has got a Passage,
spreads. And,

3. They proceed to Burlesque, Fortiter calumniare and aliquid adhaerebit.
and Libel. It is a sure, but divilish Maxim, Fling Dirt enough, and some will
stick. And how dutifully they have Scanned this Directory: how diligently they
have profited in this Science, examine with a little Patience, and you may be
satisfied. From their first Appearance to this present Age, they never wanted a
Succession of Scurrility. There always have been Scorners that have filled the
Chair, Psalm. 1.1. from Martin Marprelate, unto Andrew Marvel. Nor, was there
Man, of what Eminence soever, that did appear against them, but under this
Correction, from Bishop Jewel, down to Dr. Stillingfleet, Church and State,
Prince and Prelate, have been wounded by these Arrows, their Bitter Words. It
is an Accusation that needs little Proof; the Proclamations of our Kings, and
the Writings of our Bishops, are full of these Complaints. With these Men it is
nothing but a Rara Show, to Ridicule Soverainty; and by their Measures of
Paying Reverence to the Lord's Anointed, one would be apt to guess, that under
the Gospel, God had reversed the Methods of Obedience, Acts 23.5. And commanded
us only to speak Evil of the Rulers of our People: Caesar's gracious Connivance,
being grown to be a Privilege of the People, In Civitate libera mentem, and
linguam liberas esse debere.
no less than Parliament: all Men assuming as great Freedom to their Tongue as
Thought. What Indulgence, their Guides may give them, that I cannot tell: but
never did I meet with a Divine of that Clann, that reproved this Vice; and what
escapes without Correction, has the Countenance of Connivance, or tacit
Approbation. Yet, in pity, I shall tell them, what a Learned Prelate has
observed on this Piece of Profaneness; There were Times, says he, when
Persecutions were great in the Church, even to exceed Barbarity it self. Did
any Martyr, or Confessor in those Times, Bp. Laud's Speech in Star Chamber.
Libel their Governors? Surely, no, not one of them, to the best of my
Remembrance. Yet these complain of Persecutions, without all show of Cause; and
in the mean time, Libel and Rail without measure: so little akin are they to
those, who suffer for Christ, or the least Part of Christian Religion. Nor is
he alone in this his Judgment, for the Apostles be of the same Mind, who give
this Character of Temporizing Christians, That they despise Dominion, and speak
evil of Dignities, Ju. 8.9. 2 Pet. 2.10. A Policy so Suspicious: the Blessed
Angels feared to make use of it, when they truly might. For Michael the
Archangel durst not bring against the very Devil (who questionless deserved
it) a Railing Accusation; but meekly begged of God, that he would be pleased to
rebuke him. And how his Temper suits unto the Gospel, which commands us, To
pray for our Enemies, to bless them, which curse us; when we are reviled, not
to revile again; when we suffer, not to threaten; 1, Pet. 2.23. or how it does
transcribe our Saviors Example, who, as the Lamb was dumb before the Shearers,
and opened not his mouth; is not my Province to enlarge upon. Only I concieve,
it might be some Mitigation unto David's Affliction, that they were Drunkards,
that made Songs upon him, Psalm. 96.12. But that men, who are sober, and
conscientious (if we may believe them) that they should suffer either Head, or
Hand; their Tongue, or Pen to touch the Lords Anointed, and do his Prophets
Harm, Psalm. 105.15. is such a Device of Religion, as I dare avouch the Gospel
is a Stranger to.

But no Wonder, if their Proselites forsake the Communion of such lewd men, as
they Decypher us, and betake themselves to some more powerful means. And this
brings the Difference unto a Formal Schism. They depart from us, and set up
Altar against Altar, and Pulpit against Pulpit; Doctrine against Doctrine, and
Worship against Worship. What is wanting to the Purity of their cause? they
supply by the Impurity of their Lips, and impute the weaknesses of men's
Persons, to the Disadvantage of their Principles. Like the Stoic in Lucian,
who, reduced to a Nonplus, cries out (...), So they deal with us, Base words,
and Popery, are an Ample Confutation. And when, by these Artifices, they have
rendered the Government uneasy, and the Governors odious.

4. They incite, and instigate unto Tumults by Turbulent Positions, and
Seditious Doctrines. Such are these, See the Judgment of the Univ. of Oxf.
That Kings are but the Peoples Trustees; That they are accountable for the
Miscarriages of the Government, with many more. And how directly these tend to
Sedition and Rebellion. I may be excused the Comment. For when a Prince is
Dethroned in the Conscience, what can follow, but an Arbitrary Obedience.
Subjection as long, and in what Instances they please; if he be the Peoples
Creature, there needs no more to the full Process of a Deposition, then the
Declaration; We will not have this man to reign over us, Luke 19.14. St. Paul
was aware of this, and therefore, requires you to be subject, not only for
Wrath, but also for Conscience sake, Romans 13.5. Divinity they have no mind to
be concerned with.

What can now remain, but that the Populacy, thus provoked, in a transport of
Zeal, do arise to destroy all the Ungodly that are in the Land; that they may
root out the Evil doers from the City of the Lord, Psalm. 101.11. Force and
Violence, Bloodshed and Murder, Plots and Conspiracies, Insurrections and
Rebellions are the End of these Divisions. To this height has the Quarrel
about Modes and Habits, Gestures and Ceremonies risen. Dear God! Is the life of
man right, Dear in your Sight ( Psalm. 116.15.) in their Eyes so cheap? Do we
become obnoxious to Bloodshed, for enjoining a few Innocent Rites, and
Primitive Ceremonies? All that I shall say, is this. The men that do these
things, have either no Religion; or what is next to none, a Bad one. And what
Temptation can you find in them, that you Caress them as your Countries
Patriots.

Were the late times of Confusion, so pleasant; that we should be laborious to
relapse into the same? Survey the misery; Fines, Confiscations, Plunders, are
but the Beginning of Sorrows. Banishment, Imprisonment, and Death succeed. Or
if you do survive: What David of old Age may with more Dolefulness he affirmed
of that, your life can be but Labor and Sorrow, Psalm. 90.10. when your Person
is impoverished, your Souls enslaved, your Churches profaned your Religion
gone. God alone, who, foresees all things, saw the Calamities that they were
bringing on us, and in Mercy and Compassion, was pleased to prevent it.

Before I pass this Topic, I must desire you to remark, how they have
aggravated their Opinions in the Causes of our Difference. What at first, were
no worse than Tolerabiles ineptiae, Calv. Ep. ad Protect.
Levities that might be tolerated (the which was also spoken of Chrism, and
Extreme Unction, Rites that are now disused) are now grown to be Antichristian
Impositions, and Prelatical Tyranny. Our Liturgy, which some of the Fraternity
did verily believe, FOX.
to be composed by the Assistance of the Holy Ghost, is now reproached as the
Rags of Popery. Our Bishops, whom Beza prays for a perpetual Succession of;
Bez. de div. grad. min. cont. Sar.
and the Repulsion of whom, was Corah's Sin under the Law, and Aerius under the
Gospel, are justled out with Ignominy, as Ithacian Priests, and Persecuting
Prelates; as Men that hold the Stirrup for Popery to mount the Saddle. And our
Kings, whom Calvin, Artic. 37. Calv. in Am. c. 7. v. 13.
by a Mistake of the meaning of that Title, which our Reformers gave them, The
Supreme Head of the Church, next under Christ, imagining what is not dreamed
of; some Spirituality included in it, did chance to censure: are looked upon,
as either Enemies of, or Inconvenient to the Privileges of the Kirk. Of which,
you have an Instance in the Scotch Commissioners, Refor. of Chapter Gov. in Scot.
by Com. page 10.
who taking notice of this Objection against the Presbyterial Government, That
'twas incompatible with Monarchy. Confess the Accusation, in not pleading to
it; or rather, reflect on the Institution, by what they afterward assert, That
it is complyable with every Lawful Kind of Humane Policy. Maliciously
suggesting, as if Monarchy was unlawful. You see, how the Floodgate being
opened, the Waters do prevail, and Strife increases.

What our Dissenting Brethren did at first with Modesty, or by Mistake,
scruple, is now improved past all the hopes of Composition. The Pen is
exchanged for the Sword; and a Combat of the Press, into a Battle of the Field.
There is one thing behind, which as long as it is indulged, will both perpetuate
our Difference, and amplify their Guilt: And that is,

5. Their Incredulity. They will believe no Evidence against their Affections:
let it be written with the Beams of the Sun, it is obscure and dark to their
Optics. These are Men, Gifted, either to deny the Truth, or extenuate the
Fact. A few Instances of fresh Memory, may give you Satisfaction. The Murder of
an Archbishop, must by no means be imputed to the Bandying of the Party. And an
Head of the Faction, though he may have the Spirit above Measure, cannot well
be supposed to have Strength enough to be his own Executioner. Innocent Men!
that cannot find Spots in their own Children, but admire their Blemishes for
Perfections, and their Moles for Beauties. Men of a strong Faith, that can
believe their Plots the Fiction of their Enemies, and our Thanksgivings an
Illusion upon Heaven.

Now, Persons of this Obstinacy, are irreclamable, and desperate, past the
ordinary Means of Recovery: what God may do, is not for us to resolve. But
methinks, they lie under a necessity of maintaining the Irresistency of Grace:
for that is all the Hopes they can have of Renovation.

My Brethren, you accuse the Papists for this very Crime. Thou therefore that
teach another, teach thou not thy self? Or, art not thou inexcusable, O
Man! whosoever thou art, that Judge; for wherein thou judge another, thou
condemnest thy self; for thou that Judge, do the same things, Romans 2.1. The
Papists disown the Tenets we allege against them, because they hear them not
delivered in their Sermons: and is not this your own Apology? Now, though we
give a Reason for this Silence, That they be Doctrines, which the Apostle's
Cannon is not to be applied to, for they may unadvisedly be preached out of
Season. Yet, are they not recorded in their Writings? 2 Timothy 4.2. And the Pen
leaves behind it, a more lasting Monument, and durable Character than that of
the Tongue. And to do all men Justice, The Papist has the more plausible
ground for Scruple; their Opinions being for the most expressed in a Foreign
Language; and the Liberty of the Press (as they pretend) denied unto their
Advocates. Whereas these ingross the Press with their Seditious Pamphlets, and
scatter the Poison in their Mother-Language. Not that I can excuse either of
them from the Pharisaical, Wilful, and Designed Calamity of those, Who having
Eyes, will not see; having Ears, will not hear; least, seeking, they should
find, be converted, and healed, Mat. 13.15.

And this Incredulity of Men, sided into Faction, is very much owing to the
Nature of Contention; Nubibus atris Condita nullum Fundere possunt Sydera
Lumen. Boet.
which darkens the Understanding, disturbs the Judgment, and infatuates the
Reason: though I dare not exclude the Immediate Hand of God; who, in a just
Judgment upon their Unchristian Divisions, may perhaps have given them over
unto a Reprohate Mind. Romans 1.28.

These are the Consequences of our Dissentions, which, are the more to be
lamented, in that othewise they seem to be Good Men; that have a Zeal of God,
though not according to Knowledge: Men that are kind to their Friends, and
charitable to their Brethren. To whom, I may duly apply that of my Ld.
Verulams, of another Sect, Tales cum sint, utinam et nostri essent.

And if this be the Condition of our Dissenting Brethren (which I leave to God,
and their own Conscience to determine, hoping they will be so just to their
Souls Interest, to ponder it thoroughly) if this be their Condition? I must
needs Query, If it be not time to lay aside Animosities, and leave off
Contention, because it has been already too long meddled with? Which is the
remaining Part of my Task. And to persuade them to it; I shall return by the
same Stages I advanced, and desire them to consider.

1. The Heinousness of those Sins, in which these small differences have
engaged them. Sins of no Lighter a Dye, then Massacres, and Murders,
Insurrections, and Rebellion. And what Sentence these must look for at the
General Assizes; allow them but the Benefit of their Clergy, and they may read,
though not escape thereby. Rebellion is a Sin, no place whatever will endure,
or connive at. Heaven cast down the Rebellious Angels into Chains of Darkness:
Paradise banished the Traitor Man, and keeps a Guard of Cherubins and a
Flaming-Sword against him. The very Earth admonished, opens her mouth to demand
Justice against Corah, and his accursed Accomplices. Nor dare Hell it self
pretend to Patronise an Insurrection, For if Satan be divided against Satan,
How should his Kingdom stand.

But this Sedition, which our Dissentions, at present, have fomented, has some
Peculiarities in it, that do aggravate the Guilt. For besides the Hypocrisy of
the Pretense, Religion; which, never meant to kill the Body, out of mercy to
the Soul; nor murder Gods Image, to advance his Glory.

It was carried on with Deliberation, they meet, advise, debate, consult; which
speaks their Fixedness and Resolution. Had it been perpetrated in an Heat of
Passion, the Excess would hove been some small (though sorry Apology) for so
base a Villainy. But their Design was to sin with Caution; they scorned to be
numbered amongst the lower Class, of unwary, inadvertent Sinners, but will
butcher Men deliberately, and in the Cool of their Blood. And is not this a
hopeless, irrecoverable Temper? An Instance of a seared, (more than tender)
Conscience. This is what those Divines make no mean Ingredient into the Sin
against the Holy Ghost. For we cannot but imagine the Ingenuity of the
Education, (which some glory in) could not but inform them what Rebellion was:
and the whole Party, who suppose the Scriptures to be plain, clear, and full,
unto the very Modes of Worship, cannot, surely misconstrue so Legible a Text,
They that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation, Romans 13.2.

It was also against Signal Favors and Personal Obligations: and Ingratitude
is an Inhumane Sin. The very Savages are obliged by Kindness, and the Lions of
the Forest too generous to be undmindful of Beneficence. Seneca.
Ingratum si dixeris, omnia dixeris. Shaftsbury, Lord Chanc. Essex, Ld. Lieut.
of Irel. Russel of the Pri. Coun. An hundred old Cap. Declar.
Yet many of these were Men that owed their Lives and Fortunes to his Majesty's
Clemency. And what a Barbarous Requital this? So Sirens charm the Ears that
lend them Audience: so Vipers eat the Womb that gives them Being.

But the Party will say, And what is all this to us? Are we responsible for
other Men's Excesses? Must we be chargable for their Extravagancy? God forbid,
that I should believe all the Faction privy (much less consenting) to such
horrid Villainy; although the Confederacy was very numerous. 2000 in London
Declaration.
Yet, my Brethren, it concerns you to enquire, how ye may become Partakers of
other Men's Sins. Had the Conspiracy taken Effect; which, (for ever praised be
the Name of God) it did not. To whom would you have adhered? They presumed upon
your Assistance. And may we not suspect, that Men of the same Communication,
without the Spirit of Prophesy, may have an Insight into each others Mind. We
see how Birds of a Feather flock. And whilst they observe you so eagerly to
imbibe their Principles, credit their Jealousies, pleased with their Libels, is
it possible that they should believe, that you would ever boggle, or desert
their Interest. No, the Remonstrance which they were preparing, is an
undeniable Argument of their Assurance. Would not you, (though exclaiming of
the Treason) have protected and strengthened the Regicides? Should we not have
heard some old Maxim assumed, to accomodate your Associacions? Fieri non debet,
factum valet.
And are not these Professions of Loyalty owing to such a Consideration, as to
that of the Rebellious Israelites on their bad Success: This Absalom whom we
Anointed over us, is dead in Battle; now therefore why speak ye not a word of
bringing back the King? 2 Samuel 19.10. I accuse no one, by their own Conscience
let them stand or fall. But to dismiss this.

As far as your Separation and Conventicles gave them Encouragement; as far as
the Hopes of your Aid (though we should favorably believe, they might have
been deceived in it) did animate and instigate them; so far must your Schism
bear the Guilt of their Presumption: and could you have the Impudence to wipe
your mouth? you cannot truly say, You have done no Wickedness. The most easy
Construction that can be fixed upon it, is, That in the Simplicity of your
Souls; and knowing nothing, you should have been ensnared into their Sedition,
2 Samuel 15.11. One would think, that the sad Effect of such specious Pretexts in
the late War, would make Men Jealous of the same Events. For what a multitude
was there, that would have laid down their Lives in exchange for his Majesty,
who being decoyed into the Cause, by that same Artifice, are not able to wash
their Hands, and say with Pilate, I am Innocent of the Blood of this Just
Person; See ye to it. Mat. 27.24.

The Cause which has inveigled you in so much Guilt, is small, about things of
little Moment, and mere Indifferency: and the Lightness of the Cause aggravates
the Blackness of the Sin. Moses enquires, Why do ye Wrong one to another,
seeing that ye are Brethren, Act. 7.26. The nearness of the Relation in his
Opinion, being sufficient to remove all the Grounds of Contention. What would
he have said, if it had not been a Matter of Wrong or Injustice, (...)
but Indifferency, that they quarrelled about? They certainly have little
Regard to the Peace of Christ's Church, that can disturb it on such small
Accounts.

I know indeed, they deny the Indifferency of these Things: but a common
Distinction would afford them Satisfaction, if they intended that, Viz. That in
their Nature they remain Indifferent, though not in the Use; for, being
enjoined, they become necessary unto Decency and Order.

The nature of Indifferency, Quod neque contra Fidem, neque contra bonos Mores
injungitur, Indifferenter est habendum.
St. Aug. his Rule will teach you, 'That which neither contradicts Faith nor
Morality, is a thing Indifferent. And according to this Measure, we dare stand
to your Verdict for the Indifferency of their Nature. But the necessity of the
Use, the same Father does impress from the Resolution of St. Ambrose, which he
Celebrated as the Response of an Oracle; Ad quamcunque Ecclesiam veneris, etc.
Very often in his Writings.
which is, To conform your selves unto the Rites and Customs of whatsoever
Church you come to, whilst they do not contradict the Rules of Faith and
Morality (i. e.) in things indifferent. And agreeable to this, is the
Derivation that some produce of the word Ceremony, Card. Bona. de reb. Lit.
from the Hebrew (...) to Anathematize or Excommunicate; as if we might infer,
the Nonconformity thereto, to be a Guilt sufficient to incur that Censure.

And that our Brethren may entertain more even thoughts, of these few, and easy
(as they call them) Impositions. I would entreat them to inspect.

1. The Necessity of admitting Ceremonies to the Worship of God.

There never yet' was that Religion in the World, that did appear without them,
Judaical, as well as Heathen, in what it was distinguished from the Natural,
was nothing else but a System of Ceremonies; although their Institution was
Divine. Whence St. August affirms positively, That there is no Religion whether
true or false, Aug. L. 19. cont. Faust. C. 11.
that can subsist without Ceremonies. And Vrsin as dogmatically (who being no
Episcopal Divine, I hope may have your Ear) That the Church may; Potest, ac
debet Ecclesia quasdam Ceremonias instituere. Vrs Cat. Q. 103. par. 3.
yes, and must institute some Ceremonies. And since men are taught by the Eye,
as well as the Ear; and the more lasting Impressions issue thence. I would
gladly understand, why we may not be edified by the Gestures of the Body, in
some measures as well, as by the Labor of the Lips. Or, why the Erection of my
Person, may not advise the Beholders of the Elevation of the Mind, as much as
if the Deacon did admonish them with his Sursum Corda.

Happy is the Man that condemns not himself in the Things that he allows,
Romans 14.22. For pray tell me, What are these Ecclesiastical Ordinances passed
and ordained by the Small and Great Councils of the the City of Geneva, Laws of
Geneva.
which the Ministers thereof promise, and swear to keep? Had they, for
Ordinances, substituted Injunctions, or Cannons, which is all the same; the
Church of England will be no more chargable with Impositions (unless the
difference of words make the Grievance) than other Societies Ecclesiastical.
Why then such Exclamations against her, when these are passed by in Silence?
Or, how comes She to be more Prelatically than others, Presbyterially
Tyrannical.

2. Examine the Reason why these Ceremonies were retained. Which, (after
communicating therein with the Primitive Church) was a Motion of Charity, a
Design thereby, to win upon the Papists: to give as little Scandal and Offense
as possible. To convince them, that it was not Humor and Caprich, but
Religion; not the Love of Innovation, but the Necessity of a Reformation, that
made us withdraw: that it was not such small Things as Ceremonies that we
differed about (of which, this was an Evidence, that we enjoined some) but
Matters of Faith, and Articles of Salvation. We therefore are not ashamed to
own what some, with more Malice than Judgment, do retort, That our Liturgy is
composed out of the Breviary and Missal. Is it Disparagement to Gold, that it
was mixed with Lumber in the Oar? Is it Infamy unto Moses's Seat, that Scribes
and Pharisees did fill it? Mat. 23.2. No, by this we satisfy the World, that
we emov'd no further from the Western Patriarch, than he had wandered from his
Predecessors and the Truth. And hereby the Church of England (and she alone)
gained such an Ascendant on the Papacy, as they never can be able to remove;
who by communicating with us for several Years, In Q. Eliz. Reign.
plainly did confess the Necessity of a Reformation; and as highly commend the
Prudence of our Moderation.

And I wish that our Dissenting Brethren, would calmly remember, that the
Papists were the only Faction, that at first were to be invited into our
Communion. The Name of Puritan (unless amongst those of the Novatian Schism,
the (...) which is no great Credit to the ambitious Title) was not so much as
heard of, till Aftertimes, when Men had crossed the Seas, and gone a Pilgimage
unto Geneva, Hooper and Cartwright, etc. Heyl. Hist. Ref. Edw. 6.
they returned infected with that Leaven, and set up for Gospellers, and
afterward Puritans.

What can be more charitable in this Case, than to recede no further than was
necessary? That we might assure them, that our Proceedings were for the Honor
of God, more than the Pleasure of Man. Reformation has only Reference unto
Error: so that what may be retained without Error, cannot well be rejected
without Censure. On which ground 'twas thought convenient, in Q. Elizabeth's
Reign, to omit that Declaration in the Rubric, Common Prayer.
concerning Kneeling at the Sacrament; that no Adoration was intended to it;
(which both before and since, has been inserted) and you have heard how
successful it was. And the want of this Moderation, was no mean Obstacle to the
Reformation in our Neighboring Kingdoms. I know Calvin does inveigh against
it, Mediis Conciliis vel autorem esse vel approbatorem. Calv. Ep. ad Prot.
and reproacheth it as an old Fault in Bucer. But though he might deserve the
Title of, Judicious, Bernardus non videt omnia. And it had been a happy
Composition, if we could have won the Papists to have Reformed the Doctrines of
Faith, upon the Terms of admitting more Circumstantials of Worship; which the
Lutherans Adopt, and some Divines of Note were willing to comply with, in the
Business of the Interim, which pressed a Restitution of the old Popish
Ceremonies; whose Judgment was this, (which I entreat our Brethren to ruminate,
for it deserves to be written in Letters of Gold) That it is Lawful, yea,
Necessary, Hist. Conc. Trent. l. 3. an. 1548.
to tolerate some Servitude in the Worship of God, when no Impiety is joined
with it. And amongst their number, I find the Learned Melancthon, Dr. Burnet H.
Ref. l. 2. an. 1648.
recorded by the Author of the late History of the Reformation; whose Solid
Judgment this does seem to relish.

This is the Reason of our retaining these Ceremonies: and since the Conversion
of the Papist, is as much, or more to be desired (their Errors being greater,
and their Guilt the deeper) deeper than the Dissenting Protestants, that we
ought to have an Eye as tender unto them, in the maintaining, as to the others
in the abrogating of these Ceremonies. I dare with Confidence averr, our
Adversaries themselves being Judges; it is a Maxim delivered by their Leaders;
That in things of this nature, Ref. of Chapter Gov. in Scot. p. 5.6.
when the Change is not to the better, it is both without, and against Reason,
to make a Change. And I appeal to any sober, moderate Dissenter, if admitting a
Change in these Things Indifferent, we could have so solid and plausible an
Argument to prevail upon the Romanist.

3. Let us entreat you to enquire, by whom the Differences, that you so
vigorously maintain, began: and when you see the Truth, we hope you may abate
of the Heat.

Extemporary Prayer, which you attribute to the Spirit, Fox's and Forebr. Dr.
Stillingf. Ep. to Hist. Sep.
was a Device invented by a Wolf, that had got on Sheep's Cloa^hing, and
practiced by a Romish Priest in Presbyterian Weeds.

Kneeling at the Eucharist, was traduced by John a Lasco, from the Polonian
Arrians, who robbing Christ of his Divinity, and believing him no more than
Man, Heyl. Hist. Ref. Edw. 6.
to express the Coequality of their Natures, presumed to sit with him at his
Table.

The Identity of the Orders of Episcopacy, and Presbytery, is a Novel of the
School-Divines; who supposing it the highest Ministerial Office (as if true, it
must needs be) to make Christ a Body out of Bread; Conficere corpus Domini.
unite the Priest and Bishop in one Order, whence both the Papist and
Presbyterian derive it. Conc. Trent.


The Exclusion of the People, from bearing Part in the Worship of God, by their
Suffrages and Voices, Scrivener, Course of Divinity.
is an Injury which has, prevailed ever since the Prayers were in an unknown
Tongue; and for want of a Liturgy, is by them unreformed.

Sponsers in Baptism, and what is subsequent thereto, the Benefit of
Confirmation comes to be neglected, after the Example of the Anabaptist. And
Divines Presbytertal, as well as Prelatical, commend, though they do not
practice it.

This is the true Rise, and just Account of the things you scruple.
Anabaptists, Arrians, and Papists, were the men that broached them: and you,
not barely Symbolize, but Communicate with them in Stickling for these. I dare
not, as I ought, animadvert upon the looseness of these Contracted Scruples, for
fear I should exasperate your too Fiery Zeal. But in Charity, I must commend
them to your Christian Consideration.

Thus, I have touched the Wounds of our Friends, with as soft an hand, as the
Affections, that I bear their Persons; or the Obligations, I have received from
the Party, can in Justice expect from me.

To conclude, You see how little Christianity there is in the Methods you
contrive for to foment the Difference. You must be answerable for those
Heart-Burnings, and Uncharitable Jealousies that you have of us: Those
Scurrilous Libels in which you do abuse us: and those Seditious Practices
whereby you have unsettled us. If you can believe such men as these to belong
unto Christ's Flock, you have a Strange Faith. Or if you do not see, these
things to be the Profession of such men, you have a bad Eyesight, Gal. 5.20.
Hatred, Variance, Wrath, Strife, Sedition, Heresies are catalogu'd with those
Works of the Flesh, that do Exclude us from the Kingdom of God. And though you
may retort, that Adultery, Fornication, Vncleaness, Drunkenness, Revellings
(which I know not, by what kind of Propriety, are charged upon us, as the
Church of England's Peculiars; when, Alas, they are too common to both Parties)
ly under the same Condemnation. I believe your own Conscience may be our
Compurgatrix, that such things pass neither unreproved, nor unlamented. Or if
those, who value themselves, as the more Sober Party, would be pleased by
joining our Communion to discourage them by their Example. We would call upon
them to rejoice at your Conversion, and not stick to propose you for their
Imitation.

Consider the Levity of these things that you dispute, together with the
necessity of injoyning some Ceremonies, and the Charity of retaining these.
Inquire into the Original, and Growth of your Scruples; whence they came, and
whither it is they tend, and as Abraham entreated Lot, Let there be no
Difference, I pray thee, betwixt me and thee, for we be Brethren, Genesis 13.8. I
know that you will offer an Accommodation, That both the Parties may move
until they meet. But Alas! my Brethren we are under the Law, and will you
tempt us to disobey? or because you live without Law, will you invite us to
transgress? This is such a Strain of Impiety, as none but he that is (...), the
Tempter Exegetically, by your Officiousness would seduce us to. And he that
has any Light of Conscience, with Indignation must reject the Suggestion, as
Christ did St. Peter's, Get thee behind me Siatan, for thou savourest not the
things that be of God, but the things that be of men. Matt. 16.23. Nor is this
an Expedient, if it were Practicable: for there may be a Schism in a Church, as
well as from a Church. And should we admit them, we might be justly censured,
as Betrayers of the Unity of that little Flock, that Christ has yet
miraculously preserved amongst us: for whilst one should cry, I am of Paul, and
another I am of Apollos, 1 Cor. 3.4. in the Close, we all might come deservedly
to be reproved, as Carnal. But to satisfy our Brethren the Experiment has been
made, Heyl. 'Hist. Ref. Edw. 6.
that Party has been benefited, and promoted in the Church: but were sound so
Turbulent, that Authority was constrained to Silence, and remove them.

In Brief, Ponder the many wonderful Interpositions of the Almighty God, in the
behalf of this distressed Church and People. How often have the snares been
broken, and we de^vered, Psalm. 124.7. How has the Lord turned again the
Cap^vity of Sion, that our Enemies Confession, The Lord has ^one great things
for them, has put into our mouths the Anti^hon, Yea the Lord has donede great
things for us, whereof we ^ejoyce. Psalm. 126.2, 3. Providence is a Book, and
though the Characters be so mistical, that none but God can teach ^s how to
read them; the Language often such, that we must go to Heaven for to learn it.
Yet where the Providence quadrates with the Promise, we may conclude, The lord
has spoken, and he has fulfilled it. And when I re^ect on the Purity of our
Doctrines, the Loyalty and ^eaceableness of our Principles, I am ready to
infer, 'He has not beheld Iniquity in our Church, neither has he seen
Perverseness in our State: the Lord our God is with us, and the Shout of a King
is amongst us. Surely, there ^s no Enchantment against the Church; neither is
there any Divination against the State, According to this time, ^t shall be
said of Church and State, What has God wrought? ^umb. 23. v. 21, 23.

And let us pray God, that under the Shadow of his ^ings, we may still continue
a Monument of that Pro^ise which he has made unto his Church, That the Gates
(...) Hell shall not prevail against Her, Mat. 16.18.

FINIS.

