A Loving Exhortation, TO All Kings, Princes, Potentates, Bishops and People in
the whole CHRISTENDOM.

Wherein is a Distinction betwixt the TRUE and FALSE TEACHERS.

To be Read over in Meekness and the Fear of the Lord.

Written by Thomas Tailor.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1666.

A Loving Exhortation, TO All Kings, Princes, Potentates, Bishops and People in
the whole Christendom, etc.
O Ye Kings, Princes, Potentates, and Rulers of the Earth, we desire not your
Thrones, Honors, Places or Dignities, neither do we envy you for them: for we
have enough in God our Reconciled Father, who has made us Kings and Priests to
himself by Jesus Christ, spiritually to reign over the evil in the World, and
to offer up our selves in righteousness to his Glory; and this is our Crown,
and that which we strive after in a pure Conscience; for we are not of those
that fight with flesh and blood, and with carnal weapons, for an earthly Crown,
but such as in the strength of Almighty God are taught with spiritual weapons
to war only against that Mystery of Iniquity and Power of darkness that
captivates the precious Soul of Man, and keeps it short of the Glory of God;
desiring from the truth of our hearts, that neither the Soul nor Body of any
may perish, but that this Wicked one, which is the Enemy of both, may be
destroyed out of the Earth, in this day of Christ, by the Spirit of his mouth
and brightness of his appearing; that so the whole Creation of God may be
delivered from Bondage, to stand in its holy Order, to the glory of the
Creator, as in the beginning; that so he may take delight in the Children of
Men, and make his abode with them, as at that time, when the Morning Stars sung
for joy, and all was full of beauty and sweetness, and no Death in them.

And O ye Bishops and high Teachers of the World, we desire not your Seats,
neither do we envy you for your great Promotions, but do desire that you may
know with us, the true Shepherd and Bishop of the Soul, Christ Jesus, the good
and true Shepherd and Bishop, who gave himself for the Sheep, that he might
Redeem them from all Iniquity, and deliver their Souls from the hands of all
Oppression, to serve him in his own free Spirit, where none can come to make
afraid. And as this Savior you come to know and receive, your knowledge of Men
and things according to the flesh will cease, and the Love of the World, and
the Worlds things will die in you, and a Love to the Seed that breaths after
Righteousness will arise in you, and you will know what God requires of you,
and how you may do that which will commend you to God in the great day of his
Judgment, which is nigh at hand, and apply your hearts thereto.

Therefore awake, awake, arise, arise, for the great day of the Lord is indeed
nigh at hand, yea the Sun is already arisen, and his bright glory shines upon
the Sons of the Morning, and the true searching Light from which nothing can be
hid, is felt and known in the Earth, and before it the workers of iniquity are
as Chasse, and before it can no mortal man stand in Judgment, though he glister
never so much in outward glory in the Worlds eye; for in the presence of this
Light, the Judgment proceeds not according to person or worldly appearance,
but according to Truth, Equity and Righteousness; and so every Evil-doer hates
this Light because his deeds are evil, and the Light reproves him to his Face,
and in his Heart, without respect to his Person: And therefore none but they
whose deeds are wrought in God, can willingly come to this Light with their
deeds, or endure that this Light should pass Judgment on them; for its the
Righteous only that has praise in the presence of this pure God, the Light who
lights every man that comes into the World; and is come a Light in the
World, that all through him might believe, and come out of Darkness, and the
deeds thereof, and be saved.

So if any of you perish, it is in your love of Darkness, and your destruction
is of your selves, for God would have you to be saved, and to that purpose
holds forth his Love in his Light to your Consciences daily, that you might be
warned and not perish: And if this Gospel of his Love and Grace, the Light, be
hid from you, it is because the God of this World, with his deceitful
Allurements; has blinded your eye. Mark, The God of this World, has blinded
your minds* that Old Serpent who is called the Devil and Satan, and Prince of
the power of the Aix, which works in the hearts of all disobedient ones, has
captivated your Understanding, if this Gospel of Light you perceive not to Love
and Obey it. And consider how the power of Darkness deceives man; it begins
with him betimes, and works subtly with him in his mind when he is tender and
young, carrying him forth eagerly after Childish Vanities, and youthful Lusts,
if by the Light, that secretly checks for these things, he be not resisted. The
World tells the Youth that by going forth into some form of Religion, and
conforming to that, is Gods way by which man may be helped against his sin; but
God, the Truth says, I have laid help upon One that is mighty, Christ Jesus
the Light, who is to be known in man, a present help against sin. And, by what
means, says David, may a young man cleanse his way, save only by taking heed
according to the Word of God. And, the Word is nigh, in the heart, says Paul,
discerning the thoughts and intents thereof. And, the Light shines in
darkness, says John, (in man) yea, in every man that comes into the World,
making all things in secret, manifest; and who can hide their deeds from it? So
if the young men come not to this Light, then they abide in darkness, and grow
up in darkness, and covering themselves, but not with the Spirit of God, so
long, until there be no remedy, but the woe and the curse must needs come upon
them. But he that follows me, says Christ, (the Light) shall not abide in
darkness, sin nor evil, but shall have the Light of Life, and shall not come
into condemnation.

So, He that has an ear, let him hear, and mind the Light of Christ in you,
that lets you see all that ever you have done, and sets before you your sins in
order, and brings Judgment and Condemnation upon your Souls for them: And love
the Light and its righteous Judgments, for Zion must be redeemed through
Judgment; and bring all your deeds, words and thoughts, to this Light of
Christ, and hide not any thing from it; for he that hides his sins, from the
Lord, shall not prosper. But he that in this true Light sees his sin, and
forsakes the sin, and turns to God in his Light, and abides therein, ^h^ll be
blessed. But woe is the portion of such as turn not to him that smites them, but
instead of owning the pricks and reproofs of Wisdom, kick against them. These
are the ungodly, whose Sacrifice the Lord could never accept; but they abiding
in their sins, all their Prayers and performances were still returned upon
them, from the pure God, as dung upon their faces. Therefore, go not forth,
says Christ, for the Kingdom of Heaven (which he compared to many little
things) is within you: And when they shall say, Lo here, lo there, says
Christ, go not after them: for those that draw People from the Light and Spirit
of Christ (that holy anointing within) in man, were always Antichrists. And
in John the Apostles time, many of these were come; and, they went out from us,
says the same John (the beloved Disciple of Jesus.) From us, understand such
as were in the Anointing of God, which taught all things, and they needed not
that any man should teach them, abiding in the Anointing, wherewith their souls
and spirits, of God were anointed; for that was true, perfect, and sufficient
to lead them into all truth, according to the Promise; it was in them a
Spiritual Unction, a free Gift from the holy One in Christ, the promised Seed,
with whom through Faith (the right holy Faith) they were become one Spirit, and
so became Heirs of the Promise, and true Witnesses of the New and Everlasting
Covenant, which says, And they shall all be taught of God. These are not
outwardly anointed, as those under the Law (the Figure) were, but these were
and are spiritually anointed of God himself, in Christ, and so were and are
true Heirs of the Gospel (the substance) and true Children of the day, walking
in that heavenly and eternal Light, wherein they could and do in truth say, Our
fellowship is with the Father and the Son. So here in this holy Body there was
no Antichrists; but those that went out from these into the Worlds Ways,
Worships, Customs, Traditions and Inventions, these were Antichrists: and now
being gone forth from the Lord and his Spirits Teaching, they become one with
the World, using their Tongues to talk of the things of God in the worlds
spirit, without God: and so they being of the World (says John) therefore the
World hears them, 1 John 4.5. But he that is of God (says the same John)
hears us, even us that abide in the holy Anointing of God in us. And my Sheep
hear my voice, says Christ, and follow me, but a stranger they will not
follow. So there are two Spirits, the Spirit of Christ, and the spirit of the
evil World: and two sorts of Teachers accordingly; the one hears the voice of
God in Christ, and in the strength of this Spirit, goes forth with the Word of
God, and Gospel of Truth in their heart and mouth, in obedience to God, and
pure love to the Soul of man, and not for filthy lucre, nor any worldly end
whatsoever; and these the true Seed, Gods Little Ones, Lambs and Sheep hear,
love and are one with, merely for the Truths sake, which is one, and endures
for ever.

But now contrariwise, the other sort of Teachers, who are rightly called
Strangers, because they are strangers to the Life of God, and holy motion of
his Spirit; they go forth in their own Wills, according to the motion of their
own earthly spirits, without God, for self ends, in the allowance of the
earthly Power, Name, and Authority; not to build up the Body of Christ, or to
minister to his Seed in any, for to that they are Strangers, but to commend
themselves to fallen man's wisdom for self-advantage, and to gather People into
several Forms and outside Professions and Observations, where all sorts of
Sinners are taught to say, Lord, Lord, but never a one to do the will of God
perfectly from the heart; and so they build up Babel, the City of Confusion,
where there is like Priest, like People, the Teachers living in sin, and the
People that follow them living in their sins, always learning, never learned
to worship God aright: For the Teacher being blind through his ignorance of God
and Christ, he must needs lead them that follow him from God, into the ditch.
And of this sort were they in Christ's time, that loved to be called of men,
Master; fair sayers, but evil doers, who loved the praise of men and their
greetings in the Markets, and the chief and high places in their Feasts and
Synagogues; and loving, for this end, to go in long Robes and costly Apparel,
outwardly appearing beautiful to the Worlds eye, but inwardly full of Pride,
Covetousness, uncleanness, the Spirit of Persecution, and all manner of
Unrighteousness, as one may read in the 23 Chap. of Matthew. and other places of
Scripture, where Christ had to do with the false spirited Rabbis in his day,
whom he compares to Graves, painted Tombs, Serpents and Vipers, who shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven against men, and neither entered in themselves nor suffered
others, but did what they could to hinder those that were entering. And of such
Christ gave his Disciples warning to take heed in time to come, and told them,
though such Wolves should get the Sheeps clothing on them (to wit, the good
words, or so) yet they should not trust them, but should know them by their
fruits. And so the Tree that is by nature a Thorn and a Thistle, has
manifested its fruit: and by their fruit the Children of Light now know them,
and according to Christ's will, avoid them. And of this sort are they that not
only in the days of Christ withstood him, but even the same that in all ages
withstood his Spirit and Work, as at this day. For with such earthly spirited
Teachers it was that the Prophet Jeremiahs heart was so broken in his day, as
one may read all along the 23. Chap. of his Prophecy, and of whom in his fifth
Chapter he so grievously complains, saying, A wonderful and horrible thing is
committed in the Land: The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule
by their means, and the People love to have it so. And therefore destruction
from the Lord came upon them all. And these Teachers said still in their lying
earthly spirit, that Jerusalem (though sinful) should have peace, and that no
evil should come upon them People, though they walked every man after the
imagination of his own evil heart, Jer. 23.17. And of this sort were they that
the Lord sent his Prophet Micah to cry against, saying; Thus says the Lord
concerning the Prophets that make my People to err; that bite with their
teeth, and cry peace; and he that puts not into their mouths, they even
prepare war against him: Therefore night and darkness came upon them, and the
Vision ceased from them in the just judgment of God. For a self-end was in all
their work, and the dead fly of covetousness corrupted all: as one may read at
large in the third Chapter of his Prophecy, Verse 5, etc. And of this sort are
they that Isaiah, the Prophet of God, in his time so grievously complains of
also, as one may read in the 56. Chapter of his Prophecy, saying, Verse. 9,
etc. All ye beasts of the field, come to devour; yea, all ye beasts of the
forest: his Watchmen are blind, greedy, etc. all looking for their own way,
every one for his gain from his quarter, etc. And against this sort of
earthly-spirited Teachers it was that God sent his Prophet Ezekiel to cry woe
against, saying, Woe to the Shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves; should
not the Shepherds feed the flock? Ye eat the fat, and ye cloth you with the
wool, ye kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the flocks. And so the God of
this World through pride and covetousness had so blinded their eye, and
corrupted their hearts, that they had neither will nor skill to help nor heal
the poor diseased, sick, broken, scattered souls of their hearers; and
therefore the Lord was glad to put them aside as Physicians of no value, and
became the Teacher of his People himself; as one may read in the 34. Chapter of
his Prophecy, throughout. Glory to the Lord who has fulfilled his Promise to
his Israel this day; and is become the Teacher of his People himself, whereby
they come to be truly profited, as it is written, I the Lord thy God teach
thee, O Israel, to profit. But the forementioned Teachers, who have run in
their Wills, for self ends, and the Lord never sent them, could never profit
People at all: and as Christ Jesus the Lord, and his true Prophets, in former
times were troubled and opposed by such hirelings; So also the true Apostles of
Christ did not escape the trials and oppositions of that deceitful spirit by
which they were acted. For such, says Paul, are false Apostles, deceitful
Workers, Satan's Ministers, transforming themselves into the likeness of the
Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor. 11. Some of these were already come in his day: And
I know, says he, that after my departure grievous wolves shall come in among
you, not sparing the flock: also, of your own selves shall men arise, speaking
perverse things to draw away disciples after them, Acts 20.29, etc. And as the
Kingdom of Antichrist grew, these perverse things were established for Doctrine
by a Law: For the very Name of Antichrist holds forth a spirit opposing it self
to every appearance of Christ, and of his holy Spirit and Anointing in man.

The true Apostles and Ministers of Christ drew the soul from men and self,
unto Christ, and his Anointing in them, to know that to teach them: but these,
and all other false teachers, draw from Christ and his Anointing within, to
look at Flesh and Form without, which perfects not at all to God. And of this
sort also are they, says the same Paul, which creep into houses (understand
the great stone houses, called Churches, as well as others) and lead captive
silly Women, laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts; ever learning, and
never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth, 2 Timothy 3. Of this sort, says
Paul, as shall come in the last perilous times, even Lovers of their own
selves, Covetous, Boasters, Proud, Blasphemers, Unholy, (who say they are
Christians, but are not so in truth) Fierce, etc. having the Form of Godliness,
but denying the Power thereof; and these he exhorted true Believers to turn
from; and so in obedience to God, those now who are come to know Christ and his
anointing in them, to teach them, are turned from such. And though these
Deceivers have proceeded for a time, to wit, during the late night of Apostasy,
which Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. spoke of, to deceive many; Yet now that the Light is
risen again from under the earth, they are manifest, and can proceed no
further. Let none therefore now be so void of understanding, as to brand the
true Messengers of Jesus Christ in this day, with the name of Deceivers,
Because they declare truth, not only publicly, but also from house to house,
by virtue of the holy Spirit only; for so did the Apostles themselves, and yet
were no creepers into houses; for creeping into houses denotes the work of the
children of darkness, who run without the Lord Jesus Christ, his Spirit, or
Authority, in their own wills, for self ends, as before: leading about People
in their silliness and sinfulness all their days, as by woeful experience, in
the late Ages of the World, since the Apostles days, has been fully manifest;
wherein the World has wondered after the Beast. And as there were false
Prophets among the People, says Peter, even so also shall there be false
teachers among you; who shall privily bring in damnable Heresies, etc. 2 Pet.
2. But how may these be known, may some say; By their fruits, says Christ, ye
shall know them. And of this sort are they, says Peter, in the same Chapter,
who through covetousness, with fained words, make merchandise of People; and by
walking after the flesh, in the lust of covetousness and uncleanness, and
despite of Christ's Government, even deny the Lord that bought them. These are
the presumptuous ones indeed, who count it pleasure to riot in the day time,
speaking evil of the worthy things that God works and makes manifest in his
Children, which these presumptuous ones know not. And these false Teachers are
of those whose eyes are full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin: for
how should they, seeing their heart is exercised with covetous practices,
loving the wages of unrighteousness, like Balaam, as he (to wit, the Apostle
Peter) there speaks. And therefore, those that see not these are blind indeed;
and those that these Teachers can deceive, may well be said to be without a
foundation: and hence it has comes to pass that through such Teachers
wickedness and Peoples ignorance, the World has been as a Wilderness. And now
therefore is the the Lord, according to his blessed Promise, bringing up that
knowledge of himself and his Christ again, that shall make the Wilderness a
fruitful Field, and sweet smelling Garden for himself to be glorified in. And
this knowledge of God shall cover the Earth as the Waters do the Sea. And,
thereby shall all hurting and destroying be done away from amongst men, Isa.
65. last; as is this day witnessed amongst such where this knowledge of God
has place. Glory to his Name for ever. So now therefore all ye Kings, Princes,
Potentates and Rulers of the Earth, see in what Principle you stand, and upon
what Foundation you grow, and whose work you are a doing; whether Gods or your
own. True Magistrates are not a terror to the good, but to the evil But how
can ye see the good and the evil truly asunder, or know what to punish, and
what to protect, if you come not to the Light, Christ Jesus, that true Light
which lights every man that comes in to the world (as was said before) to
take counsel at him, for he is the wonderful Counselor; and whatsoever makes
things truly manifest is his Light, and with it every hard thing is known, and
every secret thing found out, but without it nothing; but all People that walk
in the darkness of their own understandings, do err in Vision and stumble in
Judgment, and so know not what they do nor whither they go: and this way that
seems good in the man's own eye, is that which always tended to death, and
disordered all things. And by such a judgment Barralas was released, and the
innocent Jesus delivered to be crucified; and by this the false Prophets in all
ages were protected and born up, and the dear Servants of Christ cast out as a
thing of naught.

So arise, arise, awake, awake to righteousness and sin not, for the Lord is on
his way to give unto every Nation, and each People therein, Rewards according
to their Works, without respect of persons. And until Gods righteousness rule
in all, and over all, how can any thing stand, let that of God in all
Consciences judge; So lay things to heart, for this is the day of your
visitation. Also, you Bishops and high Teachers, who are pleased in your minds
because accepted of man; consider, Are you accepted of God? Is your Sacrifice
so pure, and your Persons so innocent, that the holy God can receive them? Is
your Doctrine so sound, and Life incorrupt that none can justly blame it? Have
your Hands handled the Word of Life which you speak of to others? And do you
know in your selves what that living sharp and powerful Word of God is (which
the Apostle, Heb. 4. speaks of) which divides betwixt joint and marrow, soul
and spirit, and discerns all the thoughts and intents of every heart? And are
your hearts cleansed by it? And do you preach and minister this internal,
living, and eternal Truth (the Word) to the People, or the dead Letter only?
See how it is: For the Fruit now must be the real witness of every Trees
nature. Have you received the free gift from above? Then sell it not for money.
Would you be accounted Ministers and Ambassadors of Christ, and would you have
the Children of Light to own you? Then approve your selves to them as Paul did
to the Brethren in his days, 2 Cor. 6.3, etc. In much Patience, in
Afflictions, in Necessities, in Distresses, in Stripes, in Imprisonments; as
dying, yet alive in the hearts of the Hearers by the power of Truth, etc. And
let all People see that you mind the good of the Soul, and Gods glory, more
than the World, and your own self-ease and advantage: For the Day is dawned
that makes all things manifest. And lay by your carnal Weapons, and make proof
of your spiritual Weapons (if you have any) and try a little, how you can
persuade men to be of your mind by that means: for People begin to question
much the forcing of men into Religion by the carnal Sword and outward
Constraint, whether it be of God or no. For its found by experience, that into
what People are forced by the outward Power, by the same means may they be
forced out of that again, and so remain restless and without a foundation,
until the Truth it self settle them. So set not up your rest in the Wilderness,
much less in Egypt, but look toward the holy Land, the undefiled, unmovable
Foundation, and suffer others to do so too. And those that have spied out the
good Land, hinder them not from entering in, but help them on in their journey,
if you can, lest you be found fighters against God. For now is the effect of
every Vision coming in; and a feeble one in this blessed Jerusalem, that is
descended, and daily coming down from God out of Heaven, is as David, and David
as the Angel of God before them, Zach. 12.8. he that runs may now read it his
eye be open. And blessed are all that have believed in Gods holy Name; these
will not be troubled at Zions Prosperity, but will set to their Seal that God
is true, and praise the Lord with us, the Children of the Womb of the Eternal
Morning, Praised be God. So be it.

And all know a separation in your selves betwixt the precious and the vile,
and the vile brought under, and the precious bearing rule there, and then will
you be in some measure able to discern and judge aright of things abroad, but
not until then. The carnal man seeks to gather a great heap into a Form, but
the Spiritual man whose eye is in his head, he seeks to bring People out of the
evil of the world into the good of Gods Kingdom and power of Godliness. Blessed
are they that can lay down all their own at the feet of Jesus Christ, that they
maybe what they are in him; for the World and the Glory of it, and the Lovers
of it, is as a fading Flower, but he only that does the Will of God abides for
ever.

Given forth in the Movings of the Spirit of the Lord God, in his Servant, who
is a Sufferer amongst his Reproached Ones (called Quakers) for the Testimony of
his Everlasting Truth, praised and blessed be God for ever, who has counted us
worthy thereunto. T. Tailor.
THE END.

