A SERMON Preached in the Parish Church of Burcester in the County of Oxford,
ON THE Second Day of December, 1697. Being the Day appointed for A THANKSGIVING
To Almighty God, For His Majesty's Safe Return, and for the Happy and
Honorable PEACE, of which God has made Him the Glorious Instrument. By THOMAS
TAILOR, M. A.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren for Thomas Bennet at the Half Moon in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1697.

Prove. XXI. 30, 31. There is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against
the Lord.

The Horse is prepared against the day of Battle, but safety is of the Lord.


IN these words the Wise Man gives a brief, but true, and complete account, of
the weakness and insufficiency of all humane endeavors, when employed against
the purposes of Divine Providence, or destitute of the Interest, and Assistance
of Heaven. He declares that the best laid Projects, and Contrivances, the
deepest reaches of the Wisest Politicians, when directed against the Tendencies
of the Divine Will, are vain and insignificant; that they come to nothing:
There is no such thing as Wisdom, or Understanding, or Counsel against the
Lord. And as the Wisdom of Man is in this case no better than Folly, and
Madness; so is his Power the contemptible Effort of Impotence and Presumption.
The Horse is prepared against the day of Battle; but safety is of the Lord.
Those numerous Forces and hostile Preparations, which Men conside in as their
utmost security, unless blessed and reinforced with Power from on High, are
ineffectual to Victory, or Safety.

There is no King saved by the Multitude of an Host; Psalm. 33. 16, 17.
A mighty Man is not delivered by much Strength; An Horse is a vain thing for
safety; neither shall he deliver any by his great Strength; says the Royal
Psalmist, who had frequently experienced Worldly strength, and confidence, to
be an unequal match for the God of Hosts, the mighty God of Israel. The sum and
meaning therefore of the words amounts to this; That there is a superintendant
Providence, which overrules the Counsels and Powers of Men, as shall be most
suitable and serviceable to the Divine Counsels in the Government of the World;
which either succors and incourages, or suspends and retards, or baffles and
disappoints natural causes, so as to determine the issues of War and Peace, and
of all humane Force and Policy, according to this supreme Agency and Direction.
That the World is subject to the Presidency, and conduct of such a Providence
as this, must be acknowledged by all, who profess to believe the existence of a
God. For the very notion of a Providence is inseparably involved in the Idea of
an infinitely Wise, Powerful, and Beneficent Being; nothing seeming more
absurd, than that He who is All-wise should not know how, He that is Almighty
should not be able, and He that is transcendantly Good should not be willing to
take care of his own Creation. And therefore Epicurus was deservedly charged
with Hypocrisy and Collusion, and looked upon by the rest of the Philosophers
as a disguised Atheist, who in words professed a Deity, but in reality and
effect, disowned Him, when he denied he had any interest in the Government of
the World. A Man need but open his Eyes and contemplate those common changes,
and vicissitudes of things, which daily happen round about him, to be fully
convinced of this truth, that the Lord is King, and that he rules unto the ends
of the Earth. That I may not therefore take up your Time and Thoughts with an
unnecessary proof of a Providence, which all Religions in the World suppose,
and which the Christian has plainly employed, or demonstrated in every page of
the Gospel: I rather choose to lead your Minds at present to an attentive
Reflection on the various methods of its dispensations, which is no less useful,
yet a more uncommon and difficult consideration. For though the directive hand
of a supernatural Providence be so very visible and palpable in its effects, it
seems quite otherwise in the manner of its Operation. We often feel, and enjoy
the Influence of the Divine Government, whilst we are insensible by what kind
of Ministration it is conveyed to us. The Counsels of God are for the most part
Mysterious and Impenetrable: He makes Darkness his secret Place, Psalm. 18. 11.
his Pavilion round about him: says holy David. He does great things, and
unsearchable, mavelous things without number: says Job, Job 5. 9.
speaking of his providential administration. It Is indeed impossible to trace
the footsteps of the Almighty, in his whole management of humane affairs; but
yet those many Characters and Impresses of his Hand, which are legible in the
wonderful events of things, are sufficient to justify such an humble enquiry
into the manner of his procedure, as may serve to remove all profane
objections against his Providence, and to encourage our Faith, Hope, and
Confidence in Him. Wherefore, my present business shall be to consider,

First, Some of those ways, and methods which God makes use of to govern, or
overruled the Counsels and endeavors of Men, so as to accomplish his own wise
purposes thereby.

Secondly, The reason and intention of his interposing his Providence in the
Government of Humane Affairs and Actions.

Thirdly, I shall apply these considerations to that particular Providence and
Mercy of God which is the occasion of this present solemnity: by which it will
at last evidently appear; that There is neither Wisdom, nor Understanding, nor
Counsel against the Lord; that though the Horse be prepared against the day of
Battle, yet safety is of the Lord.

First, Then to consider some of those Methods, which God makes use of, to
govern, or overruled the Counsels, and endeavors of Men, so as to accomplish
his own wise purposes thereby.

If God governed the World at present as he did heretofore the Nation of the
Jews, by a visible Authority, and vouchsafed it such repeated Prophecies, and
evident Miracles, and manifestations of his Power, in his Mercies, and
Judgments to Mankind; the manner of his Providence might be easier accounted
for, in those great turns of affairs, he bring^ about in the Kingdoms of the
Earth. For that People were generally so miraculously Blessed, or Afflicted,
that they could no more doubt of the Manner, than they could question the truth
of the Deliverance, or Punishment it self which they actually enjoyed, or
suffered. If an Israelite were asked, how he escaped the Host of Pharaoh, and
how he was sustained in a barren Wilderness forty Years, it were ready for him
to answer to the Former, That God divided the red Sea, and made the surrounding
waves Bullworks of safety, against the Enemy; and to the latter, That the same
God opened the Rock of Stone, and made the Waters flow, and rained Manna, and
Quails from Heaven, for his daily provision, and support. For thus God found it
necessary to deal with an incredulous, and sluggish people, who would ever have
been revolting back toward Egypt, if he had not submitted his Providence, and
Care over them, to the Test of their very Senses, and caused them constantly to
taste and feel how gracious he was to them. But he no longer transacts with
mankind by such obvious, and condescending instances of his Power: Though he
has an equal regard to his People at this day, yet he deals with them in a way,
more suitable to the exercise of their Reason, and their Faith, and becoming
his own Wisdom: He raises and depresses Nations by such easy steps, and
cadencies, that it is extremely difficult to discover any break or interruption
in the whole series of second causes, whereby to give birth to his designs in
the Prodigious Revolutions of the World. The great Opera of his Providence is
carried on in so uninterrupted a Tenor, and all its Machines are acted with
that facility, and evenness, that nothing but uniform Nature presents its self
to the Vulgar Spectators eye; whilst the more inquisitive Christian, and
Philosopher carry their researches up to that invisible hand, which directs the
innumerable resorts, and movements: and which teaches them all to conspire in
the finishing those wonderful events proposed by Divine Wisdom in the
government of Mankind. Now amongst the various ways, and methods which his
Counsel may employ to his end, the more easily accounted for are these
following: First, He influences the Thoughts, Desires, and Passions of man's
Mind, in such a Manner as is most proper to facilitate, and carry on the Work
he intends.

If we consider God as an Infinite and Almighty Spirit, in whom we live, and
move and exist, we cannot avoid concluding that he is immediately present to
every Soul which he has created; and is as capable of ruling, and directing
them, as they are of actuating and moving those Bodies to which they are
united. They entirely depend upon him for their Being, and capacities: So that
it is inconceivable how they should be invested with a Power of Willing, unless
God gave them both to Will, and do: Or whence they could derive their
Understanding, did not the Father of Lights enlighten every one that he sent
into the World. And if these two principal Powers of the Mind, are so
absolutely dependent on him; it is no wonder that he frequently determines their
particular operations; That he inspires them with a new train of Thoughts and
Intentions; That here presents to them very moving Ideas; That he Caresses
their Desires, with grateful, and inviting Objects; That he quickens their
Hopes, or hightens their Fears, or excites such other Passions, as have a
Natural tendency toward promoting his designs for the welfare and happiness
of the World. Nor does the Liberty he has endowed them with, in the least
exempt them from his Jurisdiction, any more than the privileges of Subjects
discharge them from their subjection to the Authority of their Sovereign.
Indeed the consequences of such extraordinary suggestions are not of alike
importance in all, but vary according to Men's Public or private capacities,
and Relations in the World; For as a King is worth ten thousands of the people
(as the Israelites told David) so are the purposes of his Heart, proportionably
of greater moment, toward the well or illbeing of Mankind. A King's word is
accompanied with power, and the affairs of Men are vastly the better or the
worse, according as this power is employed. If like Titus's, it be exercised
only for the Public Good, and that the day be reckoned lost to a Prince,
Amici, di^m perdidi. Sueton. in vit. Tit.
in which he has not been beneficial to some or other: Both himself and his
Fortune, are the Joy and delight of Humane Nature. But if like Nero's the same
Power please it self in Ruin and Devastation, it is a public Scourge and
Calamity, and one of the greatest Curses that God can send into the World. And
now considering how much Humane Happiness, or Misery, depend upon the Wisdom or
Folly, the Righteousness or Wickedness of Governors; how necessary is it, that
the Hearts of Kings should be in the hand of the Lord, Prove. 21. 1.
and that like the Rivers of Waters he should turn them whither soever he will:
How would the World run to confusion, and become one great Den of wild Beasts,
or more ravenous Men, if great Oppressors could effect their unweildy projects,
and God did not carry the counsels of the Froward headlong? And unless he
likewise restrained the madness of the multitude and struck them with an Awe
and Reverence of Majesty, though in a Person in many respects not unlike
themselves. How could good Princes establish their Government in Righteousness,
and prove such Universal Blessings as we find them? Indeed he frequently serves
himself of the insatiable ambition of unmerciful Tyrants, no less than of the
generous and beneficent designs of the best, and kindest Governors, and that
by way of judgment on a wicked Generation; when that end is obtained, he
degrades their aspiring thoughts, as he once did Nebuchadnezzar's, from
believing themselves the Gods, to the acknowledging themselves the Beasts of
the Earth.

The Scripture presents us with variety of instances, wherein the supreme Lord
of the World has made the actings of an Humane Mind, instrumental to the
effecting the Work of his Providence. How did Pharaoh's incredulity, and
obstinacy to pursue the Israelites into the Red Sea administer an occasion to
God to exalt his Power, in the destined destruction of him and his whole Host?
How did he raise the Siege of Samaria, when reduced to the utmost extremity by
Famine, by causing sudden fears and fancies to put to flight the Syrian Army?
How did he preserve David and his handful of Men from the destructive issues of
Achitophel's Counsel, by determining the People to prefer that of Hushai before
it? For by this choice it must be, that the Lord (as the text tells us) had
appointed to defeat the good Counsel of Achitophel. 2 Kings 17. 14.
I will mention but one example more, and that is of Cyrus, who ascending his
Throne with as great Ambition and Glory, and as little affection to the Jewish
Nation as any of his Predecessors, could not resist the Impressions God made
upon his Mind, to restore the Captive People, and to rebuild the Temple: The
Lord stirred up the Spirit of Cyrus King of Persia, Says the sacred Historian,
Ezra 1. 1. 'Twere needless to spend time in proving That God influences the
Mind of Man, in bringing to pass the result of his own Counsel, were not they
apt to overlook the Divine Efficacy, and to ascribe the success or
disappointment of the most important actions, to Time or Chance, to Fate or
Fortune, or any thing rather than to the Finger of God: Whereas did they
impartially observe how inconsiderable Moments turned the Scale in the
weightiest Concerns; how some unexpected accident, surprise, or inadvertency
frequently determined the Fate of a Battle, and gave rise to the most Glorious
and Heroical Actions, beyond the intrinsic Virtue, and Efficacy of their
causes: How the Peace and Prosperity of a Nation, depended on the nice and
critical Conjuncture of some lucky hits of Counsel and Action; they would
quickly perceive that the train of consequences was laid by a Divine Artist;
and that it was God, who, by some secret Energy, touched the Hearts of Men, and
thereby put all the Wheels of his Providence in Motion. And here I cannot but
Anticipate my Method, in mentioning that Memorable act of Providence,
manifested but the other day, in the Person of our Royal Sovereign: For what
less than a Divine Impulse could have forced him upon that seeming
impracticable Attempt, of rescuing the Metropolis of a Country from immediate
Ruin and Desolation, which obliged him to break through the impending dangers
of twice as numerous an Enemy, the difficulties of a precipitate March, and the
discouragements of his Army? An attempt more glorious than the compleatest
Victory, as was plain by the Success, which was speedily followed with an Happy
Conclusion of a General Peace, and the Security of Europe. But this Method of
God's influencing the Minds of Men in his Government of the World, will be more
conspicuous when illustrated with a second Consideration.

Secondly, That He imploys the General Efficacy and Power of Natural Causes,
and makes them subservient to the ends and purposes of his Providence.

The fixed and standing Laws of Nature, are nothing else but the General Will of
an All-wise and Universal Being, who holds the Reins of the Universe in his
Hands, and turns them which way he pleases. There is nothing in this World
except Man, that he has made the Arbiter of its own actions. All other things
do not so properly act, as suffer his Agency upon them. Bodies are continually
moved by those impressions which he has given them. As he spoke the word, and
they were made, he commanded and they were created, so the same Power which
created them, still governs, and determines them. Fire and Hail, Snow and
Vapor, Wind and Storm fulfill his word. He makes the Winds his Ministers, and
Flames of Fire his Messengers. Life and Death, Health and Sickness, Riches and
Poverty, Plenty and Famine, and the whole Retinue of Nature, are all the
Attendants of his Pleasure, and the Instruments of his Power: And if so, what
an infinite scope is here, for the compassing his designs in the free
Government of a rational World, by the Ministry of natural and necessary
Causes? For what is there in the whole Circle of humane actions, and sublunary
Occurrences, but falls under the influence of some of these? So that it seems
had it so pleased God, he might have brought about the whole course of his
greater Providential Dispensations, from the beginning of the World to the end
of it, without making one irregular or unequal step, or departing out of the
common road of Nature. If the Sins of a degenerate Race of Men, are ripened
into an Harvest for Divine Vengeance, there is no need that the Almighty should
create Thunder bolts to execute his wrath; He can quickly draw an Artillery out
of the Stores of Nature, sufficient to overthrow a Lustful City, or a Lewd and
Vicious World. For even that Exemplary Judgment on Mankind, in an Universal
Deluge, which seems to abound with Miracle, and which Moses describes by the
rupture of the Abyss, and the descending Cataracts of Heaven, is looked upon by
most thinking Persons, to have been effected by a Providential use of second
Causes, and that it will very well bear a Natural Explication. And it is not
improbable, but that other destruction which the Earth still waits by Fire,
will be wrought by the concurrence of Natural Principles, and Powers in
subservience to the Will of God, when he shall think sit to permit that raging
Element, to accomplish the great and fatal Revolution. Nor does this at all
derogate from the Divine Wisdom, but exalt and vindicate it, in that it is not
like a Mortal Understanding, at a pause, what extraordinary course to take in
the exigencies of affairs, but still makes its Providence keep pace with
Nature, and leisurely produce those signal Changes and Alterations which are
subjects for Wonder and Admiration to all Ages: But to place this Pourtraicture
of Divine Providence in a clearer light, let us only consider, that these two
Instruments of it, Life and Death, are in the hand of God; and observe how the
interests of the World, in a great measure, turn upon these two Hinges. For
Example, how does a Nation thrive, and prosper under the gentle Life, and
Government of a Wise, a Pious, and a Valiant Prince. He is the Soul that
animates the Body Politic, that gives it Health and Vigor, and succors every
Member with a generous warmth, and activity: Under such a Reign how thankfully
will the People enjoy the Blessings of Peace, or strenuously Prosecute a lawful
War for their mutual Defense and Vindication? Their Reputation will improve
their Commerce, and their Industry make Plenty flow in their Streets. Their
Church and Religion will erect its Head, and by returning the joyful Offerings
of Praise and Gratitude for all the Mercies it receives, engage the Favor of
Heaven still on in its support and preservation. And now if it please God to
continue these Blessings to them, he need but lengthen the days of such a
Governor, as he did Hezekiah's, and then the designs of Providence, will be
answered by the very intention of Nature, without recurrence to Miracles, or
bringing Prodigies on the Stage. But oh! then the Death of this great and good
Man is as tragically lamented, as his Life was admired, and doated on: and
unless the same kind Providence has otherwise designed it, strange changes, and
decays must likely happen both in Church, and State. Just the reverse of this,
both as to Mercy and Judgment, God intends the World, in the Life and Death of
a Wicked, a Foolish, a Tyrannical, and degenerous Prince. For as he cannot
deserve the love of his own People, he consequently will not be able to procure
the fear of his Neighbors. Either he will suffer himself, and his Subjects to
dissolve in Sloth, and Luxury; or he will dispirit them with Violence and
Oppression, or betray them by his Cowardice and Folly. A People will droop, as
if under the Reign and Guidance of some Malignant Planet, having neither
Courage to oppose their Enemies, nor Spirit to Enrich and Advance themselves.
It Is only the Exit to such an Inglorious Life and Reign, can reinstate them in
the possession of their Hopes, and capacitate them for the Enjoyment of those
Mercies, which Heaven may design them. I might produce innumerable instances of
this sort, to confirm what I am proving: viz. That God serves his Providence of
the Efficacy and Powers of Natural Causes, in his Presidency over the World.
But I hasten to another consideration: viz.

Thirdly, That he suspends or alters the settled course of Natural Laws, when
they happen to obstruct, or at least do not forward the purposes and ends of
his Government.

Though nothing can be wiser or better ordered, than the settled course of
second Causes, in the constant and regular Production of their Effects; yet the
laws of them, like the laws of Nations, being of great simplicity, and
constituted for the general good of the Universe, can not always bend and
comply to those particular Moral Exigencies, which Men may create by the
perverse use of their Liberty; and therefore God has reserved to himself a
transcendant Right (as it were a Court of Equity) of suspending, or post-poning
their Execution, to mitigate that rigorous procedure, and redress those unequal
Judgments, which might otherwise reflect upon his Wisdom or his Justice. For
why should it be supposed that God who is the freest Agent, should prescribe
himself such Fatal and unalterable Laws, as might any ways control the
exercise of his Power, or tie the hands of his Providence, in his merciful and
bounteous designs to his Creatures? He that made those Laws for the good order
of the Natural World, may well be allowed to suspend, revoke, or alter them to
serve an higher end, i. e. for the dispensations of his Grace, and the benefit
of his Church and People. All the miracles which have ever been wrought, are so
many demonstrations of this Sovereign and free Power, which he has employed for
the manifestation of himself, and the service of his Worshippers: Wisd. 19. 20,
etc.
As when the Fire had power in the Water, forgetting its own Virtue, and the
Water forgot its own quenching Nature, and when the Flames wasted not the Flesh
of corruptible living things; in all which, and the like instances, God
magnified his People and glorified them, and assisted them in every Time and
Place. If it be said, that the age of Miracles is past, and that the Lord no
longer deals by such extraordinary Methods with Mankind; we own that the sign
and the wonder, the ostentatious part of Miracles is ceased. The Sun does not
stand still in Gibeon, nor the Moon in the Valley of Ajalon. God does not work
Prodigies, to amaze and confound his Enemies, or to convince his own People of
the truth of his Revelations, which have already been so abundantly attested by
those powerful Credentials. But whoever from hence will conclude, that he never
supersedes the ordinary course of things, that he does not sometimes withhold,
or promote, or stop, and revolt the Wheels of Nature in their Roats, for the
relief of the Good and Righteous, or the punishment of Atheistical and Wicked
Men; must be driven to this Conclusion, that the Church of Christ is less dear
to him than that of Moses, and that a Christian has not equal pretensions to
the care of Providence, with a Jew: But if this were so, what imaginable
encouragement could be left to our Prayers, in our Difficulties or Distresses,
which yet God has commanded us to make, and has promised to hear and grant?
When our Blood boils within us, and a Raging Fever drinks up our Spirits, to
what purpose shall we have recourse to God for help, if the Disease must
equally spend its force, and the Remedies be as ineffectual, as if instead of
Praying we had Blasphemed? They that go down to the Sea in Ships (says the
Psalmist) and do business in great Waters, Psalm. 107. 23, etc.
These see the Works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep. For he
commands, and raises the stormy Wind which lifts up the Waves thereof.
They mount up to the Heaven, they go down to the depths: Their Soul is melted
because of trouble. They reel to and fro, and stagger like a Drunken Man, and
are at their wits end: as he Elegantly describes their condition in a Tempest.
Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he brings them out of their
distresses. But to little purpose it would be for the Mariners to cry unto the
Lord in hopes of Deliverance, if he suffered the Winds and Waves to take their
full swinge in wrecking their fury upon the defenseless Vessel, and he
vouchsafed not to rebuke the Winds, and to say unto the Sea, Peace, be still.
Such Miracles as these we make no doubt but God works every day for the benefit
of those, who in their troubles heartily and devoutly call upon him. Yet if any
shall still contend, as some have done, That it is below the dignity and nature
of an Universal, and Immutable Being, to deviate from his general Will, in
these particular exceptions, and contradictions to it; these may be also
satisfied, without receeding from what has been said, by considering

Fourthly, That God interesses his Angels in affairs here below, and makes them
Minister to the necessities and advantage of Mankind.

In the Infancy, and uninlightned ages of the World, if God had any special
Message to reveal, or Business to transact with the Sons of Men, his Angels
were his Ambassadors, Commissioned to perform it in his Name; and as they
themselves appeared with a visible Pomp, and Authority, so they discharged
their Office in the Face of the World, and thereby asserted the Truth of the
Revelation, and the Sovereign Power of the Revealer. But since those Ministers
have withdrawn themselves from that manifest commerce, we are more in the dark
concerning the extent of their Province, and the actual exercise of their
Power: Nevertheless since in Scripture we read of Kingdoms committed to the
care of Angels, and hear of the Princes of Persia, and of Greece, Dan. 10. 20.
12. 1.
and of Michael the Prince that Protected Israel. Since we are assured that
they are all Ministering Spirits, Heb. 1. 14.
sent forth to Minister for them, who shall be Heirs of Salvation: We cannot
doubt but they still mingle themselves with humane Interests, and by the
appointment of their Almighty Lord, engage their Power in influencing both the
public Policies, and private Transactions of the World: We are apt enough to
believe there are evil and lying Spirits, which diligently wait to betray us
into Sin and Misery; and why should we so reproach the Mercy and Goodness of
God, as to think he has not counterpoiz'd those evil designs with the
auspicious Protection of more Charitable, and Benevolent Natures; which being
so, we need not nicely dispute how far God himself may Personally operate in
the suspension or application of his general Laws, to our particular
necessities, there being the same Mercy of Providence on God's part, and the
same obligation to gratitude, and adoration on ours, whether he in Person takes
this immediate care of us, or in subservience to his Will has appointed
Deputies to this purpose, and given his Angels charge over us, to keep us in
all our ways. Ps. 91. 11.
I shall add but one consideration more, of the manner of God's Providential
Proceeding, and that is

Lastly, That he mannages the whole result of all sorts of Powers, and Motions,
both in the Natural, and Moral World, so as to make all things however
repugnant to his Will, or inconsistent with one another, harmoniously conspire
in the producing those effects, which his Wisdom has pre-determin'd; which
consideration I do not mention as distinct from the rest, but as the sum and
comprehension of them all. This is the great Mastery and perfection of the
Divine Policy, to act upon such thorough views as infallibly to attain its
ends, though by ways that seem never so contrary to, or incompetible with them.
Thus St. Paul contemplating the mysterious depths of the Divine Providence, in
the reciprocal Dispensations of Mercy, to the Jews and Gentiles; in that the
unbelief of the Jews should administer to the Faith of the Gentiles; and the
bringing in the Fullness of the Gentiles, at length turn to the Salvation of
the Jews; breaks out into an ecstasie of Admiration. Oh! the depth of the
Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God; how unsearchable are his
Judgments, and his ways past finding out? Romans 11. 33
Doubtless this is an Abyss, that no created understanding can fathom. It Is
that infinite mind alone, which at one steady, and unchangeable view, takes in
the whole Eternal round of Causes and Effects, which can either sufficiently
admire, or comprehend the reaches of its own Wisdom. But notwithstanding our
inability to see far into the Divine Councels; we are confident that nothing
falls out but by the Appointment of an Heavenly Father, who is so intimately
conscious to our minutest concerns: that, to express it, the very Hairs of our
head are said to be numbered by him. Mat. 10. 30.
And it is the foundation of the greatest hope, and security to us Christians,
to know that all things shall work together for Good to them that love God.
Romans 8. 28.
Even the Sin and Evil, and Folly and Rashness of Men, things most repugnant to
his Nature, and Will, shall one way or other tend to illustrate the wonderful
extent of his Wisdom, who from the Darkness and Confusion of a Chaos, could
raise the August Fabric of a World; and from the more horrid distractions of
Sin and Madness, can strike out the most beautiful, and uniform designs for the
Happiness and Encouragement of his Servants: How otherwise could Joseph have
risen to little less than Royal Dignity, by means that, humanely speaking,
tended only to Misery and Perdition? Could the purposes of Revenge, and Hatred
in his Brethren to destroy him; of Covetousness in Merchants to sell, and
inslave him; of disappointed Lust in an enraged Woman, to Imprison him; have
ever been conceived to be gradual steps to his saving both Israel and Egypt?
Yet these and a number of other as unlikely presages to Advancement, were
ordained by God the necessary preparations for it. But it is more amazing to
follow the Clue of God's wonderful Economy in all those perplexed Labyrinths
through which he deduced his great purpose, of raising the Posterity of fallen
Man by the Seed of the Woman, the Messiah of the World. The Kings of the Earth
stood up, and the Rulers took Counsel together against the Lord, and against
his Anointed. All Earthly Powers conspired to destroy him in the Root, in his
Progenitors, or to cut off the Righteous branch of Jesse: But how vain were
their imaginations, and rash and foolish their endeavors when God had
determined to set his King upon his Holy Hill of Sion? Ps. 2. Our short-sighted
knowledge can comprehend but a few, and those the most obvious Links in this
wonderful Chain of Providence, but yet enough to humble us in our own thoughts,
and to teach us that there is no Wisdom, nor Understanding, nor Counsel against
the Lord. Which point being sufficiently cleared, I come to the second general,
to discover briefly

Secondly, The Intention, or Ends, and Reasons of God's thus interposing his
Providence in the Government of humane affairs and actions; and these in
general are two. First, The Temporal Prosperity and Security of his Church and
People. Secondly, The exercising those Virtues and Graces in them, which are
necessary to their Eternal Happiness. First, The Temporal Prosperity and
Security of his Church and People. There are two great Evils which in this
present disordered state of the World, violently break in upon the Welfare and
Happiness of Mankind, and are very great Reasons to induce an Omnipotent God to
inspect and govern humane affairs: these are the destructive use of the Liberty
of their own Minds: and the irresistible violence of external Bodies: one great
share of Men's infelicity happening to them by the designed wickedness of their
Neighbors; and another portion of misery accruing, by the unpremeditate
injuries of outward accidents, which no foresight could prevent or remedy. So
that these necessities seem to have superinduced a peculiar Order of
Providence, which an unsinning state did not stand in need of: For as it was a
state of Innocence, there was no moral evils to disturb the quiet and felicity
of Man; and being a state of Happiness, we may be certain too, natural evils
grew out of exterior Bodies to afflict and grieve a Righteous Soul. The course
of Nature was then subservient to the order of Grace, till Sin and Evil
entering, broke and confounded the happy Connection, and obliged God to lay to
his hand when Man had destroyed his Law. We know then that the present state of
the World is such as justly calls for an overruling Providence, both to still
the Raging of the Sea, and to control the other Elements, and also to restrain
the Madness and Wickedness of the People: that so neither the designed Malice
of the one, nor the blind and insensate Fury of the other, may pass the bounds
which the Almighty sets them. Were it not for such an unconfined Sovereignty of
God, his Worshippers would be the most wretched and forsaken People living.
They would lie at the Mercy of a wicked and desperate Race, and be subject to
the Outrage and Violence of every other Creature; and that without Refuge, and
without Hopes. Nay how can we conceive but that the Face of a Visible Church,
had long since disappeared, had it not been for the assurance of a Divine
Presence, and assistance to the End of the World? The Impious Rage, and Enmity
of Earthy Powers, had e're this effaced the memory of it; and excluded the
belief of a Deity, no less than of a Providence; from the Minds of Men;
especially, if that Brood of Evils, which Nature teems with, were permitted to
take part with the Wickedness of Man, in disheartning Religion and Piety
toward God: What destructions might Deluges, Earthquakes, and Conflagrations
ever this, have brought upon the Earth, had they constantly been suffered to
exert their natural, and unbroken strength? and if Thunder, and Lightning,
Storm and Tempest, Heat and Cold, Poisons and Pestilences, were discharged from
the Regions of the air we breath in, in their genuine and native Force, and
Providence interposed not to prevent their effects, or overruled them to an
excellent end; the best of Men would labor under a worse fate than Cain; and
imagine not only that every Man, but that every part of Nature was armed
against them to destroy them. But all these fears and despondencies are
removed, by the assurance God has given of his constant Care and Vigilance over
his Church and People.

Secondly, The second end and reason of Divine Providence, in the Government of
the World, is the exercising those our Virtues and Graces, which support it and
depend upon it, and are necessary qualifications for Eternal Happiness. What
would become of our Christian Faith and Hope, of our Confidence and Patience,
of our Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost, if we were not assured there was a good
God who prevented our Sufferings and Afflictions, or supported us under them,
or rewarded us for them. If he were unconcerned at the Successes, or
Misfortunes of our present Life, of what use would be a great part of our
Services and Devotions? Why should we pray unto him for temporal Mercies, or
return thanks for Benefits received? To what purpose were our present Solemnity
of pouring out our hearts in Praise and Thanksgiving to God, for restoring
Peace to our Nation, and Blessing his Majesty's Councels, and endeavors in
promoting it; if there were nothing in the whole event, but what was owing to
humane Strength and Policy, and the natural course of things? And therefore as
the sense of Providence begets in the Wise, and Good, Pious and devout
Affections; invigorates their Virtues and Graces, and the ends of Religion are
served by the belief of it: So God will magnify himself in the disappointments
of the wicked: and by overthrowing their infidel purposes, and resisting their
endeavors make them at last confess, that it is he alone that Rules in the
Kingdoms of Men. Lest the humble and meek should despair and faint, and the
proud boisterous Sinners triumph in their power; he makes the success of things
unequal to their Causes, so that the race is not to the swift, nor the Battle
to the strong. For which reason our Church devoutly acknowledging the Poverty
and Weakness of humane Forces, unless in dependence on the Favor and
Providence of Almighty God; ever accompanies the efforts of our Fleets, and
Armies, with her Prayers; and returns the Praise and Honor of all Success to
God, in those dutiful Resentments and Thanksgivings which she offers. Which
leads me to the third thing proposed.

Thirdly, To apply these Considerations to that particular Providence, and
Mercy of God which we now commemorate: A Mercy so extraordinary and surprising,
that our Joys will hardly give leave to our Thoughts to represent it; A Mercy
which this Nation has long hoped for, and long prayed for; and in the pursuit
of it has expended a great deal of Blood and Treasure; but has at length
obtained, under the Glorious Conduct of our Great Sovereign, concurring with
Almighty Providence, in the birth of a Happy and Honorable Peace, of which he
has so long travailed: How great a Blessing Peace is after the long toils and
expenses of War every People is sufficiently sensible; but setting aside the
common advantages, that which renders it inestimable to these Kingdoms, is that
hereby they are established upon a firm and unshaken foundation; a work which
being hitherto retarded, and undermined, was reserved for the Reign of Him, who
seems destined by Providence, for the redress of oppressed Nations, and the
safety and deliverance of Europe I shall not be thought to detract from his
Courage, or his Wisdom, when I say he has been made the great instrument of
Providence, in healing the Wounds of divided Christendom; and unravelling those
great events, which have lain for Ages wrapped up in the dark folds of Time. He
must be obstinately blind who will not at least perceive a Divine Hand in the
whole Scene of his Actions, and confess that so large a Field of Glory, was
appointed for his Heroic Virtues to expatiate in. Indeed his Life in the many
great turns of it, seems to be wholly Miraculous; and all those vast
difficulties which constantly encountered his aspiring Honor, designed by
Heaven to Illustrate the Greatness of his Merit, and to make his Virtues
unparalled, and Triumphant. If we view him more particularly, and nearer
home, in the late wonderful Revolutions, what less then a Divine Power could
have so happily established him on his Throne; What else could have turned the
Hearts of a great People, as of one Man: and have broken all those measures,
which were laid for the ruin of our Liberties and Religion? what else could
have encouraged him to undertake the Cause of distressed Europe, against the
overgrown Power of an ambitious Nation; or have enabled him to humble her in
the height of her Victories and Successes, so as to make her stoop to the
modest requests of Peace, and narrower Limits of Dominion? who but such a
Prince, and under a Divine Direction, could have retrieved the Ancient Spirit,
and Valor, together with the high Reputation of these Realms; and thereby
extinguished a flaming War, that depopulated and laid wast the best cultivated
part of the Earth? He that will ascribe such Effects as these to mere Naval
Preparations, and Field Forces, under the sole guidance of a Cabinet Council;
must be obliged to own his disbelief of a God, or at least that he has any
interest in the Government of the World. For if Humane Wisdom could have
prevailed, where were there more refined Policies than in a Neighboring Court?
If Humane Force, where were there such mighty Preparations against the day of
Battle? Insomuch, that I know not in what instance the adorable Wisdom of
Providence is more conspicuous, than in causing a Nation, which hardly any
Foreign Force could shake, to sink under the weight of her own grandeur, and
grow less by her Conquests: Those toils which she spread to a vast extent for
the Captivating other Kingdoms, have providentially exhausted her own Bowels,
and left the decaying Bulk of Power to be recruited by the gentler Methods of
Peace and Tranquillity; and in the disappointment of all her lofty Projects, and
gigantick Undertakings, we have an undoubted Testimony afforded to this truth,
That there is no Wisdom, nor Understanding, nor Counsel against the Lord; that
the Horse is prepared against the day of Battle, but safety is of the Lord. To
the Lord therefore we ascribe our Peace and Safety: The Safety of our Persons,
and our Properties, but especially the Safety of our Church: and here I beg
leave to remind you of your Duties to Thankfullness and Gratitude upon this
occasion; in that there is not any Church on Earth, that has had more Signal
Providence, to approve it the immediate Care and Concern of Heaven, than this
we are Members of. How often has it been ready to be swallowed up, as if it
were to magnify the goodness of God in its Preservation! What Method of a
Miraculous Providence, has been wanting to Confirm its Establishment? Open
Violence and Secret Conspiracies to destroy and undermine it, have still been
overruled by that Almighty Arm which protects it to its greater Glory and
Security: Witness an Invincible Armado, threatening our Kingdom with perpetual
Slavery of Soul and Body, dispersed and ruined by the irresistible Power of
God, who makes the Creature his Weapon for the Revenge of his Enemies, Wisd. 5.
17, 22.
and causes a mighty Wind to stand up against them, and blow them away. Witness
the dark designs of Hell, to destroy our Laws and Lawmakers, our Church and
State at one blow, betrayed and confounded by a kind of supernatural, and
prophetical impression on the Spirit of our Prince: Nay that which is more
amazing, the Blood of our Royal Martyr, wherewith the Life and Soul of our
Religion seemed to expire; how has it by the wonderful appointment of Heaven
proved the seed of the Church? The Wrath of Man in that desperate and unheard
of Wickedness has turned to the praise of God; in that the blessings which this
Church and Nation at this day enjoy, under the happy Protection of our present
Sovereign, have a visible dependence and connection with the fatal Event. Who
can choose but admire and adore the goodness of God, who has not suffered our
Wickedness to make us miserable as we have deserved; but whenever his
threatenings or his judgments have wrought in us a deep sense of our Sins, and
Sorrow for them, has still manifested his mercy in our Deliverance! If he has
formerly suffered the Luster of our Church to be eclyps'd, it is probably that
it might at least shine with a brighter vigor, under his gracious Patronage,
whom he has made the Author of our Peace, and the Defender of our Faith. For
who can conceive but to this end God has raised him up, and Covered his head so
often in the day of Battle; that to this end his Angels have taken care, that
whilst Thousands fell on his right hand, and on his left, the Arrows of Death
have not come nigh him? May the same good Providence persevere to Protect and
Defend Him, who has, at the Hazard of his Life, so often Defended us: and may
our Thankfulness to God, and grateful Obedience to his Vicegerent, deserve that
he may long Reign over us, and late exchange a Temporal for an Eternal Crown.

All the Application I shall make shall be taken from the words of the Psalmist
upon the like occasion. I will hear what God the Lord will speak: Psalm. 85. 8.
for he will speak Peace unto his People, and to his Saints, but let them not
turn again to folly. It Is the provoking Folly of our Sins that has induced God
to Unsheath the Sword upon us, as the severest of National Punishments. But our
Repentance or Chastisements have at last atton'd his Anger, in causing him to
put an end to War, and speak Peace again unto his People: and it is now at our
own extreme Peril, if we return to those Sins and Follies for which we have
already suffered. God has given us Peace, and with it, has put into our hands
all those Blessings which are the Materials of our Temporal Happiness; so that
nothing seems to be required on our parts, but to prepare and qualify our
hearts for the Enjoyment. If we shall enlarge our Souls with Joy and Gratitude,
in proportion to these Mercies, we may reasonably expect, the Continuance and
Succession of them: But if we prove such insensible Wretches, as no bounds can
satisfy: If we are Impatient and Querulous, and deal with God and our Prince,
as did the murmuring Israelites in the Desert, we may justly apprehend that
these our Follies, will recall those Judgments, which are now so happily past
over us; and expose our Church and Nation to a more irrevocable Sentence.

Now we are made whole, let us go and Sin no more, left a worse thing come unto
us.

FINIS.

