A FUNERAL SERMON ON THE DECEASE Of the Reverend Mr. Richard Mayo, Late
Minister of the Gospel in London. Who Died the 8th of September, 1695.

By NATHANAEL TAILOR.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Cockerill, Senr and Junr, at the Three Legs in the
Poultrey, over against the Stocks-Market. M DC XCV.

TO That part of the Church of Christ in London, of which the Reverend Mr.
RICHARD MAYO was lately Pastor.
Beloved in our Lord;
I Here present you with the following Sermon, which I hope, will meet with a
kind and favorable Reception from You. Indeed a stately Monument showing the
Excellency of the Workman that erected it, as well as of him that is enclosed
in it, is necessary to invite and gratify the curiosity of a Stranger. But any
little thing, though so mean in it self that it cannot challenge any regard
upon its own account, yet is wont to have some value set upon it, because it is
the Memorial of a Departed Friend.

The Relation to you wherein both of us stood; the entire Affection you so
justly had for him; the great kindness you have shown me for so many Years,
together with the Additional one of so unanimously fiixing me in his room since
his Decease, do not only justify, but also command this my present Dedication.

I shall now more than ever need your Remembrance of me at the Throne of Grace,
in order to the discharge of the great Trust committed to me with Faithfulness
and Success, so that none of you may want a Crown of Glory, nor I one of
Rejoicing in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming; 1 Thessalonians. 2.19.
which shall ^lso be the daily Prayer and faithful Endeavor of him, who is on
many accounts, with great Sincerity and Affection

Yours to serve You In the Work of the Gospel. Nathanael Tailor.

2 COR. V. 8. We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the
body, and to be present with the Lord.


IN that Prophecy of our Blessed Savior, recorded by the Evangelist, Luke
17.34, 36.
concerning some black and terrible Day, which some understand of the
approaching ruin of the Jewish State, and others apply to the dissolution of
the World; among other things we are told, That two Men shall be in the same
field; two Persons in one and the same bed, the one shall be taken, the other
shall be left. Somewhat like this the Sovereign discriminating Providence of
God has lately done among you. Not long since Two Persons were working in this
part of God's Field: A few days ago there were Two that were wont to stand in
the same Pulpit; the unprofitable Servant indeed is left, but Alas! the very
Valuable one is taken. The first remarkable stroke that was given him, was in
this very Place, and in the midst of his Work; and the change that it made in
his Countenance, and thereupon in many of yours, you cannot but remember. Death
pursued the Blow that made the strong and fruitful Tree to shake, till at last
it fell to the Ground. And now, if like the Sons of the Prophets we should seek
our Elijah, it would be in vain; for he is Ascended. It Is to no purpose to
enquire for him at his own home, for he is absent from his Family. It Is a vain
thing to search the houses of any of his People for him, for he is absent from
his Flock. It would be lost labor to seek him any where here below, for he is
absent from the Body too, and present with the Lord. Our time and pains will be
far better employed in seeking after some portion of the same Spirit that
rested on him, that so we who have so lately followed him to his Grave, and
must ere long do so in another sense, may follow him to Heaven too. For the
hour of our decease will come; whether we are willing or no, we also must ere
long be absent from the Body; and I wish our being present with the Lord, were
but as sure as that is. For could we but say upon good grounds with our A
postle and his Brethren, that we are confident of this; we should not stop
there, but be able to go on to the end of the Text, and add, we are willing
rather to be absent from the one, and present with the other.

In which words you have these three Parts.

1. One of the true Notions of Death. It Is a being absent from the Body.

2. What immediately follows upon it to a holy Soul. He shall thereupon be in
Heaven; which the Apostle describes by one of the greatest Privileges of it,
being present with the Lord. It Is the Lord Jesus Christ he here means. For of
him is this word Lord used in the New Testament, as peculiarly belonging to
him. And in other parallel places the Apostle describes the happiness of Heaven
by our being with Christ, Phil. 1.23. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
and being for ever with the Lord; where the Context plainly shows, that Christ
is meant; for it is that Lord that shall descend from Heaven with a shout, and
whom they that remain alive to that day shall be caught up to meet in the Air.
And so our Savior himself was wont to describe Heaven. Where I am, there shall
my servant be also. And, John 12.26. Chap. 14.3.
I will receive you to my self, that where I am, there ye may be also.

3. The frame of his Spirit, and of other holy Men like him, in reference to
Death on this account. We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent
from the body, and be present with the Lord.

I say; These words are not in the Original, but are well put in by our
Translators. The Apostle had said this before, v. 6. And after the
interposition of a short Parenthesis, v. 7. For we walk by faith, and not by
sight, he here repeats it, lest any should suspect that these great words had
hastily dropped from him. He intimates hereby that he had well-weigh'd the
Point, and that this was indeed the settled temper of his Soul.

We are confident; i. e. we are well assured of Heaven; or, we are full of holy
Courage to venture on all dangers that lie in the way of our Duty, and are able
to look even Death it self in the face, without the least degree of fear.

We are willing. We do acquiesce in and approve of, (...).
as the word signifies. We are willing rather. We have a natural Inclination to
continue in this Body; but yet this is overruled by Reason and Grace to that
degree, that of the two we like this better, to lay down these our Earthly
Tabernacles, as knowing the advantage we shall receive thereupon by being
immediately introduced into the blessed Presence of Christ above.

From the words thus opened, many Doctrines might be raised; but I shall
confine my self to these two.

I. It Is a most desirable thing to a holy Soul to be present with Christ in
Heaven.

II. It Is possible for a holy Person to be willing to dye, rather than live any
longer, that he may be with him there.

I. It Is a most desirable thing to a holy Soul to be present with Christ in
Heaven.

In speaking to this Point, I shall show you on what accounts it is so. Only I
must premise, That my Text confines me to treat of our being with him only in
that intermediate space of time between the hour of a Christian's Death, and
the Day of the Resurrection; being present with him while we are absent from
the Body. For tho indeed we shall be with him to all Eternity, yet we shall
behold him in other kind of Circumstances as to some particulars; when the end
of all things is come, his intercession is over, 1 Cor. 15.24, etc.
and the Kingdom shall be delivered up to the Father, and the Son himself shall
be subject to him, that God may be all in all. I am therefore to discourse of
the presence of holy Souls with Christ above to the end of the World. And how
very desirable that is to them, will appear by a threefold consideration.

1. Of the Person they shall then be present with.

2. The State he is in, and what shall be manifested concerning him there.

3. The Circumstances which they themselves shall then be in.

1. The Person they shall then be present with; our Lord Jesus Christ. For
consider how glorious he is in himself, how exceeding gracious he has been to
them, and how great a one in their thoughts. He is the King of kings, and the
Lord of lords, the first and the last, the brightness of his Father's Glory,
and the express image of his Person, by and for whom all things were created;
and who upholds all things by the word of his Power. Their Prophet, Priest and
King; their Sacrifice, Reconciler and Advocate; their Peace and Hope; their
Life and Head; their way to the Father, the Savior, the Shepherd and Bishop of
their Souls; made to them of God, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption. Without whom they could do nothing, through whose strengthening of
them they could do all things. From whom they have received all habitual, and
all supplies of actual Grace, and Peace, and Comfort in every time of need:
Through whom their Sins are pardoned, their Temptations conquered, their Fears
scattered, their Sorrows removed, their Souls quickened, their Trials
sanctified, and who in all their wanderings through the howling Wilderness has
been a Pillar of Cloud to defend them from the scorching heat of the Day, and
of Fire to guide them through the darkness of the Night. The blessed Jesus on
whom they have believed, having committed their Souls to him, and laid the
whole weight and stress of their Salvation upon him; whom they love more than
their nearest Relations, or their own Lives; in whom they rejoice, having no
confidence in the Flesh; whom they have served, to whom they have lived;
Fellowship and Communion with whom they have breathed after, and a little taste
whereof has been sweeter to them than Wine; who is precious to their Souls,
the chiefest of ten thousands, fairer than all the Children of Men, whose very
name has carried with it the savor of Life. What would not a disconsolate
Widow give to enjoy again the sweet converse of a Husband that was the delight
of her Eyes! And a mournful People to see and hear again their dear and
justly-beloved Pastor! Oh what ravishing transports will be in the Faithful,
when they shall be introduced into the presence of that Jesus who stood in the
same Relations, and filled them up far better than any mere Creature was ever
capable of; especially considering they shall see him not in a low condition,
but in such circumstances as they desire to behold him in. Which leads to,

2. The state that Christ is in above, and the manifestations of him there. He
is there without that Veil, and those Eclipses which were here caused by his
sinless Infirmities in the Days of his flesh. For consider,

1. The glory of his humane Nature above. That Body of his which endured
Hunger, Thirst, and Weariness, was Spit on, Buffeted, Scourged, and Broken for
them, lifted up on the Cross, and cast into the Grave, is now made Immortal and
Spiritual; and differs as much from what it once was, as a Diamond when it is
rough, and after it has past through the Hands of the skilful Artist, setting
off its native Beauty and Luster to the greatest advantage. It now out shines
the Sun in his Meridian brightness: For so shall the Bodies of his Saints do at
the last Day, which yet must be much inferior to his, he being the Exemplar and
Pattern to which theirs shall be conformed, but yet fall far short of it, that
in all things he may have the pre-eminence. All the Members, Senses, and
Faculties of it are every way suited to all the purposes and pleasures of his
Holy Soul: And all the Powers of that Soul of his exquisitely fitted for that
noble Work and high Honor to which his Father has advanced him; and
invigorated by the constant and unlimited influences of the indwelling Deity
pouring it self into, and in a most ineffable manner discovering its own
glorious Excellencies through the Man Christ Jesus, to the everlasting
Admiration of all the Inhabitants of Heaven.

2. The manifestation of his Deity, Unity with the Father, and mystical union
with his Brethren. His Godhead lay hid and obscured for a season when he
emptied himself, making himself of no Reputation, taking on him the form of a
Servant, and enduring the punishment of a Slave. The speedy discovery of it
therefore he prays for when he was going out of the World; at least this is one
thing intended in those words, And now, O Father, John 17.5.
glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee
before the World was. For this glory he had with the Father from all Eternity,
to be with him in the form of God. And it is as if he had said, this has now
been hid by the poverty of my life for many Years, and will further be so by my
speedy suffering so shameful a Death. But O Father, make it fully known that I
am not what the most have hitherto judged me to be, a mere Man, but truly and
really God, even the same God with thy self.

And he himself told his Disciples, John 14.20.
In that day ye shall know that I am in the Father; and you in me, and I in
you. Some understand it of the day of his Resurrection; others, of the time
when the Holy Ghost was poured forth. But how small a portion of these deep
Mysteries did they then know, in comparison of what they in Heaven understand,
where Knowledge is perfect? The better understanding of them is reserved for us
as one of the Privileges of the State above: And it were well Men were willing
to wait for it till they come thither, and would forbear reaching after this
Fruit which hangs too high for them in their present State, till they strain
themselves, and it may be tumble into the Ditch. These great things of God
partly through the craft of Satan and his Instruments, and partly through the
darkness and unbelief of their own Spirits, the best are sometimes apt to
stagger at; but yet because they are laid down in the Scriptures, they humbly
adore and receive with the Obedience of Faith. It cannot but shed a mighty
pleasure throughout the Souls of the Blessed, when they shall see them
displayed in such an illustrious manner before them, as never more to have an
uneasy thought, like a Thorn in their Minds, about them.

3. His glorious work of Redemption shall then be much better understood. The
breadth and length, the depth and height of the love of Christ, and the glory
of Divine Wisdom, Power, Holiness, Justice, Goodness, Mercy and Grace
manifested herein, is that which they are daily studying of; their Souls do
live upon, and are refreshed by. These things we see now through a glass
darkly. 1 Cor. 13.12. Ver. 9.
What things does the Apostle mean? The fame things that they did prophecy
about; viz. Christ and him crucified. We see these now as a Man does those
objects that are at a great distance through a Perspective-glass, which he has
but a small glimpse of. (...).
They are obscure in a great measure to us, as Truths wrapped up in a Riddle: But
then we shall know them face to face, have such a knowledge of them as two
persons have of one another that steadily view each others faces: Now we know
but in part, but then shall we know even as also we are known.

4. The views they shall have of his Intercession for all Saints. Heb. 5.5.
This is a part of that Honor and Office to which the Father has called, and
thereby glorified him. To perceive how near an access he has to God, being now
within the Veil, how high his designs are, how powerful his claims, how
acceptable his suit, how great an interest he has in him, how faithfully he
does improve it in the behalf of his and their Brethren, how fervently he does
plead their cause, recommend their persons and services, procure their renewed
pardon and continual supplies of Grace and Strength for the carrying them
through the same or the like temptations, doubts, distresses and dangers,
wherewith they themselves had been exercised here below; and how effectually he
takes care of their eternal Salvation. The beholding all this cannot but be
highly grateful and pleasing to those Holy departed Souls, that have so high a
concern for the glory of God, and the welfare of their Brethren that are left
behind them, exposed to so many storms which themselves have so happily
escaped. Especially considering this further, that the tenderness of Christ
toward their Brethren which they there behold, cannot but create in them a
quick and lively Sense of the incomparable Kindness and Compassion which he
formerly showed to themselves when in the same straits. In what he does for
them, as in a Glass, they see how near they lay to his Heart, and in what a
manner he appeared in the presence of God for them.

5. That universal Kingly Power that he is instated in. This is a part of that
Glory that Christ means in that Petition of his, that runs in a very peculiar
strain: Father I will, John 17.24.
that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may
behold my glory which thou have given me, for thou lovedst me before the
foundation of the World. The insisting upon his most endearing Relation to him,
Father; the manner of expression, I will; and the enforcing it with the
consideration of the everlasting Love that he bare to him, show how much the
Heart of Christ was set upon this matter. The views of Christ, as lifted up on
the Cross, have been unspeakably refreshing to them here below; How much more
will the views of him be so upon the Throne above, Ephesians. 1.21, 22.
where he is exalted far above all principality and power, and might and
dominion, and every name that is named not only in this world, but in that
which is to come, all things being put under his feet? It cannot but be so,
considering how fit and reasonable a constitution this is, how honorable to
him, that it is his reward for what he endured on their account, and that of the
rest of their Brethren; that he is now in a condition to vindicate his own
Honor against all those whom they formerly saw to the great grief of their
Souls reproaching, despising, hating and opposing of him; that he is able to
save his whole Church, and fulfill all the promises made unto her. He is in such
Circumstances that he can give Eternal life to all that John 17.3.
the Father gave him, for he has a power over all Flesh given him to that end.
Ephesians. 1.22, 23.
And he is head over all things unto his Church, which is his body, the fullness
of him that fills all in all.

6. His entire Faithfulness and Devotedness to his Father. How amiable a sight
is an eminent Saint on Earth, on whom the Divine Image is stamped, the whole
tenor of whose life shows the sincerity of his aims for God, and the purity of
his affections to him? Such a one is a very valuable thing, like a small but
exact Medal of a great King; and it is Pity there should be the same reason to
enhance the worth of the one as of the other, the great scarcity of them. And
yet there is no such person to be found on Earth but has his Blemishes, and
sometimes takes a wrong Step or two; as the most exact compass in some places
has its Variations. What then will it be to behold our Lord Jesus, the
brightest and most perfect Exemplar of Fidelity to, and Zeal for his Father's
Interest and Honor! For he not only leads a life of Glory above, but a life of
Service too: Romans 6.10.
In that he lives, he lives unto God. Both as Priest and King he faithfully
manageth all things with due Respects to his Father's Will and Glory, and goes
on continually beating down every person and thing that exalt themselves
against him, till all being brought into an entire subjection to him, the
Kingdom be resigned up into his Father's Hands.

7. The excellent State of all that are present with him, Angels and departed
Saints. For in the same Firmament where the Sun is, these Stars are fixed and
shine with a distinct Glory. His Government is acceptable, and all his Subjects
easy and orderly; noble and holy, numerous and inexpressibly happy. The place
where they are, as St. Peter styles it, 2 Pet. 1.17.
The most excellent Glory. Who can tell what noble Creatures the good Angels
are, or how many Myriads of them there be? Or give us a clear Comment on St.
Paul's words, where he makes a distinction between principalities and powers,
and thrones and dominions? Colos. 1.16.
Whither some of them are subordinated to others is not so clear. But sure we
are they are all subjected to Christ, and there is not the least shadow of
Confusion or Disorder among them: The Spirits of just Men there are perfect,
and their number daily increasing: None there has so much as a Thorn in his
Foot, a Cloud on his Face, a Tear in his Eye, or a Spot on his Soul. There Is
neither Pride nor Envy, Jealousy nor Strife, Weakness or Folly, to render them
uneasy to themselves or each other; they are like flaming Tapers in a Branch of
burnished Gold, which so mingle their several Lights, that at a distance they
seem to be but one, though indeed they are many. They live in glorious Light,
entire Love, and perfect Harmony, and such a fullness of Joy, that there is no
room for any Sorrow to creep in among them. Now if the Queen of Sheba, when she
saw the Glory and Wisdom of Solomon, the Stateliness and Magnificence of his
Buildings, and the Riches, Beauty, and Order of his Court, was wrapped up into
such an Admiration of him, and said, 1 King 10.7, 8.
Happy are these thy servants which stand continually before thee: Who can
imagine the Ecstasies of a holy Soul when brought into the presence of Christ,
the Glory of whose Court and Government does more exceed his, than the place
where Christ is is higher than that Throne on which Solomon sat.

8. The universal Adoration given to Christ by all the Host of Heaven. They all
say, with a loud voice, Rev. 5.12, 13.
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom,
and strength, and honor and glory, and blessing. And they actually give him
what they acknowledge him to be so worthy of; for they add blessing, and
honor, and glory, and power be unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto
the Lamb for ever and ever. O the pleasant melodious found of this Song (sung
by so many sweet Voices in the heavenly Choir) to a holy Soul that sees so much
of Excellency and Glory in Christ, and is so sensible of the straitness of his
own narrow Spirit, that he unfeignedly wishes that wherever there is a Heart,
he had a Throne, and is daily grieved here below to behold him so despised and
rejected of Men, that know neither him nor their own Mercies!

So much for that second Consideration. The State that Christ is in, and what
shall be manifested concerning him above. To this I must add,

3. The Circumstances which holy Men themselves shall be in when present with
him.

And here consider 1. what lies in the Text, viz. The being absent from the
body, i. e. the present one. Not that it can be the happiness of a Soul to be
eternally unclothed of any body at all, and commence a purely naked Spirit; nor
the matter of a regular desire. Departed Spirits retain an inclination to their
old Colleague, and the being reunited to it when it is so much improved, as it
shall be at the last day, will be an additional bliss to what they now enjoy.
But yet a removal from this Body as now it is, where the bright Sword is so
much impaired by the rusty Sheath wherein it is lodged, may justly be esteemed
no small advantage. For what vile things are these Bodies of ours at present?
It Is an humbling description given of us while we are in this World, Job 4.19.
Chapter 17.14.
that we dwell in houses of clay whose foundation is in the dust: that
corruption is our father, and the worm our mother and our sister; and these
unnatural Parents will ere long devour their Children. How many inconveniences
and evils are we subject to while we are lodged in these sorry Tenements?
Sleep, which is the rest of our Nature, is the Image of Death, and interrupts
our most noble Thoughts and Designs. It Is to life, like long and frequently
returning Parentheses in an Author, that suspend his sense, and mar the beauty
of his Style. The several Creatures that we live upon, revenge themselves upon
us; for much of our precious time is eaten up while we feed upon them. And he
that never found any ones Table to be a snare to him, is a perfect Man indeed.
Recreations, tho innocent and necessary, are a great Diversion from the main
business of Life, and hinder the Rational and Divine Exercise and Improvement
of the Faculties of our Souls. How does the providing Accommodations for these
Bodies of ours engross our Thoughts, take off the edge and vigor of our
Affections from heavenly things, steal away our hearts from God, and the one
thing necessary, and fill us with pale Fears and perplexing Cares, so that we
neglect our Duty, or perform it with abundance of coldness, and a world of
distraction? How much guilt do we contract? How many follies are we betrayed
into out of an inordinate love of bodily Pleasure, and a sinful fear of bodily
Pains?

How many Sins are Men strongly inclined to by their Constitution and
Complexion? We need to make but one visit to a melancholy Person, and we shall
presently see what a fatal Enemy Bodily-Temper is to a Life of Grace and Peace?
How often does Sin enter in at our Ears, and our Eyes? The Christian has far
more reason to complain of being deceived by his Senses, than the Philosopher
has? How frequently do bodily Passions darken our Minds, and cloud our
Judgments, and involve us in Practical as well as Speculative Errors? And the
weakness and disorders of the Flesh cramp the forward motions of a willing
Spirit?

What a multitude of tormenting Diseases are they subject to, which shatter our
Understandings, and bow down our Spirits to a continual Meditation on our
Misery; are an Obstruction to the present performance of Duty, as well as a
Chastisment for our former neglects; and expose us to strong Temptations to
impatience and fretting against Gods, jealousies and hard thoughts of him. How
many cruel methods of Cure are we forced to submit to? How many Potions do we
sometimes swallow down, which are so very nauseous, that they would make a man
Sick, if they did not find him so? And when the Tempest is over, how much time
and pains does it cost us to stop the Leaks, and piece up the ruins of the poor
weather beaten Vessel? All which too is but the rigging it out for a new Storm
that will arise again in a few days. For the Sun does not more certainly and
more constantly run through the same Signs, than many pass through the same
Diseases. And they who happily escape such Calamities as these, shall have the
rough Wind often blowing upon them from some other Corner, in this open State
where we are so much exposed every moment.

It Is no small part of the Happiness of departed Saints, that they are absent
from such a Body as this is, which yet they know shall be restored to them with
so great advantage at the last day.

2. Consider the happiness of their Souls. They shall be perfectly conformed to
God's Image, and satisfied with his Likeness. They shall never any more groan
as now they do, Wretched Creature that I am, who have so much of Corruption,
and so little of Christ in me! In this World sometimes they are sick of love to
him, Cant. 2.5.
but have oftener reason to be so for want of it. There they shall love him as
they would, which they never could do before. They shall have no chilness on
their Spirits, no coldness on their Hearts. Never more shall that doleful cry
be heard, Cant. 3.1.
We sought him whom our souls loved, but we found him not. Now they have a
small glimpse of him in an Ordinance, as a Man of a Star through a glass held
in a shaking and trembling hand, which he just sees and loses. Now a Cloud is
often drawn between him and them, but then they shall with a steady Eye always
behold his pleased and glorious Face. They sup with him now, and how sweet, but
oh how short is the Banquet! But then they shall always eat and drink with him
at his Table, sit with him on his Throne, as he sat down on his Father's
Throne; shall be Heirs together with him, and have a Kingdom appointed to each
of them, as his Father has appointed one for him. By such earthly Expressions,
because we are not capable of understanding heavenly Language, does the
Scripture shadow forth to us their most intimate and delightful Converse and
Communion with him; and how in their respective Measures and Degrees they shall
be partakers together with him of such Bliss and Glory, as eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, nor can it enter into our hearts to conceive. Now all these
things being laid together, no wonder that holy Souls are willing to be present
with the Lord. One would think that all the true Lovers of Christ should say,
not as his Disciples, Let us go away and die with him, John 11.16.
but let us go away and live, and be for ever with him. And so they would, but
that there is a Lion in the way; Death is the passage to him. They must be
absent from the Body, before they can get to him, a thing that few have a heart
to desire, tho our Apostle and his Brethren did so. Which brings me to the

II Point. It Is possible for a holy Person to be willing to dye, rather than
live any longer, that he may be with Christ in Heaven.

I shall endeavor to open this in these following Propositions.

1. All sincere Christians are willing to be with Christ above. For they
profess themselves to be Pilgrims and Strangers on the Earth, and declare
plainly by the Tenor of their Lives, that they seek another Country. Their
Conversations and their Hearts are in Heaven, they have set their Affections
upon, and seek after the things that are above, Colos. 3.1, 2.
where Christ sits at the right hand of God. They love him more than life it
self, and cannot bear the thoughts of being eternally at so great a distance
from him. They have been drawn to him by that promise among others, John 12.26.
Where I am, my servant also shall be; the fulfilling of it therefore cannot
but be grateful to them. It Is the main business of their Lives to prepare for
an eternal Abode with him, and Ministration before him in the holiest of all.
This is what they have in their eye, as the great end of their attendance on
him in his Ordinances. And is it possible for them to be unwilling to enjoy
what they are continually providing for? They hope for Heaven, and that cannot
be without desiring to be there, that they may have the nearest Conjunction
with him, and the fullest Enjoyment of him.

2. All holy Souls are willing in the general to dye some time or other, that
they may be with him. This follows from the foregoing particular. They know
there is no other way but being absent from the Body to get to him. This
therefore does so far reconcile them to Death, that they had rather on the
whole submit to its stroke, than to an eternal distance from him whom their
Soul loves. They fear the King of Terrors indeed, but they fear and abhor an
everlasting Separation from Christ a great deal more. Tho when it comes to the
Point, many of them are afraid to dye, and ready to contradict all again; yet
they would not for all this World, and the Glory of it live always, if they
might, in their present State. And this does not flow from a sullen and
impatient humor. For,

3. A holy Soul's willingness to dye, proceeds from noble Principles. He is not
like the men of this World, who when crossed, in discontent, passion, and
despair, madly wish for Death, and sometimes sinfully hasten it; which is not a
desiring to be with Christ, but only to be out of their present Misery. Not but
that a sincere Christian may have those short-lived fits and pangs that are
very unbecoming; but these are the sinful Infirmities of the man, not the holy
Groanings of the Saint within, which we are now speaking of. The accidental
fretting of a rich and generous Wine must be distinguished from its natural
Ferment.

It Is true, indeed, a sense of those Miseries that press so hard upon them, is
a help to these desires. Being burdened, we groan after the heavenly House. 2
Cor. 5.4.
But the true Springs of their willingness to depart, are such as these: A
certain Knowledge and serious Consideration of the Happiness of being with
Christ, and how much better that is than to continue here. A new Nature that
tends to the place whence it came. A Divine Faith; Love to Christ; some degree
of a weanedness from, and deadness to this World, and a serious preparation for
the next; some good hopes, through Grace, of Eternal Life; some taste of the
sweetness of an imperfect fellowship with Christ here below, and desires of
drinking more of this Water of Life at the Fountainhead. These are the things
that make these Doves be upon the wing, ready to fly away toward Heaven.

But yet they are not too forward to be gone. For,

4. This willingness is duly regulated with an entire submission to the Divine
Will. Tho they are in a close and painful Confinement, yet they are not for
breaking Prison, but resolve to wait till they are released by Authority. They
are not like an hasty Clock that out-runs time, and strikes before the hour is
come. Tho they are willing rather to depart, yet they are contented to stay as
long as God has any Work and Service for them to do in this World; considering
that the Presence of Christ, when they are introduced into it, will make
abundant amends for the delays and sufferings of a few moments; and the more
they do for him, the greater shall be their reward. But tho that be so very
great; yet

5. There are many things that do check and abate these Inclinations of a holy
Soul.

A real desire of being further serviceable to the interest of Christ in this
World. This was the Apostle's case, who was willing to have his happiness
suspended for a time, because to abide in the flesh was more needful for
others. Phil. 1.24.


The weakness of their Faith, and love to Christ. Too great addictedness to
this World. Immoderate love to near Relations, with some touches of a distrust
of Divine Providence, as tho God either would not, or could not take care of
them and their Affairs, when we are gone.

But the more common and powerful Obstructions are these two.

1. A natural Fear of Death. Could they with a sudden Spring leap over the
Gulf, and in a moment be with Christ; Could they but as easily get up to the
place where he is, as his three Disciples to the top of that Mountain where he
was transfigured; they would do it without any reluctance or delay. But alas,
the dark Valley must first be passed through, Death must first be endured by
them; a fear of which the God of Nature has inwrought into the very Frame and
Constitution of Man, it being necessary in order to the good Government of this
World. His own commands are enforced with the promises of a long Life, and the
threatenings of a speedy Death; which Sanction of his would lose its edge and
force, did not Men love the one, and dread the other. Were it not for this, the
refined sort of Mankind would sinfully neglect the Body, and never undergo all
that Slavery which now they endure for its Preservation. Upon every cross
accident men would lay violent hands on themselves; at least, on every sore
Affliction they would boldly cut the Cable that fastens them to this wretched
Shore, and sail away to the invisible World, and this Earth be unpeopled, and
much thinner of Inhabitants than God has designed it should be for a season.
The Magistrate would then always bear the Sword in vain, for no one would fear
the edge of it. All places would be filled with Rapine and Blood; for he that
despises his own Life, is master of his Neighbor's almost whenever he
pleases. And holy Men would not have that opportunity for the exercise and
discovery of their Graces, as now they have, in conquering the Reluctancies of
Nature, and laying down their heads to receive the fatal stroke with steddiness
and composure of Mind. So to do, is great indeed. For to endure tedious
Sickness, and sharp Pains, the rude Knocks, the strong and repeated Blows that
this Enemy gives to break asunder Body and Soul, which are so strongly fastened
together; to be cast as a noisome Lump into the Grave, there to crumble into
Dust, to be triumphed over by worms, and turned into corruption and rottenness;
these are very formidable things. How does this beat down the ascending Flame,
and hinder its rise! It is hereupon with a Christian, as with an affectionate
Child that is in another Land, and desirous to go home that he may be with his
beloved Father. But there is a dangerous Sea to be first passed over, and
therefore he often comes down to the Shore, looks wishly over to the other
side, and would be glad he was there. But when he sees the swelling Billows,
his heart misgives him, and he hardly knows how to think of venturing and
launching forth.

2. The want of Assurance. Many are ignorant, unskilful, and negligent in the
great work of Self-examination. Many have but very low degrees of grace; the
handwriting of God's Spirit on their hearts is in so very small a Character
that they are not able to read it. Too many are loose and careless in their
Walk. Not a few are overrun with Melancholy, and have dismal apprehensions of
their state, tho a judicious Stander by may perceive the goodness of it; the
dark side of the Lanthorn is toward themselves, and tho others behold the
Grace of God in them as a burning and a shining Light, yet the Persons
themselves cannot discern it. And in this gloomy State they conclude if they
should dye, they should be banished from the Presence of Christ; and under these
apprehensions Death is such a thing, as strikes Terror and Confusion into every
corner of their Souls.

These are the things whereby the Soul of a sincere Christian is pressed down,
as the inferior Air is in the Judgment of Modern Philosophers, by the incumbent
weight of the superior Air and Clouds; which as soon as it is in any degree
unfettered from, by a spring that is natural to it self, it flies up again.
Which brings me to the

6. As the heavenly Life improves, so holy Souls get ground on the fears of
Death, and are more willing to be gone, that they may be with Christ.

As Grace and Peace are multiplied in their Souls, as these living Waters do
increase, they lift them higher and nearer toward Heaven. The young and tender
Eagles are afraid to stir out of the Nest, and try their feeble Wings; but when
they arrive to a greater strength, they can mount upwards with a vigorous
flight. When they are arrived at the same height and stature in Christ as Paul
was; when they can say on as good grounds as he, To us to live is Christ, and
to dye is gain; especially at some seasons when their Hearts are listed up into
a heavenly Frame, and enlarged in sweet Communion with God in Christ: They can
long for Death, welcome it, and triumph over it. When their near Relations and
Friends stand round about their Sick-Beds very Sad and Melancholy, they are the
only cheerful Persons in the Room; they can die smiling, and spend their
expiring Breath in Hallelujahs, that bear some resemblance with those they are
to sing for ever. Their last Speeches are like the grateful strokes of a
skilful Musician when his Instrument is almost brought in Tune; a delightful
Praeludium to the sweet Melody that shall immediately succeed. Hence it follows,

7. That this is not a mark whereby to try the truth, so much as the strength
of our Grace. For though there be some true desires in the Soul this way, yet
they may be so born down by many things, that they are not easily discernible;
like Seed in the ground that may be rooted there, but yet has not shot through
the surface of the Earth, nor is it crowned with a beautiful Flower; or if it
has been so, yet may be covered by an extraordinary Snow, and be invisible for
the present. All cannot attain to Paul's Height and Spirit; the Children come
behind the young Men, and the young Men themselves fall short of those that are
Fathers in Christ. Indeed no great measure of this can be attained, but by
great improvements in Grace, a long and close walking with God, and contending
with Flesh and Blood that strongly oppose and speak contrary things.

But yet to prevent Sloth, and rouse up our dull and sluggish Hearts; I add,

8. That more of this Spirit ought diligently to be labored after.

I shall have occasion briefly to urge this in the Application. Which I now
hasten to.

Use 1. Is Heaven desirable to you under this notion whereby our Apostle sets
it forth? It is amiable in your Eyes, as a place where you hope to be eased of
all those Afflictions that sit so very uneasy upon your Spirits. You like it as
a Refuge from Hell: But can you savor it, and take any delight in it under
this consideration, as a place where you shall be for ever with Christ? You may
know this by the standing frame and workings of your Hearts toward him. If
your Eyes have not been opened to see his Beauty, if your Hearts have not been
drawn to him, if your Souls do not pant and thirst after him, and rejoice in
him; if he be as a withered Flower to you, the Heaven which the Gospel has
propounded to us, cannot be grateful to you. How can such a Man tune his Voice
to sing the Song of the Lamb, or take any pleasure in that place, if it were
possible for him to crowd into it?

2. See to it that you be persons so qualified, that when you die, you may be
present with the Lord. Suppose God should say to you, This night shall thy Soul
be required of thee, Whither do you think it would go? Don't many of your
Hearts misgive you, and your guilty Consciences tell you, not to be with
Christ, but with Devils and damned Spirits beneath? Die ere long you must, and
the youngest and strongest among you know not how soon. There Is a common
Executioner that stands invisibly by us all, and has not promised the Civility
to wait till we give the Sign; he may suddenly and without any warning give us
the fatal Blow. It may be in a little while you may be filled with such
intolerable Pains, that you may long to be absent from the Body, that you may
be out of your Misery. But yet how will you be able to wish for that, if you
are tortured with Fears of hearing those dreadful words, Depart from me ye
cursed?

Will you then believe on the Lord Jesus Christ with all your hearts? For the
unbelievers will be shut out.

Will you seek after Regeneration? For verily, verily, John 3.3.
I say unto you, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
Give God no rest till he put this good Principle into you, that you may cease
from evil, and do good. Without this, the most glittering Profession will not
avail; and multitudes will find it so when it is too late. You have the
Superscription of God upon you, see that his Image also be stamped on your
Souls, otherwise you will be rejected. Our Savior in propounding the Parable
of the Virgins, Matthew. 25.
speaks of them as though there was an equal number of wise and foolish ones,
five of one sort, and five of the other. But in our days we have reason to
apprehend the latter do vastly exceed the former; and then they will look like
foolish ones indeed, when that Scripture shall be fulfilled, wherein it is
written, Luke 13.26, 27.
that the Judge shall say to many that have eat and drunk in his presence, and
heard him in their streets, I know not whence you are, Depart from me all ye
workers of iniquity. The Sentence, is Severe, but Righteous, and Univerfal too.
All that fall under that Character shall fall under that Condemnation; and it is
worth our while to observe the disdainful manner wherein their Plea is
overruled, and Execution awarded against them. Then shall ye begin to say, q.
d. this is so idle and frivolous an Allegation in the behalf of the workers of
Iniquity, that they have eat and drunk in my presence, and I have taught in
their streets, that I can have no patience to hear it: I will cut off such
foolish Babblings and idle Arguments immediately, for they do not deserve any
regard. And I tell you, I know not whence you are. I scorn to be thought to
have any Acquaintance with, or Respect for so vile a Generation of Men. I often
warned them that I would disown them; and I now judicially declare, I am
unalterably fixed, and will never change my mind.

Will you serve and imitate the Example of Christ? For if any man, John 12.26.
says he, will serve me, let him follow me, and where I am there shall my
servant also be.

Oh that Men were wise for themselves, that they would consider and prepare for
their latter End, that then an entrance may be administered to them into the
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior!

3. Let holy Souls labor after this divine and raised frame of Spirit, to be
willing rather to be absent from the body, that they may be present with the
Lord. How willing was Christ to come from Heaven, a far better Place than this
where we are, to undergo a sharper Death for you, than you can suffer to be
with him? And should you be unwilling to depart hence, and go to him? How
unkindly may he take such a temper, when he is gone to prepare so glorious a
Place for you, that you should be so backward to enter into it? He desires that
you may be where he is, to behold his glory; And should not the same mind be in
you that is in him? What though Death lie in the way? Is it not an Enemy that
he has Conquered, and plucked out its Sting? What have you in this World, the
Element of Sin and Sorrow, whose Pleasures are so thin, whose Miseries are so
weighty, that you should hang about it, and cleave so fast to it? Methinks you
should groan earnestly within your selves to be gone to that better Place and
Company.

That you may be willing, draw off your Affections from every thing here below;
take heed of over-indulging the Body, and the Pleasures of it; familiarize
Death to your selves by serious Meditations; increase in the Knowledge of the
Mystery of the Father, and of Christ, Faith in him, and love to him; beware of
wilful Sins; get and keep your Evidences for Heaven clear, and let the Glory of
God and Christ be the end of your lives.

4. Let not surviving Friends too much regret and bewail the Death of their
Holy Relatives. They are gone from us, but they are with Christ, where they
were and are willing to be.

And this I doubt not is the Case of your late Reverend deceased Pastor, Mr.
Richard Mayo.

He was a Man of sincere Godliness.

A worthy Person, Mr. Singleton.
sufficiently known in this City for his great Skill and Pains in training up
of Youth, was the happy Instrument which Providence made use of for the first
awakening and enclining him to look out after God. I have often heard him speak
with great thankfulness both to God and him, of that mixture of Love and
Prudence whereby he gained upon him.

God having engraven a Divine Image upon his Heart, used him as a Seal to
impress the same upon many others. For upon this he soon entered (tho Young)
upon the Sacred Work of the Ministry.

I shall not follow him into all the places of his Abode, tho he was like a Box
of sweet Perfume, that sheds abroad a fragrant Smell whithersoever it is carried
and opened. It shall suffice to take notice of one or two only.

He was fixed for many years at Kingston upon Thames, where he had a large
opportunity for Service, and his Labors were crowned with an answerable
Success. And tho most of the old Disciples that were wont to sit under his
Ministry are dead, yet his Name and Memory still lives, and is very precious
there to this day.

But tho that was the place of his stated Residence, yet he was not confined to
it, and 'twas pity he should. He kept up for several Years, a weekly Lecture in
London at White-Chappel Church, where multitudes flocked after him to that
degree, that many were wont to hang about the very Windows, glad to fix their
Foot in any place where they might but have the advantage of hearing him; so
that they darkened as well as filled the place. And seeing the Multitude, he was
moved with Compassion, opened his Mouth and taught them with great Life and
Zeal, a more than ordinary Spirit being poured out on him and them, so that the
Word of the Lord ran and was glorified. Such a deep tincture and savor of God,
Christ, and Religion, was by his means left on the Spirits of many, as is not
worn out to this very day.

At length came that Black day, wherein so many hundred faithful and excellent
Ministers of Christ were ejected; and he among the rest. But yet they could not
wholly silence him, 1 Cor. 9.16.
because he remembered that it was written, Woe be unto me, if I Preach not the
Gospel. I pass over all the following time, which he with the rest of his
Brethren spent with a great variety of interchangeable Providence till he came
to be fixed with you.

You know his preaching among you to have been solid, weighty, and substantial,
apt at once to instruct and move. For the matter of it, it was things of the
greatest importance, Christ crucified, the necessity of an Interest in him,
Conformity and Obedience to him; imputed Righteousness and inherent too, not
putting one into the room, or exalting it to the Prejudice of the other, both
being necessary in their proper places, and to distinct ends, which he knew
well how to assign, and warmly to press. Three great Excellencies in his
Preaching I have often observed, that it was methodical, clear, and genuinely
derived from his Text, like ripe and fair fruit that drops from the Bough
whereon it naturally grew. I had rather that your Lives than my Tongue or Pen,
should show how successful his Labors have been among you; yet I have had the
opportunity of knowing that here he has been far from laboring in vain; tho
it cannot be presumed, but that he has done a great deal more good than ever
came to my knowledge, or even to his own, while he was here below.

As for his great insight into Divinity, both Polemical and Practical, his
Learning and Ingenuity, you may have a taste of all these if you peruse what he
himself has published; a Catalogue of which you will find annexed to the end of
this Discourse. And indeed Men's own Books are far better Pictures of the
Authors, than any of those which their Friends are sometimes pleased to set
before them. We may in these Points more fully and exactly discern what manner
of Men they are, by what they themselves have written, than by any
Representations that another can make of them. The Understanding Reader may
become more so, by a diligent consulting of what he has printed; and then will
have reason to thank me, tho I only do the Office of a hand in the Margent,
point out to him those remarkable things that deserve a very attentive perusal.

Besides all this, he had some other most valuable Qualifications; such as a
great love for Peace and Union. This he unweariedly pursued with a godly Zeal
in despite of all Discouragements; a thing that all wise and good Men cannot
but wish to see effected for the Glory of God, and the public Welfare. For
Animosities and Divisions, slaming Anger and Passion in the Bosoms of Brethren
one against another, will naturally produce as many terrible Effects, as
blazing Comets in the Heavens are generally thought to presage.

Add to all this his great Sincerity, and an excellent Sweetness of a natural
Temper that ran through his whole Converse, like a Golden Thread through a
Garment.

With such a one you may be sure that I could not but lead a very happy and
comfortable Life. We drew in the same Yoke, and the same Way, though indeed on
my side with a vastly unequal strength. He treated me with the same gentleness
and kindness as the right hand does the left. The pleasure of a Minister's Life
and the success of his Labors greatly depend on this; the contrary will weaken
his Hands, and is enough to break his very Heart. Where two are joined together
to serve their common Lord in one place, though matters should not come to an
open Breach and Quarrel, yet if there be but a shiness, or a secret displeasure
against each other tainting their Spirits; or if there be but oblique
Reflections, it is like the two Eyes in a Man's Head turned several ways and
looking ill-favouredly on each other, a very unpleasant and uncomely thing, and
very prejudicial to the Body which they are to serve: But God be thanked it was
not so with us. We have lived and labored together among you for about the
space of eight Years, and matters have been carried with the same endearing
Affection on his part, and the same reverential Respect on mine, as are wont to
be between a Father and a Son; which have been so far from decaying, that they
were daily on the growing hand: Like the Joints of the Body the longer we grew,
the more firmly we were knit together; of which he gave me very ample Proofs,
particularly throughout his late Sickness, which put a period to his Days about
the 65th Year of his Age.

His make and the strength of his Constitution, and his uninterrupted state of
Health for so many Years (which made his Life like a strong Thread drawn out to
a great length without any Knots) promised a much longer continuance here. And
could the Skill of his Eminent Physicians, who were also his cordial Friends,
have effected it, we had ye^ enjoyed him. But experience shows us, that neither
the natural Strength of the Place, nor all the contrivances of the most
excellent Artists, are able to keep a Castle from being taken, which is
strongly besieged by a numerous and poten^ Enemy, and furiously battered by a
great train of Artillery.

He was attacked by a great variety of Distempers; and while endeavors were
using to dismount one Battery, another as strong and threatening was raised; and
then no wonder the Fortress was so speedily taken, even tho the Garrison had not
been weakened by any foregoing Siege. But there was no Distemper in his Mind,
tho so many in his Body; his Soul was in health and at ease. Throughout the
whole of his Sickness of six Weeks continuance, all was clear between God and
him. His end was like the Light of the Evening when the Sun sets, 2 Samuel
23.4.
an Evening without any Clouds. He said to my self, when I enquired of him,
concerning that matter, I have not indeed those raptures of Joy which some have
felt, (tho yet, he added, blessed be God, I have sometimes tasted of them too)
but I have a comfortable well-grounded hope of Eternal Life. Another time, I
have had my Infirmities and Failings; but my heart has been right with God as
to the main, and I look for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to Eternal Life.
Again, another time, I know that I have passed from Death to Life. And again,
Blessed be God for our Lord Jesus Christ who has delivered me from the wrath
to come. In the presence of others that stood by him, when the sudden Blast was
so strong as almost to puff out the Lamp of Life, expecting to dye in a very
few moments, he said in the words of the Psalmist, Into thy hands I commit my
Spirit; thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth; and this was uttered by him
with a more than ordinary cheerfulness visibly spread on his Face. He would
often say in his Sickness, If God has any pleasure in me, and any more work
for me to do, he will raise me up; but if not, lo, here am I, let him do with
his servant what seems him good.

In short, I could neither observe my self, nor learn from those that were
constantly about him ( who must know this matter better than any others, and
would not lie for God himself) that he had the least Darkness upon his spirit
as to his present and future State from the beginning of his Sickness, till he
gave up the Ghost, which he did the last Lord's Day about five in the Morning,
the time when he was wont to arise and prepare himself for his Sacred Work.
Then did he enter upon his Everlasting Sabbath, to the very great loss of his
own Family, of this Society in particular, and indeed of the Church of God, and
Interest of Christ in general among us. To our great loss, but his own gain;
and therefore weep not as those that are without hope or comfort. For he is
entered into the Joy of his Lord; he is gone within the Vail, and has left the
People weeping without, to whom he shall never return. For the Eye that saw him
in this place with so much delight, shall see him here no more; the Ear that so
often heard him with pleasure, shall hear his Voice no more.

But tho the Sower be dead, let not the Seed be so. Let me bespeak you in the
words of the Apostle, Heb. 13.7.
Remember him that had the rule over you, Who so often spoke to you the word of
God, whose faith follow, considering the end of his conversation. For his END
was PEACE.

The God of all Grace enable us to prepare to follow, that when our turn shall
come, we may also go to the great Shepherd of the Sheep, even that Jesus who
has loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his own Blood, and may be for ever
with him singing Hallelujahs to God, and to the Lamb that sits upon the
Throne.

FINIS.
BOOKS, etc. published by the late Reverend Mr. Richard Mayo.
(...), or a Plain Answer to this Practical Question, What course may a
Christian take to have his heart quickened and enlarged in the the Duty of
Secret Prayer?

A Sermon showing, That the Papists dangerously corrupt Holy Worship by their
sinful Prayers to Saints and Angels. In the Morning Exercise against Popery.

A Sermon showing, What we must do to prevent and cure Spiritual Pride. In the
Continuation of the Practical Morning Exercise. Vol. 3.

A Sermon showing, From what Fear of Death are the Children of God delivered by
Christ, and by what means does he deliver them from it. In the Casuistical
Morning Exercises. Vol. 4.

The Life and Death of Dr. Staunton. To which is added the Doctor's Treatise of
Christian Conference. And his Dialogue betwixt a Minister and a Stranger.

Two Conferences. One betwixt a Papist and a Jew. The other betwixt a
Protestant and a Jew. In Two Letters from a Merchant in London to his
Correspondent in Amsterdam.

A Letter from Leghorn.

A Comment on the Epistle to the Romans. In the Second Volume of Mr. Pool's
English Annotations.

The Cause and Cure of Strife and Divisions.

BOOKS Printed for Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultrey.
A Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable Sir John Shorter, Lord Mayor of
London. By Nath. Tailor.

A Sermon of the Instrumentality of Faith. And a Sermon upon the Resurrection.
Both by W. Cross, M. A.

A Sermon at the Funeral of Dr. Jeremiah Butt. By Ed. Veal.

Infant Baptism God's Ordinance. By Michael Harrison.

A Sermon at the Funeral of Mrs. Lobb late Wife of Mr. Stephen Lobb. By Samuel
Slater.

God the Guide of Youth. A Sermon Preached by T. Cruso.

Instructions about Heart-Work, what is to be done on God's part and ours, for
the cure and keeping the Heart, etc. By that Eminent Gospel Minister Mr.
Richard Alleyn. With a Preface by Dr. Annesley. The 2d Edition.

The Evidence of Things not seen: Or diverse Spiritual and Philosophical
Discourses, concerning the state of Holy Men after Death. By that Eminently
learned Divine Moses Amyraldus. Translated out of the French Tongue by a
Minister of the Church of England.

A Discourse of Christian Religion in sundry points, Preached at the Merchants
Lecture. By Tho Cole.

A Discourse concerning trouble of Mind and the disease of Melancholy, in
three Parts; written for the use of such as are or have been exercised by the
same. By Tim. Rogers, M A. who was long afflicted with both. To which is added
some Letters from several Divines, relating to the same Subject.

Love to Christ necessary for all to escape the Curse at his coming. By Tho.
Doolittle, M. A.

An Exposition of the Assemblies Shorter Catechism, with Practical Inferences
from each Question. By John Flavell late Minister of the Gospel at Dartmouth in
Devon.

A Discourse of secret Prayer, first Preached and now Published at the request
of those that heard it. By Samuel Slater Minister of the Gospel.

The future State; or a Discourse attempting some display of the Souls
Happiness, in regard to that eternally progressive Knowledge, or eternal
increase of Knowledge, and the consequences of it, which is among the blessed
in Heaven. By a Country Gentleman, a Worshipper of God in the way of the
Church of England.

ERRATA.
Page 10. l. antep. r. is as. p. 14. l. 5. for Gods r. God.


