PUBLISHED, By Her MAJESTY'S Special Command.

A SERMON Concerning the folly of Atheism; Preached before the QUEEN, AT
WHITE HALL, FEBRUARY 22. 1690/1.

By THO. TENISON, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to THEIR MAJESTY'S.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. M DC XC I.

A SERMON CONCERNING THE Folly of Atheism
PSALM XIV. 1. The fool has said in his heart, There is no God: They are
corrupt, they have done abominable works, there is none that does good.
THOUGH the Being of a God is, in Religion, the first and most fundamental
Article; yet it may be proved by some foregoing Principles of Natural Reason.
This may be done, but the attempt seems unnecessary in a Christian
Congregation, where the Members profess, not only, That there is a God who made
them; but also, That there is a Messiah who redeemed them.

Taking it therefore, here, as a confessed Principle, That God is; I shall make
it my business to represent to you these Two Things:

1. The Folly of those who live without God in the world. 2. The Vileness

For these two Remarks are here offered by the Royal Psalmist in the Text; The
fool has said in his heart, There is no God: they are corrupt, they have done
abominable works; there is none that does good.

Holy David does, here,

In the 1st. place,

Take notice of the Folly of those who live without God in the world.

They can never be without his Essential Presence, nor always without an in
ward sense of it; there is no worldly Charm that can, perpetually, keep the
Conscience from such reflections; but whilst they remain insensible of a God,
their way is their Folly. And

1st. They want Knowledge and Judgment.

2dly. They want Wisdom and Discretion.

Is It. They want Knowledge and Judgment, and commit wonderful mistakes about
Principles common to Mankind. For as a natural Fool may sometimes speak a
shrewd and seasonable thing; so an irreligious one, tho he has, in other
respects, ability of mind (as Judas and Demas themselves had, being wise in
their generation;) yet with reference to the Existence of a Deity, he is guilty
of gross and palpable Errors: None deserve those Epithetes more than these that
sollow; viz. That there is an Effect without a Cause. That an insufficient
Cause can produce a perfect and sufficient Effect. That something (without an
Almighty Power) can come out of nothing. They are to be derided rather than
confuted; who shall have the confidence to say, That a House had no Builder;
that all the Materials fell into that useful Order by Accident; and that the
Master of the House Sprung at last, out of the very Frame of it: The Atheist
does not say this in terms, but he maintains that which is equally absurd: For,
seeing the Heavens and the Earth are imperfect beings, and did not, could not
make themselves; he that denies that a God, or a First, and absolutely perfect
Being, was the Maker of them, does by consequence, set before us imperfect
Causes and Effects, existing without a Cause. And seeing all things are made in
Number, Weight, and Measure, either he shows his stupidness in not discerning
the Footsteps of Wisdom in the wonderful frame of Nature, which appears the
more regular, the greater portion a man has of the knowledge of the Lines and
Figures of Bodies, and the Rules of Motion; or he ascribes all this to Chance
(which yet is a word he ought not to use, who makes all Causes necessary) and
maintains, that Confusion is the most wise Parent of Order.

Seeing, also, he makes the Soul to be the Temper of the Body; and the
substance, and the modese and motions of it are as distinct from Understanding,
as is the matter and movement of any other Engine, from a reasoning mind; he
makes Nothing to be the Spring of Something; that is, the Constitution of the
Body, which has no thought, nor any thing from whence it can possihly come, to
be the Cause of Thought, of Judgment, of Wisdom, of Conscience.

But (as one of that sort of men has written in one of his Intervals) It Is very
Decam. Physiolog. p. 130, 131
hard to believe, that to produce all the several and curious Organs of Sense
and Memory, could be the work of any thing that had not Understanding: And he
might have added, Much more of the Understanding it self.

And this Error is still the more gross, because the Godless person holds it to
be an Error, whilst he denies the Creation of the World out of nothing; and
then sees not that it is one, when he speaks of the Original of the Soul out of
that which has nothing of Soul in it. Such Inconsistence is a plain indication
of want of judgment; and ungodly men are, in many more particulars, at variance
with themselves.

As for example; In Health they are Atheists; and in Sickness, Superstitious;
They say, all we do is necessary; and yet blame some Actions, and commend
others. They have no Faith about Divine Prophecies, even those which have been
evidently fulfilled in the Coming and Death of Christ, and the precise times of
them; yet they can put their trust in Astrology, which is not so much as good
guessing. They scoff at Good men, and yet cannot but wish, that their latter
end were like heirs. They mock at the Being of Ghosts, in the light, and dread
them in the dark. In company they deny the Existence of Evil Spirits; and fear
to be all alone in the night, lest Evil Spirits should fetch them away. In
fine, men that live without God, are so destitute of Knowledge, that they are a
riddle to themselves.

Nay, even whilst they think they have asserted their Liberty, and that they
are perfect Masters of themselves, they are led captive by the Devil at his
will; for he rules in the hearts of the disobedient.

This shows that part of their Folly, which consists in want of Knowledge and
steady Judgment. And there is,

2dly, A great deal that gives us demonstration of the other part of it, their
want of Wisdom, even that of the Serpent, the doing of things for their own
benefit, safety, and comfort. For,

1st. They use means contrary to their ends.

2dly. They run an infinite hazard, upon inconsiderable motives.

1st. Those who say in their hearts, There is no God, manifest their want of
Wisdom and Discretion, by using means contrary to their End. For one great
pretended End of Atheism and Unbelief, is a deliverance from fear, Lucret. l.
1. Humana ante ocules faede cum vita jaceret in terris oppressa gravi sub
Rellig one, etc.
the making of the mind easy in all a man's thoughts, and words, and actions,
by freeing it from that terror which is struck into it by the apprehension of a
God, as an Observer, a Judge, and an Avenger; as one that will call them to a
severe account for whatsoever they have done in the flesh, whether it be good
or evil.

But the Fear which has Torment, cannot otherwise be wholly prevented, than
either by Innocence, or Repentance, and Application to God; and for the
Expedient of the Epicureans, it brings into the bosom that Anxiety which it
pretends to expel; for men having had experience of their own impotence and
imperfection, and of the weakness and deceitfulness of others, and observing
the daily changes and chances of this world, can by no means be secured against
them, but by the belief of an overruling Providence, and the performance of
such things as may secure to them the Protection of it. He only who is not
conscious to himself of guilt unrepented of, who is sincere in his duty to God
and Man, is capable of remaining without despair, if he should perceive the
frame of Nature ready to be dissolved. Our Savior's question carries its
answer along with it; Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? A weak Faith
is scarce sufficent to keep out fear and trouble: What Peace then can there be,
where there is no faith at all? What Peace can there be to the Wicked,
remaining such, who are without God, without Providence, without inward
Comfort, without help in Nature; without hope in this World, or the Other?

2dly. The want of Wisdom, in irreligious men, is seen, by the infinite hazard
they run, upon inconsiderable motives.

The hazard they run, is the loss of Body and Soul for ever; which loss, though
the Atheists believe not, yet they cannot say it is an Impossibility.

And upon what Temptation is it, that they make this perilous Adventure?

Why! for the sake of a few vile Lusts, and inordinate Passions, the fruit of
which is present shame, and inconvenience: They lose their hopes of being like
Angels for ever, that they may enjoy a few Brutal Pleasures for a few days on
earth.

A man would mortify all those unruly Appetites, with respect even to the
dignity of his own nature, and for the Interests of this life, upon the account
of which this foolish sinner parts with a blessed Eternity.

Wisdom would prescribe Temperance, Justice, Gratitude, Peaceableness, decent
speaking, and the like, if there were no other World; much more does it require
obedience to the reasonable Commands of Religion, when they are means to the
comforts both of this life, and that which is to come.

Nothing was more remote from Wisdom than the choice of Esau; what man of
common understanding would have lost his birthright, to satisfy an impatient
appetite, which might in a little time have bin appeased, without the loss
either of Birthright, or Health? Who then is the foolish Merchant? He,
doubtless, who whilst he deals in the World, parts with a present certainty
upon the probable hopes of very great gain; But will not part with so much as a
Vice which is of no profit to him (with so much as an Oath which offends
others, and weakens his Credit among them, and brings him no imaginable
Advantage) upon the Hopes of Life eternal.

Now the Folly of such Persons is the more notorious, because, whilst they are
blind, they look upon themselves as those, who see furthest into the causes of
things. Thus it happened to the ungodly among the Romans; professing themselves
to be wise, they became fools.

Now to such Folly as consists both in the want of Judgment, and of Wisdom in
the best things, may sitly be joined, that which David (in the second place)
takes notice of in the Text, The vileness of those who live without Religion:
Which is two fold;

1. The vileness of their Temper and Disposition; They are corrupt.

2. The vileness of their Practice, They have done abominable works; There is
none that does good.

1. Atheistical Persons are vile in their temper and inclination. They are
corrupt, or they have corrupted, first themselves, and then their works. There
is rottenness at the heart of them.

Na-bhal is the Original word. From thence a Writer Bythn.
on the Text, will have that of Nebulo derived. He fails in his Etymology, but
his meaning is good; For he would suggest thus much to us, that it is the
knavish man who has said in, or to his heart, There is no God. He is of so
villainous a disposition, as, whilst he believes there is a God, to wish there
were none, because his Vices cannot approve themselves to Wisdom, and Justice,
and Holiness.

Immorality is the beginning of Atheism, and Atheism is the strengthening of
Immorality; for the Immoral first would be glad there were no God, and what
they desire they readily believe; and when once they so believe, then they are
confirm do and encouraged in their Vices, and sin with Assurance.

For Atheism begins, not from the Arguments of a sound Mind Tarq. fatuus,
insanus.
in a sober Temper, but in a sensual Disposition, which inclines Men to seek
out sor colors, whereby they may deceive themselves into an opinion of the
safety of living in a course that pleases them

What they assert through sensuality, that they do, and when they have done it,
they study to make a defense, both that the sting of Conscience may not give
any pain to them, and that they may have something to say to those who reprove
them.

It was from the corrupt hearts of the Rulers, Elders, Scribes, Annas the High
Priest, Caiphas, John, Alexander, and others;

It was (I say) from their love of popularity, and their fear of being looked
upon as openly confuted, that They endeavored to stifle a plain Miracle which
God wrought by St. Peter and St. John, in healing a lame Man, instead of being
convinced by it. When They saw Acts 4. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that they were unlearned and
ignorant Men, they marvelled, and they took knowledge of them that they had
been with Jesus, And beholding the Man which was healed standing with them,
they could say nothing against it. Put when they had commanded them to go aside
out of the Council, they conferred among themselves, saying, What shall we do
to these Men? for that indeed a notable miracle has been done by them, is
manifest to all them that dwell in Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it. But that
it spread no further among the People, let us straightly threaten them, that they
speak henceforth to no Man in this Name.

To the pure all things are pure, but to the defiled, nothing is pure, but the
very Conscience is defiled, the sense they have of things is (by their ill
temper) perfectly corrupted.

If Men had in them a principle of Probity, and were inclined to seek necessary
Truths, and the Rules of Goodness, with impartiality, they would certainly find
them; but having some Lusts or other earthly Interests to gratify, the corrupt
Heart, biasseth the judgment; and they will not understand nor seek after God.
When you speak of a just God, to an unjust Man; of a holy God, to an unclean
Man; of a merciful God, to a cruel Man; of a God that is good, and does good,
to a covetous Man; of a God of condescension, to a proud Man; of a long
suffering God, to a rash and revengeful Man; of a God that rules over all, to
an untractable Man; of a God that will call every Man to an account, to an
unjust Steward; you speak of Pearls to Swine: nay, each of these, has not only
no value for such a God; but there is in them, a wicked prejudice against the
notion of such a Deity; there is an interest (though a wretched one) made by
their earthly Affections, in their Hearts against the Being of him. When you
speak of a Heaven where they neither eat nor drink to an Epicure; of the
Idolatry of the worship of Diana to Demetrius and others who get their living
by making Silver Models of her Temple; you speak to those whom Pleasure and
Interest have rendered deaf.

If a Man could see into the Breast of a godless Person, what a Cave of horror
would he look into? What ungovernableness of Spirit would he behold; what an
unwillingness to own any Lord over it? What height of pride would he find
there? The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God;
God is not in all his thoughts. Psalm. 10. 4.


How is such a one puffed up with this vain conceit that He understands the
deepest secrets of Nature, and is wiser than all the Men of all Ages, who have
by the things that are seen, ascended to the acknowledgment of an invisible
God? What uncharitableness would he see in such a Person, rendering him
distrustful of all the World as designing, and unfaithful? for they that live
without God, mete by the Measures of their own dishonest Hearts.

What disgust would be given him by many filthy and monstrous Lusts, darkning,
by their impure steams, the understandings of knowing Men, and driving them
impetuously into such beastly Follies as are the shame and peril, as well as
the degeneracy of humane nature?

From Hearts so corrupt cannot but proceed first, wishes of Atheism, and when
they have deluded themselves into a conceit that they have their wish, there
cannot but follow (what I am next to Consider.)

2. The vileness of their practice. They have done abominable works; there is
none that does good.

First, There is a natural tendency to such abominable practice, in the Heart
of godless Men

Secondly, It is true in fact, that their Practice is, the Omission of all
good, and the Commission of presumptuous evils.

1. There is a tendency to such abominable practices in the Heart of Godless
Men.

Some Unbelievers have pretended to regulate their practice by Honor, by
Decency, by Discretion, by cunning Craft; they have pretended to sin by Method,
and to act with worldly Safety.

But where there is so ill a Heart, so brutishly inclined, so given up to a
reprobate sense, so void of the Grace of God; it will, upon temptation and
opportunity, break forth into the most execrable abominations.

Our Laws suppose all Murders, Adulteries,' Thefts, and other such violations
of them, to be acted by Persons, who have not the fear of God before their
Eyes. That is the Bridle which will restrain them, if they are not past
restraint.

And if those, who believe in general, that God is, but consider not what they
believe, and forget him, and have him not in their Thoughts, commit very black
Crimes: certainly they preserve not themselves innocent, who are by a corrupt
Heart, enchanted into this worst of persuasions, that there is no God at all.

All find it difficult to live a holy and blameless lise after having
entertained good Principles; after much consideration, and striving to master
themselves, and Prayer to God for his Assistance. How improbable then is it,
that those should be free from presumptuous evils, who neither fear God, nor
regard Man; who make Sense their Guide; who rather give up the Reins to brutal
nature, than endeavor to govern it.

And, 2dly, It is true in fact that their practice is the omission of all good,
and the commission of presumptuous evils.

1. For good, that, says David, is generally omitted amongst them, There is
none of them that does good.

It is true, that ungodly Men do sometimes that which is materially good, to
others; but it is not from the true motives of Goodness. The unjust Judge did
justice, Luke 18. 5.
but 'twas upon Importunity, and to avoid being wearied. Ill Men do good, not
because it is an imitation of God, or pleasing to him; because it is beneficial
to the Community of which they are Members; because it is a means to find mercy
at that day: they will not give up a cup of matter to a Disciple of our blessed
Master Jesus in the name of a Disciple. For they cannot act by principles which
they have not: but, with the Publicans, they do one Courtesy to receive
another; and they have a hook in every gift: They sometimes do a good office
for good Men who may honor them before the People, and serve them in another
way: But the Creatures they most readily support, are Parasites, Flatterers,
the Instruments of their Lust, Injustice and Revenge, and such who know their
several Abominations, and for that reason are feared.

Therefore the Good they do is not properly good. But

2dly, For their Evils, they are formally evil; They are all manner of
Immoralities in the Root of them: For if Atheists actually forbear any Evil, it
is not from Conscience (for that they have not) but from fear of the Law, or of
those they depend on, or public Infamy, or expense, or disease, or from
impotence, or want of opportunity.

There are two sorts of their evil practices, which I shall take notice of,
from the second Chapter of the Book of Wis-dom

1. The first is, abominable sensuality.

2. The second is, cruel and unmerciful oppression.

1. For the first, Their abominable sensuality, holy David observes in verse 3.
that they are altogether become filthy. Their filthiness is thus described in
the 6, 7, 8, and 9th Verses of the forementioned Book of Wisdom. Come on, --
let us enjoy the good things that are present; and let us speedily use the
Creatures like as in youth: Let us fill our selves with costly Wine and
Ointments; and let no Flower of the Spring pass by us. Let us crown our selves
with Rose-buds before they be withered; let none of us go without his part of
our voluptuousness; let us leave tokens of our joyfulness (that name they give
to their Lusts and Revellings) in every street.

This course, being very expensive, brings on,

The second part of their abominable practice, which is cruel and unmerciful
oppression. The Author of that Book does therefore, in the tenth Verse, go on
after this manner, Let us oppress the poor righteous man; let us not spare the
widow, nor reverence the ancient gray hairs of the aged.

Let our strength be the law of Justice.

So that whenever any one shows his Neighbor a godless Man, his Neighbor
can immediately show him a Monster made up of the Goat, the Swine, the Wolf,
the Lion; if I may allow him any thing so generous as, they say, there is in
that King of the Forest.

After all this manifestation of the Folly, and vileness of such as are without
God in the World; It is time in the

Third place to think what is fit, in this case, for those to do, who believe
in God; both first as to themselves, and

Secondly, To those who believe not.

And, first, for our selves, who believe in God, and in Jesus Christ whom he
has sent; It is necessary to keep our Faith from deadness, by the exercises of
holy Living.

The Devils do more than the Atheists, for they believe; but because they
promote infidelity in others, and obey not themselves, they are Devils still.

If we own a God, it is our duty to glorify him as God; otherwise our Faith is
vain, and the unfruitfulness of it will be the Aggravation of our sin; and if
we desire not to retain God in our knowledge, and to honor him with the Talent
with which he has entrusted us; he will deliver us up to those vile Affections
over which a Victory is to be obtained by a living Faith.

But if we adorn our Belief by an agreeable Life, that will be a means to save
our selves, and to gain others; at least, to put to silence the Ignorance of
foolish Men.

II. With relation to such,

1. All should learn to distrust, and to be watchful. For what Confidence can
be put in a Man that thinks not of a God that will call him to an Account? who
measures all things by Power and personal Humor or Interest? Who if he pursues
his Principles, must never speak Truth, nor do Justice against his private Ends?

2. All Persons should pray to God, not to work Miracles before Unbelievers,
not to call up Men from the Dead, and send Ghosts to convince them; but to give
them Grace to attend to the sufficient Means which are offered to them in the
Gospel.

3. All judicious good Men should endeavor to become part of the Means of
their Conversion, by sound Discourse, by exemplary Lives, and by bearing, not
with mean Cowardice, but with Courage and Patience, their insolent Scorn; not
answering Fools according to their Folly; but showing them that True Religion
can govern those Passions, which make them, as raging Waves, to foam out their
own shame.

4. It concerns all Masters of Families to defend their Threshold against the
Footsteps of the Ungodly, who will tempt their Children, and their Servants to
Lust and Prodigality, and to the Supports of them, Theft, and imbezlement of
Goods.

5. All Churches should, as far as possible, discountenance Superstition, and
looseness of Life.

(1.) They should banish far from them all Frauds abusively called Pious, all
fabulous Legends, all feigned Miracles, all absurd and superstitious Doctrines
and Practices, which beget and nourish Atheism; for these, where they are
discovered, blemish Religion in those who are educated in such Societies; for
they have taken that in which they have been bred, for All Religion; and
rejecting that, with it they reject all. They distinguish not betwixt the
Impostures of Men, and the Truths of God, the Light of whose Word is taken from
them.

(2.) Where there are not such Frauds, or they are not discovered; Men who have
lived loosly, and without any Principles, not being able to content the
Conscience without some Religion, will at last run from the extreme of Atheism
to that of Superstition. After having lived Infidels, they will die Idolaters.

There is no where so great a Harvest for Romish Missionaries, as where Men,
under the true Light of the Gospel, have no Religion at all.

And a Church that will keep out Popery, must, as far as it can be done by its
Discipline, mortify Lewdness and Profaneness.

6. It behooves all Civil Governors to animadvert upon Atheism, as that which
supplants the Foundation of all Humane Society.

This Psalm is supposed to have been penned upon occasion of the Conspiracy of
Absalom, and the general Wickedness of that Generation which gave occasion to
it, and to the spreading of Atheism. It was an Age so corrupt, that David seems
to compare it to the State of the Old World before the Flood, at which time the
Earth was filled with Violence, Genesis 6. 11, 12.
and all Flesh had corrupted its Ways. We read in Numb. 21. That those who
spoke Evil of God, spoke Evil of Moses. They who will not fear God, will not
inwardly reverence Man. They who scoff at Religion as Priestcraft, will, under
the Name of Prince-Craft, despise Civil Government. If such universally
prevailed, they would ruin all Kingdoms, by taking away all Faith and Trust,
which is the Ground of Commerce. They would make all Public Pacts and
Covenants of none effect, by removing Conscience, which ties Men to the
performance of their Words and Promises; when Interest, joined with Power,
commands all Men that have no Religion to be no longer Slaves to them.

Atheism supplants all Laws, by invalidating the belief of all Evidences and
Oaths. What judicial proceeding can there be, for the preservation of Men's
Persons and Properties without Witnesses? And how can an Atheist, a false Man,
be a faithful Witness? What a Mockery is his deposing upon a Gospel, which he
does not believe? Or his taking up the Name of a Deity, of which he says, as
St. Paul of an Idol, that it is Nothing?

By reason of Atheists the Land mourns; they are the greatest Enemies of it.
And if (which God avert) it should ever come to pass, that there should not be
good. Men enough to balance their Impiety, we should soon become a Desolation.

Pray we therefore to the Lord of Heaven and Earth, and say, Arise, O God,
maintain thine own Cause; remember how the foolish Man blasphemeth thee daily.

And, to this King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, to the only Wise God, let us
give from our Hearts, Glory and Honor, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

