His Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury's Letter to the Reverend Dr.
Batteley Archdeacon of that Dioecese, to be Communicated to the Clergy of his
Archdeaconry.
Reverend Sir,
MY Writing to You, at this time, is occasioned by a sensible growth of Vice
and Profaneness in the Nation: which, to the great Affliction of all good men,
appears not only in the corrupt practices of particular persons; but also in
the Endeavors that are used to subvert the general Principles of our holy
Religion. And this with a boldness and openness, far beyond the examples of
past times; so that if a speedy stop be not put to such National Provocations,
we have just cause to fear they may bring down the heaviest Judgments of God
upon Us; The preventing whereof belongs more immediately to us, who are the
Ministers of Christ; and as such, are obliged to the utmost care and
watchfulness in opposing these Instruments of Satan.

I doubt not, but many of the Parochial Clergy are sufficiently sensible both
of their own duty and the danger we are in: In the Cities of London and
Westminster, and other places, I am sure the good effects of their diligence
have been very evident of late years. But in some Parts that are more remote,
all of them may not so well understand either the Arts or the Industry of these
Enemies of Religion: And therefore I thought it a Duty incumbent on the Station
wherein Providence has placed me, to desire of you, to warn the Clergy of your
Archdeaconry, of these attempts against Religion and Virtue; and to excite them
to a Diligence proportionable to the Danger; and to suggest to them such
Methods as are most likely to work a General Reformation.

With this request, I send You such Particulars as, in my Opinion, are very
necessary to be pressed upon the Clergy for the attaining so desirable an End.
As,

I. That in their own Lives, and the Government of their own Families, they
would make themselves Examples of a sober and regular Conversation. It is the
Apostles Reasoning, If a man know not how to rule his own house (and much more
his own Life and Actions) how shall he take care of the Church of God? The true
method of working a Reformation abroad, is to lay the foundation at home; which
alone can give our Reproofs a just Weight and Authority: but till that is done,
no Exhortations, whether in public or private, can either be offered with
decency, or received with reverence.

II. To Piety, they should add Prudence in all their Actions and Behavior:
which even in Private Christians is a great Ornament to Religion; but in
Public Teachers is a most necessary qualification for the due discharge of
their Ministry. A Mildness of temper, with a Gravity and Calmness in their
Conversation, will not fail to gain them a general Love and Esteem among their
Neighbors: and a discreet Caution in their Words and Actions, will preserve
them from those little Imprudences that are sometimes so sensible an
Obstruction to the good Endeavors of wellmeaning Men. Persons in Holy Orders
are not only bound, in the conduct of their Lives, to consider what is lawful
or unlawful in it self, but also what is decent or indecent in Them, with
respect to their Character and Function. Abstaining from all appearance of
evil; and giving no Offense in any thing, that the Ministry be not blamed.

III. While Our Enemies are so very industrious in seeking out Objections
against the Christian Religion; it becomes the Clergy (who are set apart for
the Vindication of it) to be no less diligent in their Preparations for its
Defense: By acquainting themselves thoroughly with the rational grounds of
Christianity, and the true state of such Points as are the Subjects of our
present Controversies; together with the Objections which are usually made by
our Adversaries of all sorts, and the Effectual Answers that have been returned
to them by so many Eminent Writers of our own Church: That so they may be
ready, on all occasions, to do justice and honor to our Religion; and be able
to expose the folly and ignorance of these Gainsaying Men. The Cause which God
has put into our hands, is undoubtedly good; but the best cause may suffer by
the weakness of its Advocate: and when this happens in the matter of Religion,
it gives the Adversary an occasion of Triumph, and is apt to stagger the faith
even of sincere and unprejudiced Christians.

IV. It were to be wished, that the Clergy of every Neighborhood, would agree
upon frequent Meetings, to consult for the good of Religion in general, and to
advise with one another about any difficulties that may happen in their
particular Cures. By what Methods any Evil Custom may most easily be broken;
How a sinner may be most effectually reclaimed; and (in general) How each of
them in their several circumstances may contribute most to the advancement of
Religion. Such Consultations as these, besides the mutual benefit of advice and
instruction, will be a natural means to excite the zeal of some, to reduce the
over-eagerness of others to a due temper, and to provoke All to a Religious
Emulation in the improvement of Piety and Order within their respective
Parishes. And These Meetings might still be made a greater advantage to the
Clergy in carrying on the Reformation of Men's Lives and Manners, by inviting
the Churchwardens of their several Parishes, and other pious persons among the
Laity, to join with them in the Execution of the most probable methods that can
be suggested for those good Ends. And we may very reasonably expect the happy
Effects of such a concurrence, from the Visible Success of that Noble Zeal
wherewith so many about the great Cities in my Neighborhood, do promote true
Piety, and a Reformation of Manners. And therefore I desire you that you will
particularly excite the Clergy to the procuring such assistances as these, for
the more effectual discharge of their own duty.

V. It would very much further and facilitate all their Endeavors of this
kind, to gain over the persons who have the greatest Esteem and Authority in
their Parishes, to a hearty concern for the honor of God and Religion:
frequently suggesting to them the Obligation that God has laid upon them to be
Examples to others; and the great good that it is in their power to do, by
setting a Pattern of regular living, and the unspeakable mischief of their
irregular behavior. For if once the better Sort can be brought to such a
Seriousness and Sobriety, the rest will more easily follow; Example being the
most powerful Instruction; and Experience teaching us that shame and fear,
which arise from the Authority of such good Patterns, are commonly the most
effectual restraints upon the meaner sort.

VI. Where any Person is obstinate in his Vices, and not to be reclaimed either
by Teaching or Example, by Exhortation or Reproof; the Ordinary ought to be
informed of it, that he may proceed to reclaim such by Ecclesiastical Censures:
and where those are like to prove ineffectual, the Civil Magistrate must be
applied to, and desired to proceed against them according to the Laws in those
Cases provided. Which Information and Request, especially in the Case of such
incorrigible Offenders, can be made by none so properly as by the Clergy; who
may best be supposed to understand the necessity there is of having recourse to
the Civil Magistrate. And since our Lawgivers have Enacted these temporal
Punishments, on purpose to assist us in the discharge of our Ministry; it would
be a great failing in us, not to make use of them when all other Methods have
been tried to little or no Effect.

VII. Every Pious Person of the Laity, should, if need be, be put in mind by
the Clergy, that he ought to think himself obliged to use his best endeavors
to have such Offenders punished by the Civil Magistrate, as can no otherwise be
amended. And that when he hears his Neighbor swear or blaspheme the Name of
God, or sees him offend in drunkenness or profanation of the Lords Day, he
ought not to neglect to give the Magistrate Notice of it: In such a Case to be
called an Informer, will be so far from making any Man Odious in the Judgment
of Sober Persons, that it will tend to his honor, when he makes it appear by
his unblameable behavior, and the care he takes of Himself and his own Family,
that he does it purely for the glory of God, and the good of his Brethren. Such
well disposed persons as are resolved upon this, should be encouraged to meet
as often as they can, and to consult how they may most discreetly and effectually
manage It in the places where they live.

VIII. As in reforming the Laity, they ought to use the Assistance of the Civil
Magistrate; so if any of their own Brethren be an irregular Liver, and cannot
be reclaimed by brotherly Admonition, the neighboring Clergy should be
strictly enjoined to make it known to you, and by you, to me; if the Case
requires. That so the Offender may be Admonisht to live suitably to his
Character; and if a bare Admonition will not do, he may be proceeded against by
Ecclesiastical Censures; for the preventing such Scandals and Mischiefs, as
will always accompany the irregular Life of a Minister of the Gospel.

IX. And whereas the Foundations of Piety and Morality are best laid at the
beginning, in the Religious Education of Children; I cannot but wish that every
one of the Parochial Clergy would be very diligent in Catechizing the Children
under their Care; and not only so, but in calling upon them afterward, as they
grow up, to give such further Accounts of their Religion, as may be expected
from a riper Age. That being thus carefully instructed in the Faith and Duty of
a Christian, they also may teach their Children the same; and so Piety, Virtue,
and Goodness, may for ever flourish in our Church and Nation.

These Directions with such others of the same nature as will occur to you, I
desire may be Transmitted by you to the Clergy of my Dioecese; for the
Religious Government of themselves, and their People, in these dangerous Times.
So commending you and them to the Blessing of God, I rest

Your Affectionate Brother Tho. Cantuar.
Lamb^th. April 4th. 1699.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1699.


