IMPRIMATUR,

[A True Account of a Conference held about Religion, at London, Sept. 29.
1687. between A. Pulton Jesuit, and Tho. Tenison, D. D. etc.]

Oct. 17. 1687. Hen. Maurice Rmo. in Christo P. D. Wilhelmo Archiep, Cant. a
Sacris.

A TRUE ACCOUNT OF A CONFERENCE Held about RELIGION AT LONDON, September. 29.
1687. Between A. PULTON, Jesuit, AND THO. TENISON, D. D. As also of that which
led to it, and followed after it.

By THO. TENISON, D. D.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. M DC LXXXVII.

To the Parishioners of St. Martins in the Fields, and St. James Westminster.
My most Worthy Friends,
I Have had such Experience both of your Judgment and Candor, that
notwithstanding the many false Reports and Papers industrioufly scattered by
some of the less sincere and less generous Romanists, I have trusted my
Reputation with you. I was well assured that you would not pass any Censure
till you had well understood the Case; and that Truth, tho it moved slowly,
would overtake that Falsehood which made such haste to be before It. It is
certain that the Discourse it self does not deserve the name of a Conference;
for the Crowd and the Noise gave such an interruption, that the closeness of
Discourse which was intended, could never take place: But there are other
Reasons which move me to publish that which has passed, and without the doing
of it, some unworthy ends would have been further served upon the credulous. I
am not conscious to my self of any thing in which I have not been just or fair.
What I said either with less Strength, or more warmth than I ought to have
done, I have set down, and laid it before your Charity. It may be I have a
motive to severe language toward that sort of men, which few have besides me.
My Father being turned out of his Living of Mondesley in Norfolk, as an Adherer
to King Charles the Martyr; a Person, one of whose names was Gubbard,
recommending himself to the Committee at Norwich as a man who had a zeal for
the same Cause in which they were engaged, took Possession of the Living, and
received all Profits, but restored nothing; and with Mo^desty he held the
Living of Knapton also. After a few years he began to throw off part of his
Disguise, and he Preach'd-up Purgatory, and other such points in so open a
manner, that the same Committee who had put him in, turned him out again; and
in a little time he (as it were) vanished away. This instance of such gross
Hypocrisy and Injustice made impression upon me when I was young, and so
raised my Suspicion and Indignation, that where I have met with any thing of a
like nature, it has been some difficulty to met to temper my self. But nothing
(I hope) shall ever so transport me, as to prevent the doing of my duty among
you and my Willingness to spend and be spent for a Pious, Steady, Generous and
Affectionate People, who have passed as high Obligations as man can have to
man, upon,

My most Worthy Friends, Your most Thankful and Faithful Pastor and Servant,
THO. TENISON.

THE CONTENTS.
1 AN Account of the Conference, etc. written by D. T. Page 1 2 A Pursuit of
that which was said in the Conference about Citations. 27 3 An Account of D.
T's and Dr. Clagets going to the Savoy to Mr. Pulton Jesuit. 35 4 Mr. Pultons
First Letter to D. T. 40 5 D. T's Answer. 41 6 Mr. P's Second Letter. 42 7 Dr.
T's Answer. 42 8 Mr. P's Third Letter, with D. T's Note at the end of it. 43 9
D. T's Third Letter to Mr. P. 45 10 Mr. P's Fourth Letter. 48 11 D. T's Answer.
50 12 Mr. Pultons Paper sent in his First Letter. 52 13 D. T's Notes upon this
Paper. 55 14 The Account of the Conference as first written and spread by Mr.
P. with Dr. Tenison's Notes upon it. 59 15 A Letter framed by the Romish
Managers, and conveyed to J. S. to the end he might transcribe it as his own,
and send it to his Father; with D. T's cursory Notes. 71 16 A further Account
of Mr. Pultons Second Narrative, in some few Animadversions. 78 17 In that
further Account, part of a Letter from the Reverend Dr. Horneck. 79
ERRATA.
Page 8. l. 22. f. man r. Monk. p. 10. f. had r. had his? p. 11. l. 12. blot
out the Comma after nigh. p. 33. l. 4. f. John of Constantinople r. John of
Jerusalem. p. 33. l. 18. after S. Justin, etc. add on the Marg. the place is
cited at length in p. 19. Marg. 1. 6. for Quis r. Quas. p. 35, etc. f. Celgat
and Clegat r. Claget. p. 38. l. 3. f. Eccelesiasticum r. Ecclesiasticum. p. 77.
Marg. f. contemnaverit r. commutaverit. p. 51. l. 25. for herately r. heartily.

Note, That the false spelling and English in Mr. P's Letters, p. 40. etc. was
not altered, because it was in Mr. Pulton's Original. Note also, that the
Letter framed for the Boy in p. 71. was written in two different hands, and
that the latter part of it being compared with Mr. P's other Letters, appears
to have been written in his hand.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The Vindication of A. D. C. Schoolmaster in L. A. from the Aspersions of A.
Pulton Jesuit, and Schoolmaster in the Savoy, will be speedily Published by the
said A. D. C.

A True ACCOUNT Of what Passed at the CONFERENCE, etc.
As also of that which led to it, and which followed it.
MR. U. of L. A. having occasion to come to D. T. at his House in St. Martins
Churchyard, about business in the way of his Trade, he brought his Apprentice
J. S. along with him; and intimation having been given the day before by Mr. U.
to D. T. that the said Apprentice was departing from the Church of England,
having been at Mass nigh two Months before; D. T. desired Mr. U. and his
Apprentice to come into his Closet; and there he asked the Boy what Reasons
could induce him to leave so good a Church? For a while he could scarce be
prevailed with to answer a word; but at last after much importunity, he said a
few things, and told them that Mr. Pulton the Jesuit was the person in whose
Lodgings he had been, and that he had persuaded him by his Arguments. D. T.
asked him, what Arguments those were? He answered, he had showed him in Luthers
works that Luther held sometimes Three, and sometimes Seven Sacraments; and
added, that Luther was dissuaded from going to Mass by the Devil; and that ever
since the pretended Reformed had proceeded upon the word of the Devil. D. T.
showed him how frivolous that Story and Argument was, and asked the Boy what
kind of Book it was which was showed him for Luther's works. He pointed to a
Book in the Closet in thin Quarto. D. T. after telling him, that Luther's works
could not be contained in so small a compass, and that he believed Mr. P. would
not justify this way of reasoning before him; and discoursing to the Boy out
of a Place or two in the Scriptures, and saying what he then thought proper,
dismissed him, and advised his Master to send him into the Country to his
Father, who was reported to be a man of condition, and judicious; for he had
observed a very odd temper in the Boy, and a strange figure in his Countenance,
and had been told before by Mr. U. That since his having been tampered with and
seduced, his very countenance was altered, he seemed often as if he were mop'd;
he was grown so g^^at a Liar, that they knew not how to believe or employ him;
and so troublesome to the other servants by saying they were Damned, and talking
to them about Popery, that he had made all the Family uneasy. That very day
the boy had been with D. T. he had the confidence to turn that about Luther and
the Devil which was said by the Jesuit, upon the said D. and to ascribe it to
him, saying, that the D. had told him Luther left Mass at the instance of the
Devil, so that from thenceforth the Reformation proceeded upon the word of the
Devil.

It was a little after Whitsontide last, when this Fit began to take the Boy,
but it was not so observably violent till of late; it seems Mrs. U. had written
to his Father before D. T. had seen J. S. His Master after having been with D.
T. carried the Boy to Dr. Horneck, still hoping to work good upon him; but his
perverseness was so apparent to D. H. notwithstanding all the things of moment
he said, that he perceived him gone past present Cure.

Great boast was made in the Neighborhood about Mr. P.; and odds were offered
that D. T. would not meet him; though there was little reason for that
boasting; few days having passed since D. T. and M. L. in vain expected the
coming of two Priests at a Place and Time mutually appointed. Mr. U. said he
was very certain the Dr. would come, and the Party of Mr. P. having named a
Place and Hour, Mr. U. came to D. T. to give him notice of what was done. D. T.
assured him he would meet, tho 'twas inconvenient, a Friend from beyond Sea
being just come to him, and it being to no purpose as to the Boy; and it
serving cunning people with a color for saying that upon what he heard, He was
converted. Mr. U. granted all this; but added, that if Mr. P. were not met, it
would be said it was because none dare meet him; and upon that motive, how
inconsiderable soever to men of sound sense, the matter turned, and 'twas
agreed on all sides that there should be little Company, and no Noise; and on
one side Mr. P. his Friend, and the Boy; and on the other D. T. Mr. U. and his
Wife.

This being agreed, D. T. when the hour came, broke away abruptly from two
Eminent Divines, D. S. and W. W. without so much as letting them know about
what business he was going, and he went to the place alone, without either
Friend or Servant.

He had not been there many Minutes, before Mr. P. came in with nine or ten
after him, several of his Boys pressing at the door, but being hindered from
entering; D. T. does not say that Mr. P. brought them all. How many Priests
there were among these who came first, D. T. could not tell, but he espied in
the room, which was of a sudden crowded with people, Mr. Meredith, whom he
looked upon as next to a Priest; a Priest in a yellow Peruke, one who owned,
that if he was not in Orders, he hoped to be so; one from the Lady S. I's of L.
A. whom he supposes to be a Priest, and one in a plain Band, who (as was said)
came with him. It was not so very easy in the Crowd to take full notice of
these; and how many there were more of such men, he cannot tell; nor does he
say that they were all of Mr. P's bringing.

D. T. perceiving such a Company, said to Mr. P. that this way seemed not fair,
he himself having come without either Friend or Servant, that he might not
transgress the Agreement for the Privacy of the Conference. The Master of the
House excused himself, saying, That he had denied some very good Friends who
desired to be there, that he might keep to what was agreed. Then Mr. P. was
content to dismiss all besides a witness for himself; and Mr. Meredith was
proposed.

Against Mr. Meredith D. T. made three Objections.

First, that he having received from C. O. a Copy of a Conference betwixt the
D. of S. P. and Mr. G. given him by Mr. Meredith, and having showed it to the
said D. of S. P. the D. had assured him the said D. T. That it was not a true
Copy, and that a material thing about the present Greek Church was left out:
Mr. M. referred to what was printed upon that occasion.

The Second Objection made by D. T. was, that Mr. M. had in a Coffee house
pitied the slate of St. Martins as being a very great Parish under one Man; and
capable of maintaining Thirty Friars. D. T. said further, That such an
intermedler was not a proper Witness. And afterward in another Room, That he
should not count his Friars before they were hatched. Mr. M. replied calmly,
That he had said this with relation to the greatness of the Parishes in the
Suburbs, and not with particular regard to D. T. or St. Martins; and that tho
he named the Parish, he was a stranger to D. T. and had not reflected upon him.

The Third Objection was taken from Mr. M's having forsaken the Church of
England, such being more partial, and possessed with a spirit of fiercer
bigottry than those who were Romanists from the beginning. Mr. M. then
answered, He was the better judge, because he had known both Churches. D. T.
answered then, that he went away young from our Church, from which no man, who
well understands it, could depart upon true Principles. Mr. M. and D. T.
revived this discourse in another Room afterward, and D. T. saying Mr. M. was
turned in Spain, where the people had no Bibles. Mr. M. replied, That they
carried over with them a very good Library of Books.

After these Exceptions taken at Mr. M as a Witness, D. T. perceiving it next
to impossible to clear the Room, and not being willing to give occasion to the
insulting of any weak people by going away, called Mr. Meredith to him, and
placed himself betwixt Mr. P. and Mr. Meredith.

Then Mr. P. spoke first about Pen and Ink, and an Amanuensis; but D. T. having
brought no person with him, and the Crowd pressing, Mr. P. began a Verbal
Conference, by saying the Protestants had no Bible, and desiring D. T. to prove
they had one, and asking him how and whence they had it, and what was their
Rule of Faith.

And his first onset was very vigorous. D. T. answered at first to this
purpose, That Mr. P. might send for that Book which he owned to be his Bible,
and out of that he would dispute with him; or if that were too great a trouble,
he would borrow an English Bible in the house (which was afterward fetched)
and discourse out of that, and endeavor to vindicate the Translation, where it
should be by Mr. P. excepted against.

This Method Mr. P. would not allow, but repeated his discourse about our not
having a Bible, and our not being able, if we had one, to prove we had one; and
asked again about the Rule of our Faith. D. T. before he answered to this,
applied himself to Mr. M. (who seemed to be the calmer person, and of a temper
inclining to Piety) and put him in mind, that such discourses as these, and
some others, lately used by the Romanists about the Trinity and
Transubstantiation, would rather make the people Atheists or Unbelievers, than
Converts; and that the indifferent were ready to say, Content: We cannot
believe Transubstantiation, and we will have no Trinity; we cannot have the
Bible unless we take it upon Roman Authority, and none we will have.

Mr. M. said, That would not be the consequence, but gave no reason why he said
so.

Then D. T. turned to Mr. P. and told him that he began at a point of which the
Boy had not said a tittle to him in the Closet, or to his Master; the first and
chief thing said by him being that about Luther's Works, and Sacraments, and
his Colloquy with the Devil. Mr. P. at first denied that he had shown such a
Book to the Boy, and the Boy began at first to shuffle about the Story, but
afterward owned it, his Master attesting it, and upbraiding him with lying in
that and other things. Mr. P. then salv'd the matter, by saying he did not show
him the Book in Public. D. T. then replied, Is not a thing shown because it is
not shown in a Market? this is the fruit of the ill art of Equivocation. Mr. P.
proceeded to talk about Luther and the Devil, and his leaving Mass at the
Devils instance: this discourse of Mr. P's had very good effect upon the other
servants in the house, as they confessed to their Mistress, they now perceiving
that to be the Jesuits talk, which the Boy had fathered upon the Doctor.

To Mr. P's discourse about Luther, D. T. answered on this manner; That our
Church depended not upon Luther, but Christ: That Luther (some grains of
allowance being given to him, as we ought to every man) was an excellent
instrument of God's: That he ought to have read (if he had not done so) the
Book lately published at Oxford, Entitled, The Spirit of Martin Luther: That
if Luther had said any where there were Three Sacraments, he had said no more
than Paschasius Radbertus who was the Inventer of Transubstant^ation Pasc.
Radb. de Corp. and Sang. Dom. c. 3. op. p. 1561. sunt autem sacramenta Christi
in Ecclesia, baptismus and Chrisma, corpus quoque domini and sanguis.
. That admitting the Story, Luther after the Monkish way, had put his Spiritual
Conflict into the form of a Colloquy; and that he might well suspect a device
in the Devil when he dissuaded him from the Mass; for the Devil might think the
Piety of Luther would be apt to move him for that reason to go the rather to
Mass, because the Devil had forbidden him.

D. T. added, that one of the first disswasives from the Mass which made
impression upon Luther, was this. He had been at Rome, and said Mass there, and
heard it said, and he took notice of the profaneness of the Mass-Priests; and
he overheard the very Courtizans jeeringly saying, that some who Consecrated,
had used these Words, Bread thou art, Bread thou shall be: Wine thou art, Wine
thou shall be.

Mr. P. asked D. T. where he had this Story? D. T. answered, where he might
have it, in Luthers Life V. Vit. Lutheri ap. Melch. Ad. p. 104.
. D. T. would have gone on and given Mr. P. a Story out of their second Synod
of Nice, for his story about Luther's Colloquy with the Devil; but Mr. P. would
not accept of an old Tale for a new one; and tho D. T. began his Story at the
request of the people, five or six times, Mr. P. would not suffer him to
proceed, out-noising him in such manner, that D. T. asked him if he had the Art
of curing the deaf.

The Story, which was afterward told to the people in the back room, was this:
Abbot Theodore reported before the Fathers of that Council which decreed the
Worship of Images, how the Devil appeared to an Old Man, (b) See Lat. Council,
To. 7. Act. 4. Con. 2. Nic. p. 253, 254. and Act. 5. p. 382.
who asked him why he had troubled him so long with temptations to uncleanness;
the Devil swore him to secrecy, and then said, Adore this Image no more, I
will give you no further trouble [the Image was that of the Blessed Virgin with
the Holy Jesus in her Arms]. The old man revealed this to Abbot Theodore, who
said he should not have sworn to the Devil; yet notwithstanding 'twas better
for him not to dismiss his Courtezan, than to forbear to worship Christ and his
Mother in an Image. The Abbot continued and comforted the old man, and sent him
away; the Devil appeared again, and upbraided him with perjury; the old man
answered, What I have sworn, I have sworn, etc.

The Good Fathers excused the breach of his Oath, and went on to applaud the
practice of Image Worship.

Mr. P. not suffering D. T. scarce so much as to begin this story, joined with
Mr. Meredith in asking what was the Rule of Fairh, and where we had our Bible?
And as to the latter, Mr. P. asked with great quickness, who gave us the
Copies, how, where, when and the like? Insomuch that D. T. told him he was
doing the office of a Catechist, rather than a Disputer. However D. T. answered
thus,

First, The Rule of Faith is the Holy Bible; the sum of it in necessary
Doctrines, is the Apostolical Creed: Mr. P. said we had other Negative
Articles, No Purgatory, etc. D. T. replied, they were Guards of our Creed, but
not properly Articles; and that as Protestations against Them, they were not
very Ancient, because their Errors were not all from the beginning; and that we
could not pull up the weeds before they were grown up.

Secondly, That if they had any good proof of the Bible, we had it too; and
that the first external inducement for the receiving of the Bible, as written
by such and such persons, and as such a Book, was (not so much the Authority
as) the Testimony of the Universal Church of all Ages, all agreeing in it, and
amongst others the Roman, excepting the Apochryphal Books of later time raised
by them into a level with the primary Canon, whilst we have the same Canon the
Ancient Church owned in the Council of Laodicea.

D. T. added, That the Protestants took in the Testimony of Heathens, as of
Julian the Apostate, who, against himself, owned three of the Evangelists; and
the Jews, who had once the Oracles of God committed to them, and from whom the
first Christians received the Canon of the old Testament. Mr. M. caught at the
words, and said, D. T. builds his Faith on Jews: D. T. answered, That that was
not fair, and that he should take his words in their coherence, and make the
best of them: He continued, and said, That by this way of Universal Consent, we
were by way of external inducement as sure of this Books being the Bible, as of
Cicero's Offices being his Book. Mr. M. said we were not infallibly sure of
that: D. T. added, That the Consent of the World removed all doubt; and that
for the Holy Bible, when men came to consider the Prophesies and their Events,
the Characters of Christ, the History of Christ, and things in those Books most
worthy of God, and use of pious means in humility of Soul, they had further
assurance begotten in them. Mr. M. asked D. T. how he proved that inward sense?
D. T. said it could satisfy the persons themselves.

Then Mr. P. began again to ask Questions about the Bible; How, from what
Churches, Copies, etc. we had received it? It had been no difficult matter to
have perplexed him, by asking from what Copy of the O. T. St. Peter had what
Copy of the New he gave to Linus, and he to the rest; and where and by whom
Linus was ordained, and in what form, etc. but he only asked him upon what
motive he believed Infallibly that St. Peter was ever at Rome, seeing the
Scripture had not said it? Mr. P. said all the world knew that. D. T. asked him
whether all the world were good witnesses for this and not for the Bible? Then
Mr. P. said something of Thou art Peter, and upon Thee will I build my Church.
D. T. said that he made no distinction between the masculine and feminine
Gender; and that the Text ran not upon thee Peter, or this Peter; but upon this
Rock (...) in the Feminine, tho admitting that our Savior did build upon him
(for by him he opened the Kingdom of the Gospel to the Jews at Jerusalem, and
to the Gentiles at Cesarea), yet seeing there were Twelve Foundations, Christ
promising that he should be one, did not exclude the other Eleven.

Hereabouts upon Mr. P's citing this place, and that other, Hear the Church,
etc. and D* T. desiring to fix upon something, and opening an English Bible,
and Mr: P. denying it to be the Bible, and D. T. desiring to send for a Greek
Testament, one was produced by the Company, but not used, Mr. P. saying he
would allow the Translation of the places to be true. Mrs. R. in this talk
about St. Peter, being nigh, Mr. P. said softly, 'twas St. Peter's Confession on
which Christ built his Church.

Hereabouts also Mr. P. spoke about a Church at Rome, spoken of by St. Paul;
and D. T. taking up the Bible, and desiring to show how that matter stood, was
not permitted after three or four offers.

For Mr. P. turned all off by general discourse about the Bible and Rule of
Faith, and began again to ask Questions, and to say that the Greeks of whom D.
T. spoke, were all Liars, being Heretics, and that the Catholics (meaning
Romans) were said by him to be a corrupt Church, and that therefore the
Protestants depended upon Liars for their Bible.

Here first began a strife about the word Catholic, and of the Popes being the
Catholic Bishops; and D. T. asking Mr. P. whether the Ancient Bishops of other
Sees did not style themselves the Catholic Bishops of this and the other
place, Mr. P. yielded it, and this word-bate ended.

Then D. T. in Answer to his Argument said to this effect.

First, That the Greeks were not all Liars and Heretics; and that the
Missionaries had Misrepresented them.

Secondly, That when all the World, of all Ages, conspired in a testimony about
a book or such a City as Rome or Jerusalem, tho some might be ill men, and in
some particulars Liars, yet we could not believe them Liars in their Universal
Consent, because they could never be in a Confederacy to vend such a Lie.

Thirdly, That tho we took in part the Testimony of the Roman Church, yet from
her Authority the S. S. could not be proved, because she went about to prove
her Being and Authority out of the Scriptures, and therefore could not do it
till it was first proved that the Scriptures were the Word of God, and the
places cited were infallibly proved to carry that sense which the Romanists put
upon them.

D. T. remembers not that any thing was said to the two last, but upon the
first Mr. P. charged him with joining with the Greeks in the Herefie of the
Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father by the Son: Mr. D. A. C. (not known
before to D. T.) interposed, and said, That that was a dispute about Phrases,
and that they were agreed in sense: And when Mr. P. wondered at that saying, and
had said there would in a fortnights time come forth a Book which should
sufficiently show what the Greek Church was, D. T. referred him to Father
Simons Book, called [Histoire Critique de la Creance, etc. des Nations, du
Levant] published three years ago; in which that Learned Romanist showed how
the Missionaries had slandered the Greek Church, and made those Heretics who
were not so, and raised a dust about words when they agreed in meaning. Mr. P.
did not own his knowledge of this Book. [Since the Conference D. T. has seen a
Second Book upon the like Argument La Creance de l Eglise Orientale sur la
Transubst, etc. A Par. 87.
(lately published by the said Learned French man); and he perceives by it,
that as times Change, men can do so too].

Here abouts D. T. offered to fix upon something, and to speak to the Text
cited by M. P. viz. Hear the Church; but Mr. P. did not suffer it for some
time, but said, The Church was a City on a Hill, and always visible; and asked,
Where such a Church as ours was visible in all Ages? And how, and where, etc.
And clapped his Hand with great force upon the Table; and a while after said, If
he could not show the visibility of his Church, and we could that of ours, he
would be hanged. D. T. when Mr. P. beat the Table, said, smiling, Sir, I would
not by any means come under your Ferula. Mr. P. replied very calmly, I use
none. D. T. does think that he ought to have spared those words, as seeming to
reflect upon that Profession which he very much Honors, as one of the most
useful in the World: As likewise those used by him upon Mr. P's talking of
being hanged, it being somewhat severe.

But in heat of talk D. T. did say; Mr. P. you use a very scurvy word; and you
put me in mind of a saying of the late Lord Faulkland, You are apt to hang and
to damn; but if they whom you hang, were no more hanged than they who you damn,
were damned, few men would fear either your hanging or your damning.

After this there was more talk about the visibility of the Church, and D. T.
said to this purpose, The History of this matter is beyond both the Purse and
the Capacity of the People. A great many Pounds and Books are required. [A
Priest or Candidate said, It Is in less room, and was pulling out, I think, a
little Book]. It suffices the People that they have heard Christ's Promise,
That there shall be a Society of men professing Christianity to the end of the
World; That they believe Christ will make good his word, and that they find
among us such Doctrine, and Rules of Life, as are in the Bible. That the Greeks
have always had Churches; that among the Latins, we have Catalogues of
Witnesses against Romish Errors; That a True Church may (though not as such)
have many Corruptions; And that the present Corruptions in the Roman Church,
were not formerly made Articles of Faith.

That we had the True Faith, before any Mission came from Rome. That S.
Gregory's Faith was not that which Rome now teaches. That here the Synods of
the Second of Nice and Trent could not prevail; That a Doctrine contrary to
Transubstantiation had been taught in the Saxon Church; and that he would prove
such things as these out of their own Writers. Mr. M. asked what Writers? D. T.
answered Beda, and such Historians as Hoveden, etc. D. T. said moreover to Mr.
P. asking after a distinct Church before Luther, That he would show him
Christians in Bohemia, making the Bible their Rule, and protesting against the
Errors of Rome: And asked him, If he should show him out of Aeneas Sylvius? Mr.
P. did not desire it, nor seem to know what Book that was.

Mr. M. had some while before asked D. T. (who had said, That we find the Bible
which we now have quoted by the Ancient Fathers) How he came to know they were
Fathers? To which Question he thought an Answer in that Place, a condesension
to an impertinence.

Hereabouts (I think) Mr. P. introduced a short Discourse about
Transubstantiation; and when D. T. had said, as before, that that manner of the
Breads becoming Christ's Body, was invented by Paschasius Radbertus, M. P. in
warm manner said What talk you of Paschasius Radbertus? It was decreed in the
Great General Council of Lateran, where there were all the Patriarchs. D. T.
perceiving him to mistake so much in History; and likewise err in time nigh
Four hundred years (for Paschasius flourished, according to Bellarmin, in the
year 821. and that Lateran Council was held Ann. 1215.) He turned to Mr. M. and
said, Why do you bring a man who has not common skill in History? And then,
turning to Mr. P. he asked him, Under what Pope that Council was held? And his
Memory did not serve him to tell. Then Mr. D. A. C. addressing himself to him
(having a Breviary in his Hand, in which the Trinity was pictured) said, Sir, I
can inform you under what Pope that Council was held; 'twas held under Innocent
the Third; Mr. P. being moved either by his Answer, or his Book, or Picture, or
all; called him Buffoon. D. T. then told Mr. P. he had transgressed against
part of the Office of that day of St. Michael, in which these words of St. Jude
were read, Michael the Archangel disputing with the Devil about the Body of
Moses, would not bring against him a railing Accusation, but said, The Lord
rebuke thee. And further D. T. asked him, If all the Patriarchs were there in
person, or not? Mr. P. replied, By their Legates. D. T. asked him, Whether he
had seen Father Walsh's late Book, which contradicted what he said: Mr. P.
answered, that Father Walsh was not his Pope. [Some of the words of Father
Walsh the Franciscan, are these, Letter to B. of L. p. 367.
There were not above 414 Bishops in the whole; and none of all, other than a
Member of the Latin Church; those very Two Patriarchs (he means those of
Jerusalem and Constantinople) being themselves Latins; and consequently, not
one of the Greek Church, or of any other part or Church of the World, among
them.]

By this time, Mr. P. had produced a Breviary, a written Collection of
Quotations, and Two large sheets of Quotations printed; and would go to the
Fathers. D. T. desired first to speak to his Citation, Hear the Church; but
still being denied, he was contented to hear what he would allege out of the
Fathers, with this Caution, That he would not take them either for his
infallible Judges or Rule; but that, seeing he had them on the side of his
Church, he would not part with them. He began with his Breviary, and read out
of it part of that which is in the Margent, construing it into English Infra
Oct. Corp. Christi. Lectio 4. Tu forte dicis: meus panis est usitatus. Sed
panis iste panis est ante verba Sacramentorum; ubi accesserit consecratio, de
pane fit Caro Christi. Hoc igitur astruamus, quomodo potest, qui panis est,
corpus esse Christi? Consecratione.

Lectio 5. Vides ergo quam operatorius sit sermo Christi? Si ergo tanta vis est
in sermon Domini Jesu, ut inciperent esse quae non erant; quanto magis
operatorius est, ut sint quae erant, and in aliud commutentur? Coelum non erat,
mare non erat, terra non erat. Sed audi dicentem, ipse dixit, and facta sunt;
Ipse mandavit and creata sunt. Ergo tibi ut respondeam, non erat corpus Christi
ante consecrationem; sed post consecrationem dico tibi quod jam corpus est
Christi. Ipse dixit, est factum, and ipse mandavit and creatum est.


. And the Sum of it was, That before Consecration it was Bread; but, after it,
the Flesh of Christ: And that Christ whose Word made things begin to be, which
were not before, could much more bring it to pass, that they should be what
they were, and yet changed into another thing [which shows the opinion of the
Author to have been that it was Bread and Christ's Body too, if from this place
we may find out his mind] And then he named S. Cyril's Catechism, and then
Justin Martyr, and was going on to read many more Citations out of the printed
Sheets, entitled, Speculum Ecclesiasticum, but called (it seems) by their
Hawkers, The Soldiers Paper: of which Title D. T. being ignorant, his Man could
not till Wednesday, procure him a Copy of them.

D. T. Proposed the fixing upon something after so long and noisie a rambling;
and called for Pen, Ink and Paper, and said he would begin with S. Ambrose, and
then go on to S. Cyril and J. Martyr in the order of Mr. P. and answering those
Quotations there at that time, he would afterward, as they agreed, go on to
the rest. Mr. P. would go on, and read further: and did it so often out of
those two Sheets, repeating the names, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, etc. that D. T.
provoked with what he thought an unreasonable digression, called the Papers his
Ballads, and said he might give them for Kites to his Boys; which words were
too light, and he repents him of using them.

At last D. T. took the Pen and wrote down an Assertion to this effect, That
that was a spurious and late Book, and none of S. Ambrose 's, and that he would
show it to be such. Then he desired Mr. P. to underwrite that D. T. could not
do what he there undertook. M. P. refused, and taking a Pen began to write his
name to his Quotations in the printed Sheets; but did not write (as I think)
all his name there. After which Mr. M. took Pen, and D. T. delivering him the
Paper he had signed in order to a regular proceeding, he began to write the
first words of these Questions, Whether God Almighty has left us any Guide or
Guides to direct us in the Interpretation of Scripture in things necessary to
Salvation? Whether he has left every one to his own understanding in such
Interpretation, without obliging him to submit his judgment to any others?

D. T. interrupted him, and said he was drawing them away from their point. And
upon this occasion M. M. and D. T. talked a little while about a Guide in
Controversy; and D. T. did tell him in short, That a Man after using all
Christian means, and the help of all Ministerial Guides possible, must at last
judge for himself, and that this was not to run on his own head: as also that
our People could know the Voice of our Church, it being in their own Language;
but not so readily the Voice of the Church of Rome, it being in an unknown
Tongue; for the true Interpretation of which the unlearned depended upon the
particular Priest that instructed them.

Then D. T. and Mr. P. came again to the Quotations: and D. T. waved for a time
that out of S. Ambrose, in relation to which he used a word somewhat too sharp,
saying Mr. P. falsified, instead of saying he had quoted a spurious Author. So
they came to S. Cyril's Catechism; to which D. T. said, He knew the place Mr.
P. meant, and that it was answered nigh twelve Years ago at the end of the
Conference betwixt some Gentlemen of the Church of Rome, and Dr. Stillingfleet
and D. Burnet. Mr. P. said, That Conference as written by D. St. and D. B. was
answered, and that he would give D. T. the Answer. Something was said to Mr. M.
about that Conference, which needs not (as I imagine) to be here repeated.

After this D. T. desired Mr. P. to read out of his printed Paper, the place
out of Justin Martyr, which he did. The words were these:

S. Justin Mart. in Apologia Antonio Pio Imperatori pro Christianis oblata. Now
this Food, says he, amongst us is called the Eucharist, which it is lawful for
none to partake of, but those who believe our Doctrine to be true, etc. For we
do not receive this as common Bread or common Drink, but as the Word of God,
Jesus Christ our Redeemer being made Man, had both Flesh and Blood for the sake
of our Salvation; Just so are we taught, that That Food over which Thanks are
given by Prayers in his own Words, and whereby our Blood and Flesh are by a
change nourished, is the Flesh and Blood of the Incarnate Jesus; For the
Apostles in the Commentaries written by them, called the Gospels, have
recorded, that Jesus so commanded them.

D. T. answered, That those words proved the Bread to remain Bread, because it
nourished the Body, and was called Bread after Consecration: and that they did
not at all establish the Roman Article of Transubstantiation. Mr. P. answered,
He brought it for the proof of the Real Presence. D. T. replied, A Lutheran
held that, yet would not be of their Communion. He then asked D. T. what his
opinion was of the Real Presence? He answered, He would defend the true Sense
of his Church, even in those mistaken words in the Catechism, The Body and
Blood of Christ are verily and indeed taken and received by the Faithful in the
Lord's Supper. [One in the Crowd said, not very loud, Hold him to that.]

I think here was further talk about the Roman Corporeal Presence. And Mr. D.
A. C. asked Mr. P. what kind of Philosophy that was which maintained that
Accidents subsisted without substances: He said,'it was true Philosophy. D. T.
asked whether it was true Philosophy to say, there was whiteness without a
white thing, and breaking without a thing broken, and the body of a Man without
the dimensions and figure of such a body. It was answered, God could do this.
It was replied, there was no need, no promise, supposing God could do it. Mr.
D. A. C. said then or afterward in the next Room, that God could not do what
was a contradiction, it being an imperfection. Mr. P. continued the discourse
and said we accused them of Idolatry, whereas they worshipped not the Bread,
but Christ under it. To which D. T. answered, that he also adored Christ when
he took the Sacrament, but not that substance which they said was under the
show of Bread: and that if it proved to be Bread, it was a Creature, and the
worship of it would be the worship of a Creature; adding that Costerus the
Jesuit owned, if it should prove to be Bread, the worship of it would be worse
Idolatry than that of the Laplanders who worshipped a red Cloth. Mr. P.
replied, Mr. Stillingfleet had cited that place. D. T. rejoined that it was
rightly cited, for he had read it in Costerus. Mr. P. was silent.

Mr. P. here asserted that the Bread was annihilated; and being shown by D. T.
that his Opinion was contrary both to truth and his own Church; he salv'd it by
saying, 'twas annihilated so far as it was Bread.

About this time (as I think) Mr. Meredith removed and went to a Window, and
Mr. D. A. C. had there some discourse with him.

And there was other occasional talk with a Roman by M. S. about the Cup in the
Sacrament, the Roman saying, 'twas taken away for fear of being spilt.

About this time also (as I think) Mr. P. was desired to stick to something,
and particularly to the place of Scripture long ago cited by him; If he will
not hear the Church -- and he was asked by D. T. where the place was? He could
not tell. At which some of the people upbraiding Mr. P. Mr. M. asked D. T. if
he could tell Chapter and Verse throughout the Bible. D. T. answered he would
by no means pretend to it: But if he cited a place as a proof of a Fundamental
point, he would first know where it was, that by the Antecedents and
Consequents he might be the better assured of the sense of it.

After which D. T. turned to the place in S. Matthew the 18th. and read it out
of the English Bible, and asked if the Translation were faulty? Mr. P. would
not say it was. Then D. T. explained the sense of the place as meant of
Trespasses and not Articles of Faith, and said to a very honest Gentleman whom
he espied not far from him, it is as if it should be said to you by one to whom
you owe any thing (though pardon me, the Obligation is on the other side) Sir I
come privately to you, pray be just to me. You say you will not. Then he comes
with a Friend and says, Pray do me right, and the matter shall go no farther;
you say, you will not. Then he puts you into the Ecclesiastical Court
(supposing it proper for their cognizance:) you will not stand to their
sentence. Then you are Excommunicated, and treated as such a One. What a
consequence from hence is this, Therefore the Roman Church is to be heard as an
infallible Guide in matters of Faith? Mr. M. said (being returned from the
other part of the Room) when there is a controversy about the meaning of a
place of Scripture, who should be judge? D. T. answered there was no need here,
the case was plain; especially if this Text was further compared with one in
Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 17. 8, to 13.
and that if the Roman Church should make an Interpretation, the sense of the
words of that Interpretation would as much need a Key, as the easy Text it
self. D. T. added that Christ's Church was not then thoroughly formed, and that
the Rule had some respect to the extraordinary state of those times in which it
was not so proper to go to the ordinary Courts, the Judges being unbelievers. A
Romanist not so well known by D. T. offered something in confutation of this;
but D. T. told him that if he would bring an Authentic interpretation out of
some of his Church Books, he would hear it. But if not (and at that he did not
offer) then he, as a Romanist, would say nothing to the purpose, but argue, as
he says the Protestants do, out of their own head.

At last Mr. P. and D. T. came to the Quotations again; and then it was
resolved that D. T. should write of this matter and of S. Ambrose, S. Cyril,
and Justine Martyr, etc. to M. P. and receive his Answer, and reply as often as
there was just occasion given.

After this D. T. said to Mr. P. there was one thing remaining and fit to be
said to him: he had in a printed Paper, promised not to tamper about Religion
with the Protestant Boys who should come to the Savoy-School; it had appeared
that he tampered with Boys out of his care, and would do so much more with
those under it: He said, it did not follow, because of his word which he would
not break, and that for this Boy he had done it in order to his everlasting
Salvation. D. T. answered, that being your Principle, that all out of your
Communion are damned, you being a Jesuit and a Papist, must break your word in
tha^ Paper for the necessary good (as you think) of the Souls of the Boys,
especially you having hope of turning Boys under your Care. Mr. M. said to D.
T. This reflects upon the King. Another more aloud, this reflects upon the
King, and suggests that he will break his word: and Mr. P. joined in the
Accusation; but many of the Hearers cried out against them, and said, it was a
knavish trick. Mr. M. was going away, D. T. called to him and desired him not
to run away with a false Tale. Mr. M. denied he said such words. D. T. told him
he did, and that for his part he thought his Loyalty at this time to be more
valuable than Mr. M's. because he as a Son of the Church of England, professed
he would not rebel against the King, notwithstanding he might be of another
Religion; whereas Mr. M. being of the same Religion, could not so well separate
Loyalty from Interest. D. T. being concerned at this false and unworthy way of
catching men, did say to Mr. M. at the Door of the first Room, that if he had
persisted in this Trick, he could not have forborne to have given him the name
of Evidence Meredith.

Then D. T. desired Mr. P. and Mr. M. to go from the throng into the back Room,
and to talk a little where there was less heat and noise. But Company followed
thither too, and there some things were repeated, and some new things started
about a Judge in Controversy; about the Head of the Church; about Berengarius:
but nothing was pursued. Mr. M. took leave, and just at the Door muttered
something about Penal Laws. Mr. P. was following, and D. T. said to him, that
it was always his way to pity the people of differing Assemblies, but that for
such as his Order, who had taught excluding and deposing Doctrines, and brought
in a foreign Jurisdiction, it seemed fit to keep up some Laws against them.

Mr. P. denied that his Order taught any such Doctrines. Mr. D. A. C. asked him
what he thought of Suarez and Mariana. M. P. asserted, that the Pope had had a
right of Jurisdiction here a thousand years, and that D. T. ought not,
therefore, to call it foreign. D. T. said those were dangerous words: soon
after this, Mr. P. took leave, it being now late in the Evening. D. T. staid a
while; and there was brought up to him out of the Shop, the aforesaid Question
of Mr. Meredith left with the Boy, and written in the same hand with the few
words which Mr. Meriton had begun to write upon the back of D. T's. Paper. It
was said to the Boy, that he should have an Answer to that Paper, if he came in
the Morning to D. T. 'Twas not thought fit by Mr. U. and his Wife that the Boy
should come, lest, having been found to be so great and malicious a Liar, he
should invent and spread some new Tale or other. But Mrs. U. came her self, and
carried back a little Book, in which an Answer to that Question was contained.

During the Conference, the Son of Mr. J. a Roman, came to a Constable, and
desired him to go to Mr. U's. where the Father Mr. P. was in danger of being
killed. The Constable, saw how little need there was for the Exercise of his
Authority.

Next Morning came to Mr. U's: the Roman, who said if he was not in Orders, he
hoped to be so; his pretended Errand was good Counsel to the Boy, in Relation
to his Master and Mistress, who had complained that, since he had been in this
new way, he had troubled the House, misspent his time, and become an
intolerable Liar, and he pointed the Boy to a place or two of Scripture about
Obedience; but by and by the great design of his coming appeared: for he asked
the Boy if he was now satisfied in his Religion. Both they and the Protestants
knew that he was gone before, and they had been told how much worse he was in
his Morals, since he had been tampered with; and the Boy had owned to D. T. in
his Closet, that he had been often at Mass. And D. H. before this Conference,
had concluded him gone over, and the Boy was already taught how to fence in
this matter, as may appear by his Letter to his Father, September 20th. upon
his hearing the Contents of the Letter, his Father had sent to Mrs. U. on
September 17th, she having given notice of the strange Alteration made in his
Son.

There came also a Woman to Mr. U's. to be satisfied in these Questions:
whether there had not been a Conference there? Whether there had not been five
Ministers of the Church of England there against one Jesuit, who put them all
to silence? whether Mr. U. and Mrs. U. were not staggered in their Religion
upon this Conference? Whether a Gentlewoman of the Church of England was not
after the Conference fallen distracted? And when she heard that there was but
one Minister there, and no putting of him to silence, and no distraction, and
further Confirmation of Mr. U. and Mrs. U. declared by themselves, and the
rather upon their taking notice of certain Arts of Lying, not so much before
observed by them; she owned that the aforesaid Stories were used by a Roman, as
Arguments to turn her.

I believe there might be false Stories to the prejudice of Mr. P. and his
Friends; but to the end that false Reports may not on either hand prevail, this
Account is written by D. T. which Mr. P. wheresoever he thinks it is faulty,
may please to correct.

Tho. Tenison.

A Pursuit of that which was said in the Conference about the three first
Quotations, viz. out of S. Ambrose de Sacramentis, S. Cyril of Jerusalem in
his Catechism, and Justin Martyr in his Apology, etc.
1. FOR the Book de Sacramentis, as not genuine, it may suffice at present to
say, That though there was a Book written by S. Ambrose under that Title, this
is not it, there not being found in this the Places which S. Austin cited out
of that. That the style is plainly more moderen and rude than that of S.
Ambrose and his Age: That the version of the places of Scripture mentioned in
this Book, is not the same with that which S. Ambrose uses in his genuine
Works. That this Book is taken notice of by the Writers of the 8th. and 9th.
Age, the time of the introducing of the Corporeal Presence. The very eminent
Cardinal Bona Rer. Liturg. l. 1. c. 7. p. 351.
whose credit is greater than that of Alexander Natalis, does own all this, the
last words excepted.

Haec Ambrosius, si tamen ipse horum librorum, qui de Sacramentis inscribuntur,
Auctor est. Testatur quidem Augustinus, scripsisse Ambrosium libros de
Sacramentis, sive de Philosophia adverfus l'latonem, quorum meminit, lib. 2.
Retract. cap. 4. and doctrina Christiana lib. 2. cap. 28. eosque pe^iit sibi
mitti a S. Paulino Ep. 34. sed illi vel perierunt, vel alicubi latent; long
diversi sunt ab his qui nunc extant, ut patet ex sententiis, quas ex illis
citat idem August. lib. 2. primi operis adversus Julianum cap. 5. and tribus
sequentibus. De his vero, quos hodie habemus, fecit primo, ut dubitarem, styli
diversitas; cum enim opera Ambrosii ante aliquot annos haud perfunctorie
percurrerem, (...) ad hoc pervent, visus sum mihi alterius lingue hominem ab
Ambrosio prorsus diversum loquentem audire. Tum animadverti loca scripturae in
his citata, non esse ejus versionis, qua in aliis libris Ambrosius uti
consuevit. Quaedam etiam in his reperi, quae seculo Ambrosii minus convenire
visa sunt. Nihilominus a Scriptoribus octavi and nani seculi laudantur saepius
tanquam Ambrosii legitimus foetus, quorum auctoritati cedens, eos deinceps sub
ejus nomine, cujus est possessio, semper cit abo.

It is true he says at the end of his Discourse, that, (notwithstanding his
Reasons before alleged) he yields to the Authority of the Writers of the 8th
and 9th Age; and that, seeing they are in possession, he will henceforth cite
this Book under the name of S. Ambrose. But considering the Time and the
Doctrine then preparing for the papal stamp, who wants the fagacity of
understanding to what purpose this Book was forged, and then brought forth as
out of its ancient mouldiness? And for the humility of the Cardinal's deference
to such late Authority against his solid reasons and judgment, all know what
that means in the Roman Communion, where Writers after knowing that they have
said things against the genius of that Church, do in the end submit all at her
feet. So did Descartes, whose principles are utterly inconsistent with
Transubstantiation. So did Molinos the Father of the numberless offspring of
the present Quietists. For this is the Conclusion of his first amply licensed,
and then rigidly condemned Guida spirituale Guide 1 Spir. per Il dott. Mich. di
Molinos sacerdote p. 318. Quarta impressione in Roma, 1681.
Il tutto sottoponga, humilimente prostrato, alla Correttione della Santa
Chiesa Catolica Romana

After all this I do allow that Mr. P. was the less to be blamed in this
Quotation, considered as a Romanist, because he cited it out of his Breviary,
and believed as his Church believed.

Of this spurious S. Ambrose, and of the doctrine of the Eucharist in the true
S. Ambrose, I will say more, when more is required.

I will add only, at this time, these two things.

First, The Author cited out of the Breviary, suppose him S. Ambrose, is
inconsistent with himself, if Transubstantiation be an Article of his Faith.
For he says in another place De Sacr. l. c. c. 4 p. 447.
non iste panis est qui vadit in Corpus, sed ille panis vitae aeternae, qui
animae nostrae Substantiam fulcit. That is, it is not that Bread which goes
into the Body, but the Bread of Life eternal, which sustains the substance of
the Soul.

Now what a Judge has Mr. P. chosen toward the deciding of a Controversy, in
which he is not reconciled to himself?

Secondly, This Author in all probability has been further tampered with; for
he would scarce have said that in the Breviary, seeing he owned the Canon of
the Mass in his time to run otherwise than now it does in the Roman Missal, and
to assert that the Elements were De Sacram. l. 4. cap. 5. p. 439. Accipe quae
sunt verba -- Dicit sacerdos, fac nobis, inquit, banc oblationem ascriptam,
etc. Quod est figura corporis and sanguinis D. N. J. Christi.
the Figure of Christ's Body.

Secondly, For the Testimony of S. Cyril, it was not that cited thus in the
Speculum. S. Cyril. Alexandrinus, etc. For Mr. P. spoke of S. Cyril of
Jerusalem: and though he did not produce the words, yet he said they were those
in his fourth Mystagogical Catechism. I say now as I then did, That the place
was long ago fully answered See Relation of a Conference, by Ed. Still. etc.
An. 1676. p. 36, 37. and Append. p. 50, 51, 52.
. The place of S. Cyril is by a Romanist, M. W. thus rendered: Though you see it
to be Bread, yet believe it is the Flesh and the Blood of the Lord Jesus. Doubt
it not, since he had said, This is my Body. And for a proof instances Christ's
changing Water into Wine.

Cyril. Catech. Mist. 3. p. 235. and Catech. 4. p. 237.
The Answer is this, and it is a true one;

We acknowledge [that the words of S. Cyril of Jerusalem] were truly cited: but
for clearing of them we shall neither allege any thing to the lessening the
Authority of that Father, though we find but a slender Character given of him by
Epiphanius and others. Nor shall we say any thing to lessen the Authority of
these Catechisms, though much might be said. But it is plain, S. Cyril's design
in these Catechisms was only to possess his Neophytes with a just and deep
sense of these holy Symbols. But even in his fourth Catechism he bids them, not
to consider it as mere Bread and Wine, for it is the Body and Blood of Christ.
By which it appears he thought it was Bread still, though not mere Bread.

And he gives elsewhere a very formal account in what sense he thought it
Christ's Body and Blood, which he also insinuates in his Fourth Catechism: for
in his first Mystical Catechism, when he exhorts his young Christians to avoid
all that belonged to the Heathenish Idolatry, he tells, That on the Solemnities
of their Idols, they had Flesh and Bread, which by the Invocation of the Devils
were defiled, as the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist, before the Holy
Invocation of the blessed Trinity, was bare Bread and Wine: but the Invocation
being made, the Bread becomes the Body of Christ. In like manner (says he)
those Victuals of the Pomp of Satan, which of their own nature are common or
bare Victuals, by the Invocation of the Devils become profane.

From this illustration, which he borrowed from Justin Martyr his second
Apology, it appears that he thought the Consecration of the Eucharist was of a
like sort or manner with the profanation of the Idolatrous Feasts; so that as
the substance of the one remained still unchanged, so also according to him
must the substance of the other remain. Or if this will not suffice them, let
us see to what else he compares this change of Elements by the Consecration. In
his Third Mystag. Catech. treating of the consecrated Oil, he says, As the
Bread of the Eucharist, after the Invocation of the Holy Ghost, is no more
common Bread, but the Body of Christ; so this Holy Ointment is no more bare
Ointment, nor, as some say, common, but it is a gift of Christ, and the
presence of the Holy Ghost, and becomes energetical of his Divinity. And from
these places let it be gathered what can be drawn from S. Cyril's Testimony.
And thus we have performed likewise what we promised, and have given a clear
account of S. Cyril's meaning from himself, from whose own words, and from
these things which he compares with the Sanctification of the Elements in the
Eucharist, it appears he could not think of Transubstantiation; otherwise he
had neither compared it with the Idol-Feasts, nor the consecrated Oil, in
neither of which there can be supposed any Transubstantiation.

I will at present add only three or four Notes about this place of St. Cyril.

First, that the Romish Translator Grodecius St. Cyril p. 237. C.
has (as should seem) to help this matter in his way, rendered the words,
(...), by, sub specie panis, and sub specie vini, under the show of Bread, and
under the show of Wine, instead of in the Type (or Figure) of Bread, and in the
Type (or Figure) of Wine.

Secondly, that just before the words cited in favor of Transubstantiation, he
uses these. But in the new [not Law as the Translator has it, but] Covenant,
the heavenly Bread, and the Cup of Salvation sanctify Soul and Body; as the
Bread agrees to the Body, so the Word to the Soul. It should hence seem that
the Body of Christ meant by St. Cyril, was the Word, and that both Bread and
the Word, were received by the Communicant.

Thirdly, that St. Cyril's Third Catechize of the Illuminate, or baptized,
opens the Sense of the Fourth Mystagogical Catechize; for there he speaks, in a
very high strain, of Consecrated Water, and advises the Persons to be baptized
St. Cyril Catech. 3. Il^um. p. 16. B. (...).
to come not as to common Water, but as to the spiritual Grace given together
with the Water.

Fourthly, It is much to be doubted whether this be the Book of St. Cyril of
Jerusalem; for, besides that Gesner says, he saw that Book in the Ausburg
Library, under the Name of John of Constantinople: the Author forbids his
Hearers to be Frequenters of Spectacles in Theaters, or of Horse-races in
Hippodromes; for this there was no occasion at Jerusalem since it had become
Christian; there being, especially in his time, no such Sports and Places there
that I have ever read of.

So, in three Quotations, the two first are taken out of suspected Authors; yet
I will allow the Catechisms to be ancient, and to be ascribed to St. Cyril by
Sophronius and St. Hierom; yet they note that he composed them in his youth
Sophron. -- (...). D. Hieron. l. de. Ser. Eccles. -- Quis in Adolescentia
composuit.
.

3. Touching the Quotation out of Justin Martyr, it was this in English, and
read out of the abovesaid Sheets called Speculum Ecclesiasticum, by Mr. P.

S. Justin. etc. I suppose, in Charity, that Antonio for Antonino, is the
mistake of the Printer; but'tis a mistake of some body else, when (...), is
translated, As the Word of God, Jesus Christ our Redeemer being made man, etc.
instead of by the Word of God [or the Divine Spirit] Jesus Christ being made
flesh, etc. Just. Mart. Apol. 2. p. 97, 98.
. But to pass to something more material.

I observe, first, That the foregoing words of Justin, which are very
considerable, are omitted, viz. That [at the end of the Eucharist] the
Ministers distribute to every one present, that he may partake of the
consecrated Bread, and Wine, and Water, etc. Justin calls it Bread after
Consecration, as St. Paul did before him.

I observe, secondly, that Justin interprets himself whilst he says, It is not
Common-Bread; as if he had, said, It is Bread in its Nature, but being
consecrated, and made the Figure and Pledge of Christ's Body, it deserves a
higher Name; and indeed this is a Key to the Expressions of most of the
Fathers, and particularly to St. Cyril, as has been already shown; and it is
plain to those who read the Fathers with Attention, that they use such Language
in relation to the Water in Baptism, as they do in reference to the Bread and
Wine in the Eucharist, without teaching a Substantial change; so Greg. Nyssen.
despise not the Divine Washing, nor make light of it as Commmon Gr. Nyss. dc S.
Chapter B.
.

I note, thirdly, that Justin affirms of the consecrated Bread and Wine, that
they nourish the Body; and that therefore he is no Teacher of
Transubstantiation, which removes the Substances which nourish the Body.

And now, how far is it from the true Art of Thinking, and the sincere love of
Truth, to draw a Proof for a pretended Article of Faith, from the high and
hyperbolical Phrases of the Ancients? by the same reason, if the World should
last 14, or 1500 years, men might conclude that the Church of England taught
the Doctrine of the Corporal Presence as well as the Church of Rome, she having
used these words in the Office of the Communion at the Consecration of the
Elements; -- Grant that we, receiving these thy Creatures of Bread and Wine,
according to thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ's Holy Institution in remembrance
of his Death and Passion, may be Partakers of his most blessed Body and Blood.
--

An Account of Doctor Tenison 's and Doctor Celgat 's going to the Savoy to Mr.
Pulton.
UPon October the 3d. 87. Dr. Tenison and Dr. Claget went to the Savoy about
Five at Night: After having found Mr. Pulton, the Jesuit, in his Lodgings
there, Dr. Tenison desired him to call to them any one of his Friends, that he
might hear the Discourse which he was about to offer. After being twice or
thrice pressed to it by Dr. Tenison, he called one in the Habit of a Jesuit, a
Grave and Civil Person; his Name was not asked. Then Dr. Tenison applied
himself to Mr. Pulton on this manner; Sir, I was informed that on Sunday last
in the Afternoon, after you had finished your Exposition on some Point in the
Catechism, you spoke to the Company in the Chapel to this Effect. I believe
you have heard of a late Conference, in which I was concerned. It is not the
way of Catholics to make a great noise of such Matters; but if the Protestants
make a stir about it, then next Sunday, in this place, I will give you an
Account of that which passed in that Conference. Mr. Pulton and the other
Jesuit owned that he had said this, and that he was not Misrepresented; upon
which Dr. Tenison told him that he had opened the Scene, and that if he himself
had done so at St. Martins, it was his Opinion he should not have observed the
Rules of Peace and Decency. Mr. Pulton answered, He had neither named Dr.
Tenison in his Chapel, nor elsewhere spoken ill of him; and that he was moved
to this by the Dirt that was cast upon him by Papers and Words in
Coffee-houses. Dr. Tenison assured him, That he was not the Author of such
Papers or Words, and that he himself had had his share of Slanderous Words from
some of his Party; and he gave him a remarkable Instance of that Nature, which
is in Dr. Tenison's Account above Repeated. After which Dr. Tenison said, that
he came to make a double Proposal to him; either to give one another Liberty to
use such Discourse, and to Publish such Papers in all Companies and Places, as
should seem meet to each of them; or else to proceed as was agreed upon at the
end of the Conference. That is to say, First, That Dr. Tenison should send in
Writing to Mr. Pulton, what he judged fit of that which had passed, and of that
which he had undertaken in a Paper which he signed relating to Mr. Pulton's
First Quotation out of St. Ambrose; as also of that which he said in Reference
to Mr. Pulton's Second Quotation out of the Catechism of St. Cyril of
Jerusalem, and his Third, Read by the same Mr. Pulton out of a Printed Paper,
and cited as Justin Martyr's.

Then, that Mr. Pulton should send to Dr. Tenison his Answer in Writing: After
which they might proceed to more Quotations, and further Replies.

Here Mr. Pulton stuck a while, and showed a little Heat, which his Friend soon
tempered. Mr. Pulton would have confined Dr. Tenison to that which he called
his Main Point; and complained further, that Dr. Tenison would not hear out all
his Quotations, though there was not time for all, there being others in a
Paper Book, besides that in his Breviary, and those in his Printed Sheets; and
to allude to them as called, the Soldiers Paper, to hear all read over before
the answering of One, seemed to Dr. Tenison as absurd as not to permit a
Soldier to answer to his Name till all the Muster-Roll is called over. Further,
Dr. Tenison was for setting forth the Matter at length, and desired not to be
confined to Mr. Poulton's new Method, leaving him to the liberty of making such
Objections as he judged fit in the Case.

Mr. Pulton's Friend persuaded him to go on thus, and at last Mr. Pulton
yielded to it.

Here Dr. Clegat interposed, and said, That Dr. Tenison had taken a good Course
to prevent false Reports, by coming to him to adjust the Method betwixt
themselves, and that it had been better if Mr. Pulton had done the like before
he had spoken of the Matter in his Chapel in the Savoy; and that Dr. Tinison
had, by his Proposition, showed that his Intentions were fair. Then some
Discourse was had about St. Ambrose de Sacramentis, another Place in the true
St. Ambrose, and Alexander Natalis's Arguments about the former Book. Dr.
Clegat said, That his Arguments had need be good, for he knew that Writer too
well to take any thing upon his mere Authority. Then Dr. Clegat being to go
into the Country was desirous to take leave; but before that was done, Dr.
Tenison entreated Mr. Pulton to give him such Printed Sheets as he had used at
the Conference. Mr. Pulton said he knew not where they were, and went into his
Study to look for them, but came again and said, he could not find them. Then
Dr. Tenison asked him what Title they had; he said, he had forgot. It seemed
strange that he should forget the Title of a Writing out of which he had
Disputed, though it is plain he was not perfectly Versed in it, for there he
might have found Pope Innocent the Third, about whom he was at a loss. The
Truth is, the Title was such, that it was not worth the remembering, though it
was so Remarkable, that a Man could scarce forget it: viz. Speculum
Eccelesiasticum; rendered an Ecclesiastical Prospective-glass, instead of
Looking-glass: But as Fantastical as it was, and as falsely rendered, they
found it Pasted up in the Entrance to the Savoy Chapel, and there left it: Mr.
Pulton being with them, and having told them that the Woman that sold those
Sheets, (who was then out of the way) or else N. T. would furnish them with
this Piece.

So they took leave Civilly one of another, after Mr. Pulton had Courteously
invited, Dr. Clegat and Dr. Tenison to taste of their Beer, and they, being in
haste, had with Thanks excused themselves.

This is a Faithful Relation of what passed at the Savoy whilst I was there
with Dr. Tenison, Mr. Pulton and another Jesuit, October. 3d.

William Clegat.



Dr. Tenison afterward looking into these Sheets, was amazed that Mr. Pulton
should be so earnest to read further Quotations from them; for there he found a
great many Books plainly spurious, (besides that De Sacramentis under St.
Ambrose's Name) cited as genuine; of this Number are these: The Third Epistle
of St. Anacletus, Canon 39. Arab. of the First Council of Nice, St. Cyril of
Jerusalem, l. 3. in Apol. contra Ruffin. c. 4. If there be such a Book in the
World ascribed to St. Cyril by any one before. I suppose he has Confounded St.
Cyril with St. Hierom, in the Second Tome of whose Works is such a Book as
Apologiae adversus Ruffinum libri tres.

But enough of this Magical-glass, which shows us St. Cyril in another Man's
Figure, and sets before our Eyes Pope Leo presiding in the Council of
Chalcedon, and Pope Vigilius presiding in the Second Council of Constantinople,
with other such Sights which the Learned World never saw before.

On October. 9th. being the Lords Day, Mr. Pulton, in the Mass-house at the
Savoy, spoke thus to the People. I know it is expected I should now speak of a
late Conference I had; but the Dr. having since then been with me, to acquaint
me he had not taken any Measures about speaking thereof in the Pulpit, desired
therefore that I would not; to which I promised him; so, for your Information
of what passed there, you are to expect it from Methods which may be concluded
on.

This, how well soever intended, gave occasion to the People to spread it all
about the City, that Dr. Tenison had been with Mr. Pulton to beg of him to say
nothing of the Conference, as being afraid that the Truth should come out.

Mr. Pulton's first Letter to D. T. thus superscrib'd.
This for the very Reverend Doctor, Doctor Tenison, Pastor of St. Martins.
The Savoy this 4th. of October. 1687. Very Reverend Doctor,
AS it was my desire in the beginning to say nothing but what should be write,
so you having now accepted that Condition, I desire the same method may be
observed in our wrighting which was followed in our Conference and the Rule of
Faith having been the Question principally debated, I humbly crave that may be
first voided, lest we embroil things by embracing to much together, then we
will pass, as you shall please, to collateral Questions. I have not showed yet
a Copy of the enclosed to any body out of our house, complying with the
Condition put: you may take your leisure to answer it as your greater Occasions
may allow. I have got it write out fair, by reason I wright my self so ill.

Reverend and Learned Doctor, Your most obliged, and humble Servant to
command, Andrew Pulton.


The Paper which was enclosed in this Letter, the Reader will find afterward
with Notes upon it.

Doctor Tenison's Answer to Mr. Pulton 's first Letter. October. 5th. 87.
Sir,
LAst night I received your Letter and a Paper enclosed in it; and I pray you
to excuse me, if I do not follow the methods there prescribed by you. You
cannot forget the Agreement made at your Lodgings on Monday Night. I was to
take my way in writing to you, and you were to form your Answer as you pleased.
I shall stand to the Agreement. If I write that which is weak, refuse me; if
that which is rude, reprove me; if that which is false, be as severe as you
please with me; I shall account it a kindness. I shall (with God's Permission)
begin to write at large to morrow, having minutes by me already; and on Monday
next I hope to send you the first Copy of that which I shall write, if not on
Saturday. And in the mean time no man shall have one line about this matter out
of my hands: Neither have I hitherto written one word about it in any Note or
Letter to any man living; notwithstanding, I have been sufficiently importuned.
And though (I confess) I differ very widely from you in many things, yet you may
expect nothing contrary to Truth and Humanity from,

Reverend Sir, Your Servant in all Christian Offices, Tho. Tenison.

Mr. Pulton 's second Letter to Dr. T. delivered to T. T. at one of the Clock,
September. 5th. 87.
Very Reverend Doctor,
I Was something surpised, that a Person of your credit in the World, should
return me such an Answer to my so reasonable demand. I cannot think you believe
me so imprudent and weak, as when I admitted of your answering the Authority of
St. Ambrose (on which I put very little stress) that I would let fall the mean
Question: no, Honored Sir, as you desire to be esteemed a fair Adversary, so I
expect you return a positive Answer to our principle difficulty, as well as a
collateral Controversy; I beg the favor therefore, that you return me an
Answer this Evening, whether you accept this Condision? if not, I remain free
to take such measures as I shall find necessary to thwart the injurious and
scandalous Reports which run up and down the Town, much to my Prejudice, in
expectation of which, I remain,

Reverend Sir, Your most obliged Servant, A. Pulton.

Dr. Tenison's Answer to Mr. Pulton's second Letter, October. 5th. 87. One of the
Clock.
Sir,
I Perceive by yours, which your Scholars brought just now to me, that you are
under a Misapprehension, both as to my Temper and my Purpose in the matter
before us. You seem to have a Suspicion of me, as a cunning man, and as one
who, in what I promised to write, would take the advantage of insisting on one
Quotation of yours, believed by me to be out of a spurious Author, and pass by
the rest, and the principal things in debate, and particularly those in your
Paper sent yesterday to me: No, Sir, you may assure your your self, that I am
too blunt a man to be a man of Artifice, and that I will (if God gives me
Health) consider the whole, and not neglect your Paper, though I will not be
precisely tied to it, for that was none of our Agreement: What the Agreement
was, is well known to your Friend and mine, who were present all the time we
discoursed of that matter in the Savoy. No more now, (being in business of
another nature) but that I am,

Reverend Sir, Your Friend to serve you in all the Offices of the common
Christianity, Tho. Tenison.
I cannot procure your Speculum Ecclesiasticum. I sent my Man this Morning to
her, who (you said) sold them; and she said, She had not one.



Mr. Pulton 's third Letter, October. 8. 87.
Very Reverend Sir,
YOur last was in terms so ambiguous, that I cannot sufficiently gather the
intentions from it, you will not neglect my Paper, not yet will you do what most
reasonably is required thereby. We having agreed therefore to wright, I thought
my self bound first to disabuse the World in reference to the matters of Fact
of S. Michael's day, then return me a fair Answer to the difficulty therein
proposed, but not solved: to which I will not fail speedily to answer as becomes
the Zeal I have for the Truth. The impudent Lies of 5. 10. and 15. Jesuits
being silenced, running up and down the Town and Kingdom of which we are
already informed from the West and North with the daily false accounts given
out by the Brasier (which I can prove against him, and which you ought not to
have allowed of, but hindered) has obliged me to hasten this short Account of
that Transaction, which shall not lie under the scandalous acception it has
hitherto had, if you would have any thing else added to it, within a few days I
shall have leisure to give a more full, but allways ingenuous Account. This is
at present wherein I am obliged to show how I am,

Honored Sir, Your obedient Servant, A. Pulton.
I have tak'd with Mr. U. and he professes that he has bin rather sparing
then profuse in his Discourse about the Conference; and that it cannot be proved
against him, that be spread any one falls Tale, unless by such a Witness as his
lying Apprentice.

J. S. T. T.





Dr. Tenison 's Third Letter to Mr. Pulton.
To the Reverend Mr. Pulton at his Lodgings in the Savoy. October. 10. 87. SIR,
ON Friday I had finished my Account of the Conference, and my further
Animadversions on your Quotations out of the Fathers. And I did not write the
first at large, till after I had called to me four Credible Persons, who
happened to be hearers, and had read my Minutes to them, and was satisfied by
them that my Memory had not failed me. In some few things they refreshed it,
and nothing was set down which was not believed to be such as Partiality had
not corrupted. Some straggling Words were not gathered up, as that about false
Coin remembered in your Narrative, and the Accidental talk about the Quietists,
concerning whom Mr. Meredith said they were extinct.

If I have touched upon any Infirmity of yours, I presume it will be the more
easily Pardoned, seeing I do not spare my self. I thought it would give the
greater satisfaction to tell the whole Truth, having observed, as others do,
that in such Cases, ordinary things give Light to those which are more
Material. If our Motions shall seem to the World somewhat too irregular for
Divines, I hope it will be considered that we met with Noise and Interruption.
My Amanuensis having promised me to Transcribe the whole before Eight this
Morning, I did purpose to send it to you; but on Saturday in the Evening, I
received from you a Letter, and with it your Account of the Conference; and
being desirous to send you some Notes upon your Narrative, and having had no
free Minute from that time to this for such an Affair, and being willing to lay
before you all at once, I think I must delay my further sending till Wednesday
or Thursday. And then (by God's leave) there shall, be conveyed to you a just
Representation of the whole that relates to this Controversy betwixt us. And
though you have not kept to our Agreement, yet I shall certainly do so. You were
to expect my Account and then to send your Answer, and not first to write a
Narrative, and then to percipitate (as I hear you have done) the Publishing of
it. I will keep to my Agreement made before Witnesses; and no Man has had, or
shall have, either from me or my Amanuensis, a Note or Letter about this
Affair, or so much as a Line of the Account, till a Copy has been lodged in
your own Hands. You have given me an Advantage, not coveted by me, through the
many Motions you have made since we were (as I thought) fixed, by consent; and
in this, though not in many other things, I may apply to my self, that which was
said by the Bishop of Ross; (a subtle and observing Man) concerning Sir
Nicholas Bacon; viz. That he could not come within him, because he offered no
Play. What you say in your Defense, of false Reports, and of the Ambiguous
Words in my Letter, is not enough to excuse the Alteration of our Agreement. My
Letter is in your Hands; and in it you were plainly told that I would keep to
my Word, of which it was no part that I should, in what I was to write, follow
your scanty and constrained Rules. Truth is best painted at full length, and
with the freest Air; for false Reports, if they would set a Man at Liberty from
his Promise, then it would be also Lawful for me to Sacrifice Truth to Fame.
For your People have been very liberal in their Talk; and they who have spread
the Story of my going to the Savoy to ask your Pardon, and of Five Ministers
silenced by one Jesuit (the Deans of Peterborough and Windsor, Dr. Horneck, Mr.
Wake, and my self; though none of them were there, my self excepted) with other
such Groundless Calumnies, had certainly no design of raising our Reputations.
But why should we be so eager about that, which on either Hand is said of us?
One Week of Patience would have served your purpose better, and a little time
would have settled and cleared Reports. But you have broken loose, and you may
go your own way. I, for my part, as far as Truth will lead me, will attend your
Motions in the Quality of,

Sir, Your Servant. Tho. Tenison.

Mr. Pulton 's Fourth Letter to Dr. T.
The Savoy 11th. of October. 1687. Honored Sir,
YOU were pleased in yours of yesterday, to Expostulate at large with me
concerning the Agreement made between us which you judge me to have infringed.
I humbly beg the favor to know in what: for I am Conscious to my self of
nothing in that kind, nor by the Grace of God ever will be. All the Agreement
we made, when you did me the Honor of coming to our Lodgings in the Savoy; was
First, That I should not give an Account of our Conference from the Pulpit, you
not having taken those Mesures, as you said; Secondly, you desired that you
might answer the Quotation of St. Ambrose, I said I was content, provided I
might be allowed to give in all the Testimonies that I had to allege to the
same Matter. You desired you might first Answer to St. Ambrose, and that then I
might go on to the rest of the Fathers, to which I also assented, then you
added I should have the first Copy. Now there was not one Syllable spoke
relating to my wrighting, or not wrighting an Account of the Matter of Fact
past, nor had I broke my Word, though I had not sent you the first Copy (which
notwithstanding I refused to let Dr. Waker peruse before you had it) the
wrighting agreed on only being in reference to a further prosecuting the
Arguments before proposed; I will notwithstanding take it in that Point, as you
are pleased to do, and I have hitherto done, and accordingly will send you my
entire Narrative by the Hands which shall bring yours if possible. I desire you
to take the freedom, when you have it, to let me know before we print (for I
suppose it will come to that) what you may except against in the whole, and I
will do the same to you, and by this means Truth by degrees will come to Light.
What you say Five Doctors to one Jesuit, I have never heard it from any but
your self, I will prove (if you please) that this was a common Story, T. T.
nor do I believe there is Three in the Kingdom that give Credit to it, though
Thousands believe things more injurious to me: Had not your Party made our
Conference a common Cause, and run down the Catholics with hundreds of falls
Reports; I had never once opened my Mouth concerning the Conference, but you
must know Justice and Conscience oblige me to it; unless you may prescribe some
more amicable way of disabusing the Kingdom, then by Public Narratives, in
attendance whereof I remain

Your obliged Servant A. Pulton.
I am informed you desown you ever spoke to me to desire I woed not make a
Pulpit Matter of it, may I beg the favor to know whither this be so or no? or
whither you have been pleased to give out you came to give a second challenge.
If any say you came to ask Pardon, I declare they injure you.



Dr. Tenison 's Answer to Mr. Pulton 's Fourth Letter.
October 12th. 87. Sir,
I Will not be tedious in answering yours of the 11th. Instant, in relation to
our Agreement, for of that we have Witnesses. I am now assured that Copies of
your Account were spread all over the City, whilst I have kept my Word of
sending my first Copy to you, and have not sent abroad one single Line; but
after your Receipt of this (seeing you have begun on this manner) I will let
the World know the whole Truth, so far as my Memory with all due helps will
serve me, and from Truth I would not willingly swerve a Tittle. For the Story
of my going to the Savoy to ask your Pardon, it is made very common, though I
do not charge you with it; and if you be curious about Places and Persons, I
will name some of them to you. I never said I came to give you a second
Challenge: Nor did I come to beg of you to forbear your talking of this Matter
in your Pulpit, but to Expostulate with you about the unfitness of that way,
and to understand whether you would keep to the Method you agreed on at the end
of our (rambling Talk rather than) Conference; and to tell you, that in my
Judgment, it was most becoming. The Jesuit, your Witness, did not differ from
me in this Opinion, nor Doctor Claget who was mine. I did purpose (as I told
you) to send something to you about your Account, but having perused it, I
perceived you might by comparing it with mine, see what you omitted, what you
mistook, and what (as to me it seems) you sometimes added; I will therefore
save you the trouble of my Notes upon your Narrative, though, perhaps in due
time I may help others (who may not carry my Account in their Heads) with such
Animadversions. I believe in this as you do, that it may be fit to Print the
whole, for the quieting of People, who are, as yet, in suspense; and seeing you
put me in Mind of it, I resolve by that way to ease my self of the trouble of
transcribing Copies. You have my Letters and I yours, and your Account, and
with this I send you mine, together with a pursuit of my Discourse about your
three first Quotations. Do with them what you please, and write what you please
further, and I will take the like freedom. My Stationer, (which I did but just
now know of) is at Oxford, so that I must elsewhere apply my self; but this I
promise you, that as soon as I send any thing to the Press, I will give charge
to the Printer, to conveigh to you, by way of due notice, the first Sheet that
shall be wrought off: All things on my part shall be fair; and I am not your
Enemy, unless (which God forbid) you will account me so for telling the Truth,
but can still, very heratily Subscribe my self,

SIR, Your Friend as far as obliged by the Gospel of our Blessed Savior, Tho.
Tenison.

Mr. Pulton 's PAPER sent in his first Letter, with Dr. Tenison 's
Animadversions upon it.
Mr. Pulton's Paper.
AS the concern I had, that the Truth might appear to a Soul that was in search
of it, made me willing to enter on a Discourse of that Subject with you, so I
humbly beg, that nothing but Charity, and a true Sense of Zeal may appear in
what may happen to be writ by either of us, not to the Scandal, but to the
Edification of all such as may peruse our Papers.

You having therefore been pleased in our late Conference to assign the Holy
Scriptures for the Rule of Faith, I desired of you the Favor to know what
assurance you had, that the Volumes you call Holy Scripture, are the undoubted
Word of God; and this having been the main Point of our four hours Discourse, I
humbly crave a more clear and positive Answer then I could then obtain.

You were pleased to say, the Bible had been handed down to you from the
Apostles. Then I desired the Favor to know who they were that had so handed it
down to you: you replied, the Universal Church. Whereupon I demanded what you
meant by the Universal Church. You answered, That you meant all those several
Bodies who make up the number of Christians. Then I farther pressed to know
whether all these made up one true Church, or no. You said there was something
true in each of them, but would assign none void of great corruption. Upon
which I replied, That the Volumes which wholly relied on corrupted Authority,
could have no assurance of being the pure, true, and certain Word of God. And
here we stuck near 2 hours, I never being able to obtain a satisfactory Answer.

I humbly therefore crave to be satisfied,

10. Whither receiving the Scripture from the Universal Church, you have
received a Canon common to all distinct Bodies of Christians? If not, that you
farther explicate what you mean by taking the Scripture from the Universal
Church.

20. How the Universal Church consisting in Members disagreing in Faith can
give you a true and certain Rule of Faith.

30. If, when you begann, you pretended Reformation, there was any Church in
being, which had that precise Canon you have now, and explicated it as you do.
If so, be pleased to assign where it was, and how you took your Scripture from
it.

As for what related to Transubstantiation and Real Presence, it having been a
Question thrown in by the by, I desire it may be remitted to the second place;
and having cleared the present difficulty where the stresse of the Discourse
lay, we will then pass to particular Controversies, if you please.

Dr. Tenison 's short Notes upon this PAPER.
1. IT calls the Boy a Soul who was in search after Truth, whilst, at the same
time, Mr. P. was satisfied that the Boy had never acquainted his Father, his
Master, his Minister, with his Doubts, till after he had been at Mass; and was
by his Master and Mistress accused of having been guilty of unsufferable lying,
and neglect of Business, and of the growth of both since he had had
Conversation with a Romish Apprentice, and Mr. P. and others of that way. It is
not a thing to be easily credited, that a Soul that is in sincere and diligent
search after Truth of Doctrine, should at the same time become more sinful than
formerly in the invention of Lies, and more sour in Nature, and more faithless
in the duty of his Calling.

2 Mr. P calls the Rule of Faith, and the proving the Holy Bible to be that
Rule, the main Point. Whereas it was, indeed, the Point he desired to begin
with; but it was not that which the Boy had mentioned, but the inconsistence of
Luther about the Sacraments, and his pretended Colloquie with the Devil, which
therefore was in true order, to be begun with. But in this there is too much
Art; for the People may be amused by talk about the Copies of the Bible, and
the Tradition of them, and carried into the dark, and so be led the more easily
by those, who with the greatest Confidence, call themselves Guides: seeing they
are not themselves Masters of critical History; but they are more capable of
more particular Points (as Ex. gr. of the Communion in one kind, which the
People can find to be contrary to the Bible) and therefore that which is
tenderest they are not so willing to touch in popular Conferences. It is
enough, if they can get them to the Authority of their Church, and then the
obedient Child swallows whatsoever the Mother gives it.

3. It is said, no particular Answer was given: it will be found otherwise in
the account of the Conference. But if a sufficient Sum be tendered, and Mr. P.
be out of humor to receive it, he ought not to complain, that he cannot have
his Debt paid him. If Dr. T. had said less, certainly it had not been out of
unreadiness to answer, seeing in that matter he was prepared, he having
published a Tract about the Rule of Faith, of which a second Edition came forth
but a while ago, and no Answer has been yet made to it, whether out of contempt
of the imperfections of it; or for other Reasons, he cannot tell. And here,
seeing Self-defence is not vanity, he takes occasion to make mention of another
Tract scribbled by him against the Romish Author of the Protestants Plea for a
Socinian; at the latter end of which, Diff. betwixt Prot. and Socin. Meth. p.
57, 58, etc.
Mr. Meredith's Question about being judged by another, or going on our own
head, is answered, tho not so fully as by another Pen Judge in Contr.
: and to be perpetually answering Questions answered already, is a Task which a
person of good breeding will not impose, till the Answer first given, is
refuted by him. It is true, there was one who cited a few lines of the latter
Tract, who, if he had cited a few more, had spoiled his design of
Misrepresentation The Catholic Representer, 2 part. chapter 9. p. 58.
. His words are these:

If you have seen the Answer to the Protestants Plea for a Socinian, you will find
there (Page 26.) he points it out for the mark of a Right Socinian, to make
Reason the Rule of the Scriptures. Such a one (says he) makes Reason the Rule
of the Rule.

He goes no farther; for that which follows shows the Author to have spoken of
their Reasonings, not of Reason it self, which if any Man allows them in their
own Doctrines, he, in effect, does yield them the Cause. That which, there,
follows is this. Though he [the Right Socinian] thinks a Doctrine is plain in
Scripture, yet if he believes it to be against HIS REASON, He assents not to
it. And P. 27. -- A Man of this Church [of England] suspects not Reason it
self, but his own present Art of Reasoning, whenever it concludes against
that which he reads, and reads without doubting of the Sense of the Words.

If the Representer can come no nigher the Likeness, he may, if he please, lay
down his Pencil.

D. T. owns that this is a Digression, but he judged it better (seeing there
was no more needed) to write a Paragraph in defense of himself against a
public unjust Cavil, than to trouble the World with a whole Book.

4. Whereas it is said that by the Universal Church Dr. T. said he meant the
several Bodies who make up the Number of Christians, which Mr. P. afterward
calls distinct Bodies; Dr. T. did not use that Phrase. For his Words were
remarkable enough, that he meant, by the Universal Church, what he called it
every Lords Day before Sermon, the Congregation of Christian People dispersed
throughout the World. And he added that he took in the Testimony of Jews, and
Heathens, and might believe Men sincere when they spoke against themselves; and
that he also took in the Roman Church in the better Ages, and honest Men in it,
who, in the corrupter Ages, gave Testimony against its Corruptions, as they
arose. And he always inserted this Caution, that he took this Testimony from
such Universal Consent, with Considerations of the Persons as agreeing
Witnesses, and not from their Authority.

5. There is Craft in putting in the words, distinct Bodies; as if the Being of
a Church could not be continued, and the Corruptions of it opposed and
relinquished, without going forth to some other Body of Men, free from all such
Corruptions. Mr. P. may please to answer Dr. T. in this Point about the Church
of the Literal Israel, besides which there was then no other Church; and
enlighten him by the Resolution of this Query, whether there may be a
Reformation in a Church without leaving of it? The Learned Dr. Jackson said it
long ago Dr. Jacks. Works, Tom. 3. cap. 16. p. 870.
, That our Church was in the Romish Church before Luther's Time, and yet in it,
neither as a visible Church altogether distinct from it, nor as any native
Member of it. To his Arguments and Explications at present I refer Mr. P. tho
there are others of other kinds of equal weight and clearness.

For the rest, the aforesaid Account of the Conference, will show how far this
Paper of Mr. Pulton's is true; and whether it contains a fair Proposal, when it
offers in Exchange for the Contents of it, that which is really thinner Stuff,
and much shorter Measure.

The Account written by Mr. Pulton.
A True Account of a Conference had about Religion between Dr. T. and A. P. on
the 29th of September, 1687, in Long-Acre, London.
Dr. T's Note.
MR. P. scattered Copies of this Account, and Dr. T. saw three of them on
Monday October the 10th. Dr. T. and Mr. P. spent their time very ill, if so
lame an Account as this of a four-Hours Conference be a true one. How far it is
from the whole Truth, has been already shown in Dr. T's fuller and more
impartial Relation. And it is so ill repeated that Mr. P. having by so doing
made it his own, may take the whole to himself. For Dr. T's part he will not be
his Stirrup to be let down and taken up at his Pleasure. That which is against
him is omitted by him, and that which he thinks is for him, is added, tho never
spoken.

Mr. Pulton's Account.
ON Monday there came a Youth to A. P. who desired to know, if he was willing
to accept of a Conference with D. H. concerning Religion? He answered that he
was; But on Tuesday it was told him Dr. T. would be the Person, he must meet at
3 in the Afternoon on Thursday: Accordingly the Parties met on the said
Thursday, being Michaelmas Day. A. P. came with one Witness (no Priest) Dr. T.
alone: And when the Doctor excepted against the Gentleman, A. P. was willing he
should retire, and pitched upon another who casually came in at the same time,
tho not so much as known by name to A. P. If the Doctor would have no Witness
present, then A. P. desired all might depart, except the young Man upon whose
account they met (the Room being now full.) The Doctor not assenting to that,
(a) A. P. pressed much, that whatsoever should be said on either side, might be
writ down, but this not being accepted of, the Subject of the Conference was
proposed by A. P. who desired the Doctor to give the young Man (b) a Rule of
Faith which might keep him in the Church of England. After some Preambles the
Doctor was pleased to assign the Holy Scriptures. To which A. P. replied, that
there were (c) two things incumbent on the Doctor to prove; 1. That the Books
which he called the Scripture, were truly such. 2. That when so proved, they
were of themselves a sufficient Rule. But to the second Point nothing was said.

To the first the Doctor replied, that their Bible had been handed down from
the Apostles. A. P. desired to know by what Hands? The Doctor answered, by the
Testimony of (d) all the World, Turks, Jews, Gentiles, and Christians. But A.
P. urging to know from what immediate Hands the Church of England had received
them, when she began to reform? The Doctor answered, From the Universal Church,
and that he meant by Universal Church, all those (e) different Bodies who make
up the whole Number of Christians. Then A. P. demanded, Whether those different
Bodies of Christians made one true Church, or no? Or, whether some one Part of
them were so? The Doctor, tho much pressed, would specify no Part, which he
acknowledged free from Corruption. Upon that A. P. desired to know how the
Doctor could make out, that his Bible was the pure and incorrupt Word of God,
if all those, from whose Testimony he took it, were corrupted, and consequently
false Witnesses, and what Assurance he had (f) the sense of Holy Scripture,
being, as he said, depraved, the Letter remained pure?

Here (g) a pleasant Schoolmaster diverted the Auditory with a Picture, as he
said, of the Blessed Trinity, and offered it A. P. with wry Mouths and Antic
Gestures. But A. P. saying, he saw no Reason, why God appearing to Daniel under
the Figure of an old Man, might not be so painted, provided one meant not to
delineate him specie propria: He returned to the Doctor, and pressed his
forementioned Argument; but the Schoolmaster continuing to give Diversion to
the People, and throw in impertinent Questions; A. P. desired him to be silent,
saying, he came not to dispute with a Buffoon but a Doctor, which was ill
taken. Dr. T. read a Lesson of Charity upon that occasion, endeavoring to
prove that A. P. had violated the Holy Day. And when Mr. M. said in A. P's
Defense that (h) S. Paul had used as sharp Language in a like occasion; The
Doctor replied that if A. P. was St. Paul, he might so do. When the Doctor had
done his (i) Harangue, A. P. returned to his Argument, and much importuned the
Doctor to make out how he was assured his Bible was the pure Word of God, and
not as full of Corruption and Falsehood, as he believed those to be, from whom
he received it.

Here the Doctor called (k) Mr. M. from the Window whither A. P. had desired
him to retire, that no Body might argue against the Doctor but himself, and
instead of answering the Difficulty began a private Parley with Mr. M. And (l)
A. P. could never obtain any thing like a Satisfactory Answer to his Difficulty
proposed. In the end he answered, the calling the Authority of Scripture in
question disposed to Atheism. A. P. replied, he believed it might in their
Principle, who having taken all Infallibility from the Church, could assert
none for the Scripture.

This Debate lasted upwards of 2 Hours, when the Doctor threw in several
Byquestions about St. Peter's being at Rome, (m) which when A. P. was ready to
prove (n) the Doctor passed to the Real Presence, and Transubstantion. A. P.
demanded of the Doctor, whom he would be judged by (not being able at this time
to obtain any Answer to the first and chief Query.) The Doctor replied by the
Universal Church. A. P. demanded whether by the Universal Church, now in being,
or by that which had been in the four first Centuries? The Doctor said, that of
the four first Centuries. A. P. asking how we should know the Judgment of those
Times? The Doctor answered, by the Testimony of the Fathers then living. Then
A. P. naming several, and proffering to begin with which the Doctor pleased,
(o) he desired to hear St. Ambrose. A. P. thereupon read one out of his 4th
Book de Sacramentis, which the Doctor noted down, and required A. P. to put his
Hand to it, which he refused for the present, but said, as soon as he had
produced his whole Evidence, he would then sign it. But the Doctor plainly
refused to hear any more, saying that the rest would prove like that, which he
believed to be of a Spurious Author. To which A. P. replied, that if he doubted
of that Work, he would cite another of the same Author's to the very same
Intent of an unquestionable Work. But the Doctor refused absolutely to hear it.
And continued to press A. P. to subscribe. He answered, that he would when all
his Witnesses were heard, and with much ado after about 3 quarters of an hour
after twenty endeavors, he obliged the Doctor to hear of Justinus his Apology
to Antoninus Pius: (p) but that the Doctor would not note down, or hear one
word more, which seeming unreasonable to Mr. M. he asked the Doctor (using his
own Instance) whether or no, if one should come to pay him a (q) a Sum of Money,
and the first piece might appear somewhat dubious, he would refuse the rest
upon that account, especially if the Party was content to change it in the very
place.

Now this Paper it is, which has made all the great Noise, as though the Doctor
having summed up the whole Discourse, A. P. should refuse to sign what he had
asserted.

In this Debate the Parties rising up, the Doctor was pleased to say, that (r)
the Papists were by their Principles Breakers of their Word, and proved against
A. P. thus;

You believe yours to be the only saving Church, but you are bound to save all
you can, therefore you are bound to break your Word (given in your Paper of
Rules of your Schools) of not tampering with your Scholars in Matters of
Religion. A. P. replied that it was a very injurious Assertion, and proved no
more against him than his Majesty, which he thus proved. His Majesty believes
his to be the only Saving Church, but his Majesty being Head of his People, is
bound to endeavor to save them as much as A. P. to save his Scholars,
therefore (according to the Doctor's Argument) his Majesty is bound to break
his Word given to his People of not forcing their Consciences.

This Reflection was ill taken, and A. P. said he was willing to believe the
Doctor spoke it not with any such Intention; but added that it was ill done to
vent such Propositions, whence naturally and unavoidably ensued so bad
Illations. Then A. P. answered directly, that no body was bound always to do
all the good possible: And that to teach gratis Learning with the Fear of God
was very well done, although one meddled not with Religion; and defied the
Doctor to bring the Scholar, where note, that the Boy, on whose account the
Dispute was held, was no Scholar (that ever heard him touch a Point of
Controversy in time of Schools, or tamper with him out of them. And this was
the Conclusion of our Conference.

(s) If any doubt of the Truth of any thing here asserted, let him go to Dr. T.
to be informed, and desire him to show the (t) Famous Paper, as also to receive
a more satisfactory Answer, than A. P. could to the main Question.

A. P. had never gone so far, as to give any public account of this Affair,
had not the Town and Kingdom been already full of very false, injurious and
scandalous Reports relating thereunto: And tho upon the Doctors instance, A. P.
promised not to speak of it from the Pulpit, Sunday next the 9th of this
Instant, as he had intended; yet now being so far provoked, he could not in
Honor and Conscience but find some means to disabuse the World, since his
Adversaries (tho he believes not the Doctor) have been so industrious to impose
upon it.

Dr. Tenison's Notes upon it.
MR. P's Account begins unluckily, for he stumbles at the first setting out, he
makes as if the Appointment which came from the Romans, proceeded from Dr. T.
who, till it was made, knew nothing of it.

(a) A. P. pressed Writing, yet when Dr. T. began to do so, he declined it; But
whereabouts would these Disputers be? a while ago they were all for verbal
Conferences, when written ones were offered as more safe and useful: Dr. T. is
Witness of this in a greater Case, and so is an excellent Bishop and a worthy
Dean. Now when verbal Conferences are agreed to, Writing is pressed.

(b) A Rule of Faith which might keep the Boy in the Church of England. A new
Art of shutting the Doors of St. Martin's Church for the keeping in of a
Person, who was before gone out, and gone as far as Rome.

(c) Two things -- incumbent on the Doctor to prove; 1. That the Books which he
called the Scriptures, were truly such. 2. That when so proved, they were of
themselves a sufficient Rule. But to the second Point nothing was said. Good
Reason, for it was never propounded, the only Question of that kind was,
Whether our Bible was a Bible, and how we could prove it to be so? The
Sufficiency and Purity of the Scriptures were Points never started. This Dr. T.
is certain of from his own Memory, and from the Concurrence of more than an
ordinary number of Witnesses, whom, upon this new Narrative, he consulted.

(d) All the World, Turks, etc. The Turks were never named on this occasion. It
had been monstrously absurd if they had. And when some judicious People,
present at the Conference, heard this Paragraph of Mr. P's Narrative, they were
amazed at the Invention. But no Additions are to be wondered at, where Men will
add to the Creed it self.

(e) Different Bodies who make up the whole Number of Christians. This Mistake
of Mr. P's may be rectified, by what is said before in Dr. T's Account, and
Notes on Mr. P's. Paper.

(f) The Sense of holy Scripture, being, as he said, depraved. If he means Dr.
T. it is a great Slander. It is true, he said it was happy for the World that
the Copies of the Bible were so widely dispersed; for if they had been all in
Roman Hands, they would have been in Danger. Of this Dr. T. was reminded by
some of the Hearers of the Conference, upon the Perusal of this Narrative.

(g) A pleasant Schoolmaster diverted the Auditory with a Picture. The
Schoolmaster is of Age, and he will answer for himself.

(h) St. Paul had used as sharp Language in a like occasion. This about St.
Paul Dr. T. does not remember, nor do others who stood by Mr. M. for he spoke
of St. Jude, but perhaps it might be so.

(i) Harangue. Dr. T. knows not what Mr. P. means by this: For to repeat a
Verse out of St. Jude about the Disputation betwixt Michael and the Devil, is
not properly haranguing.

(k) -- Mr. M. from the Window whither A. P. had desired him to retire. Mr. M.
stayed much longer, for he began to write upon the Back of D. T's. Paper, as is
aforesaid. And he removed upon a Gentlewoman's coming to him with a Mask in her
Hand which gave occasion to another of that Sex to say to Mr. M. he chose to
dispute rather with Ladies than Doctors. It is unhappy that amidst so many
things, we can have nothing sincere, and in its Naturals.

(l) A. P. could never obtain any satisfactory Answer to his Difficulty
proposed. The Account shows that fit Answer was obtained, tho not accepted.

(m) Which when A. P. was ready to prove. There was no occasion for that, for
it was then granted that he was at Rome, but not till 25 years after Christ's
Ascension.

(n) The Doctor passed to the Real Presence and Transustantiation. Whereas he
was led into it by Mr. P. upon his reading about it out of his Books and Sheets.

(o) He desired to hear St. Ambrose. Mr. P. began with it of his own mere
Motion, pulling out his Breviary, and reading the words. Dr. T. was so far from
desiring to hear St. Ambrose first, that when Mr. P. began with him out of St.
Ambrose, he told him he should not begin with so late an Author, but with S.
Clement, and so go downwards. And if Mr. P. said any thing in general about
Places in the true St. Ambrose, Dr. T. did not hear him repeat the Words. Nor
is any other Book of St. Ambrose cited in his Breviary in that Place.

(p) But that the Doctor would not note down. He had no reason to write a
second Paper after having been refused signing of the first. But he spoke
enough to the Place as is before rehearsed.

(q) Sum of Money. This was said to Mr. M. at the Window in the back-Room by
Dr. T. himself. Mr. M. complained that Dr. T. was too hard upon Mr. P.
supposing that Book was not St. Ambrose's. Dr. T. appeals to Mr. M. whether his
answer was not this; If a Man be to pay me a Sum of Money, and the first piece
I take proves a brass Half-Crown, he that offers it to me, either knows it not,
or, knowing of it, is not honest in offering it as good Coin. If Mr. P. will
own either of these, that he was either ignorant, or insincere, I am content.

(r) The Papists were by their Principles Breakers of their Word. Mr. P. has
forgotten all about his Aequivocation, about Luther, Pope Innocent, and the
Council of Lateran, the places of Scripture, the Pope's Jurisdiction, etc. But
he will not fail of his Insinuation, He is an Enemy unto Caesar. And he here
makes a Syllogism, which upon the place the Protestants could not hear; and he
omits Dr. T's answer to Mr. M. and the Sense of the Company.

(s) If any doubt of the Truth of any thing here asserted, let him go to Dr. T.
to be informed. There have many come, and none have gone away yet unsatisfied.

(t) -- The famous Paper. No Body boasted of the Paper that Dr. T. knows of
with relation to the Contents of it. But they laid some weight upon one's
writing and signing, and the other's refusing. Dr. T. had no great value for
it, for he left it on the Table. But, it may be, it became the more famous for
having been put by Mr. P. into his Pocket, out of which, after much shuffling
about it, not knowing where to find it, he was prevailed with to pull it, by
the importunity of an ingenious Woman.

Thus far the Account reached which was written with Mr. P's own Hand. But in
other Copies it was added, at the End, that Mr. P. desired to meet where Books
were, and to have a Scrivener: If he did, he was not in danger of losing what
he longed for. For it was more than once, when Historical Things were talked
of, that Dr. T. desired that Coaches might be called for, and that they might
go where Books might be consulted. And when Offers, by Dr. T. were made about a
Bible, about Beda, Aeneas Sylvius, Hoveden, and others; they were refused. Dr.
T. is certain that the Author of the Speculum, if he has been by Books, has not
been in them. But to what purpose is it to go into Libraries, when they have
already furnished the World (in the Speculum) with Authorities enough, and it
may purchase them for Sixpence?

The Copy of a Letter written by a Romanist, and conveyed by the Apprentice of
-- in L. A. to J. S. in order to his transcribing it, and sending i^ to his
Father into the Country.
Most Dear and Honored Father,
NOthing could be more sensible to me than your extraordinary Affection you
were pleased to show in your last, and was there any thing less than an
Eternity at stake, and the saving or losing my Immortal Soul; I should have all
the repentance in the World of disobliging you. Dear Father, take therefore a
sum of those Motives which oblige me in Conscience to betake my self to the
Church I am now resolved to embrace. The Roman Catholic Church is allowed to
have been once the true Church built upon the Rock against which our Savior
promised Hell should never prevail, whence unless we will give our Savior the
Lie, she is still so. The Church, I am informed, had power during the four
first Centuries, to summon and precide in General Councils, when any Debate
arose concerning Religion, and they were reputed Heretics who obeyed not her
Decision. Now the same Reason and Authority which proves her to have had that
power then, proves she must retain it still. Again I have heard clearly made
out, that those or that Church are all of one Faith in all Countries. Whereas
our Reformed Churches all clash among themselves, and divide and subdivide
without end; and it cannot be otherwise, they having no assured Guide, upon
which they can rely. It is the Catholick-Church alone which is taught in all
Countries, and none but the Pastors of that Church have any Zeal to go among
Barbarous and Idolatrous People to convert them; and if there be any Faith in
History, God has seconded their Labors with manifest Miracles, Power over
Devils, and the like. And I have never heard of any who can assume that to
themselves beside them. Again, I am informed that among them abundance of Noble
and Rich People follow the Evangelical Counsels, and leave all for God's sake;
and that they built and founded all those Monuments of Devotion and Churches we
see now extant. Whereas our Reformed Religions, have only served to pull them
down. And as I have lastly understood, was founded on the Leachery of King
Harry the 8th, the Ambition of the Tutor of King Edward the 6th, and Violence
of Queen Elizabeth, and only preserved by the Rigors of Penal Laws, and
spilling the Blood of those who for a thousand Years had professed the
Catholic Faith. All these things I have heard proved, with so much show of
Truth, that I should resist the Holy Ghost, if I obeyed not the Inspiration I
have to become a Roman Catholic. Dr. Tenison has discoursed before me four
Hours, but I am more confirmed than I was before. Dear Father, Let not the
force of Education and Prejudice so by as your Judgment, as to be angry with me
for the best thing I ever have done in my Life, and if you had heard as much as
I, I am sure, you would have that Sense of your Soul as to do as I do. All the
Stories of their Selling Pardons, of their Idolatry and bloody Principles, are
nothing but mere Calumnies. I humbly therefore crave that I may,
notwithstanding my present Resolution, still be esteemed, as I am with all
Submission,

Dear Father, Your most Obedient and Affectionate Son.

Dr. T 's Notes on this Letter.
THE Original of this Letter was sent to Dr. T. together with this Account of
it. After J. S. had copied it, and it was seen where he had laid it, and was
taken from thence: Mr. V. asked J. S. whether he had finished his Letter, and
from what Copy he had taken it? He answered from no Copy; he urged him thrice,
and he still denied it: At last Mr. V. brought forth the Original, and showed
it to him, etc. then he was silent, instead of begging Pardon of God and his
Master.

The Author of the Letter failed in his own Art of Cunning, for he endeavored
to write an accurate Letter for a Boy who is not able to write one correct
Line, as is plain by that which may be seen in his former Letter to his Father.
He should not have perfumed his Paper, if he would not have had the Protestants
to smell him out.

1. He begins the first Motive by saying, and by taking that for granted, which
no Protestant will yield to him; that the Roman Catholic Church is allowed to
have been once THE True Church. This first Motive is a Fallacy, of The Church,
for A Church: The Roman was once A true Church, but never The Church; and a
true Church may fail in Process of Time, as some of the seven Churches of the
Lesser Asia did; and St. Paul cautioned the Romans themselves against
immoderate Romans 11. 20, 21, 22.
Confidence, lest They, as well as the obstinate Israclites, should be cut off.

2. The second Motive is taken from the Power of the Church to summon Councils,
and to preside in them. This is the same Fallacy again of the Power of The
Church in General, and of the particular Church of Rome, whose Popes were
sometimes condemned by Councils, which the Emperors summoned. It is absurd to
say that the Church presides over the Council; and they who presided, had
Priority by it for that season, but not further Power. Mr. Pulton's (or Mr.
Ward's Speculum) shows Sylvester as presiding at the first Council of Nice; but
when he recollects himself, and finds he should have represented Hosius instead
of Sylvester (for he was not as is pretended, his Legate) he will (I suppose)
not be so liberal of Power to the President of a Council. For Councils they
were not to give a Rule of Faith, but to make Peace in the Church, by
proceeding according to the Rule, the Scripture. If it had been otherwise, the
Christian World, in which from the Beginning were many Divisions and Heresies,
had been long without a sufficient Guide or Rule, seeing there was no General
Council till 325 years after Christ. They alleged Scriptures, and if they had
not done so, Men would not have stood to heir mere Authority, or to any other
Tradition than the Creed, and not to that but by universal Consent, as found in
the Holy Bible.

3. The third Motive is their Unity, and the dividing and subdividing of the
Reformed without end, as having no Guide. Yet the Protestants have the surest
Rule, and due Ministerial Helps; and they have published a Harmony of
Confessions of Faith. And in the Roman Church, the Jansenists have accused the
Jesuits of a new Heresy of the Pope's being infallible in Matters of Fact, and
about many other things they are at variance. The Anti-blacloists accuse the
Blacloists of Heresy about their Method of Oral Tradition. The Assembly of the
Clergy of Hungary have lately condemned the Theses of the Assembly of the
Clergy of France, as dangerous to the Souls of Men; and there are now in Spain
and Italy great numbers of the Disciples of Molinos, who are against the use of
Images in praying, and the Invocation of Saints, and other things for which the
rest of the Church of Rome do so very much contend; and it is not long, since
the Assembly of the French Clergy approved of a Book of Mr. Gerbais Gerb.
Dissert. de Cause. major. V. Bref du 8 December. p. 84, 85. Act. Cl. Gall.
, which this best of modern Popes condemned, forbidding the reading of it upon
Pain of Excommunication, and of not being absolved by any but this Pope, or
some other Pope for the time being, unless in the Article of Death. Certainly
what they differed about, must be something of Moment, otherwise it would not
have drawn after it so heavy a Sentence. And now we see how Father Walsh and
Father Pulton differ here about a General Council, which the said Father P. in
his late Catechisings, has owned as his Rule of Faith.

4. The fourth Motive is the Zeal of making Conversions abroad. The Question
is, Whether they are Conversions to the true Christianity, of which we have
Instances in the English Protestant Colonies. For the Scribes and Pharisees
compassed Sea and Land to make Proselytes; but it would have been much better
for Religion, if they had staid at home, and mended their own Morals. Balzac
somewhere observes, that most of the Conversions are made in warm Countries,
where there is Gold, and other valuable Things; and that the like Zeal does not
move them toward cold and barren Nova Zembla. And the manner of the
Conversions made by the Spaniards in America, is too Tragical to be related.

5. The fifth Motive is Miracles. The Church has no need of them for the
confirming the Apostles Creed. If the Creed of Pope Pius wants them, lying
Wonders agree well enough to a Sum of false Articles of Faith. But seeing
Miracles are for them that believe not, and not for them who believe, why do
they not show a Sign among us who are not too hasty of Assent to Doctrines
properly Roman? The Letter says, none pretend to Miracles but the Romans, yet
even the Quakers, and some very nigh to them See Mr. Barclay 's possib. and
necessity of immed. Revel. And Scarlot 's Eternal Gospel.
pretend both to Miracles and Infallibility.

6. The sixth Motive is, That Men of Quality go out of the World into Holy
Orders. It is, in the Ecclesiastical State, the readiest way to Preferment, but
I do not say that none have better Intentions.

7. The seventh is, that they built our Churches. A good Argument for the
Heathens who built the Pantheon, (or the Temple for the Worship of all strange
Gods) which now at Rome, they use as the Church of All their Saints. A good
Argument for the Turks, who in the Morea built many of the Mosques, which are
now by the Romanists used as Churches.

8. The eighth is the Leachery of King Henry the 8th. He lived and died a
Papist, and many Popes have outgone him in Vice, and more in Atheism: However,
he was a great Prince, and Luther is blamed for using Language toward him
which was not so respectful; but the Priests can put into the Mouth of a Boy
words very unseemly.

9. The ninth is the Violence of Queen Elizabeth, etc. But who are the violent?
they that provoke, or they they that punish when justly provoked? Till the Pope
sent his Bull against her, the Papists lived in great Quiet and Ease, and came
to our Service. Gabiutius Gabiut. in vita Pii 5. c. 9. p. 102. -- tandem divino
judicio -- impiam vitam cum sempiterna morte commutaverit, etc.
confesses that Pope Pius did, by all means possible, disturb her Reign; and
he himself would not let her die in Peace, for he makes her Death (after a
Reign of four and forty years) to be a Judgment upon her, and says, as his
sort of Charity moved him, that she exchanged a wicked Life for everlasting
Death.

After all this Weakness of Argument, to pretend to Inspiration, and the Holy
Ghost, is certainly to grieve that blessed Spirit of Truth.

After their having taught the Boy to say this of the Spirit of God, it is a
small thing for them to lessen Dr. T. and to manage him in writing that Dr. T's
four hours-Discourse had more confirmed him. He could scarce be harder than he
was before. But these Virtuosi have found out an Art of confirming a Nether
Millstone. May God give J. S. and them the Grace of Sincerity. If they had had a
sufficient Measure of it, they would not have taught him to say, that the Roman
Faith (such as is now their Faith) had been here for a thousand years. For
Gregory the Great sent not the same Canon of Scripture they now go by. For he
would not allow the Book of Maccabees to be Canonical; and what Bible did he
send, for he confesses he understood no Greek? Further, it appears from the
very Recantation of John Wickliff for the saving of his Life V. H. de Knyghton.
p. 2647.
, that there was then in England no such Doctrine, as Transubstantiation
publicly imposed as an Article of Faith. That which comes at the close, is
still as false. viz. that all the Relations of the selling of Pardons are
Stories; tho the Romish Historians agree in this with the Protestant, that the
gross Practice of the Popes selling Pardons by Tezelius, was the occasion of
Luther's leaving the Church of Rome.

A Brief Account of Mr. Pulton's second Narrative, with cursory Notes upon it.
AFter Dr. T. had sent Mr. P. the first Copy of his Account, Mr. P. sent him
his second Account, or his Narrative enlarged. On this Dr. T. makes these
Cursory Notes.

1. He will have the Conference to be for the sake of J. S. tho Dr. T. had
declared otherwise, and cautioned against the old Trick of making a Conversion
of one changed already to turn upon a verbal Conference. And to the End that
the Opinion of Dr. Horneck touching J. S. as well as that of Dr. T 's may be
the better known, I have here inserted part of a Letter sent to Dr. T. from
that Reverend Person.

October. the 13th 87. Reverend Sir,
WHEN the Boy came to me with his Master, I looked upon him, and methought I
saw Stubbornness, Ill Nature, and Sullenness in his Face: I asked him several
Questions, but had much ado to get an Answer from him. To me he seemed to
intimate that he was already gone over to them. Something I dropped accidentally
about Succession, which he laid hold of, and with a kind of scornful Smile
demanded, what Succession we could show? I told him both for Men and Doctrine,
and proved it to him. But after that he gave me little or no Answer to any
thing I asked him. I made him promise me to consider of what I had said, and to
come to me again, which after some Demurr, he did; but never came. I suppose
you have an Account of the Sermon that was preached at the Mass-House in the
Savoy on Sunday last, etc. The Publication of the Conference will be absolutely
necessary. I was at Black-Friars yesterday, and heard that a Man having heard
that the Victory went on the Papists side, was turned Papist upon it. This I
had from the Man's Neighbor, who asked me about that Conference, but I
rectified his Mistake. I am

SIR, Yours to command A. Horneck.


Note, Dr. H. was not consulted till October. 13. which confirms sully both what
Mr. U. had said of J. S. and Dr. T. had observed of him.

These Numbers relate to Mr. P 's Paragraphs.
4. He makes Dr. T. to say that Luther's Works were not in Quarto but in Fotio,
instead of saying in four or in six Folio's, which small things I would not
note, if they did not show that a Thread of Mistake (sometimes wilful, and
sometimes not) does run through his whole Narrative.

He goes on, saying, that he had not brought the Book into the Pulpit: we never
talked of it, but as shown privately in his Chamber, and by this way of
excusing his Aequivocation, he exposes it.

10. He says Dr. T. appealed to the Greeks and Bohemians. But certainly to say,
as Dr. T. did, that there were amongst them Christians professing the Faith of
the Apostles Creed, and disclaiming the Errors of Rome before Luther rose, is
not appealing to them.

12. What Mr. P. says of Dr. T's boast of having ten thousand Pounds worth of
Books (if his Amanuensis has not mistaken in the figuring) will not be easily
credited.

13. Mr. P. would not have said what he does of St. Peter's 25 years, if he had
not mistaken Dr. T. who never denied that St. Peter was ever at Rome, but spoke
of the 25 Years before he came thither, not out of Eusebius's Cronicon, as Mr.
P. imagined (tho in that Book the 25 in the Latin, is not in the Greek, and
Eusebius elsewhere Eus. E. Hist. l. 2. c. 14. p. 41 l. 3. c. 1. p. 56, 57. V.
Orig. Exp. in Genesis Tom. 3.
contradicts that Computation) but out of a passage in Lactantius. Lact. de
mort. Perfec. ap. Baluz. Misc. p. 2, 3.
which perhaps being formerly run away with, without due attention to its
meaning, might occasion that Blunder in Chronology; if Pope Damasus had not a
Finger in that Corruption.

14. He speaks of Dr. T's being judged by the four first Centuries, which is
not the whole Truth; he liked them best, but would not be judged by them; for
he took in Universal Testimony, separate from Authority.

15. Mr. P. affirms, That he had read all Ecclesiastical History, and had
Volumes of Notes relating to it. Much good may his Common-place-Book do him, if
it be taken out of some such Authors as are cited in his Speculum, Anacletus's
Epistle, St. Cyprian de caena Domini, St. Cyril of Jerusalem's Apology against
Ruffinus (who flourished not till about Anno 390. Whilst St. Cyril flourished
Anno 350.) he may call his Notes Collections, but they are properly Weedings.

15. He puts upon Dr. T. a false thing, of denying that any Bishops came from
England to the Council of Lateran. Dr. T. is positive, upon Inquiry, that this
is a false and unfair way of Apologizing for his own Mistake, by inventing one
for him who charged him with it. Dr. T. only asked a few Questions about that
Council, and set Father Walsh against Father Pulton, showing how far they were
from Unity, about what was, and what was not a General Council, Mr. Pulton's
Guide, tho not every Jesuite's.

Dr. T. well knew that most of the Roman Communion have insisted on that
Council as General, tho it be not so. And he well remembers he told Mr. P. he
would upon occasion hold him to it, seeing that Council teaches the Deposing
Doctrine, which Doctrine, notwithstanding, Mr. P. disclaimed at his going forth
out of the second Room.

16, 17. He is much concerned at Dr. T's insisting on one place in St. Ambrose.
Dr. T. insisted upon that for a reason Mr. P. might know, but was not aware of,
and it was this: That Passage out of St. Ambrose, had been by a certain Priest
translated into English, and given to a Person of Honor in order to
Conversion; and this Paper has been long, tho in private manner carried about
the Town, as likewise some disjointed Passages transcribed from Dr. Taylour
about the Real Presence, which taken by themselves do give a most abusive
Representation of that Doctor's Sense. This Place being then the Engine of
Converters, it was fit to be exposed. If Mr. P. pleases, I will name Persons
and Places to him.

17. Observe here the Fidelity either of Mr. P's Memory, or his Conscience. He
savs the Doctor told a Story of some Priest at Rome, who having pronounced the
Words of Consecration, was heard to say aloud, that he believed not as the
Roman Church obliged. Whereas the Story (as before repeated) was about the
Courtesans over-hearing the Priests, say, Bread thou art, and Bread thou shall
be.

18. Mr. P. (leaving out what was answered to the place in J. Martyr) says, the
Doctor would not declare what he believed in the Point of the Real Presence,
and yet Dr. T. repeated the Words of the Catechism, and said he would abide by
the true Sense of them.

18. He talks of knocking the Pulpit, which words he never named there. What
Priests act most there, is known enough to the World.

19. Dr. T. is said to have asked Mr. P. what Verse it was wherein it was
written -- If he hear not the Church: Whereas he appeals to all the Company, if
he did not ask him in what Evangelist it was, and he could not tell, and
instead of that Mr. P. says of himself that he did not tell. He had said more
than was fit upon other occasions, why was he not in humor to say what was fit
here? He adds Dr. T. turning from place to place found it. Whereas he named the
Chapter and Verse before he began to turn; and the reason of his turning was
manifest, for he could not read the Print by the Light they had, till he was
forced to pull out his Spectacles. These are very little Remarks, but they
discover (that which by God's Grace I shall always abhor) great Shifting and
Insincerity.

30. He says, that Pope Nicholas never taught that the People ate Christ's
Flesh as divided into many pieces. But how then does he construe the Confession
of Berengarius enjoined by the said Pope, and his Synod? Decreti par. 3. 1. 42.
de Consecr. p. 1932. -- Cord profiteor -- verum Corp. and Sangu. D. N. J Chr.
esse, and sensualiter, non solum sacramento, sed in veritate manibus Sacerdotum
tractari, frangi, and fidelium dentibus atteri, etc.
-- I profess from my Heart, that the true Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ, is, and is sensually, not only in the Sacrament, but in Verity, handled
and broken by the Priests Hands, and ground by the Teeth of the Faithful.

32. Dr. T. is said to have cited Mariana and Suarez. He never named them. The
Schoolmaster did. He spoke only of Becanus and Doleman, and of him not under
the Name of Parsons; for if Parsons owned that Book, he thinks 'twas another
Person that wrote it.

32. Mr. P. ends, as he brake up the Conference, with insnaring Words about
Persecution, and the Q. of Scots, and the Bill of Exclusion; and he writes as
if he had been transcribing Philanax, or, the Book whence he borrowed,
Jerusalem and Babel: And makes the fierceness of some Men to be the Spirit of
the Reformation. I will not touch upon indecent Arguments, but conclude by
wishing that Mr. P. well knew what Spirit he is of.

THE END.

