Engraving of Sir William Temple, Bart., framed in a wreath, with the blazon or
coat of arms of Sir William Temple, Bart. Engraved by Robert White, after a
portrait by Sir Peter Lely. Servare modum finemque tueri Naturamque sequi
P Lely pinx. R. White sculp.
Printed for I. Tonson A. J. Chruchil and R. Simpso^.

Dominus Gulielmus Temple Equos Baronettus Ser.miet Pot.mi Mag. Britanniae
Regis ad Ord Eoed.^ Belgii Legatus Exns. et apud Tractatus pacis tamdquisgram
quam Neomagi Legate Mediats. Ejusdem Ser.mi Regis a Secretioribus Concilus. 16^.



LETTERS Written by Sir W. Temple, Bart. AND OTHER Ministers of State, Both at
Home and Abroad. CONTAINING, An ACCOUNT of the most Important Transactions that
passed in Christendom from 1665 to 1672.

In Two Volumes.

Reviewed by Sir W. Temple sometime before his Death: AND Published by Jonathan
Swift Domestic Chaplain to his Excellency the Earl of Berkeley, one of the
Lords Justices of Ireland.

LONDON: Printed for J. Tonson, at Gray's Inn Gate in Gray's Inn Lane; and A.
and J. Churchil, at the Black Swan in Paternoster Row, and R. Simpson, at the
Harp in S. Paul's Churchyard, MDCC.

TO HIS Most Sacred Majesty William III.

King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, etc.

These Letters of Sir W. Temple having been left to my Care, they are most
humbly presented to Your MAJESTY by

Your Majesty's most dutiful and obedient Subject. Jonathan Swift.

THE Publisher's Epistle TO THE READER.
THE Collection of the following Letters is owing to the diligence of Mr.
Thomas Downton, who was one of Sir William Temple's Secretaries, during the
whole time wherein they bear date. And it has succeeded very fortunately for
the Public, that there is contained in them an Account of all the chief
Transactions and Negotiations, which passed in Christendom during the seven
Years, wherein they are dated; as, The War with Holland, which began in 1665:
The Treaty between His Majesty and the Bishop of Munster, with the Issue of it:
The French Invasion of Flanders in the Year 1667: The Peace concluded between
Spain and Portugal, by the King's Mediation: The Treaty at Breda; The Tripple
Alliance; and The Peace of Aix la Chapelle in the first Part. And in the second
Part; the Negotiations in Holland in consequence, of those Alliances, with the
Steps and Degrees, by which they came to decay: The Journey and Death of
Madame: The seizure of Lorrain, and his Exc^llency's recalling; with the first
Unkindness between England and Holland, upon the Yatch's transporting his Lady
and his Family: And the begnning of the second Dutch War in 1672.

With th^se are intermixed several Letters, fa^ (...) and pleasant.

(...) Book among Sir William Tem^ (...) ^^th many others, wherewith I had the
^pportunity of being long conversant, having pass^d several Years in his Family.

I pretend no other Part, than the Care, that Mr. Downton's Book should be
correctly transcribed, and the Letters placed, in the Order they were writ. I
have also made some literal amendments, especially in the Latin, French and
Spanish: These I have taken Care should be translated and printed in another
Column, for the Use of such Readers as may be unacquainted with the Originals.
Whatever faults there may be in the Translation, I doubt, I must answer, for
the greater Part; and must leave the rest to those Friends, who were pleased to
assist me. I speak only of the French and Latin; for the few Spanish
Translations, I believe, need no Apology.

It is generally believed, that this Author, has advanced our English Tongue,
to as great a Perfection as it can well bear; and yet, how great a Master he
was of it, has I think, never appeared so much, as it will in the following
Letters; wherein the Style appears so very different, according to the
difference of the Persons, to whom they were addressed; either Men of Business,
or Idle; of Pleasure, or Serious; of great or of less Parts or Abilities, in
their several Stations. So, that, one may discover, the Characters of most of
those Persons, he writes to, from the Style of his Letters.

At the end of each Vollume, is added a Collection, copied by the same hand, of
several Letters to this Ambassador, from the chief Persons employed, either at
home or abroad in these Transactions, and during six Years course of his
Negotiations. Among which are many from Pensionary John de Wit, and all the
Writings of this kind that I know of, which remain of that Minister so renowned
in his time.

It has been justly complained of, as a defect among us, that the English
Tongue, has produced no Letters of any value; to supply which, it has been the
Vein of late Years, to translate several out of other Languages, though I think
with little Success. Yet among many Advantages, which might recommend this sort
of Writing, it is certain, that nothing is so capable, of giving a true Account
of Story, as Letters are; which describe Actions, while they are alive and
breathing; whereas all other Relations are of Actions past and dead: So as it
has been observed, that the Epistles of Cicero to Atticus, give a better
account of those times, than is to be found in any other Writer.

In the following Letters, the Reader will every where discover, the Force and
Spirit of this Author; but that which will most value them to the Public, both
at home and abroad, is, First, that the Matters contained in them, were the
Ground and Foundation, whereon all the Wars and Invasions, as well as all the
Negotiations and Treaties of Peace in Christendom, have since been raised: And
next, that they are written by a Person, who had so great a share, in all those
Transactions and Negotiations.

By residing in his Family, I know, the Author has had frequent Instances from
several great Persons both at home and abroad, to publish some Memoirs of those
Affairs and Transactions, which are the Subject of the following Papers; and
particularly of the Treaties of the Triple Alliance, and those of Aix la
Chapelle; but his usual Answer was, that whatever Memoirs he had written of
those Times and Negotiations, were burnt; however, that perhaps after his
Death, some Papers might come out, wherein there would be some Account of them:
By which, as he has often told me, he meant these Letters.

I had begun to fit them for the Press during the Author's Life; but never
could prevail for Leave to publish them: Though he was pleased to be at the Pains
of reviewing, and to give me his Directions for digesting them into Order. It
has since pleased God to take this great and good Person to Himself; and he
having done me the Honor, to leave and recommend to me the Care of his
Writings; I thought, I could not at present do a greater Service to my
Country, or to the Author's Memory, than by making these Papers public.

By way of Introduction, I need only take notice, that after the Peace of the
Pyrenees. and His Majesty's happy Restoration in 1660. there was a general
Peace in Christendom (except only the Remainder of a War between Spain and
Portugal) until the Year 1665. when that between England and Holland began,
which produced a Treaty between His Majesty and the Bishop of Munster. And this
commences the following Letters.

I beg the Readers Pardon for any Errata's which may be in the Printing,
occasioned by my Absence,

THE First Dutch War, Begun May, 1665.
To Sir John Temple, Master of the Rolls of Ireland.
Brussels, Sept. 6th 1665. SIR,
THOUGH I was forced by the King's express Command, not only to leave you and my
Family at very short Warning, and in a very melancholy Season, but without so
much as telling you whither I was sent, yet I would not fail making you this
amends, by giving you an Account of my Journey and Negotiations thus far, so
soon as I thought it might be fit for me to do it.

When my Lord Arlington sent for me to Sheen, it was to let me know, that the
King had received an Overture from the Bishop of Munster, to enter into an
Alliance with his Majesty against the Dutch, from whom he pretended many
Injuries; to bring an Army into the Field, and fall upon them by Land, while
His Majesty continued the War by Sea: But at the same time, to demand certain
Sums of Money, that would be necessary to bring him into the Field, and to
continue the War: And that if his Majesty would either treat with the Baron of
Wreden, (who was the Minister he sent over in the greatest Privacy that could
be) or send a Minister of his own to treat with him; he doubted not an easy
Agreement upon this Matter, but desired it might be with all the Secret
imaginable. My Lord Arlington told me, the main Articles were already agreed on
here, and the Money adjusted, but that it was necessary for the King to send
over some Person privately, to finish the Treaty at Munster, and to see the
Payments made at Antwerp, where the Bishop seemed to desire them. That I must
go, (if I undertook it) without Train or Character, and pass for a Frenchman or
a Spaniard in my Journey, and made me the Compliment to say, He had been
perplexed three or four Days together, to think of a Person that was not only
capable of the Affair and of the Secret, but that was to be trusted with such a
Sum of Money: But that when he had thought of me, and proposed me to the King
and to my Lord Chancellor, they had both approved it, and I must suddenly
resolve upon my Answer to the Proposal he mademe; but whether I accepted it or
no, I must keep it secret from my nearest Friends.

I told him upon the Place, I would serve his Majesty the best I could in it,
though being a new Man, I could not promise much for my Self; that there was only
one Point I could by no means digest, which was the Business of the Money,
having ever been averse from charging my self with any bodies but my own. This
made at first some Difficulty between us, but at last, his Lordship was content
to endeavor the engaging Alderman Backwel (who furnished it) to go over himself
with it into Flanders, and there by my Order, to make the Payment to the
Bishop's Agent, and said, he believed at such a time of Infection in London,
the Alderman might easily take an occasion of such a Journey.

After my Instructions dispatched, I came away in have, and with the Secret you
saw; and without more than one Days stop at Brussels, went strait with the
Baron of Wreden to Coesvelt, where the Bishop then was. I stayed there but
three Days, was brought to him only by Night, agreed all Points with him,
perfected and Signed the Treaty, and returned to Antwerp, where the Alderman
performed his Part, in making the first and great Payment to the Bishop's
Resident there. All this has been performed on all sides with so great Secrecy,
that the Bishop has not only received his Money, but raised his Troops to about
Eighteen Thousand Men, without the least Umbrage given, that I can yet hear of,
to the Dutch; and by all the Assurances I receive from him, I conclude that
before this Letter comes to your hands, he will be in the Field; though some
unexpected Disappointments about a General Officer he reckoned upon, has a
little discomposed the Measures he had taken, and may (I doubt) not a little
maim the Progress of them: But that will be governed by Time and Accidents; my
Business was to bring him into the Field, and I have had the Fortune to do it,
sooner than either they expected at Court, or the Bishop had promised upon our
Signing of the Treaty.

He is a Man of Wit, and, which is more, of Sense, of great Ambition, and
properly, Un Esprit remnant: But the Vigor of his Body, does not second that
of his Mind, being, as I guess, about six or seven and fifty Years old, and
pursued with the Gout, which he is not like to cure by his manner of Life; he
was a Soldier in his Youth, and seems in his Naturals, rather made for the
Sword than the Cross; he has a mortal Hatred to the Dutch for their supporting
his City of Munster against him, and is bridling those Citizens by a very
strong Citadel he is building there. He seems bold and resolute, and like to
go through with what he has undertaken, or break his Head in the Attempt, and
says he will perform all he has engaged, Fide sincera and Germanica, which is a
Word he affects. He speaks the only good Latin that I have yet met with in
Germany, and more like a Man of Court and Business than a Scholar: He says, if
he fails in his Enterprise, and should lose his Country, he shall esteem his
Condition not at all the worse; for in that Case, he will go into Italy, and
has Money enough in the Bank of Venice to buy a Cardinal's Cap, which may
become him better than his General's Staff, tho he has a Mind to try this
first, and make some Noise in the World before he retires.

This is the best Character I can give of the Bishop, and for my Self, I can
say nothing but what you know; finding no Change at all by this Sally into a
new Scene of Life and Business as well as Climate; my Health, I thank God, the
same; my Kindness so too, to my Friends and to Home, only my Concernment for
them in this miserable Time among them, much greater while I am here, than when
I was with them; which makes me very impatient after every Post that comes in,
and yet very apprehensive of every Letter I open. The Length of this I doubt is
too much for once, and therefore shall end with the Assurances of my being

SIR, Your most Obedient Son and humble Servant, W. Temple.

To Alderman Backwell.
Brussels, October 9th. 1665 Mr. Alderman,
I Am very much in pain to find at Monsieur Rhintorf's Return, that he has made
no Progress in his Affairs (which are ours too) during the stay he has lately
made at Antwerp. But I am very much surprised to hear that I should have had
any Part in this Delay, and that you should have told him, you had no Orders
from me to pay him that Money. However, to take away all scruple, if any can
still remain, after our last Conference at Brussels upon this Subject; I do by
these Presents order and appoint you, pursuant to those Powers that have been
given me from the King, to pay or cause to be paid to Monsieur Rhintorf or his
Order, al^ such Sums of Money, as you shall any ways be able to raise, either
by the Sale of such Tin as is already arrived, or shall arrive at Ostend upon
his Majesty's Account, with all the Diligence and Dispatch that is possible. Or
in case you do not find any ready Sale for it, that you will at least pay him
all such Sums as you shall be able to raise, by pawning or engaging it to the
best advantage you can; after this. I need say no more, than to Conjure you by
all the Zeal you have for his Majesty's Service, and all the Friendship you
have for me, to employ upon this Occasion, your utmost Diligence and Credit;
for the Conjuncture is grown so extremely pressing at this time, that I can
never say enough, to recommend this Service to your best Endeavors.

I am SIR, Your Servant.

To my Lord Arlington.
Brussels, Oct. 13. S. N. 1665. My Lord,
UPON Saturday last about Nine at Night, the Bishop's Agent there brought me a
Desire from the Of Castle Rhodrige, Govern^^ of the Spanish Netherlands.
Marquis to come privately to him. We stayed long together and talked much. The
Substance was; that he had last Post writ to the Spanish Ambassador to inform
the King, that he heard the French were ready to march in Assistance of the
Hollander against the Bishop of Munster, and had told the Spanish Ambassador
in France, they should take all Delays here in leave of Passage, for Denial:
That he, (the Marquess) was resolved upon Confidence of his Majesty's late
Letter and Assistance, to oppose them till he received Orders from Spain, and
hopes his Majesty will not fail, of protecting and defending him in this
Resolution: He speaks with much Earnestness and Passion for concluding the
League between England and Spain; and either a Peace or Truce, between. Spain
and Portugal; in which he very much presses His Majesty's Interposition at this
Time, because nothing else will take away the Dishonor on the Spanish side,
but the Respect given to so Great and Powerful a King's Mediation. He assures
me, he has given an absolute Denial to the Hollanders Demand, of buying a great
Quantity of Corn in these Countries, which now begins to be one, among their
other great Wants: That the French upon Jealousy of the Swede, sent very
lately an Envoy into Holland, to join with them in pressing the Dane, to put
himself into a Posture of making a Diversion: That for Security of these
Countries, six thousand Spaniards and Italians were in few Days expected here;
these by Land, those by Sea: And that for raising German Troops, he had last
Week sent five hundred thousand Gilders into Germany, from whence, if they
needed, he could have twenty four thousand Men; so as he doubted not to defend
these Countries, if France Assaults him. The Biass of all this Discourse was to
show, they had no great need of our Assistance, at the same time, they press so
much to be assured of it; and to represent the mutual Necessity of a
Conjunction between England and Spain, with all the Expressions of Affection,
to His Majesty's Person and Service, that a Courtier, or almost a Lover could
use. Upon this last Subject I could not let him pass, with the Discourse of the
late King's Ruin, and His Majesty's Danger at home for want of Friendship
abroad; nor could I leave that Point, because he had so often harped upon it,
till I forced him to confess, at least by Silence, that his Majesty was as safe
at Home at this time, as either French or Spanish King.

For the rest, finding him now much warmer than he used to seem, in the Desires
of the Bishop of Munster's Success, or at least, Preservation; and finding from
Alderman Backwell, that he had yet been able to raise no more Money upon all
our Tin at Antwerp for the second Payment, those paltry Merchants combining to
Ruin him in the Price of it, upon the Belief of his Necessity to sell; I would
not omit that Occasion of desiring the Marquess to find some Person out, that
should take it all off our Hands, with ready Money, which they might raise at
their own leisure, and, I believed, with much Gains, in which I assured him, he
would give His Majesty, a great Testimony of his Affection to his Service,
which was so much concerned in the Bishop of Munster's Fortunes: He told me, he
would consult about it next Morning; and upon Sunday Night, sent one with a
Dispatch of mine to Alderman Backwell, to know the whole Quantity and lowest
Price: So that I am now in great hopes of seeing some good Issue of that
Business; which I almost begun to despair of.

An Express from the Bishop of Munster came to me on Saturday last, protesting
he could no longer subsist unless the Money came; an^ Your Lordship may easily
imagine, how much Pain I am in upon that Occasion, especially hearing my Self
so often reproached for having drawn him to so desperate an Adventure, so much
against his own Resolutions, which were, not to take the Field, till the second
Payment were received, and the third assured on this side: It would look like
Vanity in me, to tell Your Lordship more of what I hear too much of this kind;
but I will say, that unless you take some speedy and effectual Resolution in
this Particular, I shall look like the veriest Rogue in the World, and such, as
it will not be much for his Majesty's Honor to employ. But after all, I will
tell Your Lordship freely, that I think all my Trains had not taken Fire,
without a perfect Accident, which I had the good Fortune to improve so upon the
sudden, as to make it the absolute Occasion of the Bishop's taking the Field
when he did; which I shall some time or other, I hope entertain you with, and
will serve for a Moral to show how small Shadows and Accidents sometimes give a
Rise to great Actions among Mankind; for either such, or the beginning of such,
this bold March is like to prove. All I know of its Success, you will find in
these Letters; one from my Lord Carlingford, to whom I cannot send Your
Lordship's last, till I have farther Directions from him for my Address; the
other being Part of one from a Person in the Holland Camp belonging to the
Rhingrave. Twenty Rumors more we have of his Successes, but I will not yet
credit them; this much I will, that nothing can probably endanger him, besides
want of Money, and that I know him to be a Man too firm to be diverted from his
Point, or slacken it without some such Maim; for he wants neither Prudence,
Courage, nor Ambition. For the Hollanders, they were certainly never worse at
their ease than now; being braved and beaten both at Sea and Land; flayed with
Taxes, distracted with Factions, and their last Ressourse, which is the
Protection of France, poisoned with extreme Jealousies; yet, that must be their
Game, or else a perfect Truckling Peace with England.

I am ever, Your Lordship's most Faithful, and most humble Servant.

To the Duke of Ormond.
Brussels, November. 20. S. N. 1665. My Lord.
I Am to acknowledge the Honor I received last, by one from Your Grace of
October the 25th, which gives me the Occasion to beg your Belief, that the
frequent Troubles I give Your Grace of this kind, proceed from a most hearty
and uninteressed Duty, without the least Thoughts of making any unconscionable
Advantage by such a Commerce, or at all expecting a Return of so great value,
as Your Lordship's Letters to a Venture so small as mine. I confess I am
extremely pleased with any Testimonies of Your Grace's Remembrance and Favor
to me, which I must esteem the best, and ever acknowledge for the first of my
good Fortunes; nor shall I ever be so much pleased with any lucky Hits that may
happen to me in public Employments from any other Respect, as from the Hopes
of meeting some Occasion to express the Esteem and Resentment, of Kindness
showed me, when I was idle and unknown. But, I beseech Your Grace, never to
give your self the least Trouble, or lose Time in writing to me, upon the Score
of common Civility, but to deal with me perfectly like one of your own; and
write only when you have Commands to honor me, or Inclinations to oblige me;
for the rest, one Word to my Father or Brother, may at any time give me the
Knowledge that mine are received, which is all they pretend, and perhaps more
than they deserve.

Since the Passage of the French Troops, which thought fit to touch no Part of
these Dominions, we hear little of them: Their Number fell something short of
six Thousand, their Horse were brave as they passed Mastricht; their Foot
rascally, their Shoes upon their Shoulders, their Feet galled, and their
Gallantry spent in giving the Dutch a thousand times to the Devil for their
kind Invitation: They paid nothing as they passed, or false Money; took the
best Treatment the Dutch could make them, with Scorn and Insolence; and drank
his Majesty's and the Prince of Munster's Health, openly in the Marketplace at
Mastricht; a strain I suppose of their Extravagance, rather than good Meaning:
So I leave them, as they do their Colors when they can, and return this way by
Couples and Leashes good Store. By the last from the Prince of Munster of the
12th instant, we had Assurance, that his Bridge over the Marsh was perfected,
his Army joined, and that Colonel, or Baron d'Ossory (who is made a Sergeant
Major de Bataglia) had with a Squadron of Horse, killed nine Hundred of the
Dutch in a late Encounter near Groaning: Besides this, and the French Envoy's,
Monsieur Lessyn having been dismissed with General Terms, I had nothing but
desperate melancholy Complaints of his Disappointments from his Friends, which
I will not trouble Your Grace with at this Distance.

I had my first Formal Audience last Night from the Marquess, and was received
with the greatest Expressions of Zeal and Devotion to the King my Master's
Person and Service; of the Resentment of the Honor done him by this Resolution
of a Resident here, and wonderful Compliment to the Personal Choice; as I
believe Your Grace knows, good Words of all Sorts cost no Man less than His
Excellency: But I am very confident, his Inclinations to Us, his Aversions to
France, his Desires of Truce with Portugal, and strict League with England, are
all very hearty.

I am ever, Your Grace's most Obedient, and most humble Servant.

To the Baron Wreden.
Brussels, Dec. 10. 1665. SIR,
I Received yours, and am glad of your Arrival at Court, where I never doubted
the good Reception so honest a Gentleman would find, who came from so brave a
Prince. I am sorry for your bad Wine and Lodging at Oxford; for as to the
former, I know, it is a sort of Plague you are more afraid of, than that at
London, where in a little time I hope you will have no occasion to complain
either of one or the other: In the mean while, take my word for the matter, it is
but half a dozen Glasses more, and good or bad, comes all to the same thing. As
for your Lodging, in Troth, I believe the Crowd is so great at present in every
House, that you will hardly find an opportunity of making Love to your
Landlady: But, Sir, you must have a little Patience, and not think of
succeeding in all Amors, at the rate you did with Mademoiselle Isabella;
besides, if you remember, it cost you dear enough then, by the Fright you were
in, of losing your great Diamond. Love, like other things is good for nothing
when one makes too much haste in it; and our English Ladies don't care that Men
should be over violent in beginning this Game, for fear they should be so in
concluding it.

Well, I am heartily sorry I can give you no good Recommendations where you
are, because I am sure you would be so just and generous, to pay me by a Bill
of Exchange on your little Mistress here. But, now I talk of a Mistress, you
must know Monsieur le Chevalier has ordered his Affairs here worse than at
Paris: For I believe seriously, he passed through this Place without so much as
paying one Visit to his; and that is the Reason why he carried so much Money to
Munster. and rode Post with greater vigor than ever he did from hence to
France.

And is not this now a very fine Letter for two Grave Ministers of State? But
come, we must talk a little of Business, if it be only for the good Grace of
the matter: And yet I am confident, if Sr. Bealing would entertain you at this
Rate but once a Month, and unbend himself a little from his serious way, you
would reckon him as your only Friend and think no more of me.

Well; but have you heard what the Dutch Resident tells us, that the Prince of
Munster has taken Reyde, a small Seaport, where his Friends may come and give
him a Visit. The News from Antwerp say further, that he has got the Fort of
Bourtang: But they add, how the Bishop of Osnabrug is resolved to let the World
see, that a Lutheran Prelate is as good as a Catholic; and to that end, is
resolved at the Head of some Lunenbourg Troops, to go knock Mitres with your
Master: All in good time: and as for Heads, I do not doubt, the Prince of
Munster's is much the stronger of the two; but for the Mitres I can say
nothing. I am told besides, that your Chapter of Munster has somewhat
embroyiled your Master's Affairs; if this be so, there are more Diables de
Canons beside your self. But I believe the Matter is not much; for if it were,
I know, the Prince would quickly make Monsieur d'Herbe and Monsieur Majette, a
couple of Canons, in Exchange for some of those Blockheads: And for Grand Dean,
I think, the Governor of Pleuren with the great Belly, would make a good
Figure enough. Who knows, but such Revolutions may happen; For, to speak in
your own word, The World is as round as a -- For my own part, I had rather be
one of your Master's Priests than his Soldiers; for they say here, that he
rises at four a Clock, gives them [his Soldiers] his Benediction, and then
sends them to the D -- over Bogs and Marshes where no secular Captain durst
ever pass.

Farewell Sir, and when you intend to warm your self with Sack, pray remember to
order your Servants instead of removing your Sword, to remove your Purse, and
prevent you from doing (according to your Custom) more Good than you design, as
they prevent others from doing Mischief. For it is a Custom in England, that
whatever a Man gives away over Night, he hears no more of it next Morning. At
all hours of both I am

SIR, Your most Affectionate Servant.

Au Baron Wreden.
A Brusselles, le 10 Dec. N S. 1665. Monsieur.
J'AY recu la votre, and je me rejouis de votre arrivee a la Cour; je n'ay
jamuis doubt qu'un aussi honette homme que vous, and qui a l'honneur d'etre
Envoye par un Prince aussi distingue, n'y trouvait toute sort de bon acceuil;
Je prens part au mauvais giste d'Oxford, and au mechant Vin que vous y avez bu.
A l'egard de ce dernier, je scay que ce'st une sort de peste que vous craignes
plus que celle de Londres; and au rest, j'espere qu'^vant qu'il soit peu, vous
n'aurez plus sujet de vous y plaindre ni de l'un ni de l'autre. En attendant,
croyez moy, il ne faut que six Verres de Vin de plus, il n'importe qu'il soit
bon ou mauvais, and tout reviendra a la meme chose^ Pour le Ingement, je
m'imagine que la Foul est si grande a oette heure dans toutes les maisons, que
vous ne trouvez pas les moyens de fair commodement l'amour a la fille du
logis; Mais, Monsieur, il faut avoir un peu de patience, and ne croire pas
reussir toujours avec autant de bonheur and de rapidite que vous fites avec
Mademoiselle Isabelle: Encore, devez vous vous souvenir, qu'il vous en couta
alors assez cher par l'extreme peur que vous eutes, quand vous vous appercutes
du danger que couroit le gros diamant. L'amour aussi bien que toutes les autres
chooses, ne vaut plus rien des qu'on le traite trop a la hate; and nos filles ne
veulent point qu'on soit si precipite a commencer cette sort de jeu, de peur
que la fin ne ressemble trop a la commencement.

Je suis ma foy, tres marri de ne pouvoir vous adresser surement dans la ville
ou vous e^es; car de l'humeur don't je vous connois, je say que vous seriez
assez genereux, and assez equitable, pour me rembourser par un lettre d'echange
sur votre petite maitresse Brabanconne. Mais a propos de maitresse, Monsieur le
Chevalier a plus mal fait ses affairs icy qu'a Paris; car je croy tout de
bonqu'il a pass par icy sans voir seulemeut la sienne; mais c'est par la aussi
qu'il a port tant d'argent a Munster, and qu'il a couru la post plus
courageusment qu'il n'a fait d'icy en France.

Voici ma foy, une belle lettre pour deux sages Ministres; tout de bon il faut
un peu parler d'affaires ne fut-ce que pour sauver les apparances: Mais, avouez
la verite, si le Chevalier Bealing vous entretenoit seulement une fois le mois,
comme je viens de fair, and qu'en votre faveur il relachat un peu de ce grand
serieux, n'est il pas vray, qu'il n'y auroit plus que luy'qui fut de vos amiss,
and que je perdrois la place que j'occupe dans votre souvenir.

Savez vous bien que le Resident d'Hollande avoue que le Prince de Munster a
pris Reyde, un petit port de mer, ou il peut etre visit de ses amiss; and que
les avis d'Anvers nous disent, qu'il est venu a bout du fort de Bourtang. Mais
on dit aussique l'Eveque d'Osnabrug est fort pique de la pensee qu'^n peut
avoir qu'un Eveque Lutherien ne vaut ^^s un Eveque Catholic; and qu'il est
tout resolu de s'avancer a la tete de quelques troops de Lunebourg, and
d'aller heurter sa Mitre contre celle de votre Maitre: A la bonne heure; car je
ne doubt pas que Monsieur le Prince n'ait la tete plus forte and plus dure, a
l'egard des Mitres je n'en say rien. On m'a dit aussi, que votre Chapitre de
Munster va un peu brouiller les affairs de v^^re Mai^^e; si cela est, v^ila ma
foy des Diables de Canons, aussi bien que vous. Mais je croy qu'il n'en est
rien; car si cela etoit, le Prince ne manqueroit pas de fair bientot deux
Chanoines de Messieur d'Herbe and de Masjette and de les echanger pour
quelqu'un de ces etourdis: le Governeur de Pleuren ne Manqueroit de pretense,
si le titre de grand Doyen etoit ente sur son gros ventre. On ne sait point si
de pareils changemens ne pourroient pas bien arriver car (selon votre phrase
Allemande) Roond is de Werld as even --. Pour moy, j'aimerois mieux e^re de ses
Pretres que de ses Soldats; car on dit icy qu'il leur done sa Benediction, and
les Envoye au diable, je veux dire, a travers de Marais impracticables, d'ou
jamais Captain seculier n'auroit ose approcher.

Adieu Monsieur, and souvenes vous bien en vous echauffant des fumees du vin
des Canaries, qu'on prend souvent la precaution d'oter de devant un homme qui a
bu, son epee, de peur qu'il ne fasse le Mechant; mais que vos amiss en doivent
prendre un opposee, qui est de vous oter votre argent, de peur que ne fassiez
trop le genereux; car en Anglet err, ce qu'on done le soir, ne se retrouve
plus le matin: Quant a moy, and le soir and le matin vous me trouverez toujours.

Monsieur, Votre tres Affectionne Serviteur.

To the Marquis of Castle Rodrigo.
Brussels, Dec 12. S.N. 1665 My Lord,
THE News of your Excellency's Indisposition has very sensibly afflicted me;
but, God Almighty will, I doubt not, quickly restore your Health, which is of
too great Importance to Christendom, to sink under common Accidents.

I desire your Pardon for the Liberty I take to let you know, how Monsieur
Rhintorf complains exceedingly, that he finds yet no Advance in the Affair you
were pleased to undertake for his Master's sake, and indeed for that of the
King my Master too. I desire your Excellency once more to give your Hand to it;
and that if those Merchants will not buy the Tin, you will give Order at least,
to have it engaged for three parts of it is value; so as some present Remedy may
be found to the Bishop's Necessities, wherewith, (by means of this delay) he is
now pressed, to the last Extremities.

I take more part in this Affair, having already writ to the King my Master,
that you had wholly finished it, in affection to his Service; for which I do
not doubt, but you will receive His Majesty's Thanks by the first Courier; so
that I shall be in the greatest Confusion imaginable if the Business fails, and
His Majesty cannot choose but think me very impertinent.

By my last Dispatch from Court of the 18th instant, I am informed, that the
Spanish Ambassador did that Evening privately deliver his new Credentials to
the King, to whom and his Ministers he still continued to be very acceptable;
and that upon arrival of these Credentials they began to enter in good earnest
upon adjusting our common Interests.

By a Letter of the 15th instant from the Prince of Munster I am informed of
the great and happy Progress of his Arms; but on the other side, that the
Hollanders used their last Endeavors to raise against him all the Protestant
Princes of the Empire, under pretext, that Religion has part in the Quarrel, as
well as the Interest of the House of Austria: And on both these Accounts, as
well as from your own Generosity, your Excellency is engaged not to disappoint
him in this little occasion: not to allege the Moral, which tells us, That,
whatever good we can do without damage to our selves, we are obliged to do,
even to a Stranger.

Upon an Answer from your Excellency I am ready to dispatch an Express to
Antwerp, and shall remain,

My Lord, Your Excellencies most humble and obedient Servant.

Au Marquis de Castle Rodrigo.
Brussels, Dec. 12. S. N. 1665. Monsieur.
LA Nouvelle de l'indisposition que votre Excellence a ressentie depuis
quelques jours, m'a sensiblement touch; mais je ne doubt point, que Dieu ne
retablisse bien-tot une sante qui est trop necessaire a la Chretiente pour
succomber sous des accidens vulgaires.

Je vous demand pardon de la liberte que je prens de vous avertir que Monsieur
Rhintorf se plaint extrement de ce qu'il ne trouve encore rien de fait dans
l'affaire qu'il vous a plu de prendre a coeur en faveur de son Maitre; ainsi
que sur la recommendatidu Roy mon Maitre: Je supply V. E. d'y mettre encore
une fois la main, and de donner order que si on a resolu de ne point accepter
cette Merchandise, du moins on la prenne en gage pour les trois quarts de sa
valeur; a fin de remedier sur le champ aux necessicez don't Monsieur l'Eveque se
trouve press, qui peut etre sont rendues extremes par ce retardement.

Je me trouve d'autant plus interresse dans cette affair, qu'ayant deja mande
au Roy mon Maitre que vous l'aviez touta fait finie dans la veue de render
service a sa Majeste, ce qui vous sera sans doubt marque avec remerciment de sa
part par le premier Courier; je sero is l'homme du monde le plus confus, and le
plus impertinent aux yeux du Roy mon Maitre, si citte affair venoit a manquer.

Par la derniere lettre que j'ay receue de la Cour dattee du 18. du courant,
j'ay ete averti que Monsieur l'Ambassadeur d'Espagne avoit le soir de ce jour
la present au Roy ce^ novelles lettres de creance and que sa person etoit
toujours fort agreeable, and a ses Ministres: qu'au rest sur l'arrivee de ces
nouvelles lettres de creance on alloit commencer de fort bon coeur a ajuster
nos interets communs.

Par une lettre du Prince de Munster du 15. du courant, j'ay ete averti de ses
grands and heureux progrez; mais que d'un autre cote les Hollandois faisoient
tous leurs efforts pour soulever contre luy tous les Princes Protestans de
l'Empire; sous le pretexte que la Religion and la Maison d'Autriche y etoient
interesses. C'est par la aussi bien que par votre generosite que vous etes
engage a ne luy pas manquer en cette petite occasion, pour n'alleguer pas la
Morale qui nous dit, Quicquid sine detrimento facere potes, vel ignoto
faciendum.

Sur la Response de V. E. je suis tout pret a depecher un exprez a Anvers; and
bien resolu d'etre toujours.

de V. E. le tres humble and tres obeisant Serviteur.

To Sir William Coventry.
Brussels, Dec. 15. S. N. 1665. SIR,
I Am to acknowledge both the Honor and Obligation I received by yours of
November the 9th; the last of which seems so great in that Light you give it,
and by those Circumstances I now see attend it, that had it come from any other
hands I should have wished a thousand Times never to have received it: For,
there are very few I desire much to be obliged to; having always thought that a
sort of Debt which ought as duly to be paid as that of Money, with more
Interest, and much greater Difficulty of casting up. But knowing that all
generous Persons are apt to favor and esteem their own, rather such whom they
oblige, than such as serve them; I am extremely glad to have my Name enter into
the knowledge of his Royal Highness, by his Bounty and Favor in the Grant of
those Passports, rather than any other way I could have taken; and beg of you,
that with my humble Thanks, His Royal Highness may know I enter into his
Service with this Advance of Wages, which it shall be always my Endeavor, as
it is my Duty, to deserve, I owe, and should say, a great deal to your self
upon this Occasion, but that with my Thanks for the Thing it self, I am to join
my Complaints for the manner of it: I mean that you should trouble your self to
reason me out of any Custom or Action you would have me leave off, or say any
thing upon such a Subject, besides, that you wish it had been otherwise; which
I desire you to believe, shall in far greater Matters be from your hand
Persuasion and Command enough to me, My Presumptions may be great With my
Friends, but they are the easiliest checked of any Man's alive; which is all I
shall say upon this Occasion as to the future; and for the past, I will only
assure you that I should not in the least have offered at what I did, had it
not been at the earnest Instance of the Prince of Munster's Resident here; and
I am to make it my Business abroad, to enter as far as I can into the Secrets,
and for that end, into the Affections of such Ministers as I have to deal with;
and as some Men are to be gained directly by their Heart, so are others by
their Hands: But, another Fault were easier to be born than a long Excuse; I
will not add to it by our News, since, of all I write I am sure you know as
much as you please; only, in general, our Bishop loses not Courage nor Strength
upon all the great Preparations of Enemies or Disappointment of Friends. The
Dutch seem to be plagued by their own God, and to grow unhappy in their own
Element, the Sea having done them in the last Storms most extravagant Harms;
some Letters from Amsterdam say to the Value of thirty, and others, of sixty
Millions; their Case may grow harder, yet if the Frosts do so from the Munster
side. Our Court here is passionate toward the League between the two Crowns;
as I am in the Desires of growing in your Friendship and Favor, and deserving
it by any Testimonies I can give of my being,

SIR, Your most Faithful, humble Servant.

To Dame Augustina Carry.
Brussels, Feb. 16th. S.N. 1666. Madam,
I Know not whether the shame of having been so long in your Debt, be greater
than that of paying it so ill at last, but I am sure, it is much harder to be
excused, and therefore shall not attempt it, but leave it to Father Placid's
Oratory, though having failed in the substantial Part of your Business, I have
little Reason to hope he will succeed better in the Ceremonial Part of mine:
The Truth is, there is so great a Difference in common Sound between, It is
done, and, It will be done, that I was unwilling to acknowledge the Honor of
having received your Ladyship's Commands, before I had compassed that of
obeying them, which the Marquess here has so often assured me would suddenly
fall to my share, that I thought we had both equal Reason, His Excellency to do
it, and I to believe it. This Right I must yet do him, that I never pressed him
in this Concern of your Ladyship's, but he told me, all my Arguments were
needless, for the Thing should be done; and how to force a Man that yields, I
never understood; but yet I much doubt that till the Result be given upon the
Gross of this Affair, which is and has been some time under view, your Part in
particular will hardly be thought ripe, for either his Justice, or Favor,
which will be rather the Style it must run in, if it be a Desire of Exemption
from a General Rule given in the Case: Whatever Person (after the Father's
Return) shall be appointed to observe the Course of this Affair, and pursue the
Lady's Pretensions here, will be sure of all the Assistance I can at any time
give him; though I think it would prove a more public Service to find some way
of dissolving your Society, and by that Means dispersing so much Worth about
the World, than by preserving you together, confine it to a Corner, and suffer
it to shine so much less, and go out so much sooner, than otherwise it would.
The ill Effects of your Retreat appear too much in the ill Success of your
Business; for I cannot think any thing could fail that your Ladyship would
solicit; but, I presume, nothing in this lower Scene is worthy either that,
or so much as your Desire or Care, which are Words that enter not Your Grates,
to disturb that perfect Quiet and Indifferency, which I will believe, inhabit
there, and by your Happiness decide the long Dispute, whether the greater lies
in wanting nothing, or possessing much.

I cannot but tell you it was unkindly done to refresh the Memory of your
Brother Da. Cary's Loss, which was not a more general One to Mankind, than it
was particular to me: But if I can succeed in your Ladyship's Service, as well
as I had the Honor once to do in his Friendship, I shall think I have lived to
good Purpose here, and for hereafter, shall leave it to Almighty God, with a
Submission as abandoned, as you can exercise in the low common Concernments of
this worthless Life, which I can hardly imagine was intended us for so great a
Misery as it is here commonly made, or to betray so large a Part of the World,
to so much greater hereafter as is commonly believed. However, I am obliged to
your Ladyship for your Prayers, which I am sure are well intended me, and shall
return you mine. That no ill Thoughts of my Faith may possess your Ladyship
with an ill one of my Works too; which I am sure can not fail of being very
meritorious, if ever I reach the Intentions I have, of expressing my self upon
all Occasions,

Madam, Your Ladyships most humble and most obedient Servant.

To my Lord Arlington.
Brussels, Mar. 1st. S. N. 1666. My Lord,
I Need say nothing to bring your Lordship acquainted with Mr. Sherwood's
Person or Errand; yet because all Men take themselves to measure best their own
Business, I would not disappoint his Desires of this Address; though to add any
thing to what I write upon all Occasions of the Prince of Munster's Condition,
Necessities, or Complaints, were, as I take it, just so much of nothing to the
Purpose. All I will say is, that whatever His Majesty resolves to do, ought to
be sudden, and in a Lump, to provide for his taking the Field this Spring, with
Heart and Strength, which I believe, a Sum within the Compass of a hundred of
His Majesty's Subjects would enable him to do; Nothing will ever me, to give
your Lordship those Testimonies I desire, of the most hearty constant Passion,
wherewith I shall ever be,

My Lord. Your Lordships etc.

To the Duke of Albemarle.
Brussels, Mar. 1st. S. N. 1666. My Lord.
UPon Mr. Sherwood's Passage this Way into England from the Bishop of Munster,
I could not refuse him the Occasion of waiting upon your Grace, who so well
knows how far His Majesty's Honor and Interests may be concerned in the
Success of his Errand.

Though that Prince's Necessities may be grown great, as well as his Complaints
and the Arrears of his Payments; yet I am confident, five and twenty or thirty
Thousand Pounds in a Lump and sudden, would bring him strong and vigorous into
the Field this Spring; which would prove a cheap Advantage to His Majesty's
Arms, and perhaps the greatest in Sight, next to your Grace's commanding this
Summer's Fleet; from which we all here certainly reckon upon a Success,
suitable to the rest of your Fortunes and Glories, which I hope to see
completed upon the French Fleets. Mine will be great, if your Grace pleases to
esteem me as you will ever have Reason to do,

My Lord, Your Graces most faithful humble Servant.

To my Lord Carlingford.
Brussels, Mar. 6. N. S. 1666. My Lord,
I Have this Exception to your Service, that my Faults are taken notice of, and
not my Diligence; for in your Lordship's of the 21st past, I find not the least
Mention of any Letters received from me, though I am confident by other
Circumstances, some of them must have been come to your Hands, I fear your News
at Vienna is not so good nor true as your Wine; and by the Abundance of Reports
with shallow Grounds, I doubt your Court is rather inclined to hear News than
to make it. That Brandenburg is our Enemy, at least for four Months, is too
certain; that Sueden is a Friend to Munster, we may guess rather from Causes
than any Effects that I know of; and since neither the Emperor nor Spain will
contribute any Thing toward the Bishop's Assistance, nor so much as the
staving off Enemies, that by Dutch and French are raising up against him in the
Empire it self, I know no Remedy; But yet in spite of all Force and Artifice
to disarm him, I expect for my Part, to see him rather besieged in Cosvelt or
Munster, than make a Peace without our Master's Consent, as is hoped by our
Enemies, and perhaps wished by some of our Friends, for fear the Continuance of
his Music should make them dance before they have a Mind to it: But I believe
all their Coldness and Shrinking will hardly defend them, and may help them
rather to lose their Friends than gain their Enemies: For we have certain News
that the French have made a Place d'Armes between la Fere and Peronne, where
that King is coming down to the Rendevouses of Fifteen Thousand Men; and the
Hollanders on the other side, are so incurably possessed with an Opinion of some
wonderful deep important League between us and Spain, that they are upon the
very Brink of resolving a War too, and concluding a League Offensive as well as
Defensive with France; at least, if the Ascendant of this Year be favorable to
De Witt's Party as that of the last was, which begins to be a little doubted of
late. I will not send your Lordship any English Letters, nor our Declaration of
War against the French, in Confidence it goes along with your Packet; by which
you will see, His Majesty has been as generous and civil, as the French King
was rough in his, to call it no worse; but he has begun the War with so much
Heat, that I am apt to believe he will come to be cool before it ends.

I shall ill deserve your Lordship's Leave of writing often, if I do it so long
and so little to the Purpose together. After I have ^^ld you, my Lord Ossory is
come (...) into England, and that my Lord Arlington is for certain (as they say
both in England and here) to marry the Lady Emilia my Lady of Ossory's Sister;
I will give your Lordship the good Night, almost as late as I imagine you use
to go to Bed, and only tell you that I am at all Hours,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble Servant.

To Sir Philip Warwick.
Brussels, Mar. 12. N. S. 1666. SIR,
THough it be more easy and more usual to beg Favors than to acknowledge
them; yet I find you are resolved to force me upon the last, without ever
giving me Time of Occasion for the other. How much I am obliged to you in my
last Dispatch, I am told enough by Mr. Godolphin, but more by my own Heart,
which will never suffer me to believe, that a Person to whom I have been so
long, and am so much a Servant, should be any other than kind to me; for that
is my way of judging my absent Friends, and serves, like a Watch in my Pocket,
to measure the Time, though I see no Sun. The very Name of Time, puts me in mind,
that yours is not to be spent idly, and that you are more pleased to oblige
your Friends than to receive their Thanks; and therefore I will only say, that
mine are very sensible and very hearty, and that no Man is with more Reason and
with more Sincereness than I am,

SIR, Your Affectionate humble Servant.

To the Bishop of Munster.
Brussels, Mar. 19. S. N. 1666. SIR,
YOUR Highnesse's Letter of the oath instant came in due time to my hands* by
which I plainly find with how much Faith and Con^^^^y, as well as Wisdom and
Courage, your Highness intends to order your Affairs. My utmost Endeavors
shall not be wanting for the advancing of them, as well as for increasing and
cultivating the Confidence His Majesty has in your Highness (on which the
common League chiefly relies) especially at this time, when so many ill
designing Men use all Endeavors to shake or destroy it, wherein it, is hard to
tell whether their Folly or Malice be greater.

I hear every day in this City; that you Highness has made Peace with the
Hollanders, without any Regard to us or our League, or so much as consulting
His Majesty upon it: And I pretend to believe what I (...) to^^, though I am
inwardly assured to the contrary. As for Whispers and Rumors, it is not my
Custom either to amuse others with them, or perplex my self. I confess, I was
somewhat moved with a Letter from the Duke of Brunswick to a Man of
Understanding in this City, which I lately saw and read; wherein he seems to
feed himself and his Friend with hopes of a speedy Peace in all those Parts of
Germany, and assures him from his certain knowledge, that the Prince of Munster
will accept it, in case it be offered to him without the greatest Ignominy and
Loss; wherein he says, the neighbor Princes use all means to engage him.

I am sorry to find the Marquis Castle Rodrigo of the same Opinion; because I
know, the Event must be dishonorable to your Highness; and will be imputed to
the King my Master perhaps as Imprudence, at least, as ill Fortune. Nor do I
think the Spaniards at this time of day so generous as to promote the League
(which we hope to see confirmed by my Lord Sandwich's Embassy into Spain) if
they once imagine, though but falsely, that His Majesty among such potent Enemies
is forsaken by his nearest Confederates.

On the contrary, I am entirely persuaded as well from your Highness's last
Letter, as from your Virtue and good Sense, that you have too great a Regard
for your Faith and Honor, to darken the Luster of so fair a Life by so foul a
Stain: This I do not fail continually to inform both His Majesty and his
Ministers: nor do I doubt, but if Fortune shall be wanting to the Justice of
your Arms, so far as that your Highness shall be in Danger of being brought to
the last Extremities; you will at least have that Regard to so sacred a League,
and to the Honor of so great a King, as to give His Majesty timely Notice;
declare the invincible Necessities you lay under, and desire permission to
enter upon new Councils.

As for us, I am sure your Highness is sufficiently convinced of His Majesty's
Care in performing his Part; and how happily he has overcome the greatest
Difficulties and Straits, wherein by occasion of the late Pestilence, his
Revenues have been involved. About ten days ago, I gave Monsieur Rhintorf
Letters of Exchange for 77000 Dollars; He is a diligent Person, a Friend to the
common League, and of equal Probity and Industry. I have given him also other
Letters, wherein a very Rich Merchant of Amsterdam has undertaken to transmit
30000 Dollars more to me with all convenient speed. I have also, Orders from
His Majesty to advance Money for your Highness upon a great quantity of Tin
lately recovered from Shipwreck at Ostend: And His Majesty has further given me
in Charge to let your Highness know, that whatever remains shall be paid
without fail.

All this matter was finished before Mr. Sherwood's departure for England; whom
I have however instructed with the best Council I could, as well as with
Letters of Recommendation to the chief Ministers; though I (...) certain, His
Majesty's Justice and Truth will be more prevalent in this Matter than the most
importunate Solicitations or Complaints.

In the mean while I shall use my utmost Care and Diligence for the Service of
your Highness, and it will be your part not to be wanting either to His Majesty
or your own Honor and Safety, which are all concerned in this Conjuncture. I
also beg your Highness not to be discouraged by your Enemies, not to distrust
your old Friends, not despair of raising new ones.

Time for the better changes many things.

In the mean time I wish your Highness Health and Victory, and desire you will
ever esteem me.

SIR, Your Highness's most obedient humble Servant.

Episcopo Monasterii.
Brusselles, Mar. 19. N. S. 1666. Celsissime Domine,
REcte and tempestive admodum mihi redditae s^^^ literae Celsitudinis, vestrae,
9o Martii dataec^^ quibus plane perspexi qua^ inco^cussa fide, and quam decora
constantia C. V. ressu^s semper ^rnat^ur a sit, dum casde^^ eximia prudentia
and animo molitur inte^ea and gubernat. Mihi certe nihil erit unquam antiquius
isto, officio; quod semper praestiti and praestit^^us sum tam in illis omni
medo pr^movendis, quam in formanda, and si opus fuerit erigenda sacrae suae
Regiae Majestatis fiducia, qua praecipue niti videtur communis f^ederis
vinculum and robur, hoc praesertim tempore cum multi and vafri and vertosi
homines. illam pedibus eant labefactatum, majore levitate nescio, an malitia.

In hac urbe pacem jam ratant ^^inter C. Vm. and Hollandos, post habitis omnino
rationibus and foederis and nostris, nedum consulta voluntate, ego utrisque
auribus quotidie accipio, credulitatem simulo, toto autem pectore inficias o^^
Rumoribas certe and susu^ris nec mihi alio^ pas^ere assuetum, nec meipsum
excruciare; co^^^o^um nic paul fate^ literis Ducis Br^si^ censis viro saga^^
in hac (...) transmiss^^, qu^^ ipse naperrime (...) diligentin^, inqui^^^ and
s^se and amicum mult^ spelactare videt^r pacis in universis istis Ge^^^^^^
partibus breviter ^^st i^^endae; sibique pro compert^ constable are asserit,
Principem Monasterii eam libentissime accepturum, modo fine summa ignominia and
damno eam oblatam iri contingat; in quo vicinos ait Principes oleam and opera^
summo jam studio impendere.

Marchionem de Castle Rodrigo eandem imbibisse plane opinionem and sentio and
doleo: quippe ejusmodi eventum and C. V. vitio verti necesse est, and Regi
Domino meo, imprudentiae forsan, aut saltem infaelicitati. Nec Hispanos usque
adeo jam tempori^ generosos aestimo, ut provibendo foedoxi (quod jam arcti^
astrictum iri speramus nuperrima Comu^^ de Sandwich in Hispaniam Legatione)
fortius impellant remos, si Regem Domin^^ meum inter tantos hosts, ab intimo
foederate desertum iri, sibi ve falso persuaserint.

Ego interea tam ex postremus literis, quam ex ingenti C. V. indole and genio,
moribus etiam and studiis, mihi e contra procul omni alea persuasum habeo, eam
virtuti, fidei and gloriae nimis foeliciter litasse, quam ut tot decora tam
insignis vitae tanta 'labe infuscari ullo modo patiatur. Hoc sacrae suae Regiae
Majestati, hoc Ministris regiis inculcare non desino; nec ullus dubito, si tam
justis armis Fortuna in tantum defuerit, ut inter tot hosts C. V. in extremis
se laboraturam praesentiat; quin hoc saltem tanto foederi, hoc tanti Regis
nomini and auspiciis tribuendum judicet, ut sacram suam Majestatem non
inconsultam velit, necessitates insuperabiles exponat, veniamque demum impetret
novis and alienis consiliis incundis.

Quod ad parts nostras at tinet, satis confido C. V. abunde exploratum habe^e
quanto studio and opere sacra sua Regia Majestas explendis ad amussim singu^^s
invigilaverit, quantaque demum faelicitate angustias and difficultates summas
eluctata sit, quibus per nuperam contagionem res suas praecipue pecuniarias
involutas sensit. Ego jam infra december elapsos dies literas Cambli usque
adseptaaginta septem Thalerorum millia valitutas, Domino de Rhintorfe (...)
tradidi, viro certo impigro, animique erga res communis foederis propensissimi,
nec minoris ut mihi videtur probitatis quam industriae. Eidem alias impertii
literas, per quas mercator admodum opul^ntas Amstelodami in se provinciam
recepit, triginta adhuc Thalerorum millia mihi: quamprimum transmittendi. Eodem
tempore and magnam stanni molem Ostendae^^per ex naufragio revulfa^, augendis
C. V. ^ationibus impendere, inter regia jussahabeo; praecipuumque a sacra sua
Regia Majestate mand^^tum, ut C. V. persuasu^^ penitus and securam vetim, quod
reliqui est sine ulla ambagie s^^ctum iri.

Haec omnia excussa and absoluta fuisse advertendum est act appulsum Domini
Sherwood, quem tamen in transitu saluberrimis quibus fas erat consiliis, and
commendatoriis apud summos Regios Ministros literis munitum volui; etiamsi pro
comperio habeam, Regis Domini mei justitiam insignem and fidem in violatam plus
quaeremoniis omnibus vel preoibus maxim importunis in hac re valituras.

Ego interea cura, opere, studio, and diligentia, nec desum nec defuturus sum;
Celfitudim autem vestrae curae erit ne sacrae suae Regiae Majestati, ne sibimet
ipsi defuerit, ne propriae denique gloriae nec saluti, quas in hoc cardine
rerum ver^ satis perspectum habere ^^^sse est. Nec inter insurgentes hosts
desponde^^ ^ro, nec veteribus ami^^^ ad minimum diffidat, nec despere^ de ^^vis
excitandis.

Multa Dies variusque labor mutabilis aivi

Detulit in melius.

Valeat interea C.V. and vincendo pergat; inter aute^^ addict issi^ios ejusque
rerum studiosissimos de jure semper aestimet

C. V. Observantissimum.

To Mr. Afterward Sir William Godolphin.
Godolphin.
Brussels, Apr. 1st. N S. 1666. SIR,
AMong my few Debts I could not have imagined my self likely to have any in
Spain, till my late Intelligence from England and Observation of the Winds
persuaded me to it, as my good Conscience does to endeavor at the satisfaction
of them before it be called for. After I have welcomed your into the Climate
with the same Cheer and Kindness the Sun I know will do, You must receive my
Acknowledgment of two Letters I had from you before you left English Ground,
but withal, some Reproach that you could mingle the Expressions of your
Kindness with that idle Business of Accounts, in which you are too just, as
those you had to deal with for my For Barone^
Patent Fees, were I think too merciful, at least much more so than I expected.
Your Letter from Sheen was more obliging in making me believe you (...) any
Thing in that Corner you could be entertained or pleased with; but if it were
so, I fear you had your Revenge; for my Wife tells me to my Face in her Letter
upon that Occasion, that She shall love you whilst She lives for the Kindness
of that Visit: What Effect this might have upon an absent Man in Spanish Air I
know not; but from this more temperate Climate I will assure you that I am
content to share with you the Kindness of my best Friends; which is all the
Quarrel I will raise at this Distance upon this Occasion.

The last Courier from Spain renewed our Mourning at this Court for the News of
Sir Richard Fanshaw.
Sir R.F. and Sir R.S.'s Arrival at Madrid without Success in the Portugal
Truce; which being the Hinge of all Affairs at this time in Christendom, is (I
hope) reserved for your more happy and more dexterous Management: I find it
agreed from France with other Parts, that nothing will have good Issue in
Portugal without the Style of King; and methinks the Spaniards Height should
rather aim at giving him, King without Kingdom, than Amuse about Kingdom
without King. The best Swords and Guns and Treasures, will have ever the Power
of reviving those Controversies; In the mean time, pray endeavor to make them
sensible, that the Possession of Flanders is worth the Reversion of Portugal,
and that they could never have such a Conjuncture to say by the Puntiglio as
during their King's Minority, who when grown Major, may avow and disavow what
he pleases of his Mother's Regency.

It Is pleasant in me to be giving you Arguments; but we are so full of it here,
as you must excuse all Impertinencies in this Matter: In short, this is a
Business must of Necessity be done, and therefore for God's Sake dispatch it:
And there is an End of my wise Councils.

From the Marquis you must look for no great Assistance in this one Particular;
his Birth and Interest make it too ticklish a String for him to touch; in all
others assure your self I have taken a Care to press him, and His Excellency
the Pains to endeavor all he can possibly, for preparing whatever may honor
your Reception, or facilitate your Negotiation, and being a Person that has run
through all the Business of that Monarchy, and allied to almost all the Persons
of the Council, I will be confident his Offices will not be useless to you, as
I hope some of our Countrymen's will that preceded them. When you further
Desire any from his Excellency here; upon the Notice, I doubt not to furnish
you.

I find by him, the last Promotion of Councillors was not made either by the
Duke of Medina's or Castriglio's Faction or Authority, but chiefly by the
Queen's Confessor, and on purpose to strengthen a Party dependent wholly upon
her Majesty.

The Duke of Albuquerque you will find a Man of more Warmth than Depth, and no
great Leader in Council or Business; Montalto is a Man of more Head, has more
of the Queen's Ear, and runs the Fortune of growing one Day into the greatest
Ministry; he is at present embroyled with the Duke of Medina, but if my Lord
Sandwich would reconcile those two Strings and tune them together, he would
find it easy to concert his own Music there.

D'Ayala is Herb John, Aitona considered; and upon his March; which he may
succeed well in, if he contents himself to make it by slow and even Steps.
Pignoranda would make a third Party, is learned, and called wise, but wants
Birth and Vigor to support more Greatness than he has. The Confessor is
honneste Homme, has lived till now retired from Business, but made a great Leap
into it on the sudden. Castriglio and Caracena are so far known, as I need say
nothing of what you are to hope or fear from them in your Negotiation. Pray
present my humble Service to my Lord Ambassador; and give him this little
Light if you think it is worth it. The French Men's Looks toward us are fair,
but I doubt their Meaning; at the same time they offer at Accommodation, they
write into Holland pressing all that is possible, that State's Agreement with
Munster, that their Forces may be all free to fall upon England, and encourage
the speedy setting out of their Fleet with Assurance of their own being ready
to join: They mustered fifteen Thousand Men but ten Days hence near this
Fronteer in great Bravery, where King, Queen, and all the Court appeared. The
French King resolves to march about the first of May in the Head of them
toward Sedan, upon pretense to force the Duke of Lorrain to disarm, or at
least, to know the Cause of this present Arming: In the mean time the Hugonots
of Poiton have put in three Requests to the King, demanding Liberty of their
Churches according to the Edicts of Names, and mingling some Strains very bold,
with others very humble.

The Prince of Munster has Envoys from six of his Neighbor Princes now with
him, treating about the Peace and Security of the Westphalian Circle, and an
Accommodation with Holland; all which gives Jealousy of his Honor and
Constancy.

The Elector of Brandenburg has put in a Memorial to the States, recommending
passionately the Interest of the Prince of Orange, which has given some
Jealousy both to Dutch and French,

The Elector of Collen has sent an Envoy to the Hague, who is there arrived to
demand the Restitution of Rhinberg,

The Prince of Orange's Sister's Marriage is concluded with the Duke of
Simmeren; for the Consummation of it the Princess Dowager and Prince of Orange
intend suddenly for Cleve. Captain Bennet and Sir John Sayers with several
others are arrived at Ostend in the King's Yacht for Mademoiselle Bevarwaers's
Transportation. The Captain of the Vessel approaching the Town, and pretending
to take a Ship belonging to that Port, and entering there for a Hollander,
pursued and fired at her, till a Gunner from the Castle not knowing what Vessel
ours was, gave her one Gun, but so unluckily, that it struck through the
Cabin, killed the Gunner, and shot off the Captain's Leg. I have sent Letters
from the Marquis to the Governor at Ostend to make all Excuses and
Reparations. I have just now dispatched an Express to the Hague to desire
Mademoiselle Beverwaert's Commands where and when I shall attend her Passage,
which my Lord Arlington has advised to make by Antwerp, and to leave all her
Money there in my Hands, which with a hundred and fifty Thousand Dollars I
shall meet there about the same Time for Munster, will make me so rich, that I
think I had best take the good Time, and run away to you into Spain; but I
shall never reckon upon your Protection, longer than I have some Honesty
mingled with my Kindness for you, and whilst I have the least of one, you may
reckon upon the most of the other that can be from,

SIR, Your most affectionate Friend, and most faithful Servant.

To the Bishop of Munster.
Brussels, Apr. 27. 1666. SIR,
THE Care your Highness was pleased to express for the safety of my Journey,
makes me believe you will be pleased, to hear how soon and happily I arrived at
Brussels after many Difficulties.

By a Letter yesterday, I recommended to his Majesty the Affairs of your
Highness, as I promised to do, and hope my Care will not be in vain: But since
I left Munster, I am informed, that Monsieur Colbert the French Minister, would
arrive in a little time to buy the Troops that your Highness designs to
dismiss, and to put them into the French Service. Now I cannot but inform your
Highness, how unjust, how false, and how ungrateful it will appear, for those
Troops that were raised and armed by the King my Master's Money, to enter into
the Service of a foreign Prince, now at open Enmity with us; by which means
they become Rebels rather than Enemies. And indeed, I find all the Ministers of
Munster are extremely averse from this Counsel.

For, since His Excellency the Marquis of Castle Rodrigo designs to draw into
the Spanish Service, all who are Subjects of his Catholic Majesty, with two or
three Regiments besides, and for that end designs to send Monsieur D -- to
Munster; I think it more for the Honor and Advantage of the King my Master,
that these Forces be placed in the Service of a Prince who has been long our
Friend and Confederate: And therefore, I desire your Highness to give a Hand to
this Negotiation, which I promise shall be neither unknown nor unwelcome to the
King my Master.

I am, SIR, Your Highnesse's etc.

Episcopo Monasterii
Brussellis, Apr. 27. S.N. 1666. Celsissime Domine,
SUmma ista sollicitudo and benevolentia quas C. V. in securitate itineri meo
praestanda demonstravit, me persuasum habent, non ingratum fore si eam
certiorem velim quam brevi and faeliciter inter multa incommoda and
difficultates, Brussellas appulerim.

Ego jam per Hesternas literas operam and studium meum impendi istis officiis
C. V. erga sacram suam Regiam Majestatem exsolvendis, quae pollicitus sum, nec
vana fore confido. Accepi autem ex quo Monasterio discessi, Dominum Colbert
Ministrum Gallicum brevi appulsurum ad mercandas copias quas dimissura est C.
V. easque in stipendia Regis Gallici attrahendas. Non possum C.V. celare quam
iniquum, infidum, and ingratum videbitur, copias pecunia Regis Domini mei
conflatas and instructas, in parts and stipendia transire Regis alieni, jamque
palam nobis inimici, and contra nos armati; nec isto modo dici potest, ut novum
bellum, sed genus quoddam rebellionis instituant; a quo consilio ego omnes,
quos conveni Monasterii officiales expertus sum admodum alienos.

Cum autem Excellentia sua Dominus Marchio de Castle Rodrigo in votis habeat
subditos omnes Catholicae Majestatis in sua stipendia retrahere, duasque
insuper vel tres alteras legiones; and in hunc finem statuerit Dominum D --
Monasterium usque ablegare; ego multo magis and honori and utilitati Regis
Domini mei conducturum aestimo, si copiae istae in auspicia and stipendia Regis
nobis jam temporis confoederati and amicissimi transeant; Ideoque supplico C.
V. ut huic negotiationi facilitandae (quicquid in se erit) utrasque manus
praebeat, idque officium Regi Domino meo nec ignotum nec ingratum forespondeo.

C. V. etc.

To Sir John Temple.
Brussels, May 10. S. N. 1666. SIR,
AFter so hard and so long a Journey, I thought you would be glad to know I was
well again in my former Station, and what was the Occasion of my leaving it so
suddenly and so privately, that I could not acquaint any of my Friends with it
before I went, which now I am at liberty to entertain you with.

This Winter has passed with much Noise, made by the Bishop of Munster in his
Enterprise against Holland with some Attempts, but little Success: The Fault he
has laid in some Degree upon the Marquess here, for refusing to suffer the Duke
of Bornoville to go and Command his Troops, which he durst not consent to, for
fear of giving too much Offense to the French and the Dutch, at a Time when the
Spaniards here are in ill Condition for a Quarrel: But the Bishop's chief
Complaints have been, Want of those Sums of Money stipulated by his Majesty to
be furnished him both before and after his taking the Field. Our Excuses upon
the Loss of the Ships with Tin before Ostend, though they may serve to keep us
in Countenance, yet they will not pay Forces in the Field, which he has often
threatened these three Months past, must break up without speedy Supplies. In
the mean time his neighboring Princes of the Empire, especially the Electors
of Ments and Brandenburg, with the Duke of Nieuburgh; seeing a Flame broke out,
which must draw foreign Armies into the Empire both French and Dutch; have used
first all Offices they could, to prevail with the Bishop to make his Peace with
Holland, engaged the Emperor himself in the same Endeavors, and finding him
steady to his Treaty with the King, at last the Duke of Brandenburg drew his
Forces into the Field, resolved to compel him by joining with the Dutch, if he
could not persuade him to make the Peace; and the Duke of Nieuburg prepared to
second him in this Design: The French were not wanting in their Offices to the
same Ends; so that a private Agreement was made about the beginning of this
Month, for the French, Dutch, and Munster Envoys to meet at Cleve, and there
treat the Peace under the Mediation of the Elector of Brandenburg.

As Soon as the King received this Alarm, he sent an Express immediately to
command me away the instant I received it, with a Commission to the Bishop of
Munster, and with Instructions to do all I could possibly to hinder the Peace,
and with Bills of Exchange to revive his Payments which had been long
intermitted, and Promise of more to be remitted every Post, which I was to
order into his Agent's Hands here in my Absence.

I went accordingly, acquainting none with my going but the Marquess here, who
gave me Twenty of his own Guards, with Command to follow absolutely all Orders
I should give them. I was to pass through a great deal of the Spanish Country,
much infested with Dutch Parties, more of the Duke of Nieuburg's, and more yet
of the Brandenburgers, who I know were all Enemies to the Affair I went upon,
and therefore thought it best to pass for a Spanish Envoy sent from the
Marquess Castel-Rodrigo to the Emperor; and charmed my small Guard and the
Cornet that commanded them, to keep true to this Note. And some of my Servants,
as most of the Guards speaking Spanish, I spoke nothing else unless in private,
or when I was forced out of it by some Incident.

In this Guise I came to Duseldorp where the Duke of Nieuburg happened to be;
(contrary to what I had been informed) as soon as I was in my Inn, one of his
Officers came to know who I was, and whither I was going, and would not be
satisfied by the common Answer from my Servants and Guards, but would receive
it from me; when he came up, though with much Civility, yet he pressed me so far,
that I found there was no feigning with him, and so bid him tell the Duke, that
within an hour I would come and give him an Account both of my self and my
Journey. I remembered the great Kindness that had ever interceded between His
Majesty and this Prince; and though I went upon an Errand that I knew was
disagreeable to him, yet I thought he would be less likely to cross me, if I
acquainted him frankly with it, than if I disguised scurvily as I was likely to
do, being the Thing of the World I could do the most uneasily.

I had a Letter of Credence which I brought out of England at my first coming
over, for this Prince; but passing another Way to Munster I had not used it,
and so resolved to do it now: I did so, gave it him, told him my Errand; how
much His Majesty reckoned upon his Friendship, and desired his good Offices to
the Bishop of Munster in the Design I went upon, of keeping him firm to his
Treaties with the King my Master.

This Duke is in my Opinion the finest Gentleman of any German I have seen, and
deserves much better Fortune than he is in; being small, very much broken, and
charged with a very numerous Issue; he seems about fifty Years old, tall, lean,
very good Mien, but more like an Italian than a German: All he says is civil,
well bred, honneste, plain, easy, and has an Air of Truth and Honor. He made
great Professions of Kindness and Respect to the King, was sorry he could not
serve him in this Affair; his Engagements were already taken with the Emperor
and his Neighbor Princes for making the Munster Peace, and by that Means
keeping War out of the Empire. He doubted I could not serve His Majesty upon
this Errand neither; for, he first believed I could not get safe to Munster,
the Ways being all full of Dutch and Brandenburg Parties, who had Notice of the
King's Intention to send away to the Bishop upon this Occasion; and if I should
arrive, he believed however I should find the Peace Signed before I came.

My Answer was short, for I was very weary; that go I would, however I
succeeded, that for the Danger of the Journey I knew no providing against it,
but a very good Guide who might lead me through Ways the most unfrequented;
that I would desire His Highness to give me one of his own Guards to conduct
me, because none would expect a Person going upon my Design, would have one in
his Livery for a Guide; and I desired he would let me pass as I had done
hitherto in my Journey for a Spanish Envoy: The Duke, after some Difficulties
at first (which we turned into Pleasantries) complied with me in all: I took my
Leave and went away early next Morning.

I never traveled a more savage Country, over cruel Hills, through many great
and thick Woods, stony and rapid Streams, never hardly in any high Way, and
very few Villages till I came neat Dortmund a City of the Empire, and within a
Days Journey or something more of Munster. The Night I came to Dortmund was so
advanced when I arrived, that the Gates were shut, and with all our Eloquence,
which was as moving as we could, we were not able to prevail to have them
opened; they advised us to go to a Village about a League distant, where, they
said we might have Lodging. When we came there, we found it all taken up with a
Troop of Brandenburg Horse, so as the poor Spanish Envoy was fain to eat what
he could get, in a Barn, and to sleep upon a heap of Straw, and lay my Head
upon my Page instead of a Pillow: The best of it was, that he understanding
Dutch, heard one of the Brandenburg Soldiers coming into the Barn examine some
of my Guards, about me and my Journey, which when he was satisfied of, he asked
if he had heard nothing upon the Way of an English Envoy that was expected; the
Fellow said, he was upon the Way, and might be at Dortmund within a Day or two,
with which he was satisfied, and I slept as well as I could.

The next Morning I went into Dortmund, and bearing there; that for five or six
Leagues round, all was full of Brandenburg Troops, I dispatched away a German
Gentleman I had in my Train with a Letter to the Bishop of Munster to let him
know the Place and Condition I was in, and desire he would send me Guards
immediately, and strong enough to convey me: The Night following, my Messenger
returned, and brought me Word, that by eight a Clock the Morning after, a
Commander of the Bishop's would come in Sight of the Town at the Head of twelve
hundred Horse, and desired I would come and join them so soon as they appeared:
I did so, and after an easy March till four a Clock, I came to a Castle of the
Bishop's, where I was received by Lieutenant General Gorgas a Scotchman in that
Service, who omitted nothing of Honor or Entertainment that could be given me.
There was nothing here remarkable, but the most Episcopal Way of Drinking that
could be invented. As Soon as we came in the great Hall, where stood many
Flaggons ready Charged; the General called for Wine to drink the King's Health,
they brought him a formal Bell of Silver gilt, that might hold about two Quarts
or more; he took it empty, pulled out the Clapper, and gave it me who he
intended to drink to, then had the Bell filled, drunk it off to His Majesty's
Health, then asked me for the Clapper, put it in, turned down the Bell, and
rung it out to show he had played fair; and left nothing in it; took out the
Clapper, desired me to give it to whom I pleased, then gave his Bell to be
filled again, and brought it to me; I that never used to drink, and seldom
would try, had commonly some Gentlemen with me that served for that Purpose
when 'twas necessary; and so I had the Entertainment of seeing this Health go
current through about a dozen Hands, with no more share in it than just what I
pleased.

The next Day after Noon about a League from Munster, the Bishop met me at the
Head of four Thousand Horse, and in Appearance brave Troops. Before his Coach,
that drove very fast, came a Guard of a Hundred Hey Dukes that he had brought
from the last Campaign in Hungary; they were in short Coats and Caps all of a
brown Color, every Man carrying a Sabre by his Side, a short Pole-Ax before
him, and a skrew'd Gun hanging at his Back by a Leather Belt that went cross
his Shoulder. In this Posture they run almost full speed, and in excellent
Order, and were said to shoot two hundred Yards with their skrew'd Gun, and a
Bullet of the bigness of a large Pease, into the breadth of a Dollar or Crown
Piece. When the Coach came within forty Yards of me, it stopped; I saw the Bishop
and his General the Prince d'Homberg come out; upon which I alighted so as to
meet him between my Horses and his Coach; after Compliments, he would have me
go into his Coach, and sit alone at the back end, reserving the the other to
himself and his General: I excused it, saying, I came without Character; but he
replied, that his Agent had writ him Word, I brought a Commission which styled
me Oratorem nostrum (as was true) and that he knew what was due to that Style
from a Great King. I never was nice in taking any Honor that was offered to
the King's Character, and so easily took this; but from it and a Reception so
extraordinary began immediately to make an ill Presage of my Business, and to
think of the Spanish Proverb; Quien te hase mas Corte que no suele hazer
Ote ha d'engannar ote ha menester.


And with these Thoughts and in this Posture I entered Munster, and was
conducted by the Bishop to a Lodging prepared for me in one of the Canon's
Houses.

The Bishop would have left me immediately after he brought me to my Chamber;
but I told him I could not let him go without asking an Hour of Audience that
very Evening: He would have excused it upon Respect and Weariness, and much
Compliment; but I persisted in it, unless he would choose to sit down where we
were, and enter upon Affairs without Ceremony. He was at last contented; and I
said all I could toward my End of keeping him to the Faith of his Treaty with
the King, to the Pursuit of the War till both consented to the Peace, and to
the Expectations of the Money that was due; he answered me, with the
Necessities had forced him to Treat; from the failing of his Payments; the
Violences of his Neighbor Princes, and the last Instances of the Emperor; but
that he would upon my Coming, dispatch one immediately to Cleve to command his
Ministers to make a stop in their Treaty till they received further Orders,
which I should be Master of.

I went to Supper after he left me, but was told enough privately, to spoil it
before I sat down, which was, that the Treaty was Signed at Cleve, though I took
no Notice of it, because I knew if it were so, being angry would hurt no Body
but my Master or my Self.

Next Day the Bishop made me a mighty Feast among all his chief Officers, where
we sat for four Hours, and in Bravery I drank fair like all the rest; and
observed that my Spanish Cornet and I that never used it, yet came off in
better Order than any of the Company: I was very sick after I came to my
Lodging; but he got a Horseback on purpose to show himself about the Town,
while the rest of the Company were out of sight all the Afternoon. The Day
after was agreed to give me an Account of the Affair of Cleve; upon the Return
of the Bishop's Express after my Arrival; and at an Audience in the Evening,
with great Pretense of Trouble and Grief he confessed, the Treaty was Signed, and
so past Remedy, and that it had been so before his Express arrived, though much
against his Expectation, as he professed, I am sure 'twas not against mine; for I
left Brussels in the Belief that I should certainly find all concluded; which
made my Journey much harder than it could have been with any Hopes of
succeeding.

I told him, when I found all ended, and no hopes of retrieving it, that I
would be gone within a Day or two, and would take my Leave of him that Night,
being not well, and needing some Rest before I began my Journey: He said and
did all that could be to persuade my Stay till I had represented his Reasons to
the King, and received an Answer; and I found his Design was, to keep me as
long as he could, while his Agent at Brussels received Bills of Exchange from
England that were ordered him in my Absence; so that I knew not how much every
Days stay would cost the King, and that no other Service was to be done His
Majesty in this Affair besides saving as much of his Money as I could. The
Bishop finding me immovable, advised me however in pretended Kindness to go by
Collen, which though four or five Days about, would be the only Way that was left
for me with any Safety, the Dutch and Brandenburgers having posted themselves
on Purpose to attend my Return upon all the other Roads; and he offered me
Colonel Ossory an Irish Gentleman in his Service to conduct me; I seemed to
accept all, and to be obliged by his Care, but wished my Self well out of it,
and took my Leave, though he pretended to see me again next Day.

I went home, laid instead of going to Bed, as I gave out, I laid my journey so
as to be on Horseback next Morning between three and four of Clock, upon good
Friday, which I thought might help to make my Journey less suspected: I fee'd
the Officer that opened the Gates for me, to keep them shut two Hours longer
than usual that Morning, (which I hear was performed) and so committed my self
to the Conduct of the Duke of Nieuburg's Guide, to lead me the shortest Way he
could into some place belonging to his Master. I rode hard and without any
stop, to a Village eight Leagues from Munster, and just upon the Borders of the
Brandenburg Country: There I baited, and pretended to go to Bed and stay all
Night; but in an hour's time having got fresh Horses ready for four Men that I
pretended to send before me; I put on a Cassaque of one of the Marquess's
Guards, and with my Page, the Duke of Nieuburg's Guard, and Colonel Masjette a
Flemish Officer in the Munster Service, I took Horse at the back Door of my
Inn, while the rest of my Company thought me a-Bed, and resolved to ride as far
as I could the rest of that Day, leaving my Steward to follow me the next, with
the rest of my Train and Guards.

I rode till eight at Night through the wildest Country, and most unfrequented
Ways that ever I saw, but being then quite spent, and ready to fall from my
Horse, I was forced to stop and lay me down upon the Ground, till my Guard went
to a Peasant's House in Sight, to find if there were any Lodging for me; he
brought me word there was none, nor any Provisions in the House, nor could find
any thing but a little Bottle of Juniper Water, which is the common Cordial in
that Country: I drunk a good deal, and with it found my Spirits so revived,
that I resolved to venture upon the three Leagues that remained of my Journey,
so as to get into the Territories of Nieuburg, having passed all the Way since
I left my Train through those of Brandenburg, whose Engagements with the Dutch
left me no Safety while I was there. About Midnight I came to my Lodging, which
was so miserable that I lay upon Straw, got on Horseback by break of Day, and
to Duseldorp by Noon; where being able to ride no further, I went to Bed for an
Hour, sent to make my Excuses to the Duke of Nieuburg upon my Haste and
Weariness, and to borrow his Coach to carry me to Ruremonde, which was a long
Days Journey. This Prince sent me his Coach and his Compliments, with all the
Civility in the World: I went away that Afternoon, got to Ruremonde the next,
and from thence hither, not without great Danger of the Dutch Parties even in
the Spanish Country: And so have ended the hardest Journey that ever I made in
my Life, or ever shall; for such another I do not think I could ever bear with
a Body no stronger than mine.

At my Return I have had the Fortune to stop several Bills of Exchange, that
would otherwise have fallen into the Hands of the Bishop's Agent here, and to
forbid the Payment of the rest he received in my Absence, which though accepted
by the Merchants at Antwerp, yet were not satisfied, the Time having not
expired at which they were payable. And this Service to the King is all the
Satisfaction I have by this Adventure, which has ended the whole Affair of
Munster that has of late made so much Noise, and raised so much Expectation in
the World. I am,

SIR, Your etc.

To the Duke of Ormond.
Brussels, May 14. S. N. 1666. My Lord.
THOUGH my late Munster Journey has given Your Grace some Ease by my
Intermissions, and me many Troubles, yet I met none of which I was more
sensible, than what I received at my Return by the News of Your Grace's
Indisposition. But I comforted my Self first, that your Health is too
considerable to fall, tho'it may suffer under common Accidents; and since, with
the certainty given me of its Recovery, in which I give Your Grace what I
receive by it my Self, as much Joy, I am sure, as if I felt never so great an
Addition to my own; since Mankind is esteemed so great a Self-Lover that these
are the highest Expressions will be allowed us.

I have desired my Lord Arlington to give Your Grace in my own Letters to his
Lordship, the Account of my whole Transaction; which I take no great Pleasure
in repeating, and should very difficultly at once give Relations so particular,
as what I made whilst the Objects, their Dispositions, and Motions were in my
Eye. The Length of them may make them too much Trouble to Your Grace, of which
my Father or Brother I know would be glad to ease you, and give the Minute of a
Draught at large.

I so concerted with the Bishop whilst I was there, and with the Marquess here
at my Return, that we expect here between five or six Thousand of his best
Troops upon His Excellency's paying Fifty Thousand Pattacons, and obliging
himself to restore them upon Repayment of the like Sum whenever the Bishop
shall have need of them; which is a better Disposal of Forces raised by His
Majesty's Money, than if they had been drawn over into the French Service,
according to their Prospect and Monsieur Colbert's Endeavor, who was sent to
Munster on Purpose to marchand them. Whether the Duke of Nieuburg, who seems
wholly French, will make any Difficulty in giving them Passage through his
Country, I know not; nor whether the Light be true which was lately given me
of a War like to suceed in those Parts between that Duke and the Marquess of
Brandenburg, which would in this Conjuncture mingle the Cards after the
strangest manner imaginable.

Though we hear much of our Fleets being at Sea, yet we talk more here of the
Dutch slowness, who have not yet Men for above fifty Ships, and those so
disheartened and cold in the Service, that I fear nothing but their eluding our
great Preparations by keeping close in their Harbors, till for want of
Victuals we may be forced to return to ours.

My Lord Carlingford is now at Prague, uncertain upon his late Letters from
Court, whether he advances this Way, or returns to the Emperor; whither, he
has dispatched his Son; and where we have some Ground of Complaint, seeing the
Emperor's Name among all the other Princes in the Guarranty of the Munster
Peace. The Endeavor of that Court had been much better employed in compassing
the Peace with Portugal, which hangs yet in great Uncertainties, not to say
Difficulties: Neither of which there is the least of in my being with most
hearty and unfeigned Passion,

My Lord, Your etc.

To my Lord Lisle.
Brussels, Aug. -- S. N. 1666. My Lord.
I Received lately the Honor of one from Your Lordship; and by it the
Satisfaction of finding your Health and good Humor continue, as well as my
share in your Favor and Memory which I am much concerned in. I assure Your
Lordship, in the midst of a Town and Employment entertaining enough, and a Life
not uneasy, my Imaginations run very often over the Pleasures of the Air, and
the Earth, and the Water, but much more of the Conversation at Sheen; and make
me believe, that if my Life wears not out too soon, I may end it in a Corner
there, though Your Lordship will leave it I know in Time, for some of those
greater and nobler Houses that attend you. I am obliged by the very pleasing
Relations you give from those softer Scenes; in Return of which, such as I can
make you from those of Business, or War, or Tumult, must, I know, yield rougher
Entertainment; and therefore I have sent them in a Paper which shall pass
rather for a Gazette than a Letter; and shall content my self only to tell Your
Lordship, that it is hardly to be imagined the Change which about three Weeks
past have made in the Face of Holland's Affairs, which are now esteemed here to
be upon the Point of breaking into much such a Confusion as we saw in England
about 1659; Nor can any Thing almost be added in these Parts to the Reputation
of his Majesty's Arms and Affairs; so far, that it grows a Credit to be an
English Man; and not only here, but in Amsterdam it self; I am told my Lord
Stafford who went lately thither about a Process, has more Hats and Legs than
the Burgomaster of the Town. I will not increase Your Lordship's Trouble by any
enlarging upon this Subject, having offered you a much longer in the enclosed;
I wish I could give you some of another Kind by sending you a little Spanish
Mistress from hence, whose Eyes might spoil your Walks, and burn up all the
green Meadows at Sheen, and find other Ways of destroying that Repose Your
Lordship pretends alone to enjoy, in spite of the common Fate of Mankind: But
however your Friends suffer by it, I wish it may last as long as it pleases
you; I am sure the Professions will do so of my being

My Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful humble Servant,

To my Lord Arlington.
Brussels, Aug. -- S. N. 1666. My Lord,
I Am not to be forgiven, that endeavor by one Trouble to make Room for
another, and solicit Your Lordship this Way that my Wife may have Leave to
solicit you in a Matter wherein I can never resolve to do it my Self. Your
Lordship's Friendship has left me little to desire or complain of, unless it be
when I find my own Fortune so disproportioned to my Mind, in the Resolutions I
have of doing His Majesty all the Honor, as well as all the Service I can; But
how ill they agree in this Point (though I was ever Rich while I was private,
even beyond my Desires) is a Story I would rather any Body should tell you than
I: However, I should not bring my Wife into this Scene, but that I know she
will ask nothing but my own, is a Person not apt to be troublesome or
importunate, and in all kinds the best Part of

My Lord, Your etc.

Patri Gottenburg.
Brussels, Dec. 16th. S.N. 1666. Domine.
REcte and per manus dulcissimae tuae sororis accepi Chirothecas elegantissime
consutas, and non minus polite contextas Literas; per quas nec me elapsum
memoria vestra, nec plane exutum Benevolentia, and sentio and gaudeo. Utroque
nomine me pulcherrimae istae Indoli per totam vestram Familiam diffusae, potius
quam ulli meo merito obligatum aestimo: Habeo itaque and ago gratias
quamplurimas, ut vero acceptiori quodam modo eas refer studeam sororem
optimam exoravi, quae me (ut spero) Officio and Debito perfunctum brevi
redditura est. Valeat interim Reverentia vestra, studiis propositis
auspicatissime incumbat, and ex Votis procedat, meque semper teneat.

Amicissimum etc.

To Mr. Thynn.
Brussels, Feb. 19. S. N. 1667. SIR,
ABout two Days since I received the Favor of Yours of the 16th past, and am
sorry to be put upon the Defense in an Encounter so much to my Advantage; This
had not arrived, if I could as easily have found the Way of conveying my
Letters, as the Dispositions of Writing; For those I have always had about me
since I knew your Station and Character, which I thought would help to bear me
out in that Attempt. The little Acquaintance you are contented to own, I durst
not reckon upon, because it was so much more than I deserved, and so much less
than I desired; but am very glad that may be allowed of among the Obligations
we have to enter upon this Commerce, though we need no other than our Master's
Service, which may on both sides be improved by the Communication of what
passes in our different Scenes. I shall not engage in answering the Complements
of your Letter, though I should have much more Justice on my Side; but I am very
ill furnished with that sort of Ware, and the Truth is, there is required so
much Skill in the right tempering, as well as the Distribution of them, that I
have always thought a Man runs much hazard of losing more than he gains by
them; which has made me ever averse, as well as incapable of the Trade. It will
be to more Purpose to let you know the Confidence we have here of our Treaty
with Spain being Signed in all Points to our satisfaction; but whether Portugal
has or will accept their Part in it, which is a Truce of forty five Years, I
cannot yet resolve you, only this I am assured, that it is feared in the French
Court as well as hoped in ours.

The current News at Antwerp as well as here, is of the Dutch Merchant Fleet
from Nantes and Rochel, consisting of above a hundred Sail under the Convoy of
six Men of War, being fallen into a Squadron of about twenty of our Frigates,
and few are said to have escaped: though this be doubted of none here, and the
current Letters from Zealand as well as Ostend make it probable; yet I suspend
my Confidence till the Arrival of my English Letters, which are my Gospel in
these Cases. This Coldness I know makes me lose many Pleasures, but on the
other side helps me to escape many Disappointments, which light Belief in the
midst of so many light Reports is subject to. The Councils or Dispositions of a
subordinate Government as this is, are not worth troubling you with, but those
in the Court here are in short what we wish them.

Those of the Scene you are in deserve much more the Enquiry; and I should be
very glad to know them from so good a Hand. My Desires of serving you, can I am
sure, never be known from a better than my own, which can value it self to you
by nothing else, but by telling I am

SIR, Your most obedient humble Servant.

To the Earl of Clarendon Lord High Chancellor.
Brussels, Mar. 4. S. N. 1697. My Lord,
UPon the Arrival of the last Post from Spain, which brought us the unwelcome
News of our Treaty meeting an unhappy Obstruction when it was at the very Point
of being perfected; Count Marsyn came to me, and after a Preface of the great
Obligations he had to His Majesty, and the Part he took in all our Interests,
as well as those of Spain; he fell into large Discourses of the unhappy
Influences any Interruption in the present Treaty would have upon the Affairs
of both Crowns. He insisted much upon the Hardship we put upon the Spaniards,
in not consenting to leave the Assistance of their Enemies, which was all the
Advantage they expected from this Treaty in stead of many they gave; that the
great Effect of it on both sides would thereby be lost; which was a Return into
mutual Confidence, and at least the Beginnings of a sincere Friendship: That
Spain having consented to what Terms His Majesty thought reasonable, and
Portugal not only refusing them, but entering at the same into new Dependancies
upon France; he could not see what could oblige His Majesty to more than
offering Portugal an equal Peace, and becoming the Warrant of it. That at His
Majesty's Mediation Spain had given them a Style as usual and as honorable as
what they desired; and if they could resolve to give them that of King in stead
of Crown they had then no need or use of His Majesty's Mediation.

That whether we thought it our Interest to have a Peace or War in
Christendom, we must begin by adjusting the Business of Portugal; for if we
desired the first, nothing could so much awe the French into quiet Dispositions
as that Peace, and ours with Holland, to which that would likewise be an
Ingredient; If the latter, and we had a mind rather to be Seconds in a War of
Spain with France, than Principals in any, (which he thought was our true
Interest) nothing could make Way for it, or enable Spain either to begin or
sustain a War with France, but a Peace with Portugal.

That he was confident, His Majesty's consenting to abandon them in Case they
refused to be included in our Treaty, would force them immediately to accept
it; that if not, and His Majesty should hereafter find it his Interest to
support them upon any great Successes of Spain on that side, it would be easy
to do it by Connivance, by voluntary Troops of his own Subjects, or by a third
Hand, provided it went no further than to keep Spain in the Temper of yielding
to the Peace upon the Terms His Majesty shall have judged reasonable: But for
the present, without His Majesty's Condescension to Spain in this Point; he did
not see how we could hope to effect our Treaty, or to receive any Fruits of it,
where new Occasions of Diffidence and Distaste would every Day arise.

These were the chief of Count Marsyn's Discourses, which he ended in desiring
me that I would represent them to His Majesty's chief Ministers, and
particularly to Your Lordship from him, as the best present Testimony he could
give of his Zeal to His ^ajesty's Service and Affairs; and which he would have
done himself, but for fear it might look like intruding into Matters and
Councils he was not called to.

Besides this single Point upon which this Stop of our Treaty is wholly
grounded; I could not but represent to Your Lordship some other Circumstances
which I imagine may have fallen in and helped to occasion it. I hear, France has
declared positively to the Spaniard, that they will immediately begin the War,
upon the Spaniards Signing the Treaty with us, and concluding the Truce or
Peace with Portugal upon our Mediation. To this End, and to show the Spaniards,
they are in earnest, they busy themselves in making new Levies, and drawing
down many Troops upon these Frontiers, as well as all sort of Provisions,
either for Sieges or a Camp. Upon this, I know not whether the Spanish Councils
may be so faint as not to dare give the French any pretense of a Quarrel, but
preserve their Quiet rather by shrinking, than making a bold Peace: Or whether
being composed of Men that hardly ever looked out of Spain, or consider any
thing but that Continent; they may not upon Foresight of War either continuing
with Portugal or beginning in Flanders, rather choose the first, where being
Invaders, they may give themselves what Breath they please, employ their own
Natives in the Charges of Honor and Gain, and keep all the Money spent in the
War, still within their Country; whereas whatever comes into Flanders, never
returns, and is swallowed up by so many foreign Troops as the Levies for that
Service must needs draw together. There may yet another and more prudent
Consideration arise with these, which may for the present delay the Conclusion
of our Treaty; and that is, a Desire to sign it rather before the Winter than
in the Spring, and by that Means both gain this Summer to finish the
Fortification of their Frontiers here, and the next Winter to put their Army in
a better Posture than they now are, or I doubt, will suddenly be for the
beginning of a Campaign; and if this Council should be taken by Concert with
us, that no Breach of Confidence may grow between us by these Delays, but the
French only flattered by vain Hopes of breaking our Treaty, and thereby induced
to let the Spaniard grow a Year older in their Peace with them, and slacken the
War of Portugal into as low Expense, and as little Action or Hazard as they
can; I know nothing can be said against it, and should be apt to believe it,
were the Councils there, in the Breast of any one Person by last Ressort;
whereas the divided Interests and Passions of the Councillors cannot well
suffer them to fall into such a Resolution with hope of Consent, and Secret
among them all.

This Reflection puts me upon another I hear from private Hands; which may
possibly have made some Change in the Course of our Treaty; which is, that the
whole Management of Affairs in the Council of Spain seems at present to be
devolved into the Hands of Count Castriglio; the Confessor leaving it to him,
and reserving to himself those Things only which depend immediately upon the
Will of the Queen, and proposing to himself during his Ministry (which cannot
be long in regard of Castriglio's great Age) to make Way for his own, by
growing older and practiced in Affairs, as well as the Knowledge, Obligations,
and Dependances of Persons. Now, our Treaty having never passed through
Castriglio's Hands, but conducted by Sir Richard Fanshaw wholly through the
Duke of Medina's, (his declared Enemy) and since by my Lord Sandwich chiefly
through Pignoranda's, who is a third Party; it is not improbable, that a new
Hand may give it new Form, either to add something of his own, or to show his
Authority, or perhaps to pursue his former usual Dispositions, which have been
bent upon the War with Portugal: considering no Part of the Monarchy but Spain
and the Indies, and I doubt, in particular, not very partial to our Alliance or
Affairs.

Upon these Intimations Your Lordship will infinitely better judge than I, to
what to attribute the present ill Posture of our Affairs in Spain, and how to
retrieve it.

I am ever My Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient and most humble Servant.

To Don Estavan de Gamarra the Spanish Ambassador at the Hague.
Brussels, Mar. 29. S. N. 1667. My Lord,
I Do not know how to acquit my self of the Obligation my Lord Stafford has
engaged me in to your Excellency, in begging your Favor to procure a Passport
from the States for my Wife. Your Excellency I am sure will excuse the Care of
a Mother, in providing all that lay in her Power for the safety of her
Children, and who to ease her self in it has (methinks) considered so little to
whom she was troublesome If I had been consulted upon this occasion, I should
not have suffered one I am so nearly concerned in, to owe her Safety to those
who yet profess themselves Enemies to the King my Master; and much less, to
them that treat the Wife of one of his Ministers like a Merchant, in demanding
an Account of her Goods: And therefore am very glad the Passport did not come
till she was a Shipboard in one of his Majesty's Yatchs, trusting, next to God
Almighty, in the Protection of his Royal Name. And though I have not yet heard
how her Journey has succeeded, I esteem my self as much obliged to your
Excellency (whatever ever happens) for your favorable Intentions upon this
Occasion to a Man neither known nor deserving to be so, as if you had delivered
me and my Family from the greatest Dangers.

God Almighty preserve your Excellency many Years, and give me the Occasions of
serving you.

I am, Your etc.

A Don Estavan de Gamarra.
Brussels, 29 di Mar. S.N. 1667. Sennor.
YO no se que modo me he de rescartar del obligo en que el Sennor Conde de
Stafford me ha empennado a V. E. pidiendo su favor, en procurar un Passaporte
de los Estados de Hollanda para mi mujer V. E. ha de perdona* el recato de una
sennora que tenia gana de proveyer todo lo que era possible a la seguridad de
sus ninvios, y para descansarse en este cuidado no se le dava nada (mi parece)
a qui en cargava trabajo ni importunidad. Si yo huviera sido de lajunta en esta
occasion, no huviera permitido que una persona que me tocava tan, cerca
pidiesse su seguridad de los que hazen hasta aora profession de enimigos al Rey
mi Sennor; y mucho menos de los que havian de trattar a la mujer de un Ministro
como a Mercadera, mandando la cuenta de su bagaje; y por esto me huelgo mucho
de que no ha venido el passaporte antes que se hay a embarcado la Sennora en un
Yacht del Rey my Sennor, confiando se (con Dios) en el amparo solo de su Real
Nombre: Aunque no se hasta aora en que ha parado s^ viage. Toda via por ^oque
ay de las intenciones tau favorables de V. E. en esta occasion a un hombre ny
conocido ny que merece se^lo, me tengo por obligado al mismo punto, como se me
huviera rescatado a mi y mi familia, de los mayores Peligros que se pueden
topar en la mar o la tierra. Dios guarde a V. E. muchos annos, y a mi me de las
occasiones de hazer las obras como la profession de lo que soy.

De V. E. May humilde Servidor

To my Lady Giffard written in the Name of Gabriel Possello.
Amberes, 30. de Marco. S. N. 1667. Sennora Mia.
HE recebido con mucho gusto y no menorre conocimiento la guarnicion de spada
que V. S. me ha hecha la merced de enbiarme, la qual me ha stado, mucho mas
encarecida con lo que me ha dicho despues el Sennor Residente de la part de V.
S. que no era menester enternecer me en lagrimas ny oraciones (como estoy
accostumbrado) con el sentimiento de tal obligo y que V. S. se estimara muy
bien pagada con una carta Espagnola; porque a mi es tan facile de mal escrivir
como a V. S. de bien hazer. Yes verdad que se tiendra por pagado con una carta?
Voto a tal que no le faltara carta aunque la pidiera en Gallego. Pero digo me
di veras, es santa V. S. O es hechizera? porque esto se a buen seguro que ha
hecho milagro y con una guarnicion di plata mi ha herido hasta el coracon y aum
mas fuerte que nolo pudiera hazer el mas bravo Cavallero con una oja de Toledo.
Pero me dira V. S. que estamos en un siglo que no es cosa mueva el hazer
milagros con la plata y que con esta sola se cumplen aora hazanas mayores que
no con el valor y el acero en los siglos passados. Por vida mia que tiene razon
V. S. y por este milagro no lo han de cortarla la capa. Pero no se como ha de
escapar quando la dire que despues que he tocado esta guarnicion encantada, me
van amenudo cayendo las canas, y en lugar de un viejo de setenta annos, me
hallo moco de quinze, me siento calentar la sangre en las venas, y bolverse en
triumfo el desterrado amor para afirse d'este miserable coracon y hazer le
pedacos en un punto. Desdichado de mi que he de tocar otra vez estas pisados
tan trabajosas de la ciega mocedad como me basta una vida a padecer dos
martyrios. Es possible que yo me sienta otra vez abrasor de las llammas
amorozas, y que de ceniza tanfria salga de nuevo tan violento fuego. Que yo me
voya otra vez resfriandomi con sopiros, y anegandome en las lagrimas y
padeciendo las penas y los afanes que no me d^xaran la vida si no fuera para
sentir cada dia el dolor de la muerte. Ah Sennora de mi alma, quanto mal me ha
hecho conhazarme tanto bien, quanto mi ha de costar de veras, la burla que me
han hecho de ser enamorado di V. S. en mi viyez passada. Pero quan facilemente
se remedia el mas trabajoso amor con uno poco d'esperanca. Yo me voy piensando
que una Sennora tan complida no puede desviarse de la razon, y que me haviendo
tan favorecido quando estava viejo, no puede faltar d'alguna piedad para mi
descanso, estandome aora moco y lindo y enamorado. Pero si me lisonjea mi deseo
y me enganna mi esperanca lo que ay di bueno en esta occasion, es que me
haviendo su favor rendido en un instante de viejo moco, de la misma manera me
parece que su crueldad me ha luego de buelver de moco viejo, y entonces me
havre a burlar me tanto de su hermosura quanto se puede burlase aore V. S. de
mi passion

Bive V. S. mill annos, y se vea enamorada como yo a setenta, que con esto no
se ha de olvidar entonces de.

Su mas humilde cryado y Galan. Gabriel Possello.

To Colonel Algernoon Sidney.
Brussels, Apr. 29. S. N. 1667. SIR,
I Received two Days since one from you of the 19/29th past; with two enclosed,
which I shall not fail to convey by the English Packet that parts this
Evening, and with the same Assurance that usually attends my Letters; So that I
think you may reckon upon their Safety in those Hands to which they are
addressed. Your present Abode was no Secret to me before I knew it from your
own Hand; That Information having been given me about two or three Months since
by some English Gentlemen, who passed from Italy through Germany and these
Parts into England; where I cannot think they made a greater Secret of it upon
Occasion, than they had done here.

I am sorry your Dispositions or your Fortunes have drawn you so far out of the
Reach of your Friends Services, and almost Correspondence; in which I doubt the
Difficulties may shortly increase, at least this Way: For we are here at
present in little hopes to see next Month end, without the Advance of a French
Army into these Provinces.

I had Letters very lately from Petworth, and my Wife some as fresh from
Penshurst, which left Health in both those Places; and will thereby I suppose,
furnish you with News not unwelcome from

SIR, Your most humble Servant.

To Monsieur Gourville.
Brussels, May 2. S. N. 1667. SIR,
YOu ask me whether we have a mind in earnest for a Peace, and I ask you,
whether you have a mind in earnest for a War: For as yet, we are no better
informed of the Designs and Marches of the French Troops, than we were at your
Departure from Brussels. I begin to think that King and his Ministers are
mortal like other People, and that their Affairs are managed with as little
Concert as those of their Neighbors. For I believe, as to what concerns this
Country, the Critical Minute is past, and that the French will find here a
braver Defense than they pretend to believe. However, it is certain, if they
had begun by Marching rather than Menacing about three Weeks ago, the Business
on this side had been past Remedy. In short, I as little comprehend the French
Proceedings at present, as those of the Spaniards a while ago, nor where they
can find their Account in this Enterprise which begins to awaken and alarm all
Christendom.

For our selves, my real Opinion is, that our Intentions for the Peace are very
sincere, and cannot fail if the other Parties bring along with them the same
Dispositions; and if I were as much concerned therein, as you perhaps may be. I
would regn are my Affairs accordingly for the future.

I thank you for your Account of what passes in your Parts; but I am very
little satisfied with the Queen of Spain's Letter, whereof a Copy has been
delivered at the same rhyme to the States by Monsieur d'Estrades: I think the
Form is faulty, as well as the Substance; and that if your Soldiers be at
present no better than your Secretaries, Affairs will hardly succeed as they
imagine.

By the last Ordinary from Spain, it appears that they dream no more of War
there than they do of Fire, at least they conceal from our Ambassador any
Advices they may have received of it from hence: But our Treaty of Commerce was
yet once again upon the Point of being Signed. The Spaniards make no
Preparations against Portugal this Campaign, and therefore seem to think of
being on that side upon the Defensive, or else of an Accommodation: though they
are well enough informed of the Particulars of an Accord concluded between
France and Portugal.

Nothing perplexes me more than to find a way of writing often to Breda, and
you will not send me your Address. I resign up this to my Fortune, but since
yours is always better than mine, it may happen upon that Account that you may
never receive it. As happy as you are, I advise you to look to your Affairs at
Breda: For in a few Days, I resolve to go and plunder your House at Brussels,
and get satisfaction for my great Orange-Tree upon your little ones. I do not
pretend it shall be open War; however the Hollanders will tell you that we
English are D -- and all at Reprisals.

I am Sir your etc.

A Monsieur Gourville.
De Brusselles, May 2. S.N. 1667. Monsieur,
VOus me demandez si nous voulons toutde-bon la paix; and moy, je vous demand
si vous voulez tout-de bon la guerre; car jus-qu'icy nous n'en savons pas plus
sur vos desseins and la march des Troops Francoises, que nous en savions a
votre depart de Brusselles. Je commence a cr ire que ce Roy and ses Ministres
sont mortels comme le rest des hommes, and que leurs affairs sont maniees
avec aussi peu de concert que celles de leurs voisins; car je croy, que pour ce
qui est de ce p^is icy, l'heure de berger est passee pour eux, and qu'ils y
trouveront une resistance plus opiniatre, and plus rebutante qu'ils ne
s'imaginent: Mais il est constant, que si au lieu de menacer, ils eussent
commence a marcher il y a troit semaines, l'affaire etoit sans ressource de ce
cote icy. Enfin je les comprens aussi peu dans leur conduite d'apresent, que je
comprenois autrefois les Espagnols dans la leur; and je ne prevois pas comment
ils pourront trouver leur conte dins la pour faite d'un enterprise, qui va
reveiller and mem^ choquer toute la Chretiente.

A notre egard, mon sentiment, que je croy veritable, and que je vous
communique sans deguisement, est, que nos intentions pour la paix sont fort
sinceres, and qu'elle ne scauroit manquer de se fair, si les autres parties y
appertent les memes dispositions; j'ajoute, que si j'y etois interresse autant
que j'entrevois que vous pouvez l'etre- je reglerois mes affairs conformement
aux conjonctures.

Je vous rens graces de ce que vous me mandezce qui se pass en vos quartiers;
mas je suis fort pou satisfait de la lettre ecrite a la Reyne d'Espagne, don't
la copy a ete done en meme tems aux Estats par Monsieur D'Estrades. Il me
semble qu'il y a du defaut dans la maniere aussi bien que dans le fond de la
chose meme; and que fi pour cette fois vos Capitaines n'en savent plus que vos
Secretaires, les affairs n'iront pas le train qu'on a pense.

Par ce dernier ordinaire d'Espagne, ils ne paroissent non plus songer a la
guerre qu'au feu; ou bient ils taisent a notre Ambassadeur les avis qu'ils
peuvent avoir recu de deca; mais notre traitte de commerce eroit encore une
fois sur le point d'etre sign. Ils ne font point de preparatifs contre le
Portugal pour cette campaign; and par la ils semblent songer seulement ou a se
tenir de ce cote la sur la defensive, ou bien a entendre d un accommodement;
quoy qu'ils sachent bien le detail de l'accord conclu enter la France and le
Portugal.

Il n'y a rien qui m'embarasse plus que de trouver les moyens d'ecrire souvent
a Breda; and vous ne m'envoyez point aussi votre adresse. J'abandonne celle cy
a mon etoile; mais comme la votre l'emporte toujours sur la mienne, il pourra
bien arriver qu'elle manquera saroute. Quelque heureux que vous soyez, je vous
conseille pourtant de bien fair vos affairs a Breda, car dans peu de jours
j'iray pillar votre Maison a Brusselles, and vanger mon grand Oranger sur vos
petits. Ce ne sera pas guerre declaree; mais les Hollandois vous diront que
nous faisons le d^able a quatre en matiere de represailles.

Je suis etc.

To my Lord St. Albans.
Brussels, May 13. S.N. 1667 My Lord,
SInce my Acknowledgments of the Honor I received some time since from Your
Lordship, I have had nothing to give me Countenance in offering any new
Trouble; and indeed the Party is so unequal in regard of our Stations at this
time of Paris and Brussels, as well as all other Circumstances, that no
Commerce can pass without very great Presumption on my Side, and as great
Condescension on your Lordship's: For we are so amazed with the Numbers and
Bravery of the French Preparations to invade this Country, that we can hardly
lift up our Eyes against the rising of this Sun, that is said, intends to burn
up all before it: Yet not to flatter you, though Men's Eyes are weak at first
sight, when they have gazed a while I believe they will find their Hands, and
try to defend themselves against Gold as well as against Iron; and perhaps the
Stomach they have conceived at, being treated with so little Ceremony as to be
invaded without any Declaration of War, to have the Duchy of Brabant not
esteemed worth the demanding, nor any Colors given to the Justice of the
Invasion; will make the Defense sharper than is expected, as it has done the
voluntary Contributions larger than was imagined.

This makes all Friars already despair of praying away the War, and begin to
look like other worldly Men, and the very Nuns fear they may be forced to work
too, before the Business ends: In short, all prepare for a warm Summer, only
the Spanish Duennaes cannot think so ill of a King that married an Infanta, and
will never leave wondering that Un Rey qui tiene que comer en su Casa, y de
regalarse tanbien, should resolve to give himself and them so much Trouble for
nothing. Our poor Nuns at Louvain have more Faith and not less Fears, and
therefore the Reverend Mother has sent to desire me to recommend them to Your
Lordship's Favor, and to beg of you to get them a Protection from thence, in
case the Scholars and Learned there should not find Arguments to defend their
Town against the French, who I can assure Your Lordship, will not lose much by
the Bargain as far as I see, of that Nunnery, Nuns and all; for it seems by
their Faces, as well as their Buildings to be an ancient Foundation, and gone
much to decay.

Now they have put me upon desiring Passports, my Wife will needs have me
recommend her to Your Lordship for another for her self, and Servants, and
Baggage, to go over into England, and if She shall find it convenient, to pass
as far as Calais, and embark there, because She is no Lover of the Sea. Upon
the first of these Requests Your Lordship has Occasion to merit very much, but
by the Second, to deal freely, I know not what you will gain, besides the
Obligations of a Person who is already all that can be

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and most obedient Servant.

To my Lord Ambassador Coventry.
Brussels, May 21. S. N 1667. My Lord,
I Know not by what Conveyance, nor by what Delays the Honor Your Excellency
intended me so long since from aboard the Frigate, came yesterday to my Hands,
and made my Acknowledgments later than they ought to have been: I am sorry you
agreed so ill with the Sea, since that is the Dutch Men's Element, with whom we
hope you will agree so well; but if you had the Faculty of uttering your Heart
in the Seamens Sense, as well as you had of uttering your Thoughts; I am to
rejoice with you upon the good Health you must needs have brought ashore, and
to believe that the Temper and Constitution of your Body, is as sound and as
good as that of your Mind. Since my last to my Lord Holles, our Ordinary from
Spain arrived; by which Mr. Godolphin assures me that I may expect the News of
our Treaty at Madrid being Signed by the next, nothing remaining at the Date of
his Letter besides only the Examination of the Phrase in Latin, which was
referred to the Inquisidor general, and Count Pignoranda; after whose Sentence
upon it, nothing was in Sight that could stop the immediate Signing and Sealing.

Mr. Godolphin assures me, all Parts of the Treaty of Commerce are so much to
our Desire and Advantage, that he hopes to see many a rich Man in England by
it; for the other Part which concerns the Adjustment with Portugal; though the
Terms are likewise agreed between us and Spain, yet the present Effect of it
seems likely to be avoided by the late Accord between France and Portugal, of
which I send the Account enclosed by the Copy of Sir Robert Southwell's Letter
to my Lord Sandwich upon that Occasion. I enclose likewise the Copies of the
French King's last Letters to the States General, and at the same time to the
Queen Regent of Spain; declaring his Intentions to invade these Countries;
which last methinks is drawn with so ill Colors and so ill Grace, that if his
Captains do no better than his Secretaries upon this Occasion, the Success of
his Enterprise may prove no better than the Justice of it here appears. If
these Papers may have arrived already some other Way, Your Excellency will
however pardon my Diligence, since you receive no other Trouble than that of
throwing them away. The Levies here and Musters go on with all the Care and
Speed this Government is capable of. This Evening I am assured, the Twelve
Hundred Italians so long expected, are arrived at Ostende. Last Night parted
Don Bernard de Salinas, dispatched from the Marquess here, to beg some
Assistance from his Majesty; the present Hopes are only of Leave to recruit the
old Regiment here to the Number of Two Thousand, or else to raise two new Ones,
under such Officers as His Majesty shall name. The Cloud threatening these Parts
from France is not yet broken, and the Marches of their Troops to three several
Rendezvouses make it yet uncertain where it will fall. Cambray, Valenciennes,
Namur, Mons, and St. Omers are in very good Condition, and the last has three
Thousand Men in Garrison besides the Bourgeoisie. The Prince of Ligni has now
Four Thousand Horse effective at the Headquarters near Nivelle, where there
will be Five Thousand Foot to join with them, and attend theit Enemy's Motion,
and cover Brussels upon Occasion. It is most certain that if the French had
begun to march when they began to talk, about three Weeks since, this Country
had been lost without Dispute, or Remedy; the Defense will be now perhaps
sharper than expected. La Basse and Armentiers are already slighted, and
Charle-Roy is all mined within, the Mines filled with Powder; Guns, and
Magazins drawn off, and ready to fly upon the first Approach of the French,
which is here esteemed both a generous and prudent Resolution of the Marquess,
since he could not finish it in Time, nor preserve his Child without the
Mother's Danger.

I know nothing else to increase this Trouble besides the Assurances of my being

My Lord, Your Excellency's most humble and most obedient Servant.

To my Lord Arlington.
Brussels, May 27. S.N. 1667. My Lord,
TWo Days since came hither the News of Armentiers being seized by a Party of
the French Horse, about Five Hundred strong; half of the Fortifications were
already slighted, and not above a Hundred and Fifty Soldiers left in the Town:
What their next Design will be, seems not yet resolved; their Troops marching
on all Parts, give the Occasion I suppose to the several Governors of Mons,
Cambray, and Valenciennes, to signify by Expresses hither the Jealousy each
of them has of the Storm being ready to fall upon their Parts.

At Cambray and Lille several French have been taken surveying the Works, and
disguised; but all those Places are at present in so good Condition, that the
Choice may perhaps make some Difficulties in the French Councils, which I
believe have been much disconcerted by the blowing up of Charle-Roy; a
Resolution they expected not from the Marquess, and without which these Parts
of the Country had run inevitable Dangers, and the most successful Invasion
had been made in those Provinces where the French Pretensions lay.

The Discoursers here observe that the first Pace of the War being made in
Flanders, loses all the good Grace which the French endeavored to give their
Invasion; that the Town they have taken can import no more than the Advance of
their Frontiers; that they seem unresolved whether to keep it or no; how to use
the Governor and Soldiers whom they took in their Beds, whether as Prisoners,
or Friends, and more uncertain what to do next; that their slowness in entering
the Country, and Loss of twenty Days Time, though they were then as ready as
now, has certainly saved these Provinces; for it is constant without any
Dispute that if they had fallen on in the beginning of this Month, Charle-Loy,
Nivelle, Louvaine, Brussels, and Mechlyn would have cost them neither Time nor
Danger. From these Circumstances the Reasoners here conclude a Weakness and
Incertitude in the French Councils, and begin to hope they may have taken their
Measures as ill among their Neighbors, as they have among themselves; and say
confidently, that unless they are agreed with England, their Affairs are in a
worse Posture than they have been these twenty Years. They begin to hope that
all our late Practices with the French, are aimed no further than to embark
them in this Affair, and have our Revenge for the Game they played in engaging
us in the Dutch War: They say, that if by Offers and Shows of abandoning Spain,
we have drawn the French into this War, which has already cost them all their
Confidence with Holland, all further hopes of amusing Spain, and the Credit of
their good Faith and Meaning with the rest of Christendom; that if after our
Peace made with Holland and France, we resolve to offer our Mediation between
France and Spain, and upon the Refusal or failing of it, join with the
Hollander in the Protection of these Countries, enter vigorously into the War,
share with the Spaniard whatever shall be gained from the French, and let
Holland find their Account by destroying all the French Designs of Trade and
Plantations abroad; the Reasoners here conclude that if this has been our
Design for these two Months past, and be pursued with the same Success it has
begun; It is one of the greatest Councils that has ever been conceived by any
Prince, and which will make the greatest Change in our own Affairs, and in
those of all Christendom besides; and appear the best adjusted Revenge upon the
French that ever was taken upon an Enemy.

From Breda we have got little more than the Entry of our Ambassador, which
makes us believe some Mystery in the Delays of Peace there, as well as those of
War on the other side.

From Sueden I have the last Post a particular Assurance of that Crown's good
Intentions toward the House of Austria, of their dispatching one Monsieur
Tongel Envoy into Spain, who is to pass this Way, and will be Addressed to me
to introduce him to the Marquess, by whose Representations the Court of Sueden
desires to have their Minister's Reception in Spain favored, and his
Negotiation advanced.

I am, as will ever become me to be, with equal Passion and Truth

My Lord, Your etc.

To my Lord Holles.
Brussels, May 29. S. N. 1667. My Lord,
I Know not with what Speed or Success three of mine may have arrived at Breda,
but am apt to doubt the Certainty of this Commerce by observing that Your
Excellency's of the 22d came not to my Hands till Yesterday, and after the
Receipt of it I was so unlucky, as not to find the Baron de L'Isola till later
at Night than would suffer this Dispatch: I now send it to Mr. Shaw of Antwerp
with Orders to convey it by Express from thence, in Case he meets no other
sudden Occasion; and whatever Favor or Commands Your Excellency may hereafter
design me, will come sooner and safer I suppose by an Address to the same Hand
at Antwerp.

I acquainted the Baron de L'Isola with the Dutch Allegations concerning some
Advances made by him as from his Majesty, upon the Point of Poleroon. He says,
however they may seem to interpret it, they could not understand it by any
Thing that passed from him in that private Communication, which was all he
entered into upon his short stay in Holland. That upon his first Discourse of
His Majesty's Intention to make the Treaty of 1662 the Foundation of this at
present; the Person he discoursed with raised two Difficulties; the first, that
of Poleroon; and the other, the Continuance of the Pretensions left on either
side; which as they had given Occasion, or at least Pretext for the present
Quarrel so, if they were left still undecided, they might hereafter have the
same Effect; whereas their Desire was by this Peace to cut off the Root of all
future Differences. For the first Point, he (the Baron) asked, whether if all
other Articles should be agreed, the States would be so obstinate upon the
Point of Poleroon as to endanger the Peace for that alone: It was answered, the
French had already essayed to do some Offices in this Particular, and had
brought it to this very Demand; whether the States would continue the War
rather than yield the Point of Poleroon; and that the States had answered
formally, they would.

For the second, concerning the mutual Pretensions left in the Treaty of 1662,
He, (the Baron) seemed to approve the cutting them all off, but proposed that
in Consideration of it, the States should give His Majesty a Sum of Money in
some sort proportionable to what his Pretenses might amount; and that if the
States would make any Advance considerable in Point of the Sum, He (the Baron)
would employ all his own and his Friends Endeavors, to induce His Majesty to a
Condescension in this Point of Poleroon as well as that of clearing all
Pretensions on either Side.

To this was answered, that for Poleroon nothing more could be said, nor any
Consideration make the States yield it, without the Alternative of restoring
all on each side, which would create Length and Difficulty in the Treaty. That,
for a Sum of Money in Satisfaction of His Majesty's Pretensions, they could not
consent to any such Proposal, without a particular Liquidation of what the
Pretentions on each side amounted to; since they believed in gross their own
upon us, to be higher than ours upon them; And yet at the same time it was
insisted, that no such Examen or Liquidation should be entered upon; since doing
it before the Conclusion would expose the Treaty to the Danger of Delays, and
consequently of Accidents; and leaving it to Commissioners after the
Conclusion, would leave Field for new Disputes.

This was the Sum of the Baron's Negotiation, in which he made all the Advances
as from himself; but when he found he was not likely to bring it to any Issue,
by Reason of those two Difficulties, that is, Poleroon, and the Sum in
Consideration of our clearing all Pretensions; he then told them as by his
Majesty's Order, that the Point of Poleroon, touching our East India Company
rather than His Majesty; the King would send over some Persons Deputed from the
said Company, with His Ambassadors; and if the States would do the same, it
was likely the Persons Deputed from each Company might find an Expedient in the
Business.

This the Baron gives me for the short and true Relation of all his Discourses
in Holland, which having been made with one Person alone, and very private; I
find he expected not they would have been so public, as to be alleged upon
any new Negotiations.

Our News from the Frontiers since my last is this. About the time of the
French King's coming down to Arras, the Orders were given for slighting
Armentiers, la Bassee, and Charle-Roy, which being public, and begun to be
executed at Armentiers; a Brigetin Priest of that Town went to Arras, and upon
Complaints of their being left without Defense in the Times of Danger that were
approaching, made Application to the Governor of Arras for a Protection for
their Town: Within a Day or two after, when the Works were about half slighted,
instead of the Protection, came Seven or Eight Hundred French Horse, and
finding a Guard of about forty Men at the Entrance of the Place, made a
Discharge upon them, killed one, and wounded two: Upon which, those few
Soldiers that were in the Townhouse, shot and killed three or four of the
French, who began to pillage some of the Burgher's Houses; but this Disorder
was soon appeased by their Officers, after which they summoned the Peasants in,
and begun to repair the Fortifications, kept the Governor in Restraint, and
carried the Matter as if this had been the Declaration of War. This News coming
to the Governor of Lille, he seized upon some French Men he found in his Town
by Way of Reprisal for those taken at Armentiers; and the Marquess gave Order
to the Prince of Ligny who commands the Horse here, to charge any Party he
should find making Courses into the Frontiers, and to endeavor to bring away
some Prisoners, both as Reprisals for those of Armentiers, and to know
something of the French Pretensions.

After they had kept Armentiers about five Days, they released the Governor,
told the People they came not to begin any War, but only at their Invitation to
protect the Town; drew off at first one Party of their Men, and last Friday
Morning all the rest: The Governor of Lille set his French Men at Liberty, and
the Prince of Ligny, some that he had taken in a Skirmish of small Parties upon
the Borders of Hainault, wherein the Marquess tells me, about fifty of the
French were killed, and near twenty taken. This I am more particular in
relating, because it seems the first Pace of the War, though since in a manner
disavowed by the French, and indeed it is generally censured as the Effect of a
weak and uncertain Council, to begin without any formed Design or Declaration,
by siezing so rashly a Place of no Moment, and in the Province of Flanders,
where none of their Pretenses lie. These three last Days the Motion of their
Troops has been through Philiipeville, and the Frontiers of Hainault. The
French King was expected last Night at Quesnoy, and to Day at Philippeville.
They have begun a Bridge upon the Sambre near a Village called Marsin au Pont,
a League up the River from the Place where Charle-Roy stood; the Ground being
on the one side Pais de Liege, and on the other, the Spaniards Country; so we
expect here they will enter that Country to morrow, but which Way they intend
their first Impression is uncertain, the Bridge they make serving a Design
either upon Namur, Mons, or Brussels. The Spanish Forces on this Side, lie
between this Place and Marimount, consist of about four thousand Horse and as
many Foot, have no formed Design but to attend the Enemy's Motion, and to
retire for the Defense of this Place, in Case of the Enemy's marching this Way.

The general Belief here of the most Intelligent is, that France has had the
Skill or good Luck, de nous endormir, both us and Holland in this great
Conjuncture, and by assuring us of Peace upon good Terms with the Dutch, and at
the same Time the Dutch of never According with us, nor breaking with Spain to
their (the Hollanders) Prejudice, will amuse us both in a slow Treaty till they
have made so great an Impression in these Countries, as will give neither of us
the Liberty to take those Measures upon this Affair, to which either of our
Interests might lead us: And perhaps find Means to divert the Treaty at last,
for coming to any Issue. They say, that delaying our Treaty for the Point of
Poleroon, is losing a Dinner for Mustard; and that every Day it is deferred,
endangers an irrecoverable Conjuncture, that Heaven has given us of making our
Selves Considerable to whom, which way, and to what Degree we please. God send
these Reasoners to be deceived, and that we may not be so, at least no more by
the same Hands. I am

My Lord, Your etc.

To Sir Philip Warwick.
Brussels, June 21. S. N. 1667. SIR,
I Am very sorry that I must rejoice with You, and condole with all your
Friends at the same Time and upon the same Occasion; for though the Retreat I
hear you have made from Business, must needs be a Trouble and a Loss to us all,
yet I know it is an Ease and a Happiness to your self, or else a wise Man as
you are, ought not to have chosen it. I will not tell you how great a
Contentment I had in knowing my Business lay so much in your Way, because I
never intend to pursue more, than what His Majesty pleases to make my Due, and
I have ever reckoned both upon your Justice and your Kindness: But I must bear
this Disappointment, since you are the Author of it, which is the best
Consolation I can think of. In the mean Time I hope you do not intend to retire
from the Commerce of your Friends, as well as that of Business; for though you
should lock your Self up within your Walls of Frog-Pool, I shall ever pretend
to have a share in you, there it self, and never omit any Occasions of assuring
you that no Change you can make in your Course of Life, can ever make any in
the Resolutions I have taken of being always

SIR, Your etc.

To my Lord Arlington.
Brussels, July 19. 1667. My Lord,
THE Diligence of the Posts or Favor of the Weather, have given me two of Your
Lordship's, to acknowledge since my last of the 1st and 5th current, with the
good News of the Dutch being beaten off at Harwich; for since we are in a
Disease, every Fit we pass well over, is so much of Good, and gives hopes of
Recovery: I doubt this is not the last, for I hear De Wit is resolved that
their Fleet shall not give over Action till the very Ratifications of the
Treaty are exchanged: In which he certainly pursues his Interest, that the War
may end with so much the more Honor abroad, and Heart at home; for commonly
the same Dispositions between the Parties with which one War ends, another
begins. And though this may end in Peace, yet I doubt it will be with so much
Unkindness between the Nations, that it will be Wisdom on both Sides to think
of another as well as to avoid it. All Discourse here is of the Peace as a
Thing undoubted, and every Packet I receive from England confirms me in the
Belief that a War abroad is not our present Business till all at home be in
better Order; no more than hard Exercise which strengthens healthy Bodies, can
be proper for those that have a Fever lurking in the Veins, or a Consumption
in the Flesh; for which, Rest, and Order, and Diet are necessary, and perhaps
some Medicine too, provided it come from a careful and a skilful Hand. This is
all that I shall say upon that Subject, which I presume has before this,
received some Resolution by my Lord Ambassador Coventry's Arrival; for I
confess my Stomach is come down, and I should be glad to hear the Peace ended,
and our Coasts clear, since it will not be better; but all this while, Multa
gemens Ignominiam Plagasque superbi Hostis, and I am sure, would not desire to
live, unless with hopes of seeing our Selves one Day in another Posture, which
God Almighty has made us capable of, whenever we please our selves.

I am sorry to find the Commerce between England and Spain so far cut off, as
it should seem by Your Lordship's Complaints, of having received none of a Date
later than May the 1st, for mine holds yet pretty constant, though I suppose
visited by the French in their Passage. On Sunday last I received one from Mr.
Godolphin of the First current, where he told me, the Treaties were sent Signed
by several Ways into England, and therefore concluded some of them arrived. He
seems to doubt still, the Portuguees accepting their Share in it: which is the
likelier, because the Marquess tells me, he hears by this Ordinary, that better
Terms may be offered them, though it is pleasant, the Spaniard should not have yet
resolved to give them the Title, when for ought I know, without it, all their
own may be in Danger. His Excellency assures me they are resolved in Spain upon
declating a general War both by Sea and Land, and that Way make the French
unmask their Designs, that they have sent Order already to sieze upon all that
belongs to the French in their Indies, who have a great Share in the Spanish
Fleet that is daily expected home; that they have remitted by this Ordinary to
his Excellency, a Hundred and Thirty Thousand Crowns, which is the third Remise
of about that Sum, arrived since the War began; and that they have negotiated
with the Fregoni, or some such Name, being the ablest Merchants at Amsterdam
for Nine Hundred Thousand more; so that the Process seems well entered, and I
wish them a good Issue.

We have here no Certainty of the Progress of the French Arms, nor can we say
that Courtray is taken, though the Report has continued more or less these four
Days; but the Marquess would not own any Advice of it on Saturday Night; though
he spoke very despairingly of the Town, but confidently of the Cittadel's
holding out at least fifteen Days, if those within it did their Duty. His
Excellency makes a very different Story of the Baron of Limbeck's Defeat, which
was reported here; and assures me that having carried some Relief into
Courtray, He retreated with only Two Hundred Horse, and meeting a Party of Six
Hundred of the French, charged through them, killed the Captain of their
Vantguard with several others, and came off with the Loss only of Fifteen Men.

Yesterday Morning the Marquess went to Gant with Intentions of Returning in
three or four Days; and has left the Town so emptied by his Journey as well as
the Camp, that besides the Governor, I know not of a Gentleman of my
Acquaintance in it.

The Baron de l'Isola went this Morning toward Antwerp, and from thence passes
toward Ostend to go over with the Convoy, which I could not persuade him to
lose, though I endeavored it upon a Hint in Your Lordship's Letter, and more
upon his telling me that you had dissuaded him from coming till the
Ratifications of the Treaty were passed; but he says, he is confident that will
be before he can arrive; that he has sent over all his Papers and Bills of
Exchange before Hand, and if he loses this Convoy, knows not when to hope for a
secure Passage. And if His Majesty thinks fit, will rather make a stay at
Gravesend, or any other Place near the Water side, till all Jealousy of his
Coming be blown over.

I give Your Lordship humble Thanks for the Letter I received to make use of
Part of the Money in Mr. Shaw's Hands, for Supply of what was grown due to me;
and am, I am sure, at all Times, more troubled to ask it, than pleased to
receive it. I was much more sensibly obliged, by the Part you was pleased to
give me of the good Fortune arrived to your Family, by it is Increase, and my
Lady's Safety; and will assure Your Lordship you do me but Justice, to believe
I am concerned in all that happens to you, and more particularly upon this
Occasion, of which I have made very constant Inquiries, though without Your
Lordship's Trouble. I give you El para bien with all the Joy that can be, and
the Presages of many more such Adventures; and know, my Lady began with her own
Sex for no other Reason, but because the War was ended. My own particular
Satisfaction in it is, that my Family may continue their Services to Your
Lordship's, and that way make up, what I shall fall short in the Expressions of
that Passion and Truth, wherewith I am

My Lord. Your etc.

To my Lord Lis^e.
Brussels, Aug. -- 1667. My Lord,
I Received lately the Honor of one from Your Lordship, which after all
Complaints of Slowness and Dullness had enough to bear it out, though it had been
much better addressed, but needed nothing, where it was, besides being yours.
In my present Station, I want no Letters of Business or News, which makes those
that bring me Marks of my Friends Remembrance, or Touches at their present
Thoughts and Entertainments, taste much better, than any thing can do, that is
common Fare.

I agree very much with Your Lordship, in being little satisfied, by the Wits
Excuse, of Employing none upon Relations, as they do in France; and doubt much,
it is the same Temper and course of Thoughts among us, that makes us neither
act Things worth Relating, nor relate Things worth the Reading. Whilst making
some of the Company laugh and others ridiculous, is the Game in Vogue, I fear
we shall hardly succeed at any other, and am sorry, our Courtiers should
content themselves, with such Victories as those. I would have been glad to
have seen Mr. Cowley, before he died, celebrate Captain Douglas his Death, who
stood and burnt in one of our Ships at Chatham when his Soldiers left him,
because it should never be said, a Douglas quitted his Post without Order;
whether it be wise in Men to do such Actions or no, I am sure it is so in
States, to honor them; and if they can, to turn the Vein of Wits, to raise up
the Esteem of some Qualities, above their real Value, rather than bring every
Thing to Burlesque, which if it be allowed at all, should be so only to wise
Men in their Closets, and not to Wits, in their common Mirth and Company. But
I leave them to be reformed by great Men's Examples and Humors, and know very
well, it is Folly for a private Man to touch them, which does but bring them
like Wasps about ones Ears. However, I cannot but bewail the Transitoriness of
their Fame, as well as other Men's, when I hear, Mr. Waller is turned to
Burlesque among them, while he is alive, which never happened to old Poets, till
many Ages after their Death; and though I never knew him enough to Adore him, as
many have done, and easily believe he may be, as Your Lordship says, enough out
of Fashion, yet I am apt to think some of the old cutwork Bands, were of as
fine Thread, and as well wrought, as any of our new Points; and at least, that
all the Wit, he and his Company spent, in heightning Love and Friendship, was
better employed; than what is laid out so prodigally, by the modern Wits, in
the Mockery of all sorts of Religion and Government.

I know not how Your Lordship's Letter has engaged me in this kind of
Discourses; but I know very well you will advise me after it, to keep my
Residency here as long as I can, foretelling me what Success I am like to have
among our Courtiers if I come over. The best on it is, my Heart is set so much
upon my little Corner at Sheen, that while I keep that, no other
Disappointments will be very sensible to me; and because my Wife tells me She
is so bold, as to enter into Talk of enlarging our Dominions there, I am
contriving here this Summer, how a Succession of Cherries may be compassed from
May till Michaelmas, and how the Riches of Sheen Vines may be improved, by half
a dozen Sorts which are not yet known there, and which I think much beyond any
that are. I should be very glad to come and plant them my Self this next
Season, but know not yet how those Thoughts will hit: Though I design to stay but
a Month in England, yet they are here very unwilling I should stir, as all
People in Adversity are jealous of being forsaken; and His Majesty is not
willing to give them any Discouragement whether he gives them any Assistance or
no. But if they end the Campaign with any good Fortune, they will be better
humoured in that as well as all other Points; and it seems not a very unlikely
thing, the French having done nothing in six Months past but harass their Army,
and being before Lille engaged in a Siege, which may very well break the Course
of their Success: They have not yet made the least Advance upon any of their
Outworks, but been beaten off with much Loss in all their Assaults; and if
that King's Design be to bring his Nobility as low as he has done his People,
he is in a good way, and may very well leave, most of the brave among them in
their Trenches there.

I had not need write often at this Length, nor make Your Lordship any new
Professions of my being

My Lord, Your etc.

To my Brother Sir John Temple.
Brussels, October. 10. S. N. 1667. Dear Brother,
HAving written so many and long Letters to my Father, I resolved this should
be to you, though upon a Subject wherein he has been very desirous to be
informed; which was more than I could pretend to, from any Notices of my own;
having been Young and very New in Business, when I was first employed upon the
Munster Treaty. All I knew of the Grounds or Occasions of our late War with
Holland, was, that in all common Conversation, I found both the Court and the
Parliament in general, very sharp upon it; complaining of the Dutch
Insolences, of the great Disadvantages they had brought upon our Trade in
general, and the particular Injuries of their East India Company toward Ours;
And it was not easy to think any should better understand the Honor of the
Crown than our Court; or the Interests of the Nation, than the House of
Commons. One Thing I confess, gave me some Reflections, which was, to observe
that three of my Father's greatest Friends, and Persons that I most esteemed
upon many Accounts, were violently against the Councils of this War; which were
my Lords of Northumberland, of Leicester, and Sir Robert Long; though two of them
were of the Privy Council, and the third in a great Office, and ever bred up in
Court. For my own Part, when I entered into that Affair, all I knew was, that we
were actually in a War, and that the best we could do, was to get out of it
either by Success and Victories, or by a fair and reasonable Peace, which I
believed our Treaty with Munster would make Way for; and I found some of our
Ministers had no other End by it, having given over the Thoughts of any great
Advantages we would find by pursuing the War; how that succeeded, and how it
ended, You all know there, as well as I do here.

Upon Conclusion of the Peace at Breda, my Sister took a very strong Fancy to a
Journey into Holland, to see a Country She had heard so much of; and I was
willing to give her that Satisfaction, after the melancholy Sense we have had
here ever since the French Invasion of this Country. We went Incognito, with
only her Woman, a Valet de Chamber, and a Page out of Livery, who all spoke
Dutch. I leave it to her to give you an Account of what Entertainments she met
with there, which she was much pleased with, especially those of the Indian
Houses: For me, who had seen enough of it in my younger Travels, I found
nothing new but the Stadt-House at Amsterdam, which though a great Fabric, yet
answered not the Expectation I had, from so much Time, and so vast Expense as
had been employed to raise it: Which put me in mind of what the Cavaliero
Bernini said of the Louvre, when he was sent for, to take a View of it; that it
was Una granpiccola Cosa. The chief Pleasure I had in my Journey was, to
observe the strange Freedom that all Men took in Boats and Inns, and all other
common Places, of talking openly whatever they thought upon all the public
Affairs, both of their own State and their Neighbors: And this I had the
Advantage of finding more by being Incognito; and think it the greatest Piece
of the Liberty that Country so much values; the Government being otherwise as
severe, and the Taxes as hard, as among any of their Neighbors.

At our Return from Amsterdam, we lay two Nights at the Hague, where I made a
Visit to Monsieur de Wit: I told him who I was; but, that having passed
unknown through the Country, to all but himself a I desired I might do so
still: I told him, m^ only Business was, to see the Things most considerable in
the Country, and thought I should lose my Credit, if I left it without seeing
him: He took my Complement very well, and returned it, by saying he had
received a Character of me to my Advantage both from Munster and Brussels, and
was very glad to be acquainted with me at a Time when both our Nations were
grown Friends, and had equal Reason to look about us, upon what had lately
happened in Flanders, he seemed much to regret the late unhappy Quarrel between
us, which had made Way for this new War among our Neighbors. He laid the Fault
of ours wholly upon Sir George Downing, who having been Envoy from Cromwell at a
Time when the States were forced to observe good Measures with him; Sir George
had made use of that Disposition, to get a great deal of Money from the
East India Company, who were willing to bribe his good Offices, in some
Disputes that remained between the two Companies: That having been continued in
the same Employment by the King, he thought to drive the same Trade; but
finding the Company more stanch, he had taken upon him, to pursue a Dispute
about the old Pretensions, upon the Loss of the Bonadventure, as an Affair of
State between the Nations, whereas it was left by our Treaties, to be pursued
only as a Process between the Parties. That in their Treaty with Cromwell, all
Pretensions on both Sides were cut off, but with this Clause; Liceat autem (to
such as were concerned in that Affair of the Bonadventvre) Litem inceptam
prosequi. That this Treaty having been made the Model of that, concluded with
His Majesty soon after His Restoration, that Clause continued still in the New
Treaty; and the Process which had been begun long before Cromwell's Treaty,
before the Magistrates of Amsterdam, had still gone on after their Treaty with
the King, according to the true Intention of that Clause. That Mr. Carry. who
was employed to pursue it in the Name of Courtin's Executors, had brought it
very near a Composition, demanding Forty Thousand Pounds for all Pretensions,
and the Dutch offering Thirty. That he, (Monsieur de Wit) to end this Affair,
had appointed a Meeting with Mr. Carry, who had since confessed to his Friends,
that he was resolved to end it at that Meeting, and rather to take the Dutch
Offer, than let the Suit run on; but that very Morning Sir George Downing sent
for him, told him it was a Matter of State between the two Nations, and not
only a Concern of private Men; and therefore absolutely forbid him, to go on
with any Treaty about it, otherwise than by his Communication and Consent: That
he would put in a Memorial to the States upon it, and instead of Forty Thousand
Pounds which he demanded, would undertake to get him Fourscore, and that he was
sure the Dutch would give a great deal more, rather than venture a Quarrel with
His Majesty.

This Course he pursued, made extravagant Demands, and with great Insolence;
made the same Representations to our Court, and possessed some of the Ministers
that he would get great Sums of Money, both for His Majesty and them, if they
would suffer him to Treat this Affair after his own Manner; for he was sure the
Dutch would go very far in that Kind, if they saw there was no other Way to
avoid a War with England.

That Monsieur de Wit for his Part thought they were a free State no longer,
if they should yield a Point, that they not only knew we had no Ground for, but
were sure we knew it as well as they; and that whatever the States should give
upon this Occasion, might be demanded at any Time by our Court upon any other,
since none could have less Pretense.

This was all the Account he thought fit at least to give me of this War: But
other politic Reasoners among the Dutch pretended to give several others. Some
said, the Duke's military Genius, made him desirous to enter upon some Action
abroad, and be at the Head of a great Fleet against a State he never had been a
Friend to: That the Duke of Albermarle had long had a Peek to their Country,
upon some Usage he resented during his being an Officer there: That he had a
very mean Opinion of their Fleets, as well as their other Forces, since the
Successes of the English in the first War during the Usurper's Time. That some
of the Ministers were possessed with an Opinion of getting Money, by only
threatening a War, without Intention of seeing it brought to Effect, and had let
it run on so far, till it was too lare to go back. Some others attribute Sir
Thomas Clifford's Violence in the House of Commons, and Practices with our
East India Company, to a deeper Design; and would have the Matter of Religion
concerned in the Quarrel, as their Pamphlets still endeavored during the War;
and these will not believe that when all Christendom was at Peace, such a War
could be begun, merely upon a Chicane about the Loss of a Ship or Two so many
Years since. There are others that lay the War upon the Conduct of France, by
which they say, we were engaged in it: That the present King was resolved to
pursue the old Scheme laid by Cardinal Richlieu, of extending the Bounds of
France to the Rhine, for which Ends the Conquest of Lorrain and Flanders was to
be first achieved: That the Purchase of Dunkirk from us was so violently
pursued for this End, without which they could not well begin a War upon
Flanders. That after this they had endeavored to engage the present Ministry
in Holland, to renew the Measures once taken in Cardinal Richlieu's Time, for
dividing Flanders between France and Holland: But not succeeding in it, they
had turned all their Intrigues to engage us in a War, which might make Room for
their Invasion of Flanders, whilst the two Neighbors most concerned in it is
Defense, should be deep in a Quarrel between themselves: That they made both
Parties believe they would assist them if there were Occasion; and would
certainly have done it: That as they took Part with Holland upon our first
Successes at Sea, and the Bishop of Munster's Treaty, so, if the Successes had
been great on the Dutch Side, they would have assisted us in Order to prolong
the War.

These are Discourses current in Holland upon this Subject; and I had rather
give you those of others upon it, than any of my own. The Duke of Ormond will
be able to judge, whether any of these Dutch Reasonings are true, or which are
most probable. For my part, I can only say, that however the War began, I am
very glad it is ended; but sorry it has made Way for another, which if it lasts
any time, is like to involve us, and perhaps all the rest of the Neighbors,
either in a new War, or in new Dangers. For if the French shall carry Flanders,
as they very well may in another Campania, by the Weakness and Disorders in the
Government here; the Dutch are sensible that they must fall to be a maritime
Province to France, upon the best Terms they can. The Empire will expect to see
them soon at the Rhine, and thereby Masters of four Electors; and what a
Condition England will be left in by such an Accession of maritime Forces, as
well as Provinces, to such a Power as France is already, is but too easy, and
too melancholy a Reflection. The Dutch are much exasperated at this Invasion of
Flanders, both as dangerous, and as scornful, to them in particular; for they
say that France, till the very Time of their March, gave constant Assurances to
the States, both by the French Ambassador here, and by their Ambassador at
Paris, that they would not invade Flanders without first taking their Measures
upon it, with the States themselves. I find, our Court are as much provoked on
the other side, not only upon this new Danger, but also upon the French having
declared War against Us in Favor of Holland, without the least Pretense of
Injury or other Occasion; so that if we both understood, or trusted one
another, it is likely we should be both of a Mind in this Matter; but after such
a sharp War as has been for two Years between us, and such a snarling Peace as
that at Breda; I do not well see how this can happen before it be too late; and
so must leave these Contemplations to such as are in the Ministry, both in
England and Holland, as well as Spain and the Empire, to take such Measures as
are wise and necessary in such a Conjuncture, which is perhaps the most
important, that has been a great while in Christendom, and may have
Consequences that none alive will see the End of. It Is time I am sure, that you
should see an End of this long Letter, and come to the Assurances of my being
ever

SIR, Your etc.

To Sir George Savil.
Brussels, Dec. 9th. S.N. 1667. SIR,
BEcause my Wife assures me I am not wholly lost in your Favor and Memory, I
will not run any further Venture of forfeiting my Title for want of laying
Claim to it, but make use of the smallest Occasion rather than none, in a
Matter wherein I am so much, and so justly concerned.

This Place never was in worse Posture to furnish either a War or a Gazette
than at this Time; for the Troops are all mouldring in their Winter Quarters;
and as the greatest Calms ordinarily succeed the greatest Storms; so since the
Heat of News and Occurrences here during the late Campaign, I have hardly known
a Place, where less of both were stirring; Action and Invention seeming to have
ended together. There is indeed a new Difference between the two Crowns arisen
this Winter; which is, that France talks of Peace, but prepares for War; and
Spain talks of War, but prepares hitherto as if they were sure of Peace: They
say at present they are off that with Portugal, which is the only Thing yet in
Sight that can make the other necessary to them.

Because my Wife tells me you were content with the last Papers I sent of the
Roman News; I take Occasion to continue it by the enclosed, though there be
seldom any Thing in it worth considering at this Distance; unless it be the
Style; and the Quiet of that Scene, which like the upper Region, has no Share
in the Storms of that below. And besides, as Men have more Curiosity to enquire
how a great Man sleeps, than what a mean Man does all day long; so the very
Rest and Idleness of that Roman Court, seems among the Discoursers more worth
knowing, than the busy Motions of many small ones in this Northern Continent,
who yet at this Time pretend to be considered, and to make a Noise.

This is all I can say to excuse my Enclosure of such Papers; unless it be,
that, to tell a plain Truth, I was very glad of the Occasion to assure you,
that I am ever with very much Passion, as well as with much Reason

SIR, Your most Faithful humble Servant.

The Triple Alliance was made in January, 1668.
To Sir John Temple.
London, Jan. 2d S. N. 1668. SIR,
YOu will wonder to see a Letter from this Place, my last having been from
Brussels, without any thoughts of such a Journey: And because my Stay here is
like to be very short, and my Time extremely filled, I take the first Hour I
can find, to give you some Account of this Adventure.

Soon after my last, an Express came to me from His Majesty, commanding me to
come immediately into England, with all the Speed I could possibly make, but to
take the Hague in my Way, and there upon the Credit of a Visit I made Monsieur
de Wit last September, and which passed very well between us; to make him
another, and let him know, His Majesty had commanded me to do so on Purpose, to
inform my self of the Opinions he had, concerning the French late Invasion in
Flanders, their great Success there, and the Appearances of so much greater
this ensuing Spring; the Thoughts he had of what was the true Interest of His
Majesty, the States, and the rest of Christendom upon this Occasion: That His
Majesty by knowing his Mind should believe he knew a great deal of that of the
States, and thought He might thereby be enabled to take such Measures, as might
be necessary for him in this Conjuncture.

I obeyed this Summons, spoke with Monsieur de Wit, entered into great
Confidences with him, made Report of all to His Majesty at my Arrival here;
gave Monsieur de Wit the Character I think he deserves, of a very able and
faithful Minister to his State, and I thought, a sincere Dealer, very different
from what Sir George Downing had given of him at Court, who would have him pass
for such another as himself, but only a Craftier Man in the Trade than he.

Upon all this, His Majesty came last Night to a Resolution of the greatest
Importance, which has yet passed I think here, in any foreign Affair, and begun
the New Year, I hope with a good Presage, and in which the new Ministry,
particularly My Lord Keeper and My Lord Arlington have had a very great Part:
Mine will be to return immediately upon it into Holland, where if it please God
I arrive and succeed, I expect^^ great deal of Satisfaction by my Errand, and
much the greater by knowing that you will have a great deal in it too, as in an
Affair, I remember to be so agreeable with what have been always your Opinions.

The Season of the Year is bad, and the Weather ill, and yet my Sister has been
so kind, as to come with me hither from Brussels, and to resolve to return with
me at this short Warning to the Hague, which will be a great Ease to me as well
as Satisfaction, and by freeing me from all domestic Cares, leave me the more
Liberty for those of my Business, which I foresee, will be enough to take up a
better Head than mine. My Wife and Children continue here, till I see where my
wandering Planet is like to fix; but my Brother Harry resolves to be of the
Party, and take this Occasion of seeing Holland, and what is like to pass in
the World upon this great Conjuncture. I am called away, and left Time only to
add the constant Professions of that Duty, wherewith I am, and shall be ever,

SIR, Your etc.

To my Lord Arlington.
Hague, Jan. 24. S. N 1668. My Lord,
UPon last Friday at Night, I gave Your Lordship the Account, of what Advance I
had then made in my Negotiation, and of the Point where it was then arrested,
with Desires of His Majesty's Pleasure; whereupon having spent that whole Day
in Debates, I had little Time left for that Letter, but intended to make some
Amends for the Haste of it, within two Days by a Dispatch with the Yatcht, and
though delayed a little longer, will not I hope be more unwelcome by bringing
Your Lordship a fuller and final Account, which may be allowed to surprise you
a little there, since it is looked upon as a Miracle here, not only by those
that hear it, but even by the Commissioners themselves, who have had the whole
Transaction of it, which I shall now acquaint Your Lordship with.

Upon my two first Conferences with Monsieur de Wit, which were the Tuesday
and Wednesday; I found him much satisfied with His Majesty's Resolution
concerning our Neighbors; but of the Opinion, that the Condition of forcing
Spain, was necessary to our common End, and to clear the Means toward it, from
all Accidents that might arise. For the Defensive League, he was of his former
Opinion, that it should be negotiated between us; but, upon the Project offered
His Majesty at Schevelin, by which all Matter of Commerce might be so adjusted,
as to leave no Seeds of any new Quarrels between the Nations.

After two very long Conferences upon these Points, we ended with some
Difference, upon the Necessity of concluding both Parts of my Projects at the
same Time; but for the rest, with great Confidence and Satisfaction, in one
another sincere and frank Way of Treating, since the first Overtures between
us.

The first Time I saw him, he told me I came upon a Day he should always esteem
very happy, both in respect of His Majesty's Resolutions which I brought, and
of those the States had taken, about the Disposal of the chief Commands in
their Army, by making Prince Maurice, and Monsieur Wurtz, Camp-Masters-General,
and the Prince of Tarante, and Rhingrave, Generals of the Horse, each to
command in Absence of the other: He told me all the Detail of that Disposition,
but the rest I remember not well. I laid hold on this Occasion (as indeed I
thought was necessary) to say what His Majesty gave me Order concerning the
Prince of Orange, which he took very well, and said, was very obliging to the
States; that for his own Part, he never failed to see the Prince once or twice
a Week, and grew to have a particular Affection for him, and would tell me
plainly, that the States designed the Captain-generalship of all the Forces for
him, so soon as by his Age he grew capable of it.

The next Day was my Audience, which passed with all the Respect that could be
given His Majesty's Character; and the next Morning began my Conference with
the Eight Commissioners of secret Affairs; I exposed my Powers, and saw theirs,
In pursuit whereof, I offered them the Project of the defensive League, as that
which was to be the Foundation of all further Negotiations, and without which,
perhaps neither of us should be very forward, to speak our Minds with
Confidence and Freedom, in what concerned our Neighbors, being likely therein
to shock so great Powers abroad: I told them, for the rest, His Majesty having
resolved as far as he could in Honor, to comply with the Sense of the States,
in the Offices of Mediation between the two Crowns; I was first to expect from
them the Knowledge of the States Resolution, in Case they were already agreed.

I took this Course in my first Proposals, because I found here, that the
Provinces were not yet resolved upon theirs, five of them only having fallen
upon that of Monsieur de Wit; but Zealand being of Opinion to agrre with
France for dividing Flanders; and Utrecht, for suffering France only to retain
the last Years Conquest, by way of Compromis, till their Pretensions were
adjudged before competent Arbiters, to be agreed by the two Crowns, or by the
joint Mediators: And I was in hopes, that knowing His Majesty's Resolutions to
join with them, before they were agreed among themselves; it might produce some
Councils among them, a little more favorable to Flanders, and consequently
more honorable to his Majesty.

After my Proposals, Monsieur de Wit was by the rest of the Commissioners
desired to speak for them all in the Conduct of our Conferences; who after a
Preamble of the usual Forms and Complements, upon His Majesty's happy
Dispositions, to enter into a nearer Alliance with the State upon the mentioned
Points; declared the same Resolution in the States, and allowing our Confidence
by a defensive League for the Basis of the rest, said, the States were very
willing de fair infuser les Clauses pour la sourete commune dans les Articles
de la Mediation; and was large upon this Argument, that the last, being of very
pressing Haste as well as Necessity, and they having already Order from their
Provinces to proceed upon it, they could not have the same Powers upon the
Defensive, being a new Matter, under six Weeks or two Months Time, but as soon
as they received them, would proceed to give their Ambassador in England
Powers to fall upon that Treaty, which must for a Basis, have at the same time
an Adjustment of Matters of Commerce for his forementioned Reasons.

I thought fit to cut this Matter short, and told them directly, I had no
Orders to proceed upon any other Points, but in Consequence or Conjunction of
the defensive League; in which I thought His Majesty had all the Reason that
could be, both because he would not venture a War's ending in Flanders to begin
upon England, and on the other side knew, the States whose Danger was nearer,
would never be capable of taking any vigorous Resolutions in their Neighbors
Affairs, till they were secure at home by His Majesty's Defense.

That His Majesty thought the most generous and friendly Advance that could be,
was made on his Side by His Proposition, being Himself so much more out of
Danger than they were, and so much courted to a Conjunction with France to
their Prejudice, as well as that of Flanders; that they had not made a
Difficulty of such Alliances with Princes, who had lately desmelees with them
as well as His Majesty; and that, God be thanked, His Majesty was not in
Condition to have such an Offer refused by any Prince or State of Christendom.

These were the Sum of our Discourses, though very long, and such as occasioned
the Commissioners to withdraw thrice and consult together, though nothing was
resolved, but that Monsieur de Wit and Monsieur Isbrant should spend the
Afternoon with me at my Lodging, to endeavor the adjusting of Circumstances
between us, since we seemed to agree in Substance.

That Conference ended, as I gave your Lordship Notice that Evening; upon the
Point, that instead of the Project of Schevelin, or any new Adjustment
concerning Marine Affairs; the States would proceed upon His Majesty's Project
of a Defensive League; provided the provisional Articles in the Breda Treaty,
might be inserted and perpetuated in this; and thereupon we should expect His
Majesty's Answer to what I should write that Night,

The next being Saturday Morning, I desired another Conference with my two
Commissioners, but could not have it till the Afternoon, they being to report
that Morning to the States what had passed the Evening before. At our Meeting
Afternoon, they told me their Communication of all to the States; and their
Lordships Resolution upon them; that it was necessary the Articles provisional
should be inserted in the Treaty; so as I began to doubt a Stop of all till His
Majesty's Answer, which subjected all to Uncertainties; I knew, the French
Ambassador was grown into very ill Humor upon my Arrival, and fallen into
Complaints and Expostulations with several of the States; and the more, because
He could not see Monsieur de Wit, from my coming over till that Time, though he
had often pressed it, and had an Hour given him the next Day, Monsieur de Wit
having promised to see him, as he went to Church after Noon: Upon this I knew
likewise, he had dispatched a Courier to Paris, which I thought would make no
Delay, and therefore resolved to fall upon all the Instances and Expedients I
could, to draw up a sudden Conclusion. I told them I desired it extremely,
before I could hear again out of England, because I had left Monsieur Ruvigny
very busy at my coming away, and not unbefriended; that I feared the same
Artifices of France to disturb us here, and perhaps Monsieur D'Estrades might
at his next Meeting, endeavor to infuse some Jealousies into them, by the
Relation of what had passed between Your Lordship and Monsieur Ruvigny, three
or four Days after the Date of my first Instructions: Upon which I told them
frankly (as His Majesty gave me Leave) what had passed in that Affair. Monsieur
de Wit asked me whether I could show him the Paper drawn up between you; and
knowing I had it not, desired earnestly I would procure it him; assuring me no
Use should be made of it, but by joint Consent; but saying, nothing would serve
so far to justify them, in Case of a Breach, growing necessary between them
and France: I promised to write to Your Lordship about it, which I desire you
will please to take Notice of.

I told Monsieur de Wit what Confidence I had given His Majesty of his sincere
Proceedings, and how I had been supported by Your Lordship in those
Suggestions, against the Opinion of some other great Men: What Advantage these
would take, if they saw our whole Negotiation was stopped upon a Thing that
looked like a Chicanerie; since Articles provisional till new Agreements, were
in Effect as strong as perpetual, which might it self be changed by new
Agreements: That this would be esteemed an Artifice of his, especially since he
had declared upon my asking him, that it was his own Opinion, (and that he
would tell the States so if they demanded it) not to conclude without Insertion
of those Articles, which yet he could not deny to be of present Force; for that
they allowed, but seemed to doubt, that referring in the Treaty of Breda to a
new Treaty, they would be invalidated, if a new Treaty should pass without
their Confirmation.

I found Monsieur Isbrant was content with my Reasons, and said he would
undertake his Province should be so, but Monsieur de Wit said, Holland and
Zealand would not. I told them at last that I was sure, the States would not
think fit, to lose the Effect of the League proposed, upon such a Point as
this, and that they intended only to have the Advantage of seeing His Majesty's
Resolution, in Answer to my Letter before they concluded, with Resolutions
however, that this should not hinder at last; that I foresaw many Things might
arise in ten Days time, to break all our good Intentions, and some more than I
had told them, or could at present; that if they knew me, and how far I was to
be trusted where I gave my Word, I would propose an Expedient to them; but
being so new among them, I thought it was to no Purpose: There I paused. They
desired me I would propose however; and so I did; which was, that we should
proceed to draw up the whole Project, and Sign as soon as was possible, and
that in Case I afterward received His Majesty's Leave, in Answer of my Fridays
Letter, to insert those provisional Articles, I would freely declare it to
them, and insert them in a separate Article, to be a Part of the Defensive
League. They both looked a while one upon another, and after a Pause, Monsieur
de Wit gave me his Hand, and after a Compliment upon the Confidence he had
taken in my Face, and in the rest of my Dealing since our first Commerce, told
me that if I would promise them what I had said, en Homme de bien, they would
ask no further Assurance of me, and provided the Treaty of Breda might be
confirmed in the Preamble of this, to take away all Scruples of those Articles
being of less Force than they were before; for his Part, though he could promise
nothing what the States would resolve; yet he would promise that he and
Monsieur Isbrant would use their utmost Endeavors, to induce them to proceed
upon my Proposition: And so we fell immediately to digest our Project of the
whole Treaty; For I made no Difficulty of the Confirmation proposed, knowing
that new Treaties use to begin by Confirmation of the old.

I am the larger in this Relation, that His Majesty may know, upon what Reasons
I engaged my Word to them in this Point, and thereupon may give me Leave
without more Circumstances to be true to it, in Case His Majesty's Pleasure in
the Point be dispatched away to me, upon the Receipt of my former Letter.

After this Difficulty well evaded, we found none but in this Expression [ In
Case our Persuasions to Spain should not prevail, and we should come a la Force
and a la Constrainte] which I moderated at first by the Words [aux moyens plus
durs] and afterward [aux moyens plus efficaces] For we drew it up first in
French: The other Additions or Enlargements I dare presume, His Majesty will
not be displeased with, no more than that Article about Portugal, though I had no
Instruction in it. If I have failed in enlarging upon very short and hasty
Instructions, I most humbly beg His Majesty's Pardon, because I am sure I kept
my Self as close as was possible, to what I apprehended to be His Majesty's
Sense upon the whole, and every Part.

That Evening being Saturday, or rather that Night and Sunday Morning, we
agreed upon the Project in French, and gave Order for the translating of it
into Latin, which was done, and perused by me, and agreed to between Twelve and
One that Night, and engrossed by Eleven next Morning being Monday, and at a
Meeting with the Commissioners, jointly was Signed and Sealed, and mutually
delivered between two and three that Afternoon, after that, Time spent in
comparing the Instruments, and adjusting the Sums, computed as the Value of the
several Aids.

After Sealing, we all embraced with much Kindness, and Applause of my saying
upon that Occasion, A Breda comme Amiss, icy comme Frer^s; and Monsieur de Wit
made me a most obliging Compliment, of having the Honor which never any other
Minister had before me, of drawing the States to a Resolution and Conclusion in
five Days, upon a Matter of the greatest Importance, and a Secours of the
greatest Expense they had ever engaged in; and all directly against the Nature
of their Constitutions, which enjoined them Recourse to their Provinces upon
all such Occasions, and used to draw out all common Deliberations to Months
Delays; and added upon it, that now it was done, it looked like a Miracle.

I must add three Words to do him Right in Return of his Compliment; that I
found him as plain, as direct, and square in the Course of this Business, as
any Man could be; though often stiff in Points, where he thought any Advantage
could accrue to his Country; and have all the Reason in the World, to be
satisfied with him, and for his Industry no Man had ever more: I am sure, for
these five Days at least, neither of us spent many idle Hours, neither Day nor
Night.

After the Conclusion, I received Yesterday the Visits of all the public
Ministers in Town, except the Ambassadors, between whom, and Envoys
Extraordinary, some Difficulties were arisen (they say, here first begun by Sir
George Downing) which have in a manner spoiled all Commerce. None of the other
failed to rejoice with me upon the Conclusion of my Business, and to express
their Adoring His Majesty's Resolutions, which in this Conjuncture, they say,
have given new Life to all the Courts of Christendom, whose Councils were
before, in the greatest Perplexities and Disorder that could be. They say His
Majesty will have the sole Honor, of giving either Peace to Christendom, or a
Balance to the Wars; and has shown, that all must follow what he gives a Head
to. Much more of this Kind I hear from all Hands, and have no Reason to doubt
their Meaning what they say.

Thus far I have given Your Lordship the smooth Side only of this Conclusion,
and now you must receive the rough; for having concerted with the
Commissioners, that Monsieur de Wit and I should give Part of our Treaty (all
but the separate Articles) to the French and Spanish Ambassadors; the first we
performed this Afternoon, the last we intend to morrow Morning.

The French Ambassador had been much surprised with our Conclusion: For upon
our first Conference with the Commissioners, he had said, Tout cela s'en ira en
Fumee, and que le Roy son Maitre s'eu mocqueroit. The Day before our Signing,
being told, we advanced very fast, he replied; Et bien, d'icy a six semaines
nous en parlerons, relying upon the Forms of the State, to run the Circle of
their Towns.

Upon our giving him Part of the whole Business, he replied coldly, that he
doubted, we had not taken a right Way to our End; that the Fourth Article of
the Second Instrument, was not in Terms very proper to be digested by a King of
twenty nine Years old, and at the Head of eighty Thousand Men: That if we had
joined both to desire his Master to prolong the Offer he had made, of a
Cessation of Arms till the Time we propose, and withal, not to move his Arms
further in Flanders, though Spain should refuse, we might hope to succeed: But if
we thought to prescribe him Laws, and force him to Compliance, by Leagues
between our Selves, or with Spain, though Sueden and the German Princes should
join with us; he knew his Master ne flecheroit pas, and that it would come to a
War of forty Years. From this he fell a little warmly upon the proceeding of
the States, saying, they knew his Master's Resolutions upon those two Points,
neither to prolong the Cessation proposed, beyond the End of March, nor to
desist the Pursuit of his Conquests with his own Arms, in Case Spain consented
not to his Demands within that Term. He said, His Majesty not being their Ally,
might treat and conclude what he pleased, without their Offense; but for the
States who were their nearest Ally, to conclude so much to his Master's
Disrespect at least, and without communicating with him the Ambassador at all
during the whole Treaty, he must leave it to his Master to interpret as he
thought fit. Monsieur de Wit defended their Cause, and our common Intentions
with great Phlegm, but great Steddiness, and told me after he was gone, that
this was the least we could expect at first from a Frenchman; and that I should
do well however, to give His Majesty an Account of it by the first; that we put
our Selves early in Posture, to make good what we have said; and that as to the
Time and Degree of our Arming, he would consult with the States, and let me
know their Thoughts, to be communicated to His Majesty upon this Occasion.

I was in hopes to dispatch this away to morrow Morning, but I shall be hindered
till Night, by the Delay of Signing of a separate Article with the Count de
Dona, whereby Place is reserved for Sueden to enter as Principal into this
Treaty: For I have gone along in the whole Business since my coming over, with
perfect Confidence and Concert with the Count de Dona, upon his assuring me,
his Orders were to conform himself to His Majesty's Resolution in what concerns
the two Crowns, though before he absolutely engages, he expects from the
Spaniards by our Intercession, some Supplies for Payment of his Troops, and
some other Adjustments with the Emperor, which will be treated between the
several Ministers at London under His Majesty's Influence. In what I shall sign
upon this Occasion, together with the States, I confess to Your Lordship to go
beyond my Instructions, but apprehending it to be wholly agreeable to His
Majesty's Intentions, and extremely advantageous to the common Ends and
Affairs; I venture upon this Excess, and humbly beg His Majesty's Pardon if I
fail. Your Lordship will be troubled with some Postscript to Morrow, before I
dispatch an Express with the Copies to be ratified by His Majesty within a
Month, though I hope a less Time will be taken, those of Holland having
undertaken theirs on fifteen Days.

I am etc.

To my Lord Arlington.
Hague, Jan. 26. S. N. 1668. My Lord,
SInce the Close of my long. Dispatch I have every Hour expected the Copies to
be transmitted for His Majesty's Ratification, without being able to procure
them: I cannot but imagine some Occasion of the Delay, may have been a Desire
in them here to interpose some Time, between the Receipt of my last Friday's
Letter, and of this Packet, to the End His Majesty may in the mean Time, have
dispatched his Orders to me about the Provisional Articles, though I cannot think
they should be of such Moment inserted or omitted, to either Side.

I now dispatch the enclosed Copies of the Treaty, in Order to His Majesty's
Ratification, which is generally desired may be returned as sudden as possibly;
the States having undertaken to have theirs ready in fifteen Days after the
Signing, and believing it necessary to proceed jointly and early, to the mutual
Councils of Arming, in Case France continues the Dispositions they seem to be
in at present of pursuing the War.

My Brother who will deliver this Dispatch to Your Lordship, is able to add
what particular Circumstances I may have omitted, or Your Lordship shall think
fit to enquire from this Place; and what he fails, Count Dona will supply, who
is a Person very well worth Your Lordship's particular Acquaintance and
Assistance in his Negotiations, or at least the Forms and Entrances of them;
being in all Points our Friend.

Yesterday the Spanish Ambassador received the Communication of our Treaties
from Monsieur de Wit and me, with some Descants upon the hardship of it, but I
believe, Satisfaction at Heart. I have this Day written at large, and with all
the Instance imaginable to the Marquess de Castel-Rodrigo to induce his
Consent, and immediately upon the Ratifications, shall away and pursue that
Point at Brussels.

I cannot but rejoice in particular with Your Lordship, upon the Success of
this Affair, having observed in Your Lordship as well as my Lord Keeper, a
constant steady Bent, in supporting His Majesty's Resolution, which is here so
generally applauded, as the happiest and wisest, that any Prince ever took for
Himself or his Neighbors: What in earnest I hear every Hour, and from all
Hands of that Kind is endless, and even extravagant. God of Heaven send His
Majesty's Councils to run on the same Course; and I have nothing left to wish,
since I know Your Lordship will continue to esteem me what I am with so great
Passion and Truth

My Lord, Your etc.

To Sir Orlando Bridgman, Lord Keeper.
Hague, Jan. 27. S. N. 1668. My Lord,
Though I know my long Dispatch by this Express to my Lord Arlington, will give
Your Lordship your Share of Trouble; yet I could not omit the encharging my
Brother with a particular Attendance upon Your Lordship from me, nor
accompanying him with these Acknowledgments of Your Lordship's great Favor and
good Opinion, even before I had the Honor of being known to you. I will
presume I have done nothing since to forfeit them, as I had nothing before, to
deserve them; and that my late good Fortunes at the Hague, will help to
continue what my good Fortunes alone at Brussels began, and my five Days stay
at London, served to improve in so great a Degree. Yet I will assure Your
Lordship if I can make any further Advance by the Resentments of your Favor,
by my Desires to deserve it in the Return of my best Services, or by the true
Honor and Esteem of those Qualities, I have discovered in Your Lordship, upon
so short an Acquaintance; I am very far upon my Way already.

But I will leave this Subject in the first Place, to congratulate with you
upon another; which is the Success of a Council, wherein I observed Your
Lordship and my Lord Arlington to have the most steady Bent, in promoting a
Resolution of His Majesty's, which is on this side the Water, esteemed
generally the happiest and the wisest, that could ever have been taken by any
Prince in such a Conjuncture, and upon Respects not only of his own Affairs,
but even those of all Christendom besides. It is not fit for me to tell you
much of what I hear of this Kind, or the Applauses given to His Majesty and his
Ministers upon this Occasion; to tell you all, I am sure would be endless; but
from what I hear, I cannot but raise at least a happy Presage of a New Year,
and a new Ministry's running on together, with a Succession of the same Honor
and good Fortunes both to His Majesty and his Kingdoms.

In the next Place, I will according to your Orders, give Your Lordship an
Account of some Particulars, that fell into this great Transaction, which I
thought not fit to trouble my Lord Arlington with, as not perhaps proper, or of
Weight enough, for the View of His Majesty or the Foreign Commmittee, and yet
worth the Knowledge or Reflection of some of his Ministers, in Order to the
Conduct of His Majesty's Councils hereafter, both in this and other of his
Affairs.

I must tell Your Lordship, that in my first Conference with Monsieur de Wit
since my Return; I begun with telling him, that he could not but remember, that
when I passed this Way last into England, I told him, upon what Points His
Majesty desired with the greatest Secrecy that could be, to know his Opinion,
and by that to guess at what might be the States, upon the present Conjuncture
of Affairs in Flanders; to the End, His Majesty might accordingly take his own
Measures. That His Majesty guessed by the general Carriage and Discourses of
the Dutch Ambassadors at London, the States were not willing to see Flanders
overrun by France, but could not find they had any thing positive to say to him
upon that Subject: That he had therefore sent me privately and plainly to tell
him his Mind upon it, as to a Man of Honor, and who he believed, would make no
ill Use of it, and (if he thought fit) to know his Sentiments upon that Affair.
That, for His Majesty, he neither thought it for his own Interest nor Safety,
nor for that of the States or of Christendom in general, that Flanders should
be lost; and therefore was resolved to do his utmost to preserve it, provided
the States were of the same Mind, and that it might be done in Conjunction
between them; and to that End, desired to know, whether the States would be
content to enter into an Alliance with him, both Defensive between themselves,
and Offensive against France, for the Preservation of Flanders. That he
(Monsieur de Wit) might remember, his Answer to me was; first, much Applause of
His Majesty's Resolution, great Acknowledgment of his Confidence toward him by
that Communication, much Assurance that the States would be of the same Mind,
as to the Preservation of Flanders, which was their nearest Interest next their
own: That he found, both His Majesty and the States had the same Mind as well
as Interest in this Matter, but that the Distrusts remaining upon the late
Quarrel between them, had kept either of them from beginning to enter frankly
upon it. But since His Majesty had pleased to break it to him in a manner so
obliging, though he could not pretend to tell me his Master's Mind, yet he would
his own: which was, that the Defense of Flanders was absolutely necessary, but
that it ought to be tried first, rather by a joint Mediation of a Peace between
the two Crowns, than by a Declaration of War; but that if the first would not
serve, it ought to come to the other. That I knew, France had already offered a
Peace to the Offi^es made by the States upon an Alternative at the Choice of
the Spaniards; that he thought our Mediation ought to be offered to both Crowns
upon that Foot, to induce France to make good their own Offer, and Spain to
accept it. And that to this Purpose, he thought it very necessary to make a
strict Alliance betweeen His Majesty and the States.

That for making an Offensive Alliance, it could not be; for it was a Maxim
observed by this State, never to make any, at least when they were in Peace;
that for Defensive Leagues, they had them with many Princes, and he believed
would be ready to enter into one with His Majesty; and though he could not at all
answer, what would be the Mind of the States upon these Points, yet he had told
me his; and would add, that he was not usually mistaken in theirs, and that he
would at least use all his Endeavors to bring the States to such Opinions and
Resolutions.

When I had said this, and observed by his Action and Face, that he assented to
this Recital, of all that had passed between us; I asked him whether this was
all right, that I might know, whether I had mistaken nothing in representing
His Majesty's Meaning to him, nor his to His Majesty. He answered, that it was
all right, and that he very well remembered it, and much commended a Method of
proceeding so exact and sincere, by an Endeavor to avoid all Mistakes between
us.

I then told him, that I had upon my Arrival in England, represented all as
faithfully to His Majesty as I had done to him; and that upon it. His Majesty
had taken so much Confidence in his (Monsieur de Witt's) Opinion and Judgment,
as well as in his Credit with the States, that he had taken a sudden and firm
Resolution upon it; first, to join with the States in the Offer of a Mediation
between the two Crowns, and upon such Terms, as they and I should agree, but
with a Desire, that they might be as advantageous as the States could be
induced to for the Preservation of Flanders, and Recovery of such Places as
should be most necessary to it: In the next Place, to conclude a Treaty, the
strongest that could be between us, for obliging France to accept the Peace
upon those Terms, and in the mean time for putting a stop to the Course of
their Arms in Flanders. But that His Majesty thought it necessary to begin all
this. with a strict League between him and the States, for their own mutual
Defense, and to this Purpose had sent me over as his Envoy to the States with
full Powers, and the Draught of a Defensive League between us; but refers the
rest for what touched Flanders, to what the States and I should agree.

Monsieur de Wit received this Discourse with a Countenance pleased, but yet
as I marked, something surprised, and as if he expected not a Return from His
Majesty so sudden and so resolute. He said, that the States would be much
pleased with the Honor His Majesty did them, and the Overture he made them;
that I should choose my Time whenever I desired it, for my Audience; and would
pass the Forms of demanding it from the President of the Week: That he was
still confident the States would enter with His Majesty into the Mediation,
though France gave them Hopes of succeeding by their own: That the Provinces
differed in Opinion upon what Terms the Peace should be made: That Utrecht was
so bold as to think nothing but Justice ought to be considered in the Case;
that all that France had conquered, should be restored to Spain, and their
Pretensions be referred to Judgment or Arbitrage. But Holland with most of the
other Provinces, were of another Mind, and considering their own present
Condition, as well as that of France, thought it best, to keep the French to
their own Offer; but he believed would come to Means of more Force, if France
should recede from what they themselves had advanced to the States. That, for
the Defensive League between us, he did not know whether the late Sore were yet
fit for such an Application, but would try the Mind of the States. That he
doubted, they would think it like to prove too sudden a Change of all their
Interests, and that which would absolutely break them off, from so old and
constant a Friend as France, to rely wholly upon so new, and so uncertain a
Friend, as England had p^^^ved.

I told him, that the doing what he said, would be the Effect of any Treaties
of this Nature between us, let them be as tenderly handled and composed as we
could: That France would take it as ill of us of them, to be stopped in the
remaining Conquest of Flanders, as to the forced out of all they had already
gained: That he knew very well, it had been long their Design at any Price, to
possess themselves of the Spanish Netherlands; and he knew as well, that it was
their Interest to do so, considering the Advantages it would give them over all
the rest of Christendom; that it was as much our Interest to hinder it, and
that nothing could do it, but a firm Conjunction between us: That the States
Part would be next after Flanders was gone, and therefore they had now as much
need of being protected by England against France, as they thought they had
three or four Years ago of being protected by France against England; and that
they had no other Choice, but either continuing their Friendship with France,
till they should see both Flanders and themselves swallowed up by such a
Neighbor; or else change their whole Measures, and enter into the strictest
Alliance with His Majesty for the Preservation of both; and let France take it
as they pleased.

Monsieur de Wit confessed the Design of France for the Conquest of Flanders,
spoke of the Treaties they had made with the States in Cardinal Richlieu's
Time, and lately offered again, for partaging it between them; and said, he
understood very well the Danger of such a Council and Neighborhood, or else he
should have fallen into them; but the Ventures were great on the other side
too; that the States were much more exposed than the King; that the Spaniards
were weak, and ill to be trusted by the States, between whom there had never
yet been any better Measures than barely those of the Munster Peace, after so
great Rancors and long Hostilities. That though he believed the German Princes
would be glad of what His Majesty proposed, yet he knew not how far Sueden
might be engaged in the Measures with France, who lay here at their Backs in
the Duchy of Bremen. And last of all, though this Resolution seemed now to be
taken by His Majesty and his Ministers, upon the surest and wisest Foundations,
which were those of true Interest and Safety; yet no Man knew how long they
might last. That if they should break all their Measures with France, and throw
themselves wholly upon His Majesty by such a Conjunction, any Change of
Councils in England would be their certain Ruin: That he knew not this present
Ministry, and could say nothing to them; but that he knew the last too well.
Upon which he said a good deal, of our uncertain Conduct since His Majesty's
Return, and concluded that the Unsteddiness of Councils in England, seemed a
fatal Thing to our Constitution; he would not judge from what Grounds, Mais que
depuis le temps de la Reyne Elisabet, il n'y avoit eu qu'une fluctuation
perpetuelle en la Conduite de l'Angleterre, avec laquelle on ne pouvoit jamais
prendre des Mesures pour deux Annees de Temps. After this ended, with some
Melancholy that looked a little irresolute, I told him, that as to their own
Interests, he knew them, and could weigh them better than I; that after my
Audience and first Conference with Commissioners, I should quickly see how the
States would understand them, in which I knew very well, how great a Part he
would have: That for our Danger, I confessed they would be first exposed to
France, and we the last, which made it reasonable they should make the first
Pace to their Safety: That for Sueden, I had no Orders to negotiate with them,
but being fully instructed in His Majesty's general Intentions, I should be
glad to see them strengthened all I could, and to that Purpose if he thought
fit, I would talk with the Count de Dona the Suedish Ambassador here, and see
whether he had any Powers, to engage their Crown in any common Measures for the
Safety of Christendom; that if by such a Conjunction, we could extend it to a
Triple Alliance among us, upon the same Foundation; I believed, he would think
it too strong a Bar for France to venture on. That for the Unsteddiness of our
Councils, I would rather bewail than defend it; but that I should not have made
this Journey, if I had not been confident, that had been ended, and we now
bottommed past any Change or Remove. That I could not pretend to know any
Body's Mind certainly but my own; but that upon this Matter, I was as confident
of His Majesty's, of Your Lordship's, and My Lord Arlington's, as I was of my
own: Upon this Occasion I said a great deal, not only of the Interests, but
Resentments that had engaged His Majesty and His Ministers in this Council; and
concluded, that I was confident it could never break, but would answer, if ever
it did, it should never be by my Hand, and was as confident I might answer the
same for Your Lordship and My Lord Arlington; and that you would fall or stand
upon this Bottom.

Monsieur de Wit seemed much satisfied with what I had said; assured me for
his Part, he would give his Hands toward a good Conclusion of this Affair:
That he would trust His Majesty's Honor and Interest upon so great a
Conjuncture, as well as the Sincereness and Constancy of His Ministers, whom he
could judge of by no other Lights, but what I gave him; made me Compliments
upon the great Confidence he had taken in me and my manner of dealing, by what
he had heard and seen of me, since the first Visit I made him in my Passage
here, after the End of the War; and concluded, that I should see the Count
Dona, and try how far Sueden was to be engaged in this Affair.

I tell Your Lordship all these Circumstances, that knowing where the
Difficulties have been, how they have been overcome, and upon what Advances on
my side, this Knot has been tied, Your Lordship and My Lord Arlington may the
better know, how to support this Affair, and make any others easy by
recovering the Credit of our Conduct in England, so far lost by the
Unsteddiness too truly laid to our Charge; and at least by your own Constancy,
in what you have begun, make good the Characters you have already in the World,
and the Assurances I have given Monsieur de Wit upon your Occasion.

That Evening I went to the Count Dona, and run over all Ceremonies of our
Characters, by going straight into his Chamber, taking a Chair, and sitting
down by him before he could rise out of his. I told him I hoped he would excuse
this Liberty upon an Errand, wherein I thought both our Masters were concerned;
that Ceremonies were intended to facilitate Business, and not to hinder it;
that I knew nothing to make my seeing the other Ambassadors at the Hague
necessary, and so was content with the Difficulties had been introduced between
our Characters; but thinking it absolutely for my Master's Service, to enter
into Confidence with His Excellency upon my Errand here, I had resolved to do
it in this Manner, and if he gave me Leave, would pursue it as if our
Acquaintance and Commerce, had been of never so long a Date.

The Count embraced me, gave me great Thanks for the Honor I did him, made me
Compliments upon so frank and confident a Manner as I used with him; and said
he was ready to return it upon any Thing that I should think fit to communicate
to him.

After this I entered into the Detail of my whole Progress to that Time, both in
England and here; of His Majesty's Reasons, of the common Interests of
Christendom, of the Reception my Errand found from Monsieur de Wit, and the
Hopes I had of succeeding: Of our Discourses about engaging Sueden in the same
Measures, and a Desire of extending our League, into a Triple Alliance among
us, for our own mutual Defense, the Safety of Flanders, and thereby of
Christendom. That I knew how the Crown of Sueden had been treated of late Years
by France, how close they had kept to the Friendship with His Majesty, and how
beneficial as well as honorable, such a Part as this might prove to them, by
the particular Use they might be of to the Crown of Spain; and that upon any
good Occasion they might be sure of His Majesty's Offices and the States, who
resolved to enter into this Affair without any other Interest, than that of the
Preservation of Flanders, and thereby of their own Safety, and the common Good.

The Count Dona professed to applaud His Majesty's Council, to be confident
that Sueden would be content to go his Pace in all the common Affairs of
Christendom, which he was assured of by his own Instructions in general; but
that such an Affair as this not being foreseen, he could have none upon it:
That if it succeeded, he would make all the Paces he could to engage his Master
in it, as what he thought, of Honor and Advantage to the common Safety: But
that he would return my Frankness to him with the same to me, in telling me,
that he doubted my bringing it to an Issue: That he first doubted Monsieur de
Witt's Resolution, to break upon any Terms with France, and close with England;
not only considering what had lately passed between us, but the Interests of
the House of Orange, which he must ever believe, would at one Time or other be
advanced by us; whereas he was sure to be supported against them by France:
Therefore he believed, though he would not oppose it, because the States and
People might run into it; yet he would find some Means, to elude the Conclusion
or Effect of it, without appearing himself in any such Design: That in the next
Place, since such a Treaty could not be made by the States general, without
first being sent to all the Provinces and Towns for their Approbation, and
Orders upon it to their Deputies; he did not see how it was possible for the
French Ambassador, to fail of engaging some Towns or Provinces against it, and
the Opposition of any one of them would lose the Effect; since no new Treaty
could be made by the Constitutions here, without an universal Consent; That
however he would not discourage me, but wished me Success with all his Heart,
upon many Reasons, and among others, as being so much a Servant to the House of
Orange, which could not but profit by a Conjunction between England and
Holland: And again promised, whenever I brought it to a Period, to use all his
Endeavors and stretch his Powers as far as he could, toward engaging his
Master, in the same Measures with us.

In the second Conference I had with Monsieur de Wit, I acquainted him with
what had passed with Count Dona, which he seemed much pleased with; and said,
though we could not expect he should have Powers so general as to conclude such
an Affair; yet an Instrument might be drawn up between us whereby Room may be
left for Sueden, to enter as a Principal into our Alliance; and the Count de
Dona had so much Credit at his Court, to recommend it there so as to succeed,
especially upon the hopes we must give him of obtaining Subsidies from Spain,
which might countervail what they might lose from France upon this Occasion.

I then fell upon the Form of concluding this Treaty; saying, I could easily
foretell the Fate of it, if it must pass the common Forms of being sent by the
several Deputies, to all their Principals for their Result upon it: That I
knew, this would take up a Month or six Weeks Time, and that nothing would be
so easy as for the French Ambassador, to meet with it in running that Circle,
and by engaging some one Member, perhaps by Money thrown among the chief
Persons in some of the small Towns, to prevent and ruin a Council of the
greatest Importance to Christendom, as well as to our two Nations, that had
been on Foot in many Ages: That unless the States General would conclude and
sign the Treaty immediately, and trust to the Approbation of their several
Provinces and Towns after it was done; I should give it for gone, and think no
more of it.

Monsieur de Wit seemed to think this impossible; said, no such Thing had ever
been done since the first Institution of their Commonwealth; that though it was
true, the States General might sign a Treaty, yet they could not Ratify it,
without Recourse to their Principals, and that they should venture their Heads
in Signing it, if their Principals not approving it should question them for
doing it without Orders; that he hoped the Forms might be expedited in three
Weeks Time, and that all Care that could be, should be taken to prevent the
Addresses of the French Ambassador among the Provinces.

I cut the Matter short, and told him, I continued of my first Opinion, to see
it immediately agreed between Me and the Commissioners, and then Signed by the
States, which might be done in four or five Days; and that the Deputies might
safely trust to the Approbation of their Principals in a Point of so great and
evident public Interest: That for my Part, I know not how this Delay, and
thereby Hazard of the Affair might be interpreted in England, nor what Change
in my Orders it might produce: That I had now Powers to conclude an Alliance of
the last Consequence to the Safety of Flanders and this State; that if it
should miscarry by the too great Caution of the Deputies in Point of Form, for
ought I knew, they might venture their Heads that Way, and more deservedly,
than by signing at present, what all of them believed, would not only be
ratified, but applauded by their Principals. With this I left him; and the rest
that passed in the Progress of this Affair, as well as in my Audience or with
the Commissioners. Your Lordship has it in my Dispatch to My Lord Arlington, to
whom you will please to communicate these more secret Springs, that by knowing
the Conception, the Forming, the Throws, and Birth of this Child, you may the
better consult how it is to be nourished till it grow to Strength, and thereby
fit to atchieve those great Adventures, for which it seems designed.

I am ever with equal Passion and Truth,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most faithful and most humble Servant.

To Mr. Godolphin.
Hague, Jan. 28. S. N. 1668. SIR,
THOUGH the Interruption of our Commerce has been long, yet I thought it
necessary to renew it at this Time, and thereby let you know, what has lately
broken it on my Side, that you may not believe any Interruption of yours has
had a worse Effect upon me of late, than it ever had before, being an Accident
I have often been subject to. About the end of last Month, N. S. I passed
through this Place with private Commission from His Majesty, to sound the Mind
of the States, in what concerns the present Quarrel between the two Crowns, and
how they were disposed to join with him in the Share of a War, or Project of a
Peace; to be endeavored by our joint Offices between them. From hence I went
to London, with the private Account of what I had in Charge. After five Days
Stay there, I was dispatched back, as His Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary to the
States, with full Power, to treat and conclude upon those Points, which His
Majesty esteemed necessary for our common Safety, and the Repose of Christendom
in this Conjuncture. Upon the 6th I arrived here, had my first Audience on the
18th; and on the 23d, were signed by me, and the Commissioners given me by the
States with full Powers, three several Instruments of our present Treaty: The
first, containing a League defensive and perpetual between His Majesty and the
States, against all Persons without exception, that shall invade either of
them, with Agreement to furnish each other upon Occasion with forty Ships of
War, of which, fourteen betwixt sixty and eighty Guns, and four hundred Men a
piece one with another; Fourteen, between forty and sixty Guns, and three
hundred Men a piece; and of the other Twelve, none under thirty six Guns, and a
hundred and fifty Men: Besides this, with six Thousand Foot, and four hundred
Horse, or Money in stead of them, at the Choice of the Invaded, and to be
repaid within three Years after the End of the War; the Proportions of Money to
the several Parts of the said Aid, being ascertained in the Treaty.

The second Instrument contains our joint Obligations to dispose France to make
Peace in Flanders upon one of the Alternatives already proposed; and likewise
to dispose Spain to accept it before the End of May; but in Case of Difficulty
made by them, to dispose France however, to stop all further Progress of its
own Arms there, and leave it wholly to the Allies to procure the Ends proposed
in this League.

The third Instrument, contains certain separate Articles between His Majesty
and the States, Signed at the same Time, and of the same Force with the Treaty,
but not to be committed to Letters.

It Is hardly imaginable, the Joy and Wonder conceived here, upon the Conclusion
of this Treaty, brought to an Issue in five Days, nor the Applause given to His
Majesty's Resolution, as the wisest and happiest that could in this Conjuncture
be taken by any Prince, both for his own, and his Neighbors Affairs; nor are
the Reflections upon the Conduct of it less to the Advantage of the present
Ministry in England; the Thing being almost done here, as soon as my Journey was
known in London, and before my Errand was suspected by any public Minister
there.

Three Days after our signing, the Suedish Ambassador signed another
Instrument jointly with me and the States Commissioners, obliging his Master to
enter as a Principal into the same Alliance, so soon as some Pretensions he has
from the Emperor and Spain are satisfied by our good Offices between them.
After which, Count Dona parted as Ambassador likewise from that Crown for
England, where the rest of that Affair will be negotiated; and in his Company
my Brother Henry Temple, with the Whole Account of my Business, and the
Treaties signed in Order to their Ratification, for which a Month is allowed,
though the States promise theirs within fifteen Days after the Date. When those
arrive and are exchanged. I return to my Residence at Brussels, to see the
Issue of this Business, which now takes up the Thoughts and Discourse of all
Christendom, and from which most Princes, will resolve to take their Measures.

I suppose My Lord Sandwich upon his Way, and therefore content my self only
with giving you this Trouble, and the Professions of my being

SIR, Your etc.

To the KING.
Hague, Jan. 29th. S.N. 1668. May it please Your Majesty;
IN my last Passage hither, I had the Honor of trying your Majesty's Yatcht in
such a Storm, as that never felt before, and a greater no Man in Her pretended
ever to have seen. The Fortune of Your Majesty's Affairs, helped us to the
Discovery of a Pilot Boat at a distance from the Coasts, that brought us
happily in, without which we had passed such another Night at Sea, as I should
not care to do, for any Thing Your Majesty could give me, besides Your Favor,
and the Occasions of serving You. If we had miscarried. Your Majesty had lost
an honest diligent Captain, and sixteen poor Seamen, so beaten out with Wet and
Toil, that the Compassion I had then for them, I have still about me, and
assure Your Majesty, that five or six more, will be necessary for your Yatcht,
if you use Her to such Passages as this: But for the rest, I believe there is
not such a Boat in the Would. She returns with along, but final and happy
Account of my Business, to My Lord Arlington, and with the Count de Dona, who
will be better Company than along ill Letter, and deserves Your Majesty's
Welcome by his other Qualities, as well as his particular Devotions for Your
Majesty's Person and Service.

I cannot end this Letter, without congratulating with Your Majesty, upon the
Success of your Resolution, which occasioned my Journey hither; and which is
generally applauded here, as the wisest and happiest both for your Kingdoms and
your Neighbors, and the most honorable to Your Majesty's Person, that ever
was taken upon any Occasion by any Prince: And the strange Success of it, has
been answerable, to the rest of Your Majesty's Fortunes and so amazing, that
the Expressions made of it here every Hour, are altogether extraordinary, not
to say Extravagant.

God of Heaven continue Your Majesty's good Health, and good Councils, and good
Fortunes, and then I shall have nothing more to wish, but that You may pardon
the Faults, and accept of the humble and hearty Devotions of

SIR, Your Majesty's most Loyal and most obedient Subject and Servant.

To Monsieur Gourville.
Hague Feb. 7. S. N. 1668.
I Have just received (by the Rhingrave's Favor) yours of the 28th past, and
am extreme glad, to have yet some Place in your Memory, after so many
Diversions in Germany, which use to make one forget Things of much greater
Importance. But all this was necessary to comfort me for your Absence, which I
believe you have ordered, with Design for all my Journeys into Holland; this is
now the third I have made since that of Breda, without ever meeting you there;
you I say, who are not able to live three Months without going thither, though
you are forced for it, to leave the Ladies and the Orange Trees at Brussels.

I can tell you no News; the Duke of Lunenburg's Resident having assured me,
that he has sent you word of the Conclusion of our Treaty here, whereof I every
Day expect the Ratifications: They will needs have me pass here for one of
great Abilities, for having finished and signed in five Days, a Treaty of such
Importance to Christendom: But I will tell you the Secret of it: To draw Things
out of their Center, requires Labor and Address to put them into Motion; but
to make them return thither, Nature helps so far, that there needs no more than
just to set them a going. Now, I think, a strict Alliance, is the true Center
of our two Nations. There was also another Accident, which contributed very
much to this Affair, and that was, a great Confidence arisen between the
Pensioner and me, he is extremely pleased with me, and my sincere open way of
dealing, and I with all the Reason in the World am infinitely pleased with him
upon the same Score; and look on him as one of the greatest Genius's I have
known, as a Man of Honor, and the most easy in Conversation, as well as in
Business. In short, the two Nations are closer united, than if there never had
been a War. For Affairs in general, I can tell you nothing, but that our common
Design is to give Peace to all Christendom, so that if France pleases, they may
have it this Spring; if not (as Monsieur d'Estrades says, at least not after
our fashion) they may have their fill of the War. For the Convention at Aix, I
can tell you nothing till we get an Answer from France and Brussels, where we
have already sent Advice of our defensive League, and of our Treaty or Project
of the Peace.

This at least may serve for a new Health at your German Feasts, when the old
ones are gone round, and will at the same time help to put you in mind of

SIR, Your etc.

A Mons. de Gourville.
De la Hay. 7 Fevr. S.N. 1668.
JE viens de recevoir par les soins obligeans de Monsieur le Rhingrave, votre
lettre du 28 du pass; and je me rejouis extremement d'occuper encore quelque
place dans votre souvenir, apres tant de divertissemens goutez en Allemagne, ce
ne seroit pas la premiere fois qu'ils auroient fait oublier des chooses plus
importantes que ma person: Mais il ne falloit pas moins que les plaisirs que
je say que vous avez gout, and la nouvelle marque que vous me donnez de votre
amity, pour me consoler de votre absence; Je croy au rest que vous l'aviez
concertee avec tous mes voyages en Hollande; car voici le trosieme que j'y fais
depuis celuy de Breda, sans vous y trover, vous dis je, qui ne pouviez passer
trois mois sans y aller, quand meme il auroit fallu pour cela quitter vos
orangers and les mignonnes de Brusselles.

Je n'ay point de nouvelles a vous mander; le Resident de Lunebour m'ayant
assure qu'il vous avoit appris la conclusion du traite que nous avons fait icy:
J'attens de jour en jour les ratifications. On veut a toute force me fair
passer icy pour habile homme, a cause que j'ay acheve and sign en cinq jours
un Traite si important pour toute la Chretiente: Mais je vous diray le secret;
quand on arrache les chooses de leur center, il faut du tems and de la peine,
and meme de l'addresse pour les fair mouvoir; mais lors qu'il n'est question
que de les y ramener, la nature y aid si puissament, qu'il ne faut quasi que
leur donner le branle: Or, je croy qu'une etroite Alliance est le center de nos
deux Nations. Il y a encore un accident qui a fort contribue a cette affair;
c'est la parfaite confiance qui nous a reciproquement uni Monsieur le
Pensionnaire and moy: il se love de moy and de ma maniere d'agir, qui comme
vous savez, est toujours franche and ouverte; and moy, je me love infiniment de
luy; j'en ay toutes les rais^ns du monde, and je dois a toute sa conduite les
eloges qu'il done a la mienne: Je le regard comme un des plus grands Genies
que j'ay connus, avec cela, tres homme de bien; d'un commerce egalement aise
soit dans les negotiations, soit dans la conversation. Enfin la confiance est
presentement retablie enter les deux Nations; and je la croy meme plus entiere
que s'il n'y avoit jemais eu de guerre. Pour les affairs generales, je ne vous
saurois dire autre chose, si non, que notre dessein unanime est de donner la
paix and la tranquilite a toute la Chretiente; de sort que si la France le
veut, elle l'aura ce printems; si elle ne le veut pas (ainsi que le dit
Monsieur le Compte D'Estrades, qui ajoute, que du moins ce ne sera pas d'une
paix de notre facon) elle aura tout son soul de guerre. Touchant la Convention
a Aix jusq' a ce que nous ayons responce de France and de Brusselles, je ne
vous en saurois rien dire. Nous leur avons deja done avis de notre Ligue
defensive, and de notre traite ou projet de paix.

Du moins cecy servira a fournir une nouvelle sante dans vos festins Allemans,
lors que les anciennes auront fait leur ronde accoutumee; and cela vous faira
en meme tems souvenir de

Monsieur Votre, etc.

To my Lord Arlington.
Hague, Feb. 12. S. N 1668. My Lord,
THE Arrival of the Ratifications here, was received with the same Dispositions
of general Satisfaction and Joy, that the Treaty was concluded: Those of the
States will, I doubt, be something later ready, though occasioned only by a
Delay, in the Assembly of the States of Friezland and Zealand; but new
Dispatches were Yesterday sent away for hastening both; and Monsieur de Wit
assures me, the 20th of this Month will be the latest I shall expect them, and
he hopes all may be ready something sooner. I shall press it all I can
possibly, and immediately. after the Exchange made, shall demand my Audience of
Conge, and away to Brussels to pursue His Majesty's Instructions there: I
cannot tell with what Success, because I know not with what Mien the Marquess
has entertained our Project of the Peace, not yet having heard one Word from
him in Answer to all I have writ upon this Subject: I wish some of his Visions
may not give it another Face than what it ought, I am sure, to receive from the
true present State of the Spanish Affairs; for in that Case I know his Way of
arguing so well, as to expect he should say, there is no Reason for them to
give Money to lose their Towns; but that in Case His Majesty will enter into
their Defense, He shall want no Money the Indies can give him; therefore he
must be plied on that side, by the Count of Molina, and Baron de l'Isola, as
well as by me here, and not only disposed to accept the Alternative, but to
receive it as the greatest Effect at present of His Majesty's good Will to the
Preservation of Flanders, and Step toward a future defensive League between Us
and Them, and Holland, for the general Safety of the Spanish Crown.

Though I shall not fail of my Part, in pressing all these Points on this Side,
yet the Impressions will be easier given the two Ministers there, than the
Marquess here, as Persons something more substantial in their Conceptions upon
this Point; and will have more Weight upon His Excellency, coming from their
own Ministers, than from me: For the Point of Money to be furnished by the
States upon the Towns of Gelderland; the whole Matter was dismissed by Monsieur
de Wit till the Marquess's Acceptance of our Project was declared; upon which
the Baron de Bargeyck will return to pursue it, and in Case of a War, by
Obstinacy of the French Refusal, I doubt not but the Matter will be easy, the
Marquess offering Ruremond and Venlo, though Monsieur de Wit insists as yet,
upon the Fort of Gelre, and two others by Sluys, which the Marquess says, he
has no Power to treat upon.

For their Opinion of the French Expedition into the Franche Compte, they seem
little startled at it, believing it may the more incline the Spaniards to
receive our Offices for the Peace according to the Treaty; and that possibly
some Exchange may be found convenient for the Spaniards between Parts of the
Franche Comte and those Towns of Flanders, which are now in the French
Possession, and lie in the very Bowels of the rest of that Dominion; which are
Courtray, Tournay, Oudenard, and Aeth; for the rest, they resolve to make good
the Peace to the Spaniards, without the Loss of any Thing more, than was
actually in the French Hands at the Time of our Treaty being Signed, whatever
new Progresses they may make before the Conclusion; and in Case France shall
refuse, or seek Evasions, I do not believe they will be the least backward,
from entering into the War.

I should formerly have marked that, in all which is digested in our Treaty,
and that is to pass in our Negotiation with France, upon this Occasion, the
States avoid calling our Parts a Mediation; because they say, That seems to
import a Neutrality, whereas upon failing of our Offices toward a Peace, we
are to take our Parts in a War.

For the Method and Manner of our joining together in pursuit of the War, if it
grow to engage us by the French Refusal; Monsieur de Wit tells me frankly, his
Opinion is for us, to enforce the Towns of Flanders by such of our Troops, as
will be necessary to defend them, or at least to draw on long and expensive
Sieges, and in the mean Time with our several Fleets, to make the sharpest
Impressions we can, upon some of their Coasts, and seize some of their Towns,
and force them that Way, to necessary Divisions and Diversions of their Forces,
as well as give Countenance, to whatever Discontents may arise among them at
home, upon such an Occasion. Upon my arguing, that an Impression would be the
sharper and the safer, perhaps if it were made by our Fleets in one Place, but
with joint Forces; he said, he did not see how our Fleets could possibly join,
for the Point of the Pavilion; and fell into a good deal of Discourse upon that
Matter, as the only now left, that could ever occasion any Dispute between us;
being at length bottomed upon our mutual Interest, and the wrangling about
little Points of Commerce being taken away. All I could draw from him upon the
Point of the Pavilion was; that they would give all to the King's Ships at Sea,
which theirs or any other Ambassadors gave to his own Person in his Kingdom,
where his Dominion was as absolute, as he could pretend it to be, in the narrow
Seas; which is, to uncover first, and cover last; so that all their Ships
should vail to ours when they met, in Case ours would in Return take down the
Pavilion as a Civility to theirs afterward, and theirs should remain veiled,
till we had set up our Pavilion again. I told him I could say nothing to that
Matter, which I knew was very delicate; but that if ever we agreed in that
Point, I thought it must not be by Articles or Treaties, but by Concert between
the Ministers of each Side; as, for the States, first to give absolute Orders
to all their Captains to vail to the King's Ships, whenever they met them in
the narrow Seas; and at the same Time, to signify so much to His Majesty in a
Letter of Compliment, and as a Resolution taken upon Consideration of so near
and happy Alliance, as was now entered into, between the Nations: Upon which His
Majesty might consider, what Returns of Civility he would be content, his
Captains should make to an Allie so near as this State, was now likely ever to
be, to the Crown of England.

Monsieur de Wit was willing to fall into any Expedient, and said, that
whenever I came into England, he would hope I might bring this last Matter to
pass, as happily as I had done all the rest. That His Majesty should find he
would be wanting in nothing, that the Point of Civility or Deference might
require in this Matter, provided it were without acknowledging our Pretensions
to the Dominion of the Sea, which they must die rather than do; but in what
should pass, they would leave us to our Interpretations, and keep themselves to
theirs.

For the provisional Articles according to my Word, which made Way for the
Treaty's Conclusion; I told Monsieur de Wit, His Majesty had in his Answer
given me Leave to do it, with an Article for the Meeting of Commissioners at
both Parties Desire, to complete what should be defective, and change what
should be found inconvenient, and cut off any Thing that should be superfluous,
so as it might appear to be an Original Treaty between us, which would be more
for our Honor, than to copy after the French: That though His Majesty had given
me this Leave, in Compliance to the States, yet he had rather the Thing should
now be left to Commissioners for these Ends, than concluded with Reference to
them hereafter. I made His Majesty's Concession in this Point, easy for these
two Ends; that either they finding His Majesty indifferent in it, might grow so
too; Men being commonly apt to pull the harder, the faster another holds; or
else (if they resolved to insist upon it, since I was already engaged) to value
a Thing which costs His Majesty nothing, for as much Obligation as I could to
the States, which might make Way for some material Return upon another Occasion.

Monsieur de Wit seemed very much pleased at His Majesty's Compliance with
them in this Point; and said, if I knew His Majesty's Pleasure in any
Particulars which he desired should be added, or any others changed for common
Convenience, he desired me to tell him, and doubted not, but we should end it
in twenty four Hours; but he was unwilling it should fall into other Hands, or
remain undone, for the Reasons I mentioned in one of my last. After much
Discourse, and no Way left to avoid the Thing; we agreed it should be done, but
with an ample Article for the Meeting of Commissioners for those foresaid Ends;
and after the Perpetuity, I will endeavor to get in these Words: Aut quousque
saltem ex utriusque partis Consensu indicentur Commissarii; or some Words to
that Purpose: And likewise in the Preamble of this separate Instrument, some
Expressions of this Kind; ut omnibus innotescat quam sincera sanctaque Fide
nuper contractae Amicitiae non modo in praesens sed in posteros colendae cavere
voluerunt; And; Ad divellenda penitus quaecunque non modo dissentionum, sed and
Litium and Altercationum Semina; And; Ad praecidendam spem omnem, and
Expectationem quorumcunque praedictam Amicitiam novis Altercationibus
labefactatam iri interesse possit. Which are Things that come now only into my
Head, but shall be digested against we meet to morrow upon this Occasion. And
this is all that is possible for me to do in this Matter, and which at least is
likely to hasten the Exchange of the Ratifications, and to leave our Alliance
the clearest, firmest, and most confident that can be: I confess, I am troubled
that it cannot be otherwise, because Your Lordship says, His Majesty would
rather have had it so; and if you had not sent me after the Treaty's Arrival,
an Explanation of what was written to me, in an unintelligible Cipher, it had
been so, and my Words had been safe; but I think it had been worse, in leaving
a Dissatisfaction between us, which is now avoided; and I find. My Lord Keeper
in a Letter to me, seems to put no Weight upon it, if done in the Manner
mentioned; and I know you both put a great deal upon any Person's (employed by
His Majesty) being and passing for an honest Man.

No Post going from hence till the End of the Week, I have resolved to dispatch
this by the Yatcht that brought over my Brother, whose Orders it seems are to
return immediately; But I know not how to find the safe Conveyance for the
Dutch Ratifications, unless another Yacht be sent for them about a Week or ten
Days hence; and to that End, I shall leave them with Mr. Carter at my Lord
Cravenss House here, and who does all His Lordship's Business; who shall
deliver them to any Person that brings a Letter from Your Lordship to that
Purpose: This I think will be much better, than to venture them with me in my
Journey to Brussels, or upon a Passage from thence.

I am ever with My Lord, Your etc.
P. S.

I had forgot the mention of this enclosed Memorial, given in Yesterday to the
States, and by their Order sent me with a Compliment, They would receive
nothing without communicating it to me; They resolve upon the Marquess's
Answer, for the Treating at Aix, to send likewise thither, but refer the
Quality or Number of Persons to the Marquess's Intentions of going himself, or
sending some Delegate; and that I suppose will depend upon Don Juan's coming
over. In the mean Time, the States are absolutely of Opinion with me, that no
Treaty can begin with good Intentions on the French Side, unless they consent
to a Suspension of Arms while it lasts; and therefore, that the Force of our
joint Instances at Paris, is to be put upon that Point.



To Sir Orlando Bridgeman, Lord Keeper.
Hague, Febr. 12. S. N. 1668. My Lord,
I Received by my Brother the Honor of Your Lordship's, and therein the
Testimony of your Favor to me in a Manner so obliging, and indeed altogether
extraordinary, that I know as little how to acknowledge as to deserve it; and
therefore I shall not enlarge my Self upon a Subject, where I am sure not to
succeed as I desire; but leave it to Time, and the constancy of my Services, to
express how very sensible I am of what I owe, and how great a Value I place
upon that Part, Your Lordship is pleased to allow me in your good Opinion and
Memory, of which I beg the Continuance, esteeming them among the very best of
my Possessions.

I have written to My Lord Arlington at large, upon the Confidence of this safe
Conveyance by the Return of the Yacht; which will give Your Lordship your Share
of Trouble, but withal, a full Prospect of the Dispositions here, and
consequently the present as well as future Estate of our Alliance, if it be
pursued with the same Directness it has been contracted; and the happy
Continuance whereof, I am perfectly of Your Lordship's Mind, is the true
Interest of both Nations, and will be the surest Support, of His Majesty's
Honor, and the Kingdoms Safety, as well as Satisfaction. The Expression Your
Lordship pleases to make, of endeavoring in your Station, the inviolable
Observation of it; I shall value before I part, to Monsieur de Wit, and the
other Commissioners as it deserves, which will be easy to do; for I dare say
very truly, that the general Opinion conceived here, of Your Lordships and My
Lord Arlington's Honor and Sincerity, and unbiassed Pursuit of the true
Interest of the Kingdom, has very much contributed to the Success of my late
Negotiation, and been indeed the Spring of any Honor, that Your Lordship or
any others may attribute to me in the Conduct of it.

It will not become me to take no Notice, of those repeated Offers, Your
Lordship pleases to make, in a Fashion so extremely obliging, to favor me in
any of my own Concernments; and therefore I shall humbly recommend to you the
countenancing my Wife in her pursuing the Payment of my ordinary Allowances
while I am abroad; since the narrowness of my own Fortunes (while it pleases
God to continue my Father's Life to us) will not suffer me to serve His Majesty
without troubling him, as I am forced to do, whenever five or six Months of my
Ordinaries are grown in Arrear. Therefore upon Your Lordship's Encouragement, I
will tell my Wife, She may beg your Countenance to her when She begins her next
Pursuit of that Kind; and that you may the more confidently own your favoring
me in this Point; I will assure Your Lordship, His Majesty shall never be
troubled with any Pursuits of mine, further than what he has pleased to make my
Due, by my ordinary Establishment, though lower than that of a much cheaper
Country, as I am informed; but that is very indifferent to me; for I am
perfectly content to live just in the Posture His Majesty thinks fit I should,
while I serve him; and very willing to spend his Allowance and my own Revenue,
but no more; which is the plain Truth of my Story: And I doubt now the Fonds at
Antwerp fail, out of which I have been hitherto paid, by My Lord Arlington's
Favor to me, something against the Commissioners Inclination, I may find
longer Attendances upon the Exchequer, for that is grown or growing due, than
my Occasions will suffer; which makes me use this Liberty to Your Lordship;
though I should not have done it had you not now twice, and of your self
encouraged me.

For the obliging Message my Brother brought me likewise from Your Lordship's
Favor to me; besides my Acknowledgments, I shall only say, that It was, that
he should be Secretary of State.
what Your Lordship pleased to mention, would be as agreeable to my
Inclinations as any thing I know; but I shall never presume to ask any Thing of
that Kind from His Majesty, no more than of any other, referring my Station and
every Thing else, wholly to his Pleasure and Choice, whilst I have the Honor
of serving him: Besides, I find every Body here and in Flanders, designs
another Post for me, at least for a Month or two this Spring, if the Treaty
happens to be at Aiz; believing, that having had so much Part in what has been
done already, I am likely to have some Part in that too: And I confess, because
People are fallen into this Thought, I may take the contrary for a Mark of his
Majesty's not being satisfied with me, in what is past: and because I am by
Advance instructed in the Business, and acquainted with Persons, I should be
very well pleased with it, if His Majesty finds none to serve him better,
esprcially if by the Marquess's going thither himself, His Majesty should find
it fit, to send a Person of great Quality to maintain the Port of the
Employment, and give me my Part under his Shade.

I am ashamed to have said all this of my Self and my Concernments; and beseech
Your Lordship to remember, that you have drawn it all from me; and after that,
to forget it all if you please: For, to say the Truth, I am very well as I am,
being of so dull a Complexion, that I do not remember any Station or Condition
of Life I have been in these dozen Years, which I have not been pleased with,
and a little unwilling to leave. However, what Thoughts of this Kind Your
Lordship shall have of me, I desire you will please to communicate them to My
Lord Arlington, to whose Favor I have been long obliged: And whatever Your two
Lordships shall think fit in my Disposal, will be ever perfectly welcome to

My Lord, Your etc.

To My Lord Keeper.
Hague, Feb. 13. S. N. 1668. My Lord,
SINCE the writing of Your Lordship's Letter, and the scaling up of My Lord
Arlington's Packet, I have been so far pressed by Monsieur de Wit, to send
him the Article for meeting Commissioners, I desired might be added to the
provisional Articles in a new Instrument that I have been fain to digest it as
well as I could, according to My Lord Arlington's Instructions, and Your
Lordship's since given me in your Letter. I thought fit likewise to draw up a
Preamble to it, whereby it might appear, that the Intention of this Agreement,
was only an Effect of our mutual Kindness, and for Prevention of any Disputes
that might possibly arise to interrupt it, and for cutting off all our Enemies
Hopes ever to see us any more, make Way for their Ends by our future
Dissension. I will send Your Lordship a Copy on the other side of this Sheet,
of both Preamble and Article, which I have been forced to draw up as hastily as
I could; and hope, if Monsieur de Wit thinks fit to pass it in this Form, it
will be in all Points of more Honor and Advantage to as, even than to have had
it all omitted. I desire Your Lordship to communicate all this to My Lord
Arlington, and to excuse this Trouble, by Reason of His Lordship's Packet
being already sealed up.

I am ever etc.

Proemium Tractatus inter Anglos and Hollandos. Febr. 13. 1668.
QUandoquidem annuente Divina Gratia, and conspirante mutuarum rerum salute,
aeque ac Christiani Orbis jam temporis necessitate; Vigesimo tertio Die
Januarii proxime elapsi, inter Serenissimum -- and --, conclusum and signatum
sit Foedus perpetuum defensivum fortissimis utrinque tam mari quam terra
proestandis auxiliis communitum: Eodemque die alioque Instrumento, de rerum
vicinarum tranquilitate, paceque Orbi Christiano restitunda inter Praedictum --
and -- pronis animis consultum and conventum fuerit, adeoque nihil aliud
protenus superesse videatur, quod tam mutua voluntate conflatam amicitiam and
necessitudinem ullo demum tempore interpellare poterit, praeter controversias
de mercimoniorum speciebus hic inde redigendis forsitan orituras, and ex
incerta vel ambigua ejusmodi rerum utrinque adjudicatione forsitan etiam
promovendis. Quo autem omnibus innotescat quam sincera sanctaque fide
Praedictus -- and -- nuper conflatae amicitiae non modo in praesens sed and ad
posteros colendae cavere voluerint, jamdemum ad divellenda quaecunque non modo
dissentionum sed vel altercationum semina, praecidendamque penitus eorum Spem
aut expectationem quorumcunque demum praedictam amicitiam novis litibus
concussam aut labefactatam iri interesse poterit, In subsequentes Articulos
utrinque conventum est, qui pro norma and Regula ejusmodi rerum maritimarum and
mercaturae hic inde redigendae mutuo and perpetuo observabuntur, aut quousque
saltem ex utriusque partis Arbitrio and Consensu Commissarii indicentur, and
conveniant ad uberiorem iis de rebus omnibus Navigationisque Legibus tractatum,
and communi utrinque commodo and ulteriore experientia dirigendum.

Sequuntur Articuli. Conclusio.
CUm autem rerum omnium and Conventionum commoda aut Incommoda non nisi tractu
temporis mutuaeque experientiae documentis penitus indagari poterunt; Conventum
itaque est ut quocunque demum Tempore utrique Parti id visum fuerit, ex communi
Confensu indici and convenire poterunt utrinque delegati Commissarii, quorum
curae erit, and operis quodcunque in supra memoratis Articulis defecisse
reperietur, supplere, quodcunque autem incongruum and utrinque incommodum,
mutare aut circumscribere, and uberiorem demum hisce de rebus omnibus Tractatum
absolvere prorsus and perlimare.

To the States at first Audience.
High and Mighty LORDS,
WHereas His Majesty of Great Britain the King my Master, has already found
the good Effects of the late Peace, concluded at Breda with Your High and
Mighty Lordships, by the general Satisfaction of His Majesty's Subjects, as
well as his own; and doubts not but Your Lordships have likewise found, the
same Effects among your People in general, as well as among your selves: His
Majesty esteems nothing more likely to increase the mutual Satisfaction, nor to
assure the Safety of both Nations, than an Increase of the Confidence and
Friendship, already contracted, between His Majesty and Your Lordships, by a
stricter and firmer Alliance at this Time.

And whereas His Majesty contented with those great and powerful Kingdoms and
Dominions, which Almighty God has given him by an undisputed Succession, covers
nothing from his Neighbors, nor has other Thoughts or Wishes, besides those of
the common Peace and Repose of Christendom; His Majesty finds himself in this
Conjuncture, sensibly touched by the Calamities, so many others are like to
feel, from the Continuance of the War lately broken out between the Neighbor
Crowns, and which in Course of Time, cannot but involve most of the Princes and
States of Christendom, unless the Flame be quenched, before it rise too high.
And His Majesty believes that nothing can so much contribute toward a safe and
sudden Composure of that Quarrel, nor consequently restore the Peace of
Christendom, as a joint Mediation of His Majesty with Your H. and M. Lordship's
(together with each others Allies) between the two Crowns now in War.

Upon these two Considerations, His Majesty has thought fit, to send me to
Your Lordships with full Powers, to treat and conclude, upon what shall be
found necessary, between His Majesty and Your Lordships, in the Adjustment of
all Matters, tending to these great Ends. And since nothing can bring these
Negotiations to be of Effect, so much as the suddenness of their Conclusion; I
desire Your Lordship's to appoint such Commissioners as you shall think fit,
with whom I may fall upon the Treaty of these Matters, and to whom I am ready
to expose the full Powers which His Majesty the King my Master has given me
upon this Occasion.

At my Audience of Leave, to the States General.
High and mighty Lords.
HIs Majesty of Great Britain the King my Master, having seen so happily
finished, and in so few Days, three several Treaties with Your High and Mighty
Lordships; By which the common Security of both Nations is established, the
Seeds of all new Differences entirely rooted out, and the Way laid open to the
Peace of Christendom, in Case our Neighbors proceed with the same good Faith,
wherewith we have begun: His Majesty thinks he has no further Occasion for my
Services here, because Ministers are only proper, for fastening and cementing a
Confidence and Friendship; whereas ours is so firmly established, as not to
require any, even the most ordinary Supports.

For this Reason, His Majesty has ordered my Return to Brussels, there to
pursue in concert with Your Lordships, in favor of our Neighbors, what we
have here concluded for our selves. But His Majesty has commanded me upon my
Departure to assure Your Lordships from Him, that, as all things are best
preserved by the same Means they are begun; so His Majesty will not fail for
ever to observe what he has now concluded, with the same Faith, the same
Sincerity, and the same open Heart, wherewith he gave Command they should be
negotiated: and His Majesty doubts not at all, that Your Lordships are entirely
resolved, to proceed after the same manner, which is the highest Mark of a
perfect Confidence to be given at present.

For my own particular, I cannot part from hence without expressing my
Satisfaction, at the sincere and judicious Proceeding of Your High and Mighty
Lordships, in the whole course of these Negotiations; and particularly at the
great Prudence you have shown in the Choice of those Commissioners you gave me;
their Candor and Sincerity, their great Capacity, and Application, did
contribute very much to the quick and happy Conclusion of our Treaties. For my
own particular, as I shall ever bear in mind with Joy and Pleasure, this short
space of Time I have passed with Your Lordships, in whatever Part of the World
I may be; so I shall always contribute by my good Wishes, and whatever Services
I may be capable of, to the Support of this good Intelligence, so happily
restored between both Nations. In the mean time, God Almighty take Your High
and Mighty Lordships inot his Holy Protection.

A mon Audience de conge aux Estats Generaux.
Hauts and Puissants Seigneurs.
SA Majeste le Roy de la Grande Bretagne mon Maitre, ayant un conclurre si
heureusement, and en si peu de jours, trois diverse traitez avec V. H. and P. S.
par lesquels la seurete commune des deux Nations vient d'etre retablie; les
semences de toutes les nouvelles discordes entierement deracinees, and le
chemin a la paix and au repos ouvert pour la Chretiente, en cas que nos voifins
s'y portent avec la meme foy and la meme franchise qui nous la deja fait
acheminer; sa Majeste croit n'avoir plus besoin de moy en ce lieu, puisque les
Ministres ne servent and ne sont propres qu'a cimenter and entretenir la
confiance; mais la notre se voit etablie sur de si solides fondemens qu'elle
n'aura plus besoin des appuis ni des aides ordinaires.

C'est pourquoy sa Majeste ordonne mon retour a Brusselles, pour y poursuivre
de concert avec V. S. en faveur de nos voisins, ce que nous venons de conclure
icy pour nous memes: Mais elle m'a command sur mon depart d'assurer V. S. de
sa part, que comme une chose n'est jamais mieux conservee que par les principes
qui l'ont fait naitre, aussi sa Majeste ne manquera pas d'observer constamment
tout ce qui vient d'etre conclu, and cela avec autant de bonne foy, avec la
meme sincerite, and la meme droiture de coeur, qu'on luy a vu temoigner lors
qu'elle l'a fait negotier: Et sa Majeste ne doubt point que V. S. ne soient
entierement resolus a tenir la meme conduite a son egard; and c'est la le
dernier sceau qui doit etre appose de part and d'autre a nos traitez pour
preuve d'une parfaite confiance.

Pour ce qui me regard en particulier, je ne saurois sortir d'icy sans me
lover hautement de la judicieuse, and sincere conduite de Vos H. and P. S. dans
tout le course de cette Negotiation, and particulierement. de l'extreme prudence
que vous avez fait paroitre dans le choix de Messieurs les Commissaires que
vous m'avez done. Leur candeur, leur capacite consommee, leur ardeur, and leur
application pour l'affaire proposee, n'ont pas peu contribue au bonbeur and a
la rapidite de la conclusion de nos Traitez. Pour moy, comme je me souviendray,
toute ma vie avec joye, and meme avec tendresse du court espace de tems que
j'ay pass pres de V. S. aussi dans quelque lieu du monde que je sois appelle a
passer ma vie. je ne negligeray jamais de contribuer par mes voeux, par toutes
sorts de soins, and de services don't je me croiray capable, au maintien de
cette mutuelle intelligence que je vois si heureusement retablie enter les deux
Nations. Cependant je prieray Dieu ardamment de prendre vos H. and P. S. sous
sa saint protection.

A Letter from the States to the King of Great Britain.
Feb. 18. S. N. 1668. SIR,
IT is merely in Compliance to Custom, that we do our Selves the Honor to
write to Your Majesty, in Answer to the Letter you were pleased to send us,
relating to Sir William Temple: For We can add nothing to what your Majesty has
seen your self of his Conduct, by the Success of the Negotiation committed to
his Charge. As it is a Thing without Example, that in so few Days, three such
important Treaties have been concluded, so we can say, that the Address, the
Vigilance, and the Sincerity of this Minister, are also without Example We are
extremely obliged to Your Majesty, that you are pleased to make use of an
Instrument so proper for confirming that strict Amity, and good Intelligence,
which the Treaty at Breda had so happily begun: And we are bold to say, that if
Your Majesty, continues to make use of such Ministers, the Knot will grow too
fast, ever to be untyed; and Your Majesty will ever find a most particular
Satisfaction by it, as well as We, who after our most hearty Thanks to Your
Majesty for this Favor, shall pray God, etc. and remain

SIR, etc.

Lettre de Recreance de la part des Etats. Au Roy de la Grande Bretagne.
Le 18. de Feur. S. N. 1668. SIRE.
CE n'est que pour satisfaire a la coutume que nous nous donnons l'honneur
d'ecrire a Votre Majeste, en response de la lettre qu'il luy a plu nous ecrire
au sujet de Monsieur le Chevalier Temple; car nous ne pouvons rien ajouter a ce
que Votre Majeste meme a vu de sa conduite, par le succez de la Negotiation qui
luy avoit ete confie. Comme c'est une chose sans example que dans si peu de
jours trois si importans Traitez ont ete ajustez, aussi pouvons nous dire que
l'addresse, la vigilance, and la sincerite de ce Ministre sont aussi sans
example. Nous sommes bien fort obliges a V. M. de ce qu'il luy a plu se servir
vir d'un instrument si propre a achever d'etreindre le noeud d'amitie and de
bonne intelligence que le traite de Breda avoit commence a serrer: Et nous
osons dire, qui si elle continue d'employer des semblables Ministres, le lien
deviendra indissoluble, and Elle en tirera toujours une satisfaction toute
particuliere aussi bien que nous, qui apres l'avoir remercie de tout notre
coeur de cette faveur, prierons Dieu.

SIRE, etc.

A Letter from Monsieur de Wit to my Lord Arlington.
Febr. 14. S. N. 1668. My Lord,
AS it was impossible to send a Minister of greater Capacity, or more proper
for the Temper and Genius of this Nation, than Sir William Temple; so I
believe, no other Person, either will or can, more equitably judge of the
Disposition wherein he has found the States to answer the good Intentions of
the King of Great Britain. Sir William Temple ought not to be less satisfied
with the Readiness, wherewith the States have passed over, to the concluding
and signing of those Treaties for which he came hither, than they (the States)
are with his Conduct, and agreeable manner of Dealing in the whole Course of his
Negotiation. It appears, My Lord, that you thoroughly understand Men, and bestow
your Friendship only upon such as deserve it, since you cause Persons to be
employed who acquit themselves so worthily. I think my self happy to have
negotiated with him, and that by his means your Lordship has been pleased to
give me a new Testimony of your Goodwill. For the Favor you say His Majesty is
pleased to have for me; I have no otherwise deserved it than by my Respects for
his Royal Person, whereof I shall endeavor to give Proofs upon all Occasions,
His Majesty will please to afford me. In the mean while, I shall wait with
Impatience, for some Opportunity, to show how sensible I am of all your
Lordships Civilities, which I shall ever acknowledge, by a true Esteem for your
Merits, and by a strong Passion to let you see, that I am with as much
Sincerity, as you can desire,

My Lord, Your etc.

Monsieur de Wit a Milord Arlington.
Le 14. Fevr. S. N. 1668. Monsieur.
COmme il n'etoit pas possible d'envoyer icy un Ministre plus capable ni plus
propre pour le naturel and le Genie de cette nation que Monsieur le Chevalier
Temple; aussi croyje que l'on n'auroit pas pu choifir une person qui puisse
ou venille plus equitablement juger de la disposition en laquelle il a trouvee
les Etats a repondre aux bonnes intentions du Roy de la Grande Bretagne. Il ne
doit pas etre moins satisfait de la promptitude avec laquelle les Etats ont
pass outre a la conclusion and signature de traitez pour lesquels il est venu
icy; qu'ils sont de sa conduite, and de sa belle maniere d'agir en toute la
suite de sa neg^t^ation. Il paroit Monsieur, que vous vous connoissez en
hommes, and que vous ne donnez votre amity qu'a ceux qui la meritent, puisque
vous faites employer des persons qui s'acquittent si dignement. Je m'estime
heureux d'avoir eu a negotier avec luy, and de ce que par son moyen il vous a
plu me donner un nouveau temoignage de votre Bienveillance. Pour ce qui est de
la bonte que vous dites que sa Majeste a pour moy; je ne l'ay merit point que
par le respect que j'ay pour sa person Royale, don't je tacheray de luy donner
des preuvez a toutes les occasions qu'Elle me faira la grace de m'en fair
naitre. J'attens bien avec autant d'impatience celles ou je vous puisse
temoigner combienje suis sensible a toutes vos civilitez, que je reconnoitray
toujours par un veritable estime pour votre merit, and par une tres forte
passion de vous fair voir que je suis ave^ autant de sincerite que vous pouvez
desirer

Monsieur Votre etc.

The Triple Alliance copied from the Original Papers.
WHereas by the late Treaty concluded at Breda between the King of Great
Britain, and the States General of the United Netherlands, both Nations have
been restored, through the Blessing of God, to that ancient Friendship and good
Correspondence which was between them: And in Order to cut off all Occasions of
farther Differences, and to prevent all new Accidents, which might tend to the
Disturbance of the said Amity and good Correspondence of the Subjects on either
part, some Articles and Rules of Navigation and Commerce were there agreed; and
particularly by the Eleventh Article of the said Treaty, it was ordained, That
the said King, and the said States General, shall be obliged as Friends, Allies
and Confederates, mutually to defend the Rights and Immunities of each others
Subjects against all such as shall endeavor to disturb the Peace of either
State by Sea or by Land, or such, as living within the Dominions of either,
shall be declared public Enemies by the one or the other: And because it is
not particularly determined in what way and manner the said Confederates stand
obliged mutually to succor each other; and that it is the fixed Resolution of
the said King of Great Britain, and of the said States General, more and more
to corroborate and accomplish the said Agreement: Therefore in the first place,
and above all other things, they consent to confirm the said Treaty concluded
at Breda, together with the said Laws of Navigation and Commerce relating to
the same, as by these Presents they are confirmed, under a mutual and
undissolvable Obligation to observe and accomplish them truly and faithfully,
and to command the Subjects on both sides exactly and religiously to observe
and fulfill them according to the genuine Sense and Tenor of the said Treaty
and Articles: And for the better ascertaining the mutual Assistance that the
Parties are to give to each other, which was omitted in the preceding Treaty;
for increasing Amity and Friendship between the said King and States General,
and that full Provision may be made by a nearer Alliance and Union, for the
safety and mutual defense of both States, against the pernicious Endeavors and
hostile Attempts of any Enemy under any Pretext whatever; We whose Names are
underwritten, in virtue of the Orders and full Powers granted to us, and
hereunder to be inserted, do covenant and agree, That the said King of Great
Britain, and the said States General of the united Netherlands, shall be
mutually obliged, united and confederated together, as they are by the Force
and Virtue of these Presents mutually obliged, united and confederated in a
perpetual League defensive, in the manner, and under the Conditions following.

I.That if any Prince, State, or other Person whatever, without exception,
shall under any Pretext, invade or attempt to invade the Territories,
Countries, or any Places that lie within the Dominions of the said King of
Great Britain, or shall exercise any Acts of Hostility by Sea or by Land,
against the said King or his Subjects; the said States General shall be
obliged, as by Virtue of these Presents they are obliged, to send forty Ships
of War, well furnished with all things necessary, to assist the said King to
oppose, suppress and repel all such Insults and acts of Hostility, and to
procure him due reparation for any Damages sustained: That is to say, Fourteen
of the said Ships shall carry from sixty to eighty great Guns, and four hundred
Men, a just allowance and computation being made, as well with respect to those
Ships that carry a greater, as those that carry a lesser number of Men:
Fourteen other Ships shall carry from forty to sixty Guns, and one with
another, three hundred Men at the least, Allowance to be made as before; and
none of the rest to carry less than six and thirty Guns, and a hundred and
fifty Men. Besides which, they shall assist him with six thousand Foot-Soldiers
and four hundred Horse; or shall pay a Sum of Money with due regard to the
just value of such an assistance, either for the whole or a part, at the choice
of the said King. All these Aids shall be furnished within six Weeks after they
shall be demanded; and the said King shall reimburse the whole charge to the
said States within three Years after the Conclusion of the War.

II.That if any Prince, State, or other Person whatever, without exception,
shall under any Pretext invade, or attempt to invade the United Provinces, or
any Places situated within the Jurisdiction of the said States General, or
garrisoned by their Soldiers; or shall exercise any act of Hostility by Land or
by Sea against the said States general or their Subjects; the said King shall
be obliged, as by Virtue of these Presents he is obliged, to send forty Ships
of War well furnished with all things necessary, to assist the said States
General, to oppose, suppress and repel all such Insults and Acts of Hostility,
and to procure due Reparation for any Damages sustained by them: That is to
say, Fourteen of the said Ships shall carry from sixty to eighty great Guns,
and four hundred Men; a just Allowance and Computation being made, as well with
regard to those Ships that carry a greater, as those that carry a lesser number
of Men: Fourteen other Ships shall carry from forty to sixty Guns, and one with
another three hundred Men at the least: Allowance to be made as before; and
none of the rest to carry less than six and thirty Guns, and a hundred and
fifty Men. Besides which, He shall assist them with six thousand
Foot-Souldiers, and four hundred Horse; or shall pay a Sum of Money, with due
regard to the just value of such an Assistance, either for the whole or a part,
at the choice of the said States. All these Aids shall be furnished within six
Weeks after they shall be demanded: And the said States shall reimburse the
whole charge to the said King, within three Years after the Conclusion of the
War.

III.The said Ships of War, and the said auxiliary Forces of Horse and Foot,
together with the Commanders of the Ships and Forces, and all the subaltern
Officers of both, that shall be sent to the Assistance of the Party injured and
attacked, shall be obliged to submit to his Pleasure, and be obedient to the
Orders of him or them, who shall be appointed to command the Armies in chief
either by Sea or Land.

IV.Now that an exact Computation may be made of the Charges that are to be
reimburs'd within the space of three Years after the conclusion of the War; and
that the value of such Assistance may be adjusted in ready Money, which
possibly the Party attacked may choose, either for the whole or a part of the
said Ships, Horse and Foot; It Is thought expedient, That the fourteen Ships
carrying from sixty to eighty pieces of Cannon, should be valued at the Sum of
eighteen thousand six hundred and sixty six Pounds sterling; or of English
Money; the other fourteen which carry from forty to sixty Guns, at fourteen
thousand Pounds sterling; and the remaining twelve, at six thousand Pounds of
the same Money: Six thousand Foot, at seven thousand five hundred Pounds
sterling, and four hundred Horse, at one thousand four hundred Pounds, for one
Month: The Money to be paid by the said King of Great Britain at London, and by
the said States General at Amsterdam; according as the course of the Exchange
shall be at the time when Payment is to be made. But in consideration of the
six thousand Foot-Soldiers, the Sum of six thousand Pounds sterling shall be
paid within the first Month, to defray the Expense of listing and providing
the Men.

V.This League, with all and every thing therein contained, shall be confirmed
and ratified by the said King of Great Britain, and the said States General of
the United Provinces, by Letters Patents of both Parties, sealed with their
Great Seal in due and authentic Form, within four Weeks next ensuing, or
sooner if it may be; and the mutual Instruments of Ratification shall be
exchanged on each part within the said time.

Here follows a Copy of the Powers granted by the most Serene King of Great
Britain, etc. Charles, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all, etc.

A Copy of the Powers granted by the High and Mighty Lords, the States General
of the United Netherlands. The States General of the United Provinces of the
Netherlands, To all those, etc.

In Witness and Confirmation of all, and every part of this Treaty, We, whose
Names are underwritten, have subscribed and sealed the same, at the Hague in
Holland, the 23d. of January, 1668.

Signed on the King of England's Part, W. Temple. On the Part of the States,
Gellicom. Asperen. J. de Wit. Crommon. Vnkel. Jacob Van Coeverden. K.
Isbrants.


Factum tripliciter conventum.
QVandoquidem pactis non ita pridem Bredae inter Magnae Britanniae Regem, and
foederati Belgii Ordines generales conclusis, pristina inter utramque Nationem
Amicitia ac bona Correspondentia annuente divina gratia restituta, ade o ^ue ad
praecidendam omnem omnino in posterum novis dissidiis ansam, atque ad
praevenienda nova inter utriusque partis subditos accidentia, quae dictam
amicitiam ac bonam correspondentiam turbare aliquando possint, in Articulos
quosdam Legesque navigationis ac commerciorum ibidem consensum atque speciatim
undecimo dicti Tractatus Articulo statutum sit, uti dictus Dominus Rex,
dictique Domini Ordines Generales maneant Amici, confoederati Necessitudine and
Amicitia, conjuncti and astricti, ad Jura atque Immunitates Subditorum
alterutrius contra quoscunque demum tuendas, qui utriusve status Pacem Terra
Marive disturbare conabuntur, vel qui infra alterutra Dominia degentes publici
utriusque status Hosts donunciabuntur; neque tamen specifice definita
reperiantur media, auxiliave, quibus Foederatorum pars una alteri, tali in casu
succurrere debeat: Dicto autem magnae Britanniae Regi, dictisque Ordinibus
Generalibus stet Sententia is it haec Pacta corroborandi magis, magisque
perficiendi, Placui^ imprimis atque ante omnia, dictum Tractatum Bredae
conclusum, dictasque Leges Navigationis ac Commerciorum eo spectantes
confirmare, quemadmodum per praesentia confirmantur, obligatione mutua atque
indissolubili, eas bona Fide observandi atque adimplendi, jubendique ut a
subditis utrinque exact atque religiose observentur atque adimpleantur, juxta
genuinum dicti Tractatus dictorumque Articulorum Sensum ac Tenorem. Vt autem
praeterea de specialiore auxiliorum mutuo praestandorum designatione prioribus
Pactis omissa, pro Amicitiae inter dictum Dominum Regem dictosque Dominos
Ordines Generales Incremento majori c^nstet, utque securitati and defensioni
mutuae utriusque status contra inf^stos conatus vel insultus Hostiles a quoquam
f^rte qu^cunque demum sub praetextu instituendos, ar^tiori foedere atque V^ione
plene prospiciatur; Nos infra scripti Virtute mandati plenaeque potestatis
nobis concessae, atque inferius inserendae, convenimus atque statuimus dictum
Dominum Magnae Britanniae Regem, dictosque Dominos foederati Belgii Ordines
Generales, invicem obstrictos, unitos atque confoederatos fore; quemadmodum vi
ac vigore praesentium invicem obstricti, uniti atque confoederati sunt foedere
defensivo perpetuo, modo atque conditionibus sequentibus.

I.Quod si Principum Statuumve aliquis, aut quilibet alius, qualiscunque ille
tandem fuerit, Nemine excepto, sub quocunque praetextu invaserit vel invadere
tentaverit Territoria, Regionesque, aut loca quaelibet sub ditione dicti Magnae
Britanniae Regis sita, aliumve quemcunque Actum hostilem Terra Marive contra
dictum Dominum Regem ejusve Subditos exercuerit; dicti Domini Ordines Generales
tenebuntur, quemadmodum virtute praesentium tenentur, dicto Domino Regi, ad
insultus eos actusque hostiles arcendos, supprimendos, atque repellendos,
debitamque Damni dati Reparationem obtinendam, auxilio adesse quadraginta
Navibus bellicis probe instructis; quarum quatuordecim a sexaginta ad octoginta
Tormenta Bellica m^j^ra, H^minesque q^a dringentos forant singulae, facta justa
compensatione aut retributione inter eas quae numerosiore, and eas quae minus
numeroso milite Nautaque instructae erunt: Quatuordecim aliae a quadraginta ad
sexaginta Tormentis, ^o^ominibusque ad minimum trec^ntis; facta compensatione
ut supra, instructae sint quaelibet: Et nulla reliquarum minus forat quam
triginta sex tormenta, Hominesque centum and quinquaginta: atque insuper sex
mill Peditibus, and Equitibus quadringentis; vel Valor justo hujusmodi
Auxilii in pecunia numerando, (...) dicto Domino Regi (...) placuerit, vel
part (...) Auxilli, aut dicti Val^^^s in Pecunia, quae a dicto Domino R^^^
expetetur, P^asta^^^tur autem dicta Auxilia intra sex s^ptimanarum spatium
postquam postulata fuerint; dictisque Dominis Ordinibus a dicto Domino Rege
refundentur impensae omnes intra triennium, a finito atque extincto Bello
numerandum.

II.Quod si Principum, Statuumve aliquis, aut quilibet alius, qualiscunque ille
tandem fuerit, nemine excepto, sub quocunque praetextu invaserit vel invadere
tentaverit Provincias Confoederatas, aut loca quaelibet sub Ditione dictorum
Dominorum Ordinum Generalium sita, vel in quibus ipsorum miles praesidio
positus est, aliumve quemcunque actum hostilem, Terra, Marive, contra dictos
Dominos Ordines Generales, corumve subdi^es exercuerit, dictus Dominus (...)
tenebitur, quemadmodum Virtute p^aesentium tenetur, dictis Dominis Ordinibus
Generalibus ad insultus eo^ actusque hostiles arcendos, supprimendos, atque
repellendos, debitamque Damni dati Reparationem obtinendam, auxilio adesse
quadraginta Navibus bellicis probe instructis; Quarum quatuordecim a sexaginta
ad octaginta Tormenta bellica majora, Hominesque quadringentos ferant singulae
facta justa Compensatione aut Retributione inter eas quae numerosiore, and eas
quae minus numeroso milite Nautaque instructae erunt: Quatuordecim aliae a
quadraginta ad sexaginta Tormentis, Hominibusque ad minimum trecentis, facta
compensatione ut supra, instructae sint quae^ibet: Et nulla reliquarum minus
ferat quam triginta sex Tormenta, Hominesque centum and quinquaginta: Atque
insuper, sex mill Peditibus, and Equitibus quadringentis; vel valor justo
hujusmodi Auxilii in Pecunia, numerando, prout d^ctis Dominis Ordinibus eligere
placuerit, vel part tali praedicti Auxilii, aut dicti valoris in Pecunia, quae
ab iisdem expetetur. Praestabuntur autem dicta Auxilia intra sex septimanarum
spatium postquam postulata fuerint: Dictoque Domino Regi a dictis Dominis
Ordinibus refundentur impensae omnes intra triennium, a finito atque extincto
Bello numerandum.

III.Dictae Naves bellicae, ac dictae equitum peditumque Co iae auxiliares,
Naviumque and Copiarum Praefecti, caeterique Officiales bellici minores, vim
atque injuriam passo submissi, ejus Voluntatem respicere tenebuntur, atque
obsequi mandatis ejus corumve, quos summa cum potestate exercitui suo Terra
Marive praeficere voluerit.

IV.Quo autem exacta Computatio institui possit impensarum, intra trium Annorum
spatium, postquam bello finis impositus fuerit, restituendarum; vel etiam justi
earundem Valoris in Pecunia numerata quam vim hosticam passo, loco dictarum
Navium, Equitum, Peditumque, vel omnium vel pro part eligere forte placuerit;
visum fuit impensas quatuord^cim Navium a sexaginta ad octoginta Tormentis
instructarum, aestimare Pretio octodecim millium sexcentorum and sexaginta sex
Librarum S^^^lings, sive Monetae Anglicanae; ea^^mque qua^^^ decim quae a
quadraginta ad sexaginta Tormenta ferunt, qua^^^r d^^im millibus Libris
Sterlings; Reliquarum autem duodecim, sex millibus ejusdem Monetae libris: Sex
mill autem P^dites, septem millibus and quingentis Libris Sterlings:
Quadringentos vero Equites, mill quadraginta ejusdem monetae Libris, pro
quolibet Mense computandis: Nummaeque a dicto quidem Domino Rege Magnae
Britanniae, Londini, a Dominis vero Ordinibus Generalibus Amstelodami
solventur, juxta cursum Cambii eo tempore quo Solutio praestanda erit: Pro
primo autem Mense respectu peditum supradictorum, insuper persolventur sex
mill Librae Sterlings, pretium nimirum ad eos conscribendos instruendosque
necessarium.

V.Foedus hoc omniaque and singula eo contenta, a dicto D. Rege Magnae
Britanniae, dictisque Dominis Ordinibus Generalibus Foederatarum Provinciarum,
per patentes utriusque partis Literas sigillo magno munitas debita and
authentica forma, intra quatuor septimanas proxime sequentes aut citius si
fieri poterit, confirmabitur and ratihabebitur, mutuaque Ratihabitionum
instrumenta intra praedictum tempus hinc inde extradentur.

Sequitur tenor Mandati a serenissimo Domino Rege Magnae Britanniae dati.
Carolus, Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex, Fidei
Defensor, etc. Omnibus, etc.

Sequitur tenor Mandati, a Celsis and Praepotentibus Dominis Ordinibus
Generalibus foederati Belgii dati. Les Etats Generaux des Provinces Vnies des
Pais Bas, A tous ceux qui ces presents, etc.

In quorum omnium and singulorum Fidem majusque robur, hisce Tabulis
subscripsimus, illasque sigillis nostris subsignavimus. Hagae-Comitum in
Hollandia die 23tio. Januarii, Anni 1668.

Signed on the King of England's Part, W. Temple. On the States Part, Gellicom.
Asperen. Johan de Wit. Crommon. Unkel. Jacob van Coeverden. K. Isbrants.


THE King of Great Britain, and the States General of the United Netherlands,
having with great Grief considered, and maturely weighed the Miseries and
Calamities of the late War between the two Crowns, which raged in their
Neighborhood; and having observed, That the Flames of that Fire have
insinuated themselves among their Neighbors, which by inevitable necessity
will involve the greatest Part of the Princes and States of Christendom in the
same Calamities; unless they may be timely extinguished, before they gather
greater Force: Have thought that they could not discharge the Duty of that
Trust, and the respective Offices, wherein they are placed by God, if after the
Re-establishment of a mutual Friendship and Alliance, between the Nations of
Great Britain and the United Netherlands, and the Conclusion of a Peace between
the four powerful States that were Parties in that bloody War; They should not
apply their Minds with the utmost Diligence and Industry to compose the
differences that have arisen between the said two Crowns, and more especially
to take care, That the Flames of that War, which have been kindled in their
Neighborhood, may be extinguished. Therefore, The most Serene King of Great
Britain, and the High and Mighty States of the United Netherlands having with
much Labor and e^^nest Entreaty induced the most Christian King to profess
solemnly to the said States General, That he would immediately lay down his
Arms, if the Spaniard would either consent to yield up to him in due form and
manner by a Treaty of Peace, all those Places and Forts, together with the
Chastelanies and their Dependencies, which he possessed himself of in the
Expedition of the last Year; Or will be persuaded to transfer and make over to
him all the right that remains to them in the Duchy of Luxemburg (or else in
the County of Burgundy) together with Cambray and the Cambresis, Doway, Air,
St. Omer, Winoxbergen, Furnes and Lincken, with their Bailiwicks, Chastelanies,
and other Dependencies; and in case they accept the Alternative last mentioned,
the most Christian King will restore to the King of Spain, all such Places and
Territories as the French have possessed by their Arms since they entered
Flanders. Provided the High and Mighty States General, shall on their part
promise, and render themselves Guarrantees to the most Christian King, That
they will by their Reasons and other effectual Means induce the Spaniards to
agree to these Conditions. The said King of Great Britain, and the said States
General, jointly conclude and judge, That they can do no better Service in this
Conjuncture and State of Affairs, either to the two Kings before named, or to
the rest of the neighboring Princes and States; than by their joint Counsels
and utmost Endeavors, to exhort, and as much as in them lies, oblige the said
two Crowns to make Peace, upon the Terms and Conditions before mentioned. To
which end we, whose names are hereunto subscribed, having received full Power
to that Effect; have by Virtue of those Injunctions, concluded and agreed, the
following Articles.

I.That the King of Great Britain, and the States General of the United
Netherlands, shall either jointly or separately (provided their Intentions be
mutually communicated, and no way repugnant to this Agreement) use their utmost
Endeavors and Industry with the most Christian King, to persuade him to promise
and engage in the best Form, and by a solemn Treaty, to the King of Great
Britain, and to the States General of the United Netherlands, That he will
conclude a Peace and Alliance with the King of Spain, without any Exception or
Reserve under whatever Pretext, or for whatever Cause; if the King of Spain
shall be induced or persuaded by the King of Great Britain, and the
Confederated States, to yield to the most Christian King, either the Places he
possessed himself of, the last Year in the Low Countries, or to give him an
Equivalent, by delivering up the Places above mentioned, or others in lieu of
them, as shall be mutually agreed between the Parties concerned.

II.That the most Christian King be induced to consent, That the present
Cessation of Arms in the Low Countries, may be prolonged to the End of the
Month of May, to the end that the King of Great Britain, and the confederated
States may, in the mean time, employ themselves with all Diligence, Care and
Industry, to procure the Consent of the King or Queen of Spain, and their
Council, to the aforesaid Terms and Conditions.

III.But that the most Christian King may have no just occasion to refuse to
prolong the Cessation of Arms; the King of Great Britain, and the Confederated
States shall oblige themselves by the same Treaty, to take effectual Care, That
the Spaniards shall yield to France all that was taken the last Year by the
French, or give them an Equivalent, as shall be agreed with the Consent of both
Parties.

IV.That the most Christian King shall be induced and persuaded to give entire
Credit to, and put full Confidence in, the aforesaid Promise, that his Arms may
not for the future disturb the Quiet of the Low Countries: So that if it should
happen, contrary to all hope and expectation, that the King of Great Britain,
and the confederated States shall not be able by their Exhortations and earnest
Solicitations to persuade the Spaniards to give their Consent to the
Conditions abovementioned, before the end of the next ensuing May; and that it
become necessary to use more effectual means to that purpose: Nevertheless the
French shall not move or introduce their Arms within, or upon the Limits of the
said Low Countries; but the King of Great Britain, and the confederated States
shall engage, and take upon themselves to make such necessary Provision as may
effectually oblige the Spaniards to accept the foresaid Conditions of Peace:
And it shall not be left to the Discretion of the most Christian King, either
to exercise any Acts of Hostility in the said Countries, or to possess himself
of any Town, though by voluntary Surrender; unless the King of Great Britain, and
the Confederated States shall cease and omit to prosecute the Things
abovementioned.

V.That when the Peace is made between the two Crowns, not only the King of
Great Britain, and the confederated States; but likewise the Emperor, and all
the neighboring Kings and Princes, who shall think themselves concerned, that
the Quiet of Christendom remain unshaken, and the Low Countries be restored to
the Enjoyment of their former Tranquillity; shall be Guarrantees and
Conservators of the same: To which end the number of Forces, and other means to
be used against either of the Parties that shall violate or infringe the said
Peace, shall be determined and agreed, that the Injury may cease, and the Party
offended receive Satisfaction.

VI.That this Agreement with all and every thing therein contained shall be
confirmed and ratified by the said King of Great Britain, and the said States
General of the United Provinces, by Letters Patents on both sides, sealed with
the Great Seal in due and authentic Form, within four Weeks next ensuing, or
sooner, if it can be done; and within the said time the mutual Instruments of
Ratification shall be exchanged on both sides.

In Witness and Confirmation of all which, we, whose Names are underwritten
have subscribed and sealed the same. At the H^gue in Holland the 23d of
January, 1668.

Signed as before.

REX Magnae Britannae, atque Ordines Generales Foederati Belgii, reputantes,
atque apud Animum expendentes summo cum dolor Miserias Calamitatesque Belli,
quod nuper inter duas Coronas in Finibus exarsit, quodque necessitate quadam
ineluctabili maximam partem Principum atque Statuum Christiani Orbis iisdem
involvet malis, Serpente incendii istius Flamma ad Vicinos, nisi tempestive and
in Principio extinguatur: Existimarunt se nullatenus functuros partibus Officii
munerisque sibi a Deo mandati, si post foeliciter instauratam Amicitiam sub
auspiciis divini Numinis, and reductam veterem necessitudinem inter Magnam
Britanniam and foederatum Belgium, eodemque tempore stabilitam Pacem inter
quatuor potentes Status, qui cruenti istius Belli Parts fuerunt; Animum non
applicent sedulo omnique Industria ad componenda dissidia quae oborta sunt
inter praedictas duas Coronas, praesertim ut memorati in sinibus Belli flamma
sopiatur. Proinde, cum serenissimus Magnae Britanniae Rex, and Celsi
praepotentesque Ordines foederati Belgii, post multum Operis insumptum,
variasque obtestationes, obtinuerint a Christianissimo Rege, ut professus sit
dictis Ordinibus Generalibus se ex hoc tempore Arma depositurum, dummodo
Hispani parati sint illi rite atque solenniter cedere per Tractatum Pacis omnia
loca and munimenta, ut and Castelanias cum annexis, quae Armis in Expeditione
praecedentis Anni occupavit aut munivit; vel ut Hispani permoveantur in eum
transcribere omne jus quod illis restat in Ducatu Luxenburgico (sive in
Comitatu Burgundii) praeter Cameracum cum Cameracesio, Duacum, Ariam, Fanum St.
Audomari, Bergas St. Vinoci, Furnas and Linckium, cum Bailluatibus,
Castelaniis, caetisque quae inde pendent: Regemque Christian, posteriori casu,
restituturum Regi Hispaniae omnia loca ditionesque, quae Galli Armis ex quo
Flandriam ingressi sunt occupavere; ea Lege ut Celsi and Praepotentes D. D.
Ordines Generales reciproce caveant, Regemque Christian, securum reddant, se
effecturos apud Hispanos rationibus aliisque momentis, ut in easdem consentiant
Leges; arbitrati sunt se hac tempestate, atque hoc rerum Articulo optimam
navaturos operam non modo utrique praefatorum Regum, sed and aliis Principibus
Statibus vicinis; si conjunctim communicatis Consiliis collatisque Operis
adhortentur, and quantum suarum Virium est permoveant saepius dictas duas
Coronas, ad ineundam Pacem Legibus atque Conditionibus supra m^ noratis; in
quem fin^m facta nobis, qui has Tabu^as su^^, (...) us, potesta^ (...) ^e^a, ex
p aescrip^^ ^andatorum nostrorum co^^enimus de Articulis and Capitibus
sequentibus.

I.Q^^d Rex Magnae Britanniae, and Ordines Generales foederati Belgii,
conjunctim vel separatim, communicatis tamen omnino consiliis, and secundum ea
de quibus mutuo convenerit, omnem operam omnemque industriam adhibebunt apud
Regem Christianissimum ut in optima legitimaque Forma, solenni Tractatu
spondeat and promittat Regi Magnae Britanniae, and foederati Belgii Ordinibus
Generalibus, se pacis foedus facturum cum Rege Hispaniae, citra omnem quocunque
sub praetextu, vel quacunque de causa exceptionem vel dispensationem; si
Hispaniae Rex induci aut permoveri queat per Regem Magnae Britanniae, and
Ordines foederatos, ut cedat Regi Christianissimo, ut loca anno praeterito in
Belgica armis occupata, aut aliud tantundem valens, per traditionem locorum
superius memoratorum aliorumve in compensationem, de quibus mutuo consensu
parts inter se convenire poterunt.

II.Vt Rex Christianissimus consentire velit in prorogationem vacationis
armorum in Belgica ad finem Mensis Maij, ut temporis interea Rex Magnae
Britanniae, and foederati Ordines sedulo omnique industria and diligentia
operam dare possint apud Regem aut Reginam Hispaniae, ejusque Consiliarios, uti
legibus conditionibusque praefatis consensum adhibere velint.

III.Vt vere Rex Christianissimus nulla justa ratione dictam armistitii
prorogationem recusare queat: Rex Magnae Britanniae, Ordinesque foederati se
eodem Tractatu obstringent, id se effecturos ut reapse Gallicae cedatur ab
Hispanis omne quod Gallorum Armis Anno praeterito occupatum fuit aut aliud
tantundem valens, de quo mutuo partium consensu convenietur.

IV.Quod Rex Christianissimus inducetur and permovebitur praedicto promisso
plenam adhibere fidem, atque in eo Fiduciam ponere velit, and ut proinde ejus
Arma in posterum quiescant in Belgica, ita quidem ut si praeter omnem Spem and
expectationem Rex Magnae Britanniae foederatique Ordines nequeant per
exhortationes obtestationesque permovere Hispanos ante finem Mensis Maij
proximi, ut consensum adhibeant Conditionibus saepius memoratis, ac proinde ad
media majoris efficaciae venire necesse sit; nihilominus Galii intra fines and
in finibus dictae Belgicae sua arma non movebunt aut introducent: Sed Rex
Magnae Britanniae and foederati Ordines se obstringent, atque in se recipient
id sese suppleturos quod necessum erit, ut Hispani reapse astringantur, uti
Pacem legibus supradictis accipiant; adeoque Regi Christianissimo integrum non
erit ullos exercere Actus hostiles in dictis Regionibus, neque ullum occupare
Oppidum licet sponte sua se dedere velit, nisi Rex Magnae Britanniae, and
foederati Ordines cessent atque omittant efficere id quod jam dictum est.

V.Quod sancita inter duas Coronas pace; ejus servandae Sponsores vindicesque
erunt, in forma omnium optima, amplissima and securissima, non modo Rex Magnae
Britanniae, and foede^ati Ordines, sed and Imperator, omnesque R^^ges and
Principes vicini, qui existimabunt sua interesse ut Orbi Christian^ incon^ussa
maneat quies, and Belgicae sua reddu^^r constetque tranquilli^as: In quem finem
d^f^n^^cur copiarum militarium numerus, aliaque media quibus utendum erit
adversus alterutram partium quae temeraverit vel violaverit Pacem, ut injuriam
demat ac parti laesae resarciat.

VI.Pacta haec conventa omniaque and singula iis contenta, a dicto Domino Rege
Magnae Britanniae, dictisque Dominis Ordinibus Generalibus foederatarum
Provinciarum, per patentes utriusque partis literas sigillo magno munitas,
debita and authentica Forma, intra quatuor septimanas proxime sequentes, aut
citius si fieri poterit confirmabuntur and ratihabebuntur, mutuaque
ratihabitionum instrumenta intra praedictum tempus hinc inde extradentur.

In quorum omnium and singlorum fidem majusque Robur, hisce Tabulis
subscripsimus, illasque Sigillis nostris subsignavimus. Hagae-Comitum in
Hollandia 23. Die Januarii, 1668.

Signed as before.

Separate Articles, which shall be of the same Force and Authority, as if they
had been inserted in the Treaty concluded this Day, between the King of Great
Britain, and the States General of the United Netherlands.
I.I^ in the procuring of a Peace between F^ance and Spain, any Difficulty
should arise about the Point of the Renunciation, it is to be so contrived, That
either no mention at all is to be made of it in the Treaty, or at least, the
Form is to be conceived and set down in such Words, as nothing may accrue to
either of the two Crowns, on account of the said Renunciation; nor any
Prejudice be created to either of them in Point of Right: But if either the
King of Spain, or the most Christian King refuse their Consent to this
Expedient; then the King of Great Britain, and the confederated States, shall
proceed against the Refuser, as is agreed by the third and fourth Article of
the Treaty, and in the last of these Articles respectively; with this Condition
however, That in case such refusal proceed from the King of Spain, the most
Christian King shall oblige himself not to make War in the Low Countries,
according to the Tenor of the fourth Article.

II.That the King of Great Britain, and the States General of the United
Netherlands, to the end that all Parties may be satisfied, shall oblige
themselves to use their utmost Endeavors, that a Peace may at the same time be
established between the Kings of Spain and Portugal; but with this Condition,
That the most Christian King shall also oblige himself, in case this
Negotiation cannot be so soon accomplished, that such a Delay shall no way
hinder on his Part, the Peace between him and Spain; except only, That it shall
he free for the said most Christian King, to give Succor and Aid to the King
of Portugal, his Ally, either by way of Attack, that he may draw the Enemy fron
other Parts, or by an other means which he shall judge to be most convenient
and advantageous. And if the Spaniards can be brought to consent to a Peace
under the said Condition, and the same be concluded accordingly; then the most
Christian King shall be obliged wholly to abstain from the Low Countries, as
possessed of Peace, and not involved in the Disputes of either Party. Neither
shall it be lawful for him to form any Designs against them, either by open
force or clandestine Practices; nor to require any Satisfaction, under the
Pretext of Charges and Expenses to be sustained on account of the War in
Portugal; either for raising Men, or any other Burdens of that War. And if it
should happen that during the said War, the auxiliary Forces of the most
Christian King, should possess themselves of any Places in Spain or Italy; the
said most Christian King shall restore them to Spain, as soon as the Peace with
Portugal shall be made. But if beyond, and contrary to Expectation, Spain
should refuse to make Peace with the King of Portugal, and also with the most
Christian King; under that Exception, of leaving him free to assist his
Confederate, as has been already said: In this unexpected case, The King of
Great Britain, and the confederated States, shall be bound to employ themselves
effectually to procure the Consent of the Spaniards; yet with this Provision,
That the most Christian King do also oblige himself not to make War in the
Low Countries, as in the former Case is already said.

III.But if beyond all expectation, the most Christian King should entertain
such Thoughts as shall induce him to refuse to promise, That he will sign the
Treaty of Peace, as soon as the Spaniards shall consent to give up all those
Places, which have been acquired by him in his last Expedition, or such an
Equivalent as shall be agreed by mutual Consent; or in case he shall not
accomplish his Promise; or shall disallow or reject the Cautions and Provisions
that are expressed in the said Treaty, which are so necessary to obviate the
Fears and Jealousies that are most justly conceived of the most Christian
King's Intentions to make a farther progress with his victorious Arms into the
said Low Countries, so often already mentioned: In all these Cases, and also,
if he should endeavor by any Subterfuges or oblique Practices to hinder or
elude the Conclusion of the Peace; Then England and the United Netherlands
shall be bound and obliged to join themselves to the King of Spain, and with
all their united Force and Power to make War against France; not only to compel
him to make Peace upon the Conditions aforesaid, but if God should bless the
Arms taken up to this end, and favor them with success; and if it shall be
thought expedient to the Parties concerned, to continue the War, 'till things
shall be restored to that Condition, in which they were at the time when the
Peace was made upon the Borders of both Kingdoms, in the Pyrenaean Mountains.

IV.These separate Articles, with all and every thing therein contained, shall
be confirmed and ratified by the said King of Great Britain, and the said
States General of the United Provinces, by Letters Patents of both Parties,
sealed with their Great Seal in due and authentic Form, within four Weeks next
ensuing, or sooner if it may be; and within the said time, the mutual
Instruments of Ratification shall be exchanged on both sides.

Done at the Hague in Holland the 23d of January, 1668. Signed as before.

Articuli separati, qui ejusdem erunt Virtutis atque Authoritatis, ac si
inserti forent Tractatui, hodierno Die intra Regem Magnae Britanniae, and
Ordines Generales foederati Belgii concluso.
I.SI in procuranda pace inter Galliam and Hispaniam se offerat aliqua
difficultas super puncto renunciationis, ea ineunda est ratio, ut vel nulla
ejus in pactis fiat mentio, vel ut ejusmodi Verbis concipiatur Formula, ut
neutrae duarum Coronarum quoad praedictam renunciationem eo quicquam accedat,
aut etiam inde creetur aliquod juris detrimentum: Quod si vero Rex Hispaniarum
vet etiam Rex Christianissimus in id consentire nolint, adversus recusantem,
Rex Magnae Britanniae, and foederati Ordines procedent; conventum est Articulo
tertio and quarto dicti Tracitatus, and ultimo horum Articulorum respective: Ea
tamen Condition, ut in casu Recusationis Regis Hispaniae, Rex Christianissimus
se reciproce obstringat, quemadmodum in Articulo quarto, se nullatenus arma
moturum in Belgica.

II.Quod Rex Magnae Britanniae, and Ordines Generales foederati Belgii, ut
prolixius ab omni part satisfiat, se obligabunt omnem sedulo operam daturos,
ut Pax inter Reges Hispaniae and Lusitaniae eodem tempore sanciri possit; ea
tamen lege ut vicissim Gallia se obstringat, si tam cito non possit id negotium
perduci ad exitum, uti Pax inter se and Hispaniam nihilominus ineatur; hoc
excepto, ut liberum sit Regi Christianissimo suppetias far Regi Lusitaniae
Foederato suo, eique auxilio esse, sive inferendo arma sua ut aliunde detrabat
hostem, sive alio quocunque modo quem sibi commodissimum atque maxim ex usu
fore existimabit. Et si Hispani adduci poterunt ut consentiant in Pacem sub
dicta condition, atque ea proinde concluclatur; Rex Christianissimus
tenebitur, a Belgica ut pacata, atque neutrarum, partium rebus implicata omn^o
^bst^nere; neque ei jus fa q^e erit quidquam adversus eam moliri, neque palam
virtute bellica, neque clandestinis artibus; ut ne petere ullam satisfactionem
sub obtentu impensarum erog tronumque quae in bello Lusitanico erunt facien^ae
tam ob delectum M^^tum quam alia Belli Onera. Quod si contingat m^nente dicto
Bello per Auxiliares Regis Christianissimi Copias, occupari loca quaedam in
Hispania Italiave; Rex Christianissimus simulatque Pax cum Lusitania facta
fuerit, eadem restituet Hispaniae: Sed si praeter and contra Expectationem
Hispania recuset Pacem cum Rege Lusitaniae, ut and cum Rege Christianissimo, ea
cum exce tione ut Foederato suo liberum sit ei auxiliari, quemadmodum jam
dictum est; hoc inopinato casu Rex Magnae Britanniae and foederati Ordines
tenebuntur reapse id efficere ut Hispani omnimodo in id consentiant; ita tamen
ut reciproce Rex Christianissimus se obstringat quemadmo^ um Casu primo, quod
non sit moturus Arma in Belgica.

III.Si praeter omnem expectionem Rex Christianissimus inducat in animum ut
promittere nolit quod Tractatum Pacis signaturus sit, simulatque Hispani
cessuri fint omnia loca ab eo occupata in novissima expeditione, vel aliud
tantundem valens, de quo mutuo consensu convenietur; aut promissorum fidem non
impleat, aut detrectet respuatve cautiones and praemunimenta in dicto Tractatu
expressa, quae necessaria sunt ut obviam eatur metui justissime concepto, ne
Rex Christianissimu^ arma sua victricia in saepius memorata Belgica ulterius
proferat: Quod omnibus istis casibus, ut and si per alia Subterfugia aut
obliquas Arts conetur Pacis conclusionem impedire aut eludere; Anglia,
foederatumque Belgium tenebuntur accedere partibus Regis Hispaniae, omnibusque
and junctis viribus Terra Marique adversus Galliam bellum gerere; ut
compellatur non in leges duntaxat saepius jam memoratas Pacem facere; sed si
arma in eum finem sumpta, Deum habeant faventem and propitium, atque de communi
consensu id expedire visum fuerit, etiam bellum continuare, donec res in eum
statum fuerint restitutae quo fuerunt tempore foederis in collimitio Regnorum
in Montibus Pyrenaeis sanciti.

IV.Articuli hi separati, omniaque and singula iis contenta, a ^icto Domino
Rege Magnae Britanniae, dictisque Dominis Ordinibus Generalibus foederatarum
Provinciarum, per patentes utriusque partis litteras sigillo magno munitas,
debita and authenticu Forma intra quatuor Septimanas proxime sequentes, aut
citius si fieri poterit, confirmabuntur, and ratihahebuntur, mutuaque
Ratihabitionum Instrumenta intra praedictum tempus hinc inde extradentur.

Actum Hagae-Comitum in Hollandia Die 23 Januarii, 1668. Signed as before.

The Sweedish Act.
WHereas the King of Great Britain, and the States of the United Provinces of
the Netherlands have earnestly desired, that the King of Sweeden might be
associated with them, as one Principal party, in that League which is this Day
concluded, and signed by their Commissioners and Plenipotentiaries; whereby a
speedy and safe Peace may be promoted and made between the two neighboring
Kings, and the public Tranquillity of Christendom, by the Blessing of God, may
be restored: And whereas the King of Sweeden himself, even from the beginning
of these Differences, which have grown to such a height between the two Kings,
has acquainted the King of Great Britain, and the States of the united
Netherlands, with his good and sincere Intentions and Desire, to associate and
join himself to them in the Business abovementioned, as well in regard of the
strict Friendship and Alliances, which he ackowledges have joined him in one
common Interest with them, as that by his Accession to them, all useful and
honorable Means and Industry may be used to establish a Peace between the two
Kings: Professing that no other Difficulty has hitherto restrained him from
opening his Mind upon that whole matter, than, That he waited to be informed,
what firm and deliberate Counsels the King of Great Britain, and the States of
the United Netherl^^ds, would take in this Affair, and what Assistance would by
requisite, with other things of that kind, in which the said King of Sweeden
desires to be satisfied, to the end that he may proceed by the like Steps, and
in equal manner, with the King of Great Britain, and the States of the United
Netherlands: For these Reasons, it is thought expedient for the common good,
That the present Instrument between the Ministers, Deputies and
Plenipotentiaries of the said Kings of Sweeden and Great Britain, and those of
the said States of the United Netherlands, be put down in Writing, whereby, on
the one hand, the King of Sweeden should be obliged, after the foresaid
Satisfaction received, to embrace the said League, to use the same Endeavors
and to proceed equally, and in the like manner, as the said King of Great
Britain and the said States of the United Netherlands think fit to do, in order
to promote and carry on so useful a Work; and on the other hand, the said King
of Sweeden will be assured, That a Place is reserved for him, empty and entire,
to enter, as one Principal Party, into this League; as by these Presents he is
desired in the most friendly manner, both by the King of Great Britain, and by
the States of the United Netherlands; who on their Part will most readily
employ themselves, and all kind of good Offices, toward the Emperor and King
of Spain, to the end that all such Differences, as the said King of Sweeden may
have with them, be composed and determined, according to the Rules of Equity
and Justice. And forasmuch as concerns the Aid which is required from the said
King, the States General of the United Netherlands will not be wanting to send
with Expedition, such necessary Instructions to their Ambassadors in the Court
of England; that between them, and such Commissioners as the said King of Great
Britain shall appoint to that purpose, and the Extraordinary Ambassador of the
King of Sweeden, who is now ready to begin his Journey thither, together with
other Ministers residing there on the Part of diverse Princes and States, who
are concerned and interested in this Affair; such Measures may be taken to
settle all things which shall be requisite and necessary, that the said League
may acquire the substance as well as the Form of a Triple Agreement: To which
the respective Parties shall make it their Business to invite their Friends and
Allies, if any of them should desire to be admitted.

Done at the Hague, 13/23 of January, 1668. Signed. Christopher Delphicus B.
and Count of Dhona. Haraldus Appelboom.

CVM Magnae Britanniae Rex, ac Ordines Foederatarum Belgii Provinciarum, valde
desiderarint Regem Sueciae una cum ipsis in partem principalem adscisci illius
Foederis, quod hodierno Die per Deputatos ac Plenipotentiarios suos conclusum
signatamque est; quo promta atque tuta Pax inter Reges duos vicinos
promoveatur, quoque Divina adspirante gratia Orbem Christianum publica
tranquillitas instauretur: Praeterea cum Rex ipse Sueciae jam ab initio eorum
motuum qui inter duos designotos Reges cruduerunt, tam Magnae Britanniae Regi,
quam Foederatorum Belgarum Ordinibus sit testatus bonum sincerumque suum
propositum ac studium quo tenebatur, sese cum iis in hoc negotio modo
supradicto sociandi ac jungendi; idque respectu arctissimae necessitudinis, and
horum Foederum per quae communibus cum iisdem commodis adstringi se agnoscit,
ut per hunc interventum, perque modos utiles quoscunque ac honestos, Paci inter
binos Reges stabiliendae insudetur: Nec per ullam difficultatem sese hactenus
cohibitum, mentem suam super re tota aperiendi, nisi quod praestolatus est dum
certo resciretur quid deliberati atque firmi confilii Rex Magnae Britanniae and
Foederatorum Belgarum Ordines super omni hoc negotio essent capturi; tum
quousque promoveri subsidia, aliaque id genus nonnulla possent, per quae dictus
Sueciae Rex sibi satisfieri exoptat, ut pari and aequato cum Magnae Britanniae
Rege ac Foederati Belgii Ordinibus passu in hac re procedat: Ea propter, ex
commodo communi visum est fore, si hoc instrumentum inter Ministros Deputatos
at Plenipotentiarios dictorum Regum Sueciae Magnaeque Britanniae, nec non
dictorum Foederati Belgii Ordinum scripto consigna^etur; Quo una ex part
obligaretur Rex Sueciae, mediante satisfactione praedicta, ad amplectendum
designatum Foedus, and ad eandem navandam Operam, eodemque passu procedendum,
quo dictus Magnae Britanniae Rex, dictique Foederatorum Belgarum Ordines
procedendum sibi esse existimant, ut negotium tam salutare promoveatur: Necnon
part ex altera dictus Rex Sueciae certus ita fieret locum sibi vacuum ac
integrum relinqui Foederis hujusce inter parts principales amplectendi,
quemadmodum id ut faciat a Magnae Britanniae Rege, and ab Ordinibus Foederati
Belgii per hasce praesentes, maxim amicum in modum rogatur; qui and ipsi
libenter apud Caesarem and Hispaniarum Regem omne officii genus eo convertent,
ut Controversiae nonnullae quae dicto Sueciae Regi cum iis possint intercede^e,
quamprimum componantur, and secundum jus fasque e medio tollantur. Quantum vero
ad subsidia quae a dicto Rege praetendu^tur; Ordines Foederati Belgii Generales
non defuturi sunt mandatis necessariis confestim ad Legatos suos in Aula
Britannica mittendis, ut hos inter and Commissarios quos dictus Magnae
Britanniae Rex eam in rem designabit, interque Legatum Regis Sueciae
extraordinarium, qui iter jam nunc eo meditatur ex Belgio, aliosque illic
degentes Ministros Principum Statuumve, quos id negotium quoque tangit atque
concernit; concilia ineantur, super necessariis ac requisitis omnibus
constituendis: sic ut Foedus jam dictum consequatur, quamprimum substantiam
atque formam Pacti tripliciter conventi; ad quod invitandis Amicis and
Confoederatis, si qui ejus in partem admitti volent, omni ex part opera quam
diligentissime dabitur.

Actum Hagae-Comitum, 13/23 die Januarii, 1668. Signed, Christophorus Delphicus
B. ac Comes in Dhona. Haraldus Appelboomius.

The Negotiation of the Peace at Aix la Chapelle.
To my Lord Arlington.
Antwerp, Febr. 27. S. N. 1668. My LORD,
I Did not expect to give your Lordship another Trouble from this Town, but
having been detained here some Days by the Marquess's Stay 'till this Morning,
and intending at Night to follow him for Brussels; I know not whether my
Arrival there may be time enough to write by the Packet that parts from thence
to Morrow at Evening, and therefore will not venture by any Omission to forfeit
my Charter of writing every Post.

I had yesterday a joint Audience with the States Deputies, and will refer your
Lordship for what passed there, to the enclosed Memorial on our Part, and
Answer given us by the Marquess, which we have dispatched this Morning to Sir
John Trevor, and Mr. Bouningham at Paris, by a joint Express; in hopes by their
Endeavors there to bring the business to a Suspension of Arms, upon the
Marquess's having now accepted the Truce, to the shorter Term offered by
France, as well as the longer proposed by his Majesty and the States.

For the Alternative, we can yet draw no Resolution from him upon it, defending
himself by the Necessity of first concerting with us, how he shall be assisted,
in case of France refusing both the Truce, and the Alternative. This is in the
Marquess an Aim of engaging us by advance in the Party, and thereby
exasperating France, by being threatened more directly; and so imbarque the
whole Affair into the necessity of a long ensuing War: For, That Spain would
much rather engage in with our Assistance, than be forced to a Peace upon our
late Project; and I think, pursues its own Interest right in this Point: That
of Holland is certainly opposite to theirs, and leads them to nothing so much
as the Composure of the Quarrel, with some security of France growing no
greater at least on this side.

The Marquess is large, in arguing to me, That our Interest lies in a joint
War, rather than a Peace between the two Crowns, and that our end must have
been hitherto, only to engage Holland with us in the Quarrel; and reasons from
Story, and the present Genius of our People and Parliament. I endeavor to
quiet him in this Point, by assuring him, That whatever other Kings have
thought or done, and whatever the People wish or talk; the King, in whose sole
Disposition all matters of Peace and War lie, will by no Arts nor
Considerations be induced to break from Holland, in the Management of this
Business; nor make one Pace further in the Spaniards Defense, than the Dutch
are willing to join in. That his Interest as well as Honor lies in this
Resolution, agreed by so many solemn Treaties; and that we as well as the Dutch
can very well content our selves with a Peace, and Pursuit of our Commerce;
provided we are not alarmed too much, and too near, with the Growth of the
French Greatness: And I wind up all with pressing him still to an Acceptance
of the Alternative, and to embrace the Peace according to our Project. And thus
we fence here at present; of all which your Lordship, I believe, will receive
the Detail more at large by the Holland-Pacquet, in the Dispatches past between
me and Monsieur de Wit since my Arrival here; of which I desired him to send
Copies to their Ambassadors in England, to be by them communicated to your
Lordship; because, more Uncertainty in the Nieuport-Pacquet, and the present
Want of a settled Cipher, have hindered larger Transmissions this way, and more
directly to your Lordship's Hands.

Yesterday came in the Spanish Letters, and though I have not seen the Marquess
since; yet by what I have from his Secretary, and the Count Monterey, I have
reason to believe, That Don Juan is on his way hither, and now at Sea with
considerable Supplies of Men and Money; which are very necessary here, either
for carrying on a War, or inducing a Peace: The Particulars I cannot assure,
though the common Talk is, of eight Thousand Spaniards, and six hundred
thousand Crowns in Specie, and eight hundred thousand in Remise. It Is very
possible, your Lordship may hear more there of his coming, and see him sooner
than we shall here, as well as judge better; What, or how much it will import
to the Effect or Defeat, the Advance or Diversion of the present Councils. What
occurs to your Lordship upon it, and will relate to my Conduct here, I hope to
receive from you by the first; not esteeming any thing well begun without a
Thread at least from your Lordship to guide me, nor well performed, 'till I
receive your Approbation; upon which depends so much the Satisfaction, as well
as good Fortune of, etc.

To Monsieur de Wit.
Antwerp. Febr. 27. S. N. 1668. SIR,
I Have received much Satisfaction as well a^ Honor by yours of the 25th, and
am very glad to observe the same Conformity of Sentiments between us since we
parted, that there ever was while I resided at the Hague. I shall write to you
now with my own Ink; having already done it with that of the Marquess, who
would not be satisfied, 'till I sent you that Dispatch: And I was forced to
show him my Letter before I sealed it, to see whether it were agreeable with
what he had desired me to tell you upon that occasion.

I had at my first Audience pressed him so closely to declare himself upon the
Alternative, and surmounted all his Excuses upon defect of Powers, by desiring
that he would do it by way of Limitation, not to be ratifyed 'till the Queen of
Spain's further Pleasure; that at last he told me he would comply, provided
France could be brought to ratify their Renunciation in Form in the Parliament
of Paris; to content themselves with an Equivalent for the Cities taken, which
advance so far into the Heart of the Country: And lastly, if in case of a
Refusal from France, he might be assured before hand of the Assistance of
England and Holland by a common Concert.

I told him, That for the two Points of the Renunciation and the Equivalent; he
might reckon from our joint Offices upon all we could obtain from France in
favor of Spain. For, as to the Equivalent, our own Interest obliged us to it,
that we might leave so much a stronger Barrier between France and Holand: And
as for the Renunciation, we desired it too, but do not conceive it a Thing upon
which Spain ought to be too stiff; since our Guaranty was the only strong and
solid Renunciation that could be made upon this occasion: And for the Assurance
he desired, of being assisted in case of a Refusal from France; I did not
doubt, but he had heard at least, the substance of our secret Articles to that
purpose; because their Ambassador at the Hague had told me, that a Jew of
Amsterdam had sent him a Copy of them; by which he must needs be well informed
of our mutual Obligations, as well as of our Intentions not only to assist
Spain in case of a Refusal from France, but to engage our selves in the Quarrel
by an open War of all our Forces against that Crown.

After much Discourse to this Purpose, I thought fit for his entire
satisfaction upon the Article of our assisting Spain; to let him know clearly,
how far he might hope from us in the Point of the Renunciation, and to remove a
Thought which Don Estavan de Gamarra had given him as coming from me, That
there was something in the Articles, by which it should appear, that we would
not force Spain in case of a Refusal: For these Reasons, I say, I thought good
to read to him our three separate Articles, without giving him a Copy; for he
professed to me, that he never received one from the Jew, though he did the
substance of them both from him, and the Baron de Bargeyck. I do not know,
whether I did well in showing them to him; but if you think otherwise, I hope
you will excuse me upon my good Intentions, and my usual plain dealing, to
inform freely those I treat with, of what they have to hope or to fear. The
Marquess took no Offense at our two first Articles; and only said, He could
not comprehend, why the States being newly Enemies to Portugal, and having
still a Controversy with them, should desire so much to see them strengthened
by a Peace with Spain. I told him, my Opinion was; That they drove on this
Affair, because they believed, that without a Peace with Portugal, Spain would
not recover it self enough to make head against France, and reduce Affairs of
Christendom to the Balance that is necessary. He was satisfied with this
Answer, and spoke no more of the Business of the Renunciation: But, upon That
of the Assistance we promised; he said, That the Words of the third Article
were strong enough, but in too general Terms; and that after he should have
accepted the Alternative, France might yet, during the next Month, or April,
make some Enterprises upon the Places on this side, before the new Levies could
be raised, and take some of them, if he were not furnished with three or four
thousand Foot, which might be easily done from Holland: And though I told him,
that we could not concert further with him before he had accepted the
Alternative, and by that means cast the Refusal upon France, and by
consequence, the Force of our Arms in case of a War, which we would not declare
'till we were assured upon which Side the Refusal would lie; For all that, he
would not be satisfied 'till I had writ you that Letter; from which however, I
looked for no other Effect, than to let him understand from you, what he had
already learnt enough from me.

On Sunday-Morning your Deputies arrived, and we had a joint Audience with the
Marquess, whereof they will send you an account. I shall only tell you, That as
we pressed him very much upon the Alternative, and he on the contrary, pressed us
to a Concert for the Defense of Flanders, and in the mean while to make our
Preparations for War; I told him thereupon, what Preparations the King my
Master had already made, and those also made by the States on their side; but I
desired him by his declaring himself upon the Alternative, to let us know,
against which of the two Parties such great Preparations must be employed. I
leave it to your Deputies to entertain you with an Account of the long
Discourses he made upon this occasion, which however were moderate enough
toward our common Intentions. But we finished them all, by giving him a
Memorial to the same Effect with what we had told him; upon which having
received an Answer yesterday in the Evening, we dispatched it away this Morning
to the Ministers at Paris, to forward the Suspension of Arms, if possible, by
our accepting the Truce proposed by France, to the end of March.

Yesterday came Letters from Spain: And though I have not seen the Marquess
since, (who went early this Morning for Brussels) yet, by what I have learnt
from other Hands, I have reason to think, that Don Juan may be at present upon
his Journey hither, and perhaps at Sea, and that he brings along with him
considerable Supplies both of Men and Money. The Talk runs, that he has eight
thousand Spaniards, six hundred thousand Crowns in Specie, and eight hundred
thousand in Returns. But of these Particulars I cannot assure you at present. I
have already informed your Deputies more at large in what I have learnt upon
the Subject of Don Juan; as I shall continually do beforehand of all things
that I think you would be glad to know from hence: And I believe they will tell
you, That there is no need to desire me to use them with all Confidence whereof
they have already received Proofs enough since we met here: And, they will be in
every thing the more acceptable to me, by how much I see they are in Esteem
with you, and in Credit with the States, as indeed they deserve both from their
Qualities and their Persons.

Pray give me the Liberty to desire you will send a Copy of this Letter to the
Dutch Ambassadors at London, with Directions to show it my Lord Arlington;
because I cannot so well trust the Nieuport-Pacquet, too much exposed to the
Inspection of the French; and I am not yet so perfect in my Cipher as to write
long Letters in it upon these Affairs.

I desire you will remember me to my Friends at the Hague, and believe me, as
much as any Man in the World,

Sir, Your, etc.

A Monsieur de Wit.
Anvers. le 27 Fevr. S. N. 1668. Monsieur,
J'AY eprouve beaucoup de Satisfaction, and receu beaucoup d'Honnour par votre
Lettre du 25 de ce mois; and je suis fort aise de remarquer une aussi grande
Conformite de Sentimens enter nous, depuis que nous nous sommes separez, qu'il
y en a toujours eu pendant mon sejour a la Hay. Je vous ecriray a present de
mon propre encre, car c'est de celle de Monsieur le Marquis que je vous ecrivis
dernierement: Il ne voulut point paroitre satisfait, que je n'eusse consenti a
me charger du soin de vous ecrire, and par la je me vis contraint a luy montrer
ma lettre avaunt que de la fermer; car il falloit qu'il jugeat si elle etoit
conform a ce qu'il m'avoit pry de vous mander sur l'affaire qui en faisoit le
sujet.

Dans ma premiere audience je l'avois si fort press de se declarer sur
l'alternative, and j'avois ete si habile a lever toutes ses difficultez, and a
m'opposer a ses delais qui etoient fondez sur son manque de Pouvoirs; mes
instances etoient si fortes and si redoublees; qu'il me dit enfin qu'il se
disposeroit a fair ce que j'exigois de luy, pour^ u qu'on put porter la France
a fair verifier, dans les forms sa renonciation dans le Parliament de Paris; a
se contenter d'un equivalent pour les Villes prises, lesquelles sont situees si
avaunt dans le pais, and presque au coeur de l'Etat, and enfin qu'en cas de
refus de la part de la France, il seroit assure du secours de L'Angleterre and
de la Hollande, and que les deux Nations armeroient de concert. Au rest, voicy
par ou je reussis a vaincre sa repugnance, and a obtenir ma demand; je luy dis
qu'en attendant l'arrivee de pleinpouvoirs, il fit sous le bon plaisir de la
Reine d'Espagne, and ad ratificandum, la declaration sur laquelle je le
pressois.

A l'egard de conditions qu'il propose, voicy ce que je luy ay repondu; que
pour les deux premieres, savoir la Renunciation and l'Equivalent, qu'il se
pouvoit promettre de nos soins and de nos offices mutuels tout ce que nous
pourrions obtenir de la France en faveur de l'Espagne; a quoy j'ay ajoute, qu'a
l'egard de l'Equivalent, notre interet commun demandoit qu'on pressat cet
Article, and qu'il fust accord, afin qu'une plus forte barriere fust laissee
enter la France and la Hollande. Que pour ce qui regardoit la Renonciation,
nous la desirions aussi; mais que nous ne croyons pas que ce fut une chose sur
laquelle l'Espagne dut s'opiniatrer; puisque notre Guarantie etoit l'unique
seurete and la seule solid Renonciation, sur laquelle il fut seur de se
reposer en cette occasion. Qu' a l'egard de l'assurance qu' il vouloit avoir
d'un secours, en cas que la France refusat les Conditions; je ne doutois point
qu'il n'eut ete instruit, du moins en substance, du contenu de nos Articles
secrets touchant ce point la; que l'Ambassadeur d'Espagne a la Hay m'avoit
meme dit, qu'un Juif d'Amsterdam luy en avoit fait tenir la copy, par ou il
devoit etre assez instruit de nos engagemens mutuels, aussi bien que de nos
Intentions pour l'Espagne; qui etoient, non seulement de l'assister en cas d'un
refus de la part de la France, mais de nous engager dans sa querelle, par la
declaration d'une guerre ouverte en tournant toutes nos forces contre la France.

Apres beaucoup de discourse sur cette matiere, j'ay trouve a propos, afin de le
satisfaire pleinement sur l'Article de secours, pour luy fair evidemment
sentir jusqu'ou il pouvoit conter sur nous, dans l'affaire de Renonciation,
aussi bien que pour luy oter la pensee que Don Estavan de Gamarra luy avoit
donnee de ma part, que peut etre y avoit il quelque chose dans les Articles par
laquelle il paroitroit que nous ne voulions forcer l'Espagne en cas d'un refus:
Pour toutes ces raisons dis je, j'ay juge a propos de luy lire nos trois
Articles separez, sans luy en laisser la copy; car il me declara, qu'il ne les
avoit point receus de son Juif, mais qu'il en avoit vu la substance, and que
c'etoit par le canal de ce Juif and du Baron de Bargeyck. Je ne say pas si j'ay
bien fait en les luy montrant; mais en cas que vous jugiez le contraire,
j'espere que vous m'excuserez toujours en faveur de mes bonnes Intentions, qui
m'ont toujours port a declarer ouvertement a ceux avec qui je traite, tous les
sujets qu'ils ont a craindre and d'esperer. Le Marquis ne se formalisa pas de
nos deux premiers Articles; il dit seulement, qu'il ne peut comprendre pourquoy
les Etats qui etoient n'agueres ennemis de Portugal, and a qui il rest encore
des chose^ a demeler avec luy, souhaitoient fi fort de voir accroitre leurs
forces par une paix avec l'Espagne: Je luy dit que ma pensee etoit, qu'ils
pressoient cette affair, parce qu'ils croyoient que sans la paix avec le
Portugal, l'Espagne ne se verroit jamais en etat de fair tete a la France, and
de donner par ce moyen aux affairs de la Chretiente le just equilibre
qu'elles doivent avoir. Il se contenta de cela, and ne parla plus de l'affaire
de la Renonciation. Mais a l'egard de secours que nous promettons, il me dit,
que les terms de l'Article troisieme etoient assez forts, mais trop generaux;
and qu'apres qu'ils auroient accepter l'Alternative, la France pourroit encore
pendant les Mois de Mars and d'Avril, fair quelques tentatives sur les Villes
du Pais bas; que les nouvelles levees ne pourroient encore etre sur pied; and
que la Flandre se verroit enlever quelqu' une de ses places, si elle n'etoit
munie de trois ou quatre mill Hommes de Pied, and qu'il etoit facile a la
Hollande de les fournir. Quoy que j'aye pris le soin de luy repeter, que nous
ne pouvions entrer en aucune Negotiation avec luy, avaunt qu' il eut accept
l'Alternative, que par la le refus retomberoit sur la France, and que par
consequent elle s'attireroit toutes nos forces sur les bras en cas de guerre;
qu'enfin ces forces ne pouvoient fair de demarches jusqu'a ce qu'on eut scu de
quel cote seroit le refus. Tout cela ne le satisfit pas, and il ne parut point
content que je ne vous eusse ecrit la Lettre qui a precede celle cy, de
laquelle pourtant je n'attendois pas d'autre effet que de luy fair voir par
votre propre Plume, ce qu'il avoit deja assez appris par ma bouche.

Le Dimanche au matin Messieurs vos Deputez arriverent, and nous eumes
conjointement notre audience du Marquis; c'est de quoy ils vous rendront conte;
je vous diray seulement, que comme nous l'avons fort press sur l'Alternative,
and que luy au contraire, ne nous a parle and n'a insiste que sur un Concert
pour sa defense, nous proposant de fair tous nos preparatifs pour la guerre en
attendant; je luy ay parle de ceux que le Roy mon Maitre faisoit deja, and de
ceux que les etats faisoient aussi de leur cote: Je l'ay pry de nous apprendre
en se declarant sur l'Alternative, contre le quel de deux parties il faudroit
employer de si grands preparatifs. Je laisse a Messieurs vos Deputez le soin de
vous entretenir du Detail de la Conference, qui fut longue, and dans laquelle
le Marquis parla souvent and long tems, mais toujours d'une maniere assez
moderee, and qui ne paroissoit point s'eloigner de nos communes Intentions.
Notre audience s'est conclue par la Presentation d'un memoire que nous luy
avons remis, and qui contenoit en substance les chooses que nous etions charge
de luy dire. Notre memoire ayant ete repondu hier au soir, nous avons envoye ce
matin la reponse aux Ministres qui sont a Paris, and cela dans la veue de fair
reussir, s'il est possible, la suspension d'Armes; qui selon toutes les
apparences ne sera pas long tems differee, des qu'on aura appris en France, que
la treve qu'elle a proposee jusqu'a la fin de Mars vient d'etre acceptee.

Il arriva hier des Lettres d'Espagne, and quoy que je n'ay pas vu le Marquis
depuis qu'il a receu ses depeches (car il a parti ce matin des la point de
jour pour Brusselles) j'ay pourtant lieu de conclure de tout ce que j'ay appris
d'ailleurs, que Don Juan est enfin parti, and meme deja embarque pour se render
en ce pais-cy, and qu'il a mean avec luy des secours considerables and d'Hommes
and d'Argent; le bruit court, que les Troops consistent en 8000 Espagnols, que
l'Argent se monte a 600000 ecus en especes, and en 800000 ecus de remises. Mais
en vous ecrivant ces particularitez je ne pretens vous apprendre encore rien de
certain. J'ay dit dans un plus grand detail, a Messieurs vos Deputez, ce que
j'avois appris touchant Don Juan; and a l'avenir je seray toujours pressed a leur
declarer toutes les chooses que je croiray que vous serez bien aise que vous
soient mandees d'icy. Je me flate qu'ils vous diront qu'il n'est pas necessaire
de me prier de me communiquer, and de m'ouvrir a eux avec toute sort de
confiance, puisque je leur en ay deja done des preuves depuis que nous nous
sommes rassemblez icy. Leur entretien and leurs persons me seront d'autant
plus agreables, que je vois qu'avec votre estime ils ont aussi l'estime and la
confiance de Messieurs les Etats; c'est une justice rendue a leur merit and a
leurs qualitez personnelles.

M'accorderez vous la liberte de vous prier d'envoyer une copy de cette Lettre
aux Ambassadeurs d'Hollande a Londres, avec order de la fair voir a Milord
Arlington; car je me defy extremement du courier de Nieuport, trop expose a la
rencontre des Francois; and je ne suis pas encore assez grand Maitre dans mon
chiffre, pour m'en servir dans les affairs d'un aussi long detail.

Je vous pry de m'aider a me conserver dans le souvenir de mes amiss de la
Hay, and de me croire toujours, and autant que person du monde,

Monsieur, Votre tres humble and tres affectionne Serviteur.

The Memorial given to the Marquess of Castel-Rodrigo. Febr. 1668.
My Lord,
THE under-signed Resident of the King of Great Britain, and the Deputies
Extraordinary of the States General of the United Neitherlands, find themselves
obliged to represent to your Excellency, That his Majesty and their High and
Mightinesses having lately concluded a Treaty, by which they have not only
provided for their proper Security, but also for the Peace and Quiet of
Christendom, in case their Neighbors proceed in it with the same good
Intentions wherewith the said Allies have begun this Affair: His said Majesty
and Their High and Mightinesses, for the better perfecting so Christian a Work,
having given Orders to their Ministers residing at the Courts of both Kings at
present in War, to endeavor by all means, and by a common Concert to dispose
both the said Kings to accept the means proposed by the said Allies, as the
readiest and most necessary for arriving at so happy an End; that is to say, to
accept the Peace upon the Alternative already proposed: And (to prevent the
Accidents that may intervene to hinder the Progress of the Treaty) to consent
also immediately to a Truce 'till the end of March, and in the mean while to
send their Plenipotentiaries to Aix la Chapelle, furnished with Instructions
and Powers, necessary to treat and conclude a Peace upon the said Alternative;
that the Fire at present kindled, and whereof in all appearance the Sparks are
ready to fly through the greatest Part of Christendom; may be soon
extinguished, and give place to a general and lasting Peace, to the safety of
all those who find themselves engaged in the sad Effects or Consequences of the
present War.

The said Resident and Deputies extraordinary are more particularly obliged by
the Orders of their Masters, to represent to your Excellency, how glorious it
will be to you, how advantageous to the common Ends of the Peace, and how
necessary for preserving to Spain the remainder of Flanders; that your
Excellency by virtue of your Powers, would make the first Step in this great
Affair, by consenting readily to the said Alternative, and to the said Truce,
and to the dispatching of the said Plenipotentiaries to Aix la Chapelle; and
for the better entering into this Negotiation, and the said Truce, That your
Excellency will declare immediately your Acceptance of the Truce, which the
most Christian King has proposed, from the 18th of November to the last of
March, 1668. And upon all these Points, the said Resident and Deputies
extraordinary, do pray your Excellency with all possible Instances to give them
a speedy and plain Answer, agreeable to the good and holy Dispositions
wherewith his Majesty and Their High and Mightinesses have begun and pursued
this glorious and Christian Design of a general Peace.

Memoire au Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo. Anvers. Fevr. 1668.
Monsieur,
LES sous-signez Resident de la Grande Bretagne, and les Deputez
extraordinaires des Etats Generaux de Provinces Vnies de P^i bas se trouvent
obligez de representer a V. E que sa Majeste and leurs Hautes Puissances ayans
depuis peu conclus un traite, par lequel ils n'ont pas ^eulement pourvu a leur
propre seurete, mais aussi a la paix and repos de la Chretiente, en cas que
leurs voisins y procedent avec les memes bonnes intentions don't les dits Alliez
ont entame cette affair; sa dite Majeste and leurs Hautes Puissances, pour
mieux acheminer un ouvrage si Chretien, ont done ordres a leurs Ministres
aupres de deux Couronnes a present en guerre, de tacher par tous moyens, and
par un Concert commun de disposer les dites deux Couronnes a accepter les
moyens proposez par les dits Alliez, comme les plus prompts and les plus
necessaires pour arriver a une fin si heureuse; c'est a dire, de consentir a la
paix sur l'Alternative deja proposee; and (pour prevenir les accidens qui
pourront survenir pour empecher le progrez d'un traite) de consentir aussi
promptement a une treve jusqu'e la fin du mois de Mars, and en attendant,
d'envoyer leurs Plenipotentiaires a la Ville d'Aix la Chapelle, munis des
Instructions and de pouvoirs requis pour y traiter and conclurre la Paix sur la
dite Alternative, afin que le feu qui se voit a present allume, and duquel les
estincelles se vont en appearance jetter dans la plus grande part de la
Chretiente, se puisse bientot etouffer; and fair place a une paix generale,
durable and salutaire a tous ceux qui se trouvent enveloppes ou dans les effets
ou dans les consequences funestes de la guerre present.

Les dits Resident and les Deputez Extraordinaires se trouvent plus
particulierement obliges par les ordres de leurs Maitres, de representer a V.
E. combien il luy sera glorieux, and avantaguex a la fin commune de la paix,
and necessaire a la conservation de ce qui rest a l' Espagne dans les Pais
bas; que V. E. en virtue de ses pouvoirs fasse le premier pas dans cette grande
affair, en consentant promptement a la dite l'Alternative, and a la dite
Treve, and a la depeche des dits Plenipotentiaires a la Ville d'Aix la
Chapelle: Et aussi pour mieux acheminer cette Negotiatiation and la dite Treve,
que V.E. se declare promptement d'accepter la treve que sa Majeste. Tres
Chretienne a proposee le 18 de Novembre 1667, jusqu'au dernier jour de Mars
1668. Et sur tous ces points les dits Resident, and les Deputez Extraordinaires
se trouvent obliges de prier V. E. avec toutes les instances possibles, de leur
donner une reponse prompte, net and agreeable aux bonnes and saints
dispositions avec lesquelles sa Majeste and leurs Hautes Puissances ont entame
and poursuivi ce dessein glorieux and Chretien de la Paix commune.

To my Lord Hallifax.
Brussels, March 2. S. N. 1668. My Lord,
IT would be a difficult thing to answer a Letter I received lately from your
Lordship, if it could ever be difficult for me to do a Duty where I Owe it so
much, and Pay it so willingly. The Reflections I make upon what you say, and
what I hear from other Hands of the same kind, carry me only to consider how
much by chance, and how unequally Persons and Things are judged at a Distance;
and make me apprehend from so much more Applause than is my Due upon this
Occasion, that upon the next I may meet with as much more Blame than I deserve;
as one seldom has a great Runn of Cards that is not followed by an ill one, at
least Gamesters that are no luckier than I. It is not my Part to undeceive
People, that will make my Successes pass for Merit or Ability; but for my
Friends, I would not cheat them to my Advantage it self; and therefore will
tell you the Secret of all that has seemed so surprising in my Negotiation;
which is, That Things drawn out of their Center, are not to be moved without
much Force, or Skill, or Time; but to make them return to their Center again,
there is required but little of either, for Nature it self does the Work. The
true Center of our two Nations now so near allied, is where they now are
seated; and nothing was in the way of their returning thither, but the extreme
Jealousies grown between the Ministers on both sides, and from thence diffused
among the People; and This it was my good luck to Cure, by falling into a great
Confidence with Monsieur de Wit, which made all the rest easy: And there is
the whole Story; that you may see how much you are either biased, or mistaken
in all the rest you say of it. For what you mention of Reward, I know not how
it came into your Head, but I am sure it never entered into mine, nor, I dare
say, into any Bodies else. I will confess to you, that considering the
Approbation and good Opinion which his Majesty, and some considerable enough
about him, have been abused into, by my good Fortune in this Business: I think,
a wiser Man might possibly make some Benefit of it, and some of my Friends have
advised me to attempt it; but it is in vain: For I know not how to ask, nor
why, and this is not an Age, where any Thing is given without it. And by that
time you see me next, you shall find all this which was so much in Talk to my
Advantage for nine Days, as much forgotten as if it had never been, and very
justly I think; for in that time it received a great deal more than its Due,
from many other Hands as well as from yours. This I tell you, that you may not
deceive your self by hoping to see me ever considerable, further than in the
Kindness of my Friends, and that your Lordship may do your Part to make me so
in that, seeing me like to fail in all other Ways. But as I remember, this is a
Time with you for good Speeches, and not for ill Letters; I will therefore end
this, to make you more Room for the others, and hope that none of the Eloquence
you are entertained with, can be more persuasive than a plain Truth, when I
assure you that I am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Faithful Humble Servant.

To my Lord Arlington.
Brussels, March 2. S. N. 1668. My Lord,
I Am sorry his Majesty should meet with any thing he did not look for at the
opening of this Session of Parliament; but confess I do not see why his Majesty
should not only consent, but encourage any Enquiries or Disquisitions they
desire to make into the Miscarriages of the late War, as well as he has done
already in the matter of Accounts: For, if it be not necessary, it is a King's
Ease and Happiness to content his People. I doubt, as Men will never part
willingly with their Moneys, unless they be well persuaded it will be employed
directly to those Ends for which they gave it; so they will never be satisfied
with a Government, unless they see, Men are chosen into Offices and Employments
by being fit for them; continued, for discharging them well; rewarded for
extraordinary Merit; an punished for remarkable Faults. Besides, in these Cases
his Majesty discharges the Hardship and Severity of all Punishments upon the
Parliament, and commits no Force upon the Gentleness of his own Nature, while
his Subjects see, that no Tenderness of their Prince, nor Corruption of
Ministers, can preserve them long from paying what they owe to any Forfeits of
their Duty. Nor indeed, can any Prince do Justice to those that serve him well,
without punishing those that serve him ill; since That is to make their
Conditions equal whose Deserts are different. I should not say this to any
Person but your Lordship, to whom I know part of that Justice is due. But to
say Truth, the Progress and End of the last War, went so much to my Heart, and
I have heard so much lately from Monsieur de Wit, concerning the carriage of
it on our side, especially what fell under his Eye, while he was abroad in the
Fleet; that I cannot but think the Parliament may be excused for their Warmth
in this Pursuit. But your Lordship can best discern by the Course of Debates,
whether this proceeds from a steady Intention upon a general Good, or from some
accidental Distempers, from which the greatest and best Assemblies of Men are
not always free, especially when they have continued long together.

I beg Your Lordship's Pardon for my Liberty in these Discourses, to which You
were pleased to encourage Me by hearing Me so obligingly those few Minutes I
was allowed for such Talk or Thoughts at my last being with You, and from the
Sense You then expressed of the absolute Necessity there was for His Majesty to
fall into a perfect Intelligence with His Parliament, especially being engaged
into an Appearance of Action abroad by the Force of this present Conjuncture.

I am ever, etc.

To Sir John Trevor.
Brussels March 5. S. N. 1668. SIR,
ABout ten Days since I dispatched away an Express to You (jointly with the
Deputies of Holland) whereby We acquainted You and Mons. Beuningham that the
Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo had accepted the Truce and Suspension of Arms
proposed some Time since by France until the End of March, as well as the other
proposed lately by His Majesty and the States General until the End of May. We
are in some Pain to have yet received no Account of His Arrival, but hope this
Delay will be recompensed by bringing Us news of the Treaty's being accepted in
the same Terms by that Court as well as by this. However in case of any Scruple
which may be raised there, for want of due Notice given of the Acceptance
here, we now send You an Act of the Marquis Castel-Rodrigo, authorizing His
Majesty's and the States Ministers at Paris, to manifest to that Court His
Excellency's said Acceptance, and thereupon to negotiate and conclude the same
on that Side.

And, to the End that no Objection may be made by France against the present
Expedition of this Truce in order to an ensuing Treaty and Peace; We send You
likewise by this Express the Marquis's last Answer to our Instances Yesterday
made for the Acceptance also of the Alternative, which is so full and so
direct to the Ends of our late Treaty, that we have now nothing left to do on
this Side; the Remainder of the whole Negotiation lying on your Parts at Paris,
which we are here very much pleased with, seeing it is devolved to so much
abler Hands. I hope You will place the whole Strength of His Majesty's and the
States General's Credit in that Court upon an immediate Consent to the
Suspension of Arms; knowing how dangerous all new Accidents may prove to the
fair Hopes and Prospect in which we are at present of a Peace; and withal how
far His Majesty and the States are engaged to take Part in any Action that
shall begin after the Marquis's accepting the Alternative, as well as all other
Points of their late Project for bringing about so happy an End.

For a good Presage of this greater Peace, we received here the News of That of
Portugal, the very Evening which brought us so happily the Marquis's Answer
upon the Alternative; which has so much raised the Hearts of the Spaniards
here, that we are likely to have less Thanks for pressing them so far to a
prejudicial Peace, as they esteem it on this side: But since they are already
obliged, it will depend wholly upon France to hinder the Conclusion of this in
the same Season with the other; which I will believe them too wise to do, as
well as too constant to the Assurances they have already given His Majesty, the
States, and several other Princes in this Point; of which the immediate
consenting, a Suspension of Arms will show the Meaning and Effect.

I shall no further increase your present Trouble than by the Professions of my
being

Sir, Your most humble Servant.

TO THE Count de Molina, Spanish Ambassador at London.
March 7. 1668. My Lord,
YOUR Excellence cannot doubt of my Satisfaction in arriving at Brussels, to
find my self there immediately possessed of your Letter with the enclosed
Paper; though the News of your Health was more necessary to me than that of the
Unreasonableness of one of your Neighbors, and true Interests of the others,
which I find so well described there. But the best Ink in the World is not a
Balsom that can cure such Wounds; they must find their Remedy from more
powerful Medicines, which the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo has given us reason to
hope, if France will still choose rather to fall out with all the World, than to
make a Peace so much to their own advantage as that we offer them. At least it
is certain, that your Excellency with a stroke of your Pen, has brought to
light the most covered Designs of your Enemies, undeceived with the greatest
Clearness your Friends, and put Flanders under the securest Protection; of
which I cannot help rejoicing with You as the Author. For what relates to
Father Patrick, how much soever I concern my self in his Fortunes, I do not yet
see any way that it can be in my power to serve him on this Occasion; the last
French Conquests having determined the Dispute between the Abbot Arnolphino and
the Marquis of Baden about the Abbey de la Charity. But the Marquis de
Castel-Rodrigo has assured me, he will find some other way of showing the
Esteem He has both for the Merits and Person of Father Patrick, to whom I hope
Your Excellency will do me Justice, having endeavored (though without Success
by this unhappy Conjuncture) all that lay in my Power to serve Him.

I Kiss Your Excellency's Hands, and am Yours, etc.

Al Conde de Molina.
7 Marco 1668. Sennor Mio,
NO puede V. E. dudar del gusto que he tenido enllegar a Brusselleus, aviendome
yo allado a qui con su carta en las manos con el quaderno adjunto, aunque a mi
era mucho mas necessaria la noticia de su salud de V. E. que no de la sinrazon
de uno suyo vezino ny del interez verdadero de los otros, que van muy bien
tracados en el dicho quaderno; Pero la mejor tinta del mondo no es balsamo
bostante para curar tales heridas, y es menester remedios mas fuertes, a los
quales la prudencia del Sennor Marquis de Castle Rodrigo a dado lugar, si la
Francia par sus peccados mas quisiere la guerra con todo el mondo, que no la
poz avantajada que la hemos offrecido: a lo menos se puede dezir que S. E. con
un rasyo de pluma a sacado en luz los desinios mas encubiertos de sus enimigos,
a dado a los interessados el mas claro dessenganno, y puesto las cosas de
Flandes debaxodel amparo mas fuerte que se podia buscar, de que no me puedo
impedir de dar a V. E. la enorabuena. Por interessado que soy en los aumentos
del Padre Patricio, no veo come sara possible servirle mas en esta occasion;
aviendo la Francia con su postrera conquista determinada el pleyto enter el
Abad Arnolfin y el Marquis de Baden, en la de la Abadia de la caridad. Pero el
Sennor Marquis me ha prometido con muchos veras de hallar otra manera di
manifestar en quanto stima la personna y los meritos del dicho padre, a quien
V. E. me ha de justifiar por averme empennado quanto era possible en suo
negotio aunque faltado en alcancarle por la desdicha de las coyunturas.

B. L. M. D. V. E. Su Mayor Servidor.

To my Lord Arlington.
Brussels March 13. S. N. 1668. My Lord,
THE last Post brought me none from England, nor has this Week as yet brought
me any from Spain; so that it is France only at this Time that entertains Us.
The Dispatch returned Us late last Night from Sir John Trevor upon the point of
the Alternative, has given the Town here occasion to talk of the Peace as a
Thing done; though I know not yet what the Marquis says to it, having not seen
Him since; but think it possible He may be as much surprised with their
Acceptance, as Sir John Trevor says They were with His. It seems plain to Me
that France desires to pursue the War, but fears our engaging in it, and to
hinder That, will use all the Address that can be to lay the Obstruction of
Peace upon the Spaniards; They on the other Side desire to continue the War,
provided they may be sure of our and Holland's Assistance, and to that End, if
they play their Game well, they will be sure to retort the Address of France
upon them, and lay the Blame of the War at their Doors, without which they have
no Hopes of Holland's falling into their Party; who whether they are partial to
the French or no in this Quarrel, are certainly partial to the Peace, and will
not be drawn to share in the War but upon the last Necessity. Therefore my
Business will be at present, to induce the Marquis to clear those two Scruples
made by the French upon His Powers, and the Choice of one or other of the
Alternatives; in which I know not what Success I am like to have after so many
Advances made already as He conceives on His Side, and so near Don John's
Arrival, at least according to the present reckoning here, which persuades us
that He parted from Madrid upon the 22d. past.

I know your Lordship has the same Papers I received from Sir John Trevor, and
for what occurrs upon them here, I beg your Lordship's Leave that I may this
once refer you to the enclosed Copy of my Letter this Evening to Him upon that
Subject, having not Time left Me to repeat it here ^o at large as I ought to do.

The Truth is, I never had so hard a Part upon me as I have at this Time, to
keep all in good Temper between the Marquis and the Deputies of Holland; For
besides that their Ends may perhaps be a little different, their Complexions
are extremely so: He is not the easiest of Access, nor the quickest at
Dispatch; And His Officers are at the same Rate: The Dutch Deputies are all
upon the Spur, and when they demand an Audience or a Paper, if they have it not
within half an Hour, they say the Marquis Se mocque d'eux, et Ils se trouvent
obligez de l'escrire ce Soir aux Estats, et que le Marquis ne cherche que des
Retardements, and par la' de les engager dans la Guerre. When they receive
Orders to move the Marquis in any Particular, they must have it granted the
first Time it falls in Discourse, and in the very same Form and Words it runs
in their Letters; and think the Marquis ought to observe the States Order and
Directions as punctually as They; And will reason Him to the Death upon every
Point: The Marquis who uses to owe no Man any thing in that Kind, grows ten
times more difficult by that time they have talked an Hour, than He was at
first; and engaging in large Discourses, gives them twenty Occasions of growing
Warm upon the Place, and Wise afterward by Interpretations, that, God knows,
were never in the Case; so that in their Audiences, between the Marquis's
Eloquence and their Leyden Philosophy, the Cards commonly run high, and all is
Picque and Repicque between them; and I am to go to one and the other next Day to
set all right again, and endeavor to make them agree asunder upon Points which
they could by no means agree upon together. But if I go on, I shall weary your
Lordship as much as they weary Me; And therefore I shall break off this Letter
with telling You only, that the Talk here is of an Attempt for the Relief of
Genap, and that the Horse are drawing together for that Purpose, with what
Success I know not, but am sure, the French deserve none there, for continuing
an Attempt so long after the Suspension of all Enterprises was accorded.

I am ever, etc.

To Sir John Trevor.
Brussels March 13. S. N. 1668. SIR,
I AM two Letters in your Debt since my last by the Ordinary, one of the 8th,
the other of the 12th; but I must needs say that your last has left you nothing
in mine. That King's Answer is full and fair in my Apprehension, what it will
appear in the Marquis's I know not; For since that Court cavils at His
Acceptance of the Alternative, and calls it captious, I know not whether He
may not have His Revenge at theirs. Besides, Monsieur Lionne's Letter I confess
looks of a very different Style from His Master's, and, in my Judgment,
Artificial: Nor do I understand great Ministers reasoning upon the Intentions
of Crowns, rather from common Report, from Passages of private Men's Letters, or
of Books made for Argument; than from the open and positive Declaration of
Ministers, who ought to know their Powers best, and how to use them. Besides,
they give the Spaniards very fair Play against them in this kind of War, by an
Action I am very much unsatisfied in, which is, beginning and continuing the
Siege of Genap, about four Leagues from hence, now the eighth Day after the
Accord granted by France for the Suspension of Arms, notwithstanding our
Signification of it to the Commander of those Troops; Besides the seizing of
another Castle five Days after the said Accord, though the Courier came in two
Days from Paris, and the same Haste might as easily have been made upon the
other Errand. In short, if France pretends to be believed here, they must give
Deeds as well as Words; and will show the Sincerity of their Intentions for
Peace, by consenting to the Truce till the End of May, accepted already here;
Since, if there should be any Defect in the Marquis's Powers, it may be easily
supplied with a little Time, and any Delay in the Choice of the Alternative
repaired. In the mean while, I will hope by the next Courier to give you
Satisfaction in those Points; For I neither know why the Marquis should be
difficult in making His Choice upon the Alternative, or exposing the material
Clauses of His Powers, which I will assure you, are as full, in my
Apprehension, as can be granted. In the mean time, this Courier goes to you
with a Duplicate of Monsieur Colbert's Pass, (which was sent some time since to
the Internuncio at Aix) with the Orders sent out for the Suspension of Arms,
and with the Marquis's naming a Day for the Baron de Bergayck's coming to Aix,
in case Monsieur Colbert can be ready in that time; Though I do not see how the
Treaty can begin till His Majesty's and the State's Ministers can be there, as
well as two Principals; And in that Regard as well as many others, it will be
absolutely necessary to obtain France's Consent to the Truce, if they would
have Us believe they intend the Peace, and in the mean time to procure Orders
for the Suspension of Arms before Genap as well as all other Places.

To morrow I expect an Audience upon the Choice of the Alternative; though I
confess I did not think, any more than the Marquis, that such a Declaration was
necessary before the Ministers meeting at Aix; but the Compliance must be on
the weaker side, and to that Purpose I shall use my best Endeavors; And remain,

Sir, etc.

To my Lord Arlington.
Brussels, Mar. 16. S. N. 1668. My Lord,
BY Your Lordship's of the 28th past, I am put out of Pain for the Merlin
Yacht, and Return of the Ratification upon the last Treaty. The Error in the
Forms of the preceding Instruments sent over for His Majesty's Ratification,
was, I suppose, occasioned, as your Lordship says, by the Omission of Signing
both Parts, which I confess was offered Me by the Dutch Commissioners, but
being unpractised in those Forms, I chose to follow the Ambassadors Example at
Breda, who Signed but one.

Your Lordship sees how ill a Minister I am likely to make, if ever I must
enter upon new Forms, or a Character that requires being more punctual in them;
I shall however say no more in answer to what your Lordship has hinted to Me
about the Journey to Aix, having written from Antwerp all that occurred to me
upon it, after which I know very well, it becomes Me to leave all to the King's
Pleasure. I have asked the Marquis, with what Character He will send the Baron
de Bergayck; He says, in Quality of Plenipotentiary, but in the rest, with
Power to take upon Him that Character the French Minister shall assume: He
plainly acknowledges that in Right He cannot send any Man with the Title of an
Ambassador, which lies only between two Sovereigns; and I know not why the
Character of Plenipotentiary may not agree with that of Envoy Extraordinary on
all Hands. But the Light in this Point must be drawn from France, and not from
this Place.

Last Night at an Audience jointly with the Dutch Deputies (which I had
disposed in the Morning with the Marquis, and with Difficulty enough) His
Excellency was content to declare His Choice of the Alternative, which was to
leave France their Conquest of last Campaign, and likewise to promise Us a
Transcription of the most material Clauses, both to be sent to Sir John Trevor
and Mr. Van Beuningham at Paris, to enable them to give that Court Satisfaction
upon their last Objections against the Marquis's Acceptance of the
Alternative. So that we have now gained the utmost Point that can be desired
here in pursuit of our Treaty, and must leave the rest upon their Hands at
Paris.

The Marquis took occasion at the same time to complain hard of the French
breaking the Suspension by the Attempt upon Genap, which was yielded to them
two Days since upon Conditions, after a large Breach with their Cannon, and
seems to be designed for a Post to block up this Town, which they would
certainly do if they could possess themselves of Terveur and Vilvorde; the
first being an abandoned Place, and the second not tenable without Forces to
relieve it. I do not see how His Majesty and the States can refuse to oblige
France to restore Genap within the Time of the Suspension, since no Pretense of
Mistake or Delay in the Orders can appear at all sincere without the
Restitution, the Siege continuing to the eighth Day after the Accord made for
the Suspension at Paris.

The Marquis seems to apprehend, that the Effects of our having obtained from
Him all that France can demand in pursuit of their former Proposals, or We in
Pursuit of our Treaty, will be a sudden throwing off the Mask on the French
Side, and making what Advances they can in the War before We and Holland are in
Posture to enter upon Defense of this Country, and therefore presses all that
can be our arming, and concerting how to proceed in such a Case: And I suppose
His Majesty may think fit to encourage Holland that is so near, and already
armed, to furnish them here with three or four thousand Foot, for Defense of
their Towns upon the first Motions of the French to attack any of them; with
assurance that His Majesty will fall into the same Course, with all possible
speed and vigor, and in the ways that shall be concerted.

For the supplies of Money from hence, I can yet say no more than in my former,
though I omit no Instances upon that Subject: But, I doubt, in the present
Posture Here, the King must lose His Right, which they say will be, where
Nothing is. And I cannot yet find any Thing drawn to a Conclusion in the
Negotiation with Holland for the Money upon their Towns. The Marquis showed Me
Don Estevan's last Letters Yesterday upon that Matter, which say, that the
Dutch insist peremptorily upon all the Spaniards hold in Gelderland, and
besides, upon Damme and two other Forts in Flanders. On the other side, the
Spaniards are unwilling to conclude, if a Peace be like to ensue; by which
means, parting from those Places to the Dutch, and at the same time so many
other to the French, would leave them hardly any thing here they would think
worth their pains to keep: So that the Conclusion of this Money matter between
them, will depend upon the Fr. King's Answer to the Truce till the ^^d of May,
and fuller declaring the Contin^^^^ of His Satisfaction upon the Alternativ^*
And even then I doubt it may be necessary for Me to make a Journey into
Holland, for the perfecting that Treaty between them and the Marquis; who has
not yet found out the Persons or Ways of treating to any purpose with them. In
the mean time if I knew how far I might engage His Majesty to arm in the
Defense of these Countries, since Spain has accepted all We propose in our
Treaty; I would endeavor to induce the Marquis to conclude a Treaty to that
Purpose, and for furnishing His Majesty thereupon, with certain Sums at certain
Times, thereby to make the Debt at least from Spain a certain thing whenever
the Money could be found. I hope to receive some Light from your Lordship upon
this in answer to a former of mine, and the mean while will prepare the Matter
with the Marquis.

I am sufficiently warned upon the Point of the Pavilion, and will hope His
Majesty's Constancy therein proceeds from a Resolution to take those Courses
and Councils which may make Him as much feared abroad as any of His Ancestors
were, in whose Time that Point was first gained: For, without That, our
Pretensions will grow Vain at present, and in time Obsolete. In the mean while
I hope, some Expedient will be foreseen that may prevent the Inconveniences or
Unkindnesses which may happen between Us and the Dutch upon this Point in the
present Conjuncture; and in case of Necessity to join our Fleets. The Indignity
offered Us by la Roche in landing armed Men in England, and the rest, seems the
greatest I have ever heard of that Kind; And how far Moderation in resenting
and revenging Injuries, is a Virtue in a Prince, or a State, as well as in a
private Christian, I will not take upon Me to judge: That which I know best is,
that

I am ever, etc.

To my Lord Arlington.
Brussels, Mar. 20. S. N. 1668. My Lord,
THE Day after the last English Pacquets Arrival, I received Your Lordship's of
the 2d. by the Dutch Resident's Conveyance, which together with some
Expressions I made out of your Letter, gave Me occasion to conclude that your
Lordship at the writing of it believed Me in Holland; I know not whether upon
something written by the Marquis or Me, but that Journey I see, the Marquis
would have depend upon the French Answer to our last Dispatch, and their
consenting or refusing the proposed Truce till May, from which He supposes it
will be easy to guess a Peace or a War. In the mean time I was in hopes to
receive some particular Commands or Instructions for my Carriage in Holland,
not desiring to be left so much at large; and it is very possible I ought to
have received them by your Lordship's last; But that new Cipher will at one
time or other cast Me into Despair, for by all our skill we cannot make out one
Syllable of the two long Paragraphs; though making out the last short one very
easily, makes Us see the Fault must be on the Writers side; And I am apt to
imagine the Exactness required to this Cipher, is more than can agree with the
Haste often necessary in your Lordship's Office; having observed frequent
Mistakes in the Use of the old Cipher, which yet never hindered my Collection of
the Sense, whereas the least of this is mortal to the whole Paragraph.

I cannot yet come to any Adjustment with the Marquis upon the chief Point
recommended to Me, though I have often fallen upon the Discourse, and
endeavored to engage it further by the offer of a Project I have drawn up to
that purpose; But He assures Me your Lordship is fallen upon it with the Count
de Molina and Baron de l' Isola in England, and when you have agreed it, will
send it over hither for His Excellency to perfect; which I confess I think were
the better way, since I am but very generally instructed in it: However His
Excellency desired Me this Morning to perfect the Draught I had projected, that
in case we found it not concluded in England, it might be ended here.

I doubt, He will not be induced to part with what the Dutch demand in
Gelderland, till He foresees plainly an inevitable War; And till that
Conclusion, or Don John's Arrival, all will be Misery here; what could be
spared being gone out upon new Levies and Recruits, and the very Spaniards late
arrived here, falling already into Want; which is a piece of Husbandry of all
others I cannot understand, the old Troops every day diminishing as the new
Levies advance. But they assure Me, Don John brings with him in Bars a Million
and a half of Crowns, and another Million and a half of the same Money in
Remises; which is the Life of all Hopes here, though we cannot yet be certain
of His having lest Madrid; The last Letters of the 29th past mentioning His
Indisposition, at the same time with His design of parting three Days after.

Your Lordship will have sound that all I could uncypher in your last was
already performed here, both upon the Choice of the Alternative, as well as
Satisfaction in the Powers, and Disposition of the Baron Bergayck's parting for
Aix: However, I failed not to mind the Marquis of the last this very Morning;
who assured Me the Baron should certainly be there by the Day appointed, which
is the 27th of this Month, and that His Equipage was already well advanced; but
however the completing of it, should not hinder His Journey. The Baron tells
Me, that France upon des gning Monsieur Colbert, declared His Character to be
of Ambassador Plenipotentiary, with Reserve of joining another to Him as chief
of the Ambassy in case of the Marquis's going, but that He, (the Baron) knows
not yet in what Quality He shall go, leaving it wholly to the Disposition of
the Marquis.

I have this Week a long and hearty Assurance from Monsieur de Wit, of the
State's Resolutions to pursue the Effects of our Treaty, with all the Vigor
that can be; and for that End, of their having given the first Rendevous to
their Army near Bergenop Zoom, from whence they may easily fall into the
Defense of the Spanish Towns, upon the first Attempt of the French after they
have refused the Peace; which they must now suddenly unmask themselves in, one
way or other* no further Pretenses being left, since our last Friday Pacquets,
which were repeated by an Express on Sunday, and shall go by another this Week
for surety sake; (and your Lordship may be assured we omit no Cautions, we can
use, in the matter of our Dispatches, of which none yet has failed us): The
Suspension of Enterprises is owned by the French Commanders since the taking of
Genap: So that there is little now, that furnishes Talk here, besides the
shameless Treason by which Burgundy was lost, and of which, the Marquis d'
Yenne the Governor, his Nephew the Count de St. Amor, and Don John de
Batteville have chief Honor; the last being employed by the Marquis to treat
with the Suitzers for the Protection of that Country. The Villainy and Foulness
of this Action make the Spaniards say here, that a great King, should rather
have sent His Lacquays, than gone Himself, to receive such a Conquest.

I am ever, etc.

To my Lord Keeper.
Brussels, Mar. 23. S. N. 1668. My Lord,
I Believe You may wonder on that side, as well as many do on this, both here
and in Holland, at the Election the Marquis has lately made, of the Alternative
offered by France, after so long a Deliberation, as might have served him, to
make a wiser Choice. For if Spain had parted with the County of Burgundy,
Cambray, Air, and St. Omer; though they had furnished France with a better
Frontier, yet they had kept a good one for the rest of these Countries on both
sides; whereas, parting with the late conquered Places, besides their large
Dependancies, which straighten their Territories, that should maintain their
Armies; their whole Frontier is laid open on the side of Flanders, by the loss
of Douay, Lisle, and Tournay, and on the other side, by that of Aeth and
Charleroy; which leaves the Spaniards the open Towns of Lovain and Brussels for
a Frontier on this side, and those of Ghent and Bruges on the other; and the
Country so pierced by the French Conquest, as what remains, will be the Work,
but of one Campaign, whenever the Councils or Forces of England and Holland,
shall fail or delay to defend them.

The Reasoners here, pretend to say, that Spain could not part with the
Burgundy.
French County, because they must with it quit the Title they yet retain of
Dukes of Burgundy; and besides, they would thereby lose their Communication
wholly with Lorrain, and in a great measure, with the Empire: This last is
indeed of weight, though the first be but airy: But neither of them, I take, to
have determined the Marquis in his Choice; And having in various Conferences,
penetrated his inmost Thoughts upon this Subject, I judged it necessary to
acquaint your Lordship with them; that His Majesty knowing perfectly the
Dispositions of his Neighbors, may the better take his own Measures, in this
great Conjuncture. But, to explain this Matter I must run it up to the Original.

Your Lordship remembers, that after the French Invasions and Successes, last
year in Flanders, and the Peace at Breda; when they found, how much both
England and Holland resented the Progress of their Arms in Flanders; They sent
a Declaration to the States General, that they were willing to make a Peace
with Spain, either upon Spain's quitting all their Right to the late conquered
Places; or else to the County of Burgundy, Cambray, Air, and St. Omers, and
would leave to Spain the choice of either of these Alternatives. The Dutch were
perplexed, what Use to make of this Declaration, being frighted at the Danger
of Flanders, but newly and faintly reconciled to England, and not knowing, how
we would take, the Invasion of Flanders. In these Doubts I found them, when His
Majesty sent me first to sound their Intentions, and immediately after, to
enter into Leagues with them, for our own mutual Defense and that of Flanders.
The King would have joined with them, for the recovery of all the Spaniards had
lost in Flanders, either by a Peace or a War. The Province of Utrecht was for
this Resolution; but the Pensioner and the other six Provinces, were for
accepting the Offer of the Alternative, made by France, and obliging Spain to
make their Choice, as well as France, to stand by their own Proposal. Upon
these Terms the Triple Alliance was concluded, but with different Views, both
of Holland and of Spain. The truth is, Holland was unwilling to break off their
ancient Amity with France, and embark in a War, with the Conjunction of such an
old Enemy as Spain, and such a new Friend as England. They reckoned on a Peace,
upon one of the Alternatives, and were sollicitous only, to preserve Flanders,
as a Frontier for Holland against France, without considering the Interests of
Spain further, than as they appeared to be their own. They reckoned certainly
upon Spain's choosing to part with Burgundy, Cambray, etc. which lay far from
Holland, and recovering the Towns they had lost in Flanders, by which their
Country would be left defensible, at least with the Assistances of England and
Holland.

On the other side, Spain, though they professed the greatest sense that could
be, of what they owed His Majesty, upon the late generous Advances he had made
in their Favor; yet they were enraged at Holland, for seconding so ill, His
Majesty's Resolutions, and turning it upon the Choice, only of an Alternative,
by which the Spaniards were to lose so great Territories, and part with their
Right to them, instead of recovering the Possession they had yet only lost.
They took it, as the greatest Indignity in the World, that Holland should
pretend to oblige the Crown of Spain to accept the very Conditions of France,
after an Invasion so unjust, as they esteemed this last. They were at first,
upon the thoughts of parting with all they had in the Low Countries, to France,
upon some Equivalent on the side of Spain; and thereby both end the Charge of
keeping Flanders, and be revenged upon the Dutch, by leaving them open and
exposed to the Neighborhood of France. The Marquis once assured me, that most
of the Council of Spain were for making this desparate Peace; and that for his
own part, he was inclined to it, though more out of spite to the Dutch, than
what he thought was the true Interest of Spain. After some Pause, this heat of
the Spaniards began to cool: They saw the Spanish Crown, by parting with
Flanders, must abandon all Commerce with the Princes and States on this side
that Country; and that upon a new War with France, about the Succession, they
should have no way left of diverting the French Forces from falling upon Spain
it self. And so, with much ado, they resolved to accept the Alternative; but
left the Choice to the Marquis here, as best enlightened in all the Interests of
Flanders, as well as the Dispositions of their Neighbors.

The Marquis hated the Peace, upon either of the Alternatives, and desired
nothing but the continuance of the War, with the Assistance of England and
Holland; to which he saw His Majesty inclinable, and thought the States would
be induced to, rather than venture an Agreement between Spain and France, for
the Exchange of Flanders: He thought, that if they yielded Burgundy and the
remote Frontiers, Holland would be secure, and France would perhaps be
contented to let the Peace rest upon those Terms during the King of Spain's
tender Life: But if he yielded all the late conquered Towns to France, Holland
would be in perpetual Allarm, for the Danger of the rest; England would be
likewise the more concerned, and both being obliged, to be continually armed,
to prevent the Danger or Flanders, would find it their Interest, rather to
enter into such a War, as might end in a safer Peace, than by a patcht Peace,
to lie always in danger of a new War, whenever France should be in a Condition
of carrying the rest of Flanders, by any sudden Invasion, or by any Disconcert
of Councils or Interests, between Us and Holland.

Besides, the Marquis imagines, that France will either endeavor to avoid the
Peace now offered; or if they conclude it for the present, that being possessed
of the Frontiers of Flanders, they will not long resist the Temptation of
carrying the rest, being in a manner but open Country; and thereby engage both
Us and Holland, to assist Spain with all our Forces; which he thinks, must make
the War prosperous, or a Peace secure. So that upon the whole, the Marquis has
chosen this Alternative, not from any desire of making the Peace at present;
but only in the view, either of carrying on the present War, or of making
another with the Strength of his Neighbors.

Your Lordship may easily judge, how much the Dutch are like to be disappointed
and offended with the Spaniards, for this Choice: So that I cannot pretend to
guess, what is like to become of a Peace which both France and Spain come to so
unwillingly; and which England and Holland promote upon Conditions, which they
both dislike. And so I leave this perplexed Affair, and ask your Lordship's
Pardon for this long Deduction, which I should not have troubled your Lordship
or my self with, but that I thought you would come to know the true Springs of
it no other way: And which I could not have known, if the Marquis were not a
very warm Talker, and sometimes further than he intended.

I am ever, etc.

To Monsieur de Wit.
Brussels, Mar. 25. S. N. 1668. SIR,
BY Monsieur Van Beuninghen's dispatches of the 21st. you will have known the
Answer of the French Court upon the Truce we desired; which in my opinion seems
to make the War inevitable; and that all the Appearances France has made of
desiring a Peace, are levelled at no other Mark but to slacken the Resolutions
of the Allies from assisting Flanders; or at least, to gain six weeks time to
enlarge their Conquests, before the Spaniards can either receive the Recruits
they expected, or the Assistance of their Neighbors for defending their most
considerable Places. For, as to what the French propose, of restoring all they
shall conquer between the end of this Month and the 15th. of May, it seems to
me to be too gross, and to discover a contempt of our Wit as well as of our
Treaty: For, if all our Offices and Offers to make Spain ratify what the
Marquis has accepted, are not sufficient to withold them six weeks, from what
they pretend to restore, how will they be capable of restoring for ever what
they have already taken. I cannot see how their manner of accusing and making
Exceptions to the absolute Powers of a Minister of Spain; and all this founded
upon particular Intelligence they pretend to have from the Court at Madrid; nor
the formal Objections they make against the Delegation of the Baron de
Bargeyck, when at the same time they send Monsieur Colbert to Aix la Chapelle:
How, I say, all this can admit better Interpretation in what regards their
Intentions for the Peace: For, in whatever comes from these Ministers at Paris,
I think one may discover an irregular Ambition under a great deal of
Affectation and Disguise, whereof God only knows the Issue.

For my self, I will tell you in confidence and with my usual Freedom, my
Opinion in all this I think then in the first place; that by all our
Negotiations though never so well managed; by all our Offices and Caresses, we
shall never obtain a Peace from France, while they have any Appearances of
pursuing their Interest or their Glory in carrying on the War: And, that the
only way of disposing them to a Peace, is to order it so, as they may only find
their Interests in it; which we can no otherwise do but by showing them the
Strength of our Forces, and the Firmness of our Resolutions before the War
begins; and since we only draw a War on our selves by desiring a Peace, to
endeavor on the contrary to draw on the Peace by making all the Appearances of
desiring a War.

Therefore I think, that what remains to be done, is, to advance as much as
possible, our Preparations and Forces by Sea and Land; and let the Most
Christian King know by our Ministers, that since His Majesty still declares he
is content with the Alternative already accepted by the Marquis of
Castel-Rodrigo, and that all the Difficulty His Majesty finds, is only upon the
Powers of the said Marquis, and the Sincerity of Intentions in the Court of
Spain; We therefore desire His Majesty to give us so much time by a Suspension
of Arms, as may be sufficient to send a Dispatch to Madrid, and return to Paris
with a full and plain Answer from the King of Spain upon the Alternative. (And
truly I think, a Months time will be sufficient after the Dispatches of our
Expresses from Paris.) But in the mean time, to add, that if His Majesty
refuses us a Demand so necessary to the Peace of Christendom, and will still
carry on his Arms without consideration of the Offers of Spain, or Offices of
the Allies; that upon the first Advances he shall make to attack the rest of
Flanders, we will march with our Forces to defend it, and endeavor further by
all ways to give him a Diversion both by Sea and Land.

This I think is all that is left us to do upon the present State of Affairs,
for obtaining the Peace: And as to the inward Dispositions of the Spaniards, I
will tell you, that there is not one of them here, of the least Consideration,
who does not desire it, and think it wholly for the present Interest of Spain:
And the Marquis assures me in confidence, that he has not only the Power
exhibited, but that the King his Master has given him others, by which he
leaves him Absolute Arbiter of the Conditions of the Peace, according as
Conjunctures shall serve to make him accept either an equal or a
disadvantageous one. And all the Delays of Don John seem only to proceed from
their hopes of a Peace upon the Project of our Treaty.

In the mean time, I am glad the States have sent Monsieur van Beverning to be
at Aix with the Ministers of both Crowns; I doubt not but the King my Master
will do the same, when he shall have received Advice of their Departure: For
Forms must be observed as well as Substance: Though for my share, I cannot
imagine to what Effect this Congress will meet; France having declared it self
already upon the Invalidity of the Delegation in particular, as well as of the
Powers in general. And truly I think, all Pretense of negotiating without a
Cessation of Arms, seems a mere Jest, in an Affair where two Months Progress in
the War may so near end the Dispute upon which they pretend to treat.

I am, Sir, Your, etc.

A Monsieur de Wit.
Brusselles, le 25. Mars. S. N. 1668. Monsieur,
VOus avez appris par les depeches de Monsieur Van Beuninghen du 21. du
courant, la reponse de la Cour de France sur la treve tart desiree: Cette
reponse selon moy semble render la guerre inevitable; et il paroit que toutes
les mines que la France fait de la vouloir, ne tendent a autre but qua
refroidir les Alliez sur le secours de Pais bas, ou du moins, a gagner un mois
et demi de tems, afin de pousser ses conquetes, avaunt que les Espagnole
puissent recevoir leurs recruites, ou des secours de leurs voisins pour munir
leurs plus importantes places. Car, a l'egard de l'offre qu'elle fait, de
restituer tout ce qui sera conquis enter la fin de ce mois et le 15. de May,
cela me paroit trop grossier, et decouvre meme son mepris pour nos Esprits
aussi bien que de notre traite. Car, si tous nos soins, et nos bons offices,
joints a l'offre que nous faisons de fair ratifier par l' Espagne les articles
deja acceptes par le Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo, n'ont pu obtener de la France
qu'elle renonce pour six semaines au dessein de tenter de nouvelles conquetes,
qui sont, du rest, les seules qu'elle offer de restituer; si tout cela dis je,
est v^ay, pouvons nous flater que nous en obtiendrons la restitution entiere.
Je ne voy pas que leur maniere de chicaner, et de fair des exceptions contre
les pleins pouvoirs d'un Ministre d'Espagne, et tout cela fond sur les avis
particuliers que la France pretendo avoir de la cour de Madrid, non plus que
les objections formelles qu'elle fait contra la delegation du Baron du
Bergeyck, en meme tems qu'elle envoye Monsieur Colbert a Aix la Chapelle;
puissent recevoir de meilleurs interpretations par rapport a les intentions
pour la paix; Car dans tout ce qui part de ces Ministres, il me semble qu'on
decouvre une ambition dereglee, qui se couvre sous une address recherchee, et
des manieres trop etudiees pour etre sincere. Dieu sait ce qui en est.

Pour moy, je vous diray avec ma confiance et ma franchise ordinaires, mon
sentiment sur tout cela. C'est, que par toutes sorts de Negotiations les mieux
conduites, par toutes sorts de cajoleries, et de caresses, et par tant de bons
offices reiterez, nous ne pourrons jamais obtenir la paix de la France, pendant
qu'elle est flattee par les apparences; et qu'elle juge qu'il est et de son
interet et de sa gloire de pousser la guerre: et que par consequent, le seul
moyen de la disposer a la paix c'est de fair en sort que la paix seule puisse
s' accorder avec ses interets. Pour cela il me semble, que la seule voye qui
nous est offerte, est de fair^ une grande montre de nos forces, de paroitre
bien resolus a la guerre, avaunt que la guerre commence: Car puisque nous
attirons la guerre en voulant trop fortement la paix, il faut tacher au
contraire d'attirer la paix, en faisant toutes les mines de vouloir la guerre.

C'est pourquoy, il me semble que ce qui rest a fair, c'est de hater nos
preparatifs, et de mettre toutes nos forces en etat tant par mer que par terre:
De fair dire en meme tems par nos Ministres au Roy tres Chretien, que puisque
sa Majeste paroit disposee a se contenter de l' Alternative deja aceptee par le
Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo, et que toute la difficulte roll sur les pouvoirs du
dit Marquis, et sur la sincerite des intentions de la cour d' Espagne; nous la
prions de nous accorder par une suspension d'armes autant de tems qu'il en faut
pour depecher a Madrid, et de Madrid revenir a Paris avec une reponse, j'entens
une reponse net et precise de la Reine d' Espagne, touchant l' Alternative,
don't les deux partis temoignent se contenter (et pour moy il me semble, qu'un
mois apres, le depart de nos couriers de Paris, sera suffisant) D' ^jouter en
meme tems, que si sa Majeste nous refuse une demand si necessary au repos de
la Chretiente, et veut sans egard pour les offres d'Espagne, et les offices des
Alliez, pousser ses arms plus loin; que sur la premiere demarche qu'elle fera
pour attaquer le rest des Pais-bas, nous ferons avancer nos troops pour les
defendre, et tacherons de produire une puissante diversion tant par mer que par
terre.

Voila ce me semble tout ce qui nous rest a tenter sur l'etat present des
affairs, afin d'obtenir la paix. Et pour ce qui est des dispositions
interieures des Espagnols, je vous diray, qu'il n'y en a pas un seul icy tant
soit peu considerable, qui ne la souhaite, et qui 'ne croit y voir l'interet
present de l'Espagne. Le Marquis m'a assure en confiance qu'il n'a pas
seulement les pouvoirs exhibes, mais de plus, que le Roy luy en a done encore
un autre, par lequel il le rend arbitre absolu des conditions de la paix, selon
que les conjonctures le devront determiner a la recevoir a des conditions ou
egales ou desavantageuses. Et tous les retardemens de Don Juan ne semblent
provenir que de ce qu'il espere une paix conform au projet de notre traite.

En attendant, je suis bien aise de ce que les Etats font partir Monsieur van
Beverning, pour se trouver a Aix avec les Ministres des deux Couronnes; je ne
doubt pas que le Roy mon Maitre ne fasse la meme demarche, quand il aura recu
avis de leur depart; car il faut satisfaire aux forms aussi bien qu' au fond;
quoy que pour moy, je ne puisse imaginer quel effect resultera de ce Congrez;
la France s'etant deja declaree sur l'invalidite de la delegation en
particulier, aussi bien que sur les Pouvoirs en general. Et pour moy, toute
appearance de negotiation avaunt une cessation d'armes me paroit une pure
mocquerie, sur tout dans une conjoncture ou deux mois des guerre et de progrez
peuvent changer la face des chooses, et decider le different sur lequel on va
traiter.

Je Suis, etc.

To Mr. Godolphin.
Brussels, Mar. 27. S. N. 1668. Sir,
I Received lately the favor of some Lines from you in a Letter of my Wive's,
which were the first I remember to have seen of yours these five or six Months
past, though I never failed on my part to entertain the Commerce between Us as
became both our Stations, and the Kindness with which it began on both sides,
as I thought; I am sure on mine, till I took your Silence as a civil
Declaration that you were willing it should end; And the Compliance I was
desirous to show you in all things, would not suffer me to deny it you in this.
I find it very difficult to answer your last otherwise than by giving you
Thanks for the favor of your Remembrance, which indeed I thought had been
better employed than upon one, who has for so long time so little deserved it.
For those Expressions you are pleased to use so much below your self, and so
much above me, I confess they rather confound than oblige me; since I am not
fond of receiving what I despair of returning. I know no reason at all I had to
be angry with you, but much rather with my self, if having been once possessed of
your Friendship, you found I did not deserve it; But as I reckoned that Loss
among my ill Fortunes, so I shall among my good, whenever you, return to your
former dispositions of Favor to me; though the Misery of the Scene where I live,
will teach me to be fond of no Possessions that I am in danger of losing; and
to a plain equal Man like Me, the Certainty of an Estate seems more valuable
than the Greatness of it. But I have as much Ambition for my Friends Advances,
as others have for their own; And therefore rejoice in all your good Fortunes
in Spain, and wish you an Increase of them in your next Designs.

I am, etc.

To my Lord Keeper.
Brussels, April 3. 1668. My Lord,
I Received some Days since the Honor of one from your Lordship of the 9th.
past, and though I owe all the Acknowledgements that can be upon it, yet I will
not so much wrong your Lordship's Time or my own Sincereness, as to enlarge
them with much Ceremony. It will be enough to say, that nothing can be more
obliging than your Favor to me, both in the Degree and Manner of it, arising
so freely from your Lordship's Bounty and Generousness, as well as expressed in
a way so franck and so hearty as that of your last Letter; and on the other
side, that no Man can resent it more, though they may much better deserve it;
And that your Lordship can never reckon more truly nor more justly, upon any
Person's Esteem and Services, than upon mine, which I humbly beg your Lordship
to believe. I doubt you will be troubled with my Wife's Attendances, having
told Her, your Lordship had given Her that Liberty; If she ever pretends your
Favor and Countenance further than in receiving what the King has made my due
upon this Employment while I have it, or what His Majesty shall from his own
Motion assign me, upon any new Commission; I disclaim Her beforehand, and
declare she goes not upon my Errand; For I shall never think that too little
which His Majesty thinks enough: For the rest I will be confident neither your
Lordship nor my Lord Arlington intend I should ruin my self by my Employments,
or that I should at my own Charge bear out a Character, which of it self is
enough to turn round a Head that has all its Life, till these last three Years,
been used to Shade and Silence. In case the Occasion should break, and my
Journey to Aix should yet fail, I ask nothing of His Majesty, though putting my
self in a Posture to comply with any sudden Necessity of it, has already forced
me to enter into very considerable Expenses; But in case I must go, I beg your
Lordship that has Children, to consider how hard it would be for Me to perform
such a Journey upon my own Credit. Whatever it be His Majesty thinks fit to
assign Me upon such an Occasion, if He pleases to order Alderman Backwell to
furnish Me with a Letter of Credit, for so much, let it be what it will, I will
live according to what, that and my own little Revenue will reach, and not
spare any little Presents, I have received in His Majesty's Service, where His
Honor requires it: All I desire is only not to be forced into Debts, which to
say the truth, I have ever abhorred, and would by my good Will, eat dry Crusts,
and lie upon the Floor, rather than do it upon any other Consideration, than of
His Majesty's immediate Commands, and I hope those, His Justice and my Friends
Favor, will prevent.

I beg your Lordship's Pardon for troubling you with this strange Freedom about
my own Concernments, which you have pleased to encourage Me to, and may at any
time check Me in it, with the least Discountenance, which I doubt I have
already deserved. But I will not increase or lengthen my Faults by Excuses, nor
trouble your Lordship, by repeating any thing of what my Lord Arlington
receives from Me at large, upon the Course of Public Affairs here; which
though seeming to change often, in others Eyes, appears to Me constant in the
French Design of a War; which I believe nothing can alter, but the visible
Marks of Force and Steddiness in their Neighbors, to oppose them.

I beg your Lordship's Belief, that as I am with very great Reason, so I am
with very great Passion too,

My Lord, Your, etc.

To Monsieur de Wit.
Brussels, April 17. S. N. 1668. SIR,
I Doubt not but you are pleased as much as I, at the Contents of the last
Dispatches from Paris, which make us believe, that in two or three Days we
shall have the Suspension of Arms to the end of May; and then I do not see the
least Difficulty that can happen, which we shall not easily avoid in the
Negotiation of the Peace: For I see not how France can draw back, after the
Satisfaction we are going to give them at Paris: And for Spain, I never had the
least scruple upon their Conduct; And I still believe, as I ever did, that
unless we drive them to Despair by ill Usage, neither the Spanish Nation in
general, nor the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo in particular, will have recourse to
any base Evasions. And to speak to you in Confidence (as it is necessary
between Physicians) since the Resolution you have talked of, about driving the
Spaniards wholly out of this Country, and Cantoning your selves in it: And
since so many violent Instances made by your Deputies for signing Monsieur de
Lyonne's Project without altering a Word, or so much as giving the Marquis any
Assurance of assisting him in case France should draw back, (according to the
Orders of the Queen) I have often heard His Excellency say, that if he were now
in the Council of Spain, he would give his Advice without further Difficulty,
for making Peace with France by delivering this Country up to them, rather than
suffer such a Treatment from all their Neighbors, who are more interessed in
the Loss of it than themselves. For it cannot enter into the Marquis's Head,
why we should give France more Assurances than they desire, in case of Spain's
refusing the Alternative, and even contrary to our Treaty at the Hague; and yet
refuse to give Spain the bare Assurances of the words of our Treaty, in case of
France's Refusal after having driven Spain to all we can ask. Neither can the
Marquis imagine why we press him so much to sign a Project word for word from
Mons. de Lyonne, without first using our Endeavors at Paris, to reduce the
Affair of Cities in the Heart of the Country, to some reasonable Exchange; as
we have always promised him, and as I let him see in one of your Letters: Nay
without once endeavoring to hinder the Devastations in the Franche Compte: So
that by this Project, he sees clearly, he must be confined within Brussels as
in a Prison, shut up by French Garrisons, within seven Leagues of him on one
side, and eight on the other; And that Burgundy may be invaded as an open
Country, without the possibility of defending it a Day. And if the Peace be
made upon these Terms, every one may see, that France will only wait till we
are engaged in a Quarrel with our Neighbors, or till some Misunderstanding
happen between our two Nations, to finish the Conquest of this Country, which
they may do in fifteen days. However, the Marquis says, that in case we will
give him Assurances to follow the third of our Separate Articles, he is ready
to Sign himself, or give Powers to Sign even Monsieur de Lyonne's Project
immediately, as the Foundation of the Treaty; and will rely upon our good
Offices to negotiate either some convenient Exchange for Burgundy, or to have
it restored in the condition it was taken; or else find means to repair the
Towns demolisht. In case you will not be persuaded to give him these
Assurances, we must endeavor to finish it all together at Aix; whither I shall
begin my Journey as soon as we shall have received the Suspension of Arms. And
I shall not fail to pursue as effectually as I can, both there and at other
Places, the Accomplishment of this great Affair; and shall be glad to receive
your Advice from time to time, upon the Conduct of this Negotiation.

Before I go, I must tell you freely, that the less of Business you leave
between the Marquis and your Deputies here, I think it will be so much the
better for the general Affair: For in one word, they are not Persons made for
each other: The Marquis being of a humor rather to dye than be Governed in the
management of Business: And he says, Monsieur Bourgersdycke is a Man not to be
employed but where you absolutely give the Law. I have already hinted something
of this to you; but now I think it necessary you should be informed of it, that
you may do thereupon as you shall find convenient: For I have not observed one
thing in the course of this Affair, which you and I could not have compassed
without the least Heat or Discontent: And I will not tell you the Pain and
Cares I have been at to manage Matters between them, and prevent their breaking
out into Violences upon so many Occasions; which I endeavored by all means to
avoid; Because I know, the Dispositions of Ministers are often infused into
their Masters. I see nothing in the World that can hinder the Peace at present,
unless France finds some Misunderstanding between Us and Spain. To tell you the
Truth, many People would persuade me, that you have changed your Measures since
I left Holland: But I answer every body, that I trust so much to the Sincerity
of your Proceedings, that I do not doubt, but if it were so, your self would be
the first to inform me.

You see what Confidence I have in your Person, and you may safely have the
same in that of,

Sir, Your, etc.

A Monsieur de Wit.
Brusselles, le 17. Avr. 1668. S. N. Monsieur,
JE ne doubt pas que vous ne vous rejouissez autant que moy du contenu de
dernieres depeches: de Paris, qui nous donnent lieu de croire, que dans deux ou
trois jours nous aurons une suspension d'armes jusqu' a la fin de May; et cela
etant, je ne vois point de difficulte qui puisse survenir, don't nous ne venions
facilement a bout dans le course de la negotiation de la paix. Car je ne vois
pas comment la France pourra reculer apres la satisfaction que nous luy allons
donner a Paris. A l'egard d'Espagne, je n'ay jamais eu le moindre scrupule sur
sa conduite; et je croy encore, comme je l'ay toujours cri^, qu' a moins que
nous ne la reduisions au desespoir a force de la traiter de haut en bas; ni la
nation Espagnole en general, ni le Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo en particulier
n'auront point recours a de honteux subterfuges. Et pour vous dire en
confidence (comme il faut fair enter Medecins) Depuis que vous avez parle de
la resolution de chasser les Espagnols des Pais bas, et de vous y cantonner;
depuis tant d'instances reiterees faites par vos Deputez pour la signature du
projet de Monsieur de Lionne, sous la condition de ne rien changer, et meme
sans luy donner la moindre esperance de l'assister en cas que la France recule,
conformement aux ordres de la Reyne; Depuis cela (dis-je) j'ay souvent ouy dire
a son Excellence, que s'il etoit a cette heure au conseil d' Espagne, que son
avis seroit, qu'on fit sans marchander l'accord avec la France, en luy donnant
tout ce Pais, plutot que d'endurer un traitement pareil, de la part de tous les
Etats voisins de la Flandre; lesquels doivent etre plus interessez dans la
perte de ces Provinces, que les Espagnols eux memes. Car il ne peut pas entrer
dans l'esprit du Marquis, que nous donnions a la France plus d'assurance
qu'elle n'en desire, suppose le refus d'Espagne, et cela meme contre notre
traite de la Hay; et que nous refusions a l' Espagne de l'assurer simplement
des clauses de notre traite pour elle, en cas que la France refuse, sur tout,
apres avoir pousse l'Espagne a fair tout ce que nous avons voulu. Le Marquis
n'imagine point aussi, pourquoy nous le pressons tant pour la signature
mot-a-mot du projet de Monsieur de Lionne, sans fair par avance tous nos
efforts a Paris, pour reduire l'affaire des villes situees dans le coeur de
Provinces, a quelque echange raisonable: cela luy avoit toujours ete promis; et
je l'en ay moy meme assure par une de vos lettres que je luy ay fait voir. Il
s'etonne encore pourquoy nous ne fassions pas nos efforts pour empecher la
demolition des places dans la Franche-Compte. De sort qu'il voit tres
clairement, que par ce projet il sera dans Brusselles comme en prison, ou en
otage a l'egard de la France, ses garnisons d'un cote n'en etant qu'a huit
lieues, et de l'autre qu' a sept. Il voit de plus, que les forces de France
entreront dans la Bourgogne comme dans un plat pais sans qu'on la puisse
couvrir un jour entier. Que si la paix se fait dans ces terms, tout le monde
voit que la France n' attendra que le moment de la premiere desunion enter
quelqu'un de nos voisins, ou de la plus legere mesintelligence enter nos deux
Nations, pour achever la conquete des Pais-bas, qui ne luy coutera plus de
quinze jours. Pourtant le Marquis dit, qu'en cas que nous luy donnions des
assurances de poursuivre le troisieme de nos Articles separez, il est pret de
signer ou donner les pouvoirs de signer le projet meme selon les terms de
Monsieur de Lionne, comme servant de fondement au traite: Qu'il s'en remettra a
nos soins et a nos bons offices pour la negotiation de quelque echange commode
a l'egard de la Bourgogne, ou bien d'une restitution en l'etat ou elle a et^
prise, ou pour trouver les moyens de reparer les villes demolies. En cas que
vous luy refusiez a tous ces egards les assurances qu'il demand, il faudra que
nous tachions de reprendre et d'achever le tout ensemble, et d'un meme filet a
Aix la Chapelle; ou je commenceray a m' acheminer d^s que nous aurons recu
nouvelle de la suspension d'armes, et la non plus qu' ailleurs de poursuivre de
tout mon pouvoir la conclusion de cette grande affair. Je seray bien aise de
recevoir de tems en tems vos avis sur la maniere don't cette negotiation sera
conduite.

Avaunt que je part, il faut que je vous dise franchement, que le moins
d'affaires que vous donnerez a discuter avec le Marquis a vos Deputez, sera le
meilleur pour la cause commune; car en un mot, ce ne sont point des gens faits
les uns pour les autres. Le Marquis est d'un humeur a braver plutot la mort,
que de souffrir d'etre maitrise dans la conduite et le maniment des affairs.
Il dit, que Monsieur Bourgersdycke n'est propre a etre employe, que dans les
lieux ou vous donnez souverainement la loy. Je vous en avois deja touch
quelque chose, mais je croy a cette heure qu'il est necessaire de vous le dire,
afin que sur cela vous en usiez comme vous le jugerez a propos. Je n'ay encore
rien remarque dans le course de cette affair don't je ne fusse venu a bout avec
vous sans le moindre chagrin, mais meme agreement: Et je ne vous diray point les
peines et les soucis que j'ay eu a menager toutes chooses entr' eux, et a
prevenir des eclats et les reparties picquantes qu'ils etoient prets de se
fair a tout bout de champ; j'ay employe pour cela toute mon adresse; car je
faisois cette reflection; que les dispositions, ou si vous voulez, les passions
des Ministres ont une grande influence sur celles du Maitre. A cette heure je
ne vois plus rien qui puisse empecher la paix, si ce n'est que la France vit la
dissension se glisser enter l' Espagne et nous. A ne vous rien celer, il y a
icy beaucoup de gens qui voudroient bien me persuader que vous avez change de
mesures depuis mon depart d' Hollande; mais je leur repons a tous, que je me
repose si fort sur votre sincerite, et a la candeur de votre proceder, que
suppose que ce qu'ils disent fust, vous auriez ete le premier a m'en instruire.
Voila qu'elle est la confiance que j'ay en vous, et vous pouvez avoir la meme
en,

Monsieur, Votre, etc.

To my Lord Arlington.
Aix, April 28. S. N. 1668. My Lord,
I Never writ to your Lordship in worse Health nor in worse Humor, and
therefore you could never receive a worse Letter than this is like to be. The
Ceremonies of my Journey your Lordship shall find in a Letter to Mr.
Williamson, so soon as a Fever which is now upon me, gives me leave, to say
one more Word, than what I think of absolute Necessity; For so I conceive, all
I have now written to the Marquis is. The Despite of seeing the Baron de
Bergayck yet refuse to sign the Project of the Treaty, without another Dispatch
from the Marquis, after that, I brought him, is enough to lose all Patience; My
ill Humor I confess, is not lessened, by seeing my self here, with equal
Character to other Ministers, and without possibility in this Place, of putting
my self in an Equipage suitable to them, which I could not think possible
neither to provide my self before my Journey, considering the Uncertainty of
it, almost to the very last, and the Assurance I came with from the Marquis, of
the Treaty's being Signed the first Moment. I assured the Baron de Bergayck,
that I thought it necessary, so that I hoped three Days would end our Business,
which I believed, His Majesty would unwillingly see done, without his
Intervention, and would be content to have all Men think as they have done
here, ever since the Convention began (and perhaps every where else) that
nothing could be done, till the King's Minister came, and that would
immediately close the Affair. The rest I must refer to the enclosed Copy of my
Letter this Night, to the Marquis, by an Express; And beg your Lordship to give
me leave to rest a very weary distempered Head, which yet can never forget how
much I am,

My Lord, etc.

TO The Marquis OF Castel-Rodrigo.
Aix, April 28. S. N. 1668. My Lord,
I Arrived yesterday in this City. This Afternoon I received a Visit from the
Baron de Bargeyck, and another from Monsieur Colbert. I treated them both
equally; upon a Message by a Gentleman sent from the Baron to inform me, that
he was already qualified, Ambassador of Spain by the Letters and Powers of the
Queen her self. Monsieur Beverning visited me this morning Incognito; And, all
that a great Indisposition will suffer me to tell you at present, is this; that
it is not possible to make any other Paces for saving the Netherlands, but by
immediately signing the Project sent to the Baron de Bargeyck: For every body
expected the signing of it upon my arrival. The French Ambassador declares
every where, as he has already done to me, that he is ready to sign this very
Evening, and in all Points as they have been couched by our own Ministers at
Paris. And if the Baron makes any Exceptions or Difficulties, he is ready to
give answer thereupon, according to his Instructions, and as he shall think
convenient: But, that Spain must impute to it self whatever may happen by this
loss of Time. I see plainly, he is ready to second and assist the Baron de
Bargeyck in any Delays that may be given to the Affair; And foreseeing that is
must at length pass in the words of this Project, since we and Holland are
already engaged about it at Paris; He hopes either to see the Affair break, or
have the Honor to make Spain yield at last upon all Difficulties they first
raised. In the mean while, Monsieur Beverning pretends to think, that after the
Orders given to the Baron de Bargeyck, and the Copies of them sent into
Holland, no Difficulties can arise upon the Signing: And for me, I cannot
refuse to carry the Orders, and am in the greatest pain imaginable, to see the
Baron still make a Difficulty to Sign without another Order from your
Excellency. Therefore I desire you in the name of all those who wish well to
the Affairs of Spain and of Christendom, to dispatch an express Command to the
Baron, to Sign without further Trifling, and to send him Instructions for any
thing that your Excellency shall find convenient to have negotiated afterward;
in which I shall have Monsieur Beverning's Assistance, but not at all before
the Project is signed.

If your Excellency will not think fit to comply with this; I discharge my self
at least of all the fatal Effects that may arrive upon it. I desire your
Excellency yet once more, to grant this Dispatch to the Instances of one who
had sounded the Bottom of this Affair with all possible Attention, and all the
Reflections I am capable of making; and who forms a Judgment of it, without
other Passion than that I have for the preservation of Flanders.

I am, etc.

Au Marquis DE CASTEL-RODRIGO.
A Aix le 28. Aur. S. N. 1668. Monsieur,
I'Arrivay hier en cette ville. I'ay recu cette apres-dinee une visit de la
part du Baron de Bargeyck, et une autre de la part de Monsieur Colbert. Je les
ay traite tous deux egalement, sur la parole que le gentilhomme envoye de la
part du Baron m' a done, que son Maitre etoit deja revetu du titre d'
Ambassadeur, et qu'il etoit munides lettres et de pleins pouvoirs de la Reine
elle meme. Monsieur Beverning m'a aussi visit incognito ce matin; et tout ce
qu'une grande indisposition qui me retient a present permet que je dise a V. E.
c'est, qu'il ne rest plus d'autre demarche a fair pour sauver les Pais bas,
que de signer incessamment le projet envoye au Baron de Bargeyck; cela est si
vray que meme a mon arrivee tout le monde en attendoit la signature. Celuy de
France declare par tout apres avoir declare a moy meme, qu'il est pret de
signer des ce soir meme tous les points, tells qu'ils ont ete couchez par nos
Ministres a Paris. Que si le Baron de Bargeyck fait ou des difficultez, ou des
exceptions, il donnera ses reponses conformement a ces instructions, et selon
l'exigence des chooses; et qu' apres tout, l' Espagne ne doit attribuer qu' a
elle seule les malheurs quipeuvent naitre de tant de delais et de tems perdu.
Je vois fort bien, qu'il est pret a suivre et a aider le Baron de Bargeyck dans
tous les retardemens qu'on pourra apporter a la conclusionde cette affair; et
que prevoyant que l' Espagne doit enfin s' accommoder des conditions et des
terms du traite, veu l'engagement ou la Hollande et nous sommes deja entres
par nos Ministres a Paris; il se promet ou de voir l'affaire se rompre, ou
d'avoir la gloire de fair ceder l' Espagne sur toutes les difficultez qu'elle
aura mise en avaunt: Cependant, Monsieur Beverning ne s' attend point a voir
susciter de nouveaux obstacles, et de nouvelles difficultez touchant cette
signature, apres des ordres donnez au Baron de Bargeyck, et don't les copies ont
ete envoyees en Hollande. Pour moy, apres l'avoir promis, je n'ay pu reculer a
porter les ordres, et je suis dans la plus grande peine du monde de voir que le
Baron de Bargeyck fait difficulte de signer avaunt que d'avoir reccu un autre
order de V. E. C'est pourquoy, je la supply au nom de tous ceux qui souhaitent
le bien des Affairs d' Espagne, et de la Chretiente, d'ordonner par un
commandment expres, que l'ordre soit sign, et qu'on n'y marchande plus. V. E.
donnera aussi ses avis au Baron de Bargeyck touchant ce qu'elle trouvera bon
qui soit negotie dans la suite; cela fait, je pourray conter sur le secours et
l'^ide de Monsieur Beverning, du quel je n' attens rien, tandis que la chose
sera comme elle est. En cas que V. E. suive d'autres voyes, je me decharge par
avance de toutes les suites funestes qui en pourront arriver. Je supplis encore
une fois V. E. de donner cela aux instances d'une person qui a approfondi
cette affair, avec toute l'attention et la reflection don't je suis capable; et
qui en port un jugement exempt de Passion, except celle qu'il a pour la
conservation des Pais-bas.

Je Suis, etc.

To my Lord Arlington.
Aix, April 30. S. N. 1668. My Lord,
IN the Hurry of these Expresses to Brussels, all that I can possibly do, is to
give your Lordship the Account of the State of our Business here, in the Copy
of those Letters I am forced to write to the Marquis: To which end, the
Ambassadors of Spain and Holland have been very often with Me already, though I
have not yet stirred out of Doors, and they are but now gone successively from
my Bedside. The Fruits of our Conferences your Lordship will find in the
enclosed, and will pardon me for doing nothing more at this Time, than barely
acknowledging, and that in extreme haste, yours of the 10th and 13th, which are
come here to my Hands: The torn Paper is the Original of a Postcript I received
just now in a Letter from Monsieur de Wit, which I send in Answer to one I had
lately from your Lordship. The enclosed from my Secretary to Mr. Williamson,
gives Account of all the Ceremonies that have been hitherto past.

I am ever, etc.

TO The Marquis OF Castel-Rodrigo.
Aix. April 30. S. N. 1668. My Lord,
I Am very much indisposed, and God keep me from those Accidents, which the
Despite I have upon the present Course of Affairs, may cause in my Illness.
All I have to say is, that the Ambassador of France has Orders not to change a
Word in the Project as prepared by our Ministers at Paris: The Dutch Ambassador
has the same Orders from his Masters: The Nuncio presses also the Signing
without any Change; and all the German Ministers are of the same Opinion.

The Baron refuses to Sign without another Order from Brussels: Upon which, the
French Ambassador presses both me and Monsieur Beverning to give him an Act,
wherein we are to witness, that he has been ready to Sign ever since the
arrival of the Project. The Dutch Ambassador protests he cannot refuse it; and
besides, that if the Baron will not Sign to morrow, he will depart, and return
for Holland. The Most Christian King has sent all his Officers into the Field,
and intends to follow them in Person; so that our Ministers at Paris apprehend
some new Accidents, unless they are prevented by signing the Treaty. For my
self, I have Instructions to use all means for advancing the Peace in concert
with the Dutch Ambassadors; and can by no means disagree with his Resolutions.
I bear with what Patience I can, the Mortification, to see that I must pass for
a Person whom your Excellency has imposed on, by giving me an Order which your
Minister was not to obey: But I cannot bear with Patience to see that the
Affairs of all Christendom must be absolutely ruined by a Caprice of the Baron
de Bargeyck: For I will not, as others do, impute to your Excellency such a
Feinte as that of drawing from us, all Assurances you demanded, upon your
promise of immediately signing the Treaty, and then of giving me a sort of
Order to the Baron, contradicted before by a counter Order in secret.

I should not have left Brussels, had not your Excellency assured me, that the
Baron should Sign without delay, whenever I judged it necessary: I now find it
so; and have told him, it is so very necessary, that I believe, France would
not have carried greater Advantages, nor triumphed more upon the winning of a
Battle, than on the Advances they have made in this Affair.

For my self, I was never in my life in greater mortification, than what I have
born in this Affair.

I am, etc.

Au Marquis DE CASTEL-RODRIGO.
Aix le 30. Avr. S. N. 1668. Monsieur,
JE trouve ma sante fort ebranlee, et a Dieu ne plaise que les accidens qu' est
capable de me causer le depit que je ressens du train que prennent les
affairs, viennent se joindre a mon indisposition. Tout ce que j'ay a dire
c'est, que l' Ambassadeur de France a order de ne changer pas un seul mot au
projet de nos Ministres qui sont a Paris. Celuy d' Hollande a les memes ordres;
le Nonce du Pape press la signature, et insiste sur le meme point: enfin, tous
le Ministres d' Allemagne sont dans le meme sentiment.

Le Baron de Bargeyck refuse a signer sans un nouvel order de Brusselles: La
dessus l' Ambassadeur de France press et moy et Monsieur Beverning de luy
donner un act, dans lequel nous temoignions, que depuis l'arrivee du project,
il a ete tous les jours pret a signer. L' Ambassadeur d' Hollande proteste
qu'il ne peut pas le luy refuser; et que meme, si le Baron de Bargeyck ne sign
pas dans la journee de demain, il partira d'icy pour s'en retourner en
Hollande. Le Roy tres Chretien a fait partir tous ses Officiers pour aller
ouvrir la campaign, et il pretend les suivre en person: De sort que nos
Ministres a Paris apprehendent de nouveaux desordres, si on n' arrete tout ce
grand mouvement par la signature du traite. Pour moy, les instructions que j'ay
recu, portent qu je n' epargne rien pour avancer la paix, et que je fasse
toutes chooses de concert avec l' Ambassador d' Hollande, et je ne puis en
aucune sort me departir de ses resolutions. Je port le plus patiemment que je
puis, la mortification de passer pour un homme don't V. E. s' est jouee, lors
qu'elle m'a fait expedier un order auquel on ne devoit pas obeir, et que Votre
Ministre a en effet elude; mais je ne puis voir qu'avec la derniere inquietude,
que toutes les affairs, de la Chretiente se brouillent et se perdent par le
seul caprice du Baron de Bargeyck. Car je me guard bien de supposer comme les
autres, une feinte en V. E. et de luy attribuer de nous avoir tendu un piege,
en tirant de nous les assurances demandees, sur la promise de fair aussi tot
signer le traite; et ensuite de m'avoir charge d'un order pour le Baron de
Bargeyck, qui par avance etoit detruit par une instruction secret.

Je n'aurois jamais parti de Brusselles, si V. E. ne m' avoit assure de bouche,
que la Baron signeroit sans y manquer tout aussi tot que je jugerois la chose
absolument necessaire. Nous nous sommes vus, et je luy ay represente la chose
si pressee, si necessaire, que je croy que la France n'a pas remporte plus
d'advantage, ni ne se soit erigee a elle meme un plus grand triomphe par le
gain d'une bataille que par les avances qu'elle a faite en cette occasion.

Pour moy, je n'ay eu de ma vie une plus grande mortification que celle que
j'ay essuye en cette rencontre.

Je Suis, etc.

To Mr. Williamson.
Aix, April 30. S. N. 1668. SIR,
MY Master being kept in his Bed by an Illness that seized him the first Night
of his arrival here, and since increased upon him by the Constraints he was
forced to the next Day in the Reception of the several Ambassadors; has
commanded me to give you the Account of his Journey hither, and desires you
will help it to pass with my Lord Arlington for that Promise which he made in
his last, of doing it himself to his Lordship upon next Occasion.

He parted from Brussels upon the 24th of this Month, with nine and twenty
Persons in his Company, of which, ten in his own Livery. Besides those who
belonged to him, my Lord Stafford, Captain Brumidge, and Captain Wesely, did
him the Favor to accompany him in his Journey, and twenty of the Marquis's
Guard for his security till he came the second Night into the Land of Liege.
The first Night at Louvain passed without any Ceremony, not taking upon him any
new Character in the Spanish Dominions: The second Night he lodged at
Herkinraedt, a very rich Abbey of Bernardin Nuns, where he was received as the
King of England's Ambassador. The next Morning the Magistrates of the Town of
Hassel sent to inform whether he passed by their Town of Hassel in his way to
Mastricht, to the end they might do him the Honor due to his Character; But my
Master desiring to avoid those Ceremonies chose to pass a private Way about a
Mile from the Town; However, he found all the Road where it lay over against
the Town, crowded with People, and among them, the Magistrates of the Town, who
in the Highway entertained him with a Speech, a Banquet, great store of wine,
and all the great Guns of the Town at the same time.

The same Night he arrived at Mastricht, having only sent an ordinary Servant
before to take up his Lodgings: Near the Town he was met by a Gentleman from
the Rhingrave, to tell him, that if the Hour of his Arrival had been known, he
would himself have met him on the Way, but however would not fail to do it at
his coming to Town: He was received there by all the great Guns of the Town,
the Garrison ranged through the Streets as he passed, and at the end of them a
Volly of their small Shot. At his Inn he was immediately visited by the
Rhingrave, and after him by the Magistrates of the Town: The next morning he
returned a Visit to the Rhingrave, who would by force accompany him back to his
Inn. As he went out, he had all the great Guns of the Town thrice round, and
greater Volleys of Shot than the Night before, and the Rhingrave met him in his
Coach about half a Mile out of Town, to perform his last Compliment, having
told my Lord Stafford that he had express Orders from the States to do all the
Honor that was possible both to his Character and his Person.

From Mastricht he sent a Letter to the Baron de Fraisheim here, to give him
Notice of his intended arrival upon Friday the 27th. but withal, to desire him
to keep it private, that so he might enter with little Noise or Ceremony, in
regard he came upon a sudden Journey and a very short Stay, and therefore with
the Train of the King's Resident at Brussels, rather than of his Ambassador.
The Baron de Fraisheim did his Part in suppressing the Knowledge of it, but the
Town having Notice by Orders they had given at Mastricht to that Purpose, sent
one to meet him in the Midway with Compliment, and desire that they might
receive him as they had done other Ambassadors: My Master referred it to them
to do as they pleased, and the rather because he heard that the French
Ambassador had made a Solemn Entry about six Days before, with very great
Train, and Ceremony, and he thought by this more private Entry to avoid the
Expectation of any other; So he was received in the Town with all the Guns, and
the Burghers in Arms, and complimented immediately at his Arrival both from the
Magistrates of the Town, and a Commander of the Duke of Nieuburg's, to assure
him that the Duke had given him Orders for two hundred Horse to attend him upon
the Confines, and to accompany him into the Town, as he had done the French
Ambassador at his Solemn Entry, and that the Baron of Fraisheim's Assurance of
his desiring to enter privately, had only prevented that Attendance.

The Night of his Arrival, my Master went about ten a Clock Incognito to the
Dutch Ambassador's House; resolving to tell him, that upon his Arrival here, he
intended to live after another sort with him than with any of the other
Ambassadors, as well in respect of the near Alliance between their Masters, as
of their Mediation. The Dutch Ambassador happened to be in Bed, but having
heard of my Master's Intentions, came and visited him early the next Morning
without Train or Ceremony, and gave him full Information of all that had passed
here, which made good what we met with every where upon the Road, that nothing
in the Peace could be done till the Arrival of the King's Ambassador here.

My Master's Indisposition that Morning dlayed his sending to give the several
public Ministers Advice of his Arrival till about ten a Clock, and then he was
prevented by Compliments; First from the French, and then from the Spanish
Ambassadors, which were returned that Morning, and succeeded in the Afternoon
by Visits from them both in the same Order.

My Master upon His first Enterview with the Holland Ambassador, enquired of
him what Intercourse had passed between Him and the Pope's Nuncio; and finding
that after some Offices by third Persons between them, it had stopped upon some
Difficulties without coming to any Visits or formal Compliments; He spoke to my
Lord Stafford when he made a Visit of Himself to the Nuncio, to let him know in
common Conversation, that my Master finding by what had passed between Him and
the Dutch Ambassador, that the same Difficulties were like to befall him, had
omitted to give him any advice of his Arrival, but to tell him at the same
time, that he was very much a Servant to the Merits of the Cardinal Padrone,
upon his acquaintance with him at Brussels, and was very glad to hear of the
continuance of his Health since his last Recovery; and so that Matter ended, as
I suppose; My Master having no Instruction in that Point, and therefore
desiring as civilly as he could, to take this Occasion of avoiding further
Commerce with him. I have nothing else worth giving you the Trouble of, but am,

SIR, Your most obedient Servant, Tho. Downton.

To the Elector of Mentz.
Aix, May 2. S. N. 1668. SIR,
THough my own Indisposition, and Monsieur Schouborne's Affairs, deprived me of
the Happiness of seeing him since my arrival in this City; I would not however
delay any longer to acknowledge the Honor of your Highnessess's Letter of the
12th past, and to make you the Offers of my Services (since, of the King my
Master's Affection, your Highness wants no Testimonies) In the mean while I
send your Highness the agreeable News of the Peace; the Treaties whereof I have
at present in my Hands; one Signed in presence of the Dutch Ambassador, and
the other in mine; which I was glad to obtain by precaution, so to surmount the
Difficulties raised upon delivering the Instruments to the Nuncio. I give your
Highness Joy of an Affair so important to the Happiness of Germany; and your
Highness may justly do the same to the King my Master, who though at distance,
and out of danger of this Flame, has however contributed more to the
extinguishing of it, than all those who were most interessed in the
Neighborhood. And since this Peace, as well as that of Portugal, has so justly
given His Majesty a Rank so high among the Pacifici; Your Highness will join
your Prayers to mine, that God Almighty will please to add also to his
Character, the Bea^i. And as your Highness has all Reason to believe the King
my Master your Friend, so I beg your Highness to esteem me always,

SIR, Your Highness's most, etc.

A l'Electeur de Mayence.
Aix le 2. May, S. N. 1668. Monsieur,
QUoy que mon indisposition, et les affairs de Monsieur Schouborne m'ayent
empeche de le voir depuis mon arrivee en cette ville; je n'ay pourtant pas
voulu differer plus long tems sans me servir de cette voye pour reconnoitre l'
honneur que V. A. m'a fait par sa lettre du 12. du pass, et sans luy envoyer
dans une des miennes les offres de mes services; je dis de mes services, car
pour l'affection du Roy mon Maitre elle est asses connue a V. A. et n'a pas
besoin de mon temoignage. En meme tems je donneray a V. A. une nouvelle bien
agreeable, puisque je luy apprendray que la paix est conclue, et qu' a l'heure
que je luy ecris, lestraitez en sont enter mes mains; l'un sign, en presence
de l' Ambassadeur d' Hollande, et l'autre en la mienne, ce que j'ay ete bien
aise d'obtenir par precaution, et afin de surmonter les difficultez survenues
lors qu'on a livre les Instruments a Monsieur le Nonce. Je done a V. A. toute
la joye d'une affair qui importoit au bonbeur de l' Allemagne, comme elle la
donnera avec justice au Roy mon maitre; car, quoy qu' eloigne et a couvert des
flammes qui devoroient tant de pais, on dira pourtant avec justice qu'il a seul
plus contribue a eteindre cet embrasement, que tous ceux qui en etoient et les
plus voisins et les plus alarmez. Et puisque cette paix, aussi bien que celle
de Portugal a si legitimement place sa Majeste dans le plus haut rang enter les
Pacifici. V. A. joindra ses prieres aux miennes, afin que le bon Dieu y ajoute
aussi les Beati. Et comme elle a tout lieu de croire le Roy mon Maitre des ses
amiss, je la pry aussi de m' estimer toujours,

Monsieur, etc.

To my Lord Arlington.
Aix, May 8. S. N. 1668. My Lord,
SInce my last I have received your Lordship's of the 17th and 20th, which both
complain of the ill State wherein the Suedish Treaty then stood, and command my
Applications to the Marquis for a Remedy. I have infused it all I could
possibly into the Baron de Bargeyck at his return from hence to Brussels, which
was in haste, and immediately after the signing and dispatching away the
Instruments of the Treaty. Some here attribute his Haste to an Intention of
avoiding any Speech of a general Guaranty for the Peace, which with so many
other Difficulties and Delays before the Signing, as well as so many
Declamations against the Violence and Injustice in pressing him to it, are
Evidence enough of the Force by which the Spaniards have been compelled to it;
Though I doubt of their being this Age in a Condition to make any better Use of
it. For my part, I was of opinion that since Don John was neither arrived with
Supplies, nor hardly expected in any Time. Since Holland was so desperately
bent upon the Peace without any Respect to the Spanish Honor or Interest,
further than joined immediately with their own; Since Spain had not been able
to find Means to engage His Majesty or Sueden in their Quarrel by Supplies
necessary to both Crowns: And since His Majesty was not in any Condition of
entering into the Business single, upon Considerations of Honor, Justice, or a
remote Danger; And consequently, since upon the Projects made both at a Time in
Paris, it grew evident to Spain, Qu'il faloit passer par la ou par les
fenestres. Upon all these Considerations, I say, I was of Opinion that the
Spaniards Business was to end franckly and immediately upon my arrival here,
thereby to have more Time for bringing the Ratifications of the Treaty signed
here, from Spain within this Month, and so avoid all Pretexts (which I
expected) of France's breaking the Business, and which I knew they would be
strongly tempted to by the Spaniards want or neglect of Preparations, and by
our Disconcert for their Defense. Upon these Considerations I confess I have
pressed as hard upon the Baron de Bargeyck, as the Dutch Ambassador himself, to
finish the Affair, ever since my arrival, and was at an end of my Patience to
see him stop it upon such slight and unreasonable Pretenses as his two last;
which were, first, not to insert his Powers, because both his and those of
France were sharp upon the Rise of the War; But Monsieur Colbert's were sent in
that Style since his arrival here, and only in Return of the Marquis's, since
those he brought with him were soft and without any Reflections: The Baron had
been advised by Monsieur Beverning at his first coming, to have them changed,
had three Weeks to do it, and yet made no Difficulty upon it till after the
Treaty was Signed, and the Powers came to be inserted, which he refused to
suffer, saying, He expected new and softer Powers within two or three Days, and
in the mean time would have had the Instruments dispatched away without any
Transcription of the Powers, though in the Treaty mentioned as inserted: And I
believe France would not have wished a better Occasion to delay the Business
beyond a possibility of being ratified within the time. This Difficulty took up
a whole Day after the Signing; and when the Baron was beaten out of it by main
Force, he threw Us upon a worse; For, whereas his first Powers, and all he had
ever given Copies of, or mentioned to any Minister here, had only run, as
deputed from the Marquis with the same Power to Treat and Conclude as if His
Majesty had been here in Person: When he inserted his Powers, after having made
Monsieur Colbert's express Stay a whole Day, he brings the Instrument with a
Power agreeing in all Words with the first, but only those of Ambassador and
Plenipotentiary joined to his Deputation, which put Monsieur Colbert into such
a Rage that he was ready to tear all in Pieces; and for five Hours Monsieur
Beverning and I could draw no other Answer from the Baron, but, that 'twas
impossible for him to do any otherwise, protesting he had no other Power here,
the first having been returned to the Marquis upon the Transmission of this,
the Advice of which he said he had received from Monsieur Beverning. With
Monsieur Colbert we had no hopes of prevailing to have his new Style allowed,
nor had we indeed any reason to press it, being offered upon a Surprise, and
there being no Color for the Marquis being qualified to send an Ambassador
upon this Occasion: I was five Hours upon the Rack with the Opinion the
Business would absolutely break by the Delays This world occasion; and indeed
out of all Patience with the Baron, not believing it possible he could be
without his first Powers by him; And Monsieur Beverning and He were at those
Heights, that they were several times upon the Point of drawing their Swords in
my Room, and I believe had done it in any other Place. But after all, the Baron
confessed he had his first Powers, and Order to insert them if he could not
make the others pass, but Instructions to endeavor That to the utmost; which
to give him his due, he acted to a Height that I could never have done without
straining my own Truth as well as my Business. And so upon the 4th at Night all
ended. My Dissatisfaction with the Baron Bargeyck's Conduct since I came
hither, was, I confess, very great, and my Expressions upon it very free in my
several Expresses to the Marquis, who it seems takes part in it, and owns it so
far, as to seem most extremely ill satisfied with the Ministers using so much
Earnestness here in beating him out of all those Designs. I have had three
several Letters from his Excellency since my being here, upon that Subject, but
all so ill-humoured and so Emportees, that I think they had been better spared,
and though what was particular to Me, civil enough, yet some Expressions
concerning the general Proceeding wherein I had the chiefest Part, so
Picquantes, that I think I have reason to resent, and am sure have not deserved
it from any public Minister either there or here; And having answered them
accordingly, I know not upon what Terms we are like to be upon my Return; And
therefore could not forbear giving your Lordship the trouble of this Relation,
to justify my self not only to your Lordship, for there I am sure it will not
need; but if you think fit, to the Count Molina, and the Baron d' Isola too,
who may perhaps have received Letters from the Marquis upon our Proceedings
here, of the same Style that I have done.

I have been the more earnest in bringing this Matter to an Issue here, (which
the Holland Ambassador says, had never been done without Me,) because I
conceived by all I have had from your Lordship, as well as from other Hands,
not only that you desired it in England, but that the Peace was necessary for
the Constitution of His Majesty's present Affairs: And since he has had the
Glory of makng two Peaces so important, we have now nothing to wish but to see
him in a Condition to make War as well as Peace, whenever the Honor and
Interest of his Crowns shall make it necessary; For that Necessity can, I
suppose, be no ways long avoided, but by our being in a Posture to welcome it
whenever it comes, and to make Advantage of it. And I think the best Time to
fall into Councils tending to this great End, will be after the Conclusion of
this general Peace, when no Engagement abroad, forces His Majesty to have so
much need of Money from his People. For, the Time to repair the Harms that
Storms have done a House, is in fair Weather; and, to mend a leaky Ship, she
must be brought ashore.

God of Heaven send your Lordship to be an happy Instrument in the Proposal and
Application of such Councils, and that we may take warning by the poor
Spaniards Example, whose ill Conduct of late in the Government has so far
subjected them to their Neighbors Disesteem, and Insolence, and Humor, as
well as to their Conquests, Violence, and Oppression; which I confess have been
enough to put them upon such desperate Councils as your Lordship mentions, of
giving up all to the French in these Countries, rather than be the bare
Guardians of other Frontiers. And yet all these Misfortunes are the natural
Consequences of their Conduct, and will never fail befalling any Prince, that
follows their Example. I wish That might befall the French, to temper a little,
such an overgrown Greatness; but I doubt it much, from the present King's
Dispositions, among whose Qualities those of Carelessness or lavishing his
Treasures, I am afraid are none: Therefore I wish him engaged in some very
charming Pleasures, or else in some more difficult Enterprises than his last,
and where we may not have so great a Share: That which they talk on here may
possibly prove so, which is drawing, or forcing the Empire to choose the Dauphin
King of the Romans; For though his Party be grown strangely powerful in
Germany, and, if Brandenburgh be falling into it as is believed, none will be
left to the House of Austria that I know of, unless Saxony and Triers; yet such
a body so differently composed as the Empire, should methinks very hardly move
all one way in any new Course.

Monsieur Colbert talks of his Master's sending immediately ten or fifteen
thousand Men for the Relief of Candy, which were a glorious and Christian
Council; and in all ways that can be, to be cherished and applauded: And if any
Offices could be done toward engaging the French Court in that Design, by Us
or the Dutch, I think they were not ill bestowed; about which I have
entertained Monsieur Beverning, who is of my mind, and have insinuated the same
Notions among the German Ministers here, who swallow it greedily; and I hope it
may take Effect, and help to free all these Parts of the Jealousy which so
great an Army must needs give, as this Peace is like to leave idle upon the
French Hands.

I intend to begin my Journey to Brussels to morrow, Monsieur Beverning gone to
day; but I doubt I shall be five or six Days upon the Way, not knowing any
thing now that presses me to more than ordinary Haste.

I received 600 l. owing me upon my Employment there before my coming away, and
was very sorry to find by a Letter of my Wife's, that the Fear she had of my
being dissappointed in that Particular, made her draw up a Memorial which it
seems the Council was troubled with, about my private Concernments: I may very
truly and justly disown it, as I do, and hope she will be pardoned for too
forward a Care and Concernment in that business: For, as to the Charge of my
Journey here, when your Lordship thinks fit to command it, I shall send you the
exact Account which my Secretary keeps, of all I spend, and leave it in your
Lordship's Hands, for His Majesty to do as he pleases in it; which is all the
Trouble I shall give you or my self about it.

I am ever with equal Passion and Truth, etc.

TO The Marquis OF Castel-Rodrigo.
Aix. May 8. S. N. 1668. My Lord,
I Received yours of the 4th Instant; and am glad your Excellency is so
extremely satisfied with the Moderation, (as you are pleased to style it) of
the Baronde Bargeyck; while at the same time you are so much provoked at the
Complaints I made of his Conduct here. I shall always openly confess, that
seeing Don Juan's Arrival with the intended Supplies delayed, and perhaps
wholly frustrated; seeing Holland so desperately fond of the Peace, without
considering the Interests of Spain; seeing the Emperor appear wholly
disinteressed in the Matter; seeing Spain had used no Endeavors to engage the
King my Master, or Sueden, otherwise than by fair words; And that His Majesty
was not in a condition to enter into the Affair alone, upon pure Considerations
of Generosity or of a Danger at distance: Seeing also, that Spain approved even
the first Project of Peace drawn by Monsieur de Lionne: I thought, upon all
these Considerations, that it was their Interest sincerely to finish the
Affair, and gain the most time possible, to get the Ratifications from Madrid;
and by that means take away from France all Hopes or Pretexts of Breaking,
without such an Evidence of Falsehood and Ambition, as would make Holland of
necessity engage in your Defense. And upon the same Considerations I urged the
Baron de Bargeyck all I could, to finish the Affair; as soon as I saw, that
neither the Ambassador of France nor Holland, any more than the Nuncio, would
hearken to Propositions of changing any thing in the Project. And, besides, I
thought, all the Difficulties the Baron made upon the Signing, very
unseasonable, and of ill consequence to the Affair; and I showed him how much
he was in the wrong to complain of the sharp Powers of Monsieur Colbert, which
were drawn up only in revenge to yours, his former ones having been without any
Reflection upon what was past: And the Baron de Bargeyck having had three weeks
time to send for softer Powers, and more proper for treating of a Peace. I was
also ill satisfied to see him keep us three or four days on the Rack, till the
Affair was just breaking, only to insert a new Power with the word Ambassador,
which the Nuncio never heard the Baron once mention before; there being nothing
of it in those Powers whereof he had given a Copy. And, as insignificant as
these Accidents seem to be, I think they were such, that if Monsieur Colbert
either by his own Disposition, or the Interests of his Brother, had not been
very much inclined to the Peace; I am persuaded, that this great Moderation of
the Baron de Bargeyck, had wholly ruined the Affair.

I am your, etc.

Au Marquis DE CASTEL-RODRIGO.
Aix, 8. May, S. N. 1668. Monsieur,
J'Ay recu la votre du 4. de ce mois; et je suis bien aise que V. E. s'est si
fort satisfaite de ce qu'elle appelle la Moderation du Baron de Bargeyck,
pendant qu'elle temoigne etre si picquee de l'aigreur que j'ay fait paroistre
en me plaignant icy de son proceed. J'avoueray tout publiquement, que voyant
retarder avec l'arrivee de Don Juan, les secours destinez et promis, et voyant
qu'on en seroit peut etre frustre; voyant l' Hollande si eperduement amoureuse
de la paix sans egard aux interets d' Espagne; voyant l' Empereur jouer dans
cette affair le role d'un Prince parfaitement desinteresse; voyant que l'
Espagne n'avoit encore agi aupres du Roy mon Maitre, et aupres de la Suede, que
par de belles paroles; connoissant que Sa Majeste n'etoit pas en etat d'entrer
seule dans cette epineuse negotiation; et que pour la porter a le fair, il
falloit autres chooses que de purs motifs de generosite; Enfin, voyant l'
Espagne elle meme approuver le Projet de Monsieur de Lionne, tell qu'il l'avoit
dress: Faisant attention a toutes ces chooses, j'ay cru que leur interet
demandoit qu'ils achevassent franchement l'affaire; gagnant le plus de tems
qu'il seroit possible pour fair venir les ratifications de Madrid; et otant
par la a la France tout pretexte, et toute esperance d'en venir a une rupture;
a moins qu'elle voulut elle meme etaler sa honte, et fair voir si a decouvert
sa perfidie et son ambition, que necessairement l' Hollande se trouveroit
engagee dans votre defense. Ces memes considerations ont fait, que j'ay pousse
autant qu'il m'a ete possible, a terminer promptement l'affaire, des que
j'avois clairement appercu, que ni l' Ambassadeur de France, ni celuy d'
Hollande, non plus que le Nonce, ne vouloient point ecouter la proposition de
changer quelque chose aux terms de Projet. Et meme j'ay regard toutes les
difficultez du Baron de Bargeyck sur la signature, comme faites horse de propos,
et d'une facheuse influence pour la conclusion de l'affaire. Je luy ay done le
port qu'il s'est plaint de la form en laquelle etoient concus les pouvoirs de
Monsieur Colbert, il y a cru y entrevoir de l'aigreur, sans fair reflection
qu'ils etoient dressez a l'imitation, et peut etre a l'envi des votres; les
premiers Pouvoirs de Monsieur Colbert ayant ete concus sans aucune relation au
pass; et le Baron de Bargeyck ayant eu trois semaines pour fair venir des
pouvoirs plus doux et plus sortables a la paix. J'ay ete aussi fort indigne de
ce qu'il nous a retenutrois ou quatre jours a la gene; et cela parce qu'il
vouloit inserer un nouveau pouvoir avec le mot d' Ambassadeur. Le Nonce n'en
avoit jamais ouy parler auparavant au Baron; car la moindre mention n'en avoit
pas ete faite dans les pouvoirs, don't il avoit done copy. Quelque legers que
puissent paroitre de tells incidens je croy pouvoir dire, que si Monsieur
Colbert par la situation des affairs et des interets de son friar, ne s'etoit
pas trouve tout-a-fait port a la paix, je suis persuade que cette belle et
louable moderation qu'on vante en Monsieur Bargeyck, auroit suffi pour gater
tout.

Je Suis, etc.

To my Lord Arlington.
Brussels, May 22. S. N. 1668. My Lord,
YOur Lordship's of the first current, referred me to another I was to expect
by the following Post, with particular Directions how to pursue the Suedish
Affair here; But That being not yet arrived, I have hitherto been only able to
make some general Diligences therein, together with the Holland Deputy in a
joint Audience this Morning. The Marquis's Guard consisted chiefly in these
Points; That what he had promised of sending Powers to the Count Molina, was in
time of War, and with Intention of engaging Sueden with Us in the Affair. That
the Peace has altered that Measure; and though he had full Powers to grant what
he thought fit in the time of War, whose Accidents admitted not Recourse to
Spain, yet he had not the same in time of Peace, but had written effectually
upon this Subject. That, in the mean time he expected to know the Effect of
this League, and see the Form of Guaranty it should produce, with what Concert,
and what Advantages for the Affairs of these Countries, of which he had yet
received no particular Account from the Count de Molina. That he did not
understand why Spain should satisfy the Expense of those Months which the
Suedes had kept up their Troops only at the Desire of Holland, and without any
Reflections upon the Business of these Countries, which was from the time of
the Conclusion at Breda to that of our League at the Hague, wherein Count Dona
entered, and which seemed the first Instance of the Suedes concerning
themselves in this Country or Spain's Affairs.

The Holland Deputy pressed his Excellency hard upon his Promise, and his
declaring to Us, that he had sent his Powers to the Count Molina, pursuing him
with Res non est integra, and, Mandatum non potest revocari, and such Civil Law
Arguments, till it grew warm, and so not very proper for a Man in ill Health,
nor in my Opinion, for the Business as it stands: So that I was fain to divert
it upon my expectation of new Powers and particular Instructions, by which I
hoped to be able to give the Marquis satisfaction in the Project of the
intended Guaranty.

This Morning arrived Sir John Trevor's Secretary, with Directions to bring the
Business of the Ratifications to a Period, by carrying one from hence for
Sureties sake, in case That from Spain should fail, which is expected upon the
very Treaty signed at Aix; and withal to concert other Circumstances in the
manner of the Exchange, which is made very imperfect in the Treaty; that is,
one to be delivered at St. Germains, and the other at Brussels. I carried the
Secretary this Afternoon to the Marquis, and we have fallen upon this
Agreement; That to morrow he shall return for Paris with a Ratification upon
the Treaty at Aix, and with Insertion of the same Powers; a blank now in the
Marquis's Hands being to be filled up in that Form, and to be dated the 16th
current, which will answer a Possibility of a Post going to Madrid after the
2d. when the Treaty was signed at Aix, receiving this Ratification there, and
returning to Paris by the 24th, the Day this Gentleman expects to arrive there.

For the Exchange, it shall be made at Paris, and by the Hands of our Ministers
there, who shall deliver the Spanish Ratifications, and at the same time
receive the French, with which the Marquis is content, and will proceed to the
publishing of the Peace, so soon as our Ministers are possessed of the French
Ratifications, which may afterward be sent hither at leisure. The Day we
propose for exchanging the Ratifications is the 26th, and the 28th, for
publishing the Peace, in case we receive a Courier by that time with Advice of
the French Concurrence in that Day.

For the Manner of executing the Treaty, I confess I was of Opinion, nothing
should be mentioned of it till the Exchange and Publication were past, since
new Difficulties may arise upon it, which will be easiest overcome when the
Thing is done, and perhaps the Parties will have begun to disarm: The Marquis
was of my Opinion in it, and therefore has proposed only in that Point, that
after the Publication, Commissioners may be appointed on both sides to meet
upon it, and the Mediators desired by both Parties to intervene likewise by
their Commissioners, for the better composing of any Difference that may arise
between the Parties; and to whom the Adjudication of such Difference may be
referred: The Place of meeting to be Oudenard or Courtray, as most commodious
for adjudication of the Limits which may fall in Dispute. After this Matter
thus digested, and Promise of the Ratifications to be in my Hands to morrow by
Noon; I came away with Sir John Trevor's Secretary; But the Marquis sent after
me, to desire he might speak with me alone; And told me, he was to thank me for
sparing him this Morning in Disputes he was falling into with the Holland
Deputy; That in short, the Dutch had crossed him in an Alliance he was making
last Year with Sueden, because they would make themselves Masters of the
Affair; and now would buy the Suedes Dependence at the Cost of Spain. That he
had all the Reason in the World to be satisfied with His Majesty's Conduct of
this Affair, but little in the Dutch; That he knew no Reason why they should
not pay what they had promised to Sueden after the Treaty of Breda, nor why all
the Money Spain could spare should not be given His Majesty upon a nearer
League between Us, who was the only Prince had proceeded affectionately and
generously in the Spanish Affairs; and who was the best able to support them in
case he were in Condition to make War without his Peoples Purses: That he
expected the Baron Isola suddenly here for Conclusion of the Guaranty, and this
Affair with Sueden; And that at last, if it must be paid by Spain, it should be
all laid in His Majesty's Hands to dispose of as he pleased. I gave his
Excellency Thanks for Expressions so obliging in what concerned our Part in
this whole Affair; But desired him to take it for a Ground in all the
Superstructures to be made upon the present Foundations; That Spain must not
disoblige Holland even to oblige Us, but dissemble any Resentments they had
given him, and sacrifice them to the Advantage both We and Spain received by
their present Separation from France. And so our Discourses ended, and we are
returned into the same good Correspondence we were in before I went to Aix;
which had been interrupted by some Letters I received from his Excellency
there, and some I returned in the Style I thought they deserved: It being
perhaps natural to the same Men, to be the least subject to do Injuries, and
the least capable of receiving them; For it is easy enough to find Morals for
the first, but Christianity enough for the last, I doubt is difficult.

I am, etc.

To Monsieur de Wit.
Brussels, May 27. S. N. 1668. SIR,
BY my last, from Aix, I gave you Account of the Signing of the Peace; and was
in hopes by this, to have given you also an Account of the Ratification; which
is not yet arrived from Paris. Mean while, the Ravages made by the French
Troops over all the Country, and their Approaches to this City, alarm us here,
as if they had a Design to wrangle upon some Formalities, and in the mean time,
put themselves in a Condition to carry the greatest Advantages upon expiration
of the Truce. I will not have the least suspicion of such a Proceeding; the
most Christian King having already given notice of the Peace, to the Pope and
other Christian Princes: And (which is of greater weight) knowing that Sueden
has already entered into the Tripple Alliance. Therefore, the Business that
gives me most Pain, is to draw from Spain the Satisfaction stipulated to
Sueden, upon which your Deputies here have without doubt already given you the
Marquis's Answers, though indeed somewhat cold and uncertain. I have since given
him a very pressing Letter Letter from the King my Master, upon the same
Subject, but have had yet no Answer, further than that he has not yet seen our
Tripple Alliance, nor knows the Advantages given to Spain by it, or whether
they are equal to Spain and France. He makes Difficulties also upon the
Subsidies of these Months past between the Treaty at Breda, and ours at the
Hague, which was (as he says) the first day that Sueden began to consider the
Affairs of Spain; And he adds, that he has writ into Spain upon this Matter,
and waits an Answer; his Powers being more ample in time of War than of Peace.

By the Thread of his Discourse I imagine, that he is sufficiently convinced of
the Necessity of the Affair, and that he will agree to it; but knowing that he
has time till Ratification come from Sueden; he makes use of it, either, first
to see the supplies of Money expected with Don John; or perhaps, because there
are some Natures in the World, who never can proceed sincerely in Business, but
are always for gaining Time, which they will do if they were going to their
Wedding as much as if they were going to their Execution.

Mean while, the King my Master has thought good to order another Letter to be
writ to the Queen of Spain her self upon this Subject, and to come to an end of
this Affair, notwithstanding the Difficulties that may arise here: And I think
it will not be amiss if the States observe the same order, writing a Letter to
the Marquis, and at the same time another to the Queen, to press the Affair,
and both in civil Terms, without sharpning the Matter, or seeming to make
Difficulties upon the Ratifications of the Guaranty, at least, not to make them
appear greater than they are. I have told my Opinion in this Affair, and I have
dealt with the Spaniards long enough to know a little of their Genius; nor do I
doubt coming to an end of this Matter, as well as I have done of others more
difficult, provided we go the same way, as having to do with the same People.

I doubt not, but you will be of my Opinion, that it will be necessary after
the Peace is made, to endeavor at coming to some Exchange of Places, as well
to remove the French from your Frontiers, as to leave the Spaniards in a better
condition of defending themselves against any new Surprise or Attack: And this
will deserve your Thoughts upon it; I mean, the Manner by which you must begin
and carry on this Affair: And, I think, the best Occasion of entering into the
Business will be upon the Execution of the Peace; and to represent that the
Restitution of Burgandy in the Condition it is in at present, is an offer not
agreeable to the Promises of the Most Christian King.

I have desired Monsieur Beverning to discourse you about a small Particular in
our last Instrument of the Marine, which does not seem to me of any Importance,
but by which some of your good Friends have undertook to reflect particularly
upon me: But having had no News of Monsieur Beverning since his Departure, I
should be glad to know that He spoke to You of it; and what You think.

I am, etc.

A Monsieur de Wit.
De Brusselles, le 27. May, S. N. 1688. Monsieur,
PAR ma derniere lettre d'Aix la Chapelle, je vous ay appris la signature de la
paix, et j'esperois par cellecy vous apprendre la ratification; mais elle n'est
pas encore arrivee de Paris. Cependant, les ravages faits par les Troops
Francoises dans toute la Flandre, et leurs approches de cette ville, causent
encore de l'alarme icy, comme s'ils avoient dessein de chicaner sur quelques
formalitez, et en attendant, se mettre en etat de remporter les plus grands
avantages au moment de l'expiration de la Treve. Je ne veux point former le
moindre soupcon d'un tell proceed dans les Francois; le Roy tres Chretien ayant
deja done avis de la paix, tant au Pape qu' aux autres Princes; Et, (ce qui
est de plus grand poids) sachant que la Suede a deja enter dans la Triple
Alliance. C'est pourquoy, la chose don't je me mets le plus en peine, est de
tirer de l'Espagne la satisfaction stipulee pour la Suede. Vos Deputez icy vous
ont sans doubt deja communique sur cet article les reponses du Marquis, a la
verite un peu froides et incertaines. Je luy ay remis depuis, une lettre de la
part du Roy mon Maitre sur ce sujet, fort pressante, mais je n'en ay jusqu' icy
pu tirer d'autre reponse, si non qu'il n'a pas encore vu le traite de notre
Triple Alliance, et qu'il ignore quels avantages y sont contenus pour l'
Espagne; et s'ils sont balances egalement enter la France et l'Espagne. Je
form aussi des difficultez sur les subsides des Mois ecoulez enter la
conclusion du traite a Breda, et la date du notre a la Hay, qui etoit, dit il,
le premier jour que la Suede a commence d'examiner les affairs d'Espagne, et
d'y fair attention. Enfin il ajoute qu'il a ecrit en Espagne, sur cette
matiere, et qu'il en attend la reponse, ses Pouvoirs etant plus amples en tems
de guerre qu'en tems de paix. Par la suite de son discourse j'ay cru
appercevoir, qu'il est asses persuade de la necessite de l'affaire, et qu'il y
veut venir; mais comme il sait, qu'il a du tems jusqu' a la ratification venue
de Suede, il tache de s'en servir, dans l'esperance que les secours d'argent
arriveront avec Don Juan. Mais peut etre que ce temporisement a un autre
principe, et qu'il y a des esprits dans le monde faits de tell sort, qu'ils
ne saurcient jamais aller rondement en besogne, et qui songent toujours a
gagner du tems, lors meme qu'il s'agit d'aller aux noces, comme lors qu'il est
question d'aller a la mort.

En attendant, le Roy mon Maitre a trouve bon de fair ecrire une autre lettre
a la Reyne d'Espagne elle meme sur ce sujet, pour venir a bout de cette
affair, malgre les difficultez qui se pourront rencontrer icy. Il me semble
qu'il ne seroit mal a propos que Messieurs les Etats suivissent la meme voye,
et qu'ils fissent ecrire au Marquis et en meme tems a la Reine, afin de presser
l'affaire. Ces deux lettres etant conceues en terms obligeans, et au lieu
d'aigrir le different, et de grossir les difficultez, paroissant avoir pour but
de pacifier toutes chooses, et de tender a une prompte conclusion touchant les
Ratifications de la Guarantie, pourroient produire un tres bon effet. Voila mon
opinion sur cette affair: J'ay eu un assez long commerce avec les Espagnols
pour connoitre un peu leur genie; et je ne doubt point que je ne vienne a bout
de ce que j'ay entrepris, ainsi que se suis deja venu a bout de chooses plus
difficiles, pourvu que nous marchions tous d'un meme train, ayant affair a
memes gens.

Je ne doubt pas que vous ne soyez comme moy du sentiment, qu'apres la paix
faite, il sera necessaire de fair nos efforts pour amener les chooses a un
echange des places, tant pour eloigner les Franccois de vos frontieres, que
pour laisser les Espagnols en etat de se mieux defendre contre de nouvelles
surprises et de nouvelles invasions. Cecy merit vos reflections. Vous penserez
aussi a la maniere don't il faudra s'y prendre pour entamer et poursuivre cette
affair. Il me semble que l'occasion la plus propre d'entrer en matiere sur
cela, sera sur l'execution de la paix; et de representer, que la restitution de
Bourgogne dans l'etat ou il est a present, est une offer peu convenable aux
promesses du Roy tres Chretien.

J'ay pry Monsieur Beverning de vous entretenir sur une petite particularite
touchant notre dernier memoire sur la marine; la chose ne me paroit pas
importante, mais parce que quelques uns, de vos bons amiss ont pris a tache de
me blamer moy seul en particulier: Comme je n'ay point eu de nouvelles de
Monsieur Beverning depuis son depart, je seray bien aise de savoir s'il vous en
e parle, et ce qui vous en semble.

Je Suis, etc.

To Monsieur de Wit.
London, July 3. 1668. SIR,
HAving taken so much Part in your good Fortunes, and the Applauses given you
by the World, it is but reasonable, I should also take Part in your Losses, and
tell you with equal Displeasure and Truth how much I am concerned at your late
Misfortune. I have long observed, that your Fatigues for the Public were eased
by your Domestic Entertainments; and instead of those Diversions which others
seek in Vice and Extravagance, you always placed yours in the innocent
Pleasures of Conjugal and Paternal Affection. I have observed also, how happily
you discharged your self of all Affairs of your Family upon a Lady who now
lives no more but in the Memory and Esteem of all those that knew her; And
therefore I am but too sensible how nearly this Loss must afflict you; and that
it is neither just nor decent to give you Consolation upon it so soon.
Therefore, I will only say, that if it were not for this sad Occasion, you
would have wanted one great enough to show the strength of your Mind, which is
often apter to sink under Domestic Accidents, than those of Court or of War;
For by These a Man is only hardened every day, but he is softened and made more
tender by the others. I beg you therefore not to neglect this Occasion of your
Glory; nor to forget, in the midst of your Grief, that you have this long time
espoused the Good of your Country, and of Christendom it self, in these last
Conjunctures; to which you owe all your Applications and Caresses: I hope these
will be at present some Comfort to you, or at least, a Diversion, as they have
formerly been a Fatigue and a Pain.

Having begun this Letter only to condole with you upon this sad Occasion, I
will not intermix any thing of Business, only to tell you, that the King my
Master presses me every day to prepare for my Voyage, which I shall delay no
longer than my Domestic Affairs have made it necessary after so long an
Absence. In the mean while, I assure you, I find nothing here that can any way
change or slacken the Pursuit of our true and common Interests; which consist
in the Firmness of our last Alliance. But of this I shall tell you more when I
see you.

I am, Sir, Your, etc.

A Monsieur de Wit.
De Londres le 3. Juill, 1668. Monsieur,
AYant pris tant de part dans vos prosperitez, et dans les applaudissemens que
vous recevez de tout le monde; il est bien just que j'en prenne dans vos
disgraces et dans vos pertes; et que je vous dise avec autant de douleur que de
verite, que j'ay ete-vivement touch de la derniere perte que vous venez de
fair. Il y a long tems que j'ay remarque que votre domestique vous a toujours
servi d'unique relachement dans des fatigues que vous causent les affairs
publiques, et qu'au lieu de recourir a ces divertissemens qui approchent si
souvent de l'extravagance et du crime, vous faisiez, toujours consister les
votres a cultiver les fruits de l'amitie conjugale, et de la tendresse
paternelle. J'avois remarque aussi, avec quelle joye et quelle confiance vous
vous etiez decharge de tous les soins de menage sur cette vertueuse epouse, qui
ne vit plus a present que dans l'estime et le souvenir de toutes les persons
qui l'ont connue; et par la je ne sens que trop combien sa perte vous doit
sensiblement toucher: ni la bienseance, ni la raison ne souffrent point que j'
entreprenne de vous consoler si subitement. C'est pourquoy je vous diray
seulement, que sans une si triste occasion, vous n'auriez pas eu celle d'etaler
toute la force de votre ame, qui succombe quelque fois plus promptement et plus
absolument sous les afflictions domestiques que sous le revers de la
Republique, ou les disgraces de la guerre: On se familiarise avec ces
dernieres, et on s'y endurcit avec le tems; mais les premieres conservent
toujours le droit de nous attendrir et de nous toucher infiniment. Je vous
prieray donc de ne pas negliger cette occasion de votre gloire, et au plus fort
de votre douleur, de ne point oublier avec quel de vonement, et depuis quel
tems vous avez epouse le bien de votre Patrie, et avec le sien, celuy de la
Chretiente dans ces dernieres conjonctures; votre attachement, vos soins, votre
tendresse meme luy sont dus, puisque vous devez vous meme tout entier a elle.
J'espere qu' a l'avenir vos veilles et vos fatigues pour la Republique vous
procureront quelque soulagement, ou du moins apporteront quelque diversion a
vos ennuis, au lieu des travaux et des sueurs qu'elles vous ont coute autrefois.

Ayant commence cette lettre uniquement dans la veue de me cosoler avec vous,
je ne veux point la finir en y melant quelque chose qui soit etranger a votre
douleur. Je ne vous parleray donc point d'affaires, et je vous diray seulement
que le Roy mon Maitre me press tous les jours sur les preparatifs de mon
depart; je n'y apporteray d'autres retardements que ceux que mes affairs
domestiques rendent indispensables apres une si longue absence. En attendant,
je puis vous assurer que je n'ay rien appercu icy qui puisse tant soit peu
alterer ou rallentir les soins de nos veritables et communs interests, que je
fay consister dans la fermete et la duree de notre derniere Alliance: vous
verrez cela plus au long a mon arrivee.

Je Suis, etc.

To Sir John Temple.
Sheen, July 22. 1668: SIR,
THough I doubt our late Motions may have lost or delayed some of your Letters,
which we have now been some time in want of; yet I presume ours have had their
constant Course to you, though from several Parts; And though mine have not
been frequent, upon the Permission you give me to spare my own Eyes and Time
when they are otherwise taken up, and trust to my Sister's entertaining you:
Yet upon my return home after three Years absence, I could not but give you
some Account of my coming and stay here; and of what I can foresee is like to
follow it, both as to my own Particular, and to the public Affairs, in which
That seems at present to be so much involved.

After the Conclusion of the Tripple Alliance and the Peace of Aix, I was at an
end of my Ambition; having seen Flanders saved as if it had been, by one of the
Miracles, the House of Austria has, they say, been used to; and the general
Interests of Christendom secured against the Power and Attempts of France; and
at the same time the Consideration and Honor of His Majesty and his Crown
abroad, raised to a Degree it has not been in for some Ages past, and we had no
reason to expect it should be in some Ages to come, upon the Decline it felt
after the Business of Chattam, and the Peace of Breda that succeeded it. I
returned from Aix to Brussels without other Thoughts than of continuing in that
Station till I grew wearier of it than I was like to do very suddenly of a
Place, I confess I love; But immediately upon my Arrival there, I met with
Letters from my Lord Arlington, which brought me the King's Orders to continue
the Equipage of an Ambassador, that I was in, upon my Aix Journey, in order to
my serving His Majesty in the same Character at the Hague, whether he was
resolved to send me, and to renew upon occasion of our late Alliances, a
Character, which the Crown of England had discontinued in that Country, since
King James's Time. In order hereunto I was left at liberty to take my Leave of
the Marquis, and to return into England as soon as I pleased, which I did by
the Way of Holland, and left most of my Servants and Horses at Utrecht.

Upon my Arrival here, I was received both by the King and Court a great deal
better than I could deserve or pretend; But People seem generally pleased with
the Councils and Negotiations, in which I have had so much Part since Christmas
last; and I understand not Courts so ill (how little soever I have been used to
them) as not to know, that one ought not to lose the Advantage of coming home
with the common Opinion of some Merits or good Hitts at one's Back; if one's
Business be de pousser sa Fortune; And I am put enough in mind of it upon this
Occasion, by several of those many new Friends one would think I had at this
time of Day, as well as by some of my old ones; But I cannot imagine why I
should pretend to have deserved more than my Pay of the King, for which I
served Him in my late Employments; and if I got Honor by them, 'twas so much
more than I had to reckon upon. Besides, I should be sorry to ask Money of him
at a time when for ought I can judge by the Cry of the Court, He wants it more
than I do. The Spanish Ambassador and Baron d' Isola, as well as others of my
Friends, would needs be asking a Title for Me, and it is with difficulty enough
that I have prevented it; But it is That I am sure I never can have a mind to,
and if it should ever be offered me, I resolve it shall either begin with you,
if you desire it, or if not, with my Son, which I had much rather. But I
suppose, nothing of this can happen in our Court without Pursuit, and so I
reckon my self in all these Points just where I was about six Months ago, but
only designed for another Ambassy, and no Man knows how That will end. I am
very much pressed to dispatch my Preparations for it, by my Lord Keeper and
Lord Arlington, who are extreme kind to Me, as well as to the Measures lately
taken by their Ministry, and seem to value themselves a great deal upon them.
They say, all the Business the King now has, both at home and abroad, will turn
upon my Hand in Holland, by keeping the French from breaking in upon our late
Alliances, and the Confidence between Us; and by drawing the Emperor and
Princes of the Empire into a common Guaranty of the Peace; and thereupon they
are mighty earnest with me to hasten away. On the other side, the Commissioners
of the Treasury seem to have more mind to my Company here than I could expect:
For after some of them had tried to hinder the King's Resolution, of sending
either an Ambassador at all into Holland (upon Pretense of so long Disuse of
that Character) or Me in particular; when That could not be carried, they
prepared my Way by entering upon new Regulations in the Exchequer, among which,
those concerning foreign Employments, brought down the Equipage Money of
Ambassadors from three thousand Pounds as it has been since the King came in,
to fifteen hundred Pounds in France and Spain, and to one thousand Pounds in
all other Courts; And their Allowance, from one hundred Pounds a Week to ten
Pounds a Day in France and Spain, and to seven in other Places. Though this be
pretended by the Commissioners as only a Piece of a general Scheme of Parsimony
they find necessary in the present Condition of the Revenue; Yet I understand
it as calculated just at this Time particularly for Me; and my Lord Arlington
confesses, he thinks it so too, and takes part in it as a piece of Envy or
Malice to Himself as well as to Me, from some who are spighted at all, that has
lately passed between Us and Holland, and at the Persons who have been at the
Head of those Councils. For my part, I resent it not only as a Thing I have not
deserved, upon an Employment cast wholly upon me by the King's Choice, and, as
he seems to think, by the Necessity of his Affairs; but as that which I find
plainly by the short Experience of my last Ambassy, will not defray the Expense
of another, with any Honor to the King or my Self abroad; And though I do not
pretend to make my Fortune by these Employments, yet I confess I do not pretend
to ruin it neither. I have therefore been resolved several times absolutely to
refuse this Ambassy, unless it be upon the Terms all others have had; But my
Lord Arlington puts so much weight upon my going, that he will not hear of it:
He says, it is That our good Friends would have, and intend by this Usage; and
that I can no way disappoint them so much as by going, and that this Rule will
be broken in three Months time: That I should not consider small matters of
Money in the course of my Fortune, and that the King cannot fail of making mine
at a Lump one time or other: That there is nothing I may not expect from him
upon my return from this Ambassy; And that if His Majesty had not thought me of
absolute Necessity to him in Holland upon this Conjuncture, he had brought me
now into Secretary Moris's Place, which upon my going abroad is designed for
Sir John Trevor. My Lord Keeper is of the same mind, to have me by no means
refuse it (as he says) neither for the King's sake nor my own; And your old
Friend Sir Robert Long agrees with them both; and says, after a Year or two of
this Ambassy, I cannot fail of being either Secretary of State, or sent
Ambassador into Spain; which are both certain ways of making any Man's Fortune.

With all this, I confess I find it not very easy to resolve, and very much
desire yours and my Brother's Opinion upon it: And that you may the better give
it me, I shall tell you one Circumstance which weighs a little with me, though
not at all with my Friends here. They are all of Opinion, the Measures the King
has lately taken cannot be broken nor altered, however they may be snarled at
by some Persons, upon particular Envy or Interest; But I see plainly there are
others of another Mind. Six Thomas Clifford said to a Friend of mine in
Confidence, upon all the Joy that was here at the Conclusion of the Tripple
Alliance; Well, for all this Noise, we must yet have another War with the Dutch
before it be long. And, I see plainly already, that He and Sir George Downing
are endeavoring with all the Industry that can be, to engage the East India
Company here in such Demands and Pretensions upon the Dutch, as will never be
yielded to on that Side, and will increase a Jealousy, they will ever have, of
our unsteddy Councils, and of our leaving still a Door open for some new
Offenses when we shall have a mind to take them. On the other side, the French
will leave no Stone unturned, to break this Confidence between Us and Holland,
which spoils all their Measures, and without which they had the World before
them. If they can, they will undermine it in Holland by Jealousies of the
Prince of Orange, or any other Artifice, and will spare neither Promises nor
Threats. If I should be able to keep that Side stanch, they will spare none of
the same Endeavors here, and will have some good Helps that I see already, and
may have others that do not yet appear. If by any of these Ways, or other
Accidents, our present Measures come to change; I am left in Holland to a
certain Loss, upon the Terms they would send me, though I should be paid, but
to a certain Ruin if I should not; which I may well expect from the good
Quarter I may reckon upon from some in the Treasury; And when my Ambassy ends,
I may find a new World here, and all the fine Things I am told of, may prove
Castles in the Air: There is I know, a great deal to be said for my going, but
on the other Side, I am well as I am, and cannot be ruined but by such an
Adventure as this. I beg of you to let me know your Opinion upon the whole; And
if I could have the Confidence, I should beg a great deal more earnestly that I
might see you here, since I cannot get loose to wait on you there. Till I hear
from you, I shall let the Talk and the Forms of my Embassy go on, and am
confident, however they presume, yet I can spin out the Time of my going till
about the End of August in hopes of seeing you here; which will be, I am sure,
the greatest Satisfaction that can befall

SIR, Yours, etc.

The End of the First Volume of Sir William Temple 's Letters.
LETTERS TO Sir William Temple.
From Sir Thomas Clifford.
Copenhagen, October. 7. 1665. SIR,
I Have received your obliging Letter of the 20/30th past: And the News of this
Country is like the Commodities, not of equal Value with the more Southern, and
so you are like to be a Loser by the Barter: But your Kindness is the greater.
I hope the King of Spain's Death will no way alter the State of our Affairs
with that Crown. I cannot yet tell you the Effect of my Negotiation here; but
shall in my next give you some Hints. The Direction of your Letter brings it
safe to me; I shall advise you before I remove. Here came a Report last Night,
that a Squadron of the English Fleet had taken out of Fleckery nine of the
Dutch Merchantmen, and ran another on Shore: But I have examined it, and find
there was no Ground for the Report. Two of their East India Men are still at
Tunsburg, near Christiana in Norway, and two more are returned to Bergen: But
the six Men of War and East-India-Man that came here into the Sound after the
Storm, are put to Sea, and gone toward the Texel. The East India Ship that got
into the River of Elve, is there unlading, and they are sendihg the Goods home
in little small Vessels, under the Convoy only of a little Toy of eight or ten
Guns: They go home over the Watts; a Privateer lying there would probably make
his Market.

Last Night some Dutch Ships going for Dantzick arrived here, and boasted, that
their Fleet of ninety Sail, under De Ruyter, sailed upon Sunday last, the first
Instant, toward England, and to the Chanel, as they thought, to join with the
French; but no body gives credit to the Relation.

You see what a shift I make to complete my Bill of Store; but pray let it not
dishearten you from corresponding: For if I have nothing else to say, I shall
be glad of Opportunities to express my self,

SIR, Your most affectionate humble Servant, Thomas Clifford.

From the Earl of Clarendon, Lord High Chancellor.
Oxford, December 28, 1665. SIR,
I Do confess I have since we parted, received three Letters from you, which I
should be ashamed to acknowledge now, if I had been faulty in not doing it
sooner; as I promise my self you have been informed from my Lord Arlington's
Justice and Friendship. It is now near three Months, that the Pain of the Gout
has restrained me from the Exercise of Writing; and I am hardly yet returned
to it; because not able to put my Head out of Doors, or more than to stand,
rather than walk in my Chamber: So that I would not have ventured to have given
you this Trouble; but upon the Absence of my Lord Arlington, (who has
transmitted to you constantly what we thought jointly:) But upon the Sight of
your last Letter, which came since his Departure; I think it necessary to say a
little to you upon a Particular or two.

I do, in the first place think and believe the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo to be
a very generous Person, and a very useful Friend to the King our Master; and
one who will be the best Instrument to contribute to that firm Friendship
between the two Crowns, that is necessary for the joint Interest of both; And
therefore we must be careful to remove the least Umbrage, which may dispose him
to suspect our Prudence, with Reference to our own Affairs, or our Affection,
with Reference to Spain. With Reference to our selves, it is not possible we
can be without a Sense of the almost insupportable Weight that lies upon us, in
the carrying on the War against the Dutch, and preparing for a War against
France. And therefore we cannot but heartily wish to be fairly quit of one of
them; and would be very glad that any Advance were made to it by Holland. I
thought always that the Overture made by the Spanish Ambassador, had come from
Don Stephano, and never heard the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo's Name: But it
being the very same in Terms that the French Ambassadors had made, there could
then be no Proceedings upon it. But we have done all we can to invite the Dutch
to an Address how privately soever: Nor shall we make any Demands concerning
the Prince of Orange, lest it should do him hurt. If we can bring them off from
a Conjunction with France (in which Spain is more concerned than England) I
confident we shall insist upon very reasonable Conditions. We have great Reason
to commend the Proceedings of the Bishop of Munster: Nor are we jealous in the
least Degree of him, or his treating: And as our Failing toward him has not
proceeded from any Faults of ours, but even from the Hand of God: So we shall
out of hand repair those Omissions: And it is but reasonably expected that the
Princes of the Empire should (how secretly soever) support him from a
Dissolution, lest before many Months past, and the French Designs are a little
more evident, they would be glad to re-purchase the Advantage of the Bishop's
being in such a Post as he now is, at any Price.

There is nothing now ought to be labored with so much Industry and Dexterity,
as the uniting Enland, Spain and Flanders, which would give, and which only can
give Peace to Christendom. I am sure our Master is passionately inclined to it;
and truly I think Spain is well disposed to the main; yet I know not how by the
fatal Delay in Dispatch there; and it may be their Expectation, that in the
Straits we are, we shall buy their Friendship at a Rate we shall never pay for
it; there is not Haste made that the Affair required. My Lord Sandwich (who
will be gone in twenty Days) I hope will give Life to it.

You see how ill my Hand is, though never legible, by shaking and weakness
somewhat worse than usual. God keep you; and I pray let me know, that this is
come to your Hands from,

SIR, Your Affectionate Servant, Clarendon.

From Late M. of Hallifax.
Sir George Savil.
Febr. 5. S. N. 1666. SIR,
IT is a Sin against the Public, and a Trespass upon you, at this time to clog
you with such an idle Correspondence as mine: But I find I consider my own
Interest before yours; being not able to make you an Expression of my Kindness
at so dear a rate as the denying my self the Satisfaction of hearing from you.
And therefore I take hold of your Offer, and beg you would sometimes bestow a
Letter upon me; which shall be as welcome for telling me you are well, as it
can be for the best News it brings in relation to the Public: For which, if
I can be concerned next to what I am for my best Friends, it is the utmost I
will pretend to in that Matter. I find his Majesty of France will be an angry
Enemy. He does not declare War, like an honnete homme; and therefore I hope he
will not pursue it like a wise one.

I do not despair, but that the English who use to go into France for their
Breeding, may have the Honor once to teach Them better Manners. The League with
Spain is a good Circumstance to make us able to do it: It is so seasonably, and
so well done, that I will suppose you had a Hand in it. In the mean time we
have great Alarms the Monsieur will invade us, which makes every body prepare
for their Entertainment. And I hope they will neither find us so little ready,
or so divided, as perhaps they expect.

I will not make this longer, when I have assured you I am,

SIR, Your most Faithful Humble Servant, George Savill.

From the Bishop of Munster.
Munster, Feb. 12: 1666. SIR,
THE Favors you have expressed to me, are such, that nothing can add to my
Esteem of you: However, it was very acceptable to find from yours of the 25th
past, that your Affection to me still continues. In the mean time I am busy in
preparing an Army against Spring; Nor do I doubt, but such Care is taken of the
third Payment, that I may have it all together; at least, that you have
prepared 30000 Dollars ready at Brussels; and that 25000 more may be returned
with all speed by Exchange to Cologn: For it is certain, that by small Sums,
and paid by Parcels, nothing can be performed worthy of such an Undertaking;
and that my Expedition will be as much obstructed by these, as if the Subsidies
were wholly delayed. Besides, I shall this Year meet with more Resistance by
Enemies unexpected to whom the Elector of Brandenburg will join himself. But
that I hope will be recompensed by the Friendship of Sueden, and his Majesty's
Declaratory Letters communicated to me, and to be kept secret. Nor shall any
thing be more unviolably observed by me, than the League I have made with his
Majesty; from which nothing shall be able to force me. Nor is there any Reason
why the Offer of a Mediation from the Emperor and Princes, should raise any
Suspicions of the contrary; since the present Conjunctures would not permit me
abruptly to refuse it. And in order to gain time, I have kept that Affair
within Preliminaries, relating to the Persons of the Mediators, the manner of
negotiating and the means of Security to be proposed, being resolved by any
means not to separate my self from his Majesty; from whose Protection I trust
to procure Safety and Satisfaction to my self. I am glad of the Peace between
England and Spain being signed at Madrid; and that it is sent into England to
be ratified. I wish the Effects of it be not delayed; and that the Spaniards
may be ready at the time, against whom I hear the Hollanders have also declared
War by the Instigation of the French.

Your most obliged Servant, Chapter Bernardus.

Ab Episcopo Monasterii.
Monasterii Feb. 12. 1666. Generose Domine,
Dominationem vestram ita meis rebus faventem reipsa semper expertus sum, ut
nulla quidem contestatione meae desuper conceptae existimationi plus addi
possit; gratissimum tamen fuit, ex ejusdem literis de 25 toelapsi mensis
Januarii percipere, quod D. V. eundem zelum and affectum continuet. Ego interim
non desino instruere and praeparare exercitum imminenti jam very; nec dubito de
tertio termino sic provisum, ut integre a meis sublevari possit, aut certe
dispositione Dis. Vrae. triginta thalerorum millia Bruccellis in paratis
praesto sinto, and viginti quinque millia Coloniam cambio quantotius
transmittantur. Certum enim est minutis summulis and carptim solutis, vix
quicquam pro dignitate tantae rei effici posse; nec minus ex his quam dilatis
subsidiis expeditionem meam incommodi cepisse. Quae quidem hoc anno plus
resistentiae and difficultatis a tot incopinatis hostibus, quibus and Elector
Brandenburgicus se sociabit, habitura est. Id tamen fiducia amicitae Sueciae
compensatum existimo, accedentibus S. Regiae Majestatis declaratoriis literis
mihi communicatis, and secreto servandis. Nihilque mihi unquam erit antiquius
aut magis inviolabile noto foedere cum S. Regia Majestate sancito, a quo nullo
modo divelli me patiar. Nec est quod oblata Caesaris and quorundam Principum
mediatio, umbras aliquas contrariae suspicionis invehere possit; cum illam
praefracte respuere nec temporum horum ratio patiatur, nec mihi consultum
fuerit, qui lucrando tempori inde occasionem nactus, rem omnem hactenus intra
praeliminaria de ipsis personis Mediatorum, de modo tractandi, and mediis
securitatis proponendis continui, certus non separare me a S. Regia Majestate,
cujus auspiciis, and satisfactionem, and securitatem me consecuturum confido.
Quod foedus Anglo-Hispanum Madriti jam tum signatum, and ad ratificandum in
Angliam transmissum sit, libenter accepi; optarem sane hujus effectum non
deferri, and Hispanos tempori paratos esse, quibus etiam ab Hollandis bellum
Gallorum instigatione denunciandum intelligo: Ac hisce maneo

Dominationis vestrae addictissimus, Chapter Bernardus.

From Sir George Savill.
April 4. 1666. SIR,
THis must carry my Thanks to you for two Letters I received at the same time
from you; which gives me a fair Occasion to say a great deal to you; but that
I will not trespass upon our Agreement, to omit Ceremony, or any thing that
looks like it. Yet you must give me leave to tell you, I think my self as
much assured of your Kindness, by your letting me stay in your Thoughts (when
you might forget me without Breach of Friendship, considering the Weight of
Business that lies upon you) as I could be by any Mark of it you can imagine:
And if you will suppose my Sense of it answerably, and reckon upon my Service
accordingly; if it may ever be of use to you, you will do me but Right. In the
mean time you make me sensible of the Inconvenience of living out of the World:
Now that I find it impossible for me to write three Lines of Sense in Exchange
for your Letters, that are full of every thing which can make them welcome. I
am so ashamed you should converse with a dead Man, that I almost wish the
French landed upon our Coast, thinking it better to write you a sad Story than
none. How soon I may be furnished with something of this kind, depends upon
our Success at Sea, and the Faith of your Bishop, which may well be shaken, if
you do not support it with your Bills of Exchange. He is likely to be so
over-match'd this next Campaign, that I doubt he will be tempted to break Faith
with Heretics, rather than be a Martyr in our Calendar. I should be glad to
hear Spain would come into our Scales, to help us to weigh down our Enemies;
But I fear their ill Luck in the late War, has not left them Spirit enough to
fall out with the French, though their Interest provokes them to it. Besides
the Crown is in a Cradle: And a Spanish Council I imagine to be as slow an
Assembly as a House of Commons. So that we must rely upon the Oak and Courage
of England to do our Business, there being small Appearance of any thing to
help us from abroad.

I believe before this comes to your Hands, you will be waiting upon
Mademoiselle Beverwaert, who is a Testimony that this War has given us no such
Antipathy to the Dutch, since we choose one to breed Statesmen for the next Age.
The Captain that went upon so peaceable an Errand, and into a Friend's Harbor,
had ill Fortune to be so roughly saluted: But it being a single Act of the
Officer, without any Order from his Superiors, it is of no more Consequence to
us than the Sound of it may amount to.

I direct this as you bid me; and though it should not come to you, I assure my
self you would not impute it to the Omission, but to the ill Fortune of

SIR, Your most Faithful Humble Servant, George Savill.

From the Bishop of Munster.
May 21. 1666. SIR.
I Doubt not, but by your good Offices, the Reception of my Envoy the Baron de
Rosenback at Court will be so prepared, as that his Majesty may have an Account
of my Designs: And I hope you will continue your Favor so far as the King may
be persuaded that the Necessity which forced me to accept the Peace, has not
taken any thing from the Profession of that Honor, Duty and Service I shall
ever pay him. To which end, I have ordered my Agent Rentorf to cultivate a
strict Friendship in my Name, as well as to communicate to you my most secret
Affairs, resolving to watch all Occasions for the Service of his Majesty; in
order to which, I have sent back to the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo the Brabant
Troops as well as those raised in the Circle of Burgundy, all entire. And now
some German Regiments well armed and exercised, are preparing for their March
into Flanders, of whose Valor the Hollanders themselves are Witnesses, as I
believe you know already from the said Marquis. Now since it concerns me very
much that his Majesty should know these Soldiers are kept in his Service; I
should be extremely satisfied if you would inform the King of it, at the same
time that the said Baron de Rosenback will be arrived at London. And that it be
represented as Mark of my eternal Devotion to his Majesty. In which you will
highly oblige me: And in Confidence thereof I remain,

SIR, Your most Obliged Servant, Chr. Bernardus.

Ab Episcopo Monasterii.
Lugderio, Maii 21. 1666. Generose Domine,
NON dubito officiis Dis, Vrae. additum in Aula Regis ablegato meo Baroni de
Rosenback ita praeparatum, ut S. Regiae Majestati ratio consilii me praebetur;
quod Dom. Vram. ita continuaturam spero, ut Rex persuasum omnino habeat istam
necessitatem quae mihi pacis lages imposuit, nihil prorsus detraxisse de animo
quo S. Majestatis observantiae, gloriae, and utilitati, aeternum devotus sum.
Eumque in finem mandavi Agenti meo Rintorf intimam meo nomine cum Dne. Vra.
Communicationem mearum rerum, and amicitiam colere, intentus semper in
occasiones omness futurus pro servitio S. Majestatis; quem in finem copias
Brabanticas, and in circulo Burgundico conscriptas, Domino Marchioni de Castle
Rodrigo integras remisi: and jam itineri in Belgium Hispanicum accinguntur
legiones aliquot Germanorum; fortis sane and exercitatus miles de quorum
virtute ipsi foederati Belgae testari poterunt: uti Dom. Vram. jam ex praedicto
domino gubernatore latius cognovisse arbitror. Cum autem mea plurimum intersit
ut Regiae Majestati suae constet militem hunc in suo servitio conservari;
pergratum mihi foret, si Di^. Vra. de eo, facillitandae intentioni meae,
quamprimum and fine mora hoc ipso tempore quo dictus Baro de Rosenback Londinum
appulerit, S. Majestatem certiorem faciat, and tanquam indicium ratum aeternae
meae in Regem fide contestetur: Quo me Dio. Vra. sibi summopere obligabit: Et
hac fiducia manes,

Dominationi vestrae addictissimus, Chr. Bernardus.

From my Lord Arlington.
Whitehall, July 30. 1666. SIR,
WHAT I received in yours of the 2d. was written to me at large, from him whom
I suppose to be the Author of it, but not exactly with the same Circumstances:
whether his Meaning or his Imagination fail him, is a great Question here. His
Name, to speak freely with you, is able to discredit any Truth; And against the
Grain I employed him in Holland, not to make him the Instrument of Peace, but
to send us News: However, I do not yet discourage him from writing, though I
wish what he says came from any Hand rather than his. Accordingly, you shall
do well to handle him: And this is enough upon this Subject, when I have so
much a better to entertain you upon. Here enclosed you have the effective Truth
of what I sent you the Symptoms in my last. I durst not hazard any of my
Acquaintance with the putting it into French; because of the Sea-Terms
wherewith it abounds: But if you can get it well done, and quickly published,
you will do his Majesty a good Service, and may fairly put the Cost of it into
your Accounts. Moreover, I have promised his Majesty to charge you with the
writing of some small Paper, and publishing it in French, that may pleasantly,
and pertinently awaken the good Patriots in Holland, not only to Thoughts and
Wishes of Peace, but to a reasonable Application for it; assuring them his
Majesty continues still to wish it, and would gladly receive any Overtures for
it from the States, here in his own Kingdom; not expecting less from them in
this kind, than they did to the Usurper Cromwell. This done in any Form you
like best, would certainly operate well in Holland, and be a Work worthy of
your Pen; which, I know has Sufficiency very much greater. One thing especially
it will good to mind them of, the considerable Succors and Advantages they have
had by the Conjunction with France; which has not been remakarbly visible in
any thing more than in getting their Narratives to be believed in all the
Courts of Christendom, and helping them to make their Bonfires for their
Successes.

His Majesty is going this Night to visit the Queen at Tunbridge; for which he
had not Leisure till now. I am,

SIR, Your most affectionate humble Servant, Arlington.
POSTSCRIPT.
LET your Emissaries give you a particular Account of the Condition of the
Dutch Fleet gotten into Zealand; and of the Readiness they are in to come out
again; with an exact Account of their Strength if it be possible. Monsieur
Nypho will help to convey it speedily to us.



From the Earl of Clarendon.
Worcester-House, Aug. 2d. 1666. SIR,
I Have many Excuses to make you for not acknowledging all your Letters
punctually when I received them, which I suppose would give you some Trouble:
And I am sure all I can say to you by way of Information or Advice, is
constantly and abundantly supplied by the Diligence of my good Friend my Lord
Arlington.

The last Favor I received from you was of the 23d. of this Month; since which
time it has pleased God to give a wonderful Improvement to our Affairs: And
yet I am persuaded that you there know more of the full Extent of the late
great Victory than we do. In all Men's View it is very great and noble, and in
one Respect very wonderful, that almost the whole Fleet that went from hence,
rides now before the Enemies Harbors, without being compelled to send any
considerable Number of their Ships to be repaired: And I believe this Success
will change the Measures of most of the Councils in Christendom. I wish with
all my Heart it may work upon them from whom your Court must receive its
Orders, to move with a little more Vigor in their Resolutions; the want of
which will at some time or other prove fatal to that Monarchy. They have it yet
in their Power to secure themselves from ever receiving Prejudice from the
French; which I take to be the only Blessing they are to pray for in this
World: But it will not be always in their Power to do so.

I presume my good Friend Ogniate is before this time arrived there with good
Satisfaction: And I will not deny to you I always wished well to those
Transactions, the Concessions being (in truth) no other than what in Justice
ought to be granted; except we would declare to the World, that whilst we have
a War with Holland we will have no Peace with Flanders. I wish with all my
Heart that it may be punctually and religiously observed on our Part, by the
exemplary Punishment of those Persons who in the least Degree violate the
Protection agreed upon. And though there will be, as you say, a great Latitude
for them to cover the Dutch Trade; yet that cannot be long done without
Discovery; and they will thereby render themselves infamous to the World, and
will suffer accordingly. I know the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo will be as
jealous in that Affair as is possible: And Ogniate, who was the fittest Person
alive to be sent on that Errand, will be vigilant to the utmost; and I am
confident will advertise the Marquis upon the least Discovery. I know not
whether he be enough known to you: But trust me, He is very worthy of your
Friendship, which is due to him from all good Englishmen; having expressed the
same Veneration to the King, and the same Civility and Kindness to us, who had
the Honor at the same time to attend his Majesty, when we were in Flanders, as
he can do now, when we are at Whitehall. And as that Respect of his was then of
great Use and Benefit to his Majesty; so it was apparently to his own Prejudice
and Disadvantage: So that if we are not all kind to him, we deserve no more
such Friends. I am,

SIR, Your Affectionate Servant, Clarendon.

From Sir William Coventry.
September. 21. 1667. SIR,
SINCE my last to you, I have acquainted his Majesty and his Royal Highness
with your having disposed the blank Passes sent to you; and that the People of
those Countries were still desirous of those Passes; though there was another
Provision made for their Security, by the Agreement with Monsieur Ognate:
Whereupon his Majesty gave Consent to the sending over some more of them. By
this Conveyance I send you five of them. More shall be sent hereafter, if you
continue to desire them: But I thought not fit to swell this Packet too much.

The French Fleet has been in the Channel, and Prince Rupert's Fleet having
been driven from their Anchors with a Storm, and by other such Accidents, he
did not meet with them at their first coming; and now we are uncertain whether
they are not gone back again. To morrow will tell us more of that than I can
now affirm. The Storm which drove Prince Rupert's Fleet from their Anchors,
dispersed some of the French Fleet, and seven of them on the Right fell into
our white Squadron: One of them (a Ship called the Ruby) of fifty four Guns and
five hundred Men, we took; and some of our Frigates pursued the rest, with what
Success I know not as yet. I am apt to believe the Body of their Fleet is gone
back again toward Breast or Rochel. We hear De Ruyter is dead, and another
Admiral chosen.

This Day the Parliament voted that they will supply his Majesty proportionably
to his Occasions; or Words to that Effect: ^o our Neighbors will see our
Hearts do not fail us in all our Misfortunes. I am,

SIR, Your most affectionate humble Servant, William Coventry.

From the Duke of Ormond.
Kilkenny, October. 14. 1666. SIR,
I Have more of yours to acknowledge than I have by me to take particular
Notice of. They were very pertinent Informations as things then went: And some
of them got hither with so much speed, that they outrun any Intelligence I
could get out of England. To morrow I shall be in your Livery, and perhaps try
whether your Brussels Camlet will resist Irish Rain, as I have known it do that
of Flanders. I must thank you for the Present, as coming very seasonably, both
in respect of the time of the Year, and that for ought I can yet find, my
Michaelmas Rent would hardly have purchased two Cloaks: And that your Stuff
will make me, if slhall be honestly dealt with.

I know both from hence and out of England, you are informed of all that passes
here. The Commissioners and their Dependents, I mean Lawyers, and the Train
belonging to that Court, have all the Business, and will have all the Money;
and consequently if they please, much of the Land contended for, and to be
distributed. In England they are revenging upon us here the falling of their
Rents; but I doubt, not repairing themselves: They have us, and perhaps the
King, at an Advantage: The King must be supplied, and England only can do it. I
wish we could hear of some Overtures toward Peace; then would the King be
freed from a Necessity of consenting to unreasonable Things; or we should be
the better able to bear the Interdicture of our Trade with England: For to that
upon the Matter, the forbidding us to send our Cattle to their Markets, will
amount. I am very really,

SIR, Your most affectionate Servant, Ormonde.

From Sir William Coventry.
Whitehall, November. 2. 1666. SIR,
I Have received the Favor you did me of the 5th. S. N. and received with it
the Bill of Exchange for Fifty Pounds, which, I doubt not, will suddenly be
paid. I owe so many of those Advantages to your Care and Kindness, that they
become ordinary, and do not leave me any new Expressions for my Thanks.

We have great Expectations what the Suedes Army at Bremen, and the new
Confederation against them will produce. We hear the Duke of Savoy, and the
State of Geneva are falling out, which probably will not want. Partners in its
Success: So that the Influence of 66, will extend it self further than the
Puritans Allowance for the Revelations to be fulfilled in, which they confine
to England.

We are debating still in Parliament which way to raise Money, but we draw
nearer a Conclusion; and I believe the next Week will bring it to good
Maturity. I am,

SIR, Your most affectionate humble Servant, W. Coventry.

From the Duke of Ormond.
Dublin, December. 18. 1666. SIR,
YOurs of the 9/19 past found me on my Way hither, where I purpose to spend the
rest of the Winter. How the Summer will be spent, seems very doubtful: Our
Preparations for the War would make one think we are sure of a Peace; which may
be well said without any Reflection on the King and his Ministers.

I am once to thank you for your great Civility to my Nephew Clancarty, in
whose Consideration you have undertaken to endeavor a Pass Colonel Murphy, and
for the Disposition of the Money the Colonel was ordered (if he thought fit to
put into your Hand. I have by this Post written to Sir John Shaw to draw it
into England when he shall find it best: And I am prepared to pay the Colonel
here.

I believe you heard as soon of the Suppression, as of the raising of the
Scottish Commotion; perhaps equal Credit would not be given in Holland to both.
It made me hasten hither, and prepare my self to have kept Christmas in the
North, if the Rebellion had lasted. What Discovery will be made, and Justice
done upon the Offenders, you will receive sooner Knowledge of out of England
than from hence. I am very confident they had Well-wishers here; which is a
good, or rather a bad Step to Correspondency as that is to Conjunction. Those
that think well of Presbyterians, distinguish those Fellows, and call them
Remonstrators. I think the true Difference is, These thought they had Power to
change the Government; and the other do wish they had.

When you are at leisure I wish to know what kind of Fort is raised at
Charle-roy, and what Number of Men, Horse and Foot it will contain. I am with
all reality,

SIR, Your most affectionate humble Servant, Ormonde.

From the Duke of Ormonde.
Dublin Jan. 29. 1667. SIR,
THE Success of your Negotiation gives no Man greater Satisfaction for the Part
you had in it, than to me. The happy Consequences which may reasonably be
expected from the Conclusion of that Treaty, may extend further and last
longer, than I have had time since I received yours of the 24th Instant, to
consider. I confess, my first Reflections were upon the good Effect it will
have at home, and the good Humor it is likely to put the Parliament in at
their first; Meeting; which I look upon as the Foundation of all other
Advantages to be derived from it, by Reputation, and all the good Effects of
that amongst our Neighbors. I shall be glad to hear where or when you are like
to fix, that my Letters may be conveyed to you when I think they may be worth
your receiving from,

SIR, Your most affectionate humble Servant., Ormonde.

From my Lord Ambassador Coventry.
Breda, July 4. S. N. 1667. SIR,
YOurs of the 29th July I have received, and thank you for it. I doubt not but
by this time you have heard of the several Treaties of Peace signed here the
21/31st. of July We were so very busy in dispatching away Sir John Coventry
for England with the Treaties, that I had not leisure till now, to give you an
Account of it. That betwixt the States and us consists in an absolute
Abolition of all Pretenses on either Side, each to remain Masters of what they
were in possession of the 10/20th. of May, 1667; what since taken, to be
restored, as to Lands and Fortresses: Ships are yet liable till after
Publication; when all Hostilities are to cease within twelve Days in the
Channel and so proportionably in other Seas; then the whole Treaty of 1662
renewed, and we both to make use of the Articles betwixt France and this State
for contraban Goods, till such time as we can agree of one betwixt our selves.
The rest is a restoring of the Treaty in 1662, as to all its Articles except
the eleventh, wherein our Pretensions are contained. As to the Act of
Navigation, you will hear much Noise, that That is repealed. There is no such
thing; neither does the Article about that Matter give the States any more
Advantage than as I conceive the Act gave them before. As to the French, we
restore all to each other that each has taken, and all things done, put in
Oblivion. As to Denmar,.... the Debt he owed the Hamburgh Company, France
standing very firm to him upon the Point; and their greatest Argument was, That
it was not a Debt contracted by him or his Father; but on the contrary, imposed
on his Father for having assisted the late King: And, besides, they gave us our
Choice, either to agree thus, or to account for what had been taken on each
side, and render: The latter was thought the more prejudicial to the King our
Master; and so this has passed. And there is, I think, the Substance of the
three Treaties.

How or where this Letter will find you, we know not: For we here believe
Brussels besieged, and that according to the Fashion of this Year's Campaign,
is little less than taken.

All public Ministers have, or will have left this Town within a Day or two
except our selves. To morrow Fortnight they all meet here again expecting the
Ratification.

I am, Sir, with very great Sincerity,

Your most faithful humble Servant, Henry Coventry.

From my Lord Hollis.
Breda, July 4. S. N. 1667. SIR,
I Have received yours by my Lord Sfafford's Servant, and see you have put off
your Journey hither in Expectation we might be removing hence; and for which it
seems the Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo is pleased to express himself with so much
of Civility and Kindness toward us; for which both my Lord Ambassador Coventry
and my self do return our most humble Thanks. But it will not be possible that
we can remove so soon; so as assuredly you will have time enough to do us that
Favor and very gladly we shall shall receive it from you; when we may at
leisure discourse of the present Posture of our Affairs, and make those sad
Reflections which they deserve; and which will be much fitter for a Conference
than to be set down in Paper. I shall reserve them till then, and in the mean
time, and ever remain,

SIR, Your very affectionate, and most humble Servant, HOLLIS.

From my Lord Ambassador Coventry.
Breda, Aug. 12/27, 1667. SIR,
I Am very thankful to you for the Buck you sent us; and it came very well, and
so seasonably, that I made use of some of it the very Morning it came. We have
no News to send you from hence; but that we are now altogether employed in
Jollity, and expect our Ships to give us some Sea-Physick, to purge the
Excesses we make. Your Health is not only what we drink, but what ^e pray for.
The first part has already been useful to help us to digest our Venison, and
the other we reserve for more important Considerations. In Conclusion, we hear
more of Drums and Trumpets since the Peace, than we did in the War; though I
hope this will not be so fatal a Noise as they make at Lisle. I am sorry both
for the want of your Company and the Reason of it. Now our own Peace is done, I
could wish with all my Heart Christendom's were so to.

Sir, I pray believe me to be, what I very sincerely am,

Your most faithful humble Servant, Henry Coventry.

From Late E. of Leicester.
my Lord Lisle.
September. 26. 1667. SIR,
SInce I had your last Letter, I have made you no Acknowledgement of it: A
Retirement is in several Respects like the Night of one's Life, in the
Obscurity and Darkness, and in the Sleepiness and Dosedness: Which I mention to
put you in mind that I am only by my Posture of Life apt to be failing toward
you.

What is of Court or Assembles near us is at my Lord Crofts's. Sir Thomas
Ingram this Summer has made no Noise at all. Old Lady Devonshire keeps up her
Feasts still; and that has been of late Mr. Waller's chief Theater: The
Assembly of Wits at Mr. Comptroller's will scarce let him in; And poor Sir John
Denham is fallen to the Ladies also: He is at many of the Meetings at Dinners,
talks more than ever he did, and is extremely pleased with those that seem
willing to hear him; and from that Obligation exceedingly praises the Duchess
of Monmouth and my Lady Cavendish: If he had not the Name of being mad, I
believe in most Companies he would be thought wittier than ever he was: He
seems to have few Extravagancies, besides that of telling Stories of himself,
which he is always inclined to: Some of his Acquaintance say, that extreme
Vanity was a Cause of his Madness, as well as it is an Effect.

All Persons of Note hereabouts are going to their Winter Quarters at London.
The Burning of the City begins to be talked of as a Story like that of the
Burning of Troy. At Sheen we are like to be bare: Lady Luddal seems uncertain
in her Stay; and we hear that when Sir James Sheen and his Lady were ready to
come from Ireland, great Cramps took my Lady in her Limbs: And Sir James's
Servants doubt whether we shall see him this Winter.

I desire, Sir your Leave to kiss my Lady Temple's Hands, and my Lady Giffard's
Hands by your Letter. My Daughter and I were in dispute which of us two should
write this time to Brussels; and because I was judged to have more Leisure, it
fell to me, and my Lady Temple is to have the next from her.

I wish you, Sir, all good Successes in your Businesses, and am

Your very affectionate Servant, LISLE.

From the Earl of Sandwich.
Madrid, September. 27. 1667. SIR,
THIS begs your Pardon for my not writing by the last Post, and presents you my
humble Thanks for that Letter I should then have acknowledged, and another of
September 7. S. N. which, with many Advices very considerable and desirable to
be known, gives me one particular Satisfaction, to hear that one Copy of the
Treaty is in so certain a Way of getting home. There are two more gone by Sea;
one from Cales, August 2d, S. N. the other express by a Vessel from Rigo in
Gallicia, August 31, S. N. designed to set a Gentleman of my Company ashore in
Ireland on the South Part; which Course I directed as a certain Way to avoid
the Danger of the Sea, and no very tedious Way of Passage, I suppose all these
likely to arrive in England much about a time.

This Place affords not much considerable News to return you. Our Portugal
Adjustment keeps the Pace of the accustomed Spanish Gravity (if it proceed
forward at all.) They have here removed the President of the Hazienda (or as
they call it, ^^bilar'd him) giving him his Salary still of 6000 Ducats per
annum, for his own Life, his Wife's, and his eldest Son's; and also have given
him some other considerable Mercedes: And have made Don Lopez de los Rios,
President de Hazienda in his Room. This last is Castillo's near Kinsman and
Creature, the other a near Kinsman of the Duke of Medina's de las Torres.

The Conde de Fwensalida is lately dead, (a Grandee of Spain.) my chief
Business here is a longing Expectation to hear of the Treaty I have made here,
to be received in England; which now I daily shall hope for; and as any thing
thence, or here, occurs worth your Notice, it shall be presented you by,

SIR, Your most affectionate, and most humble Servant, Sandwich.

From the Earl of Sandwich.
Madrid, Dec. 1^/2^ 1667. SIR,
I Hope from your Goodness to find Pardon for missing the other Posts; but dare
not adventure your Patience to fail this also; though I am now hurried by
Business; so that I have not time so largely and considerately to write as I
desire. Be pleased then to know that Mr. Godolphin's Journey to Portugal
suffered so much Delay, until it was found necessary that I must go in Person
thither; and then he resolved to make use of the King my Master's Leave to
return into England, and began his Journey for Bilboa on Tuesday Morning last.
You know the Value of Mr. Godolphin so well, that it is needless to tell you my
Griefs in parting from one of the most accomplished, worthy, and generous
Friends that ever I met with: And I am heartily' glad that your Friendship and
mine do also Convenire in aliquo tertio.

My Journey for Portugal has almost met with as many or more Calms than Mr.
Godolphin's: and, in good earnest I am not able to give you any Light, whether
it be likely to proceed or not.

The Spaniards have reformed two Regiments of Germans at Badajos; very good
Officers they say, and are resolved never to serve the Spaniard more. The King
of Spain has had the Smallpox; but is so recovered, as they fear no Danger.

In Portugal, Don Pedro is made Governor to assist his Brother in the same
Nature as his Mother did when she was Regent: And the Addresses are made in the
same manner.

The Queen is returned to a Convent, asserting her self to be a Maid; and the
King has under his Hand and Oath delivered the same. So the Queen pursues the
Cause among the Churchmen to have the Marriage declared null. There are Cortes
to be called there January 1. S. N. On the 7th Instant, S. N. the Marquis of
Sand (the Ambassador that brought the Queen) was shot and killed in the
Street, with a Carabine, and no body knows who did it.

I wish you a very merry Christmas, and am most affectionately,

SIR, Your most faithful, and most humble Servant, Sandwich.
Postscript.
IF I go to Portugal, pray continue our Correspondence to Mr. John Werden, a
Gentleman worthy of your Favor, and very able and securely my Friend, who does
me the Favor to continue in my House, and manages the King's Business in this
Court in my Absence; and will send me your Letters.



From Monsieur Gourville.
Luneburg. Jan. 28. 1668. SIR,
BY a Copy of the Letter written from the King of England to the States, I
understand you are a peaceable Man: And the Memorial you have given to desire
Commissioners in order to examine jointly with you into the Means for a good
Peace, makes us believe that you desire in good earnest to give Repose to
Christendom. You know how I have always desired it; but however it will be the
more agreeable to see it done by your Hands. In good earnest, I am glad the
King of England has made choice of you for so great and important an Affair:
When his Majesty knows your Merit, I assure my self you will be always in the
greatest Employments; and I assure you that I shall always be making Wishes for
your Advancement, till I see you made Chancellor of England. In the mean time
I shall be ever,

SIR, Your most humble and obedient Servant, Gourville.
P. S.
IF you have a Desire to make the Peace, I look upon it as very far advanced:
The Princes here show their Desire of it. I did not think to stay in this
Country above 8 or 10 Days; yet here I am after four Months. Pray let me know
whether you think the Assembly will be at Aix, and near what time; that I may
keep my Lodgings there; and if you will tell me in Confidence the Opinion you
have of the Peace, I shall be obliged to you: Mine is, that you may make it if
you please; but I am not yet convinced whether you can hinder it, if Monsieur
de Wit has so much Desire to make it as many People believe, according to what
I am told.



A Monsieur Gourville.
A Lunebourg, 28 Jan. 1668. Monsieur,
PAR la copy de la Lettre que sa Majeste Britannique a ecrit aux Etats des
Provinces Unies, J'apprens que vous estes un hommne pacifique; la memoire, que
vous avez present pour demander des Commissaires pour chercher ensemble les
moyens de parvenir a une bonne Paix, doit fair croire que c'est tout de bon
que vous voulez donner le repos a la Chretiente. Vous scavez comme je l'ay
toujours Souhaitte, mais elle me sera autant plus agreeable, de la voir faite de
votre main: Tout de bon je me rejonis que sa Majeste Britanique vous ayt choisi
pour une si grande et si importante affair. Quand elle conoitra votre merit,
Je m'assure que vous aurez toujours les plus grands emplois; et je vous assure
de la meilleure foy du monde, que jusque a ce que je vous voye Chancelier
d'Angleterre, je feray toujours des voeux pour votre advancement. Et en
attendant, je ser ay toujours plus veritablement que person du monde.

Votre tres humble, et tres obeissant Serviteur, Gourville.
P. S.
SI vous avez bien envy de fair la paix je la tien fort avancee; les Ptinces
icy temoignent la desirer: Je ne croyois demeurer en ce pais icy que huit ou
dix jours, et m'y voila au bout de quatre mois. Je vous pry de me mander si
vous croyez que l'on s'assemblera a Aix, et a peu prez le temps a fin que j'y
fasse retenir ma chamber: Et si vous voulez confidamment me mander l'opinion
que vous avez de la paix, je vous en seray oblige. La mienne est que si vous la
voulez que vous la ferez: Mais je ne suis pas si convaincu que vous la puissiez
empecher, si Monsieur de Wit a autant d'envie de la fair comme bien des gens
le croyent, selon ce que l'on m'en mande.



From Monsieur Gourville.
Luneburg, Feb. 22. 1668. SIR,
ALL your modest Reasoning will not hinder me from believing that any other
Minister the King of England could have sent to the Hague, would not have
finished in many Months what you have done in four Days. Without Flattery, it is
a thing you ought to be extremely satisfied with. I suspected at first, that
you had made this Treaty by some Concert with the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo:
For though the King my Master has so much Reason to be content to see him grant
what his Majesty demanded, nevertheless the bad Council of the Spaniards has
put them in a Condition to receive your Work as the Safety of what remained to
them of Flanders. I never lamented my Absence from the Hague but since I knew
you were there. I cannot yet tell what time I shall be obliged to stay here.
Monsieur de Lionne having encharged me from the King with some Orders in this
Court, which I have reason to believe will accommodate my Affairs. I am
strongly persuaded the King my Master will hold to the Alternative, Monsieur de
Lionne having sent me Word, that his Majesty was content with what you had done
at the Hague; and that if the manner of it had been a little more obliging,
there were nothing more to be desired. These Princes mightily desire the Peace
upon your Conditions; the League of the Rhine is extremely satisfied with it;
so that in all appearance Spain may do what they please; for, this time their
Country shall be saved, no thanks to them. I would fain know whether you think
of going to Aix. I have a great mind to see this Negotiation: And I should have
nothing to desire if I were sure to find you there. I see by this Businese
here, that the Peace will be made; or else, that there will be a great War; but
I rather think the former. And if they will let me come no more to France, it is
there (at Aix) I design to reside for the rest of my life. I doubt not but they
will let me take one turn to Paris to see if I can make my Peace; but I fear
they will raise insupportable Difficulties.

I desire you to believe me always,

SIR, Your most humble and most obedient Servant, Gourville.
It may be I shall see you at the Hague sooner than you think.



A Monsieur Gourville.
A Lunebourg, 22d. Fevr, 1668. Monsieur,
TOute la modesty de votre raisonnement ne m'empechra pas de croire, que tout
autre Ministre que sa Majeste Britannique eut envoye a la Hay, n'auroit pas
fait en bien des mois ce que vous avez acheve en quatre jours. Sans flattery
c'est une chose qui vous doit exrtremement satisfaire. J'ai d'abord soubcnne
que vous aviez fait ce traitte de quelque concert avec Monsieur le Marquis de
Castel-Rodrigo: Car encore que le Roy mon Maitre ait tant sujet d'estre content
de le voir accorder ce qu'il a demand; neantmoins le mechant conseil des
Espagnols les a mis en etat de recevoir votre ouvrage comme le salut de ce qui
leur restera aux Pais bas. Je n'a vois point regrette mon absence de la Hay
que depuis que je scay que vous y estes: Je ne scaurois encore savoir le temps
que je seray oblige de demeurer icy; Monsieur de Lionne m'ayanr charge de la
part du Roy de quelques ordres en cette cour, tant que j'ay lieu de croire que
cela accommodera mes affairs C'est pourtant un chemin qui me peut eonduire a
cette fin: Je suis tres fortement persuade que le Roy mon Maitre se tiendra a
l'Alternative. Monsieur de. Lionne m'a mande que sa Majeste estoit content de
ce que vous aviez fait a la Hay; et que si la faccon en eut este un peu plus
obligeante, il n'y auroit eu rien a desirer. Ces Princes icy souhaittent fort
la Paix aux conditions que vous la voulez fair: La Ligue du Rhin en est tres
satisfaitte, ainsi selon les apparences les Espagnols auront beau fair, on
sauvera leur pais endepit d'eux pour cette fois icy. Je voudrois bien savoir si
vous croyez aller a Aix; J'ay fort envy de voir cette negotiation, et je
n'aurois rien a desirer si je scavois vous y trouver. Je voy par cette affair
icy, que la paix ce fera ou que ce sera une grande guerre; mais tout me fait
croire le premier; et si on ne veut point de moy en France, je m'en vay prendre
mon party pour le rest de mes jours. Je ne doubt point que l'on ne me laisse
fair un tour a Paris pour voir si je pourrois m'accommoder; mais je crains que
l'on ne me fasse des difficultez insupportables.

Je vous supply de me croire toujours,

Monsieur, Vtotre tres humble, et tres obeissant Serviteur, Gourville.
Je pourray peut etre vous voir a la Hay plutot que vous ne pensez.



From Monsieur de Wit.
Hague, Feb. 25. 1668. SIR,
THE Bearer hereof delivered me the Letter you did me the Honor to write to me
from Antwerp of the 24th. Instant; wherein I behold with Pleasure your Zeal and
Diligence for the Advancement of our common Affair; as also the good
Dipositions that your Offices have already raised in the Mind of the Marquis of
Castel-Rodrigo, and the Appearance of a more satisfactory Declaration we shall
receive upon the common Request to be made him from the K. of Great Britain and
this State. I delayed not to communicate and deliberate the Contents of the
said Letter with the States Commissioners deputed upon the Subject of our last
Negotiations; and we hope you will judge as we do, that it is absolutely
necessary for his Excellence to declare himself without further Delay or
Reserve, agreeably to what his concluded between England and this State,
without desiring beforehand any Concert more particular than that which is
made, signed, and ratified between us and our Masters: For since the King of
France has seen by his last Conquests how weak and negligent the Spaniards are,
it is to be feared, that if the Marquis lets the Month of March expire, without
plainly declaring himself as we desire, the King of France may be very glad,
after the Expiration of the said Term, not to be obliged by virtue of his Word
given, to make the Peace upon the Alternative; but may make use of the Time and
Disorder of the Spaniards, to surprise Luxenburg, and a great part of what
remains to the King of Spain in the Netherlands; and to order his Affairs
afterward as Occurrences shall happen. The States General are obliged, and
entirely resolved, in case of Refusal from the King of France, or any Evasions
from that side, after it has been insinuated to him that the Marquis has
accepted either part of the Alternative; to execute in the most vigorous manner
possible, what is contained in our third separate Article; and by consequence,
jointly with England to break into open War against France, to act in concert,
not only for Defense of the Netherlands, but also, and above all, to attack and
infest France by Sea, by Descents, Invasions into the Country, and all other
Ways. But because it must be presupposed in public, that the King of France
after having given his Word to the States, and afterward by a circular Letter,
not only to the King of Great Britain and the said States, but also to many
Princes of Germany; will not break a Promise so solemnly made; we cannot by any
means enter into Concert and League with Spain, before this Case effectually
arrives: And we think that such a League and Concert made before the Season,
would be likely indeed to produce the Effect the Marquis desires; but which is
far from his Majesty of England's Aim, or that of the States; for you cannot
but know, that his Excellence would prefer the Continuance of the War with our
Assistance, to the Conclusion of the Peace upon the Alternative; and his
Majesty, as well as the States, prefers this Peace before the Continuance of a
War, whereof they must bear all the Costs and all the Profit be to the King of
Spain. Now, we comprehend very well, that such a Concert and such a League as
his Excellence desires, would put the King of Erance upon an absolute necessity
of continuing the War; because if he should comply after such a League made
with his Enemies, it would appear publicly, that he was obliged to it by this
Bond, and consequently by his Enemies themselves. And therefore the Matter is
judiciously enough proposed by his Excellence for arriving at his End; but
since it would make us miss of ours, we hope you will put the Marquis off it,
and make him quit all Hopes of engaging us by the force of his great Genius, to
enter of our own accord, where we have no mind to come but upon a fatal
Necessity. I think his Excellence does wrong to the King of Great Britain and
the States, in not trusting their Affection and their Honor, which are
concerned, as well as their Interest, after the Alliance, and the Peace they
have already made together: but if after his Excellence has accepted our
Propositions, the King of France shall happen to draw back or seek Evasions;
then the King of Great Britain and the States General entering into the Party,
and even into a Rupture with France, it will be very just and proper to concert
with his Excellency after what manner to act in the Territory of the King his
Master; and yet in the mean while not omit entering into Action without the
least loss of time. Therefore it will be no way necessary for me to be upon our
Frontiers toward the End, proposed by his Excellence, which besides will be
wholly impossible for me; much less to send any body from hence to Brussels,
since the States Deputies, who are there at present, are the same we should
choose for the End desired: For I assure you I can name no body in whom the
States as well as I in particular can have greater Confidence, whereof I do not
doubt but they will give you Proofs, as well as of their Sincerity and good
Conduct. I desire you therefore, Sir, to use them with as much Freedom as me,
and I will engage they shall do the same by you. And if you have been at all
satisfied with my manner of transacting, as I have been extremely with yours,
that you will be also satisfied with that of the said Deputies. For the rest we
approve extremely the Diligence you make on all sides in sending to the
Ministers of the King of England, and the States now at Paris: And from your
common Offices we promise to our selves an Universal Peace in Christendom, to
the great Advantage of the Public, and the Eternal Glory of your selves, which
no Man desires more than he who is,

SIR, Your most humble, and most affectionate Servant, de Wit.

A Monsieur de Wit.
A la Hay 25me Fevr. 1668. Monsieur,
LE porteur de cellecy m'a bien delivre la Lettre qui vous a plu me fair
l'honneur de m'ecrire d'Anvers le 24me. de ce mois; et j'y ay veu avec agreement
le zele et la diligence que vous avez apporte pour l'avancement de notre
affair commune; comme aussi les bonnes dispositions que vos offices ont deja
fait naitre dan l'esprit de Monsieur le Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo, et
l'apparence d'une declaration plus satisfaisante que nous recevrons sur la
priere commune qu'on luy va fair de la part du Roy de la Grand Bretagne et de
cet Etat. Je n'ay pas tarde de communiquer et deliberer le contenu de ladite
lettre avec les Commissaires des Etats Deputez sur ce sujet de nos dernieres
negotiations; et nous esperons que vous jugerez avec nous qu'il est absolument
necessaire que son Excellence se declare sans plus de delay et sans aucune
reserve conformement a la disposition de ce qui est conclu enter l'Angleterre
et cet Etat, sans desirer au preallable aucun concert plus particulier que
celuy qui est fait, sign et ratify enter nous et par nos Maitres. Car puisque
le Roy de France a veu par les derniers progrez, comme les Espagnols some
foibles et negligents; il est a apprehender que si Monsieur le Marquis laisse
ecouler le mois de Mars sans s'estre declare nettement comme nous le desirons,
le Roy de France ne soit tres aise de n'etre pas oblige apres l'expiration en
virtue de sa parole donnee, de fair la Paix sur l'Alternative; et quil ne se
serve encore du temp et du desordre des Espagnols pour supprendre en meme facon
le Luxenburg, et une grande party de ce qui rest au Roy d'Espagne dans le
pais bas; et pour se regler par apres selon les occurrences. Les Etats Generaux
se trouvent obligez et entierement resolus, au cas de refus du Roy de France,
ou des echappatoires recherches de son cote, apres qu'on luy aura insinue que
Monsieur le Marquis ayt accept l'une ou l'autre party de l'Alternative,
d'executer en la maniere la plus vigourreuse que fair se pourra, le contenu au
troisieme de nos Articles separez; par consequent de rompre conjointement avec
l'Angleterre en guerre ouverte contre la France, d'agir de concert non
seulement pour la defense du Pais bas; mais aussi et sur tout d'attaquer et
incommoder la France de leurs Forces maritimes; er meme par des descentes, ou
invasions dans le Pais, et en toute autre maniere: mais d'autant qu'il faut
presupposer publiquement, que le Roy de Franee, apres avoir done sa parole par
une lettre circulaire non seulement au Roy de la Grande Bretagne et aux dits
Etats, mais aussi a pleusieurs Princes d'Allemagne, ne voudra pas manquer a une
promise si solennellement donnee; nous ne pourions en aucune facon entrer en
concert et ligue avec l'Espagne, avaunt que ce cas soit effectivement arrive: Et
nous jugeons qu'un tell concertt et une tell lig^e faite devant la saison,
seroit fort capable de produire l'effet que Monsieur le Marquis souhaitte; mais
qui est tout a fait eloigne du but de sa Majeste de la Grande Bretagne, et de
leurs Hautes Puissances: car il ne peut vous estre inconnu que son Excellence
preferreroit la continuation de la guerre avec nos secours, a la conclusion de
la Paix sur l'Alternative. Et sa Majeste aussi bien que leurs Hautes Puissances
preferent cette paix a la continuation d'une guerre don't ils seroient obliges
de porter toutes les depences, et don't tout le profit seroit pour le Roy
d'Espagne. Or, nous comprennons fort bien qu'un tell concert et une tell ligue
que son Excellence desire, mettroit le Roy de France, dans une necessite
resolve de continuer la guerre; d'autant que se rendant apres une tell, ligue
faite avec ses ennemis; il paroitroit publiquement qu'il y fut oblige par cette
liaison, et par consequent par ses ennemis memes: Et partant l'affaire est
judicieusement proposee par son Excellence pour parvernir e son but; mais
puisque elle nous feroit perdre le notre nous esperons que vous en detournerez
Monsieur le Marquis, et que vous luy ferez perdre toute esperance de ne pouvoir
pas par son grands genie meme nous engager comme par gayete de coeur, ou nous
ne voulons venir qu'au cas d'une fatale necessite. Il me semble que son
Excellence feroit tort au Roy de la Grande Bretagne, et aux Etats Generaux, de
ne se fire pas a leur affection et a leur honneur, don't il y va si bien, que de
leur interet apres la liaison et le pas qu'ils ont fait deja ensemble. Mais si
apres qu'elle aura acccepte nos propositions, le Roy de France vient a reculer,
ou a chercher des echappatoires; alors le Roy de la Grande Bretagne, et les
Etats Generaux, entrans dans le party, et meme en rupture avec la France, il
sera tres a propos que l'on concerte avec son Excellence la maniere don't on
agira dans le territoire du Roy son Maitre; et que pourtant l'on ne laisse pas
cependant d'entrer en action sans la moindre perte de temps. Il ne sera donc
nullement necessaire que je me trouve sur nos frontieres pour la fin proposee
par son Excellence, ce que d'ailleurs me seroit tout a fait impossible; et
encore bien moins que lons envoye quelqu'un d'icy a Brusselles, d'autant que
les Deputez des Etats qui s'y trouvent presentement, sont ceux la meme que l'on
pourroit choisir pour la fin desiree; vous pouvant asseurer que je ne pouvois
nommer person, en qui l'Etat aussi bien que moy en particulier, pussent avoir
plusde confiance don't ils vous donner ont sans doubt des preuves aussi bieu que
de leur integrite et de leur bonne conduite. Je vous suplie donc Monsieur,
d'user avec ^eux de la meme franchise, don't vous avez use envers moy, et je
vous demeure garand qu'eux de leur cote en useront de meme: Et si vous avez
este en quelque facon satisfait de ma maniere d'agir, comme je l'ay este de la
votre, que vous le serez tout a fait de celle desdits Deputes de l'Etat. Au
rest, nous approuvons fort les diligences que vous ferez de part, et d'autre
directement aux Ministres du Roy de la Grand Bretagne et de cet Etat a Paris;
et nous nous promettons de vos Offices communs la paix universelle de la
Chretiente, au grand profit du public, et a la gloire eternelle de vos
persons; Laquelle vous souhaite avec autant d'affection que person du
monde, celuy qui est, et qui demeurera a jamais,

Monsieur, Votre tres humble, et tres affectionne Serviteur, Joan. de Wit.

From Monsieur de Wit.
Hague, March 5. 1668. SIR,
IT IS with great Satisfaction that I have learnt from your Dispatch of the 2d
Instant, and by that of the Deputies of this State, the provisional Success it
has pleased God to grant to your Cares and Application to the Marquis of
Castel-Rodrigo: And I doubt not, but the Conduct you have used to dispose those
of the Council of State of this Country to conform to his Excellence's Opinion,
will be aplauded by them. I hope, before the Receipt of this you will have
received from his Excellence a Declaration in Form, and in Writing, couched in
clear and satisfactory Terms, without any Ambiguity or Obscurity; and, in
short, such as will leave no Occasion or Pretext to France to find any thing to
object against, but what shall put them to a Necessity of declaring themselves
plainly on their side, upon the Conditions and Articles of our Convention, and
shall put us out of Doubt and Trouble of what we have to do. For my self, I
shall endeavor all I can, that this State shall be put in a Posture of entering
vigorously and effectually upon the Defense of Flanders, in case, after a plain
and satisfactory Answer from his Excellence, the King of France shall leave us
any Apprehensions of his endeavoring to make further Progresses in this
Country; which we cannot suppose without the Prejudice of suspecting that the
said King will falsify his Word given, and the Promise so solemnly made by his
public and circular Letters; which God forbid, and which however, common
Prudence should make us suppose to be possible, that we might not neglect the
Means, whereof we have so often discoursed; and upon which the States have
given Order to their Ambassadors in Holland, to concert more particularly with
the King of Great Britain and his Ministers.

You have further obliged me by not giving a Copy of my foregoing Dispatch, to
the Marquis; since in my Opinion he might have made use of it to provoke and
anger the King of France, and oblige him as it were in point of Honor to be
obstinate in the War against the Desire and Intention of the King of England
and the States: But by giving his Excellency so much part therein, as to read
to him our separate Articles; that is, what I cannot but entirely approve, as
being wholly agreeable to my manner of proceeding, as well as your Precaution,
wherewith you kept the common Cause from the Danger above mentioned, in not
giving him a Copy. For the rest, I refer my self to what the Deputies of the
States shall have already told you upon the Contents of your former Dispatch,
and to what they shall communicate to you from time to time of the Intentions
of Their High and Mightinesses, and shall ever remain what I am with Passion,

SIR, Your most affectionate and humble Servant, Jo. de Wit.

De Monsieur de Wit.
A la Hay 5me. Mars. 1668. Monsieur,
C'A este avec beaucoup de satisfaction que j'ay apris par votre depeche du 2d
de ce mois, et par celle de Messieurs les Deputez de l'Etat, le succez
provisionnel qu'il a plu au bon Dieu d'octroyer a vos soins et a votre
direction auprez du Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo; et je ne doubt point que la
conduite que vous avez tenue pour disposer ceux du conseil d'Etat de ce pais a
ce conformer au sentiment de son Excellence ne produisse leur applaudissement.
J'espere que devant que cellecy vous sera rendue, vous aurez receu de son
Excellence une declaration, dans les forms et par ecrit, couchee en terms
clairs et satisfaisants, sans aucune ambiguite ou obscurite; et en fin tell
qui ne laisse aucune occasion ni meme aucun pretexte a la France d'y trouver
quelque chose a redire; mais qui la met en necessite de se declarer ausside
son cote nettement sur les conditions et articles de notre convention, et nous
horse de doubt et d'embarras de ce que nous avons a fair. Quant a moy, je ne
manqueray pas de tenir la main a ce que l'Etat se met tout a fait en posture
de pouvoir accourir vigoureusement et efficacement a la defense du Pais bas en
cas qu'apres une declaration net et satisfaisante de son Excellence, le Roy
de France nous la^sse encore de l'apprehension des plus grands progrez que sa
Majeste voudroit tacher de fair dans le meme pais, ce que nous ne pouvons pas
presuppsser sans estre preoccupe d'un soubcon que ledit Roy voudroit bien
fausser sa parole donnee, et sa promise si solennellement faite par des
lettres publiques et circulaires: ce qu' a Dieu ne ne plaise; et ce que
pourtant la prudence veut que nous nous figurions comme possible, pour ne
negliger pas les moyens don't nous nous sommes bien souvent entretenus, et sur
lesquels les Etats ont done order a leurs Ambassadeurs en Angleterre de
concerter plus particulierement avec le Roy de la Grande Bretagne et ses
Ministres.

Vous m'avez encore oblige de n'avoir point done copy de ma precedente
depeche au Marquis; puisque a mon jugement, on auroit pu s'en servir pour
aigrir et picquer le Roy de France, et pour l'obliger en quelque facon par
point d honneur, a s'opiniatrer dans la guerre contre le but et scuhait du Roy
de la Grande Bretagne, et des Etats Generaux: Mais que vous ayez, done part a
son Excellence par lecture de nos articles separez, c'est ce que je ne puis
qu'approuver entierement, comme estant fort conform a ma maniere d'agir et de
proceder; aussi bien que la precaution don't vous avez garanti la cause commune
du sudit danger, en ne luy en ayant point done copy. Au rest je me remets a
ce que Messieurs les Deputez de l'Etat vous auront deja dit et temoigne sur le
contenu de votre depeche precedente, et a ce qu'ils vous communiqueront de
temps en temps de l'intention de leurs Hautes Puissances: Et demeureray a
jamais celuy qui suis avec passion,

Monsieur, Votre tres affectionne et tres humble Serviteur, Johan. de Wit.

From Monsieur de Wit.
Hague, March 16. 1668. SIR,
YOur Dispatch of the 11th Instant did not come to my hands till the 14th at
Noon, the Courier who brought it, having not been dismissed from Brussels till
the 13th.

I was very glad to see you had at last disposed the Marquis to dispatch the
Baron of Bergeyck for Aix la Chapelle, being very much persuaded that it
imports us mightily to have a quick Conclusion of the Peace, or else to see
clearly into the most inward Dispositions of the King of France, as well as
those of the Spanish Court; and that all Delay is very prejudicial to our
Intentions, and to the Interests of Spain: And that we may be neither surpised
nor abused on either side, I think in the present Conjuncture two things are
absolutely necessary: The first is, that England and this State be well
furnished by Sea and Land; and the other, that we take away, not only all
lawful Cause, but also as much as possible, all Pretext from France to delay or
avoid the concluding and signing the Treaty of Peace.

To satisfy on our side, for the first Point, we are resolved as soon as the
Season will permit, to send into the Field all our Cavalry, which consists of
7300 Horse; and provisionally 25 Regiments of our Foot; for which the chief
Rendezvous shall be at Bergopzoom, or thereabouts; from whence there will be a
convenient March in a few days into most part of the King of Spain's Places in
the Netherlands.

We have also given Order for equipping 48 Ships of War, above the Number
commonly used for Guard and Convoy; And the States have already given order to
their Ambassadors in England to concert with the King of Great Britain and his
Ministers upon the Number of Ships and Men that each Party shall be obliged to
have ready, and in what time. Besides, the Deputies of the State have this Day
finally agreed with the Ministers of the Dukes of Brunswick and Lunebourg, to
bring into the Service of this State three Regiments of Horse, and 3000 Foot;
and I hope the Treaty will be signed to morrow or the next Day: And, further,
they are going here to augment the Old Militia by new Levies, to the Number of
12000 Men, with the Troops of the said Dukes, which are to enter into the
Service of the State: And I will not fail of helping what I can to the
accomplishing of all this, as soon as it can be done by the Constitution of the
Government. And if you approve all these Preparations and Diligences, as I hope
you will since they seem very necessary, and no way offensive, since he who
really desires the Peace, will find in it his Support and Advantage; and that
these Forces shall not be employed till the last Necessity, against him, that
by his Wilfulness would disappoint Christendom of the Benefit of it; I desire
you by your Letters to make the Exhortations necessary to the King of England
and his Ministers, that they may not fail on that side to make the like
Preparations and Diligences.

As to the 2d Point, I think it imports much that the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo
should explain himself upon which of the two Conditions proposed by the
Alternative, he pretends to have accepted; wherein there seems the less
Difficulty, since his Excellence will, without doubt, explain himself for the
abandoning the Places the King of France has conquered the last Campagn, with
their Dependances. But then I think it will be our Interest and Duty to
endeavor that some reasonable Exchange be made, for Places far in the Heart of
Flanders, against Places lately taken in the Franche Compte, or others that
shall be more for the Advantage of France, and less for the Inconvenience of
Spain and Us.

Besides, to take all Pretext from France which they may pretend to make upon a
Defect of Powers in the said Marquis, either in the principal Matter, or by
default of a Clause of Substitution, or otherwise: I think it will be very
necessary that the K. of Great Britain and the States General shall be obliged
to ratify and accomplish whatever shall be treated and concluded at Aix; and
shall promise in the firmest manner the K. of France can desire, to oblige
Spain in case of necessity to the said Ratification and Accomplishment, by all
their Forces both by Sea and Land: And in short, that in every Occurrence they
will do very judiciously to obviate all Exceptions and Delays which can be
brought to the Prejudice of the Peace. But further, when we shall have brought
the King of France to an absolute Necessity of either finally concluding, or
discovering his Intention contrary to the Peace; in that Case, upon the first
Step France shall make to frustrate Christendom of such a general Good, the
King of, Great Britain and the States shall without further Delay, bring all
their Forces by Sea and Land, not only for Defense of the Spaniards, but also
for the Intent specified in the third of our separate Articles, and more amply
deduced in my Dispatch of the 25th. of February last.

For the rest, if you have received the King of Great Britain's Ratification
upon our last Marine Treaty, I shall wait till you think proper to exchange it;
upon which I shall endeavor to c^^form the States to your Desire; whether our
Ratification shall be sent to our Commissioners now with you; or whether you
will please to send your Secretary or your Brother hereto the Hague; or whether
you know any way will please you better: For in this and every other
Occurrence, I shall endeavor to follow your Desires and second your
Intentions, as being not by form of Compliment, but very really, Sir,

Your, etc.

De Monsieur de Wit.
A la Hay 16me. Mars, 1668. Monsieur,
VOtre depeche du 11me de ce mois ne m'a este rendue que le 14me. apres midy;
le courier qui la apportee, n'ayant este expedie et parti de Brusselles que le
13me.

J'ay este fort aise de voir que vous aviez enfin dispose Monsieur le Marquis
de Castel-Rodrigo, a depecher le Baron de Bergayck promptement verse Aiz la
Chapelle; estant tres persuade qu'^ nous importe d'avoir une prompte conclusion
de la paix ou de voir clair dans les intentions les plus interieures du Roy de
France, aussi bien que dans celle de la cour d'Espagne; et que tout delai est
fort prejudiciable a nos intentions et aux interets de l'Espagne: Et a fin que
nous ne puissions pas estre surpris ou abuses de cote ou d'autre; je juge qu'en
la conjuncture present deux chooses nous sont absolument necessaires: don't la
premiere est que l'Angleterre et cet Etat soient bien arms par mer et par
terre; et l'autre qu'on ote non seulement toute cause legitime, mais aussi tant
que fair ce pourra, tout pretexte a la France de delaier ou d'esquiver la
conclusion et la signature du traitte de paix.

Pour satisfaire de notre cote au premier point, nous sommes resolus de mettre
en campaign, aussitot que la saison le pourra permettre, toute notre cavallerie
qui consiste en sept, mill et trois cens chevaux, et provisionellement vingt
cinq regimens de notre infanterie, pour lequel le principal rendezvous sera a
Bergopzoom et aux environs; place fort commode pour pouvoir de la nous jetter
en peu de tems dans la plus part des places du Roy d'Espagne au Pais bas.

Aussi avons nous done order pour l'equipage de quarante et huit vaissaux de
guerre par dessus le nombre qui sert pour la guard et l'escorte ordinaire: Et
il y a deja quelque tems que les Etats ont donn^ order a leurs Ambassadeurs en
Angleterre de concerter avec le Roy de la Grande Bretagne et ses Minist^ essur
le Nombre et la quantite des Vaisseaux et hommes, que chacun s'obligeroit
d'avoir tout prets et en quel tems. Outre cela les Deputez de l'Etat sont
tombez aujourdhuy finalement d'accord avec les Ministres des Ducks de Bronswich
et de Lunebourg, pour fair passer au service de cet Etat trois regimens de
Cavallerie, et trois mill hommes a pied; et j'espere que le traitte en pourra
estre sign demain, ou apres demain: et au surplus va-on icy encore augmenter
la vielle milice par des nouvelles levees jusques an nombre de douze mill
hommes, y compris les troops desdits Ducs qui passeront au service de cet
Etat: Et je ne manqueray pas de tenir la main, et de presser autant qu'il me
sera possible que tout ce que dessus aye son accomplissement le plutot qu'il se
pourra fair selon la constitution de ce gouvernement. Et si vous approuvez
toutes ces preparations et diligences, comme je l'espere, et que'lles me
semblent fort necessaires et nullement offencantes; d'autant que celuy qui
voudra la Paix reellement, y trouvera son appuy et son avantage; et que leur
emploi sera de la derniere necessitte contre celuy qui par son opiniatrete en
voudroit frustrer la Chretiente; Je vous supply de fair les exhortations
necessaires par vos lettres au Roy de la Grande Bretagne et a ses Ministres, a
fin que de ce cote la on ne manque pas de fair de semblables preparatifs et
les memes diligences.

Quant au second point, Je croy qu'il importe grandement que Monsieur le
Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo s'explique, laquelle des deux conditions proposees
par l'Alternative il entend avoir accept; En quoy il me semble tant moins de
difficulte, que c'est sans contredit que son Excellence s'expliquer a pour
l'abandonnement des places que le Roy de France a conquis la campaign passee,
avec leurs dependances: Mais ce sera ce me semble alors de notre interet et de
notre devoir de travailler puissamment afin que quelque echange rationable se
puisse fair des places les plus avancees en Flandre, contre des places
nouvellement occupees dans la Franche Compte, ou autres qui seront plus en la
bienseance de la Ftance, et moins a l'incommodite de l'Espagne et de nous
autres.

De plus; pour oter a la France tout pretexte don't elle se pourroit servir a
raison qu'il pourroit y avoir quelque manquement au pouvoir dudit Marquis ou en
la matiere principale ou par defaut de la clause de substitution ou autrement;
il me semble qu'il sera tres necessaire que le Roy de la Grande Bretagne et les
Etats Generaux se fassent fort de la ratification et de l'accomplissement de
tout ce qui sera traette et conclu a Aix; et promettent en la maniere la plus
forte que le Roy de France le pourra desirer, d'obliger en cas de hesoin
l'Espagne a ladite Ratification, et au dit accomplissement, de toutes leurs
forces par mer et par terre: Et en fin qu'en toute autre occurrence on fera
tres judicieusement d'obvier a toutes les exceptions et delais qui pourroient
estre apportez au prejudice de la paix. Mais aussi quand on aura mis par la le
Roy de France dans une necessite absolve de proceder outre a la conclusion
finale ou de decouvrir son intention contraire a la paix; qu'alors a la
premiere demarche que la France feroit pour frustrer la Chretiente d'un bien si
salutaire: Le Roy de la Grande Bretagne et les Etats Generaux feroient agir
incontinent et sans marchander, toutes leurs forces par mer et par terre, non
seulement pour la defense des Espagnols, mais aussi pour la fin specifee
autroisieme de nos articles separes, et plus amplement deduite en ma depeche du
25 Fevrier pass.

Au rest, j'attendray de vos nouvelles si vous avez receu la ratification du
Roy de la Grande Bretagne sur notre dernier traite de Marine, que vous jugerez
a propos que l'on en fasse l'echange; sur quoy je tacheray de disposer les
Etats a se conformer a votre desir; soit que l'on envoye notre ratification es
mains de nos commissaires qui se trouvent presentement auprez de vous; soit que
vous envoyez votre Secretaire, ou bien Monsieur votre Friar icy a la Hay; ou
que vous scachiez, encore quelque autre facon qui soit plus a votre gout: Car^
et en cela, et en toute atre occurrence, je tacheray de suivre vos desirs, et
de seconder vos intentions, comme estant non par form de compliment, mais fort
reellement, Monsieur,

Votre, etc.

From Monsieur de Wit
Hagne, Mar. 25. 1668. SIR,
I Received the Honor of yours of the 25th Instant, upon which I will tell you
in few Words, that I am wholly of your Opinion, as well for what regards the
King of France's Disposition to carry on the War; the Insufficiency of his
Offer to restore all he may conquer between the 1st of April and the 15th of
May, the strained Exceptions against the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo's Powers,
and his Acceptance of the Alternative; As chiefly for what regards the Forces
to be raised with all possible readiness; and the manner by which we ought to
proceed to the Defense of the Netherlands, as soon as the K. of France shall
begin to move against them. The States are every Day more confirmed in the same
Sentiments, as their Actions declare, by marching an Army with all Diligence to
Berg-opzoom, and by sending an Express to the King of Great Britain with
Intelligence, that they are of Opinion, that in order to satisfy the K. of
France upon the Scruples proposed in Monsieur de Lionne's Paper of the 19th
Instant, with Promises and Assurances sufficient, we must let him know
discreetly, and yet positively, that we think his Generosity will not suffer
him to ruin a State, or a Minister of Spain, whom the King of England and the
States General have obliged at his Request, to accept the Conditions
prescribed, with a formal Assurance, that by that means he should free himself
from all Danger of the War. And, at least, that the Honor and good Faith of
the King of Great Britain and the States cannot suffer such a State or Minister
to be injured without lending him their Service and Assistance. And by every
body's Disposition here I am assured, that as soon as the Agreement is
concluded, we shall march to the Assistance of the Netherlands, upon the first
Step France shall make to attack them, if the King of England will do the like.
But to acquit our Consciences, and let the World see the Justice of our
proceeding; I am entirely of opinion we must make all Advances, and give all
due Assurances to France, to oblige them to the Peace. Upon which, with many
other Particulars, I refer you to the Deputies of the States to communicate to
you; having not time at present to enlarge further, but only to repeat in one
word, that I am truly Sir,

Your, etc. Johan. de Wit.

De Monsieur de Wit.
A la Hay, 25 me. Mars, 1668. Monsieur,
J'AY bien receu la lettre don't il vous a plu m'honnorer le 25me de ce mois;
surquoy je vous diray en peu de mots que je suis tout a fait de votre opinion,
tant a l'egard de la disposition du Roy de France a continuer la guerre,
l'insuffisance de l'offre de vouloir restituer tout ce qu'il pourroit co^querir
enter le premier d'Avril et le 15me May; les exceptions recherchees contre les
pouvoirs du Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo, et contre son acceptance de
l'alternative; que principalement et sur tout a l'egard de l'armement que l'on
devroit avancer avec toute la promptitude possible, et de la maniere de
laquelle on devra accourir a la defense du Pais bas, des que le Roy de France
commencera a se remuer pour l'accabler. Les Etats ont deja approuve et confirm
encore de jour en jour les memes sentiments par leurs actions; faisants marcher
en toute diligence une armee aux environs de Berg-opzoom et ayants envoye leur
avis par un exprez au Roy de la Grande Bretagne, qu'ils sont d'opinion qu'
aussi bien que de satisfaire au Roy de France sur les scrupules proposes dans
l'ecrit du Sieur de Lionne du 19me de ce mois avec des asseurances et promesses
suffisantes; il faudra luy fair savoir discretement et neantmois bien
positivement que nous jugeons que sa generosite ne pourra pas permettre qu'il
accable un Etat ou un Ministre d'Espagne, que le Roy d'Angleterre et les Etats
Generaux ont oblige a sa requisition d'accepter les conditions prescrites, avec
une asseurance formelle que par la il se deliverroit de tout danger de la
guerre; Et qu'au moins l'honneur et la bonne foy du Roy de la Grande Bretagne
et des Etats, ne pourra pas souffrir qu'on accable un tell Etat ou un tell
Ministre, sans luy preter leurs services et assistances: Et je ne vois point de
disposition icy, qui ne m'asseure que l'oppignoration estant conclue, on
marchera au secours des Pais bas des la premiere demarche que le Roy de France
fera pour l'attaquer, si le Roy de la Grande Bretagne en veut fair autant.
Mais pour nous satisfaire en bonne conscience; et pour fair voir a tout le
monde la justice de notre proceed: Je suis entierement d'opinion qu'il faudra
fair toutes les avances, et donner toutes les asseurances requises a la France
pour parvenir, et pour l'obliger a la paix. Surquoy, comme aussi sur plusieurs
autres particularitez, je me remets a ce que les Deputez de l'Etat vous
communiqueront plus en detail; n'ayant pas de tems de m'etendre icy plus
amplement, mais seulement pour repeter en un mot que je suis tres
veritablement, Monsieur,

Votre, etc. Johan. de Wit.

From Monsieur de Wit.
Hague, April 4. 1668. SIR,
I Could not immediately answer yours of the 2d Instant, by reason of a Fever
I got by a great Cold last Night: But toward Noon the Fever lessening, gives
me leave at present to tell you, that though it is now some Days since M.
Beverning's Departure for Aix la Chapelle, yet I do not see how in the present
Conjuncture of Affairs it should be more necessary for you to reside in that
City than at Brussels; but on the contrary, that the Affair is now reduced to
such a Point, that the Business which carried you to Aix, ought to be treated
and finished in a few days, in the Place where you are, and in the Netherlands;
and I think the King of England's Ministers, and those of the States at Paris,
have negotiated with Address in procuring us an Instrument, which in a few Days
will put us in a clear Light upon what we are finally to resolve and to do; if
the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo seconds us, as we hope and expect from his
Prudence, and from the visible Interest of his Master, which obliges him to it.
I speak of the Project of the Treaty drawn upon the Foot of the Alternative,
and concerted between the said Ministers of our Masters at Paris, and the
Commissioners of the K. of France, whereof I am sure you have received a Copy
from Sir John Trevor. I think this Project gives us a certain way of obtaining
the Peace; or else a War, wherein all the Princes and States of Christendom
will support us, or at least, commend our Conduct and Proceeding. And I think
we must proceed in it after this manner: I suppose beforehand that you and our
Deputies with you, will not be at much pains to dispose the Marquis to send
immediately a Power to Monsieur Beverning and Sir John Trevor to sign in his
(the Marquis s) Name, and from the King his Master, the Treaty with the K. of
France's Commissioners, agreeable to the Project abovementioned, which I find
entirely conformable to our Agreement and secret Articles, as Monsieur
Beverning tells us, that he and Sir J. Trevor made the same Judgment of it.
Unless his Excellency would rather sign the said Treaty himself, and receive
the Exchange of it signed by the K. of France: In which case I think there may
be only writ on the Top of the Project, A Treaty of Peace between the Kings of
* Spain and France to prevent disputing upon the Terms of the Preface; And in
the other Instrument, Of France and Spain.
and beneath to add the Date. This being done, the aforesaid Ministers at Paris
must, in my Opinion, offer the K. of France to sign in the K. of Spain's Name,
or (in case his Excellency thinks fit to sign himself) to exchange the Treaty
signed; on condition that France will consent to a reasonable time to procure
the Ratification from the Queen of Spain; and above all, the Continuance of the
Cessation of Arms during the time agreed. I see that for granting this term a
little more to the Humor of France, you will be more liberal and complaisant
than I: For whereas you are satisfied with the Term till the 15th of May
already proposed by Monsieur de Ruvigny, I think Reason and Decency should
oblige to take till the End of May. And if the King of France refuses either to
sign on his side; or to grant the said Term with the Cessation of Arms, I
should not stick to declare immediately for Spain, and act by Sea and Land in
Conformity to our third separate Article.

And since it cannot enter into a reasonable Man's Mind, that the Q. of Spain
can be so blind as not to ratify the said Treaty, by which a The County of
Burgundy.
whole Province is restored, and a minor King delivered from being engaged in a
second War with us and Spain; I should not be hard at granting the King of
France whatever he can demand with any Appearance of Reason, in a Case that
will never arrive: Chiefly, because many Princes of Germany will then declare
on our side, who might else (blinded by the Appearances of Reason in Monsieur
de Lionne's Letter of the 19th. past) abandon us entirely. The King of Sueden
or his Minister at London, do, I think, stretch the Cord too far, and he will
break it if he does not yield a little. However, we have last Wednesday sent
such Orders to our Ambassadors, that I doubt not a good Success of this
Negotiation.

For the other Points of your Letter, I must refer my self to what you can
learn from our Deputies and his Excellency, by Advices from the Ambassador Don
Estavan de Gamarra. Therefore I shall conclude remaining, Sir,

Your, etc. Johan. de Wit.

De Monsieur de Wit.
A la Hay 4me. Mars. 1668. Monsieur,
UN grand rhume qui m'a suscite une fievre la nuit passee, a este cause que je
n'ay pas pu vous repondre d'abord a votre lettre du 2d de ce mois: Mais verse le
midi la fievre estant beaucoup diminuee, me laisse presentement la faculte de
vous dire, que quoy qu'il y a deja quelques jours que Monsieur de Beverning est
parti pour se render a Aix la Chapelle, je ne voy pas pourtant que dans la
conjoncture present des affairs, votre sejour soit plus necessaire au dit
lieu qu'a Brusselles; mais que tout au contraire, l'affaire est presentement
reduite a un point, que ce pour quoy vous vous fussiez transporte a Aix, se
pourra et se devra traitter et achever en peu de jour^ au lieu ou vous estes et
au Pais bas: Et il me semble que Messieurs les Ministres du Roy de la Grande
Bretagne et des Etats a Paris, ont negotie adroitement de nous avoir sceu
procurer un instrument qui nous mettra en peu de jours dans une clarte entiere
pour resoudre finalement ce que nous aurons a fair; si le Marquis de
Castel-Rodrigo nous y second comme nous l'esperons et l'attendrons de sa
prudence et de l'interet visible de son Maitre qui l'y oblige. Je parle du
projet de traitte dress sur le pie de l'alternative et concerte enter les dits
Ministres de nos Maitres a Paris et les Commissaires du Roy de France, don't je
m'asseure que vous aurez receu copy de la part de Monsieur Trevor. Il me
semble que ce projet nous done en main un moyen asseure pour avoir la paix, ou
une guerre dans laquelle tous les Princes et Etats de la Chretiente nous
appuyeront, ou au moins loueront notre proceed et notre conduite. Et voicy
comme quoy, a mon avis, nous y pourrions proceder. Je presuppose que vous et
Messieurs nos Deputez qui se trouvent auprez de vous, n'auront pas beaucoup de
peine a disposer Monsieur le Marquis d'envoyer incontinent un pouvoir a
Messieurs van Beuningen et Trevor, pour signer en son nom et de la part du Roy
son maitre, le traitte avec les Commissaires du Roy de France, conformement au
projet susdit que je trouve entierement conform a notre convention et a nos
articles secrets; ainsi que le Sieur van Beuningen nous mande aussi, que luy et
Monsieur Trevor en ont rendu ce meme jugement. Si ce n'est que son Excellence
aim mieux de signer luy meme ledit traitte, et d'en recevoir un en echange
sign de la part du Roy de France, au quel cas il me semble que l'on n'auroit
qu'a mettre dessus le projet, Et en l'autre Instrument, De France et d'Espagne.
Traitte de paix enter les Roys d'Espagne et de France; pour ne disputer pas
sur les terms de la preface; Et au bas d'ajouter la date. Cela estant fait, il
faudra a mon jugement que lesdits Ministres a Paris offrent au Roy de France de
signer au nom du Roy d'Espagne, ou bien d'echanger le traitte sign, si son
Excellence ayt trouve bon de signer luy meme; moyennant que la France accord
un term raisonable pour procurer la ratification de la Reyne d'Espagne, et sur
tout la continuation de la cessation d'armes pendant ce term un peu augre de
la France, vous seriez plus liberal ou complaisant que moy; car au lieu que
vous vous contenteriez du term de 15me de May cy devant propose par Monsieur
de Ruvigny, il me semble que la raison et la hiensance nous obligeroient bien
de prendre jusques au dernier jour de May: Et si le Roy de France vient a
refuser ou la signature de son cote, ou le term avec la cessation d'armes, je
ne hesiterois point a nous declarer d'abord sans marchander, pour l'Espagne, et
agir par mer et par terre en conformite du 3me de nos articles separez.

Et comme il ne peut tomber dans l'esprit d'un homme raisonable, que la Reyne
d'Espagne pourroit estre si aveugle que de ne ratifier point le dit traitte qui
luy fait render une La Conte de Bourgogne.
Province entiere, et qui delivre un Roy mineur d'un second accablement de
l'Angleterre et de cet Etat; je ne serois nullement chiche a accorder au Roy de
France tout ce qu'il pourroit demander avec quelque apparan^e de raison, dans
un cas qui n'echerra pas. Principalement parceque plusieurs Princes d'Allemagne
alors se declareront de nostre parti qui sans cela aveugles par les apparances
du raisonnement compris dans la lettre de Monsieur de Lionne du 19me du mois
pass, nous abandonneroient entierement. Le Roy de Suede, ouson Ministre a
Londres me semble trop tender la cord; et il la rompra s'il ne se met un peu a
la raison: Neantmoins nous avons encore Vendredy pass envoye tells ordres a nos
Ambassadeurs que je ne doubt d'un bon succes de cette negotiation.

Quant aux autres points de votre lettre, je suis oblige de me remettre a ce
que vous pourrez entendre de nos Deputez et de son Excellence par les avis de
l'Ambassadeur Don Estevan de Gamarra: C'est pourquoy en finissant je demeureray
comme je suis veritablement, Monsieur,

Votre, etc. Johan. de Wit.

From the Elector of Mentz.
Mentz, April 12. 1668. My Lord,
HAving heard of Your Excellency's Arrival to Aix la Chapelle, to assist in his
Majesty of Great Britain's Name at a Negotiation of Peace between the two
Crowns, I could not forbear expressing my Joy, and the Confidence I have that
the Intervention and Authority of so great a King, will give much Weight to the
Affair, and very much facilitate the Peace; which employing all my Thoughts at
present, I have dispatched to the said Town of Aix, the Baron of Schonborn my
Nephew, with Orders to render all Offices from me to Your Excellency, and to
contribute all he can toward a Peace so necessary to the Repose of all
Christendom. In the mean time I desire Your Excellency to be assured, that, as
I shall always reckon it an Honor to serve the King your Master, so I shall
never let pass any Occasion of showing in particular that I am, My Lord,

Your Excellency's most humble, and affectionate Servant, J. Ph. El. de Mayence.

De Electeur de Mayence.
A Mayence 12me. Avril, 1668. Monsieur,
AYant sceu l'arrivee de votre Excellence a Aix la Chapelle pour y assister au
nom de sa Majeste de la Grande Bretagne a la negotiation de la paix enter les
deux Couronnes: Je n'ay pu m'empecher de luy temoigner ma joye, et la confiance
que j'ay que l'intervention et l'autorite d'un Roy si puissant donnera un poids
tres grand a l'affaire, et facilitera de beaucoup la conciliation et le
retablissement de cette paix: Laquelle faisant aujourdhuy tous mes soins, j'ay
depeche a ladite ville d'Aix le Baron de Schonborn mon neveu avec order
d'offrir et de render a Votre Excellence de ma part, tous les offices, et de
contribuer de son possible pour parvenir a la fin que l'on s'est proposee, pour
obtenir une paix si necessaire au repos de toute la Chretiente. Cependant je
pry Votre Excellence d'estre asseuree que comme je feray toujours gloire de
servir le Roy son maitre; de meme je ne perdray jamais l'occasion ou je peurray
temoigner en mon particulier que je suis, Monsieur,

De Votre Excellence tres humble, et tres affectionne Serviteur, J. Ph. E. de
Mayence.

From Monsieur de Wit
Hague, April 16. 1668. SIR,
AFter having writ to you on the 4th. I find my self honored by two of yours
of the 9th. and 14th. Instant. The Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo's manner of
transacting does infinitely displease us; and we believe we have entered enough
into his Designs, to conclude, that his aim is to delay the signing of the
Project, and the sending of the Powers till the French begin to be in motion;
and in the mean while to sign or send the Power desired, and summon us by
virtue of a former Promise, to oppose our Arms against those of France, which
will then begin to enter into Action, and by that means set us into an open War
by Advance. However, to give the said Marquis the amplest Assurance, and to
convince him he is in the wrong, we were willing entirely to agree to your
Advice, and to authorize our Deputies to pass a promise with you in due Form by
Writing, inserting in it the same Words of our third separate Article: And I
think you have very judiciously considered, that the Condition of the Promise
ought to be, not only the signing of the Project and Powers; but if after the
Signing, etc. France refuses either to consent to it, or to continue the
Suspension of Arms, we believe we have great cause to complain of the Marquis,
that notwithstanding the solemn Promise made by the States General, and
delivered to Don Estevan de Gamarra in their Resolution of the 5th of this
Month, he has delayed to sign and dispatch the Power; so that if this had been
done at first, we had been already out of all Doubt; for either the Conclusion
of it would have been pursued at Paris with the Suspension of Arms; or, in case
of Refusal, England and this State would already act in earnest, and with a
good Conscience for Spain. And I desire you to let his Excellency see as
plainly as possible, that if now after the signing and sending the Power to
Paris, and before the K. of France can be informed of it, he shall receive any
Disgrace, it is himself he ought to impute it to; for England and this State
will not put into his Hands the Power of involving them in an open War with
France, unseasonably, and against their Intention clearly expressed in the
Agreement of the 25th Instant; which would have happened if we had left him the
liberty to delay the signing or sending his Power, till he had provoked the
French to move; or if then signing or sending the Power, he had the right of
employing our Troops against those of France, before the K. of France could
have had Intelligence of the said signing or sending of the said Power, and by
consequence before the said King could have finished the Treaty and continued
the Suspension of Arms. I hope, and am assured, that after this Pace, which is
the last the States are capable of making in this Conjuncture, the Marquis will
not delay a Moment the signing and sending of the Peace to Paris; but if,
contrary to all Appearance, he should be capable of doing so, I desire you to
let him know, that neither England nor the States can assist one who nifestly
refuses, and consequently that he will be abandoned on all sides; and also that
we shall find our selves under a Necesssity to reduce him by more effectual
means, to accept really and effectually by signing of the Treaty, the
Alternative he has already acepted by a separate writing. And I even apprehend
that by the Delays already passed, the Affair is reduced to a Point not to be
redressed; as in truth we shall find our selves embarassed enough, if the King
of France be already gone from Paris to his Army, before the Project signed, or
the Power be arrived there. I cannot tell by what Politic his Excellency
desires, his Conduct should be decryed by all Men, or that his Government
should be lost; for, to think us so ill advised, that he can engage us in a War
against France, when they on their side, are earnest for concluding a Peace, is
what I cannot suppose; and if he thinks France will draw back, or refuse the
Suspension, then why he would not let it appear publicly to the World by a
ready signing on his Side; this is what I cannot comprehend. In the mean time,
Monsieur Colbert at Aix, has loudly made appear the Easyness, and even the
Complaisance of his Master, by the Protestation he has publicly made, that he
has order to sign the Alternative, without excepting against the Preamble of
the Marquis's Power upon the Defect of a Faculty to substistute, or upon any
other; whereas on the contrary, the Baron de Bergeyck is not authorized to do
any thing at all: And I assure you, the positive Advices we receive of it, make
every Body's Head turn; Therefore I desire you so much the more to endeavor
effectually that the Marquis should finish the Affair without any more delay:
For if this last Compliance of the States does not satisfy him, I confess to
you I shall think no further, but of some effectual means to reduce him to
Reason, and of some Expedients by which the King of Great Britain and Their
High and Mightynesses may take Measures with France for preventing the Miseries
of the Neighborhood; in which I hope you assist with as much Application,
according to the intent of our Agreement, as I believe you will by all means
endeavor to prevent a Case so desperate, and so destructive to Spain: And for
me I shall remain ever with much Passion,

Sir, your etc.

De Monsieur de Wit.
A la Hay 16me. Mars, 1668. Monsieur,
APres que je vous ay ecrit le 4me je me trouve honor de vos deux depeches du
9me et 14me de ce mois. La maniere d'agir la Monsieur le Marquis de
Castel-Rodrigo nous deplait infiniment; et nous croyons penetrer asses dans ses
visees, pour conclurre que son but est de delayer la signature du projet et
l'envoy du pouvoir jusques a ce que les Francois commencent a se remuer; de
signer en meme temps ou d envoyer le pouvoir desire, et de nous summer en virtue
d'une promise prealable d'opposer nos arms contre celles de Franee qui
commenceront alors d'entrer en action, et par ainsi nous mettre en guerre
ouverte par provision. Neantmoins pour donner au dit Marquis une asseurance
plus ample, et pour achever de le mettre dans le tort, nous avons bien voulu
nous conformer-entierement a votre avis, et autoriser nos Deputez a passer avec
vous la promise en bonne et deue form par ecrit; y inserant les memes paroles
du troisieme de nos articles separes; et je juge que vous avez tres
judicieusement considere que la condition de la promise doit estre non
seulement la signature du projet et des pouvoirs; mais si apres la signature,
etc. la France refuse ou d'y consentir, ou de continuer la suspension d'armes:
Nous croyons avoir grand sujet de nous plaindre du Sieur Marquis en ce que non
obstant la promise solennelle, faite par les Etats Generaux, et delivree a Don
Estevan de Gamarra dans leur resolution du 5me de ce mois il a dilaye de signer
et de depecher le pouvoir; d'autant, que si cela eut este fait d'abord, nous
nous trouverions deja horse de toute obscurite; car ou la conclusion en auroit
este suivie a Paris, avec la suspension d'armes; ou en cas de refus,
l'Angleterre et cet Etat agiroit deja de bon coeur et en bonne conscience pour
l'Espagne. Et je vous supply de fair voir a son Excellence le plus vivement
qu'il se pourra fair, que si a cette heure apres la signature ou l'envoy du
pouvoir vere Paris, et avaunt qu'on en puisse avoir averti le Roy de France, il
recoiue quelque disgrace; que ce sera a soy meme a qui il le devra imputer: Car
l'Angleterre et cet Etat ne peuvent pas luy donner en main un moyen asseure
pour les enveloper mal a propos et contre leur in intention clairement exprimee
dans la convention du 25me de ce mois dans une guerre ouverte avec la France;
ce qui se feroit si on luy laissoit la faculte de dilayer la signature ou
l'envoy de son pouvoir jusques a ce qu'il auroit provoque les Francois de se
remuer; ou qu'alors signant ou envoyant le pouvoir il eut le droit de fair
agir nos troops contre celles de France avaunt que le Roy de France eut pu
avoir nouvelle de ladite signature ou de l'envoy duit pouvoir et par consequent
avaunt qu'il eut pu fair achever le traite et continuer la suspension d'armes:
J'espere et je me tiens asseure qu'apros le pas qui est le dernier que les
Etats sont capables de fair en cette conjoncture, Monsieur le Marquis ne
dilayera plus un moment sa signature et l'envoy d'un pouvoir verse Paris; mais,
si contre toute appearance, il fut capable de le fair, je vous supply de lui
fair voir comme il faut que-ni l'Angleterre ni les Etats, ne peuvent pas
assister un refusant manifesse; que par consequent il sera abandone de tous
cotes, and qu' aussi nous nous trouverons necessites de le reduire par des
moyens plus efficaces a accepter reellement and en effect par la signature du
traite, l'alternative qu'il a deja accept par un ecrit separe. Et j'apprehende
meme que par les delais deja passes, l'affaire ne soit reduite a un point pour
ne pouvoir pas estre redressee: Comme en verite nous nous trouverions bien
embarasses, si le Roy de France fut deja parti de Paris verse son armee, avaunt
que le projet sign ou le pouvoir y fut arrive. Je ne say pas par quelle
politic son Excellence trouve bon de fair decrier sa conduite par tout le
monde, and de perdre le pais de son gouvernement; car de nous croire si mal
avises qu'elle nous pourroit engager dans une guerre, contre la France, lors
qu'elle de son cote veut tout de bon conclure la paix, c'est que je ne puis pas
presupposer: Et si elle juge que la France reculera ou refusera la suspension,
pourquoy qu'elle ne l'aye pas voulu fair paroitre publiquement devant tout le
monde par une prompte signature de son cote, c'est ce que je ne puis pas
comprendre. Cependant Monsieur Colbert a Aix a fait paroitre hautement la
facilite voire la complaisance du Roy son Maitre, par la protestation qu'il
fait publiquement, qu'il a order de signer l'alternative, sans fair exception
sur le preambule du pouvoir du Marquis, sur le defaut de la faculte de
substituer, ou autres, la ou au contraire Monsieur le Baron de Bergeyck ne se
trouve autorise a rien. Et je vous asseure que les avis positiss que nous en
recevons, font tourner la tete a un chacun: Ce pourquoy je vous supply
d'autant plus de tenir la main efficacement a ce que Monsieur le Marquis acheve
l'affaire sans plus de delay; Car si cette derniere complaisance des Etats ne
luy satisfoit pas, je vous avoue que je ne songeray plus qu'aux moyens
efficaces pour le reduire a la raison, and aux expedients, par lesquels le Roy
de la Grande Bretagne and leurs Hauttes Puissances se puissent entendre avec la
France, pour prevenir les malhenrs de son voisinage: En quoy j'espere que vous
cooperez avec autant d'application selon l'invention de notre convention, que
je me tiens que vous tacherez par toute sort des moyens de prevenir ce cas
desespere and ruineux pour l' Espagne. Et moy, je demeureray a jamais avec
beaucoup de passion

Monsieur, Votre tres humble Serviteur, Johan de Wit.

From Monsieur de Wit.
Hague, April 27, 1668. SIR,
YOU ought to be well satisfied with your whole Conduct, since the Success so
well answers your good Intention, and that your Work has so excellent an
Agreement with the Foundations you had laid. All Christendom owes You the Glory
of having first disposed the King of Great Britain's Mind to so strict an
Alliance between his Majesty and this State, for the universal Good and Peace
of Europe. It is upon this Principle, you have continued to labor with so much
Application, and so successfully with the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo, that it is
chiefly to You we are obliged for the good disposition he is in at present, and
for the enjoyment of so great an Advantage to Christendom as results from it. I
speak of it as a thing we possess already, because I see nothing that can
hinder us from it; it being likely that the Baron de Bergeyck has already
executed the Power we have sent him; and that the Court of Madrid, in order to
deliver Flanders from its troublesome Guests, will no longer defer to ratify
the Treaty. For the rest, I agree extremely with your Sentiments, and am of
Opinion, some exchange of Places should be negotiated immediately after the
signing of the Treaty.

I writ about it before to Monsieur Beverning, so that I do not doubt but you
have been entertained with it already. I confess also with you, that this
Negotiation will be more conveniently managed afterward at Paris than any
where else, at least if the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo can resolve to have
confidence enough in the King of Great Britain's Ministers, and those of this
State, to refer to them the Negotiation of an Affair of this Nature: Though, if
he considers it well, he will find, that we both have the same Interest in it.
You have nothing else, but to go on your own way upon the Foundation of the
Agreement of January the 23d, to support the Peace made, by a Guaranty of all
who are interessed in it either in general or particular; never fearing that
those who shall negotiate jointly with you in the Name of this State, will
disorder the Harmony that has appeared in the whole Course of this Negotiation:
What they do, is as well from their own Inclination, as in pursuance of their
Orders. For me, I shall ever second your Zeal with Joy, and shall take all
Occasions to show with how much Passion and Sincerity I am

Sir, your etc.

A la Hay, 27 Avril, 1668. Monsieur,
VOus devez estre bien satisfait de toute votre conduite, puisque le succez
repond si parfaitement a votre bonne intention, and que votre ouvrage a un si
excellent rapport aux fondemens que vous en aviez jette. Toute la Chretiente
vous doit la gloire d'avoir done la premiere disposition dans l'esprit du Roy
de la Grande Bretagne a une si etroite liaison enter sa Majeste and cet Etat
pour le bien and le repos universel de l'Europe. Sur ce principe vous avez
continue de travailler avec tant d'application and si heureusement aupres de
Monsieur le Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo, que c'est a vous principalement a qui
l'on est oblige de la bonne disposition en laquelle il se trouve presentement,
and de la jouissance d'un si grand avantage pour la Chretiente qui en resulte.
J'en parle comme d'une chose que nous possedons deja, parceque je ne voy rien
qui nous en puisse frustrer, y ayant de l'apparance que des a present le Baron
de Bergeyck aura execute le pouvoir que nous luy avous port; and que la Cour
de Madrid pour delivrer les Paiis bas de l'importunite de ses hotes ne voudra
pas differer de ratifier le traite. (...) Au rest, je done fort dans vos
sentimens, and suis d'avis, que l'on fasse negotier quelque exchange de places
incontinent apres la signature du traite.

J'en ay ecrit cy devant a Monsieur Beverning, de sort que je ne doubt point
que vous ne vous en soyez deja entretenu. J'avoise aussi avec vous que cette
negotiation se faira plus commodement dans la suite a Paris qu'ailleurs; au
moins si Monsieur le Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo peut resoudre a prendre assez de
confiance aux Ministres du Roy de la Grande Bretagne and de cet Etat, pour s'en
rapporter a eux de la negotiation d'une affair de cette nature; quoyque s'il
le considere bien, il trouvera que nous y avons les uns and les autres presque
le meme interet. Vous n'avez que continuer votre route sur le fondement de la
convention du 23 Janvier, pour soutenir la paix faite par une guarantie de tous
les interesses en general and en particulier; and ne point craindre que ceux
qui travailleront au nom de cet Etat avec vous, deconcertent cette belle
harmony que l'on a veu en toute la suite de cette negotiation. Ils le feront
non seulement en execution des ordres qu'ils en ont, mais aussi par
inclination. Pour moy, ce sera toujours avec joye que je seconderay votre zele,
and que je rencontreray les occasions ou je vous puisse donner des preuves de
la passion and sincerite avec laquelle je suis

Monsieur, Votre tres humble Serviteur, Johan de Wit.

From my Lord Arlington.
Whitehall, May 8, 1668. SIR,
IF I had written to you last Post, (as I should have done if there had been
time for it) you would have heard me complain much of the Pain I was in not to
hear from you in fifteen Days in so delicate a Conjuncture of Affairs; which
was occasioned by contrary Winds. In the mean time we were a little eased by
Sir John Trevor's Assurance to us of the Peace having been signed on the 2d, S.
N. which has since been amply confirmed by two of yours brought together, of
the 2d and 8th, S. N. So that now I can with Foundation give you the Parabien
of this great Work, which you may without Vanity call your own, whatever
Padrinoes you have had to assist you in it: And with more Satisfaction,
considering what Escapes you made betwixt the Marquis's Irresolutions, the
Baron de Bergeyck's Puntillioes, and Monsieur Colbert's Emportement. God be
thanked, the great Business and You are so well delivered from these Accidents;
after which I hope this will find you safely arrived at Brussels, and keeping
your self still in the same Figure of Equipage to wear the better the Character
of his Majesty's Ambassador at the Hague; toward which I shall send you with
all speed his final Resolution and Instructions. In the mean time you will
receive by the Enclosed, his Mind to the Marquis, recommending to his
Excellence the making good with all speed to the Crown of Suede what we and the
Dutch Ambassadors have promised to the Count de Dona, as you will see by this
enclosed Act, which we gave him at the Exchange of our Treaty engaging him in
the Triple Alliance; the performance of which the Dutch Ambassadors and I have
already bespoken of the Count de Molina within six Weeks time; when we hope the
Ratification will be come from Stockholm; and the said Ambassador observing
already that the Count de Molina calls to the Dutch Ambassadors and Us for a
Ratification; he admonishes us to delay it till the Conditions be performed
with him: This, I say, is offered, but not concluded by Us to be so observed.

His Majesty had resolved the Parliament should adjourn on Monday last, but an
unhappy Difference falling out betwixt the Lords and Commons upon a great Point
of their Privileges, their sitting has been spun on to this Day, though not
without hopes of our finally rising to Morrow. Our long talked of Miscarriages
have this Week been finished with a very unhappy one in the Queen; after twenty
Days going, and raising the dejected Hopes of the whole Nation, which even this
Misfortune has somewhat revived. I leave it to Ambassador Patrick to entertain
you upon this Subject, who cannot fail of long Letters by this Post.

I am with all Truth and Affection,

SIR, Your very humble Servant, Arlington.
POSTSCRIPT.
YOU never sent us any Copy of the Promise of Guaranty you signed to the
Marquess; though you did the Original of That he gave you in exchange of it,
with relation to the King our Master. When the Count de Molina has pressed me
apart from the Dutch Ambassadors for his Majesty's Ratification, I have told
him he ought to have ready his Ratification from Madrid to exchange with ours;
which it will not be amiss for you to take notice of likewise to the Marquis
when he shall give you occasion for it.



From the Elector of Mentz.
Mentz, May 14, 1668. My Lord,
THE Honor of a general Joy upon the Peace concluded and signed between the
Crowns, being equally due to the vigorous Interposition of his Majesty of Great
Britain, and to the wise Conduct of your Excellency in an Affair of such
Importance to Christendom; I desire to rejoice with you upon the happy Success
of it. I hope, the Ratification of this Treaty will be exchanged in due time on
both sides; and shall not fail on my part, of contributing all I can to the
Preservation of the public Peace, and to second his Majesty's Intentions;
assuring your Excellency in the mean time, that the Obligations will never be
forgot, which an infinite number of good Christians ow you for your Diligences
in accomplishing the Peace: And that for my particular, I shall cherish all
Occasions of showing your Excellency the Sincerity of my Affection, and how
much I desire to let you know that I am

Your Excellency's most humble and most affectionate Servant, Jean Philippe

De Mayence, 14 May, 1668. Monsieur,
L' Honneur d'une joye generale sur la paix conclue and signee enter les
Couronnes, se devant egalement a la vigoureuse interposition de sa Majeste de
la Grande Bretagne, and a la sage maniere don't Votre Excellence a sceu conduire
une affair de tell importance a toute la Chretientie. J'ay bien voulu me
conjuir avec Elle de l'heureux succes qui l'a suivi. J'espere que la
Ratification de ce Traite sera echangee a son term de part and d'autre; and ne
manqueray de contribuer de ma part tout ce que je pourray a la conservation du
repos public, and pour seconder les intentions de sa Majeste: Asseurant
cependant Ure. Exce. qu'on n'oubliera jamais les obligations que Luy doivent
une infinite de bons Chretiens pour les soins qu'elle a apporte a la
conciliation de cette paix; and que pour mon particulier je cheriray les
occasions par lesquelles je luy pourray temoigner la sincerite de mon
affection, and combien je desire luy connoitre que je suis

Monsieur, De Votre Excellence tres humble and tres affectione Serviteur, El.
de Mayence.

From the Duke de Roanez.
From the Camp of Ruysbrouk, May 29, 1668. Monsieur,
THE Count of Rembourg has informed me this Morning (being the 27th Instant,)
at eleven a Clock, from the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo, of the arrival of the
Ratification; to which I sent answer, that I doubted not of what he did me the
Honor to write to me, but that I had no News of it from the King: Be pleased
that I repeat the same thing to you, and tell you that I wonder extremely how
any one can complain that I have attacked their Troops out of the City; since
these Acts of Hostility are always allowed till the Publication of the Peace;
for it is but yesterday that one of their Parties attacked ours, whereof I sent
you the Prisoners back to Brain le Chateau; and the same day those of Brain
le Chateau, took 10000 Francs from the Equipage of one of our Captains. They
might better inform you, how I send your Prisoners back without suffering them
to be dismounted or plundered; that I allow no Pillage that comes to my
Knowledge, and that they have dismounted and stripped even my own Domestics. For
what the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo has assured you, that his Troops on the 27th
at Noon, and the 28th or 29th at Night, acted only in the defensive. If there
be any Action for the future, whereof I see no Appearance, then I shall know by
the Issue, whether they have yet acted defensively or offensively. This is all
I can answer you upon what is past, or to come. In Expectation of the King's
Orders for publishing the Peace at the Camp, as it has been this Day published
at Brussels, you will do me Justice to believe that no one is more than I

SIR, Your most humble Servant,

Au Camp de Ruysbrouk, 29 May, 1668. Monsieur,
MOnsieur te Conte de Rembourg m'a fait scavoir ce matin 27, a onze heures, de
la part de Monsieur le Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo, l'arrivee de la ratification:
A qui j'ay fait reponse, que je ne doutois pas de ce qu'il me faisoit l'honneur
de m'ecrire; mais que je n'en avois aucune nouvelle du cote du Roy. Trouvez bon
que je Vous repete la meme chose; Et que je vous dise que je suis extremement
etonne, que l'on se puisse plaindre de ce que j'ay fait attaquer leurs trouppes
horse de la Ville: Piusque ces sorts d'actes d'hostilite sont permis jusqu' a
la publication de la paix; and que meme hier un de leurs parties attaqua les
notres, don't je renvoyay les prisonniers a Brain le Chateau; and le meme, jour
ceux du meme Brain le Chateau prirent pres de dix mill francs d'equipage a un
de nos capitaines. Ils pourroient encore mieux vous informer comme je renvoye
leurs prisonniers, sans permettre qu'on les demonte and qu'on les depouille;
que je ne souffre point de pillage, qui vienne a ma connoissance: Et qu'ils ont
demonte and depouille jusqu' a nos domestiques. Pour ce que Monsieur le Marquis
de Castel-Rodrigo vous a asseure que ses troops le 27me apres midy, and la
nuit du 28me ou 29me, n'avoient agi qu'en se deffendant; c'st un verite don't je
tomb d'accord: Si a l'avenir il y a quelque action, a quoy je ne voy point
d'apparance, alors je sauray par l'issue s'ils ont encore agi en se deffendant
ou en attaquant. Voila ce que je vous puis repondre pour ce qui est pass, and
ce qui peut arriver: En attendant les ordres du Roy pour fair publier la paix
a Camp comme l'on l'a publie aujourdhuy a Brusselles; Vous tne ferez justice de
croire qui'l n'est person qui soit plus.

Monsieur, Votre tres humble Serviteur, Le Duc de Roanez.

From Monsieur de Wit.
Hague, July 6, 1668. SIR,
I Could not receive more agreeable News than what you tell me of your return
hither with the Character of Ambassador. I am sure you will not doubt the Truth
of what I say, when you reflect on the Satisfaction I ought to have, and have
already in the Generosity and Sincerity I have observed in all your
Proceedings. You have reason, Sir, to say, that it is impossible the King of
Great Britain should not design to live in a perfect good Intelligence with
this State, when he sends us a Person who ought to be so dear to us upon so
many Considerations, honored with a Character that shows the Esteem and
Friendship he has for this State; we shall endeavor the Continuance of both,
by doing all his Majesty can expect from his most faithful Allies; and by the
same means I shall endeavor to give his Majesty the Marks of that profound
Respect I have for his Person, and the Proofs of those Sentiments I have for
your Merit. And as you and I desire nothing on both sides, but to preserve
eternally the good Intelligence you have helped to strengthen, with so much
Success; I cannot doubt, but we may easily avoid whatever is capable of
changing it. Permit me, Sir, to say, that you shall find me always disposed to
give all facility to whatever can establish the common Interest of either
State; and as I know I shall always find the same disposition in you, I cannot
but rejoice when I consider, that I shall have to negotiate with a Minister who
possesses all the Qualities that can make him succeed in whatever he undertakes.

This is all I am permitted to say, by an Affliction lately come upon me,
having lost a Wife who was indeed the true half of me; whereof I make no
difficulty by this occasion to inform you, who have had the Goodness to tell
me, that you take part in my Concerns, as on my side I shall ever do in all
your Interests, with that Affection and Sincerity wherewith I am and shall
remain all my Life

SIR, Your most humble Servant,

A la Hay, 6 Juill. 1668. Monsieur,
JE ne pouvois pas recevoir un avis plus agreeable que celuy que vous me donnez
de votre prochain retour avec la qualite d'Ambassadeur: Je m'asseure que vous
ne douterez point de la verite de ce que je viens de dire; quand vous voudrez
fair reflection sur la satisfaction que je dois avoir, and ay en effet, de la
generosite and sincerite que j'ay remarque en tout votre proceed. Vous avez
raison de dire, Monsieur, qu'il ne se peut, que l'intention du Roy de la Grande
Bretagne ne soit de vivre dans une parfaitement bonne intelligence avec cet
Etat, puisque Il nous envoye une person qui nous doit estre chere par tant de
considerations, revetu d'un charactere qui marque l'estime and l'amitie qu'il a
pour cet Etat. Nous tacherons d'en meriter la continuation en faisant tout ce
que sa Majeste pourra desirer de ses plus fideles Alliez; and par le meme moyen
je tacheray de Luy donner des marquis du profond respect que j'ay pour la
person de sa Majeste, and des preuves des sentimens que j'ay de votre merit.
Et comme de part et d'autre, nous ne desirons rien, ni vous ni moy que de
conserver eternellement la bonne intelligence que vous avez aid a affermir
avec tant de succes; je ne puis pas doubt que nous n'evitions sans peine tout
ce qui pourroit estre capable de l'alterer. Permettez moy, Monsieur, que je
vous dise encore, que vous me trouverez toujours dispose a donner une derniere
facilite a tout ce qui pourra et ablir l'interet commun de l'un and de l'autre
Etat; Et comme je say que je trouveray toujours la meme disposition en vous, il
ne se peut que je ne me rejouisse quand je considere que j'auray a negotier
avec un Ministre qui possede toutes les qualites qui le peuvent fair reussir
en tout ce qu'il entreprendra.

C'est tout ce que me permet de dire presentement l'affliction qui m'est
survenue, venant de perdre une femme qui faisoit en effet la veritable moitie
de moy meme; don't je ne fais point de difficulte de fair part par cette
occasion, a celuy qui a eu la bonte de me temoigner qu'il en prend beaucoup a
ce qui me touch; comme de mon cote j'en prendray toujours a tous vos interets
avec toute l'affection and sincerite avec laquelle je suis and demeureray toute
ma vie

Monsieur, Votre tres humble Serviteur, Jean de Wit.

From Monsieur de Wit.
Hague, July 27, 1668. SIR,
IN your obliging Letter of the 3d Instant I find so many Marks of Affection
and Tenderness for me, that I cannot defer to return you my most humble Thanks,
and to tell you, that of all the Consolations given me in my Affliction, there
is none has been more effectual than what I received from you. I there find, it
is the Heart that speaks, and that you truly take part in my Affliction,
whereof I see you know the greatness, because you so well know the inestimable
Loss I have suffered. And I dare to say, that if any remedy be capable of
closing the Wound, it will doubtless be what your gentle healing Hand has
applied to it. I confess it is somewhat sensible because it searches the Wound,
but it afterward applies a Balm that eases and lessens the Pain. I receive it
as I ought, and shall endeavor to profit by all your Consolations, by
combating my Weakness with the Strength of your Reasons, which are dictated to
you not only by that Christian Philosophy whereof you make Profession, but by
that sincere Friendship wherewith you are pleased to honor me. I most humbly
entreat you to be persuaded that I perfectly return your Kindness, and am
impatient for an Occasion to give you Proofs of it, which as I hope I shall
find when we have the Happiness to enjoy you, so I desire with Passion to see
you here, to let you judge of the Intention of this State, to preserve
faithfully the Alliance that the King of Great Britain has pleased to make with
it, but more particularly, to let you judge of the Inclination I have to
contribute thereto all in my small Power; and to remain as long as I live,

Sir, your etc.

A la Hay, 27 Juil. 1668.
JE trouve dans l'obligeante lettre que vous m'avez fait l'honneur de m'ecrire
du 3me de ce mois, style du lieu, tant de marquis d'affection and de tendresse
pour moy, que je ne puis pas differer de vous en render mes tres humbles
graces, and de vous dire que de toutes les consolations que l'on me done en
mon affliction, il n'y en a point qui ait este plus efficace que celle que je
viens de recevoir de vous: J'y reconnois que c'est le coeur qui parle, and que
vous prenez veritablement part a mon affliction; don't je voy que vous savez la
grandeur puisque vous savez celle de la perte inestimable que j'ay fait: Et
j'ose dire que s'il y a un remede capable de fermer la play, c'est sans doubt
celuy qui y applique la main benign and salutaire que vous me pretez: Elle se
fait sentir je l'avoue, parce qu'elle sonde la play, mais elle y applique
ensuite un baume qui l'adoucit and qui en soulage la douleur. Je le recoy comme
je dois, and tacheray de fair mon profit de toutes vos consolations, en
combatant une foiblesse avec la force de vos raisons, que vous dicte non
seulement la Philosophy Chretienne, don't vous faites profession, mais aussi la
tres sincere amity, don't il vous plait m'honorer. Je vous supply tres
humblement d'etre persuade que j'y reponds perfaitement, que je suis dans
l'impatience de vous en pouvoir donner des preuves; and que comme j'espere que
j'en trouveray les occasions, lorsque nous aurons l'avantage de vous posseder,
je desire avec passion de vous voir icy, pour vous fair juge de l'intention de
l'Etat a entrenir fidellement l'alliance qu'il a plu au Roy de la Grande
Bretagne fair avec luy; mais bien plus particulierement de l'inclination que
j'ay a y contribuer tout ce qui est de mon petit pouvoir, and a demeurer tant
que je vivray

Monsieur, Votre tres affectionne and tres humble Serviteur, Johan de Wit.

From the Lord Keeper Bridgeman.
July 26th, 1668. SIR,
I Received yours yesterday morning after you were gone hence; and am afraid
the Letter which I sent you from Mr. Williamson, might come unseasonably to
discompose you: It not being so intended by me; nor I believe the Message from
the King to be otherwise intended than out of Kindness and Respect to you to
hasten you away; that you might know how important he held your Negotiations
might be for his Service at this critical Time. And therefore I should be glad
that you would take this by the right Handle.

I had a Letter this Night from Sir Thomas Clifford; who writes, that they in
the Treasury have a great Desire to accommodate you; And though it be not in
the Privy Seal that you shall have three Months Advance besides the 1000 l. yet
they will be careful that you receive the Money as it is due. The Draught of the
Instructions are sent away to my Lord Arlington, and expected back on
Tuesday-night, and the Foreign Committee appointed to sit on Wednesday to
dispatch them. Really, Sir, I do not think that there is any Intention in
pressing your Departure for Holland, but just and honorable toward you, and
with respect to the Greatness of the Employment and the Urgency of the King's
Affairs at this time to have you at the Hague: And (if you will take my
Opinion) I would not have you take other Measures of it even for your own sake.
In the mean time, while you do stay, you may press on the Business of your
Account, though I should not advise you to retard your Journey upon that score. It
may be as well pressed on by your Lady if she do not not accompany you, or else
by your Sollicitors (among whom I will be one) who if any Obstructions be, may
write to you to remove them: But you will find the Vice-chamberlain dilatory,
and then your stay at last upon this new Business (for so I may call it) may
beget a Misconstruction. You will pardom the Freedom I take in imparting my own
Thoughts to you in this Case.

I wish You and my Lady (to whom I recommend my humble Service) a happy Journey
and all other Felicities, as I wish to my self; who am ever

Your faithful and very affectionate Servant, Orl. Bridgeman, C.S.

The End of the First Volume.
LETTERS Written by Sir W. Temple, Bart AND OTHER Ministers of State, Both at
Home and Abroad. CONTAINING An ACCOUNT of the most Important Transactions that
passed in Christendom from 1665 to 1672.

In Two Volumes.

VOL. II.

Reviewed by Sir W. Temple sometime before his Death: And Published by Jonathan
Swift Domestic Chaplain to his Excellency the Earl of Berkeley, one of the
Lords Justices of Ireland.

LONDON: Printed for J. Tonson, at Gray's Inn Gate in Gray's Inn Lane; A. and
J. Churchil, at the Black Swan in Paternoster Row; and R. Simpson, at the Harp
in S. Paul's Churchyard, MDCC.

Sir WILLIAM TEMPLE's First Embassy AT THE HAGUE, Begun August 1668. VOL. II.
To the Elector of Mentz.
Hague, Aug. 31. S. N. 1668. SIR,
I Did not receive the Honor of your Highness's Letter till some time after my
Arrival in England, with the enclosed for the King my Master; which he received
with that Esteem his Majesty always bears to what comes from your Highness; and
having promised me an Answer upon my Return for Holland, which has been put off
from day to day; I have deferred my particular Acknowledgments to your Highness
till I could value them by the Honor of accompanying a Letter from his
Majesty. I send it now enclosed; and desire your Highness to believe, that I
resent as I ought, the Honor you have done me; and that I will preserve your
Highness's Letter among the greatest Marks of Honor to my Family; and shall
not fail upon all Occasions to show how much I shall cherish the Title I
pretend to with so much Justice, of being

SIR, Your Highness's, etc.

A l'Electeur de Mayence.
De la Hay, le 31 Aout. S. N. 1668. Monsieur,
LA Lettre don't V. A. m'a honor, and qui est datee du 14 de May, ne m'a ete
rendue que quelques jours apres mon arrivee en Angleterre, avec elle j'ay recu
l'envelope pour le Roy mon Maitre, que je luy ay port, and qu'il a recu avec
les memes marquis d'estime que sa Majeste a toujours fait paroitre pour tout ce
qui vient de la part de V. A. le Roy m'ayant promis la reponse pour le tems de
mon retour en Hollande, qui a toujours train de jour en jour; J'ay differer de
marquer a V. A. ma reconnoissance en particulier, jusqu' a ce que j'eusse
l'honneur d'etre porteur d'un Lettre de sa Majeste. Je l'envoye a cette heur,
and je supply V. A. de croire que je ressens comme je le dois l'honneur
qu'elle m'a fait, and que je conservera sa Lettre, and la conteray parmi les
titres and les honneurs qui elevent la glory de ma famille. Je ne laisseray
echaper aucune occasion de temoigner combien je cheris and cheriray toujours la
qualite que prens avec tant de justice de

Mr. De V. A. etc.

To my Lord Arlington.
Hague, Sept. 7. S. N. 1668. My LORD,
SINCE my last I have not stirred out, but had the Favor of several Visits in
my Chamber; among the rest, one from Monsieur Meerman on Wednesday, and one of
three Hours from Monsieur de Wit yesterday. I fell into Talk with the first,
upon the Matter of the Guinea Company; who said, my Lord Holles, and as I
remember, Mr. Secretary Morris, had spoken of it to him before; but only given
him a general Relation upon which he could not sufficiently inform the States:
That they had likewise mentioned some other Parts of the Marine Treaty, by
which the East India Company thought themselves aggrieved, but remembered
nothing particular besides the Form of Passports, in which we might receive
what Satisfaction we pleased, and the better Definition of what was meant by a
Town invested. I told him, the Business of Guinea was distinct from any Thing
of the Marine Treaty (though he was unwilling to understand it so) that I was
very little instructed in the first, because his Majesty's Commands in that
Point were only to procure the Reference of it to Commissioners for the
proposing Rules by which both Companies should proceed, and thereby preventing
the said Company's acting wholly by Rules and Officers of their own, which had
been the first Occasions of the unhappy Disputes between us, and might possibly
prove so again. For the Marine Treaty, I told him I had yet no Instructions
upon that Subject, but might have in a little Time; and thereupon took occasion
of discoursing to him at large the whole Business of Commerce between us, and
the necessity of giving us some Reason and Ease in those Matters; upon which,
though he seemed a little stanch, as his Complexion is, and jealous of our great
Growth in Trade, by a more parsimonious and industrious Genius among us of
late, than had formerly been; yet I found, what I said had Impression on him:
For he parted with great Professions of contributing all he could toward the
Success of all Negotiations between us; And went that Night to communicate all
to Monsieur de Wit, as I found by our Conference next Day. It began with his
having perused my Papers about the Guinea Company; upon which he desired to
know if I had no other Information than those gave me: For by those, the Matter
seemed favorable to them, by the Letters of their Director being particular,
and with Relation to Time, and to the Articles of the Breda Treaty, by which
the new Settlements there were to be governed; whereas, what concerned our
Pretensions was contained only in some loose Examinations concerning Possession
or not Possession formerly by one or the other, without any Reference to the
Constitutions made by the Breda Treaty, and without mentioning in any direct
Terms what it was we complained of, or what we desired.

The Truth is, all the Papers concerning that Matter remitted to me by Mr.
Secretary Morris, were only the Guinea Company's Petition, the Examination of
Mr. Thomas Crisp, Captain Merbrooke, and Mr. Be'ois, with a Letter and Protest
of the Director of the Dutch West India Company. I excused my being so little
informed, upon the Reasons I had alleged to Monsieur Meerman, and pressed in
the same manner the Reference of it to Commissioners. He allowed his Majesty's
Consideration of preventing the two Companies proceeding by Rules or Executions
of their own, to be very prudent and necessary; and that he knew the States
would second his Majesty's good Intention in it; and that when he could find
the Matter of Fact and Right but alleged in distinct Testimonies of known
Persons, he doubted not but he should easily find a Composure for all these
Disputes, and agree upon a constant Reglement hereafter. And to this purpose he
would send immediately to enquire among the Officers of their Company for any
Papers that may have been remitted to them from our Officers to theirs in
Guinea; for he could not believe but that Letter and Protest of their Director
had either been occasioned by some precedent Letters or Demands from some
Officers of ours, or at least followed by some Answers, in which our Demands
and Rights were asserted, as those of the Dutch were in those Papers of their
Director. I answered all, by insisting upon Commissioners according to my
Instruction, and argued its being a Matter much more proper for such to debate
and determine, as understood the Coasts, Situations, manner of Trade in those
Parts, former Possessions, and Matters of Fact past, than for him and me, how
willing soever we should be to inform our selves, or to find Expedients; and
went so far upon this Subject, that he seemed inclined it should be so; at
least when the Pretensions were stated, so as it might appear what was to be
referred to such Commissioners. But upon this he fell into the Discourse of
what Monsieur Meerman had told him, or I had formerly written to him,
concerning some Exceptions to the Marine Treaty; and how willing the States
would be to alter the Form of Passports, when they knew how we desired it: And
if the King wished any more particular Definition of what should be esteemed a
Town invested, he did not doubt we might agree upon that too; having found me
always to propose only what I thought reasonable, and to agree to what I found
so; and he was made after the same manner, and so I should always find him. I
easily perceived, that the Thing he would be at, was, upon occasion of this
Guinea Matter, to know at once the Bottom of all we pretended, in point of
regulating Commerce between us, having I presume, heard, more than was need
perhaps, of all the Noise made by the East India Company upon the Subject of
the Marine Treaty, or by their Patrons, either out of Zeal to the Good of our
Commerce, or out of Envy at the Success of so great a Council and Conduct of
his Majesty, in which they had no Hand, and upon which if we had lost a little
in Trade by changing the Form of the Articles at Breda into a Marine Treaty,
(wherein I do not conceive how we lost at all) yet I am sure it was infinitely
recompensed by the Necessity, the unexpected Success, and the great
Consequences of those other Alliances, to which that Circumstance of the Marine
Treaty was made, I thought, but a Sacrifice of Smoke. And this I could not but
say for his Majesty's Satisfaction, and your Lordship's Vindication, with those
other Ministers, by whose Advice that Council was taken and pursued, finding
every Day more how highly it is applauded abroad, while it is maliced by some,
and so little esteemed by others at home; though his Majesty has reaped already
from it, both the whole Honor of giving Peace to Christendom, and perhaps the
only Safety of his own Kingdoms, considering the Conjunctures in which that
Council found us.

But to return to my Conference with Monsieur de Wit: Finding him lead me so
industriously into a Field wherein I had no Intention to enter, I resolved
however to take the Occasion, and once for all, to say all I had thought, or
your Lordship had infused into me upon that Subject: And so I told him plainly,
That I was not yet instructed in that Matter of our Exceptions to the Marine
Treaty, but believed I might be in a little Time; That the Particulars he
mentioned were complained of in the Treaty it self, and other Things thought to
be admitted, but that I could not enter into any Particulars till I had
Instructions; but since he gave me the Occasion, I would enter once for all
into the general. I discoursed over to him the common Interest, and indeed
Necessity, of preserving perpetual the present Alliances between Us, especially
on their Side, while the Dangers were so great from the Ambition and Power, as
well as Neighborhood of France; The great Overtures would now be made us from
thence to the Prejudice of this Alliance, and at all other Times, whenever they
could hope we were ready to receive them. That though I could give him no
Jealousy of them now, but on the contrary assure him he might be at Ease on
that Side, and that the King would only have the Honor by it of setting them
an Example of his Sincereness and Constancy, which he would expect they should
follow when the Game begun with Them, as it would after it ended with Him: Yet
I ^ould tell him, That France was at all Times capable of making us such
Offers, and of giving us our present Account so well, though in Exchange perhaps
of Danger to come (in case of no new Revolutions) that whenever there should be
in England a Prince less direct or less foreseeing than his Majesty, or either
a weak or corruptible Ministry, I could not answer what Measures we should
take: That, upon this Ground, I thought they could not do wiser than to root
this Alliance in the very Hearts of the People, and current Genius of the
Nation, and not rely wholly upon the present Inclinations or Judgment of his
Majesty, or the Dispositions of the Ministers: For if there were any Thing that
lay cross to it in the common Interest or Humor of the People, it would be
upon all Occasions breaking out to disturb it, and whenever that should concur
with the Dispositions of the Prince, they would be able to make a great Noise
in the World. I told him, That many Persons in England, either to make way for
the French Alliance by weakening or breaking this; or else perhaps to discredit
the most applauded Councils of the present Ministry, had made a Noise about the
Marine Treaty as if it had been a ruining the Nation, and from thence took
Occasion to infuse into all People as far as they could, that we should never
find any Fairness, or Directness, or Equality, in all we treated with the
Dutch; but Subtilty, and Hardship, and Injustice, and when Occasion was,
Obstinacy and Injury, in all Matters of Commerce between us; while we gave them
Reason to believe we thought their Friendship necessary or very convenient to
us. That, I had ever since I knew him, maintained the contrary to his Majesty,
assured him of the Sincerity I had found in their Proceedings, and been always
made confidently believe by them, that his Majesty should find them ever
reasonable and easy in what should be offered in reducing Matters of Commerce
to an Equality, and to be reciprocal between us. That it was a small Matter,
that all my Credit, and perhaps Fortune lay at Stake upon their making this
good; But I was sure it was considerable that the very Safety of our Alliance
might at one Time or other come to lie at Stake upon it too: And therefore for
my Part, I thought they could not do in the World a wiser Thing, than to give
us all reasonable Satisfaction in these Points, by consenting to any Reglements
of Commerce which might import Equality, and be reciprocal between us: That any
Equality it self would be the same Advantage to them, that a long Arm against a
short would be between two Men with equal Swords; for considering their
Parsimony, Industry, Necessity of turning all their Stock to Trade for want of
Land, and multitude of People; and on the other side, our native Luxury, want
of Order or Application, and our Extent and Cheapness of Land, and Ease of
Taxes, which made People choose to turn their Money that way: They could never
fail of Advantage enough in any Equality, and upon it would find the surest,
the most commodious Ally, and the best able to protect them that they could
have in the World, being without any Ambition or Designs among our Neighbors,
further than to keep the Balance of Christendom: And yet on the other Side,
the only Power that was feared by France, and that were able in Conjunction of
our Fleets with theirs, to awe them by what they might suffer from Sea, into
some Consideration of what was fit for them to act at Land.

During this Discourse, which I enlarged the most I could to the Purpose,
resolving to bend all my Force upon the Effect of it; I found Monsieur de Wit
very attentive, and willing to let me go on, with Marks in his Countenance of
relishing, and as I thought, approving what I said; which made me resolve to go
yet one Point further, and to the Root of all that could spring into any
Jealousies between us. I told him, it was true, That there wanted not some
among us that would be so wise to know, that it was impossible for us ever to
fall into any firm Confidence with the States upon their present Constitution,
nor particularly with him, upon the Prince of Orange's Occasion: That; for my
part, I was not at all of that Mind: That though the King could not lose the
Affection he had for his Nephew; yet he was of Opinion he could not express it
better than by infusing into him the Belief, That he could make himself no way
so happy as in the good Will of the States, and trusting wholly to Them in the
Course of his Fortunes, and not to private Factions, or Foreign Intrigues and
Applications. That his Majesty was of an Opinion himself, That Princes were not
apt to do themselves more Hurt, and make themselves less, any way than by
affecting too much Power, or such as was directly contrary to the Stomach and
Genius of the Country which fell to their Share: And besides this, I knew his
Majesty was so just and so reasonable, that though he should take kindly of the
States any Respects they should show his Nephew; yet I did not believe he would
offer That to any other King or State, which he should not take well that any
other should offer to him; and I did not believe he would ever be put upon any
such Designs by his Council or his People's Inclinations: For they who looked
upon the Prince in a possibility of one Day coming to be their King; and that
loved a Prince who grounded his Power in the Affections of his People, and
loved to Rule by Laws; had rather perhaps see the Prince of Orange happy in the
good Will of the States, and such moderate Power as they should think
consistent with their Government; than of a Humor and Aims at any Thing that
might tend to subvert their Civil Constitutions: So that I saw nothing of
Danger to them upon this Chapter, either from the Judgment and Disposition of
his Majesty, or the Humor of the Nation: But was confident, in case we could
agree upon Matters of Commerce, nothing could ever intervene to break an
Alliance that was so useful to our Selves, and all Christendom besides: And so
I left it with him.

Upon this Discourse, Monsieur de Wit with very great Signs of Satisfaction
told me, That all I said was so reasonable, that he agreed with me perfectly in
it: And upon that, said a great deal, of the Sympathy he had ever observed
between us, and how easy That would ever make any Thing we should fall in
Treaty of. That he knew from Monsieur Meerman, I had been the occasion of
giving him any Credit in England of an honest sincere Man; and he would never
lose mine upon that occasion by giving the King Cause to believe other of him.
That he confessed he had often told me, That the States would be ever contented
with an Equality with us in point of Trade; and, that provided they might know
what it was we would be at, and that we proposed nothing but what was equal and
reciprocal between us; he would give me his Hand (as he did) that he would use
all his Endeavors to give us Satisfaction in it; and he thought he knew the
Minds of the States so well, that he durst almost promise it me in their Names
by Advance, and without knowing what it was. That for any Thing amiss in the
Marine Treaty, he did not see how any Complaint could be made of what I had
done in it; But that the Ambassadors at Breda ought to answer for That, if
there were any Thing ill in it; ours being but Word for Word the same with
theirs, and both Parties Consent being necessary to alter what was then
provisional, as what is now more formally established. That, for the Form of the
Passports, let me but bring one drawn up as we desire it, and in Terms current
with the Forms of their State, and it shall be immediately agreed to. That, for
defining, what Towns shall be said to be besieged, he is very willing that
should be done too, since it imports the same for one as the other: And even for
any other Matters that were thought necessary to be added to the Marine Treaty,
since nothing else was desired to be altered: If his Majesty would instruct me
fully in all Points, and that they proved as I said, equal and reciprocal, he
would once more undertake we should agree upon them, and desired me to assure
his Majesty so much; and he thought, the sooner I was instructed in it, the
better: But desired that no use might be made of this, to encourage either the
East India Company or others, to make new Exceptions or Demands, but only I
might be instructed in those which had been made already: And that, I said, I
durst promise him, for they had been already digested before the Council. From
this, he fell to discourse of our Alliance, and the Considerations we had to
strengthen and continue it; and how much he was pleased with what I said of the
King's Resolution upon that Point, of his showing them an Example of Constancy,
and that I could never doubt their following it. And among other Things, said,
The States had sucked That in like Milk, which was already passed into the very
Flesh and Substance of their Body: And we might be the more confident of it,
since the Minister they employed in France, and through whose Hands all such
Matters must pass, and be represented to the States by the Lights he should
give them, was as firm and earnest upon it as any Man could be: That he knew,
France would try Them as well as Us, and would not say but they might possibly
gain some one of the little Provinces; but for Holland in particular, and the
Provinces in general, it was not a Thing to be thought on. From this he fell to
speak of the Prince of Orange; and seemed very much pleased with what I had
said on that Subject, both of the King's Dispositions, and the People's Humors
and Thoughts, especially that of the King, of doing as he would be done by: He
said, The States Intentions were, to make him Captain General of their Forces,
and Admiral too, though it was not mentioned; and to this purpose, they would
already have brought him into the Council of State, in order to fit him for
those Charges, had it not been for some of the Provinces that had hindered it
upon pretense of more Kindness to him, and designing greater Matters for him.
That it was indeed agreed, those Charges were inconsistent with that of
Stadtholder, which gave as much Authority in the Civil, as the others in the
Military Part of the Government. That, considering the smalness of their State,
and Greatness of their Milice, there was an End of their Republic when both
was in one Hand. That, for his Part, if he had been born under a King, he could
never have consented to what his Ancestors did toward the King of Spain; but
being born under a Commonwealth, and sworn to maintain it, he could consent to
nothing that should destroy it; and he wondered how it had subsisted so long in
that Danger; which was to be attributed to their constant Wars abroad, and to
the great Moderation of those Princes, among whom none had Thoughts of it but
the last, nor would he ever have fallen into them, without having been put upon
them by the French, who had his Breeding and his Conversation. That, if he had
lived, he would have been the ablest of all the Race: And from thence fell into
Commendations of this young Prince's Parts and Dispositions: And so this Matter
ended.

For the Business of Spain, he was scandalized as well as your Lordship, at
that Queen's slight Answer, and pleased with his Majesty's Letter upon it. He
said, the Talk of Don John's coming began to renew; and that in the mean time,
the Marquis neither answered upon the Suedish Subsidies, nor pressed them upon
the Guaranty, because they had refused to give it without the Compliance of
Spain in the other Point. I pursued that no further, having not yet heard from
the Marquis nor from the Spanish Ambassador here upon it. The Treaty between
the Emperor and Sueden is not yet ratified; upon a Disagreement in the private
Article about Money to be furnished them by the Emperor, who stands upon giving
but one hundred and eleven thousand Dollars a Year, upon some Calculations made
by some certain Quota's upon the several Parts of the Empire; and the Suede
demanding one hundred and fifty thousand; which would make one imagine the
Spaniards had not one of their five Senses left, to hazard or delay for such a
Sum, a Treaty wherein your Lordship will observe a particular Clause leaving
Room for Spain to enter into it as they please.

While I am writing, I receive this enclosed from the Suedish Envoy here, by
which you will see how unhappily a poor Ambassador is Embarasse by the
Ceremonies that hinder him from seeing those that have so much Mind to it, and
with whom he must have so much to do. What Expedients I shall find hereafter, I
know not yet; but shall let him know, that being Incognito till my Entry, Et ne
faisant pas l'Ambassadeur, if he pleases to come and be content that as
Incognito I neither receive him nor conduct him out of my Chamber, I shall in
it give him all the Civilities he expects, as I have hitherto done upon the
same Pretense of being yet Incognito, to all Persons of Quality that have seen
me here. Your Lordship will tell me if I do well or ill; and in Recompense I
shall only tell you, That I shall not think I do well longer than you esteem
me, what I am so much

Your, etc.

To the Count de Molina.
Hague, Sept. 9. S. N. 1668. My Lord,
AFter a tiresome Passage by Sea, the pleasure of your Excellency's Letter was
not a little necessary to divert and relieve me, renewing with the Spanish
Language at least the memory of my past Happiness at Brussels. I read the Paper
that came with it, and much esteem the Honor the Marquis does me in still
preserving me in his Memory and Favor, which I shall not fail my self of
acknowledging with the first Occasion.

I am much pleased with what they tell me here, of the good condition of the
Army in Flanders; and that they begin, with the Money they have received, to
recover new Life; if they have too much, I wish it were employed in Sueden to
bring that Nation into the Spanish Interest.

I pray God to preserve your Excellency many Years, and give me many Occasions
of serving you.

I kiss your Excellency's Hands, etc.

Al Sennor Molina.
La Hay, Sept. 9. S. N. 1668. Exmo. Senr.
SEnnor mio, Despues de un passaje de mar muy enfadoso, no me era menester cosa
de menor gusto que la carta de V. E. para recrearme, y con la Lengua Espagnola
refrescar al menos la memoria de mis passados contentamientos de Brussellas. He
leydo tan bien el papel adjunto con mucha estima de la honra que me haze el
Sennor Marquis de no haverme olvidado ny echado menos en sus buenas gracias, lo
que le he de agrdecer como devo con la primera occasion.

Mi huelgo mucho di entender loque me dizen aqui delas lindas tropas que se
hallan aora en Flandes, y que comiencan a cobrar la vida con el dinero lo que
ay de sobrado, quisiera mucho que fuesse en Suecia para enterar los de esta
gente en los interesses Espanoles.

Guarde Dios a V. E. los annos que la desseo, y me de muchos Occasiones di
servir le.

Exmo. Sr. B. L. M. D. V. E. Su mayor Servidor.

To my Lord Keeper.
Hague, Oct. 2. S. N. 1668. My LORD,
I Received the Honor of two from your Lordship, of the 4th and 10th past
together, in one Packet from Mr. Williamson about the time of my last Dispatch
into England, which was the Reason of my not answering them the same Day;
besides that I had written to your Lordship a long one about another Subject by
that Post.

For all that touches the Marine Treaty, I must refer to my Lord Arlington's
Letters by this Ordinary. As to the Point of my treating Envoys, I think it is
better to let it rest as it is, than for your Lordship to move any further in
it; and be content we should follow, since we are not at present of a Humor to
lead.

I believe I could order it so, as Spain and Sueden, and this State, should
alter the Custom by Consent with us; but that which I wished was, that his
Majesty might have said singly, he would follow no other Prince's Rules but the
old ones which he had used, and seemed to approve by Sir George Downing's
Demands, and so given me Order at my first coming, to give the Hand and Door as
all Ambassadors did, till the French Caprice changed it about eight Years ago:
And this I took to have been of more Honor as well as Advantage to his
Majesty; but it seems I did not understand it right; it may be others would
have understood it so too, if they had seen both Spain, Sueden, and these
States, and all others except France, follow his Majesty's Example, which I
could have held a fair Wager of, and is every Bodies Opinion here, as it is
many Peoples, that France it self would have fallen in too, upon the Advantage
in Commerce with other Ministers which would have followed it; For if I had
given it, not one Resident would ever have seen the French Ambassador without
it, whereas two or three of them now do both Him and Me. I am sure, if France
understand it right, they will take an Occasion to change it themselves, and to
reap the first Profit, and all the Honor as well as Pleasure of seeing us all
dance after Them both up and down as our Leaders in a Country Dance; and I am
sure I had as lieve be lame as do so; and cannot tell why his Majesty should
not think of being in the Head both of the Affairs and Forms in Christendom, as
well as any of his Neighbor Kings.

I acquainted Monsieur de Wit both with the Examinations, and what your
Lordship writ about the Prisoners from Surinam: He is of Opinion, the Complaint
lies still on their Side as it did at first; That Captain Needham's Person, who
had first left my Lord Willowby to come to the Dutch, and after, them to my
Lord Willowby, made them expect nothing Friendly from him; That his Commission
was very extraordinary, and to be executed upon Indians who were their
Subjects; That he knows not what can be done further than to send Offenders to
be both examined and punished by their own Prince; That if they were ill used
by the way, the Dutch were very much to blame in that, and it is a Thing he
abhors (but we have yet only their own Words for that) and he will inquire as
far as he can into the whole Matter. In the mean time, I having no Instructions
upon it, either to complain or demand, had nothing more to do than acquaint him
with it, till I should receive any further Orders. I hear the same here which
your Lordship does there, of the Marquis Castel-Rodrigo's Intentions to pass
through England into Spain, which I should be glad of: I believe with your
Lordship, he will have Credit in the Councils of Spain, and since you would
have me think of what I judge fit to be proposed to him; I will give you my
Opinion concerning our Affairs with Spain, though I am likely enough to be
prejudiced in it, by so particular Acquaintance with the Weakness of their
present Conduct, and Division of their Councils as well as the Consequences of
them; which are, want of Order in their Government, their Armies, their
Revenue, and I doubt, at present, even of Genius in their Nation, which ever
rises and falls according to that of the Prince or Ministry: For, if Men see
the way to rise, is by Worth and virtuous Qualities, the Genius of a Nation
will run that way, and produce great Subjects. If they can hope to do it by
vicious Humors, by little Arts, by warm Pursuits every Man of his own
Interests; the whole Spirit runs into those Courses, and perhaps the faster,
from the Propension of our Natures rather to Ill than to Good.

After all, I am of Opinion, That our present Interest and that of all
Christendom besides, in some measure, is the Defense of Spain, and not only in
Flanders but in all other Parts where it shall not be able to defend it self
against the Power and Ambition of France; from whence alone we have all our
present Fears, and shall find our Dangers upon any further Growth; For if a
great Accession should come to them in Navarre, Catalonia, Italy, during the
Spanish King's Life or upon his Death, as there will do in Lorrain after this
old Duke's Life; we should find them more formidable and troublesome even in our
Neighborhood; as Nourishment taken in by one Part increases Strength in all,
if it be once digested: It Is true, if for want of Heat or Strength of Nature,
it be not digested into the very Substance of the Body, it will grow weaker
rather than stronger by it: As we see in Spain, the Spirit began to fail by the
Weakness of their Kings and Ministers. For this Reason, and all those which
formerly engaged us so firmly to bear up France and Holland against the House
of Austria, I think it is our common Interest to bear up Spain now against
France, and the more, in respect of their being now lower than ever the others
were, by Reason of the King's tender Life, and the Distraction like to ensue
his Death, if their Affairs find no steady Support from their Neighbors.

If we were what we have been, what we might be, and God knows why we are not,
at home; I think our Interest were to enter singly into a Defensive League with
Spain, and might either preserve their Peace, or else hope to make a short War,
and with such Advantages as might countervail what our Trade would suffer, and
the Dutch grow, during the Time of our being in War and they in Peace. My
Reason for making in that Case the League single, is because we might thereby
reap alone all the Advantages which Spain would be able to give for their
Defense, which would be great, as low as they are, not only in Point of Trade
by their Wools and Logwood, but by great Pensions in yearly Quantities of Salt
from Sardinia and other Parts, which is much beyond any French Salts, and would
be the same as Money to his Majesty, considering what Quantities his Kingdoms
spend: And besides, I doubt not they would offer us constant Payments of ready
Money, and if we could make War abroad at their Charge, and without pressing too
much the Subject at home or needing them at every Turn: I know nothing were
more glorious, nor perhaps more safe, and advantageous for us, than to be in
Action abroad, especially if it were in Conjunction of Three against One, and
not as we were lately, One against Three.

This we may be sure of, that the Spaniard will give more for our defensive
League than for all others, will not much care for any others, so they may have
Ours, and in short, will give for it whatever they are able: But the Question
is whether we are able to take so vigorous a Council, and I doubt, not:
Therefore, the next would be to know, whether we are so, to enter into their
Defense jointly with Sueden, which would either aw the French into a
Continuance of the Peace, or else without doubt make the Party strong enough
for the War: And in this Case, we must be content to share with Sueden whatever
Spain can any way give for the Purchase of their Defense; and where our Gains
are less, the Consideration will be more, of what we may lose, or the Dutch
gain in Trade, if a War should break out and last: For there would be no other
Reflections, since the Suede I believe would enter into the League upon such
Terms as Spain could make them: And the Dutch would ask nothing better, than to
see us all in War, and themselves in Peace, without danger of the War ending,
in the Growth of the French Power.

The third Way, is entering into a Defensive League with Spain, Sueden, and
Holland; For in all Cases I suppose, we might reckon upon the Emperor, as far
as That would signify. This I think were certainly to be desired in what Case
soever we may be, either to accept or decline the other two But the Ills in
this are; First, the unlikelihood of Holland's engaging in it; For I could
never since my first Acquaintance here, find any Disposition toward it; and
then the Incapacity of Spain to satisfy the Pretensions of Benefit from them,
which we might all three pretend; for Holland would resolve to have a Share, if
we had any; so that the particular Advantage would grow only to Sueden, by
certain Subsidies or Benefits in Trade from Spain: And we and Holland, should
content our selves with the Certainty, of preventing a War, by so powerful a
League.

This is all which occurs to me upon this Subject, and which becomes me best,
that is, to Represent and not to Advise. For Matter of proposing to the
Marquis, I suppose he will know as well as we, that the Proposals ought to come
from him, at least till he desires to know of us, what we demand upon a
Defensive League, which is certainly the Desire of Spain, either with us
singly, or in Conjunction with the rest, and were the more to be wished, for
the preventing the Spaniards from falling into a desperate Council, of agreeing
with France, and quitting Flanders to them, for Advantage on the other Side,
and a good deal for Revenge, of their Neighbors pressing so hard upon them, by
a disadvantageous Peace, and afterward Irresolution of maintaining that it
self, by a Defensive League.

If the King should think it fit to endeavor the disposing of the Dutch to
enter into it, (which for my part I think they are engaged in by the first, as
I remember, or the second Article of the Peace at Aix, though they do not
conceive so) I should make some Trials, and give Account of what I find; for I
fear we are not growing fast enough, into a Posture of making these Paces
alone, at least by what I could observe or hear during my short stay in
England, which was but too much entertained with ill Bodings and Complaints:
But, Quid tristes Querimoniae si non Supplicio Culpa reciditur? Quid Leges sine
Moribus vanae proficiunt? Without great Virtue and Steddyness in the
Government, and Resolution of going through, with whatsoever is thought fit and
just, whereby Men may see, that the only way to rise is to deserve it; all
tempering of Factions, taking off Persons, and soothing Parties, is but
patching up an ill House: I mean not Virtue, in a peaking, formal Presbyterian
Sense, but that which the greatest Nations of old, so politickly favored and
renowned, which consisted in those Qualities, that made Men fit for the Service
of their Princes and Countries, by strong and healthful Dispositions, both of
Bodies and Minds. Your Lordship's Pardon for this once, and you shall have no
more such Troubles as these from

Your Lordship's, etc.

To my Lord Arlington.
Hague, Oct. 2. S. N. 1668. My LORD,
SINCE my last I have received your Lordship's of the 14th, and in one Letter
from Mr. Williamson, an Account of what was resolved at the Foreign Committee,
to whom your Lordship's only referred the Determination of what manner, the
Amendments of the Marine Treaty should be pursued in; and accordingly I have
since fallen into the Debate of that Affair in all its Particulars, with
Monsieur de Wit: And the Differences between us are not great, and some of his
Exceptions seem so reasonable, that I must be furnished with Arguments to
maintain the Points against him, if they must be insisted on; for I confess I
can find none of my own.

Upon the First he consents to the Change of the Form of Certificates, and will
accept of such as we shall draw up, so they run equal on both sides Mutatis
Mutandis: But to that which the East India Company say, of their Desire, that
Trade may rather be carried on without any Certificate at all; he says, he does
not see how that can be, or to what purpose all the Articles are against
counterband Goods; since it is by the Certificate, whereby it is known what the
Ship is, and what the Goods are she carries, and thereby all further Trouble of
Search is avoided. He says, He should be content, and the Advantage would be
theirs, to have all Trade free, and none to ask at Sea what another Ship was,
whether it went, or what it carried; but since that cannot be, there is no way
of avoiding Disputes, beside that of Certificates: And indeed I doubt, the
Merchants in that considered not the main End of the whole Regulation, which
was, to avoid Quarrels between the Nations; but only their own private
Interests, in saving the Trouble and Charge of Certificates, which made them
likewise desire, it might be from the Magistrates of the Ports, from whence the
Ships parted, and not from the Admiralty.

Upon the second, he consents to the Proposal in the Margin, with only the
leaving out those two Words [of India] so as the Rule may be generally to all
Places, and not confined to the Indies; which I had nothing to say against,
believing those Words fell in, only by the Matter coming from the East India
Company, without notice of any other Traders.

Upon these two Points I had given your Lordship the Account formerly of my
having at several Discourses gained his Consent: And I do not find that any
Thing he excepts at in them, is different from what we mean our selves.

For the other Points, which are wholly new, and Additions to the Treaty, they
cost us a great deal more Debate, which I shall not trouble your Lordship with,
but only the Result at least, of the Opinion he gave me leave, to write to your
Lordship as his, upon them; though the first, second, and fourth, were all of
more difficult Digestion, and such as I doubt would have given some Work to
Commissioners in pursuance of the Breda Treaty so much as to have touched: For
the Truth is, our Trade in the Indies being so little, and theirs so much, all
Equalities of this kind are Gains to us and Loss to them.

For the first of the four Particulars not provided for in the Marine Treaty,
he consents to the one half of the Period ending with the word Government: But
for the other, allowing Liberty to pass any River or Pass leading to any Place
of Trade, although the other Company have a Fort or Castle upon the said River or
Pass; he says it cannot possibly be, nor would it ever be executed, though the
States should consent to it; for in those Passes, the very end of either
Company's building a Fort or Castle, was, to secure the Trade of such a Country
to themselves; so as they would by this Article lose all the Benefit of the
Expense they had been at: That, if to such Nations, there were any other way
found, not under the Reach of their Cannon, that Passage should be free: But
under a Fort built to the aforesaid Ends, he did not believe any Orders would
compel those in it, either of our Nations or theirs, to see the Trade they had
secured to themselves, drawn away to the other Nation, by a free Passage.

The second Particular I got wholly agreed to, though with much Difficulty, as
importing I suppose, more Advantage to us, than any of the rest, considering
how many more Nations the Dutch trade with, than we, by Virtue of such
Agreements.

The third was without Difficulty, importing as we both conceived, no more,
than was before provided, by the Marine Treaty, and more particularly.

For the fourth, he could not consent it should extend further, than to Ships
belonging to either Company, or to any Nations or People subject to either
Company, and consequently under Protection of the said Company, for the making
it run, in the Words of our Article, To any Nations with whom either Company
shall trade, and not in Enmity with the other Company; would occasion only
either Company's selling their Passports to all the Nations that would buy
them, leaving it afterward to dispute, upon any Accident should arrive, whether
such Nation were in Enmity with the other Company or no; the Natives
maintaining the Negative, and perhaps the Company the Affirmative, and it may
be upon pretense of some new Injury, which had lately given the Occasion of the
Enmity: And where such Disputes should be determined, was difficult to find.
Besides, he argued from common use of Nations, that Passports operated, only
toward those, who were subject to such, who granted the Passports, or else by
Alliance and Accord between Nations, to such as were one another Subjects, and
under their Protection: But how it should extend to other Nations, because they
were not in Enmity with our Ally, he could not see any Reason, nor had heard
any Example. But on the other side, it was ever to be supposed, that there
would be no need at all of Passports from the one, to such as were not in
Enmity with the other: Nations being to be esteemed as just in their Actions,
and not likely to disturb or seize another, without at least pretense of
Enmity, which would be a sort of Pyracy at Sea, or Robbery at Land; but in case
such a Thing should happen, no other Nation concerned themselves in it, unless
it were offered to their Subjects, and consequently to Persons under their
Protection.

I thought his Reasoning seemed good, and besides, I imagined the Thing was not
of Weight; for, where one Company found a Nation, not in actual Enmity with the
other, and had a mind to protect their Navigation, they might do it by
receiving that Nation into their Protection, and then giving them Passports as
Subjects to them. Where Nations will not submit to such a Subjection, they must
protect themselves. And this was the Result of our Conference, which came to no
sort of Agreement on either Side; since I neither had Power to do it from his
Majesty, nor he from the States: So that we can only represent on each Side,
what passed, and attend our Orders upon them; and he in the mean time dispose
the States to his Opinion, when we meet and conclude formally upon them.

When I receive Instructions, I suppose it will be necessary to know the Manner
as well as the Matter, we are to agree in; that is, whether a new Marine Treaty
to be made, with these Particulars to be digested into the Body of it; or else
those to be perfected in an Instrument by themselves, as Additions to the
Marine Treaty. For the doing it with or without Commissioners I can say
nothing, since so great Authors are on both Sides; but if both seem necessary,
one to the Substance, and the other to the Form, I was thinking whether two or
more might not be joined in Commission with me, to treat and conclude it with
Commissioners of theirs, and those to be acquainted beforehand, with what was
to be expected upon this Matter. But I know not how our Expectation of having
the Commissioners meet at London, would be satisfied by their meeting at the
Hague; nor how Forms go in joining Commissioners to an Ambassador, for a
particular Business; and so I leave it.

I am, etc.

To the Duke of Buckingham.
Hague, Oct. 12. S. N. 1668. My LORD,
THOUGH I could not think it became me to interrupt your Grace's Business or
Entertainment, by empty Letters; and I know you have what Share you please of
the constant Troubles my Lord Arlington receives upon the Account of my
Negotiations here: Yet having this Enclosed sent me to convey to your Grace, I
was in hopes a good Letter may keep an ill one a little in Countenance, and
bear me out in taking this Occasion of preserving my self in your Grace's
Favor and Memory, which I esteem among my best Possessions, and should be glad
to find ways of continuing them, rather by serving than by troubling you.
Whilst I can do nothing toward the first, I will do the less toward the
other, and content my self to assure your Grace in the Language of a plain Man,
that none can wish you happier than I do, in the Course of your Fortunes and
Honors, nor rejoice more in the Presages I make of both, from those wise and
generous Dispositions I left you in, of employing those many great Talents and
Advantages given you, toward his Maiesty's and the Kingdom's true Service and
Happiness. I am still of the Mind, nothing is more necessary to both, than the
Continuance and Increase of that Harmony which we used with so much Reason to
wish so well to, and which I think has at this time more Operation than that of
the Spheres was thought to have, upon the good Temper and Order of the World.
For, I believe the Spring of all the Motions or Quiet we are like to see round
about us, lies in that Point and those Councils which proceed from it.

I beg your Grace's Pardon for this Trouble, which I should not have begun but
to end with my being

My Lord, Your Grace's most obedient and most humble Servant.

To the Constable of Castille.
Hague, Oct. 19. S. N. 1668. My Lord,
HAving passed so much time, and with so much Satisfaction to my Self, in his
Majesty's Service at Brussels; it is impossible for me to lose the Concern I
have ever had for the Interest of that Country, nor to avoid rejoicing with
your Excellency upon your succeeding in the Government; wishing you all Honor
and Satisfaction, as foreseeing many Advantages to his Catholic Majesty in so
prudent a Choice. But, with the Plainness that has been always natural to me, I
must confess that it has not been at this time without some Regret that I have
lost the Correspondence of a Governor of Flanders, with whom I had contracted
so great a Friendship, and had so entire a Confidence; finding my self in such
a Conjuncture (after having so disposed the States of Holland) as to be
confident of having it in my Power, to do something, if not something very
considerable for the common Good and Repose of Christendom, as well as for the
Interest and Safety of the Spanish Monarchy; if there were at present a
Governor of Flanders that had full Powers joined with his own desires, and
Confidence between us to agree together in the Concert of such a Negotiation. I
doubt it will not look prudent to enter further into such Reasoning with your
Excellency, to whom I am so wholly unknown; though perhaps you may have heard at
Brussels that I am not a Man used to build Castles in the Air, no more than to
engage my self unseasonably in Affairs of this kind: But your Excellency may
believe me, that at this time nothing is more absolutely necessary, nor that
more concerns the Interest of Spain, than that absolute Powers should be sent
either to your Excellency or some other Minister, to treat and conclude with
the three Allies, and which is likewise as necessary for the pretended
Satisfaction of the Suedes, as for the Advantage (in so much greater
Proportion) that it may be to Spain and the common Interest of Christendom. The
same that I say on one side to your Excellency, I come from saying on the
other, to the Suedish Minister Resident here: For it is too plain to be seen,
that with the length of the Journies and Returns from Spain and Sueden, nothing
can be hoped for but the loss of Time and Occasions; the first of which never
returns to mortal Man, and very rarely the other: At least, it is certain that
if we do not this Winter make our Advantage of the present posture of Affairs
for the common Good, we are never again to hope for the same Occasion.

I beg of your Excellency, That this Advice may be only to your self, or those
in Spain who are most concerned in it. What is most necessary; I have told your
Excellency, is, to hasten the Powers, and that needs no Consultation; the rest
Time will show; and it is not necessary, the Spanish Ministers here should
concern themselves in it till the Powers come. I engage my self to dispose
things so here, that whenever they arrive, your Excellency shall be able to
make the advantage of them, for your Master and the Countries you govern. Your
Excellency will not look upon this Letter as coming from an Ambassador, but
from a Man extremely desiring the Public Good, and that has been a little
enlightened by having so much part in what has been designed toward it: And I
hope will pardon my having entertained you so long in a Language that I begin
now to forget, and had never learnt well: But, I had no mind what I have here
said to your Excellency should pass through another Hand.

Pray God preserve your Excellency, and give me the Occasions of serving you.

I kiss your Excellency's Hands, etc.

Al Condestable de Castilla.
De la Hay, Oct. 19. S. N. 1668. Exmo. Senr.
SEnnor mio. Haviendo stado tanto tiempo y con tanto gusto a Brussellas, de la
part del Rey mi Sennor, no me es possible perder el encarecimento que he
siempre tenido por las cosas y interesses deste pays, ni dexar de dar a V. E.
el parabien de su llegada a este govierno desseandole en ello mucha
satisfaccion y honra, como augurando a su Magestad Catolica mucho provecho de
tan sabia eleccion. Pero con la llaneza que me ha sido siempre natural, es
menester confessar, que me pesa mucho en este punto de haver perdido la
correspondencia de un Governador de Flandes, con quien he tenido tan estrecha
amistad, y entera confianza; hallandome aora en una conyunctura, y aviendo
dispuesto los Estados de aqui de tal manera que me parece poder obrar algo,
sino mucho por el bien commun, y por el reposo de la Christianidad, como por la
salud y interesses de la Monarchia de Espanna, si estuviera aora Governador o
Ministro en Elandes que tuviera poderes bastantes y tan bien la voluntad y
confienca para concurrir commigo en el concierto de tal negocio. No pareciera
de hombre discreto de entrar mas adelante en estas razones con V. E. a quien
stoy tan desconocido; aunque bien pudiera aver entendido a Brussellas que no
soy hombre para dezir disparates, ni para ponerme fuera de tiempo y occasion en
cosas agenas. Pero crea me V. E. que no sey que no puede aver otra en este
tiempo que toca mas a Espanna, ny que la sea tan necessaria, que de embiar sin
perder punto o a V. E. o a otro Ministro poderes absolutos para tratar y
concluyr con los tres Alliades, loque fuera menester, tan bien por la
satisfaccion pretendida de los Suedeses, que por la utilitad que con ella se
puede alcancar mas que proporcionado a la Espanna, y al bien commun de la
Christianidid. Lo mismo que digo de una part a V. E. vengo de desir de de otra
al Ministro de Suecia, a qui Residente porque bien hecho de ver, que con las
ydas y bueltas en Espanna y en Suecia sobre estas materias, no se hara jamas
sino perder el tiempo y las occasiones, aunque el primero nunca se le velve a
los hombres, y muy raramente las postreras. A lo menos muy claro esta, que si
este hivierno no nos approvechamos de las presents por il bien commun, nunca
hemos de esperar las mismas por el venidero.

Supplico a V. E. que este aviso la sirve a solas, si no a los tan bien en
Espanna qui son los mas interessados en ellos. Porque lo que es el necessario
lo vengo de desir en lo de hazer venir los poderes, en esto no se ha de
consultar; por demas los tiempos lo diran, y no se avra di entremeterse a qui,
en el entretanto Ministro Espannol antes que vengan los poderes, que yo me
encargo de disponer las cosas a qui di manera que llegendo los V. E. avra de
approvecharse d'ellos por el bien de su Rey, y de los payses que govierna. V.
E. no ha de interpretar esto como viniendo di mano de Ambaxador, pero de un
hombre muy afficionado al bien commun, y un poco esclarecido en las cosas
corrientes, como aviendo tenido tanta part en ellas; y me pardone averla
entretenido en una lengua que y a commienco a olvidar, aviendo le nunca bien
apprendido; pero no he querido que V. E. en lo que la digo, avria de tercero.

Guarde Dios a V. E. muchos annos, y me de las occasiones de servirla.

B. L. M. D. V. E. Su mayor Servidor.

To my Lord Keeper.
Hague, Nov. 2. S. N. 1668. My LORD,
I Have had the Honor of your Lordship's of the 13th past, some Days by me,
and deferred the Acknowledgment of it till this Post, that I might make it at a
little more Leisure. I must first beg so much Favor from your Lordship, (for I
shall esteem it a Kindness to me) that you will never constrain your self to
write to me in Pain or Trouble; but upon all such Occasions use either any
other Hand, or any others Correspondence with me, to send me your Commands: And
in the next Place, I shall desire your Lordship's Belief, that I never took any
Thing ill in the least, from any Hand, that I knew meant me well; and am very
well pleased to hear of my Faults from my Friends, as I hope they will ever be
to receive my just Excuses, and others I shall never desire to trouble them
with. I know your Lordship is satisfied with what I did in showing that Letter,
having given you the Advice of it at the same time I promised it; and I shall
make use of the prudent Intimation you please to give me upon that Particular.

Monsieur de Wit has several times spoke to me since about the Pavillon,
applauding your Lordship's Resolution, or at least Inclination, to bring it to
some Certainty; and desired me to offer to your Lordship as most advantageous
to a good Issue in it, That the Expedients he proposed, you would first mention
as your own; because, whatever is offered from the contrary Party, is commonly
either suspected or despised even for its being so. I find, a good End of this
Matter is the Point he has much at Heart, believing no Quarrel could ever
happen between the Nations, if that Occasion were once out of the way. He says,
he has never yet spoken to any Man, about the Offers and Expedients he
proposed, and knows, they will be stomackt by many here; but he will put all
the Strength he has upon it, to make them pass, or any Thing else, that is at
all reasonable in the Case, and doubts not to succeed. I suppose, whatever we
have by Accord with them, will not be only so much of a gained, instead of a
disputed Right; but will engage them, to further our Pretense, of so much with
other Neighbors, and to take part in our Quarrel, if any shall be raised by
any of them with us, upon that Point: And if so, we should have something very
substantial for that which methinks is very airy now, and which serves only for
an occasion of Wars, at a Time, we have no mind to enter into any; and I doubt,
with some Reason: For if we had a conquering Genius at this Time among us, and
Force to second it, nothing could be so useful to us as this Pretense: But
every Pilot that would be safe and well, must carry Sail as the Weather is
abroad, and as the Sides of his Ship are strong or weak to resist it.

I am much pleased to find I have the Honor of agreeing with your Lordship in
all Points that fall into Consideration, as well this, as that about Envoys,
and about the Benefits of a Quadruple League; concerning which I writ my
Opinion freely in one to my Lord Arlington by the last Post, being the only
Thing which can crown the great Work his Majesty has undertaken, of settling
the Peace of Christendom, and giving a stop to the French Career, which about
ten Months since, was in a fair way to overrun us all, one after another, and
hangs still like a Cloud over all their Neighbor's Heads, leaving every one in
doubt when and where it will fall. And till That be compassed, I shall hardly
be secure of Spain's not trinkling at one time or other with France, for the
Remainder of Flanders, at least upon such a Revolution, as would arrive at that
King's Death, if not before: Nor of the French Parties getting Ground enough
again in Sueden at one Time or other, to turn the Bias of that Crown toward
the French Interests, by the Offers of Money, which can best be made them on
that Side: Whereas by such a League, Spain would find their Account in keeping
Flanders, and not fear any War which the French Pretensions there, might engage
them in: Sueden would find theirs, by some certain Subsidies from Spain, even
in Times of Peace, and by Assurance from Them and Us, of greater in case of a
War: Holland would be broken off, from all Return into any new Measures with
France, and be forced to follow the common Interests and Councils of the
Alliance: Spain and Sueden would be both hindered from entering into any separate
Concert or Treaty without Us and Holland: The Emperor, and Princes of the
Empire, and Duke of Lorrain, would be glad to be admitted into such an
Alliance: And his Majesty would remain Head and Director of a League, which
would have the Glory of preserving the Peace of Christendom, and checking and
bounding the French Greatness, at a time, when no other Prince durst look it in
the Face. And in Case of a War breaking out from France, in spite of all these
Defenses; I suppose, considering the Strength of the Alliance, and the Temper
of our People at home, bent wholly upon these Councils, his Majesty would have
rather Reason to desire, than to apprehend it.

I conceive the way of effecting such a League, must be, to make a Draught of
it with Monsieur de Wit here, if he can be finally disposed to it; and that
with all the Secrecy in the World, and to proceed in it, as near as is
possible, with all the Fairness and Equality; in the Consideration and
Comprehension of each Party's Interests, which is the only way to facilitate
such Negotiations; and whenever we and Monsieur de Wit are agreed in it, then
for his Majesty to take upon him the proposing it to Spain, and trying what
private Advantages may be gained from that Crown, in Consideration of his both
proposing and effecting a Matter so much to their Advantage.

All that seems to be against such a Council, is his Majesty's present want of
Treasure; which renders him in a Condition very unfit, to enter into any Action
abroad, by provoking France.

As to that: First, the end of this Counsel is Peace, and not War; and seems
indeed the only way to secure it, by letting France see, they cannot find their
Account in a War; for till they do that, they will never leave the Designs of
it. Then, instead of provoking France, I should think, this would make them
much warmer, in their Offers and Applications toward us; when they see, that
without gaining us, they are absolutely bound to the Peace: For, to say the
Truth, our falling at any time into the French Interests, is the ready way to a
War abroad, wherein it may be, we shall not have any present Share, but shall
pay for our present Quiet with dear Interest, of the utmost Danger, after two
or three Years time.

Besides, though our Condition is ill toward the Support of a War, it is the
most imprudent Thing we can do perhaps, to own it, if we intend to continue any
Commerce abroad; whereas, looking our just Debts, both to our Neighbors and
our Selves, boldly in the Face, will, as it does sometimes with a Merchant,
hold up our Credit so high, that with good future Management and the Strength
of that, we may help to re-establish our Estate; but, if not, nothing can keep
us up so much, as being closely linked with several other Traders of better
Stock, who will by that Means, become engaged, not to let us sink. And in case
of Action, to succeed such a Quadruple Alliance, and his Majesty's Necessities
keeping him from furnishing his Part toward the Support of it: It Is not to be
imagined that Spain and Holland would not do their utmost toward his Supply
rather than lose his Assistance* and leave him under the Temptation of falling
into any new Measures with France.

After all this, I think, let his Majesty make what Paces he please, either
bold or tender, in the way he is (for I cannot think of a Change in that with
the present Conjunctures) I know nothing will be so necessary, with the
Foresight either of Peace or War, as for his Majesty not to be found the next
Spring without any Money in his Treasury, or Credit to raise it speedily and
easily, without relying wholly upon his Parliament's Supplies, by any new
Burdens upon the Body of the People; for that can hardly be done without long
and perhaps cross Debates in the House, which lessen his Majesty's Credit with
his Neighbors whenever they happen, more than the Supplies granted can raise
it: And besides, after so great Payments as the Kingdom has continued, ever
since his Majesty's Restoration, especially during the last three Years, though
joined with the great Diminution of Money and Trade during the War; I question
whether any Thing considerable can be raised in general upon the People,
without some reasonable Occasions of Aversion and Complaints.

But nothing, they say, is more the part of a weak Understanding, and unfit for
Business, than to propose and enlarge upon Inconveniences, without so much as
offering Remedies: And therefore I shall say, That First, methinks, two
Proposals which have been already a-foot, are very considerable toward this
End; as, the selling of small inconsiderable Quit-Rents, where the Sum is
hardly worth the Charge of raising, and yet by the reason of the Trouble to the
Tenant by them, they will yield five or six, if not ten Years Purchase more
than greater Rents: If this Council be tied up to these Circumstances, I think
it very advantageous, and as prejudicial, if it be suffered to go beyond them.

Secondly, The selling of the Chimney-Mony would, I suppose, be easily granted
by the Parliament; would take off the Tax, of all others, most distastful to
the Subjects, and if sold at pretty easy and moderate Rates, would be taken
kindly of the People, purchased readily, and yield a very great Sum; and the
most equally raised that any could be, sparing no Man's part, and holding an
equal proportion with every Man's Estate: Only this Circumstance should be in
it to make it easy, That not only every Man should have the Offer and
Pre-emption of his own; but if upon refusal it should be sold to another Hand,
yet it shall be free for the Owner to buy it of him at any Time within a
certain Space, as of two or three Years; and the present Purchaser to be
content with the Profit he shall have made in the mean Time, which will prove a
great Interest for his Capital.

Thirdly, A reducing of the Interest which the King pays, from Ten to Eight in
the Hundred, with which the Bankers may very well be contented, and must be, I
suppose, if the King pleases, and finds a Course to make them see their
Security cannot fail them: For, two in the Hundred Gain is, of all Reason,
enough for them, where the Security they receive, is as good as what they give;
as it is in this Case: For the King's Security to the Banker is in effect the
Banker's Security to his private Creditors; and whenever one fails, the other
must. Now the Bankers pay but Six in the Hundred at most, for Inland Money, and
less for some: And I have Reason to doubt, a very great Trade is driven with
them from Holland by Dutch Merchants, who turn their Money through their Hands,
encouraged by the great Interest they gain there in lieu of so small here, that
the States have lately refused to take the Value of Twenty Thousand Pounds
Sterling of the Duke of Lunenburg's Money at Two and a half per Cent. and Three
is the utmost that any Man makes. And if the King, by granting good Security,
punctual Payments, and the Reputation of good Order in his Revenue, were gotten
into Credit, I do not see why he might not upon Occasion take up what he
pleased at Six per Cent. as well as the States do here at Two and a half.

Fourthly, To enable the King upon any Occasion to give better Security, I know
nothing would do so much, as if the Parliament could be disposed to settle the
Customs upon him for one Year after his Death, as they are already for his
Life; but that being an uncertain Term, Money will not be readily or without
Exaction of Interest lent upon that which may fail next Day: And yet I conceive
it to be the largest Branch of the Revenue, and in all other Points the most
certain.

Fifthly, If any Thing were set on foot in Parliament, toward an Act of
Resumption of Grants of Crown Lands, since a certain Time, Use might at least
be made of it, toward drawing such Grantees, to a voluntary Composition, of
holding their Grants at the Rent of a fourth or fifth part of the real Value to
the Crown, in Consideration of having such Grants confirmed by Act of
Parliament, or the King's Engagement to consent to nothing to their Prejudice,
after their Consent to such a Rent and Tenure.

Sixthly, A View may be made at least of what has been gained by any Grants
from his Majesty, above what were really his Majesty's Intentions to grant: As,
where the King intended to give Five hundred Pounds a Year, and perhaps Seven
or Eight, or a Thousand Pounds is made of it: And the same, of Sums of Money,
out of certain Benefits granted, toward the raising them: And what is found to
be beyond the Intention of the King's Grant, to be repaid.

Many smaller Particulars might perhaps be thought of: All which with what has
been mentioned, will be made valuable by a good Order in the management, and a
stanch Hand in Grants hereafter, till the King be as much beforehand, as he is
behind-hand now.

I am, my Lord, your etc.

To Mr. Now Earl of Montague.
Montague.
Hague, Jan. 2. S. N. 1669. My LORD,
IT is an ill Sign of the Dullness of this Place, that I must have Recourse to
the Complements of the Season for the Occasion of a Letter; and that I can find
very little to say from hence, besides wishing your Lordship, according to our
good old Style, a merry Christmas. The Spaniards have not yet had so much good
Nature as to make ours here the merrier, with their Two hundred thousand
Crowns: I doubt it has some Enchantment or other upon it; and is not to be
delivered but in some fatal Hour, or by some charmed Knight. All is here frozen
up; and the Bishop of Munster may march if he pleases; but if he do, as has
been so much talked, will blow his Fingers, unless he receives very great
Influences from your warmer Climate: For, the good Pay of these States is in so
much Credit among their Neighbors, that I believe, they will not want what
Forces they shall have Occasion for, besides what they have a-foot.

I should be very glad to hear what becomes of my Lord and Lady of
Northumberland, and how long they intend their Pilgrimage, supposing your
Lordship keeps some Correspondence with them, of which I am out of the way; but
very much in that of being

My LORD, Your Excellency's most obedient humble Servant.

To my Lord Arlington.
Hague, Jan. 18. S. N. 1669. My LORD,
THE Baron d'Isola arriving here Yesterday, I have this Afternoon had some
Discourses with him upon the Subject of his Journey; which he professes to be a
Desire of advancing the Treaty of Guaranty, as a Thing his Master has more
Interest in than Spain it self, which will be better able to subsist after the
Loss of Flanders, than the Empire can. I find he came with Hopes of affecting
much by his Eloquence and great Parts, and by making others see more of their
own Interests, than they were willing to do. And so the two Themes wherein he
came provided, were; To make it evident that France would open the War again
this Spring, and within six Weeks attack either Burgundy or Luxenburg; and on
the other Side, That the Councils of Spain as they are now composed, if they
saw not a solid and firm Assistance from their Neighbors, would fall into the
easiest way of ending that Matter, by giving up Flanders upon the best Terms
they could. That they were as a sick Man, that would not or could not help
themselves, and were so to be dealt with by those that were so deeply concerned
in their Loss, as these States in particular seem to be: And that after the
Disarming of the Duke of Lorrain, which France had now resolved, and the
seizing of Burgundy, which would be their next Work; it would be impossible to
maintain a War in what remains of Flanders, when they could do it no longer by
Diversion, after these two Inlets into France stopped up. From this we fell into
the Story of the Suedish Subsidies, and the Hardships put upon Spain in that
Business; all which I suppose your Lordship has heard a dozen Times already,
and are obvious enough, and therefore I shall not repeat them, not remembering
any Thing new in that Discourse: But it ended with Spain's having less Reason
to pay for that Peace, than France; since the Guaranty offered, would be equal
to both, and the Gain of the War had been all on the French Side. That, for his
part, he could trust little in any Treaty, where the Obligations were not
reciprocal; and when the Guaranty was given, he did not know whether these
States would not be still apt to sacrifice any new Conquests France should
make, to any unreasonable Peace, provided the Danger grew not nearer them: And
he had the more Reason to believe it, by a Resolution he was assured of, among
the States of Holland, to Treat with France about diverting their Attempts upon
Flanders in Case of the King of Spain's Death, and leaving all the rest of that
Monarchy open to his Pretensions.

This was the Substance of his First Discourse: Upon which I told him, That the
Friendliest Office I could do him at his Arrival, was to tell him, what Men and
what Resolutions he would find here, to the End he might not lose his Paces by
their being at first ill directed. That, for their own Interest in the
Preservation of Flanders, they thought, they understood it as well as any other
of their Neighbors; and needed no new Lights in that Prospect, nor new
Motions, to engage in its Defense, if they might hope to succeed: That this
depended upon Spain's good Conduct and Provisions in Flanders, and upon their
satisfying Sueden. That without Sueden's Engagement, Holland could do nothing
considerable in their Defense, lying open to the French on the one Side, and
the Bishop of Munster on the other; and without Holland he might assure
himself, the King would never interess himself in their Quarrel, but seek his
Measures some way else. So that the Strength of their whole Assistance depended
upon the engaging of Sueden, and that upon Payment of the Subsidies. That I
would tell him freely, I thought Holland might be induced to give a general
Guaranty, according to the Article of the Treaty at Aix. That if his Majesty
and Sueden would be induced to join with them in it, I thought it was the
cheapest Bargain that ever any Crown had made. That I believed a Guaranty,
without reciprocal Engagements, more to their Advantage, and less to ours, than
a Defensive League, which they so much desired: But yet the Conjuncture was
such, and the Respects that entered into it, as I could assure him he would fail
in the Pursuit of the last; and I believed, might succeed if he would content
himself with the other. That, if nothing else were in the way, there was not
Time left for it, and therefore I would advise him, to lose none about it.
That, for what should happen after the King of Spain's Death, I was confident,
neither the King nor the States would enter into it; but leave those
Considerations to the Season, in which they should arise. That, if Spain was
resolved to destroy themselves, That was a Thing beyond all our Prevention or
Remedy, and so only to be bemoaned, and no more to be thought on: If they would
be preserved, they knew the Price, which is, the Suedish Subsidies, and could
best tell whether it were worth it or no.

This I thought was the best way of dealing with a Person, that had more Wit a
great deal than I, and so would be sure to have the better in Argument: And
besides, I thought it fittest for a Business, which it is necessary to bring to
some short Issue: And the Baron seemed not to resent it ill, and said, Well, If
you are certain the Dutch will not be brought to a League with us, we must
think of what we can have, and not what we cannot: And all that remained to be
done, was to draw up the Form of a Guaranty, and send it to the Constable; and
let him know, that upon Satisfaction of the Suedish Subsidies, that should be
ready for him, and without it we had no more to say. I told him I thought he
was in the right way, and hoped he would succeed in it, and assured him of our
Endeavors to draw Sueden to the same Measures, and persuade them, if need
were, to some little Ease in the Terms of Payment. He asked me, in Case the
Subsidies were not paid, and the Guaranty given, and France should next march,
attack Burgundy or Lutzenburg, what I thought we would do? I told him, I was
ever to think, that the King and his Allies, would do upon all Occasions, what
they had engaged. He would have had me join with him, in drawing up an
Instrument of Guaranty. But I, that had a Mind to excuse my self, at least,
till I received my Instruction, advised him to propose it to Monsieur de Wit,
with whom he had an Hour assigned upon our parting. And so our first Conference
ended.

I am, My Lord, your etc.

To my Lord Keeper.
Hague, Apr. 24. S. N. 1669. My LORD,
UPON a late Conversation with Monsieur de Wit, though I had some Reason to be
surprised, yet I think I had none to take any notice of it; but am very sure I
can have no Reason for doing it, to any other Person, but your Lordship, of
whose Friendship I have had so many Testimonies, and with whom I have lived in
so much Confidence ever since our first Acquaintance. The present Subject is so
delicate, that I can hardly tell how to touch it my self, or to trust it in any
other Hands but your Lordship's, who will better judge whether any Use may be
made of it, and I am sure will make no ill one; nor do I expect there can be
other, than to gain some Light in a Matter wherein I am wholly ignorant, and
perhaps your Lordship may not have been curious enough to observe so near; and
which it is yet very necessary for us both, to be as well informed as we can.

Monsieur de Wit came to me, as he said, upon a particular Visit; and as a
Friend, not a Minister: But the Occasion of it at present he would confess,
was, to acquaint me with a Conversation he had lately had with Monsieur
Puffendorf, a Suedish Agent, who passed this way from Paris to his own Country:
That he had been some time at the French Court since our Measures taken by the
Triple Alliance, and the Negotiations set on foot with the Spaniards in
Consequence of them. That the Ministers in France had taken much Pains to
persuade him, that Sueden would find their Account very ill in pursuing those
Measures: That Spain would fail them, in what was pretended from them; and that
Holland alone would not be able to support them, or the Measures they had
rashly taken: And to make this good, the Ministers there had at length told him
(but as a Secret only for the Service and Information of the Court in Sueden)
that England would certainly fail them; and was already changed in the Course
of all those Councils they had taken with Holland and Sueden, though they did
not think fit to let any thing of it appear; and the Secret was yet, in very
few Hands, either in the French or the English Court. That when this Agent
seemed incredulous of all this Story, and to suspect that it was Artificial,
and only intended to give an Ombrage or false Light to the Court of Sueden, and
thereby help them to make the first false Step; Monsieur Turenne at last,
showed him a Letter from Monsieur Colbert their Ambassador, wherein he gave an
Account of the happy Successes he had met with, in his Negotiations at our
Court, of the good Dispositions there, and especially those of some of our
chief Ministers; upon which he added these Words, And I have at last made them
sensible of the whole Extent of his Majesty's Liberality.
Et Je leuray enfin fait sentir toute l'Etendue de la Liberalite de sa Majeste.

Here Monsieur de Wit stopped as if he had no more to say, and with a very equal
Countenance; though I found he had observed mine very narrowly, all the while
he was talking, as well as when he ended. For my part, though I thought the
Story and the Circumstances very odd, and knew not what to make of it, yet I
believe I looked innocent, and thereby as unconcerned as he did. I told him, I
had Reason to be surprised at what he had said, but did not know whether we had
either of us any, to put much Weight or draw any great Consequence from all
this Story: That there might be Artifice in it, on several Hands; That some of
those it had passed through might deceive, and others be deceived; That there
might be Mistake in Men's Apprehensions of what passed in Talk, and the
Relations too: That Monsieur Colbert might say a great deal to value his
Services to his Court, and more than he thought himself: That the Suedish Agent
might be made partial in France to their Interests, and wish his Crown still in
them, as most beneficial to the Ministers there that were so engaged: That it
was at least artificial in the French Court, to employ Monsieur Turenne to give
this notice to the Suedish Agent, and show him Monsieur Colbert's Letter, which
had been more proper for a Secretary of State; but that it was likely Monsieur
Turenne's showing it and believing it, would have more Credit and more Effect
in the Court of Sueden. That further than this I had nothing to say upon it,
besides protesting to him upon my Honor and Truth, That I knew nothing of it;
nor had I Reason, by any Thing I heard from England, to suspect any more than I
knew. That I had told him, upon the Negotiation of our last Alliance, and his
Susp^cions of our Inconstancy in England, what I truly thought of the
Dispositions and Intentions both of his Majesty and his Ministers: That I knew,
and all Men confessed, their Interests were so deep in it, as well as the
Humor of the whole Kingdom, that it was hard to think I could be deceived.
That however, I could answer for no Man but my self; and that I would, that if
ever these Measures were broken, it should not be by me; nor would I ever have
any part in destroying, what I had the Honor of building, so much for the
Safety, as I conceived, of both our Nations and the rest of Christendom; and
with so much Glory and Applause to his Majesty's Councils upon that Occasion.
That I was still of the same Mind, and had no more to say.

Monsieur de Wit smiled, and said, what he had told me was but as a Friend and
in Conversation; and left me to make what Use I pleased of it, or none if I
thought fit, without drawing it into further Consequence: That he had been very
suspicious when he first entered into the Ministry, but had been so often
deceived by it, that he had cured himself of that Quality. That he knew very
well it had been said among some Foreign Ministers here some Months since, That
it must be confessed, there has been for 9 Months the greatest Ministry in the
World, in England.
Qu'il faut avouer qu'^l y a eu pour neuf mois du plus grand Ministere du Monde
en Angleterre; as if they believed some Change had befallen our Councils before
the last Year ended. That for his part, who went to the substantial as near he
could; and the plainest way; he had made but one Reflection, and kept that as
much as he could to himself: Which was, That after my Ambassy hither had been
resolved in England, to support and improve the Ends of our last Alliances, and
to engage the Emperor and chief Princes of the Empire, as well as Spain, in the
Support of them; he could not but wonder to find me engaged of late by my
Orders from Court, so warmly in a Chicane about such a Trifle, as that of
Surinam; and in so many eager Disputes about the Pretensions of our East India
Company, which were fitter for Merchants than for Ministers: And looked, as if
we had them more at Heart, than the Pursuit of those public Interests, that
were thought so necessary for Christendom, at my first coming over. But after
all, for his part, he would go on constantly upon the Foot of our last
Alliance, as the best Ground of our common Safety; and believed the States
would do so too, till his Majesty or his Ministers should let them plainly see,
he had changed his Measures. And with this, rising up, he seemed not to expect
any Answer, but to go away in very good Humor: And I was not very desirous to
draw our Discourse into more Length; and so it ended.

It Is time this Letter should do so too, which I desire your Lordship will burn
when you have read it; and to forget it, if you find no Occasion to think
further of it; and then I shall endeavor to do so too. I am sure it should
never have begun, if it were not to end with the Professions of that Truth and
Passion wherewith I am,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most faithful and most humble Servant.

To my Lord Cavendish.
Hague, July 18. S. N. 1669. My LORD,
THOUGH I had much rather make your Lordship my Complements upon some better
Fortunes, and upon your Health rather than your Dangers; yet I could not omit
doing it at this time, upon so honorable a part as all Men allow you to have
had in your late Adventure at Paris; which I do not only as a private Person
and Servant of your Lordship's, who wishes you all Increase of Honor that may
not be bought too dear; but withal as a Public Minister, who ought ever to
consider above all Things the Honor of our Nation; and knows, that the
Complexion of it in times of Peace, is very much either mended or spoiled in
the Eyes of Strangers, by the Actions and Carriage of particular Persons
abroad. I can assure your Lordship, all that can be said to your Advantage upon
this Occasion, is the common Discourse here; and not disputed by the French
themselves; who say, you have been as generous in excusing your Enemies, as
brave in defending your self: The Dutch will have it, that you have been the
first in Excess; and say, that such a Thing, as Seven or Eight falling upon
One, would never have been done in any other Place but France, nor suffered
neither by the rest of the Company. However, I am of Opinion, if Excess may be
allowed in any part, it is in that; and therefore rejoice with you in the
Honor of both, and with my self in that of my being

My LORD, Your Lordship's most obedient humble Servant.

To my Lord Arlington.
Hague, July.... 1669. My LORD,
I Am to acknowledge your Lordship's of July the Ninth, and have but too much
Reason to agree with you in despairing to see this Matter of the Marine Article
brought to any fair Conclusion, about which I writ at large by last Post to Sir
John Trevor; and will tell your Lordship more in private, That I very much fear
our East India Merchants have some further meaning in it, than we yet
understand, and than they desire we should. For having had this whole Business
run through my Head with more Thought and Application, than ever any other did
before; I could not but observe many several Inequalities in their Proceedings,
and make some Reflections upon them.

As First, That it began immediately upon the finishing our Alliances with the
Dutch; in which none could detract in the least from the Glory abroad, and
popular Applause at home, of the King's Councils, but by declaiming against
this Marine Treaty, though at first it was only upon the Inequality of the
Passports: When that Point was easily accorded by Monsieur de Wit; our
Merchants added another, about the Definition of a besieged Place, which was
all their Exceptions against the Treaty it self, could amount to: But when
there were some Hopes given by Monsieur de Wit in his Letters to me, that this
likewise might be surmounted; they added several other Articles, untoucht in
the Marine Treaty: And when they saw all were like to be gained here, but that
one of a Free Trade with People not in Subjection, and of passing Forts (which
Sir George Downing had found here was an invincible Point) they then declared,
That without This, all the rest were worth nothing: And upon this said, they
have left our Treaty a ground, now for about Eight Months past. When we begun
first to struggle out of it, they said, They only aimed at preventing some
Innovations, which had been of late Years practiced by the Dutch, against the
ancient Usages in those Parts, and many others of the same kind, which they had
Reason to fear: Whereupon the Dutch desired the particular Instances of what
they either had felt, or thought they had occasion to fear; that so they might
redress Us in particular, and understand Us in general: Our Merchants instanced
in Cochin and Cananor, and I think one other Place, which Monsieur de Wit
said, was not at all to the Case, but to another, provided for, by the defining
of a besieged Place: So that I was forced by them here, to press still for
Instances by several Letters, till the Merchants at last sent a long angry
Paper, with very many Recapitulations of Things past, and which the Dutch said,
had been debated and agreed in former Treaties; and therefore still desired to
know, which of the Particulars named, we thought applicable to the present
Question. Upon which I received Answer, That the Practice of the Dutch, against
which they desired to provide, was but beginning* That they could not, or that
it was to no purpose to give particular Instances, their Apprehensions being
general, of what the Dutch intended to impose upon us: And that, in short, what
we desired was for Prevention rather than Remedy; which, they said, made it
much harder in the Dutch to deny us.

After this, Monsieur de Wit and I concerted an Article between us, to propose
to our Principals on either Side; and which I confess I thought comprehended
our meaning, as I understood it by the Letters I received from your Lordship,
and the King's other Ministers; which though it was immediately refused at
Amsterdam, as liable to the Interpretations they so much feared, yet was
likewise rejected by our Merchants too, and another sent over, yet stronger
than the first, in those Parts wherein the Dutch were most sensible; though
your Lordship seemed to think, the Article I had transmitted, would reach our
Aim, till you proposed it to them.

Upon the new Debates we engaged in, arrives the News of what we had suffered
at Macassar; which our Merchants made to be a formidable Instance in the
Business depending, and of far more Consequence than all they apprehended by
Dutch Forts and Passes, and therefore immediately presented the King with their
Demand of Restitution, together with some other Particulars which we were fain
to disown immediately, as against an express Article of the Treaty at Breda:
And I had the Blame of proposing all their Demands to the Dutch, though the
Paper of them was sent to me without any Distinction.

So soon as the Point of Macassar was yielded us, which I thought would prove
the most difficult of any, as of most Importance, and was, I am sure, for a
great while the most contested; and after the Project of a general Article was
gained from the Dutch (against all their former Resolutions) which was grounded
upon these two Points; That we desire no Innovations; and will make no
particular Instances or Complaints, in which they have ever offered us Redress:
Our Merchants seeing the Matter draw near a fair Issue, now seem resolved to
end all with these two Answers; That their Restitution to Macassar (as Sir John
Trevor writes) will be too dear bought, by such an Article as shall confirm
upon us all the Injuries we have complained of by Forts, and Passes, and
Treaties too: Whereas the Article as it is proposed by the Dutch (however
defective) does not extend to any Treaties to come, but only to the past; nor
do the Dutch desire to sell us Macassar at the Price of any such Article; but
had much rather restore it to us upon concluding the Treaty, without any such
Article at all: Nor do I know yet, of the Injuries in particular we have
already complained of, either by Forts, Passes, or Treaties, beside this of
Macassar; but contrary, have always been told, what we desired was rather for
Prevention than Remedy. But next they say (as your Lordship tells me) They had
rather be left as they are, with their Pretensions fair and entire, than have
them blasted for ever with a bad Conclusion: Whereas no Conclusion they now
make, upon what we have gained, and the Redress of what they complained of in
the Marine Treaty (though without this contested Article) but will leave them
and their Pretensions in the same Condition they were before: The same Liberty
still remaining upon the last Article of the Marine Treaty, to appoint
Commissioners, and alter or add any Thing, when both Parties shall agree; and
will be but like taking so much by Advance, upon Account of a greater Debt. So
that I am apt to conclude from all these Observations; That they who influence
our Merchants in this Prosecution, either have no meaning this Treaty should
end fairly, and so they put it obstinately upon that single Point, and in that
Form which they know will never be granted; or else they aim at gaining an
Occasion of raising new Disputes with the Dutch, whenever they find a
Conjuncture for it; there seeming some Reason for the Dutch Opinion, that
agreeing upon an Article as ours propose it, we may fall into new Contests upon
the Extent and Interpretation of it whenever we please. If this last End be in
the Bottom of this Business, and it be taken up or countenanced by his Majesty
or his Ministers, upon Reason of State, and we make our Provisions and take all
our Measures accordingly; for ought I know it is a wise, and may prove an
honorable Council in Time, at least if the present State of Affairs in
Christendom should change by any sudden or unexpected Revolution. But if our
Merchants, or those who influence them in this Matter, mean no such Thing as a
Conclusion of the Treaty; but only by the depending of such Disputes to leave
an Unkindness and Weakness in our Alliance, which may in time shake the
Foundations of it, and make way for new Measures on one Side or other, which
will in time prove destructive to both; I cannot but interpret this as the
Effect of their Distaste or Envy, at the King's present Ministry, and the Course
of his Councils, which have not gained greater Honor abroad, nor perhaps
Safety and good Will at home, by any Thing, than by our late Alliances so
renowned here, and thereby the Stop we have given to the Progress of the French
Greatness. And therefore it must come from the Influence of some, who would be
glad to see not only our Alliance shaken or changed abroad, but our Ministry at
home too; which I shall be sorry to see, till the King can find better Hands
for himself and the Kingdom to place it in: And whenever that happens, as much
as I am your Lordship's Servant, I shall be very well contented, and so I dare
say will you too. If your Lordship should imagine any particular Envy or Peek
at me or my Employment here, may have contributed to the Difficulties which
have succeeded in this Business; and that our Merchants or those that influence
them, believe it would thrive better in any other Hand; I will beg of you not
to be swayed by Considerations of Kindness to me in a Matter of public
Concernment; nor to fear, that whenever this Employment falls, you shall be
troubled with me at home, as great Ministers use to be with Men out of Office:
For while the King's Business goes well, it is not two Straws matter whether
such a Body as I have any Share in it or no.

And there is an end of all the Reflections I have had upon the most troublesome
and untoward Business that, I thank God, I ever had in my Life, or I hope shall
ever have again: And perhaps I am mistaken in them all. However, if your
Lordship can pardon this, you shall be sure not to be troubled in haste with
any more of it from

My Lord, your etc.

To my Lord Arlington.
Hague, Aug. 7. S. N. 1669. My LORD,
I Was very glad to find your Lordship in your last, upon your Journey into the
Country; because I very much doubt whether the Exercise or Diversions you
usually allow your self, are what your Health requires, and what your Cares and
Troubles deserve. I am sure, in the Prospect I have of them, I am so far from
envying them with all their gay Circumstances, that I think your Lordship has a
very hard Bargain of them altogether; unless it be one Day made up to you by
the Glory and Satisfaction of some great Success in the Pursuit you intend of
his Majesty's and the Kingdoms Honor, Safety, and Happiness; which I doubt
will need some stronger Councils, than Men seem at present disposed to: But
this is none of my Business.

I cannot give your Lordship any Account of what you say is made a great Matter
of by Somebody to a private Hand; about the Difficulties intended by Spain in
the two last Suedish Payments, with Design of making new Demands: I am only in
Pain at present to see the first Payment finished, which is not yet arrived,
but expected by the first Courier. When that is done, and the Guaranty
delivered by Sueden, as well as us and Holland, I shall be in no great Fear
besides that of the Spanish King's Death, or of Spain falling into some
Agreement or other with France for the Exchange of Flanders, by seeing so great
a War still entailed upon it, and their Neighbors unwilling to share so far in
their Dangers as perhaps it were Our and the Dutch Interest to do. I am sure in
the present Posture of that Monarchy, if I were of their Council, I should be
of Advice to do it whenever France would be content upon it to quit all
Pretense to the rest of the Spanish Dominions: And perhaps 'twere wise for
France to get Flanders by that or any other quiet Condition: For within two
Years after he were well possessed of that little Spot of Ground, I doubt no
Prince or State in Christendom, would pretend to dispute any more with him
then, than the Spaniard does now. But these are Events to be considered by Men
in greater Spheres than I am, and perhaps deserve to be a little more thought
on than they are.

I have received and returned a Visit with the French Ambassador; so that we
are upon as good Terms as can be. My Lord Culpepper passed this way last Week;
and upon that Occasion I cannot but desire your Lordship to let me know more
particularly from you, how I am to treat any English Lord as to the Hand and
Door in my own House: For though the French Example is given me, as to all
public Ministers, yet there is nothing specified as to other Persons; and if I
am to follow it in this and other Particulars; I desire to have something from
his Majesty's positive Commands to bear me out, as the French Ambassadors have,
and as methinks the Case deserves: Since I am told, the Innovation began in
Monsieur Cominges's Time in England, and that before the Orders he received in
it, he gave the Hand to all Gentlemen of Quality in England, and to all Persons
of great Quality or Families, though of his own Nation: And that my Lord St.
Albans ever gave it to all English Lords while he was Ambassador at Paris:
Though it seems my Lord Hollis changed it upon the French Ambassador doing so
in England.

I know not what my Father said to your Lordship concerning the Trifle you
mention in the End of your Letter: And am sure you might very well have spared
your self the Trouble of taking Notice of it; as I may do of giving your
Lordship any further Assurances of what will never fail you; which is the
hearty Passion and Truth wherewith I am and ever shall be

My Lord, Your Lordship's, etc.

To Sir Charles Wolsely.
Hague, Aug. 10. S. N. 1669. SIR,
I Received some Time since the Favor of a Letter from you of May 9th; but
hearing by your Son that you had soon after left the Town; and finding how ill
Fortune one of mine had met with in lying five or six Months before it came to
your Hands: I omitted the acknowledging yours till I might presume on finding
you sooner by my Father's Conveyance, to whose Care I have committed this, upon
Information of his Journey by your House into Ireland. Were it not for
acquitting my Debt, and assuring you of your Son's Health, and Welcome here
while it may be any Ease to you or Improvement to him, I should have little to
bear me out in giving you this Trouble: For the Return of your Compliments
would but multiply them between us: And that is a sort of Exercise in which I
am soon out of Breath, as having but a small Stock of those more refined
Imaginations which are required to make up any great Abilities in that kind.
Therefore I shall end an empty ill Letter as soon as I can; but not without the
Professions of my being

SIR, Your most humble Servant.

To the Spanish Ambassador.
Hague, Aug. 13. S. N. 1669. My Lord,
I Was in hopes the Affair now under Debate could have met with no Reply to
what I writ yesterday to your Excellency: But having observed the contrary by
yours of this Evening; I am obliged to say, that I thought, upon our last
Conference, I had left your Excellency entirely persuaded, that the Constable
was in the wrong to raise a Difficulty about the first Payment upon the Concert
proposed; because there was no mention of it in the Act signed by your
Excellency. I shall say further, that you have reason at present, if in that
Act you shall find (either expressed or implied) these Words of the Guaranty, Y
los Instrumentos necessarios dependientes de ella. If these Words are not
there, the Party contracting cannot bring them in by any Interpretation of his
own, without Consent of the other Party, or Sentence of some Arbitrator: Besides,
that this of the Concert, does not absolutely or of necessity import any thing
to the Security of the Guaranty: For, provided we execute it as the Wants of
Spain require, it is of no Importance whether it be done with such or such a
number of Troops, either of one or the other Nation, since that i^ to be
concerted according to the different Interests or Conveniences of each Party:
And it may happen that the Attack from France may be so powerful, that it will
be necessary for each of us to assist you with all the Forces we can raise or
equip, according to the general Guaranty, and not according to any Concert of
Forces specified in the Treaty.

I do not accuse Spain of any want of Sincerity in all this Affair, but only of
Readiness and Freeness to consent to, and accomplish what was absolutely
necessary for engaging Sueden in the preservation of the Peace. And on the other
side, your Excellency cannot accuse the Sincerity of the King my Master; who at
the lowest of your Affairs, and when Flanders was desperate, gave the first
helping Hand (when the Princes nearest allied to the Crown of Spain would have
nothing to do in it); contracted his Alliances last Winter, set a Fleet to Sea
the Summer following, sent Ambassadors to Aix la Chapelle, founded the Triple
Alliance, and solicited other Princes to join in it: And all this, only to
begin and procure a Peace, where neither his Dominions nor People were
concerned; nor (with permission of great Reasoners) had any Prospect of fu^^re
Dangers, but what would concern the Empire and all the rest of Christendom,
before his Majesty or his Kingdoms could be exposed to it.

For what your Excellency desires to know, why, Monsieur Marechal having said,
there would be no Difficulty in concluding and ratifying the Concert, there
should notwithstanding prove to be any in doing it at present; I will tell you,
That the two Ministers of Sueden, in all that has passed between us, have not
only said, but still persist, that they were ready to enter into the said
Concert, and intended to do so before Monsieur Marechal goes from hence (upon
which however he is extremely pressed) but that they never intended to enter
into it before the Payment of the first Subsidies, which ought to have been
made upon the mutual Delivery of the Ratification; saying withal, that they
would never allow that this Money ought to pass for Payment of the particular
Aids they were to give Spain by virtue of the Triple Alliance. I have always
found them so stiff upon that Point, that I have been a long time in despair of
overcoming their Nicety. It remains therefore to Spain to consider whether the
Guaranty of three such Powers be worth giving this little Satisfaction to
Sueden; and whether it would not be more to the purpose when the second Term
expires, to press us then upon the Concert, if you shall not see it finished:
But by all means to procure as soon as possible that the general Guaranty be
put into your Hands: And I do not doubt, but according to the Dispositions I
see on all sides, that the Concert will quickly follow, though your Excellency
should no more concern your self with urging us to what we are drawn by the
Interest of every particular Party as well as the Public.

I wish your Excellency Health and Happiness; and am, etc.

A l'Ambassadeur d'Espagne.
De la Hay, le 13 Aout, S. N. 1669. Monsieur,
J'Avois espere que l'affaire don't il s'agit a present ne trouveroit plus
d'obstacles, and qu'il n'y auroit point d^ ^^peique a ce que ^^c^rivis hier a
V. E. Mais comme j ay vu le contraire par avotre Lettre ecrite le S^ir meme, je
me crois oblige de dire, qu'il m'avoit paru que le fruit de notre derniere
conference, avoit ete de laisser V. E. pleinement persuadee, que le Connetable
de Castille avoit tort de susciter une difficulte toucha^^ le premier payement
su^ le Concert propose, puisqu'il n'en est point fait mention dans l'acte sign
par V. E. J'ajouteray a cela, que vous auriez aujourd^^y raison, si dans cet
Act vous trouviez on exprime ou sousentendu les mots de Guarentie, Y los
instrumentos necessarios dependientes de ella. Si pareils mots n'y sont pas, un
des partis contractans ne peut pas les y fair entrer par une interpretation de
sa facon, a moins que le consentement de l'autre parti intervienne, ou que de
part and d'autre on convienne de s'en rapporter a la decision d'un arbitre:
Sans conter que celuy de Concert luy meme n'importe point absolument ni
necessairement a la securete de la Guarantie: Car pourvu que nous l'executions
selon le besoin des affairs d'Espagne, il importer a peu qu'avec un tell ou un
tell nombre de troops, ou que ces troops appartiennent a une de deux Nations
plutot qu' a l'autre; car si l'on doit agir de concert, c'est selon les diverse
interets and les differentes commoditez de chacune des Parties. Et meme il peut
arriver, que les invasions and les attacques de la France seroient si
redoutables, qu'il sera necessaire que chacun de nous rassemble tout ce qu'il
peut de forces sur pied, ayant egard a l'intention de la Guarantie en general,
and non a quelques cas particuliers specifies dans le traite.

Je n'accuse pas l'Espagne d'avoir manque de sincerite dans tout le course de
cette affair, mais d'avoir manque de promptitude and franchise a accomplir ce
qui leur etoit absolument necessaire pour engager la Suede dans la conservation
de la Paix; sur cela je diray aussi a V. E. qu'elle ne peut pas accuser la
sincerite du Roy mon Maitre; lors qu l'etat de vos affairs etoit le plus
deplore, and que tous les Pais bas etoient comme an desespoir, il a le premier
mis la main a l'ouvrage (quand les Princes les plus proches de la Couronne
d'Espagne n'y vouloient pas toucher) tout l'hyver dernier sa Majeste a employe
a fair traiter ses Alliances, and a fair equiper une flote qui a paru en mer;
L'ete suivante il a envoye ses Ambassadeurs a Aix la Chapelle, il a cemente la
Triple Alliance, and fait solliciter diverse Princes de s'y joindre en plus
grand nombre: Tout cela dans la v^^e d'acheminer and de procurer une paix, qui
ne ^endoit rien a ses Etats ni a ses Peuples, puisque les uns and les autres
etoient a couvert des ravages de la guerre. Car malgre tout ce qu'il plait aux
grands discoureurs d'insinuer, and de publier; les dangers qui menacent
l'Angleterre, and que la Politic a du prevoir, ces dangers regardoient and
l'Empire en particulier, and toute la Chretiente en general de plus pres que sa
Majeste and ses Royaumes.

V. E. demand, pourquoy Monsieur Marechal ayant dit qu'il n'y auroit aucune
difficulte a conclure and a ratifier le Concert, il s'y en trouve pourtant
aujourdhuy; Je vous diray sur cela, que les deux Ministres de Suede sur tous
les points discutez enter eux and nous, non seulement nous ont dit, mais ils
persistent toujours a dire, qu'ils etoient prets a entrer dans le dit Concert,
qu'ils avoient meme pretendu le fair avaunt le depart de Monsieur Marechal,
quelque press qu'il paroisse; que leur pensee n'a jamais ete d'attendre a
fair cette demarche, que le payement des premiers subsides, fix au tems que
l'echange de la Ratification seroit delivree. Ils ajoutent a cela, qu'ils ne
consentiront jamais, que cet argent puisse passer pour le prix and la
recompense qu'ils s'engageroit de donner a l'Espagne en virtue de la Triple
Alliance. Je les ay trouve si roids sur cet Article, que j'ay desespere il y a
long tems de vaincre leur delicatesse. Il rest donc pour l'Espagne a examiner
and a bien peser, si la Guarantie de trois Puissances tells que celles qui se
presentent, ne vaut pas bien qu'on cede a la Suede la legere Satisfaction
qu'elle demand. Je voudrois que l'Espagne confiderat, s'il ne seroit pas plus
a propos d'attendre a nous presser sur le Concert, que le term du second
payement fut echeu: Si tout n'etoit entierement conclu; mais en tout cas de
procurer au plutot que la Guarantie generale vous soit mise en mains. Je ne
doubt pas, veu les dispositions ou je trouve tous les Esprits, que le Concert
ne suivit immediatement, and sans que V. E. ait la peine de nous presser
d'advantage: En cette rencontre notre propre interet se trouve joint a celuy du
public.

Je sachaite a V. E. la sante and la prosperity qu'elle desire; and suis, etc.

To the Spanish Ambassador.
Hague, Aug. 14. S. N. 1669. My Lord,
I Received your Excellency's Letter last night, as I was making my Dispatches
for England, in which I immediately enclosed it, that the King my Master may
see, in what this Affair has ended. For the Complaints your Excellency is
pleased to make of me, as having hindered instead of advancing an Agreement so
much desired; I shall not defend my self with Words, if my Actions have not
done it; nor think my self obliged whatever has passed in this Affair, to give
account of it to any Body but the King my Master. I am not the first Minister,
whose Services to Spain have had no Returns but of Reproach and Ingratitude,
which I shall not lay to Heart, since our part is only to obey. However I
cannot but think it had been more Prudence in the Spanish Ministers to
acknowledge all the King my Master has treated and done for 18 Months past in
favor of that Crown, than to accuse his Majesty upon every Occasion, either to
have done nothing, or only what he found convenient to himself: Since the true
way of engaging a generous Mind in new Obligations, is to be thankful for the
old, and rather increase than lessen what a King and a Friend has done, at
least with so much desire of succeeding well.

Since your Excellency is pleased to give so wrong a Turn to what I writ with
so good Intentions, I will say nothing to excuse it, but still repeat what I
said before; That to me it seems more reasonable that you should press the
Suedish Ministers upon this Agreement, if you think the time of the second
Subsidies not yet run out: Because it is plain, that the first Payment (by your
own Act) was to be made upon the signing the Ratifications of the Guaranty,
without any other Condition; and there being three distinct Acts from the three
Parties, your Excellency has very artificially made mention both of that of the
Guaranty, and the other of Concert; whereas that of the Guaranty ought only to
be given to Spain; and that of Concert, but communicated as an Agreement
between the three Parties entered into the Triple Alliance. With all this, your
Excellency may see, that when I said this, I told you at the same time, that
there was no doubt, after having given the Guaranty, and that the Suedes had
received their first Payment, the Agreement would be concerted too: And this I
still believe from the Interest the Suedes have in it, to secure the other
Payments; and Holland yet more, either to preserve the Peace, or in case a War
should happen, to secure a strong and powerful Defense from Flanders, which
next to their own Towns, is what they are nearest concerned in. I must repeat
again what I said of his Majesty, That if the Suedes and the Dutch can find the
way of agreeing this Affair, it will never be laid to the King my Master's
Charge if they do not see a good End of it. But I have entered deep enough into
the Thoughts of the Suedes upon this Point, to be absolutely of Opinion, That
they will never consent to the Agreement, till they have received their first
Payment. Monsieur Marechal having only heard some Expression of your
Excellency's upon this Affair, came immediately to desire I would go to you,
and inform my self of the Truth of it; and bring a positive Answer from you;
swearing, that if this were your Resolution, the Suedes could very well content
themselves without the Money: And that for his Part, he was resolved to leave
the Hague to morrow; and about four or five Days ago, Monsieur Appleboom sent
his Secretary to tell me, he had heard something to this purpose, of your
Excellency; and to complain of it. But if you can otherwise dispose both the
Suedes and the Dutch, as to me it seems by your Letter, you imagine; I shall
extremely rejoice at your Success, and applaud your Diligence, though you are so
little pleased with mine.

I cannot tell how I came to engage so far in a Language I know so imperfectly:
If you understand me, it is all I desire. God preserve your Excellency many
Years. I kiss Your Excellency's Hands, and am

Your most humble Servant.

Al Ambaxador de Espanna.
De la Hay, Aug. 14. S. N. 1669. Exmo. Senr.
A Noche recebi la de V. E. standome en mis dispachos para la Inglatiera, en
los quales la he luego encerrado, para que vea el Rey mi Sennor en que punto a
parado este negocio. Por lo que se va V. E. quexando de mi, como el que
atrasava el concierto tan desseado, en lugar de encaminarlo; Yo ne me voy
defendiendo con razones, si las obras no me defienden. Sea lo que fuera de mi,
que no tengo de responder a ninguno de lo que hago en esta materia, si no al
Rey mi Sennor, y no soy yo el prim^re M^^istro a quien aviendo (...) merecido
de Espanna s^ lo reconoce con desagradecerle todos sus officios; Pero no
importa, porque no tenemos nos-otros otra part en los negocios, si no de
obediencia. A lo menos me parece que los Ministros de Espanna hizieran mas
prudentemente de agradecer al Rey mi Sennor, loque ha negociado y obrado
despues de anno y medio passados en favor de las cosas de esta Corona, que no
de accusar su Magestad a cada punto, o de no haver hecho nada, o averlo todo
hecho por su propria convenientia; porque el verdadero medio para empennar un
espiritu generoso en nuevos beneficios, es agradecerle algo de los passados, y
mas presto agrandecer que no yr siempre disminuyendo, lo que un Rey amigo a
hecho a lo menos con buena voluntad.

Puesque V. E. se gusta de tomar a tuerto loque yo he escritto a derecho, yo no
le he de impedir, pero me voy rediziendo, que a mi parecer tuviera mas razon de
appretar los Ministros de Suecia sobre este concierto, si veyra que no se havra
acabado al segundo termino de los Subsidios; porque es cosa evidente por su
proprio acto, que el primero pagamiento se ha de cumplir con la extradition de
las ratificationes de la guarencia sin otra condition; y que siendo tres actos
distinctos de las tres parts, por esto V. E. a hecho mention de los actos de
guarentia, y otro de concierto como V. E. va concluyendo aora con mucha
agudeza, porque el acto de concierto no se devia dar a la Espanna como el de la
guarentia, si no comunicarla solamente como un accuerdo enter las parts de la
Triple Allianca. Con todo esto muy bien pudiera ver V. E. quo en diziendo esto
he dicho tan bien que no havia duda, que despues de haver dado las guarentias,
y recebido la Suecia el dinero del primero termino, se acabara el concierto, y
lo creo tan bien porque veo a la Suecia interessada en ello por asseguarse de
los otros terminos, y tan bien por lo que espera en succediendo la guerra y la
Olanda sta aun mas interessada para assegurar tanto mas la paz, o en caso de
guerra une fuerte y bastante defensa del pays, baxo como tocando les muy
apretadamente y mas que otra cosa despues de sus proprias villas. Y lo que he
dicho del Rey mi Sennor, lo digo otra vez que accordando se la Suecia y la
Olanda en las particularidades del Concierto, no tendra a su Magestad de no
accabarlo. Pero aviendome yo harto escudrinnado los sentimentos de los Suecos
en este negocio, soy enteramente del parecer que nunca han de toc^r al
Concierto antes de haver recebido el primero termino; porque el Sennor Marechal
aviendo entendido solamente alguna cosita que V. E. avia dicho a este
proposito, me venia luego supplicar de yr me a V. E. di informar me dello, y
tirar una respuesta categorica sobra esta materia; jurando si tal fuessa la
resolution de V. E. que la Suecia se passaria muy bien del dinero; y que para
el stava determinado de salir la mannana de la Haya. Y no ay mas que quatro o
cinco dias que el Sennor Appleboom me ha empiado su Secretario para quexarse de
la misma manera di haver la segunda vez entendido tal cosa de V.E. en ello.
Pero si puede disponer y los Suecos y los Olandezes de otra manera (como me
parece de immaginar en su carta) para mi me huelgare de su successo, y mucho he
de alabar sus diligentias, aunque tan poco se contenta de las mias.

No se como me he empennado tan adelante en mi geregonca de Espannol. V. E. le
ha de pardonnar, con que le hecha de entender, basta. Guarde Dios a V. E. los
annos que la desseo.

B. L. M. D. V. E. etc.

Aoust,..... 1669. Sentence donee sur l'Affaire de Portugal and de la Hollande,
par l'Ambassadeur de l'Angleterre, a qui les deux Parties avoient remis la
Decision finale de lours Differences, non pas comme Ambassadeur d'Angleterre,
mais comme Chevalier Temple.
MOnsieur l'Ambassadeur de Portugal and Monsieur le Pensionnaire de Wit;
ayants trouve a propos de communiquer a l' Ambassadeur d' Angleterre les Points
qui ont este si long tems en dispute sur l' Accommodement propose enter le
Portugal and la Hollande.

Le dit Ambassadeur d' Angleterre a trouve sur la premiere Conference avec les
deux Parties, que la principale Difficulte qui restoit a demeler, estoit sur la
maniere de fair les deux Millions cinq cent mill Cruzados qui estoient
accordes par le Portugal a la Hollande, payables a dix Payements egaux; c'est a
dire deux cent mill Cruzados par an.

Le dit Ambassadeur d'Angleterre avoit aussi remarque dans la mesme Conference,
que les deux Parties estoient d'accord que lesdits Payements se feroient par
les Droits du Sell de Setuval, and qu'a cet Effet chacun d'eux avoit propose son
Expedient, par lequel ledit Ambassadeur d' Angleterre voyoit que Monsieur l'
Ambassadeur de Portugal se proposoit que lesdits Payements entiers se fervient
par l'Assignation desdits Droits du Sell de Setuval pour le term de dixsept ou
dixhuit ans: Et que Monsieur le Pensionnaire de Wit se faisoit fort que ladite
debte de pourroit entierement satisfaire selon son Expedient par lesdits Droits
du Sell de Setuval dans le term de vingt and deux, ou vingt and trois ans.

Ledit Ambassadeur d' Angleterre ayant aussi remarque que l'accommodement sur
aucun desdits Expedients estoit desespere pour les Difficultez sur la maniere
de payer les interests, don't les deux Parties ne pouvoient aucunement venir au
bout: A trouve bon de proposer comme un Expedient enter deux: Que le Portugal
assigneroit a la Hollande les droits de Sell de Setuval pour l'espace de vingt
ans en satisfaction entiere de ladite debte; si le Portugal ne trouvoit pas que
la Hollande eut receu sa satisfaction entiere en moindre tems; and qu'en tell
cas ledit term seroit retranche apres tell satisfaction achevee.

Ledit Ambassadeur d'Angleterre ayant propose cet Expedient a chacun des deux
Parties; Monsieur l'Ambassadeur de Portugal a pris du tems pour la considerer;
and Monsieur le Pensionnaire l'a accept sur la condition suivante; Scavoir, si
dans aucune annee dudit term, lesdits droits du Sell de Setuval ne monteront
pas a la valeur de cent cinquante mill Cruzados; Qu'en ce cas le Portugal dans
l'annee suivante suppleera en Sell la valeur de ce qu'on trouvera avoir manque a
ladite sum l'annee precedente: Et a fin que les Payements se pourroient
parachever en moindre temps, le Portugal s'obligeroit de n'y hausser pas le
prix du Sell pour les Hollandois, ny de l'abaisser pour les autres.

Ledit Ambassadeur d' Angleterre ayant communique le mesme soir a l'Ambassadeur
de Portugal ledit Acceptance sous la Condition mentionnee: Il s'accorda a
l'Expedient de l'Ambassadeur d'Angleterre, and aussi a la Condition du
Pensionnaire, pour ce qui estoit de ni hausser ni abaisser le prix du Sell; Mais
pour l'autre party de la Condition. Il la refusoit entierement, a cause que la
Hollande estant asseuree par la de recevoir en Sell tout ce qui manqueroit
chaque annee sur les Droits du Sell a l'accomplissement de cent cinquante mill
Cruzados, se pouvoit deporter de tirer dudit Setuval si grande quantite du Sell,
qu'elle estoit accoutumee de tirer chaque annee par le pass: Et que par la le
Royaume de Portugal se trouveroit appauvri afaut dudit debit ordinaire du Sell,
and le Prince se trouveroit charge d'autant qu'il plairoit a la Hollande sur
les manquements des Droits annuels.

Sur ces Entrefaites les deux Parties estants entrees encore dans une
Conference avec l'Ambassadeur d'Angleterre, and ne s'y pouvant pas accorder non
plus que dans la precedente, sur aucun des Expedients proposes; Ils ont a la
fin trouve bon de convenir ensemble que la decision finale de toute cotte
dispute, se feroit par l' Arbitrage absolu dudit Ambassadeur d' Angleterre,
pourveu que l' Ambassadeur de Portugal consentiroit que la valeur du Sell se
regleroit entierement par les Cruzados, sans aucun egard a la valeur des Reys
sur laquelle il y a eu aussi beaucoup de Controverse enter les deux Parties.

En virtue de cette Convention, ledit Ambassadeur d'Angleterre ayant meurement
considere tout ce que dessus, and aussi l'interest de ces deux Nations, aussi
bien que de leurs Voisins and Alliez, que cette affair si long tems debattue,
se puisse enfin terminer a l'aymable, and ne tirer pas en aigreur enter les
deux Nations par des Disputes ulterieures; Declare and juge que le premier
Expedient propose par ledit Ambassadeur touchant les vingt annees ayant este
deja accept par les deux Parties; Demeurera firm and valable avec ces
Conditions, que la Hollande sera obligee de tirer de Setuval toutes les annees
durant ledit term, autant de Sell qu'elle a tire dans aucune de dix annees
dernierement passees: Mais, qu'en cas que par ledit debit du Sell, les droits a
Setuval ne monteront pas pourtant jusques a cent cinquante mill Cruzados dans
aucune annee dudit term de vingt ans; que le Portugal suppleera en Sell l'annee
suivante ce qui aura manque a ladite sum, pourveu que ledit manquement
n'excede pas la valeur de trente mill Cruzados.

Ledit Ambassadeur d' Angleterre juge aussi equitable que la Hollande ne
pretendra autre satisfaction de la Debte, hormis lesdits droits du Sell de
Setuval pour ledit term de vingt annees.

Que la Valeur du Sell sera conte par Cruzados sans egard a quelque autre monoye
puisqu'il n'y a eu mention dans le Traitte d'aucun autre espece.

Et qu'en cas que le Portugal trouvera a propos de se decharger de quelque
party de la dete par quelque autre moyen; la Hollande retranchera aussi ledit
term en proportion.

To my Lord Arlington.
Hague, Sept. 2. S. N. 1669. My LORD,
HAving received his Majesty's Letter to the Constable from your Lordship's
Hands, I thought it was fit for me to return his Answer by the same way: And,
that not having Matter enough to furnish two Letters this Ordinary; your
Lordship would be content to receive the whole Trouble of what I have to say,
since you were of course to have a Part of it.

I received at the same Time with this for his Majesty, the other for my Self;
and the same Express brought another for the States; I doubt, all in the same
Style; by which your Lordship will understand the ill State of our general
Business here. Monsieur Marechal came yesterday to visit me; and told me, his
Errand was to know, whether I could propose any new way of drawing their
Satisfaction from Spain; if not, whether I would give any Hopes of their having
it from his Majesty and the States: And if neither of these, what I could
propose as the best way To get out of this Affair with the best Grace, and
without too much Noise.
Pour sortir de cette Affair de la meilleure Grace, and sans trop de Bruit: I
told him, For the First, I was at an end of my own Invention, but should not
fail however of consulting with the Dutch Commissioners whom I had not seen
since our Answer from the Constable. For the Second, I knew he was so sensible
of Sueden's having no Right to demand of us more than our good Offices in this
Particular, that he would never think fit to press us any further; and those he
should not fail of. For the last, it was a Point I was very loath to think of;
but when it was necessary, I would join with him in that Consideration, but
would fain believe, the Affair was not yet desperate. He fell into great
Complaints of the Spanish Ministers here, and of their laying several
Discourses to his Charge which he never made; particularly, of their being
willing to take a verbal Engagement from Spain for thirty thousand Crowns a
Month in time of War; which he protested was contrary to his Orders, that were,
to stand firmly upon having Assurance for the whole sixty thousand pretended
from his Majesty and the States, and leave us to find our Security from Spain,
with whom they had not had any thing to do in the whole Business: But he said,
he would tell me in Confidence, that they had represented the Impossibility of
this Pretension to their Court, and the necessity of taking the Assurances for
thirty thousand from Spain; and expect Answer upon this Point by the very first
Letters: And in Case of their Court's consenting to it, he was in hopes all
Difficulties would be overcome; for we might finish the Concert before the
Payment of the Money, and give the Spanish Ministers Assurance of our signing it
suddenly after: And though Holland had hitherto declared against assuring any
part of the sixty thousand Crowns without real Security from Spain, yet his
Majesty having resolved to assure Sueden of his Part, Holland could not avoid
following his Measure and Example.

I easily perceived the first Part of this Discourse was brought in, only to
usher the last; and to sound me about his Majesty's Intention in this Point:
And so I told him, I did not remember to have heard his Majesty had ever
declared any such Resolution. That there were indeed several Projects framed by
several Hands about that time, some of which contained what he said: But I
asked him whether he had ever seen any of them signed? He confessed he had not,
but their Court ever looked upon it as a Thing agreed to by his Majesty. I said
I wondered at it, because they could not but consider his Majesty as very
little more concerned in this Affair than themselves: And being so, it would be
very hard for him to engage in the Defense of Spain without any Hopes of
Reimbursement for his own Part; and withal to furnish Sueden with so great a
Share of the Subsidies they expected upon a bare Promise from Spain, of
repaying it after the War ended. That, for my Part, having not then been in
England, I would not affirm, his Majesty had not agreed to it, because he
seemed to affirm he had: But if he had not, I thought it would be a very hard
Thing to expect it from him. He replied, He would not dispute whether it were
hard or no, but was sure, in Sueden they made no manner of Doubt upon it; and,
that in his Instruction, which mentions their soliciting Our and Holland's
assuring the whole Sum, there are these Words, The King of England having
consented to assure one fourth Part. That if there were a Question upon this,
though their Court should consent to accept an Act from Spain for Thirty
thousand, yet he saw there would be another Difficulty less surmountable than
all the rest; and so looked upon the Affair as desperate. But having frankly
communicated to me his Instructions whenever I desired it; he entreated me
freely to communicate mine to him upon this Particular, that they might know
what to trust to. I told him frankly that I had none upon it; That his Majesty,
being so near, had only ordered me, when they and Holland should be agreed
about the Particulars of the Concert, that I should communicate it to him, and
should receive a sudden Answer upon it.

We broke up this Conference very Friendly; resolving only that I should
discourse with Monsieur de Wit upon the whole State of our Affair, while they
expected their next Orders from Sueden, after which we should all have a
Conference together and take our last Measures.

This Day Monsieur de Wit came to me upon the same Occasion; showing me the
Constable's Letter to the States, which contained nothing more than mine from
Him, besides desiring them to employ their good Offices toward the Ministers
of England and Sueden for the Accomplishment of this Affair. After having asked
me two or three times what I thought was to be done; and I protesting I knew
not; at last he said, That though he was never for plaistring up an ill Wall;
and he was confident, if Sueden trusted to Spain for the thirty thousand Crowns
a Month, they would never be paid; and so their Assistance would fail in case
of a War, unless Spain gave such a Security as might certainly raise the Money:
Yet considering that the very Reputation of this Business concluded, might very
well prevent a War, might hinder Spain's taking their Measures with France to
our Disadvantage; and in case of a War, Sueden's having received the Subsidies
already due, would hinder them from taking any Measures with France, though
they should not furnish their Assistance to Spain for want of the future
Subsidies: For his Part, he could wish the Thing done; and though it had ever
been against his Opinion, yet if his Majesty should think fit to assure Sueden
of a fourth Part, he believed, the States would be induced to do the same,
rather than endanger the breaking of the Business.

After I had deduced to him the great Differences there were in his Majesty's
Concernment and theirs upon this Matter; and how hard it were for his Majesty
that had his Seas and Fleets to defend him, to contribute in all Points as much
as they who had the French Armies at their Gates, so soon as Flanders was
overrun: And finding him still firm, as I had done so often before, that this
State could never go other than even Paces with us in this Matter, nor look
upon themselves as nearer concerned in the Greatness of France than other
Neighbors, till they saw the Danger fall directly this way: I at last told him
plainly what I had told Monsieur Marechal before, concerning my Instruction:
Which he received with his usual Temper, and said, We must refer all to a
Conference with the Suedish Ministers; and in the mean Time each of us should
think what Expedient is to be found in the Case.

Concerning our Business of Surinam, I am in great Hope yet to come to some
good End of it, though they will not hear of it in Point of Right as to his
Majesty's Intercession: But that it is fit to give his Majesty greater
Testimonies of their Deference than in such a Matter as this, is already the
declared Opinion of Mr. V. B. the Pensioner of Harlaem, and some others I have
pursued: And Monsieur de Wit promises me, if those two will second him, he
will endeavor to bring the Province of Holland to it, this Assembly; and then
we may deal with Zeeland I hope well enough by one way or other. The Paper Mr.
V. B. has made me expect two or three Posts, upon the Account of the Places we
have specified in the Indies, he promises shall not fail me by the next Post;
and should have come sooner, but that he was resolved to be the most exactly
informed that could be in all Particulars.

Monsieur de Wit has writ to those of the East India Company at Amsterdam in
pursuit of your Lordship's Letter, and Sir John Worden's Desire, concerning one
Carry coming over to offer an End of a Suit upon the Pretensions of Courtin's
Heir: Their Answer is, That I might be secure they will give no Money for an End
of that Business, since all further Pretensions are clearly cut off by the
Treaty at Breda: And I find, Monsieur de Wit is of the same Opinion.

Yesterday died Monsieur Weymenum, a great Man in this State, but very little
bewailed.

I believe your Lordship may hear Reports of Discontents growing, and Parties
changing here: But I doubt it is not in Discourse further than among those that
are in the Skirts of Business; which makes me hope there may be no more Ground
for all that is so lavishly talked of here, and of the same kind among us in
England: If it should be otherwise, I am at least glad to be ignorant of it;
being of so much Disreputation abroad to our Councils: And all the Persons in
Consideration here, I am sure are sorry for what they hear of it, professing to
be as much concerned in our Union as their own; and placing all their Hopes of
taking any constant Measures with us, upon the Steddyness of his Majesty's late
Councils, and the Dispositions of our present Ministers, before whose time
Monsieur de Wit says, That there was nothing but wavering in the Councils of
England.
Que ce n'estoit que Fluctuation dans les Conseils d'Angleterre.

I am, Your Lordship's, etc.

To the Constable of Castille.
Hague, Sept. 4. S. N. 1669. My Lord,
I Sent the other Day in the Spanish Ambassador's Packet, a Letter from the
King my Master to your Excellency in favor of Monsieur Taaf; and am obliged to
second that Affair by all my good Offices, though I hope they will not be
necessary; and I hope that this Gentleman shall not be reckoned the less
capable to serve his Master, for having already well served his Friend.

I cannot let pass this Occasion without representing to your Excellency the
undoubted Necessity there is, to give Order with all speed for the Payment of
the 200000 Crowns to the Ministers of Sueden, who have expected them with so
much Patience; and are ready to deliver into the Spanish Ambassadors Hands the
Ratifications of the Guaranty, jointly with me and the States General. They
assure me also, that they are ready to enter into a particular Concert of
Forces, as soon as this Affair is finished; but are resolved not to mix one with
the other; and are so ill satisfied with some Difficulties that the Spanish
Ambassador has raised upon this Matter, that I believe it will not be possible
to keep them here two days longer; if your Excellency sends them an Answer not
according to the Act signed by the said Ambassador, and since ratified by the
King of Spain; that is to say, to order the Payment of the Money upon the mutual
Delivery of the Guaranty. This is what they told me two Days since; and may
perhaps ruin an Affair that has been so long negotiated, and brought into the
Port through so many Difficulties.

Your Excellency will judge better than any Body, how you can answer to the
Court of Spain, and to all Christendom, the loss of so great an Occasion for
establishing the Security of the one, and the Repose of the other. For, all
this depends upon your Resolutions, to which the three Confederates, as well as
so many others, will entirely attribute any Misfortune that shall arrive. And,
as I have not failed since the beginning of this Affair to contribute all my
Cares to it, so I would not be wanting toward the End, to represent the
pressing Necessity of this Conjuncture. It is left to your Excellency to make
what use of it you please; from whose Conduct every one will form Presages good
or ill to the Affairs of Spain.

I am Your Excellency's etc.

Au Conetable de Castille.
De la Hay, le 4 Sept. S. N. 1669. Monsieur,
J'Envoye l'autre jour dans le Packet de Monsieur l'Ambassadeur d'Espagne, une
lettre du Roy mon maitre a V. E. en faveur de Monsieur Taaf; je me crois oblige
de l'aider de tous mes bons offices, mais je croy qu'ils ne luy sont pas
necessairs, and que ce Gentilhomme n'en sera pas juge moins digne and moins
capable de servir son Maitre, pour avoir si bien servi son ami.

Je ne puis laisser passer cette occasion sans representer a V. E. qu'il est
d'une necessite indispensable d'expedier incessamment des ordres pour fair
toucher aux Ministres de Suede les 200000 ecus qu'ils ont jusqu'icy attendus
avec tant de patience. Ils sont prets de delivrer enter les mains de
l'Ambassadeur d'Espagne les Ratifications de la Guarantie conjointement avec
moy and les Etats Generaux. Ils m'ont aussi assure qu'ils etoient tout prets a
entrer dans un Concert particulier pour fournir un secours de Forces, que pour
cela ils n'attendoient que de voir finir cette premiere affair; and quil's
etoient resolus de ne point meler l'une avec l'autre. Ils sont au rest si mal
satisfaits de quelques difficultez que Monsieur l' Ambassadeur d'Espagne leur a
fait sur ce premier article, que je ne croy pas qu'il soit possible de les
retenir deux jours icy apres que V. E. se sera expliquee sur cette affair, and
que nous aurons recu, sa reponse, suppose que cette reponse ne s'accorde pas a
l'acte sign par le dit Ambassadeur, and depuis ratify par le Roy d'Espagne,
c'est asavoir de fair conter l'argent sur l'Extradition de la Guarantie. Voila
ce qu'ils m'ont dit depuis deux jours, and ce qui pourroit bien fair aller en
fumee une affair si long tems negociee, and menee au port a travers tant de
difficultez.

V. E. sentira mieux que person, qu'elle se rend responsable and a la
Couronne d'Espagne, and a toute la Chretiente de la perte d'une si grande
occasion, qui establissoit la surete de l'une, and le repos de l'autre. Car,
c'est de vos resolutions que tout cela va dependre; and c'est aussi sur else
secules que les trois Confederez, ainsi que tant d'autres vont rejetter les
malheurs qui suivront du peu de Succes de nos negotiations. Comme de le
commencement je n'ay epargne ni veilles ni soins pour cette grande affair, je
n'ay pas voulu manquer sur la sin a fair une derniere demarche, qui est, de
representer a V. E. toute l'importance des conjonctures qui s'offrent encore a
nous, mais qui sont pretes a nous echapper. Ce sera a V. E. a en user comme il
luy plaira: On tirera des mesures qu'il va prendre, des presages certains pour
le bon ou le mauvais etat des affairs d'Espagne.

Je suis de V. E. etc.

To my Lord Arlington.
Hague, Oct. 11. S. N. 1669. My LORD,
I HAVE this Day received your Lordship's of the 21st past, and having none by
me from Mr. Secretary Trevor, shall presume to return in an Answer to your
Lordship's that little I have to say by this Post: For all at present is here
at a stand in our Business of the Alliance; and when it will proceed again,
depends wholly upon his Majesty, do what I can. Since last Post, the Spanish
Ambassador, the Baron d'Isola, Monsieur Marechal, and Monsieur de Wit, have
been severally with me to know what I will propose, or what I will consent to
for an Expedient in this Matter. The two first would fain have something from
me to work upon; and I entertain them with Complaints of the Spanish ill Usage
toward us, having proposed at London not only to indemnity us, in what they
projected there concerning his Majesty's engaging to the Suede, but likewise a
Share of his own Charge likely to arise upon a War: All which, ever since the
Peace they have been content to forget, and now would put us upon a necessity
of engaging to advance the Suedish Subsidies. I further represented to the
Spanish Ambassador, the Imprudence of their Councils, in raising this
Difficulty in the first Payment to the Suedes, by the easyness whereof they
might have possessed themselves of the Guaranty, and thereby entered into
Confidence with Sueden; secured them from thinking of any other Measures, and
pursued the Finishings of our Work by any particular Concerts without Danger or
Unkindness.

I urged all this so far, that though the Spanish Ambassador persisted in
affirming, That the Orders from Spain to the Constable, as well as to himself,
were positive in the Case of not paying the Money without the particular
Concert; yet he at last joined with me very freely in blaming the Weakness and
Unhappiness of the Spanish Councils upon these Particulars; and wondering how
the Marquis Castel-Rodrigo could suffer the Dispatch of such Orders. The next
Morning the Baron d'Isola came to me, and entertained me with long Discourses
of what passed between him and the Spanish Ambassador, in consequence of what I
had said the Night before: And the Sum of all was, as I imagined, to sound me
whether I would be induced to enter the Concert upon the Spanish Ambassadors
promising me an Indemnity from Spain for the Hundred and fifty thousand Crowns
a Month insisted upon by the Suedes to be secured to them from the King. Upon
this Insinuation I resolved to take no Hold at all; because if his Majesty
should ever resolve to promise the Advance of the Hundred and fifty thousand
Crowns in case of a War; I thought it would be better trusting to gain his
Satisfaction by negotiating in Spain to that purpose, upon the Grounds given of
so many Overtures by the Spanish Ministers both at London, Brussels, and here;
than by taking a Promise or Instrument here from this Ambassador (as the Baron
says) beyond his Power, and especially whose Secrecy in it we cannot much
reckon upon: Whereas the publishing any such Thing may have ill Consequences of
Jealousy between Us and the Dutch. Therefore, I contented my self to tell the
Baron, That I was at the end of my Line; and could proceed no further than I
had done already: That his Majesty had ordered me to give the Guaranty in
Conjunction with the other Confederates upon Payment of two hundred thousand
Crowns according to the Spanish Ambassador's own Act: That he thought the
Spaniards had no Right to press us upon the particular Concert, which yet he
would be ready to consider of when the Confederates thought fit; and in the
mean Time was very sincerely resolved to perform the Guaranty if there should
be Occasion for it.

Monsieur Marechal pressed me something harder upon entering into a Conference
with him and the Dutch Deputies, which I promiss'd before my last, but have
excused till Monday next, in the mean time to prepare Matter for it. He desired
to know if I had yet any Powers to promise the Hundred and fifty thousand
Crowns projected at London (as he ever insists) to be secured by his Majesty;
without which he did not see any Thing to be done here: I told him directly, I
had not. He then asked me to what End we should confer, since without That, the
Concert could not be framed, nor consequently the present Money paid: And
complained that the want of this Concert was of present Prejudice to Them
alone, though it depended equally upon the Consent of the other Confederates. I
answered him, That till I received new Orders, he should never find me vary
from those I had so often told him; which were, to see first in what Proposals
Sueden and Holland could agree, and then represent it to his Majesty, whose
Answer could be of no long Delay: And That I suppose will be the Fruit of our
Conference. He said, he thought They and Holland were agreed upon all Points
but one, that is, in the number and kind of Forces, according to the first
projected Concert, and in Holland's assuring them a fourth Part of the Sixty
thousand Crowns.

That which they differed upon was; That whereas Spain offered a Promise of the
other Thirty thousand Crowns; they expected, We and Holland should likewise
warrant that Payment, because their Engagement for Sixteen thousand Men upon
the Concert, would be to Us and not to Spain; and it was no Reason, if Spain
failed of that Payment, they should yet stand engaged to Us for the whole
number of Men. I told him, I doubted much, that if this Point were still
between them, they were not very near agreeing: And he said, He would speak
with Monsieur de Wit once more upon it before the Conference. But I doubt this
will not hinder them from coming to some Proposal to be made his Majesty of
something they shall agree in.

I am, etc.

To the Prince of Toscany.
Hague, Dec. 5. S. N. 1669. SIR,
I Should not have deferred the Acknowledgments I owe your Highness for the
Honor of your Letter, if I had not been pursued with a great Illness at the
time I received it: And I would not acquit my self of this Duty by any other
Hand but my own, because I am sure there is none so pleased or so ready to
engage in the Occasions of your Service. I am extreme glad of your Highness's
happy Arrival at Florence; where I wish you all the Felicities that ought to be
destined as they are due, to so great a Merit: And I hope, that after the
glorious Fatigues which have hitherto been the Diversion of your Highness, you
will now find Pleasure in the softness of Repose.

For my self, I shall never think I am happy till I have paid my Respects to
your Highness in your own Court; and I envy no Man at present but my Lord
Falconbridge, who is going on an Ambassy into so fine a Clymate, and among such
Conversations as those of Italy, where Wit and Weather are equally clear; while
I languish in a Country where we breath nothing but Mists, and discourse of
nothing but Business.

To confirm this last, I cannot end my Letter without telling your Highness,
That after so many Shocks the Triple Alliance has born for some time, and so
many Presages of its Death; there is within these two Days some appearance of
its Recovery, unless any unexpected Accident should occasion a Relapse.

Justice is so essential among the Qualities of a Great Prince, that I will not
doubt but your Highness does me That of believing always with equal Passion and
Truth,

SIR, Your Highness's etc.

Au Prince de Toscane.
La Hay, le 5 Dec. S. N. 1669. Monsieur,
JE n'aurois pas perdu un moment a marquer la reconnoissance que je dois a V.
A. de l'honneur qu'elle m'a fait par sa Lettre, si dans le meme tems qu'elle me
fut rendue, je n'eusse ete ataque d'une violente malady. Je n'ay pas voulu, je
l'avouera, m'acquiter de ce devoir par une main etrange^e, and cela vient de ce
qu'il me semble, qu'il n'y a que la mienne qui sent autant de plaisir, and
s'employe avec autant d'affection, des qu'il est question de quelque chose qui
regard V. A. and son Service. Je prens beaucoup de part a l'heureuse arrivee
de V. A. a Florence; je souhaite qu'elle y gout toutes les prosperitez deues
and sans doubt destinees a un merit comme le sien. J'espere, qu' apres les
glorieuses fatigues qui ont fait jusqu' icy les divertissemens de V. A. elle va
trouver quelque plaisir dans les douceur du repos.

Pour moy, je ne seray jamais content de la fortune, que je n'ay fait la
reverence a V. A. dans sa propre Cour; and a l'heure qu'il est, se seul homme
que j'envie dans le monde, c'est Mi Lord Falconbridge, que son Ambassade va
conduire dans un si beau Clymat, and ou il va gouter tous les charms attachez
au delicates and spirituelles conversations d' Italy; il trouvera la les jours
and les esprits egalement purs and brillans; and pour moy, mon partage est de
languir dans un pais ou l'on ne respirent que des brouillards, and ou l'on ne
sait que parler d'affaires.

J'ay deja un peu contracte de ce Genie; and pour le prouver a V. A. c'est que
je ne scaurois achever ma Lettre sans luy dire, qu' apres tant de secousses que
la Triple Alliance a souffert depuis quelque tems, and tant de sinistres
presages qui ont anonce sa mort, il y a pourtant depuis deux jours quelque
appearance qu'il va revivre, a moins qu'un accident inopine ne cause sa rechute.

La justice est une de ces qualitez si essentielles a un grand Prince, que je
ne veux pas meme soupconner que V. A. me refuse celle de me croire toujours ce
que je suis avec tant de passion and de verite, etc.

To the Constable of Castille.
Hague, Dec. 5. S. N. 1669. My Lord,
THOUGH it will be difficult to add any Thing to the Arguments used in my last
Letter, and in other Memorials sent so frequently to the Spanish Ambassador,
upon the Subject of the Payment already due to the Crown of Sueden, and so
solemnly stipulated by the Act of May the 9th, signed by the said Ambassador,
and afterward ratified by the Queen Regent: However I would not fail in this
important Conjuncture, to make this last Effort to dispose your Excellency to
the quick Execution of a Council so just and necessary to the Repose of
Christendom, as well as the Preservation of Spain; and of such Importance to
the Honor of your Excellency, who never can defend your Self against the
Complaints of having by little Scruples lost the Success of so great an Affair,
and neglected the Fruits of an Alliance whereof all Christendom has spoke with
so much Applause, and hoped from it so much Felicity.

I do not desire to importune your Excellency by a Repetition of Things already
said; and I have nothing new to add, but the Consideration of Monsieur Marechal
the Minister of Sueden's departure, after long Impatience, and much Discontent
at the Proceedings of Spain, in all the Negotiations where he has intervened
for eight or nine Months past. Before he went, he demanded back from me the Act
of Guaranty signed by Sueden, and placed in my Hands with the other Acts to be
consigned into the Hands of the Spanish Ambassador, upon payment of the 200000
Crowns to Sueden: And in the mean time, he consented entirely, that I should
give back to the said Ambassador his Act of the 9th of May, by which he was
obliged to the said Payment upon the consigning of the said Guaranties: But I
used all my Endeavors to keep the said Guaranty of Sueden sometime longer in
my Hands, hoping your Excellency would yet in a few days acknowledge the
Obligation and Necessity of advancing this Satisfaction to Sueden, so long due
and demanded. And as yet I have it in my Power to deliver the three said
Guaranties to the Spanish Ambassador, as soon as he will have given the said
Money to the Suedish Resident here: But if this Affair be delayed till Monsieur
Marechal has represented it to the King his Master, as he was resolved to do
upon his departure; or till the Suedish Minister's Resident here shall have
received an Answer to the Dispatches they sent about three weeks ago, upon the
Spite and Despair they were in at the bad Success of this Affair: In either of
these Cases, I leave your Excellency to judge, whether there will be any Hopes
that the Suedish Court, sowered by the ill Treatment and angry Representations
of their Ministers, will then give us the means we possess at present, to
finish this great Work: And how necessary it will be to follow the late ill
Impressions made in that Court as soon as possible, by new ones to their entire
Satisfaction. For, as soon as Spain shall be in possession of the Guaranties of
all the Confederates, one may say, That not only all the Appearances are safe,
but also that the Substance it self is finished. And if any Forms remain
toward the last Perfection of the Work, there must be time given to concert
them, without hazarding the Gross of the Affair.

I desire your Excellency to consider, that such Occasions as you have at
present in your Hands, are not usually given twice to Men, and that they
commonly lose their Force by a slowness in laying hold of them. But I cannot
apprehend so sad an Effect from the Prudence and good Intentions of your
Excellence: At least, I shall comfort my self that I have done my utmost Duty
toward preventing so great a Misfortune to Christendom.

I am, My Lord, your etc.

Au Connetable de Castille.
De la Hay, le 5 Dec. S. N. 1669. Monsieur,
QVOY qu'il soit bien difficile d'ajouier quelque chose aux raisons don't je me
suis servi dans ma derniere Lettre a V. E. and qui d'ailleurs sont repandues
and ont ete repetees en tant de diverse memoires envoyes a Monsieur
l'Ambassadeur d'Espagne, touchant le payement deja deu a la Couronne de Suede,
and si solennellement accord and stipule par l'Acte du 9 de Muy, qui a ete
sign par le dit Ambassadeur, and ratify aepuis par la Reine Regente: Je n'ay
pourtant pas voulu dans une conjoncture si importante negliger de fair un
dernier effort, afin de tacher a disposer V. E. a une prompte execution dans
une affair si just, si necessaire d'ailleurs au repos de la Chretiente, aussi
bien qu' a la conservation de l'Espagne; j'ajouteray, si importante a l'honneur
de V. E. Peut etre sera t'il horse de votre pouvoir de parer aux reproaches and
aux plaintes d'avoir par de petits scrupules renonce au succes d'une si grande
affair, and neglige les fruits d'une Alliance don't la Chretiente a parle avec
de si grands applaudissemens, and don't elle se promettoit tant de joye and de
prosperity.

Je n'ay pas dessein d'importuner V. E. par la repitition de chooses deja cent
fois dites; and tout ce que je puis ajouter de nouveau, roll sur le depart de
Monsieur Marechal, le Ministre de la Suede, qui apres bien des impatiences,
apres tant de pourparlers inutiles, enfin mecontent de l'Espagne autant qu'on
le peut etre, and ayant sur le coeur l'inutilite des negotiations ou on l'a
fait intervenir, and qui ont consume neuf mois, press son depart, and va tout
reveler au Roy son Maitre; il me redemande avaunt son retour l'Acte de Guarantie
sign par la Suede, and remis enter mes mains avec les autres acts, pour etre
ensuite depose enter les mains de Monsieur l' Ambassadeur d'Espagne, lors que
les 200000 ecus auront ete pay a la Couronne de Suede. En meme tems il m'a
declare qu'il consentoit pleinement que l'acte du 9 de May fait par le dit
Ambassadeur, and dans lequel il s'obligeoit au dit payement, sur la remise des
Guaranties, and lequel act j'ay aussi enter les mains; que cet act, dis je,
fut rendu a l'Ambassadeur d' Espagne. J'ay fait de grands efforts pour retenir
encore quelques jours la dite Guarantie enter mes mains, dans l'esperance que
V. E. informee de tout en peu de jours, sentiroit la justice and la necessite
de satisfaire la Suede; il y a long tems que la chose luy a ete promise, par
consequent il y a long tems qu'elle luy est due; elle a ete souvent demandee,
elle l'est encore aujourdhuy, and a l'heure que j'ecris je suis en pouvoir de
livrer les trois Guaranties a Monsieur l'Ambassadeur d'Espagne, aussi tot qu'il
aura fait mettre l'argent au Ministre de Suede, qui est encore icy. Mais,
suppose que l'affaire soit ou negligee ou retardee jusqu' a ce que le Ministre
ait envoye son memoire and sa relation a la Cour de son Maitre, and qu'il l'ait
instruit de la situation ou toutes chooses etoient au moment de son depart.
Suppose meme que par les delais on done le tems aux Ministres de Suede de
recevoir la reponse aux memoires qu'ils envoyerent il y a trois semaines tout
remplis du depit and du desespoir de voir le projet se reduire a rien. L'une ou
l'autre de ces deux chooses supposes (and V. E. voit qu'on les peut supposer
toutes deux) il est aise de juger que la Cour de Suede aigrie de l'Espagne par
toutes les chooses que ses Ministres luy auront represente, ne voudra plus nous
continuer le moyen que nous avons encore de finir ce grand ouvrage. V. E. voit
donc de quel importance il est de poursuivre les dernieres impressions que la
Suede a eues jusqu' icy, par la nouvelle d'une prompte and entiere conclusion.
Car aussitot que l'Espagne sera en possession des Guaranties de tous les
Confederez, on pourra dire que non seulement toutes les apparences seront
sauvees, mais qu'on aura meme pourou au fond de la chose. Que s'il manquoit
quelques formalitez a la perfection de cet ouvrage, il ne faudra que du tems;
car comme tout sera dispose a une entiere conclusion, on ajustera tout a
loisir, sans que le gros de l'affaire soit en danger.

Je pry V. E. de fair reflection, que des circonstances pareilles a celles que
vous avez presentement comme sous la main, n'ont pas accouteme de s'offrir deux
fois a une meme person, and que c'est leur laisser perdre de leur force, que
de differer a s'en saisir. Mais la prudence and les bonnes intentions de V. E.
me rassurent contre la crainte d'un evenement si funeste. J'aurois du moins la
consolation d'un homme qui a fait son devoir, and qui n'a rien oublie pour
epargner un si grand malheur a la Chretientie.

Je suis, etc.

To Mr. Carry.
Hague, Dec. 6. S. N. 1669. SIR,
I Very much wonder to hear from Mr. Andros the Difficulties you make in
delivering the Tin according to my last Order; and that you thereby occasion so
much Prejudice to the King's Service, which I thought you would have advanced
all you could, when I writ to you to desire your Care in that Business. But
that you may understand what you call my Commission to you; I will let you know
that I had no Power to give any Orders at all about that Matter, but in
Pursuance of the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury's Commands; and therefore
new Orders being arrived from them by Major Andros, they are to be obeyed in
what concerns the Tin-Business. I desire you once again to comply with him
readily in the Delivery of the Tin, according to the last Letter wrote you upon
that Subject; and do absolutely disown you in all Difficulties you shall make
upon Pretense of any Order from me: And if you continue to delay it any longer,
shall upon the first Notice of it write effectually to the Constable to do his
Majesty Justice in it, and me in particular, who neither expected nor deserved
this Dealing from you.

Your Servant.

To Major Andros.
Hague, Dec. 6. S. N. 1669. SIR,
SInce the writing of this I received yours of the 4th, complaining still of
Mr. Cary's refusal to deliver the Tin; whereupon I have written him the
enclosed Letter, which is as much as I can say in it: If he continues his
Impertinence still, I suppose 'twill be at his own Cost, since your Protest:
And if you will send me Word what are the ways of proceeding against him, I
shall write either to the Constable or to the Governor of Ostend, or Sir Mark
Ognate at Bruges, to favor your Dispatch.

I am, Sir your Servant.

To the Now King of Portugal.
Prince Regent of Portugal.
Hague, Dec. 8. S. N. 1669. SIR,
Though nothing could happen more acceptable to me, than the occasion which the
Portugal Ambassador lately gave me, not only of promoting the Peace so much
desired between Portugal and this State (both Friends and Confederates of the
King my Master) but also of showing some little Mark of my great Devotion for
the Queen my Mistress; yet, I confess, my Satisfaction was much increased by
your Royal Highness's Letter, when I found how acceptable that small Service
was to you. I do not in the least pretend to deserve the Thanks your Royal
Highness is pleased to give me, at least, not upon any other account, than that
of desiring by all means to seek other and greater Occasions of being
serviceable to your Royal Highness and to the Affairs of Portugal; and in so
doing I may have some better Pretense to your Royal Highness's Favor,
wherewith you are pleased to honor me.

I wish your Royal Highness all Health, and am

Sir, etc.

Principi Portugaliae.
Hagae Comitis, Dec. 8. S. N. 1669. Serenissime Princeps,
QVanquam nihil mihi gratius ista occasion accidere potuisset quam mihi nuper
praebuit Dominus Legatus Portugaliae, non modo exoptatam utrinque concordiam
and finem litium inter Portugaliae and Foederati Belgii Status (utrosque Regi
Domino meo Amicos adeo and Confoederatos) promovendi, sed and eodem nomine,
immensi erga Reginam Dominam meam obsequii, saltem exiguum aliquod specimen
exhibendi; auctam tamen and cumulatam plane ex literis A. V. R. oblectationem
meam fuisse confiteor, cum illi tam acceptum extitisse istud qualecunque
officium summa cum voluptate percepissem. Ego me autem nec gratias, quas mihi
dignata est A. V. R. meruisse praefero, saltem non alio nomine quam summi
istius quo teneor desiderii ulteriores aliquas and majores occasiones
consequendi, quibus devotissimum prorsus in A. V. R. and res Portugaliae
studium meum testari potero, benevolentiamque istam cujus testimonio me tam
eximie ornatum voluit, omni meliore modo demereri.

Valeat interim A.V.R. meque semper inter praecipuos Gloriae suae Cultores,
rebusque suis addictissimos aestimare velit.

To Sir John Trevor.
Hague, Dec. 10. S. N. 1669. SIR,
I Received yesterday yours of the 23d past, together with his Majesty's
Instructions of the 22d; and could have wished Mr. Werden had brought them with
him for a Reserve, though not to have been communicated till the last Minute of
his stay, and the Despair of all other Trials, for by that means we might have
kept the Business entire; whereas now, though it may recover some Life, yet I
much doubt whether it ever can, the Strength and Health of its first
Constitution: For besides so great and so many Jealousies as are entered into it
on all sides; I count Monsieur Marechal's going away, a very ill Accident; and
can yet make no Guess how Monsieur Applebome will acquit himself whenever we
shall come to the Payment of the Subsidies; though Monsieur Marechal was so
forward as to make it sure: But Mr. Werden can tell you how different sorts of
Men they are; and for ought I see, all Businesses depend upon the Qualities of
the Men that manage them; which (considering the ill Success of this) is all I
shall say in Answer of your Compliment to me; That, it is in very good Hands.

I gave you an Account in my last, of the bold Advance the Dutch had made to
the Constable, of signing their Part of their Concert alone immediately upon
the Payment of the two hundred thousand Crowns. We expect every Day the Answer
of this Proposition; and finding one Clause of my Instructions to command the
suppressing them, in case I find either before or after their Arrival, that the
Money would be paid according to the Treaty of May last; I thought it agreeable
to what I conceive of his Majesty's Intentions, for me to take no Notice of
them, till I see what this Return from the Constable will produce; and in case
it be followed by the Payment of the Money, to expect his Majesty's further
Orders before I proceed upon them. If the Constable still insist to have the
Concert jointly signed, I shall then fall into the Consideration of it with the
Suedes and Dutch Ministers, and endeavor to bring it to an Issue according to
his Majesty's Instructions, but so as not to prostitute our Offer till we have
Assurance that no more Difficulties will be made by Spain; nor any Changes
desired in that Concert which has so long been framed, and in which I have not
observed the least Inclination in any of the Ministers here to admit of any
Alterations. I suppose it is not his Majesty's Intention I should consent to
the Concert, but in Conjunction with the Suede as well as the Dutch, in case
the first should not be induced to it, or raise new Difficulties; and according
to this Apprehension I shall proceed. In all which Points I am more distinct,
that you may find whether I understand his Majesty's Meaning right, and may
please accordingly to inform and direct me: For, the Paces, as they are much
more difficult, so they ought to be much more cautious in a Minister, when his
Instructions are numerous and particular, as mine are grown in this Affair. And
you may be very confident, when they are once given they shall be punctually
observed to the best that I can understand them: And in that it self, I thank
God, I have not yet failed; and desire nothing of my Master and my Friends more
than that I may be the first to hear of it when I do.

I did enclose the last Memorial I sent the States upon the Business of
Surinam; and spoke with Monsieur Van Beuninghen since my last upon it. He
protests, that for his Part he is of Opinion (and so are most of his Province)
to give us just what we ask in that Matter; but that we must excuse the Delays
of their Constitution, when the Dissent of one Province makes the Resolutions
of all the other lame. He confessed that though Zealand had consented to what I
mentioned in two of my late Letters, yet they had ordered their Deputies to
delay the Conclusion of it for a while; so as they had been forced to write
once more to convince them of the Necessity which Holland thought there was to
dispatch it speedily as well as effectually: And he hoped for a sudden and good
Answer from them.

The Ministers here have been earnest with me to propose to his Majesty, to go
the same or equal Pace with them in laying Impositions upon the French
Commodities; which they think would prove the greatest Parsimony that either of
us could use, and be a greater Blow to France than Armies could give: And they
say, in case his Majesty should resolve upon it, they would go as far as he
pleased in it; whereas, without that, they must be something tenderer than they
would be.

They would fain engage me likewise to propose to his Majesty their joining
with us in equal Proportion of Ships and Men for the carrying on a War against
Algiers: But I suppose their End is, That they may be comprehended likewise in
a Peace with them, which may perhaps be our furthest Aim: And so I tell them
this might have been a welcome Proposal when we began to set out our Fleet; but
can signify little, now the Action seems near an end: However, that such Things
are fitter to be proposed by their own Ambassador in England than by me: And I
mention them, that you may be prepared, in case he receive Instructions to
propose them there. I am always as becomes me, etc.

To Sir John Trevor.
Hague, Dec. 13. S. N. 1669. SIR,
THOUGH I had Liberty given me by your last of the 2d past, to make use of my
late Instructions as soon as I pleased; the Constable's positive Answer having
satisfied you what we were to expect from thence: Yet the Advance having since
been made from the Dutch, by the Offer I acquainted you with to the Constable;
I resolved still to pursue what I intended in my last, in suppressing wholly
this Instruction, till I saw the Constable's Answer to the States Letter, and
what Hopes that would furnish us with of obtaining the Payment of the present
Money without engaging his Majesty in the Concert before his Measures were taken
more fully with Spain. Bat yesterday the Spanish Ambassador came to tell me,
That he had received a Letter from their Agent Fonseca, which assures him, that
Orders were already sent me to sign the Concert; and that his Majesty told him
so at the same Time when he received News of Don Juan de Toledo's Death: I told
him, the Authority was too too good to be disputed: And therefore I confessed I
had received Orders to make a further Advance for the Satisfaction of Spain and
the Confederates than his Majesty had yet thought fit to do, or esteemed
himself at all obliged to: But I desired them to believe there was nothing to
give them any the least Hopes of his Majesty's charging himself with any part
of the Suedish Subsidies. That if They, and Sueden and Holland could agree upon
that Point, so as to dispose Sueden to sign the first Concert that was proposed
at the same Time with the Guaranty; His Majesty would go very far toward the
Conclusion of the whole Matter. But I assured him at the same Time, That though
I were agreed with Sueden and Holland to make him an Offer of the Concert; yet
we would not do any Thing toward it till he had Powers to consign the Money
immediately, without any new Dispatches and Difficulties from Brussels.

I found, the Spanish Ambassador had immediately upon Receipt of his Letters
from England, sent an Extract of them to Monsieur de Wit; as the Baron d'Isola
had done to Monsieur Applebome; who were both in Pain till they knew the Truth
from me, and sent to me to that Purpose: And knowing the Ambassador would be as
diligent to inform the Constable as them, and consequently influence any Answer
not already given to the Dutch Letter; I resolved to go and talk with them both
upon the Business, and concert with them what Course to hold in the Progress of
it. I could not get a Time of speaking with Monsieur de Wit to day, but did
with Monsieur Applebome; and much to the same Purpose as I had yesterday to the
Spanish Ambassador, but plainer, and in more Confidence: All I could get from
him was, That he would read over that first Concert to day, and consider
whether he could sign it: That it was true, Monsieur Marechal had offered to
sign something like it, but containing in the same Act the Security of their
future Subsidies, which they were to insist upon before they sign it. I told
him, all the Difference would be, that whereas they contented themselves before
with Spain's Promise of one half, to take it now for three Parts, if the
Spaniards would be persuaded to it; and they had the same Security for one as
for the other, (which I knew they reckoned upon) of not furnishing more Troops
than in Proportion to the Money they received. He seemed a good deal unsatisfied
that the Spanish Ambassador had received the Advice from England, before the
Answer was returned from the Constable: For since we will make no Part of the
Security for their future Subsidies, I find they would very fain touch the two
hundred thousand Crowns before they give the Concert; which they might then
sell dearer to Spain, or at least make it the Price of their Satisfaction
growing due by the two next Payments of the four hundred eighty thousand Crowns
already due. All ended between us with this Promise, of acquainting me with his
Resolution, so soon as he had considered it, and the Proposal of a Conference
upon it with Monsieur de Wit. I find now the Want I always feared of Monsieur
Marechal, who is not to be retrieved; so that we must make our best of what we
have, and do all we can to put him out of his Pace.

The Baron d'Isola came to me this Afternoon; and his Business I found was, to
persuade me to sign Monsieur Marechal's Projects, and thereby charge his
Majesty with the fifteen thousand Crowns to Sueden, but upon a Promise from the
Constable, of Spain supplying his Majesty with the Sums we should furnish upon
that Engagement. But I cut him off short in that and all other Expedients; and
told him, if his Majesty were induced to sign the Concert, as it was more than
they had any Reason to expect from him, so it was all they were to hope in this
Matter; and therefore I desired him to reckon upon it, and take their Measures
accordingly. I suppose by what he said, his Intentions are to go away for
Brussels within a Day or two, and bring us a positive Resolution of what we are
to expect from thence as to the immediate Payment, and their Promise to Sueden
of three Parts of the future Subsidies: But he will first endeavor to know
Monsieur Applebome's mind; who will at least be stiff in this, that the Promise
be made by Spain to the Confederates, and not directly to Sueden.

Since my last, the Lunenburg Envoy came to desire me, that I would let his
Majesty know, how much his Masters esteemed themselves honored by the
Overtures his Majesty made them of entering into an Alliance, of which he was
the Head: That thereupon they had ordered him to attend here ever since, in
hopes of some further Proposals toward the engaging them in it: But that his
Masters hearing no further from hence; and finding that by the ill Posture of
our Triple Alliance, other Princes of Germany were seeking other Measures, they
had commanded him to return (which he should do about three Weeks hence) but
first to endeavor by my Hand to give his Majesty the best Testimonies of their
Affections to his Service, and good Intentions toward the Ends he had so
gloriously engaged in. I promised him to perform the Message; and employed the
rest of my Discourse in convincing him, how much more the Princes of Germany
were concerned in the Defense of Flanders than his Majesty; and that however,
if his Masters had any Expectations besides their own Interests toward
engaging them, they ought to be from Holland and not from Us; since the most
important Use of their Troops would be to awe the Bishop of Munster, who might
otherwise be able by the French Assistances, to divert all, or the greatest
part of the Dutch Forces that way, and thereby leave Flanders open to the
French. He confessed both these Points; and I promised to do him any good
Offices I could toward the Dutch Ministers.

The Deputies of the States came this Day to me, to assure me of their Desires
and Resolutions to satisfy his Majesty in the Business of Surinam; but that
they could not yet come to a final Conclusion, and therefore desired me to have
Patience for a little longer time, after which I might assure my self of a good
End in it. They pretended Monsieur de Witt's and their chief Ministers being so
much taken up at this time; but upon Discourse confessed, the Zelanders Aim to
have their next Ships arrive from Surinam. Upon which I fell into some Heat
with them; and told them, I would never send such a Message to his Majesty,
such Delays being fitter for Lawsuits than public Negotiations: At last
concluded, that because I would a little consider their Ministers being so much
taken up at this Pinch, about Levies and other Affairs agitating in the States
of Holland; I was content to stay six Days longer for their Resolution in this
Matter, upon Condition I should have it in that Time to his Majesty's
Satisfaction. To make short of a long Conference; this they agreed to at last,
and I will hope may keep their Words, since there was one of the Zeland
Deputies among them.

The Task you give me in the End of your Letter, is as you say, a hard one;
for, whatsoever is planted of that kind, will not grow long or well but out of
a good Root at home; however, I shall venture at it here all I can; and dare
undertake it shall not thrive worse in this than in other Neighbor Soils.

I am, etc.

To my Lord Arlington.
Hague, Dec. 24. S. N. 1669. My LORD,
THOUGH Monsieur Overkirk wants nothing to make him welcome every where, but
especially at the Hague, yet I confess he was the more so to me, by a Letter he
brought me from your Lordship; whereby I found my self to be not altogether
forgotten where I desire most to be remembered, and would deserve it if I could.
I am very sensible that the Right you say he has done me there, may rather
prove an ill Office than a good; But however I am not the less obliged by his
good meaning, nor the more touched by their ill; who are not content I should
gain a little Esteem, whilst I am content to gain nothing else; and where I
should not care for That neither, but that I believe it to be the best way any
Minister can take toward the Advantage of his Master's Service. Whilst your
Lordship has neither Share nor Belief in the ill Offices are done me, I shall
very easily neglect what comes from other Hands, and content my self with not
deserving them, and with the Assurance, that Time will do me Right; and that
your Lordship will not lose your Confidence of me, till you have told me of
some one Action in my whole Life, that you thought did not become a Man you
were inclined to think well of. And so I will leave that Subject.

I agree with your Lordship in being sorry that Mr. Werden did not stay to see
the Effect of his Majesty's last Resolution in the great Business here: And
though the ill or no Entertainments of this Place might excuse his haste of
returning; yet I believe he would have been content a little to delay it, if he
had expected any Thing new from England: And for my Part, I wish nothing more
than some true Witness of my Carriage wherever I am employed; which I doubt
not he would have proved, without increasing, any more than lessening my
Faults. I shall do neither by those of the Spaniards, which your Lordship has
so much Reason to censure and reproach; nor should I be less amazed at them,
but that I look upon them as the usual Distractions of weak and diseased
Bodies. It Is certain, they have deserved so little of us, that we have no
Reason at all to concern our selves in their Interests or Dangers, unless we
find they will have very strong and necessary Consequences upon our own; and in
that Case, our growing angry with them will only serve to hurt our selves; and
we had better help Them to mend their Faults, than force Them by Despair or
Hardships to increase them. Most of the Ministers here not knowing what to make
of their late Conduct in the Difficulties upon the Suedish Money; nor seeing
well which way to turn themselves, in case Spain should take its Measures with
France by an Exchange of Flanders; begin to confess they have dealt too roughly
with them, in imposing not only the Laws of a hard Peace upon them, but the
Suedish Subsidies at the same time; and ever since refusing them their Guaranty
till those were paid; and seem to wish they had either accepted the first
Proposal I was sent hither to make Them upon that Occasion, or else endeavored
a Defensive League with Them after the Conclusion of the Peace at Aix; I mean,
if it might have been done in Conjunction with us: For I think, while we are
content to hold firm with them, it were no great Matter to undertake they shall
never take any Measures without us, either there or any where else: Though I
know there are Reports in France that would make us believe it, if we are apt
to those Impressions.

For their detaining us so long upon the Point of Surinam, it must be
attributed to the Constitution of this State, where the Obstinacy of any one
Province can keep off a Resolution of the States General as long as they
please: And that happens often where (as in this Case) the Matter touches one
Province by a particular Interest, and the rest only by a general one: For, I
am sure, the Province of Holland and the other Five were many Months ago
resolved, not only to give us in Substance the Satisfaction we demanded, but in
our own Forms too; till they found that Zeeland would neither be persuaded ni
Gourmande into the same Resolution; which has made it hang so long, and go
over at last defective as to what we expected about one of our own Ships,
though as they contend, full as to what we can in any way ground upon our
Articles. For their great Arming, which it seems makes more Noise with You and
in France than it does here; I shall not need give your Lordship the Particular
of it; because that is done with the other current News by my Secretary Mr.
Blaithwait every Week to Mr. Williamson; and shall only mark what may perhaps
have escaped your Lordship, That there are yet no actual Levies here agreed
upon, but only Officers chosen, Agreements made with them, and Security taken
for their bringing in their Men at a certain Warning when they shall be called
upon by the States: So as the Execution of what is hitherto but prepared, will
depend upon the clearer Discovery of the French or the Munster Intentions to
open a War; both which are expected here, and equally feared; the Difference
not being great between the Danger of Flanders and their own: So that I can
only answer your Lordship's Question about the State's meaning in this Point;
That it is, Qu'on ne les trouve pas sans Vert le Printems qui vient; and that
if it must prove a Year of Action, they will not be found without Arms in their
Hands for the better making either of Peace or War. It Is a hard Attempt what
your Lordship mentions, to defend their Neighbors in spite of their Teeth;
yet I believe, in Case Spain should come to an Exchange with France, and any of
the Towns of Flanders should refuse to obey it; either not to be sold lik^
Slaves (as they call it) by the Spaniards, or not to be used like Slaves by the
French; you would see this State protect them with all their Forces; and blow
up any such Ends of a War in Flanders, rather than venture it at home; and
perhaps endeavor to unite any such new Member into the Body of their State, by
giving them an eighth Voice in their Generality, in case it should be such a
Place as Antwerp, or Gant, or Bruges, where they might easily come with their
Arms to defend it: And they have Notice of some such Discourses a-foot already
in these Parts, which they neglect not to foment, as a Provision against such a
Blow from Spain. In case all they can do should not be of Force to prevent the
falling of Flanders into the French Hands; I believe their last Ressource may
be to endeavor being received as a Circle into the Empire: But in all these
Transactions, their chiefest Care will be, to strengthen their Union all they
can with us; and to embark us in what they now esteem the Common Cause, of
stopping the Growth of the French Greatness. For though they say, and with
Truth, That we engaged them first in the Pursuit of these Measures, and the
whole Course of their present Councils; yet they would be much at Ease to see
us now as warm and as deep in them, as they are themselves; and would fain give
Us the Honor of Leading in them all.

The Discourse your Lordship will possibly hear about Changes or Decays in the
Credit of the Ministry here; I believe have no further Source than an Endeavor
in the City of Amsterdam to make themselves more considered than as a simple
Town in the Provinces; since they pay half of all that is laid upon the
Province of Holland, as Holland does upon all that is levied on the Seven
Provinces; which makes them believe they ought at least in some Degree be
considered in the Province, as Holland is in the State; which made them employ
all their Strength to oppose the Faction of Leyden, Dort, Rotterdam, etc. who
under Monsieur de Witt's Influence have of late Years carried all before them
in the usual Elections; and join with the Body of the Nobility here, to choose
Monsieur Mattenesse in Exclusion of Monsieur Meerman; where the Contest was
about an Office of the greatest Profit in these Countries, and of great Honor,
though not Influence upon the Public Affairs. They have likewise succeeded
well in the late Election of Officers for the new Levies, and seem disposed to
run on still in a String. And amongst them there have of late been Overtures
about making a new Minister, under the Name of Secretary of State; whose
Province should be chiefly to receive the Addresses of Foreign Ministers, and
take the Care of all Foreign Dispaches; and so ease Monsieur de Wit of that
Attention he is fain to give to those as well as the Home-Affairs. And this I
suppose was calculated for Monsieur Van Beuninghen, who has silently had a
great Hand in all the Councils and Motions of his Town of Amsterdam; and I
believe, will in Effect come to have the chief Part, or at least Burden in
Foreign Transactions, whether with any new Name or no.

Monsieur de Wit in these late Brigues has very prudently avoided any
Appearance of being a Party in them; and contented himself with going his usual
Pace, but stickling no further in any of them; seeming rather to intend and
endeavor the Composure of all, than the valuing himself upon a Division; which
I believe, with his being so very necessary to the State, will ever preserve
him in his Consideration here, without some violent Revolution, to which
nothing seems at all disposed.

Among the late Divisions of this Province, one great Point has been, about the
intended Prohibition of French Commodities; which has been violently carried on
by Monsieur Van Beuninghen and his Town of Amsterdam; but opposed and tempered
by the Towns of the other Faction, upon the Respect of their particular
Interests in the French Trade, and the Pretext of Danger or ill Consequences in
such a Council, unless it be taken in Concert with England: So that whether it
will go further than the Defense of the common French Commodities that are in
Wear, I know not; though Monsieur Van Beuninghen reckoned (not long since)
absolutely, that it would be carried to French Salt and Brandy: And if we would
go the same Pace, It should reach to their Wine too: Which he believed, would
soon bring France into such a Consumption as would keep them from being so
troublesome abroad. But I entered no further with him into any Discourse of that
kind; because I doubt whether we are of a Temper or a Humor to resolve or
execute any bold or smart Propositions, how well soever conceived, or conducing
to our Health and good Fortunes: Though I question not at all, but God Almighty
has given us the Power of going as high as the greatest of our Neighbors: But
perhaps, as your Lordship says, unknown to our selves, and in another way than
some of us would be glad to have had it. But wherever it lies, I doubt it
will never come out, till his Majesty can find the Means to make an end of all
fencing with the Bents of his Parliament, or Discontents of his People; and
bring his Government into the Credit of having no other Aims nor Interests but
those of his Subjects in general, not in particular; nor consequently any Eye
upon their Money but for those Uses they are willing to give it. This I confess
is my Opinion upon the whole, and, that all does not consist in a Parliament's
being prevailed with to give what is asked in Point of Money, as I find many
People think. However, I should never have said it to any but your Lordship;
nor to you neither, but induced by the melancholy Reflections I observed in
your Letter, upon this Subject: But, whatever mine or another's Opinion is, I
am confident every Man that thinks at all, must think it were not amiss if his
Majesty and his Ministers would once for all consider and agree upon a general
Draught of those Ways and Councils both at Home and Abroad, as they judge will
best answer the great Ends of the King and Kingdom's Safety, Honor and Quiet.
For when such a Scheme is once agreed upon, all the Parts of it may be pursued
in their Order, and with constant Application till they are brought to pass; at
least such as fail not in the Trial, and so are found to have been ill
conceived. But if it should prove (as I find some Men think) that we live only
by the Day; and content our selves to patch up Things as they break out, and
fly at the Game as it rises; it is at the best but like Birding or Hawking;
which may furnish a Dish or two, but can never keep the House.

If your Lordship can pardon all this Liberty and Trouble, I will not run my
self into the occasion of asking it again; if not, you must lay the whole Fault
upon your own Letter, or rather upon my not having heard from you, or written
to you of late; and upon my perpetual strong Inclinations of returning into my
old Correspondence, just as a Man does into an old Love, which lies still at
Heart, however diverted or discontinued. But because I use so much Freedom in
the Account of Dispositions here, and of my own Thoughts, I send it by Mr.
Richard's Conveyance to your own Hands; in which I shall ever think all safe
that concerns me, because I have been always, and am with so much Passion

My Lord, your etc.

To the Constable of Castille.
Hague, Jan. 23. S. N. 1670. My Lord,
I Doubt not but the Spanish Ambassador has by this Courier communicated to
your Excellency the Project of the Concert for Particular Forces, drawn up by
consent of the Ministers of the three Confederates: And I can assure your
Excellency, that to bring it into Form, all the said Ministers have stretched
their Powers as much as possible, so that there will be no room to press them
further: And it has been with Difficulty enough that we have resisted the
Instances of the Suedish Minister, to have his Guaranty, rather than make this
Pace after so many other unprofitable ones. He assures us, that he never
advanced any Proposition of bringing Troops from Pomerania or Bremen; because
there are no more in those Parts than what serve for Garrisons; and when he is
pressed upon this Point, he answers us, That, to maintain supernumerary Troops
in those Parts, they must have Subsidies even in time of Peace; and upon this
Condition Sueden will be content.

I think, what he promises is sufficient; that is, to bring into the Field the
16000 Men in three Months after the Attack; for there is no Appearance of
employing so great Forces, unless by way of Diversion; since the Troops to be
furnished by his Majesty and the States General, joined to those of the
Catholic King, will be as many as can be well employed for the Defense of
Flanders; for it is not designed they should be Masters of the Field. Your
Excellency sees, that you may reckon if you please upon 10000 Men from the
States in 15 days time; and though there be no Term specified by the King my
Master, I think your Excellency need make no Difficulty upon it; since the
Words, As soon as possible, signify the shortest time one can desire. And I
confess, that not having observed any Reflection upon the Time, in the Orders
of the Queen Regent of Spain, which were communicated to us by the Ambassador
Gamarra, I gave no notice of it to his Majesty, thinking my self sufficiently
guarded by my Powers, to sign the same Project, which had been sent into
England as well as Spain.

I hope, that as soon as your Excellency will have sent Powers to the Spanish
Ambassador to deliver the Money, there will be no Difficulty in signing the
Project as it has been communicated to him. And I do not think, from what I can
judge by the Minister of Sueden, that the Affair is likely to suffer any
further delays; whereof I thought good to give your Excellency this
Intelligence, which you may make use of according to your Prudence, and the
Interests of the King your Master.

I am, My Lord, your etc.

Au Connetable de Castille.
La Hay, le 23 Jan. S. N. 1670. Monsieur,
JE ne doubt pas que Monsieur l'Ambassadeur d'Espagne ne communique a V. E. par
ce Courier le Projet du concert des forces particulieres, lequel a ete arrete
icy par le consentement des Ministres de trois Confederez. Je puis bien assurer
V. E. que pour le reduire a la form ou il est, tous les Ministres se sont
relachez a l'envi, and autant qu'il leur a ete possible. Il seroit inutile de
les presser de nouveau, and pretendre en obtenir davantage: Nous avons trove
assez de difficulte a l'emporter sur les Ministres de Suede, pour avoir sa
Guarantie avaunt que d'aller plus loin, and de fair de nouveaux pas inutiles,
apres tous ceux que nous avions faits. Il nous asseure de n'avoir jamais rien
propose qui tendit a fair venir de Troops de Pomeranie ni de Breme, qui sont
des lieux ou il n'y en a pas un plus grand nombre que ce qu'il faut pour les
garnisons; que si l'on le press sur ce point, il nous repond, que pour
entretenir des Troops supernumeraires en ces lieux la, il faut des Subsides en
tems de paix meme, and qu'a ces conditions la Suede en sera satisfaite.

Il me semble que c'est assez qu'il promette de fair agir le 16000 hommes
trois mois ecoulez apres l'attaque; car il n'y a guere d'apparence d'employer
de si grandes forces, que par voye de diversion: Les Troops qui doivent etre
fournies par sa Majeste and les Etats Generaux etant jointes a celles du Roy
Catholic, leur nombre sera suffisant pour la deffense des Pais-bas, car on
n'a pas dessein de se repandre dans le pais? and de s'y elargir, ni de paroitre
maitre de la campaign. V. E. voit, que quand il luy plaira, quinze jours de
tems la rendront maitresse de dix mill hommes de Troops des Etats Generaux;
and a l'egard du Roy mon Maitre, quoy que le term ne soit ni exprime, ni
precisement specify, il me semble pourtant, que V. E. ne peut former de
difficultez sur cela; Car ces mots, Au plustot que fair se pourra, emportent
bien un term limite, quelque court qu'on veuille le sousentendre, person
n'ayant jamais exige une chose plutot qu'elle ne se peut fair, J'avoueray, que
les ordres and pleins pouvoirs de la Reine Regente d'Espagne, qui nous ont ete
communiques par l' Ambassadeur Gamarra, ne faisants aucune mention de cette
petite difference, je n'en avois pas done avis a sa Majeste, me croyant asses
muni, and asses autorise par mes pleins pouvoirs pour signer le meme projet qui
avoit ete envoye en Angleterre aussi bien qu'en Espagne.

J'espere que des que V. E. aura depeche les Pouvoirs a l'Ambassadeur d'Espagne
de delivrer l'argent, il n'y aura plus de difficulte a la signature du Projet,
tell qu'il luy a ete communique: Et autant que je le puis juger, sur tout par
rapport au Ministre de Suede, je ne croy plus que cette affair trouve de
retardement. C'est dequoy j'ay voulu donner avis a V. E. C'est a elle a en user
selon sa prudence, and les interets de son Roy, and a m'estimer comme je suis,
etc.

To Sir John Trevor.
Hague, Jan. 24. S. N. 1670. SIR,
I Am to acknowledge yours of the 7th with an enclosed to Monsieur Van
Beuninghen, which I have sent to Amsterdam, having first perused it as you
pleased to give me leave. I shall say nothing upon it till I have spoken with
him, and seen how we agree in Matter of Fact: Because the Weight of all seems
to lie upon the use of those privative Contracts to the Exclusion of our Trade;
having been disowned, if not invalidated by the Treaty between the two Nations
after the first War; and upon the Practice having been exercised accordingly
for several Years after, and till within few Years of our second War: Which two
Points, if they can be evidenced by the Treaty, and by sufficient Testimonies
of the subsequent Practice, we have certainly all the Reason in the World for
our Demands. But if we must rely upon the common Equity in Freedom of Traffic
between Friends; we are engaged in the Question upon which we cannot yet agree;
whether the same Rules are current in the Indies as in Europe: To which I
suppose we shall hardly our selves consent, if the West must be comprehended as
well as the East. But I shall be able to say more upon this, when I have got a
Sight of the Treaty after the first War, and heard Monsieur Van Beuninghen upon
your Letter: And in the mean time, shall assure you of all the Offices I can
possibly render toward the obtaining of what we pretend.

I can add nothing to my last upon the Business of Surinam; being engaged in my
Endeavors of disposing those of Zeland to let it pass smooth when it comes to
the States General: Such Stops being easier prevented than removed; while Men
are so apt to persist in what they have once said. In the mean Time the
Pensioner of Zeland presses me to procure the Names of such as his Majesty
intends to employ as Commissioners, before the Orders here are consigned me,
according as they desired in their last Letter: Wherein you may observe the
Names of three Men to be inserted on purpose that his Majesty might decline
them in this Commission: If you please to send me the Names, I suppose it may
be necessary to the expediting of these Orders; unless you should think of any
Inconvenience in it, which occurs not to me.

In Pursuit of the late Conferences, whereof I gave you Account in my last; we
have agreed upon this enclosed Project to be sent the Constable, as that which
he may hope will be signed upon the Money being paid; and wherein I am sure
there is not any Thing of the least moment changed, as to what concerns his
Majesty; though the changing of the Form that you sent me, could not be
avoided, because it was without Introduction or Conclusion; and besides it went
a Step further than the Suedish Minister was willing to do, in making it an Act
to the Spaniards; whereas this runs only as an Instrument between themselves,
of which the Spanish Ministers are to have only an Authentic Copy: And since
the Suedes had rather have it this way, I thought best to agree with them; at
least if the Spaniards will be contented with it: But I would not be induced to
engage his Majesty in point of Time; though I was never pressed with more
Earnestness to any Thing, both by the Spaniards and by the Dutch; who sent
their Deputies twice to persuade me to it, because they were unwilling to leave
the Constable that way of escaping us. And to say the Truth, in my own Judgment
I thought it very little material, but I had no Orders to go further in it; and
have to the Spaniards taken upon my self the not having given his Majesty any
notice of that Pretension, early enough to have it included in my Powers; as
you will see by the enclosed Copy of the Letter I yesterday wrote the
Constable, in Conjunction with another from the States, to press Conclusion in
this Affair.

For particular Occurrents, I refer to what goes to Mr. Cook, being unwilling
to charge my self with the Credit of current News; which I have ever found so
uncertain, that a Man may be considered more for what he does not write, than
what he does. Yet I will trouble you with two small Matters, whether they
deserve it or no. Monsieur de Rohan, Brother to the Duke de Mombacon, having
sold his Place of Grand Veneur for four hundred and odd thousand Livres, came
hither last Week to dispose of a hundred thousand Crowns in this Country, though
Interest is not half so high as in France; and has done it: Which I reflected
on, because I had heard formerly, he was a Person as well with his Master as
almost any at Court.

There was executed this Week at Amsterdam, a Person of very good Quality and
Credit among them; only for having engaged the Copies of an Obligation he had
from the Admiralty, instead of the Original, to some Persons from whom he took
up Money upon them: And though he was Nephew to one of the Burgomasters of that
Town, and Brother to the Treasurer of Zealand; and all the Instances that could
be, were made for having him condemned all his Life to a Hole where he could
neither see nor stir; with offer of repaying all the Money he had taken up: And
afterward a thousand Pounds would have been given to have had him executed in
Prison; yet he could not escape losing his Head with the common Forms in
Public; to the Loss of his Creditors, who were as much concerned to save him
as his Friends. Which I observed as a remarkable Strain of the Justice here, so
much different from the Style of most other Places.

I am Sir, etc.

To my Lord Arlington.
Hague, Feb. 7. S. N. 1670. My LORD,
SINCE my last I have received your Lordship's of the 28th past; and doubt not
but before this arrives, you will be fully satisfied by the late Accounts I
have given, of our Progress here, toward the Conclusion of what had so long
depended between Us and the Spanish Ministers: I cannot yet say, the Money is
paid; but I see nothing that wants toward it, only the adjusting of that
Conjunction (demanded by the Constable) of Merchants at Antwerp: For the
Spanish Dealings are in so ill Credit, that it is hard to find any who will give
Caution for such a Sum to the Spaniards, and in their own Dominions, where they
can plead and judge themselves: I believe the States must at last engage to the
Merchants here, that they will indemnify them from all that shall fall out on
this Occasion; though after the Arrival of the Ratifications from England and
Sueden, the Spaniards should make a Querelle d'Allmand with their
Correspondents at Antwerp, and force them to any Prejudice without any Pretense.

I gave Monsieur de Wit the first News of the French King's Declaration, to
remit the Judgments of the Differences depending on the Peace, to his Majesty's
and the Crown of Sueden's Arbitration: He thought, the leaving out the States,
was something discourteous on the French side; but said, however he was very
glad of the Thing being done; and hoped, as the Business should receive no Hurt
by any Resentment on their Side, so it would receive none on our Side by any
Effect of the great Cajolry of France; especially since this Resolution
appeared by the Time to have another Source than only the Civility or Deference
of that Court toward his Majesty.

I doubt, the Confidence in this Declaration will stop the Levies which were
intended for this Spring; though these Ministers are not the most believing in
the French Promises; and I am not very confident, the Effect of this last may
not be spoiled by some unreasonable Answer from Spain upon it; having been
confirmed in such a Suspicion by the Baron d'Isola's Opinion, who told me he
would write to the Marquess Castel-Rodrigo, to advise that the Queen should
accept this Offer of France, Provided, the most Christian King would refer to
the same Arbitrage all the Contraventions of the Peace, whereof Spain
complained at the Conference of Lisle.
Pourveu que le Roy tres-Chretien remettroit au meme Arbitrage toutes les
Contreventions de la Paix don't l'Espagne s'estoit plaint a la Conference de
Lisle. Which concerns the Spoils of Burgundy, and which France would never
admit to give jointly in the Conference with their Pretensions about the
Dependances. I told the Baron, I feared such an Answer might ruin the Business,
since it could not come till the beginning of the Spring, and might then give
the French a Pretext of recalling his Word; after the passing of it had laid
asleep all Thoughts or Preparations for War both in Flanders and Holland, from
whence the first Assistance is to be expected: And that I thought the Answer of
Spain ought to be full and absolute as to the Acceptance of what is offered by
France: And if they would make room for the Contraventions he mentions, that
they should do it rather by enlarging the Acceptance than restraining it to any
Condition, and say they accepted the Arbitrage upon those Dependances, and all
other Differences arising upon the Peace, in the Discussion whereof the Spanish
Pretensions might likewise be brought before the Arbitrators, but at a more
seasonable Time than this next Spring will prove. The Baron professed to be
convinced by these Reasons: But because there is not much Trust to a Person who
is so far in Love with his own Sufficiency; and seems to mind the valuing of
himself at least equally with the doing of his Business; I thought it not
impertinent to give your Lordship my Reflection upon this Matter; That if you
approve it, you may by some safe Way or Cipher transmit it to Sir William
Godolphin: For otherwise I am confident the Spanish Answer will be perplexed
with those Contraventions, which have held the Commissioners all this while at
a Bay at Lisle, and will not be admitted by France in the Decision of the
Dependances.

I sent your Lordship enclosed Baron d'Isola's rough Propositions concerning
his Master's joining with the Triple Alliance; which the Ministers of the
Confederates think fit to discourse first among themselves, and afterward
enter into Conference with him, as the Ministers of one united Power. All we
can do at first, will be to communicate what passes to our Masters: And
therefore I send your Lordship the first Proposals by Advance, that I may the
sooner know your Reflections upon them.

After what will pass here in the Conclusion of our Guaranty and Suedish
Payments; I think, if Monsieur Ognati can propose any good way of securing his
Majesty, or rather furnishing him beforehand with what one quarter of the
Suedish future Subsidies will amount to for the 3 Months which are to be
advanced; it would add to the Strength and Credit of our Alliance, in giving so
great a Satisfaction to the Suede, as they would receive by his Majesty's
undertaking for the fifteen thousand Crowns a Month, which they have so much
insisted on, and seem so much unsatisfied with failing in it.

I had Notice from my Lord Falconbridge of his intended Journey; and have
already begun our Correspondence by a Letter which will meet him at Paris: And
shall not fail in that, nor I hope in any other Duties of my Employment.

I wish my Lord Berkly all Success in his new and great Charge; not knowing any
other wherein a diligent, honest, and able Person may be of greater Service to
his Majesty than in That.

I am ever My LORD, Your Lordship's most faithful and most humble Servant.

To Sir William Godolphin.
Hague, Apr. 3. S. N. 1670. SIR,
THIS Bearer Monsieur Chiese is dispatched by his Highness the Prince of Orange
to Madrid, for the Prosecution and Recovery of a great Debt owing now some time
from that Crown to his Highness, and I think not disputed by them: And though
this Gentleman goes armed with much better Weapons than any I can furnish him
toward the Pursuit of his Enterprise; yet the Prince having commanded me to
give him my Recommendations to You among many other he carries; I could not
fail of it, nor will I doubt its being of some Force with you, since it comes
in the Service of a Prince whose Birth gives him so much Interest in all
English Men, and whose Personal Qualities and Virtues give him a great deal
more in all those that have the Honor to know him. I must therefore beg all
the good Offices and Assistances you can show this Gentleman in Pursuit of his
Highness's Concernments; as well as your Advice to him if he desires it, how to
address himself by such Persons and in such Ways as will give him most
appearance of Success. Your Favor herein I shall take Care to value as I ought
toward his Highness; as I shall always my self acknowledge it, and remain

SIR, Your obedient humble Servant.

To the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo.
Hague, Apr. 3. S. N. 1670. My Lord,
THOUGH the Bearer hereof, Monsieur Chiese, will have no need of other Support
beside the Name of the Prince his Master, and the Justice of the Affair he has
in charge; I would not fail however, of giving him besides, this Recommendation
to your Excellence, as well to pay my Duty to his Highness the Prince of
Orange, as to show my Confidence, that I have yet some Share in the Memory and
Friendship of your Excellency. I can assure you that the Court of Spain in
doing Justice to his Highness, will oblige a Prince who equals his great Birth
by his great Qualities; and who will be one day capable of recompensing the
Kindness that shall be showed him at present. His Highness already takes great
part in the good Turn of the Spanish Affairs, by such Sentiments as deserve to
be cherished, and not discouraged by any Treatment either unjust or
disobliging. I could not recommend his Pretensions to a Person more generous
than your Excellency, nor to one who has been always pleased to interess him so
much in what regards the King my Master. And your Excellency's Favor in this
Affair cannot be desired with greater Instance, nor by one who is more than I am

My Lord, Your Excellency's, etc.

Au Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo.
La Hay, 3 Avril, S. N. 1670. Monsieur,
QVoy que le porteur de cette Lettre, Monsieur Chiese, n'ait pas besoin d'autre
appuy que du nom du Prince son Maitre, and de l'equite de la cause don't il est
charge; je n'ay pourtant pas volu manquer a luy donner comme par surabondance
de droit, cette recommendation aupres de V. E. autant pour satisfaire a mon
devoir envers son Altesse le Prince d'Orange, que pour me fair honneur de la
confiance avec laquelle je croy avoir encore quelque part dans le Souvenir and
l'amitie de V. E. Je pourrois bien l'assurer, qu'en faisant justice a son
Altesse, la Cour d'Espagne obligera un Prince don't les grandes qualites egalent
la grandeur de la naissance, and qui sera un jour en etat de reconnoitre les
bontez qu'on aura a present pour luy: Ajouteray-je, que ce Prince prend deja
beaucoup de part au bon train que prennent les affairs d'Espagne, de tells
sentimens quand ils seroient seuls, meritent que sa person soit cherie, and
qu'au lieu de le rebuter par des traitemens qui sentent l'injustice, on
embrasse cette occasion de l'obliger. Je ne scaurois recommander ses interets a
une person plus genereuse que V. E. ni qui se soit toujours plus interessee
dans tout ce qui a touch de pres le Roy mon Maitre. V. E. ne scauroit etre
plus instamment priee d'accorder sa faveur, ni par une person qui luy soit
plus acquise, and qui soit avec plus de passion que je suis, etc.

To Sir John Trevor.
Hague, May 6. S. N. 1670. SIR,
I Have newly received yours of the 23d past, with a former of the 19th, which
brought me some Marginal Additions upon the Paper I last sent into Zealand
concerning the Business of Surinam. As to the Words, The Dutch Nation
inhabiting there; which are conformable with the Style of the States last
Letter to his Majesty upon that Subject; I question not to get them inserted,
in case the Zealanders come to a Conclusion upon my Paper; though they say, it
already contains several Points more than our first Demands.

For the Words, Ou quelque autre, concerning the Person by whom his Majesty
will send the Orders; I suppose they will pass too; in case the Intentions are
not to employ any of those three Persons for the carrying them, against whom
the Dutch at first excepted.

For the other Words which determine the Rendition of the Colony, to be that
made by Major Bannister, April 21, 1668. I must say freely, that I have very
little Hopes of gaining it; having formerly employed my Strength upon it
without any Success, so much as with the Deputies of Holland, or of any other
Provinces which have expressed the most easy Compliance with our Demands: And
they ever thought it very hard that having yielded to our Demands, of exporting
Slaves, contrary to all Customs formerly practiced in that Colony, and upon the
disputed Sense of an Article; we should press them to carry away likewise those
very Slaves which they themselves had furnished us with, though they offer to
repay more than the Price they cost. And upon my Instances upon this Matter,
their Answer was, That there was no need of distinguishing the Renditions of
the Colony; since the meaning of their Letter was, that what Slaves had been
furnished by the Dutch should be left, and the rest should be carried off: So
that if none were by them furnished between the first and second Rendition,
then none were to be left; but if any were, then those to be left, as well as
such as had been furnished by the Dutch since the last Rendition. And this
Point I am confident was debated by the Deputies, not upon any particular
Knowledge of what it imports; but only upon the general Notion and Reason of
the Thing, from which it will be very hard to make them recede: However, I
shall use my Endeavors in it, and be as glad as you can, of any good Offices
that I am able to render Major Bannister; though he has been the most
troublesome Acquaintance to me, that I have ever had in my Life. I pressed
Monsieur de Wit, and the Commissioners at our last Meeting two Days since, and
particularly the Deputy of Zealand, for the Dispatch of this Business: But not
having then your Additions to my last Paper, I could say nothing of them.
Monsieur de Wit told me, a Conference was appointed this Day between the
Commissioners of Holland and Zealand upon this Business.

On Sunday-night last the Exchanges were made of the Ratifications of the
Concert, with that from Spain for the future Suedish Subsidies: But the Suedish
and Dutch Ministers having each of them three Originals of the Concert, and not
contenting themselves with Authentic Copies, as I had proposed; I am forced to
give you the Trouble of sending two Originals more of the Ratification of the
Concert, to be delivered to the Ministers of those two States upon my receiving
the like from them. I will tell you by the way, That I had some Reason to doubt
whether the Ratification you sent me, would pass or no; though I thought it was
not fit for me to make you any Scruple upon it, unless it were first raised by
the other Ministers here: And do not know whether, it came in that Form by
Choice or by Mistake; but I am sure the Ratification as it runs, is only of the
Guaranty with its Clauses, of which the Concert was never taken to be a part,
and stands in need of a very strong Deduction or Connection with the Words of
the Preface; which indeed mentions the Concert as well as the Guaranty: And you
will find it very different from the Ratification which came from Sueden (and
goes here enclosed) and such as I must confess, had I been the Spanish
Ambassador, I should not have accepted, though neither He nor the Suedish
Minister have yet taken Notice of it. I thought not fit to communicate it to
Monsieur de Wit, till the Day before the Exchange was to be made, because I
knew it could not escape him, and did it then only between our selves: And he
immediately checked when he came to the Words, Supra memoratam Garantiam; and
observed that there wanted the Convention about Forces, which was the sole end
of their Ratification; and thereupon he said immediately, This is not as it
should be.
Cela n'est pas comme il faut: But comparing it with those in the Preface, he
said at last, This may do.
Cela peut suffire; and wished that others were no more scrupulous than he,
where he knew the Intentions were good: And so he made no further mention of it
upon our Exchange of the Ratifications; which I believe proceeded in him from
the ill Consequence he foresaw might arise upon the Discovery of a Weakness of
our Instrument in this Conjuncture, when our Intentions in this Affair are
something more suspected than you assure me they deserve.

I hear the Town of Amsterdam has consented to Monsieur Van Beuninghen's
Journey; but shall not be able to give you an Assurance of it till my next, and
content my self now with that of my being always

Sir, your etc.

To my Lord Arlington.
Hague, May 15. S. N. 1670. My LORD,
THE Knowledge of your Lordship's Absence from Town, has given you of late more
Ease than otherwise I intended; and your Trouble now begins upon the first
Advice I had of your return; which was by your Lordship's of the 29th past: By
which I find the Suspicion you have conceived there, of the late Spanish Answer
to his Majesty, having been indicted at the Hague: And withal you desire to know
something more particular of Monsieur Van Beuninghen's Errand into England. The
first I am confident is without other Ground, than a common Opinion we have
conceived of more Finesse than I have yet observed in the chief Ministers here;
who are as hard and as firm as you can imagine them: But for Tricks or Juggling,
I do not observe either their Abilities or their Dispositions lie much that
way; nor I believe does any wise Man's unless he be brought to it by the ill
Condition or Necessity of his Affairs, and finds no other way of living; which
is not yet their Case here, nor will be I suppose while Flanders is preserved:
And so long I shall look upon them as Merchants in good Estate and Credit, and
who will endeavor to keep it up by square dealing: But whenever they fail in
that Adventure, I shall grow as jealous of them as I see others are. I have
enquired particularly of the Spanish Ambassador* and am assured by him, that
all Monsieur de Witt's Discourses upon that Subject of the late Answer from
Spain, agreed perfectly with what he made me upon the same Occasion: And I
know, the States Deputies at Brussels had immediate Orders from hence to apply
themselves very earnestly to the Constable for the Redress of that Fault: And I
dare say, whoever thinks that these Men here will quit a Point of Interest for
a Point of Honor, has taken a wrong Measure of them. The Spanish Ambassador
bids me be assured, That the Answer from Spain will be amended, and come in all
Points to his Majesty's Satisfaction: He goes this Day from hence toward
Brussels, being hastened thither by an Express from the Constable; who I believe
intends to make use of him in the Junto there; upon whom I hear he will wholly
devolve all his public Business: Having taken an Attestation from his
Phisicians, that his ill Health has rendered him wholly incapable of charging
himself any longer with it.

For Monsieur Van Beuninghen's Errand into England, I suppose the Rise of it
was of an old Date; and occasioned a good deal by my laying often to their
Charge, the want of Respect they showed his Majesty in the choice of the
Ministers they sent into England; who are seldom of the Province of Holland, or
of those Persons most considered in this State: Besides, when I found I was not
able to bring the Business of our Marine Treaty to such a Conclusion as we
proposed, though I failed but in one Article (which yet it seems is thought to
import the whole of our Pretensions there) I told them here, That it would be
absolutely necessary to treat it in England, and bring it to some Issue there:
And for that purpose, to send some able Person over, who being perfectly
entrusted in it from hence, might debate it there with Persons as well
instructed on our Side. Upon these Grounds Monsieur Van Beuninghen's Journey was
thought fit above a Year ago; but his being chosen Burgomaster of Amsterdam
about the same time, made him then absolutely refuse it. Since his Year
expired, my Instances still continuing for a Conclusion in our East India
Business; and Mr. Secretary Trevor's Papers upon the same Subject keeping Life
in it from Time to Time, Monsieur Van Beuninghen began about two Months since
to show some Inclination to the Journey; which has been pursued very earnestly
by the States here, and especially by Monsieur de Wit, till it came lately on
all Sides to be resolved on: So as your Lordship must reckon, that the avowed
Errand will be the Business of the East India Company; and the clearing that
part of the Marine Treaty which so long proved too hard for me here. Besides,
this will be the Compliment they pretend to make his Majesty, in sending a
Person of so much Account among them, as Monsieur Van Beuninghen: And with the
Orders of Surinam, which they here reckon upon as a perfect Piece of Compliance
with his Majesty. And this is the Account they give the French Ambassador of
this Journey; adding a good deal of Monsieur Van Beuninghen's Inclination to see
England in this Season.

That which is further meant by it, is, First in general to inform themselves
perfectly of our Temper in the Pursuit of those Ends we have been these two or
three Years last engaged in: And which many Discourses and Reflections of late
have made them a little suspect, does not continue so equal and so warm as it
began. And in this Regard it will be his Business to use his best and most
parsuasive Oratory to confirm us in the Pursuit of those common Interests
abroad, which we have of late so much advanced by our Triple Alliance, and the
Dependances of it: And in short, to persuade us, that it is more our Honor and
our Interest to Lead than to Follow. In Pursuit of this, he will I believe
endeavor to dispose Us to accept a Conjunction with such Princes of the Empire
as desire it, upon such Measures as are proposed in the late Project I sent
your Lordship drawn up by Monsieur de Wit: Though I have made so good way in
defending you upon this Point, that I believe it would not cost much Trouble
there, unless you are willing to enter further into it than you seemed of late.

Another Point, and that which I believe he will most eagerly pursue, is the
Prohibition of French Commodities, upon which his particular Imagination has
been long bent, as the only sure and easy way of bringing the French Power and
Riches into Decay, in case the Thing could be agreed on among all or the
greatest part of their Neighbors: And this State having sounded the Spanish
Court upon that Point, received Answer, That whatever England and They should
agree upon, Spain would readily join with Them in it: By which means they
suppose, that besides what would be saved by both our Nations, by stopping the
vast Importation of French Commodities; a very great Traffic would be gained
by exporting our own, to furnish the Spanish Fleet, which supplies their
West Indies every Year in a great measure with Commodities brought them from
France: The Resolutions of this State go as yet no further as I can hear, than
to all sorts of wearing Goods and Brandy; nor do I know whether this it self
will be brought to Execution, before they are satisfied how far we are likely
to join with Them in it: After which, the Considerations of Wine and Salt will
likewise come in Play.

Besides these Public Matters, I doubt you will likewise be pursued about Mr.
Honywood's Widow, who is Daughter to a Burgomaster of Amsterdam, and so most
properly under Monsieur Van Beuninghen's Protection, especially being a young
and handsome Widow; which I hear will tempt her to go over with him herself, and
plead her own Cause.

I do not think, the Intentions of his Journey go further than what I have
mentioned, unless he be invited to any Thing upon the Place, or by some new
Accident from abroad. In the mean time, to do him right, we shall have a great
deal of Reason to welcome him, because he has very industriously employed
himself in helping us to gain our Point upon the Business of Surinam, which was
yesterday resolved on by the States General, though the Province of Zealand
protested against it: And besides, nothing has given us so hopeful a Prospect
of the Prince's good Fortunes here, as the Support of the Town of Amsterdam, so
declared, and so warm in his present Concernment; toward which I am confident
Monsieur Van Beuninghen has very much contributed, as being a Person of very
great Influence in that City. The State of that whole Business is so well and
so fully set down in the Paper of Intelligence, that I am sure I cannot amend
it, and therefore will not repeat it.

Your Lordship will know by the enclosed, that Monsieur de St. Evremont set out
this Morning toward England, with the Portugal Ambassador likewise, who both
accompany Monsieur d'Opdam as far as Nieuport, and there embark for Dover;
whilst he goes on to meet the French King at Dunkirk with the States
Complements.

I am ever my Lord, your etc.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Had forgot to tell your Lordship, That another part of Monsieur Van
Beuninghen's Instructions will be, to endeavor all that can be, that this
State may be admitted into a Conjunction with his Majesty for the Pursuit of
the Algerins till they are reduced to the Necessity of a Peace with both.



To Sir John Trevor.
Hague, May 27. S. N. 1670. SIR,
I HAVE this Day received yours of the 13th current, with the Account of my
Lord of Essex's Treatment in passing the Sound; which, if wholly new, was what
we had very little Reason to expect from that Crown since the Change of their
Ministry: Though there are some Reports here that they intend to keep up a
close Intelligence with France, for fear of the Suede; whose Forces give them
at this time, it seems, some Jealousy. I will hope, my Lord of Essex may
receive the Satisfaction he demands; however he will have that of having
discharged his part upon this Occasion with the Constancy that became him.

I do not question but you will receive a wiser Answer, as you say, from Spain;
and wish they could find wiser Men to encharge with their great Affairs and
Governments, than you will see they do by the Accounts I know you receive from
Brussels, of the Constable's late Caprices in order to his return for Spain. It
is here variously discoursed who shall succeed him: The old Empress and Prince
Charles of Lorrain being still in Name among some others; either of which, or
both together as it is talked of, seeming the best Choice that can now be made
by the Crown of Spain. It is wished here that his Majesty would further it all
he can by the Offices of his Minister in that Court.

Yesterday the Spanish Ambassador's Secretary came to communicate to me a
Letter he had received from the Ambassador at Brussels; taking notice, that
upon a more particular Observation of our late Ratification of the Concert; the
Date of it was preceding to that of the Concert it self, signed by me here at
the Hague; which was the last of January N. S. whereas the Ratification at
Westminster bears Date the 7th of January O. S: And this Remark of the
Ambassadors I find to be true by comparing it with the Copy of the Ratification
that lies by me: And doubt not but the Mistake only was of the Month of January
for February, in the Ratification you sent me over. Whereupon I assured the
Secretary there could be no Difficulty in the Redress of it; and he desired me
to endeavor it as soon as I could; and I hope the Notice of it may come time
enough to prevent the same Mistake in the Instruments intended for Sueden and
Holland, as well as to procure a new one for Spain.

I could not by the last Post give you the Certainty of the Issue in the Prince
of Orange's Affair, the States of Holland not rising till one a Clock that
Night, after the warmest Debates which have been known among them for many
Years: However, the Towns which favor the Prince having the Plurality of
Voices, and Amsterdam in the Head of them, at length carried their Point; and
brought it to a Resolution, That the Prince should have Session in the Council
of State with a decisive Voice; and should have the same Place his Ancestors
were used to. After this was resolved on, that Party which the most opposed the
Prince's Interest, started two new Points: The First, That no Captain General
should be chosen otherwise than from Year to Year, but by Unanimity of Voices.
And Secondly, That in case the Prince should be chosen Captain General for
Life; then it should be again debated and resolved by Plurality of Voices,
whether he should continue his Session in the Council of State. And these two
Points were agreed to by all the Towns excepting four or five, in which number
were Amsterdam and Haerlem; who maintain, That they were not now to be
resolved, but then only when those Matters came in Question. The States of
Holland being separated after these Resolutions, the Execution of that
concerning the Prince's entrance into the Council of State, will remain in the
States General, and consequently receive no Opposition that I can foresee: And
though it bears no great Name, yet I take it to be of that Importance, as to
leave his Highness's future Fortunes in a manner wholly dependant upon his own
Carriage and Personal Qualities, which give hitherto all the Signs that can be
of advancing and not impairing them.

In the Course of this Business, Monsieur Van Beuninghen has so much provoked
the ill Will and Opinion of these Towns which were contrary to the Prince, that
they had almost resolved to make a Stop of his Journey; but that is now over,
and he prepares to be gone the end of this Week: And will not deserve to be
less welcome in England for what has lately passed here; though perhaps it may
not be to his Advantage, nor to the Prince's neither, to give him any too
public Testimonies of it. He gave me Hopes on Sunday-night, that to Morrow the
Business of Surinam would be ended, according to the Form I drew up in Pursuit
of our last Conference, which I here send you enclosed: Though he told me there
would be Difficulty in the Point of Major Bannister's landing with so much
Liberty as is insisted on: And therefore he pressed me hard to be content with
either remaining aboard his Ships, or else lodging in the Fort till his Affairs
were dispatched; where all Convenience should be provided him: But I refused
both; and so left the Thing with him in the Form it now runs.

I am Sir, your etc.

To my Lord Berkeley.
Hague, May 30. S. N. 1670. My LORD,
Though I know your Excellency would easily forgive me a Commission which might
save you a Trouble in the midst of many others that are a great deal more
necessary: Yet I could not forgive my self if I should any longer delay giving
your Lordship the Assurances how great a part I take in all your Fortunes; and
consequently how much I have shared in the general Satisfaction which I hear
you have both left in England, and found in Ireland, upon your late entering
upon the Government of that Kingdom. I am not only much pleased with it upon a
private Score, as one of your Lordship's Servants, but as having always had the
best Wishes for the public Good of that Country, and his Majesty's Service in
the Establishment of it: Both which will I am confident, thrive very much in
your Lordship's Hands; not only in regard of the great Experience and Abilities
which are so generally allowed you; but because you are too Rich as well as too
Generous to lose the Merit and Glory of great and honest Actions, in the Cares
of your own private Fortunes: For this has too often given an Alloy both to the
Worth and Success of several of your Lordship's Predecessors; and contributed
chiefly to the Unhappiness of the Governors as well as of the Country; both
which I hope you will have the Honor to restore. I cannot but observe to your
Lordship, That I find by a general Consent of the Merchants here, that Ireland
runs every Year an eighth part in Debt by Importing so much beyond its
Exportation; which being to be drawn out in Coin, will be a certain though slow
Consumption of the Treasure of that Kingdom; unless remedied by Sumptuary Laws
or Examples for lessening the Importation of Foreign Commodities; or else,
Industry for increasing the Native, which are either consumed at home, or
carried abroad: The first is like Diet, but the other like Exercise, to an
indisposed Body; which is the way of acquiring Strength and Vigor; whereas the
former gives but barely Health. I believe the two great Improvements to be made
in Ireland, are of the Fishing and the Linen Trade; This to keep our Money at
home, and That to fetch more in from abroad. If your Lordship thinks these
Particulars worth your Care; and that I can contribute toward them by any
Lights and Assistances from hence; I shall be glad upon that or any other
Occasion to receive your Commands.

I have given my Secretary Order to make an Extract of the News which either
arises here, or comes to me by Letters from Foreign Parts; which shall go
Weekly to you, if you think it worth the Trouble; and will please in return to
do me the Justice of esteeming me what I am with much Truth and Passion,

My LORD, Your Excellency's most obedient humble Servant.

To my Lord Arlington.
Hague, Jun. 3. S. N. 1670. My LORD,
I WAS extreme glad to find by your Lordship's of the 16th past, some Assurance
of your Recovery: And whatever the Name of your Illness was, will believe the
Nature of it could not be very bad, since it left you so soon: After which I
will trouble you no more with my Remedies; nor shall I need any my self after
so great a one as your Lordship has given me by the Knowledge of your own and
my Lady's Health: For which I make you my particular Acknowledgments.

By observing the Winds, I guess Monsieur Van Beuninghen will, before this
arrives, have given your Lordship the Account himself of his leaving the Hague
on Sunday-night, and setting Sail I suppose on Monday-evening; unless Madam
Honywood made him stay some Hours longer, who had appointed to be with him by
that time from Amsterdam. I will say nothing in Favor of her Pretension, but
that she is Daughter to the ancientest Burgomaster of Amsterdam, who has
expressed the greatest Passion of any other of the States, in Favor of the
Prince of Orange's late Concernment; and may perhaps thereby deserve some Mark
of his Majesty's Favor; which I assure you I say wholly of my self: For my
good Offices in her Business were not at all thought worth engaging, since
Monsieur Van Beuninghen undertook it, as I suppose he has done by their joining
Company. Your Lordship will find nothing to lessen your Esteem of his Person;
unless it be, that he is not always so willing to Hear as to be Heard; and out
of the abundance of his Imagination is apt sometimes to Reason a Man to Death:
Which I tell your Lordship beforehand, that you may not fall into any
Prejudice before you know him well: And on the other Side, I have taken some
Care to prevent his employing that Talent too much in your Conversations. For
the rest, you will find him Fort honnete homme; one that puts all the Good of
his Country upon maintaining and cultivating his Majesty's Alliance; and who
upon the Prince's Occasion will deserve the good Will of our Court.

For his manner of Negotiating, I am confident you will find him not ill-bred,
nor offering to impose his Measures, as you call them, upon us: But after any
Propositions and Reasons he shall lay before you, will rather tell you that you
are Masters of all; and that the States will in all Things that concern our
Neighbors, perfectly follow those his Majesty shall take.

Whatever Reception the State's Proposal about the Algerins meets with in
England; I wish to God some better Order were taken for preserving our Honor
in the Mediterranean: For, what with the ill Conduct of our Captains, that they
say will turn Merchants, leaving our Merchants to play the Men of War; and with
the late shameless Loss of the Sapphire: I assure your Lordship, the Reputation
of our Sea-Affairs and Men, decays abroad to a Degree that is very sensible I
am sure to me; and I doubt will hardly recover without some new and severe
Discipline or Examples.

The Prince of Orange was introduced into the Council of State on Saturday
last, and with the Circumstances which he is very well pleased with. He
resolves upon his Journey into England about the latter End of this Month, or
beginning of next: But will not fix the Time till the Pensioner's Return from
Groningue about ten Days hence.

I am my Lord, your etc.

To my Lord Arlington.
Hague, Jun. 17. S. N. 1670. My LORD,
I WAS very glad to hear this Morning of your Lordship's being well arrived in
Town; where I hope the Diversions of your late Journey have returned you with
such an Increase of Health as is necessary for the Support of your great
Affairs, Y para mi consuelo. Many French have lately passed this Way since the
Return of that Court; some who attended Madame into England, and extremely
applauded her Reception there, and his Majesty's great Graciousness to those of
her Train. The Count d'Estrades came likewise three Days since, but I think
barely on a Visit to his old Home; or if he has any Business, it is particular,
and at Amsterdam. I find, they all agree in assuring Us of the Peace, as long
as we can assure Them of the King of Spain's Life: But in giving us fair
Warning that whenever that fails, their Master will march into the rest of
Flanders without any Circumstance, and possess himself of it if he can. This
Knowledge, and that of the King of Spain's late Sickness, have given Them some
Perplexity here, which is much relieved by this Days News of his Recovery. But
we find nothing yet toward the Redress of the late untoward Answer upon the
Ar^^^age.

The Prince of Orange continues still the Talk as well as the Desires of his
Journey into England: But has of late been very earnest to know my Opinion,
whether he be like to procure any Satisfaction in his Pretensions there;
saying, as I guess, Industriously, that all his best Friends here are of
Opinion, that in Case that should wholly fail him, his Journey into England
would prove of great Prejudice to his Affairs here; by letting his Friends see
how little he is considered by his Majesty, whose Countenance will be a great
Support to him in the Course of his Fortunes.

I durst not offer his Highness the least Judgment of my own upon this Matter;
assuring him I was wholly ignorant of all his Majesty's Affairs, besides what
related to this Country; and particularly of the present State of his Revenue,
or how much the late Supplies have contributed toward the Ease of it: Upon
which, the Prince seemed very desirous that I would touch this Point to your
Lordship, so as to have your Thoughts upon it before he goes: This I suppose
proceeds chiefly from the Princess Dowager, who declared her Opinion positively
to me some Weeks ago upon this Matter, to the same purpose; and I hear,
persists in it; which yet she does not in all Things: For I can assure your
Lordship, she now professes to be the most satisfied that can be with my
Conduct in relation to the Prince; and makes me more Acknowledgments than are
fit for me to receive; since I pretend only not to have spoiled his Business,
which it had been the easiest Thing in the World for an English Minister here
to have done. I wish to God he do nothing toward the Prejudice of it himself,
by Advice of younger or warmer Heads: For this is a Country where Fruit ripens
slowly, and cannot be preserved if it be gathered green. I am very confident
from his last, as well as the present Dispositions I here discern, that his
Fortunes are in his own Hands; and I hope he will make great Advantages in the
Conduct of them, by your Lordship's Advices when he sees you in England, of
whose Prudence and Virtues he will go over with a very full Persuasion.

Monsieur de Wit returned yesterday to Town, after fifteen Days Absence at
Groningue about the composing some Differences in that Province. This was a
Year or two before he was massacred.
There is a violent Humor runs against him of late in the Town of Amsterdam,
upon Pretext of his growing too far into the Sway of all Affairs in this State
by so long a Ministry; and of advancing his own Friends into Offices and Places
of Trust, with too much Industry. But I suppose, the Bottom of this is the same
with that of all Popular Humors: That is, a design in the Leaders to change
the Scene; that so those who have been long employed may make Room for those
who have been long out. I am not of Opinion they will succeed to prejudice him
suddenly; both because his chief Enemies acknowledge his great Abilities and
Usefulness to the State, and because he will always have it in his Power to
fall in very considerably with the Prince's Interest, which the other Party
pretends to promote: Though in such a Case his Highness would have a hard
Choice with which Wind to sail: As indeed he is likely to fall into
Conjunctures here that will require all his Prudence.

I thought fit to say thus much at once to your Lordship, that so you may the
better know what to make of twenty Reports that may arise upon these Occasions.
Though it will I think after all be our Parts both in England and here, to seem
the least we can concerned in them, further than our Wishes to the perfect
Union of a State we are so near allied to; which we may I suppose own our
Opinion of, that it will never be compassed but by taking in the Prince's
Interests, as far as can consist with the Liberty of the State: And making such
a Person of him, as may in Title, Expense, and other Circumstances, represent
the Dignity of their Commonwealth.

I am ever My Lord, your etc.

To the Earl of Northumberland.
Hague, Jun. 17. S. N. 1670. My LORD,
BY the same Post which brought me the Honor of a late Letter from your
Lordship, I received from other Hands the News of my Lord of Northumberland's
having left you to the Succession of all his Honors and Fortunes: Which gives
me the Occasion of acknowledging your Lordship's Favor and Memory; and at the
same time of condoling with you upon the Loss of a Father, whose great Virtues
and Qualities must needs have made so many Sharers with you in this Affliction.
I hope the Help which is given your Lordship by so many of your Servants and
Friends upon this Occasion, will serve to ease your own Part in it: And that
after all that can be offered up to Decency, and to the Memory of so great and
excellent a Person, this will find your Lordship rather taken up with the
Imitation of his Virtues than the bewailing of his Loss: Since this is but what
he owed to Nature and to Age, and to the Course of long Infirmities; and the
other is what will be due from your Lordship all your Life, to your Birth, your
Family, and your Self. Nor indeed can ever so much depend upon so few Paces, as
will now, upon those your Lordship shall make at your first setting out: Since
all Men will be presaging by Them the Course of your Journey; as they will have
indeed Influence upon the Ease as well as the Direction of it. For my own Part,
I expect a great Increase of your Lordship's Personal Honor upon this
Occasion: And that having been so excellent a Son of a Family, you will show
your self the same in being now a Father of it; since nothing makes Men fit to
Command, like having learnt to Obey; and the same good Sense and good
Dispositions make Men succeed well in all the several Offices of Life. Those I
know will be your Lordship's Safety in entering upon a Scene, where you will
find many Examples to avoid, and few to imitate: For I have yet seen none so
generally corrupted as Ours at this Time, by a common Pride and Affectation of
despising and laughing at all Face of Order, and Virtue, and Conformity to
Laws; which after all, are Qualities that most conduce both to the Happiness of
a Public State, and the Ease of a Private Life.

But your Lordship will, I hope, make a great Example, instead of needing other
than those of your own Family, to which so much Honor, Order, and Dignity,
have been very peculiar; as well as the Consequences of them in the general
Applause, and the particular Esteem of all those who have had the Honor to
know and observe it. Among whom there is none more desirous to express that
Inclination by his Services, nor that has more of it at Heart than

My Lord, Your Lordship's most faithful and most humble Servant.

To the Great Duke of Tuscany.
Hague, Jun. 27. S. N. 1670. SIR,
HAving so long taken part in whatever concerns the Person or Interests of your
most Serene Highness, I could not fail to condole with you for your great Loss,
whereof all Christendom would have been sensible to the last Degree, if the
Grief for such an Accident were not lessened by the Succession of a Prince who
has left such Impressions of his Person and Merits wherever he has appeared,
as will never be worn out.

It Is true, such is the Composition of Human Things, that nothing is pure or
without mixture; so that even upon this Occasion I see some Ground to mix my
Congratulation with my Condolence, when I consider that your Highness has
finished your Travels before the Accession of this glorious Charge. Your
Highness has added to your Birth and Wit, all the Advantages that the Commerce
of Strangers is accustomed to give; and you now find occasion for the exercise
of all, toward the Government of your Subjects. My Wishes and Applauses shall
not be wanting to your Highness; though I know your Conduct and good Fortune will
give me little Occasion but for the latter, as your Highness's great Qualities
have already given me a great deal, to be

SIR, Your Highness's most humble and most faithful Servant.

Au Grand Duc de Toscane.
De la Hay, 27 Juin, S. N. 1670. Monsieur,
AYant pris depuis long tems une aussi grande part dans tout ce qui touch la
person ou les interets de V. A. Sme. je ne pouvois manquer a m'affliger avec
elle a l'occasion de la perte qu'elle vient de fair, and qui est tell, que la
Chretiente en seroit inconsolable, si la douleur d'un evenement si triste
n'etoit soulagee par l'idee du Prince qui vient remplir la succession; on scait
que c'est un Prince qui a laisse de sa person and de son merit par tout ou
il a paru des impressions qui ne s'effaceront jamais.

Il est vray, que tell est la composition des chooses humaines, que rien n'y
est pur and sans melange; le bien and le mal ne se laissent guere gouter
separement. En cette rencontre donc je vois dequoy meler mes congratulations a
mes condoleances; je fond les premieres sur ce que V. E. Sme. avoit acheve
tous ses voyages lors qu'un si glorieux fardeau luy est tomb en partage. Elle
a ajoute au bonheur de sa naissance, and a la penetration de son esprit, tout
ce que le commerce and la comparaison de diverse etrangers chez qui elle avoit
sejourne, a accoutume de donner. Cette rich moisson etant a peine faite, tant
de talens sont mis en ouvrage, and V. A. se voit a present obligee de les
consacrer au soin du gouvernement de ses Sujets. Mes voeux and mes
applaudissements ne manqueront jamais a V. A. quoy que sa conduite and sa
prosperity me repondent que je ne feray usage que de ces derniers: Ses grandes
qualitez avoient deja fourni beaucoup de motifs d'etre

Monsieur, De V. A. Sme. le tres-humble and tres-fidelle Serviteur.

To Sir William Godolphin.
Hague, July 3. S. N. 1670. SIR,
I HAVE not had any Thing of late worth your Trouble, nor any of yours by me to
acknowledge; though I should have been glad to have received from your Hand the
Assurance of what comes to me more uncertainly from others, of the Catholic
King's perfect Recovery, and the Junto's Disposition to admit simply of his
Majesty's and the King of Sueden's Arbitrage, as was proposed. The great
Deadness of the Season in point of News would have excused you this Trouble,
but that the Sueaish Minister here begins to pursue me hard for my Offices
toward the Spanish Court for the second Payment, which he reckons to be
already due by the Expiration of eight Months since the delivery of the
Guaranty. But Monsieur de Wit and I are both of Opinion, the Spanish
Ambassador's Act may very well be construed to signify eight Months from the
signing of the Concert, which Spain always insisted upon as an essential Part
of the Guaranty: And to begin the Payments only upon the signing of it, which
was the last of January past; by which Calculation the second Payment will grow
due at the End of next September. But this is fitter to be argued by Spain than
by us: And that which is more necessary, is for Them to provide so as the Money
may be ready here by that Term, to recover by the Fairness and Ease of this
Payment the Credit they lost in Sueden by the Difficulties of the last. In the
mean time, if you can persuade the Spanish Court to signify to the Suedish
Minister either there or here, that they have been put in Mind of it by you;
and have it so much in their Care as to provide that it shall not fail at the
end of September, which They take to be the Term it grows due; you will I
suppose perform an Office both necessary and grateful to all the Par^ies
interessed in that Affair. The Dutch would have enjoined it to their Minister,
if they had any present at Madrid; ^he Want of which gives you more tha^ your
Share in these Transactions. They would fain engage Monsieur Beverning to
accept of that Employment; which I wish for your sake, but I doubt its
succeeding.

The Prince of Orange intends to go for England about the end of this Month;
and my Lord Ossory is shortly expected here, to attend him in his Journey.

I am always SIR, Your most obedient humble Servant.

To the Earl of Essex.
Hague, July 7. S. N. 1670. My LORD,
I HAVE received by this last Post the Favor of one from your Excellency of
the 18th past; which gives me the Hopes of a sudden Dispatch in your present
Negotiations, and the very welcome News of your Intention to pass this way in
your Return; where I shall be very glad to find the Occasions I desire of
serving your Lordship in a Place that indeed better deserves a passing Visit
than any long Abode.

Your Excellency will have received by a former Letter my Condolements upon my
Lord Northumberland's Death, which indeed was very untimely for Himself, his
Family, and his Friends. But if we needed greater Examples how little Defense
is to be found against that Enemy either from Greatness or from Youth; we
should have received a very sufficient, as well as a very sad one by an Express
which brought this Morning the News of Madame's Death, by particular Letters
both to the States and to the Prince of Orange.

The French Courier being not expected till to Morrow Morning, I have not yet
received any Letter of it from my Lord Ambassador at Paris; and therefore shall
give your Lordship the Relation just as it comes in the Prince's Letter; which
says, That on Sunday last being the 29th of June N. S. Madame having eaten very
well at Dinner, and continued so some Hours afterward; about four a Clock in
the Afternoon called for a Glass of Succory-Water, which she used to take every
Day about that Hour; and having drunk it off, complained that it was very
bitter, and presently after began to find her self ill, and fell into violent
Fits of the Colic; upon which she said, That she was sure she should die, and
immediately sent for her Confessor, and with great Resolution disposed her self
to it, by passing through all the Forms of that Church upon such Occasions. The
News of her Highness's Illness was immediately dispatched from St. Clou where
she lay, to Versailles where the Court then was; and occasioned the King's
coming presently to her, who arrived about Eight a Clock that Night, and
brought his chief Phisician with him; who both began to comfort her Sickness,
and assure her that her Colic could not easily carry away a Person of her Age.
But she persisted in assuring them of her Death, spoke a good while softly to
the King; and afterward said aloud, That she had no Regret at all to die; but
that her greatest Trouble was, by so hard a Separation to lose his Majesty's
Friendship and good Graces which he had always expressed to her. She spoke to
Monsieur in the same Terms about her great Willingness to die; which, she said,
was the more, because she had nothing to reproach her self of in her Conduct
toward him.

The King left her about Ten a Clock at Night, his Phisician assuring him she
could not die of a Colic, or at least not so suddenly as she seemed to
apprehend: But her Illness and Pain increasing, she expired about Two a Clock
in the Morning, leaving great Sadness in that Court, and Regret in all those
who had the Honor to know her.

Your Excellency will easily imagine how sensibly his Majesty will be touched
by this Affliction; and therefore I am sure you will receive the same Part in
it that I, and all the rest of his Servants ought to do: Which I shall not
increase by enlarging upon so sad a Story, further than by one Particular more
of the Prince's Letter; That her Body being opened in the Presence of several
Persons, and among them my Lord Ambassador, they could not find the Cause of so
sudden a Death.

Our News from Brussels is, That the Constable was to depart from thence on
Saturday last, leaving the Count de Monterey Governor of those Countries by the
Queen Regent's Commission for the Interim, until a new Governor should be sent
from Spain; who they give out will be Don John, and that he will be there in a
very little time, and take upon him that Government for his Life: But the
Certainty of this we must expect hereafter from Spain. The Danish Envoy here,
tells me he intends to go very shortly for Copenhaguen, and that he hopes to
find your Excellency there; wherein I confess I differ with him. I should be
very glad to know whether he did me the Right of conveying a Letter I wrote to
Monsieur Guldenlew, in answer to one I received from him upon his last Arrival
in Denmark. Your Lordship will oblige me to let one of your Secretaries inform
himself from one of his, whether such a Letter was received, without drawing it
into any further Consequence.

I beseech your Lordship to believe me always what I am with very much
Sincereness

My LORD, Your Excellency's most faithful most humble Servant.

To my Lord Berkeley.
Hague, July 11. S. N. 1670. My LORD,
I Received one from your Excellency of the 11th past, by which you were
pleased both to oblige and to inform me: Nor could any Thing happen more
agreeable to me than an Occasion of acknowledging as I ought the Favor you
there express both to my Friends in Ireland and to me: Of which I am equally
sensible.

I doubt not but your Lordship will find in the loose Posture of Affairs in
Ireland, a great Subject for your Prudence and Industry; in the Application
whereof, I wish your Lordship all Success and Glory, being incapable at this
Distance to make any Reflections on Particulars, either the Evils or the
Redresses: Only as an old Servant, I may have the Liberty of putting your
Lordship in mind of one Point wherein your Reputation is much concerned, and
upon which I doubt you do not much reflect: But if you should continue this
luxurious Custom of getting a lusty Boy every Year, People will think that you
live like a voluptuous young Man of twenty Years old, and not like a staid and
wise Governor of a Kingdom: Nor am I very well satisfied my self, whether it be
a Thing that consists with the Gravity of a Privy Counselor, much less of a
Lord Lieutenant: But when I consider that of so good a Race we cannot have too
many, I am forced to leave my Censures to give your Lordship much Joy of your
Irishman.

We have nothing here in Discourse but the sad and surprising News of Madame's
Death; of which your Lordship will have the Particulars from so many Hands,
that I will not repeat them; nor enter into the general Reflections that are
made upon it in all Places I think, I am sure here without Scruple or Dispute.

The Constable is gone for Spain, and left his Government much as he held it:
Nor can I judge whether it came from his natural Temper or some contracted
Indispositions: For his Health has been of late the Cover for it: But these six
or eight Months past, he has been obstinate to hear nothing of Business,
returning all that has offered by his nearest Officers, with Why do you kill me?
Quiere Matarme? And passing his Time with his Virginals, his Dwarfs, and his
Graciosoes. Some say, his Imaginations reached so far as to raise up Spirits
and Assassins when he was alone.

If Spain has no greater Men, its pity they have so great Use of them; for I am
sure, Non tali Auxilio nec Defensoribus istis Tempus eget. He has left the
Government for the interim by the Queen Regent's Order to the Count de Monterey
whom he hated; and I hear Count Marsyn says, he will not obey a Man, Who is but
just born.
Qui ne fait que naitre; because he is but twenty eight Years old: But they
have succeeded so ill with one Who thought of nothing but dying.
Qui ne songevit qu' a mourir, that I think it will not pass for a very just
Exception; and our Friend Count Marsyn, who is hot at Hand, will I hope come to
himself, and help to keep all Things quiet in Flanders till Don John's Arrival,
which is now talked of, but I am not the easiest to believe it.

I beg your Lordship's Favor or rather Justice both to esteem and use me as

My Lord, your etc.

To my Lord Arlington.
Hague, Jul. 15. S. N. 1670. My LORD,
I WAS very glad to find that the great Measure of his Majesty's Grief upon
Madame's Death, was a little lessened by the Satisfaction he had received, that
it had passed without that odious Circumstance which was at first so generally
thought to have attended it; and of which I endeavor in my Discourse here, to
allay the Suspicions since I see his Majesty is convinced; though it is a very
difficult Matter to succeed in, after so general a Possession, which has been
much increased by the Princess Dowager's Curiosity, to ask her Phisician's
Opinions upon the Relation transmitted hither to one of them from his ^rother,
who is the Dutch Secretary at Paris; and pretends it came from Dr. Chamberlain,
though something different from what he transmitted into England. However it
happened, it had certainly all the Circumstances to aggravate the Affliction to
his Majesty; which I am infinitely touched with, as well as with the Sense of
an Accident in it self so deplorable: But it is a necessary Tribute we pay for
the Continuance of our own Life's, to bewail the frequent and sometimes untimely
Deaths of our Friends. Et levius fit Patientia quicquid corrigere est nefas.

The Baron d'Isola parted this Day for Brussels; from whence he told me he
would answer your Lordship's last Letter, by which he pretends to have drawn
Confidence of his Proposals succeeding in England with the Temper the Dutch had
given it here: But he does not press the Matter much at present, because he
does not pretend that the Emperor's Resolutions are fully taken upon it; nor
will be till after the Enterview, which is as he says about this time contrived
between the Electors of Mentz and Triers; where an Envoy from the Emperor,
another from the Duke of Lorrain, and (as the Baron pretends) from some other
German Princes, are to intervene; where the Measures will be fully taken among
them. In case his Majesty should fall into the Thoughts of admitting that
Conjunction; as Monsieur de Wit tells me he has likewise some Hopes given him
from Monsieur Van Beuninghen; I think it were best however reserving the
Declaration of any such Consent, until he were very well assured of the
Emperor's and the other German Princes final and firm Resolutions; which I know
not whether we may be confident of learning from the Baron d'Isola; whose
Business seems to be rather first to draw out our Points, and make them his
Ground for persuading his Court to agree with them; and thereby value himself
both to his Master, the German Princes, and others, upon his own being the
Author of so great a Negotiation: And perhaps, if his Majesty have a mind to
see the bottom of it, and wishes it effected for common Interest sake; he could
not do better than to acquaint the Elector of Mentz privately with his Thoughts
upon it; and leave him to make use of that Knowledge toward the preparing all
Pieces for the Work. For I find, That Prince must be the Spring of all the
Motions that are made in it on the German Side: So that all will depend upon
his Dispositions and Conduct; which for my part I pretend not to understand yet
in this Affair: For though his late Envoy here visited me with great
Professions from his Master to his Majesty, and much Civility to me; yet I fell
into no sort of plain or confident Discourse with him upon this Matter; but
finding him rather shy in it, I resolved not to be behind-hand with him in that
Point: And so we parted as wise as we met.

By this Days Post I hear, the Count de Monterey is declared Governor of
Flanders by way of Interim; which yet may last longer than is thought of,
according to the slowness or uncertainty of the Spanish Councils, especially
Don John having now finally refused to accept that Charge. The Count Marsyn I
hear, says he will not obey a Man Qui ne fait que naitre; because the Count
Monterey is but twenty eight Years old; and therefore sets on foot already many
Brigues against him both in Spain and Flanders, which we here fear may produce
very ill Effects by increasing the Disorders of Flanders, and thereby the
Temptations of France; though I hope our Friend, who you know is something hot
at Hand, may yet come to himself: For methinks his Exception against the new
Governor is not very just, after having so long obeyed a Man that thought of
nothing but dying; and for ought I hear, was by that Apprehension rendered
unfitter for his Post than any he could have met with to leave in it, without
very great Luck. They much persuade me here to make a Journey to Brussels in
this Conjuncture; having heard me speak of it this Summer, and of having his
Majesty's leave; because they know I am acquainted with those at present upon
the Scene: I find their Deputies have no Credit there, and come back only with
Dissatisfaction and Complaints: I see nothing like to take me up here, when I
have observed this Assembly of the States of Holland, and what they will do and
promise further in the Prince's Business, which a Fortnight will determine; and
therefore am well enough inclined to it: But should be much the more, if his
Majesty should think fit to Complement the Count Monterey upon this Occasion,
and save the Expense of an express Person, by sending him a Letter with me to
be delivered as one that goes wholly Incognito, and without any Character, as
was last Year intended I should have done to the Constable: Of which your
Lordship can easily satisfy me.

I find, the Prince has put off the Thoughts of his Journey till toward the
sitting of the Parliament, upon what your Lordship last writ: By whose Advice
his Highness resolves to steer in the Course of his Affairs and Motions
relating to England.

I am ever My Lord, your etc.

To Sir John Trevor.
Hague, July 22. S. N. 1670. SIR,
I AM at once to acknowledge both yours of the 1st and 5th current, with the
enclosed Names of the Scotch Ministers in the first; and in the other the last
Paper concerted with Monsieur Van Beuninghen concerning the Affair of Surinam.

Upon what concerns the Scotch Ministers, I gave in yesterday a Memorial to the
States; upon which I received this Day a Message from Them, expressing their
Readiness to perform all Parts of their Treaties with his Majesty; and desiring
to know from me the several present Abodes of the said Persons, to the End they
might direct their Orders to them accordingly. But in this Point I was not able
to answer Them at so short Warning, having not yet upon Enquiry heard of any of
the three Persons, excepting Mackard, who it seems lived some Months since
privately at Vtrecht; but whether he continues still there or no, I am yet
ignorant: And therefore I told the States Agent, That I would endeavor to
inform my self of their Abodes if I could; but would not take upon me to find
them out in any certain Place; since it was the Custom and Interest of such
kind of Men to be as private as they could, and to shift often: And therefore I
did not see any Thing likely to reach them, but a Publication of their Names,
with the States Orders for their avoiding these Dominions; which at some Time
and Place or other could not fail of coming to them, and have the same Effect
that could be expected from a more particular Direction.

I spoke with Monsieur de Wit this Morning concerning your last Paper of
Surinam; which he perused, having not seen it before, nor heard any thing of it
from Monsieur Van Beuninghen: And therefore he said, the States could not fall
upon the Debate of it without knowing upon what Grounds or Considerations
Monsieur Van Beuninghen might have made these Changes, since his last Paper
upon this Subject, which they expected would have been final in this Matter.
Besides some Point wherein he thought the Style not so clear, he observed two
main Alterations in the Substance: The first is, that our Ships should not
carry Cannons mounted in the River.
Des Canons montes dans la Riviere: Which he said, imports that they might
carry what Cannon they please so they were not mounted, which is not the
Business of an hours time; and is contrary (as he said) to your first Agreement
with Monsieur Van Beuninghen. The second was, concerning Major Bannister; whose
Landing is here positively allowed with the Liberty of going to his own Colony.
Both which were (as he says) referred in Monsieur Van Beuninghen's last Paper
to the Governor's Discretion and Judgment, whether it might be done without
Danger of the Colony. Upon both these Points we had large Discourses, which
ended with his assuring me, that he should be the last to raise any Scruples
upon either of them; but doubted that the Zealanders might thereupon
(especially the last concerning Major Bannister) change their late
Protestations to Clamors, which might occasion the States General to make more
Difficulty in these Changes; unless they were satisfied in the Reasons of them
by Monsieur Van Beuninghen's Dispatches; to which all was of necessity to be
referred.

I hear, Monsieur Lionne entertained the Dutch Secretary at Paris with the News
he had received from Madrid, of that Crown's joining this State with his
Majesty and Sueden in the Arbitrage; and at the same time with many Reasons why
his Master could not admit of it; though he said he had not yet communicated it
to him: However the declared Opinion of such a Minister seems to raise a strong
Prejudice in the Case.

I am sorry the Business of Conventicles gives you so much Trouble, and could
wish we were at a good End of all such Controversies; which make his Majesty
appear abroad to have so great and considerable a number of Subjects that have
not learnt to obey him; and consequently make up no part of his Strength, but
seem rather to lessen it; and amuse People both at home and abroad with
Imaginations of Changes. Yet Monsieur Van Beuninghen has represented it hither
as a Business which his Majesty will easier master than you seem to be
confident of: But their Interest here may help them to believe as well as to
desire it; upon the Expectation of so many Persons and Stocks as will be
brought over to them upon this Occasion; and makes as they suppose a
considerable Increase of their Trade, and Diminution of ours.

I am always Sir, your etc.

To the Count de Monterey.
Hague, Jul. 22. S. N. 1670. My Lord,
HAving long taken part in what regards the Person and Interests of your
Excellency, and having heard of your Advancement to so great a Charge as that
of Governor of the Netherlands, I would not fail of giving you Joy, and letting
you know the Satisfaction I receive by it upon many Accounts. For, since by the
force of the present Conjunctures, it will be often necessary for me in the
Post I am in, to have something or other to negotiate with the Governor of
Flanders, about the common Interests; I shall be very glad to enter into
Business where I have already entered into Friendship; and to have to deal with
a Person who has already given me so many Testimonies of his fair and prudent
manner of transacting, as well as of his particular Inclination for confirming
the Alliance between the Crowns of both our Masters, and for the Advancement of
their Interests, wherein the Welfare and Repose of Christendom are concerned.
And whereas the good Order of Affairs in Flanders is very important to his
Majesty and the other Parties of the Triple Alliance, as well as to the Crown
of Spain; I will hope, that by your Excellency's Conduct some good Order may be
taken for settling the Affairs of the Militia of this Country; and in the mean
time, an end be put to the Complaints and Miseries of the Inhabitants; since a
Government is never well established but in the Hearts of the Subjects; nor so
hard to be shaken as when the Generality of the People as well as the Nobility,
finds no Interest in the Change. I doubt not but your Excellency proposes these
Ends, and will succeed in them, because you are too generous to mix with them
your own Passions or particular Interests, which will not be less glorious to
You than profitable and happy to Christendom. And besides the Advantage Spain
will make by your Excellency's good Conduct, they will save themselves the
Trouble to think of a new Governor, or to end an Interim so advantageous to
them.

My best Wishes shall not be wanting to your Excellency, nor my Services, upon
all Occasions where they shall be necessary; for no Man is with more Esteem and
Truth than I am,

My Lord, Your Excellency's most humble and most affectionate Servant.

Au Comte de Monterey.
De la Hay, 22 Juill. S. N. 1670. Monsieur,
AYant pris depuis long tems beaucoup de part dans tout ce qui touch la
person and les interets de V. E. and venant d'apprendre qu'elle a ete pourvu
d'une charge aussi importante que l'est celle de Gouverneur de Pais-bas; je
n'ay pas voulu manquer a luy donner el para bien and temoigner la joye que j'en
ay ressentie pour plusieurs raisons. Car puisque par l'enchainement de
conjonctures presents, and dans le post ou je suis, il me sera souvent
necessaire de negotier, and d'avoir quelque chose a demeler avec le Gouverneur
de Flandres, je seray fort aise d'avoir une liaison d'affaires avec celuy avec
qui j'ay deja des liaisons d'amitie; je me felicite d'avoir a fair a un sage
dispensateur qui m'a deja done tant de marquis de sa noble and judicieuse
maniere d'agir. Avec quelle joye n'ay je point vu votre penchant particulier a
affermir l'alliance enter les deux Couronnes de nos Maitres, and votre
inclination a avancer des interets qui ne tendent aujourdhuy qu'a procurer le
bonheur and le repos de la Chretientie. Comme sa Majeste and ceux de la Triple
Alliance ont fort a coeur l'et at des affairs de Flandres, aussi bien que la
Couronne d'Espagne; je me fais un plaisir de penser que par la bonne conduite
de V.E. on fera enfin quelque bon reglement touchant la milice des Pais bas,
and qu'en meme tems on mettra fin aux plaintes and aux miscres des habitans;
puis qu'un Gouvernement n'est jamais si surement etabli, que lors qu'il a son
fiege dans le coeur des Sujets. Rien n'est si difficile a ebranler qu'un Etat
ou la multitude du peuple aussi bien que la Noblesse n'appercoit point
d'avantage dans un changement. Je ne doubt point que V. E. ne se soit deja
propose toutes ces fins, and qu'elle n'y reussisse, ayant une elevation d'ame
asses grande pour n'y laisser point entrer ses propres passions, ni aucun
interet personel. Vne tell conduite ne luy sera pas moins glorieuse qu'elle
sera utile pour la Chretiente, and outre le profit que l'Espagne en tirera,
elle luy sauvera le soin de songer a un nouveau Gouverneur, and luy fera
prendre le parti de prolonger un si heureux interim.

Mes voeux ne manqueront jamais a V. E. and mes services seconderont mes voeux,
toutes les fois qu'ils luy seront necessaires; car il n'y a person qui soit
avec plus d'estime and de verite que je suis.

Monsieur, Votre, etc.

To Sir John Trevor.
Hague, July 29. S. N. 1670. SIR,
I AM to acknowledge one from you of the 12th; and hope the Dutch Captain you
therein mention, is before this time arrived, and will prove what you desire
him, and thereby deserve the Encouragement you intend him. I know not why
Monsieur Van Beuninghen should at present receive the Proposition concerning
the Emperor's Admission; since Monsieur -- confesses he thinks there will be
Difficulties made in it by the Emperor himself; who has not yet declared
himself to the Elector of Mentz, nor I believe, to the Baron d'Isola neither;
though it be true what you observe, that it ought to be authentickly demanded on
that Side.

I hear no Hopes at all from France of admitting this State into a Part of the
Arbitrage: So that if Spain persists in the Demand of it, as France no doubt
will do in the Refusal; we shall be as much to seek in the End of the Year as
we were in the beginning.

For what concerns the Commands I received about the three Scotch Ministers;
though I cannot find out their present Abodes, yet I question not to obtain
what is desired against them: There can only be one Scruple, if these States
will adhere strictly to the Treaty, which is the Authentic Knowledge of their
being declared Rebels by his Majesty; which I should be glad to know, if it be
so; though I shall in the mean time pursue it, as if I expected no further
Informations.

I have so far pressed them here upon assenting to the last Paper transmitted
by Monsieur Van Beuninghen upon the Affair of Surinam; that the States of
Holland have agreed to it; and appointed three Persons to endeavor either to
dispose or to quiet the Zelanders, and to pass it in the States General; and I
hope it will succeed, the Town of Amsterdam concerning themselves particularly
in it for the Support of Monsieur Van Beuninghen's Credit.

The Assembly of the States of Holland will separate on Friday next; and are
yet likely to agree in the long agitated Impositions upon the French
Commodities before they part; the Town of Rotterdam having (as I hear) this day
at length assented; but with Condition that it shall not be executed till after
Monsieur de Groot's Arrival in France, and account from thence whether that
King be disposed to dispense with the late Rigors there used for discouraging
all Dutch Commodities.

Though nothing has been yet mentioned this Assembly concerning the Prince; yet
I am made believe they may, before they part, settle a Pension upon him, though
a small one of twenty four or thirty thousand Franks a Year, being only in
Consideration of his Session in the Council of State.

I am always Sir, your etc.

To Sir John Trevor.
Hague, Aug. 12. S. N. 1670. SIR,
SINCE my last, the States Agent brought me a Copy of the Letter they had
agreed on to the Governor of Surinam; which I suppose, they delayed till about
the Time of their dispatching it away, because they knew I would except against
the Limitation given to Major Bannister's landing; though they assure me, the
Governor shall have Orders not to hinder it without very evident Knowledge of
the ill Consequence it may have upon the Peace of the Colony; and that the
Zelanders were so sharp in this Point, that they could not pass it in any other
Form. I have likewise since my last been assured from the several Ministers
here, that the Orders I desire concerning the Scotch Ministers would be
granted: But that the Thing being proposed to the States of Holland then
assembled, whom it most concerned, the Persons being supposed to be in their
Province; several of the Deputies declared they would not resolve without
communicating it first to their Towns, among whom those of Rotterdam were the
chief: But their Pensioner Monsieur de Groot upon his departure from hence last
Saturday toward France, assured me of his Endeavors to clear all Scruples in
it before he left that Town.

I have since received your Commands in one of the 24th past concerning
Mentioned in the Histories of K. Charles I. for removing that King by force
from Holmeby.
Cornet Joyce; to which I can yet make no return, Monsieur de Wit being out of
Town and not expected till to Morrow: And I must first break it to him, by whom
I can best know what I may hope for from the States in it; and withal contrive
how it may pass with such Circumstances of Secrecy, that the Noise may not go
before the Shot: By the next I hope to give you an Account how I am likely to
succeed; and in the mean time will only assure you of my utmost Diligence in a
Matter wherein you say his Majesty is so much concerned.

I doubt not but a great part of Monsieur Van Beuninghen's Errand was to
dispose us toward the Admission of the Emperor, and therefore wonder not at
his enforcing that Proposition: But yet, sure the Ground of his Journey was the
Desire of finding some Temper in the Business of the East India Trade; wherein
I am very glad you hope for Satisfaction from him; I mean upon that single
Article which has so long stopped the Marine Treaty, and foiled me absolutely in
the Pursuit of it. For the other Point, I know not yet whether Monsieur de Wit
has received any new Account from Mentz of the Emperor's Intentions; nor how
much it signifies, what the Baron d'Isola tells me, That the Imperial Minister
there, has declared his Master's Resolution, of referring himself wholly to
that Elector for the Conduct and Conclusion of that Affair: And that the said
Elector has declared his Judgment of its being both fit and necessary; but
that as to the Proposition of Forces to be furnished by the several Princes, he
could not proceed to ascertain it, without more particular Directions from the
Emperor, though his Minister there pressed him to it. All which seems to me a
very general and loose Account for his Majesty to proceed upon; and to have
something of the Baron d'Isola in it, as well as of the Negotiations of Mentz:
And yet this is all the Light I can get at present; nor do I well know where to
expect better, the States Envoy having already left that Place.

I shall not fail of performing all the Offices you please to enjoin me toward
the preserving our mutual Confidence in this Conjuncture; which I have
endeavored in all my Discourses here upon the Duke of Buckingham's Journey into
France, since I first heard of it: And I am confident to have succeeded with
the most Rational and Intelligent. For common Authors, they are not to be dealt
with, being too many and too credulous to be reasoned with upon such Points:
The best is, their Credit is of as little Weight as their Belief; and at last
Truth will ever out.

I hear, the Count Molina parted from Madrid upon his way through France into
England about sixteen Days since; so as he ought to be by this Time well
advanced. The Spanish Ambassador is likewise upon his return from Brussels
hither: Which with other Marks confirm me in the Opinion of the Count de
Monterey's being likely to find a long Interim in the Government of Flanders.

I have nothing more to increase your Trouble besides the Profession of my
being always

Sir, your etc.

To Mr. Williamson.
Hague, Aug. 12. S. N. 1670. SIR,
I AM to acknowledge the Favor I have lately received of two from You of the
22d and 26th past, with the Advices you were pleased to give me of what passes
with you in my Lord Arlington's Absence: And know not what better Return I can
make you from so barren a Scene as this is at present, but continuing the
Orders I gave upon Mr. Blaithwait's going out of Town, for all the Prints as
well as the Papers of Occurrences, to be constantly transmitted to you by my
other Secretary Mr. Downton; who tells me he does not fail you in these Points,
no more than I shall do in any other wherein I can serve you here.

I thought in a time of so little Motion or Talk, to have used his Majesty's
Leave for a short Journey into Flanders; but some small Matter still arises to
keep me from being wholly idle; and among others, the Shadow of the Surinam
Business haunts me still, though Monsieur Van Beuninghen assured me he would Lay
it upon his going over. I should be glad to know if you find him as eloquent in
a Court as they do in an Assembly of States here; and that he proves as good at
Concluding as at Reasoning.

I know to a Person of so much Business, an empty Letter is an Interruption;
therefore will add nothing to this but the Profession of being

SIR, Your most humble Servant.

To Sir John Trevor.
Hague, Aug. 15. S. N. 1670. SIR,
UPON Tuesday-night Monsieur de Wit returned to Town; and the next Morning I
went to him upon the Affair wherewith you had charged me in your two last
Letters, whereof that of the 29th past gave me notice of the Yatcht's being
dispatched away. I related the Occasion to Monsieur de Wit, and his Majesty's
Desire upon it, as near as I could in the Manner and Terms you had imparted
them to me; adding of my own whatever, I could think of, concerning the
Interest of this State in such Compliances to his Majesty, especially where his
Person was concerned; and how fit it was for them to pass over the Want of
small Circumstances and Obligations of Treaties, in Matters of so great
Importance to a King so nearly allied to them, and in whose Safety and Quiet
they were so deeply concerned. He allowed all this latter Part of my Discourse;
and for the Matter it self which I desired, he told me, That whatever the
States were obliged to by the Treaty, they had Power to enjoin the Execution
of, because every Province had already given their Consent to it: But in other
Matters the States General had no Power upon any Point wherein the Jurisdiction
of a particular Province was concerned: The Union consisting of seven
Provinces, whose Sovereignty remained still entire to each of them. That, for
this Reason it was impossible to seize upon a Man residing in Holland, and send
him over to his Majesty by any other Power but that of the States of Holland,
who were not now assembled. That the seizing those Criminals by Sir George
Downing, happened to have been desired at a time when the States were assembled,
who gave their general Consent to it: Whereas, if the Town wherein they were,
had dissented and stood upon their Privileges, it had not been in the Authority
of the States of Holland themselves to command it.

After my Expostulations upon these Forms in their Government, which made it
much harder to Treat with Them, than They found it to Treat with other Princes;
and Monsieur de Witt's Deduction of the several Sovereignties of their
Provinces, and Privileges of their Towns from their Original, as well as the
framing them into an Union (rather than a Government) for their common Defense:
We fell at last into the Consideration of what could be done upon the present
Business, since we had found what could not. And he told me with great
Professions of his own Desire to see it succeed, That if I put in a Memorial to
the States General, besides the Danger of having it grow public, I should lose
just so much Time; whereas all they could do would be but to recommend it to
the Committee de Raedt of Holland, to dispose the Magistrates of Rotterdam to
seize upon the Person I desired, and keep him safely guarded without suffering
any Approach to him but by my Order until the next Assembly of the States of
Holland, which will be about a Month hence: And this he said, the Committee
might do of themselves; and he hoped they would, upon my writing a Letter to
the President, especially if I would take the Pains to speak beforehand to the
several Members of it: And in this he promised me his Assistance; and withal,
that if the Magistrates of Rotterdam would seize and guard him till the
Assembly of the States of Holland, he would then use all his Endeavors to
dispose the said Assembly to send him over to the King, though he doubted much
Difficulty in it, and that the Town of Rotterdam would never consent to it,
without an Act from his Majesty to the States, that he should be remanded to
their Town after he had been examined: For without such an Act, he said, the
Town of Dort had absolutely refused to send a Person within their Jurisdiction
to the States themselves.

Upon all these Discourses I resolved as the best I could do, to speak
severally that Evening with all the Members of the Committee de Raedt that were
in Town, which I did as late as I could, so as to give the least Time for the
Matter's taking vent. They all agreed in the same Account of the Constitution
of their Government, which Monsieur de Wit had given me; and assured me they
would act as far in this Business as they could do, if it came to them from the
States General: But withal agreed that they could do no more than recommend it
to the Magistrates of Rotterdam, upon whose Resolutions it would wholly depend.
While I was late in these Visits on Wednesday-night, Captain Harris came to my
House, and told me of the Yatcht's being come to the Briell, but so ill used by
the Storms she had met with, that she would need some Repair before she could
go to Sea again; which I was very sorry for, considering how ill her Voyage was
likely to succeed, and that I had no hopes of sending her back with her
intended Charge. The next Morning being Thursday, I sent my Letters to the
President just upon his going into the Committee: And within an Hour after,
Monsieur de Witt's Brother who is a Member of it, came to me; and told me, That
they had written a Letter to the Magistrates of Rotterdam to the same Purpose I
desired, and with all the Earnestness they could; and to enforce it the more
upon them, had appointed him and Monsieur Voorburgh another Member of the said
Committee, ^o go immediately thither, and dispose the Magistrates all they
could to the effectual Execution of what was desired.

I acknowledged the Care and Compliance of the Committee; and because I knew
all depended upon Suddenness and Secrecy, and that I had been assured the Day
before of Joyce's being in Town; I told him that I was resolved to go my self,
but as privately as I could, and be there as soon as they: And while they were
disposing the Magistrates of the Town, I would endeavor to set the Fellow, so
as to be sure of him when the Scout should have Orders to apprehend him. After
this I went strait to Rotterdam, and got privately into a House within three
Doors of Joyce's; and had not been there an hour, when the Agent I employed to
find him out, had met with him in the Streets, and staid with him till he saw
him go home to his own House. I sent immediately to my two Commissioners, (who
I heard had arrived some time before me in Town) to give them Notice of it, in
hopes of their being ready for me: But I found they were at the Townhouse,
where the Magistrates had been assembled ever since their Arrival; and they
could not be spoke with by the Person ^ sent to them till about an hour after:
And then they told him, That they had been dealing all that Time with the
Magistrates, who made great Difficulties in the Business; and they could not
yet give me Account what they would resolve, but as soon as they could, they
would come themselves and give me notice of it. After this I waited with great
Spite and Impatience till about five hours after the Magistrates had been
first assembled: The greatest part of which Time I could not have failed of my
Prize, if they had sent their Officers. But after seven a Clock at Night, my
two Commissioners came to me and told me they had never seen the Magistrates in
greater Perplexity, which had kept them so many hours unresolved what to do:
That they said, It was absolutely against the Privileges of their Town, to
seize upon any Man without a particular Charge being ready against him: That
this Man they heard, was a kind of mad extravagant Fellow: That having long
resided in their Town, he could be guilty of nothing toward his Majesty,
unless it were of Words; which People were very free of in their Country; and
amounted not to a Crime that was thought to deserve Imprisonment. That, they
should have been glad to know the Words he was accused of; and that if they
should seize a Man without any particular Charge, the Surety and Protection of
their Town would be discredited, upon which much of their Trade depended: And
that they were confident, no Town in Holland would do what was desired of them.
That however for his Majesty's sake, and at the Instance of the two
Commissioners, they had at last resolved he should be seized on, and that I
should have the examining of him if I pleased: But that if I could exhibit no
particular Charge against him, and he did not make himself guilty by his own
Confession, they must release him the next Day. I replied plainly, this was
just nothing to the Purpose, and was only so much Noise without any Effect:
That the King's Demand was to have him sent over, and that since that could not
be done without the Assembly of the States of Holland; my Desire was to have
the Man seized upon and kept till the said Assembly, or at least till I
received further Orders from his Majesty: And less than this was nothing at
all. Hereupon one of the Commissioners seeing how much I stomack't this
Dealing, told me, the Magistrates had not absolutely said they would release
him: But the other replied, That it was true they had not absolutely said it,
but that he must confess he found it was their Intention. For my Part, I
thought it was best at a venture to be once seized on him if I could; and try
whether I could get any Thing out of him upon his first Surprise, and leave the
rest to further Endeavors; and therefore I desired however that he might be
seized. They told me, the Magistrates doubted he was not in Town; but when I
had taken off that by Evidence to the contrary; they said, the Magistrates did
not know the Man, nor any of their Officers. But if I could send somebody that
did to the Townhouse, they would send their Skout with him to execute what I
desired. This I presently did; but the Person I sent found the Magistrates
still unresolved, and in very ill Humor about it; and saying besides a great
deal of what the two Commissioners had before told me, That in case Joyce had
said he would kill the Burgomasters, or burn their Town, yet they should never
have thought of imprisoning him for it: And that it was hard to be put upon
Things so contrary to their Privileges and their Customs, as well as their
Interests. My Agent finding these Difficulties, desired Leave for me to seize
him with such Persons as I could find my self: But this they said could by no
means be done; and if it should be attempted without the Officers of the Town,
the Burghers would certainly rise and rescue him. With these kind of Debates
they put him off about an hour longer, making him twice withdraw and come in
again to them: But at last, when it was grown a very dark Night, they gave
Order to their Skout to go with him, and apprehend the Fellow. Hereupon they
went and searched his House, but without finding him; and two other of his
usual Haunts with the same Success: but they found evident Marks of his having
had Notice given him of his Danger: For one at his House said, He wondered I
would search for a mad Man; and that if he were assured I desired only to
examine him, perhaps it might be done; but that for the present he knew not
where he was, having taken the Key of his back Door, where he seemed to believe
he was gone out. By all that had happened, I found plainly the Magistrates of the
Town had no Intention the Thing should be done; and began to be assured of what
I had always doubted, that such a Pack of Rascals of so many Sorts as had been
long nested in that Town (more indeed than in all the rest of Holland) had not
made this Choice without some good Assurances from the Magistrates, of being
protected there. I found as plainly that without their resolute and fair
dealing in it, 'twas to no purpose for me to endeavor it; and that my being
there was already known, and had given such an Alarm, that some of Joyce's Crew
were walking continually up and down the Streets thereabouts ever since it grew
dark, and others of them standing at his Door and his Windows: And therefore
seeing that till this Allarm was over, there was no hopes of finding my Game; I
resolved to speak with the presiding Burgomaster, and engage him as far as I
could for the effectual Pursuit of the Business; and make him see I understood
well enough how it failed, and where it depended, and so leave the Town before
Morning to give the Fellow the more Security. I sent to the Burgomaster about
Ten a Clock at Night, desiring not to have it taken notice of when I spoke with
him: But he sent me his Excuse by saying he was in Bed: After which I sent for
the Skout; and when he had confessed he had Orders to take the Fellow, and that
he knew him very well (contrary to what the Magistrates had pretended) I said
all that I could possibly to engage him in the Pursuit of it; and told him, as
the best Argument, that I would give him my self a hundred Duccatoons as soon
as ever it was done; besides representing his Diligence so to his Majesty, as
that he might expect a greater Gratuity. And for the better effecting of it, I
desired him to get me the Keys of the Town-gate that was near me, resolving
then to go out of Town, and to pass with Torches before Joyce's Door, that so
he might see I was gone, and with me the Persons I had employed in this
Business, and thereby grow secure of any further Danger for that Night. And I
desired him that about an hour or two after, he would once more search for him
at his House, and other Places where he used. All this he promised very fairly,
and all other Diligences in it for the future; but to say the Truth, in such a
manner, that I perceived plainly the Fellow had his Instructions given him
after another Fashion, from those that had more to do with him than I. And
though I have expected some News from him all this Day, I yet hear nothing.
Since my coming home I have spoken again with Monsieur de Wit, who professes
to be very sorry for my ill Success; says I did prudently in coming away after
my first Attempt failed: That he knows not what to judge of the Magistrates
proceeding till the return of the Commissioners; and hopes something may yet be
done by them, because they were not come back this Afternoon. He says he writ
two Letters himself to the Magistrates, besides that of the Committee, to
dispose them more; because he knew all would depend upon their hearty or faint
Proceeding in it; and assures me of all his further Endeavors.

For the Business of Surinam; they will not believe their last Letter should
not satisfy, since Monsieur Van Beuninghen had represented that of Bannister's
absolute Permission as a Thing desired by you, but not insisted upon: So that
if it be further pressed, it must be by your Orders after you received the last
Papers.

I ask your Pardon for any ill Digestion of this Letter, as well as for writing
it in another Hand, which my Eyes force me to; and may all be attributed to the
Want of Sleep these two Nights last past.

I am however Sir, your etc.

To my Lord Keeper.
Hague, Aug. 19. S. N. 1670. My LORD,
I HAVE lately received the Honor of one from your Lordship of the 26th past;
by which I was very sorry to find that any Occasions had at all withdrawn your
Lordship's usual Concurrence in all great Affairs, wherein his Majesty uses the
Advice as well as Labors of his Ministers. For the Steadyness of your
Lordship's Judgment, and Directness of your Application to his Majesty's and
the Kingdom's Honor and Advantage in all your Counsels, gave me at my last
coming over hither much Confidence in the successful Course of our Affairs both
at Home and Abroad: And the more your Lordship estranges your self from them,
the more my Confidence in that kind is like to abate; because I am apt to think
it not only an ill Thing, but an ill Sign too.

I am glad to receive your Lordship's Opinion concerning the Continuance of our
Measures abroad, because I see not at present where we can take better: And I
the more need some such Encouragements as your Opinion gives me; because, to
say the Truth, I should not be very apt to concur with you in it from the
Observation I can make from hence of several other Circumstances: However,
nothing ought to discourage such public Hearts as your Lordship from
contributing all they can to the Firmness of such Counsels, as they esteem most
Just and Safe at least, if we are not in Condition to think so far as Glorious:

Multa dies variusque Labor mutabilis Aevi
Detulit in melius --
We have nothing new nor material in present Agitation upon this Scene. The
last little Commission I had was as troublesome as unsuccessful; and proceeded
certainly in the Manner of it, from want of knowing or considering the
Constitutions of this Government; which makes me confident your Lordship had no
Part in directing it, no more than my Lord Arlington, who was out of Town.

I wish your Lordship perfect Health and Satisfaction; and that when neither of
these make it necessary, you may not be too much at your Country House. Though in
all Places I shall be ever with equal Constancy and Truth,

My LORD, Your Lordship's, etc.

To the Duke of Buckingham.
Hague, Aug. 21. S. N. 1670. My LORD,
AS your Grace will, I hope, meet with many new Entertainments on this Side the
Water; so you must, I fear, be content with some new Troubles: For both usually
happen upon all Changes. I wish your Grace all that can be of the first; and
should not have given you any of the other, but to rejoice with you upon your
happy Arrival at Paris.

From so little and so barren a Scene as this is at present, I cannot offer at
informing your Grace of any Thing; especially, since Men expect here to receive
all their material Informations from your Motions where you now are, and from
what shall succeed them at your Return. But, to leave these People in their
doubtful and mystical Reflections; I shall not interrupt either your Grace's
Business or Leisure with any Thing but what is plain and certain; for nothing
is more so, than that I am with equal Passion and Truth

My LORD, Your Grace's most obedient and most humble Servant.

To my Lord Falconbridge.
Hague, Aug. 22. S. N. 1670. My LORD,
I WAS very glad to find by your Lordship's of the first current, that the
Suddenness of your Return therein mentioned was owing to the Dispatch of your
Business in Italy, and to the Care of your Health; and consequently, that you
receive from it both Honor and Satisfaction. I shall esteem it a great deal of
both to me, if you continue so favorable Intentions as you express, of taking
this Place in your way; where your Lordship may promise your self whatever my
Services can be worth to you. I expect my Lord of Essex with my Lady here every
Day; unless they have changed their Design since their Arrival at Hamburgh,
where they came about ten Days since, after my Lord's having dispatched all his
Affairs in the Danish Court. Our Treaty with Spain for regulating the Affairs
of the Indies, came signed to London last Week, from whence I doubt not, it
will be suddenly remitted with its Ratification. All here is in great Quiet and
Silence, and like to continue so, unless France furnish us with some new
Discourse.

I have hitherto writ by Mr. Perwich's Conveyance; but choose to send this by
Sir John Finch's, who is like to be a nearer Observer of your Motions. But I
will not give your Lordship a long and an empty Interruption, which has little
else to bear it out besides the Profession of my being

My LORD, Your Lordship's most faithful humble Servant.

To the Great Duke of Tuscany.
Hague, Aug. 25. S. N. 1670. SIR,
I Received almost at the same time the Honor of two Letters from your most
Serene Highness; one of March the 31st, with an entire Vintage of the finest
Wines of Italy; and the other of the 5th Instant, with your Highness's
Condolences upon the Death of Madame. The great Delay of the Ship that brought
the Wine, and your Highness's great Dispatch to make a Compliment so sad and so
obliging, were the cause that two Letters of so different date arrived almost
together. For I have very much reason to commend the Diligence of Monsieur
Ferroni, in conveying me all your Highness's Favors. I find the Wines
admirable, and seeming to resemble their Prince, in having lost nothing of
their natural Taste or Goodness, by the length of their Voyage, or the Extremes
of Heats or of Colds. And herein I am more obliged to your Highness than you
imagine, not only for having made me taste the Delights of so fine a Climate in
so miserable a one as this; but also for having by the same Means given me the
Talent of a Drinker, a Quality I wanted very much to acquit my self of an
Ambassy in Holland.

I cannot tell whether your Highness by your moving Expressions upon the
Deplorable Death of Madame, has more discovered the Beauty of your Wit or the
Greatness of your Affection to the King my Master: Therefore I hope your
Highness will not take it ill that I have sent his Majesty a Copy of your last
Letter, by which you have given such sensible Proofs of the Part you take in
whatever happens to the Royal Family.

The States General are very much surprised at the News brought them this Day
from France, in an Express sent them from their Minister at Paris, which
assures them of the march of the French Troops toward the Frontier, to the
number of 30000, where they are to rendezvous at Peronne: But it is not yet
known whether their Design be upon Flanders or this Country, or whether they
project any other Measures. However, the Alarm is here so great, that they have
immediately resolved to continue six thousand Men, which they were just going
to disband: They have also ordered the Council of State to compute what Forces
and Provisions they shall judge necessary in case of a Rupture with France; and
have dispatched a Boat from Scheveling to England with Orders to Monsieur Van
Beuninghen (who is upon the Point of departing) to stay till further Orders
from the States.

For my self, I know not what to judge of these Appearances; I shall ever
complain of any Events that are like to endanger the Quiet of Christendom, to
which I have for some time (under the Orders of his Majesty) dedicated all my
Cares. And without doubt, if the War opens at present, great Conjunctures will
arise, whereof perhaps there will be Reason to give your Highness Joy, not for
being out of the Noise of them; but because great Princes only wait for great
Occasions.

I am Sir, Your Highness's etc.

Au Grand Duc de Toscane.
De la Hay, le 25 Aout. S. N. 1670. Monsieur,
J'Ay quasi recu en meme tems les deux Lettres que V. A. Sme. m'a fait
l'honneur de m'ecrire; l'une datee du 31 de Mars, and accompagnee des plus
riches vendanges d'Italie, je veux dire, de ses vins les plus exquis; and
l'autre du 5 du courant, avec les complimens de condoleance de V. A. sur la
mort de Madame. Le long retardement de navire qui a apporte les vins, and
l'empressement de V. A. a me fair un compliment aussi triste qu'obligeant; ces
deux chooses ont fait, que deux Lettres si fort eloignees par leurs dates, se
sont presque rencontrees a leur arrivee. Car j'ay beaucoup a me lover de la
diligence avec laquelle Monsieur Ferroni tache de me fair tenir les faveurs de
V. A. Les vins m'ont paru excellens; and si j'osois, je dirois volontiers,
qu'ils semblent tenir quelque chose du Prince qui les envoie, les changemens de
Climat, la longueur and les traverses du transport, la rigueur de l'hyver, ni
les ardeurs de l'ete, ne luy ont rien fait perdre de sa seve and de sa force;
and cela, ne fournit il pas un emblem assez naturel de la person de V. A.
J'ay au rest, plus d'obligation a V. A. qu'elle ne pense, sur son present de
vins, non seulement parce qu'elle m'a fait gouter des delices du plus beau pais
du monde, sous le Clymat le plus triste; mais sur tout, parce que son present
m'a excite a devenir beuveur, qualite qui me manquoit absolument, and qui est
pourtant necessaire pour se bien tirer d'une ambassade en Hollande.

Je ne say ce que V. A. fait le plus paroitre dans les expressions si
touchantes don't sa Lettre est remplie, ou la fecondite de son esprit, ou sa
tendresse de coeur pour le Roy non Maitre. C'est pourquoy, j'espere que V. A.
ne me scaura pas mauvais gre d'avoir envoye a sa Majeste la copy de sa
derniere Lettre, dans laquelle elle a done des marquis si tendres de la part
qu'elle prend aux evenemens de la Famille Royalle.

Les Etats Generaux paroissent surpris de la nouvelle que leur a apporte un
expres depeche par leur Ministre a Paris, qui vient de leur apprendre la march
des Troops Francoises au nombre de 30000 hommes; else s'avancent verse les
frontieres, and leur rendez-vous est marque a Peronne. On ne decide point
encore sur le dessein de cette march, and on ignore si elle regard ou la
Flandre ou ce pais icy; and on ne sait point si l'approche de ces Troops ne
tend point a cacher les veritables desseins, and a mieux reussir dans les
mesures qu'on a prises. Quoy qu'il en soit, l'alarme est icy a un tell point,
qu'on a pris sur le champ la resolution de continuer la sold a six mill
hommes qu'on alloit congedier; que le Conceil d'Etat a ordonne de dresser
promptement un etat de guerre, qui comprit tant les levees d'hommes, que les
munitions de bouche and de guerre, qui seroient estimees necessaires, en cas de
rupture avec la France. Qu' enfin on a fait partir de Shevelin en diligence une
barque pour l'Angleterre, avec order d'y retenir Monsieur Van Beuninghen qui
etoit sur le point d'en partir.

Pour moy, je ne say ce que je dois juger sur toutes ces apparances; je gemiray
toujours sur les evenemens qui pourront mettre en danger le repos de la
Chretiente, qui depuis un tems, and sous les ordres de sa Majeste, a ete
l'objet de mes veilles and de mes soins. Et, sans doubt que sila guerre
recommence, elle va donner lieu a des grands evenemens, desquels on aura peut
etre a donner el para bien a V. A. non comme eloignee de la tempete, mais parce
que les grands Princes ne respirent que les grandes occasions. Je supply V. A.
de m'en offrir toujours, par lesquelles je puisse luy marquer avec combien de
passion and de verite je seray toute ma vie,

Monsieur, De V. A. Sme. etc.

To the Procurator of the Court of Holland, upon the Rights of Ambassadors.
ONE of my Secretaries having given me a Copy of a Paper signed by you, F. de
Brusis, which was brought to my House, and given to one of my Servants; by
which Paper you summon one N. Wat, Valet or Footman, to the English Ambassador,
to appear before the Court of Holland: By the Title you give the said N. Wat,
you make it plain, that you believe him to be actually in my House, and
Service. Upon which I have thought good to tell you that I look upon you as an
Insolent Fellow, for daring to bring such a Paper into my House; and that I do
not intend any of my Servants shall be looked upon as subject to the
Jurisdiction of any Court of this Country, or of any other beside those of the
King my Master: And if any of them offends against the Laws, Complaint must be
made to me, that I may either order Justice to be done, or deliver the Offender
of my own accord to be punished by the Law of the Place; having beforehand
dismissed him from my Service. Therefore I do not design to be exposed to such
an Insolence as this that you have committed against me, in treating me like
one of your Burghers, as well by the Paper left in my House, as by the ringing
of the Bell, whereof you make mention. What I here say, you may let your
Masters know from me, by whose Order you pretend to have acted. Besides, for
their further Information, let them know, that while I reside in this Country,
I will never suffer the Rights and Privileges so long granted to Ambassadors by
the Law of Nations, and hitherto observed and respected by all Princes of
Christendom, to be violated, or any way infringed in this Country in my Person;
under pretense of any particular Sovereignty of a Province, or Privilege of a
City, in a Commonwealth where I have the Honor to serve a King in quality of
his Ambassador.

Au Procureur de la Cour d' Hollande, sur les droits des Ambassadeurs.
UN de me Secretaires m'ayant fait voir la copy d'un billet sign par vous F.
de Brusis, qui a ete port dans ma maison, and done a quelqu' un de mes gens,
and par lequel billet vous sommez un certain N. Wat, Valet, ou Lacquais de
l'Ambassadeur d'Angleterre, de comparoitre devant la Cour d'Hollande. Par la
qualite que vous donnez au dit N. Wat vous faites bien connoitre, que vous le
croyez actuellement dans ma maison, and attache a mon service; la dessus j'ay
trouve bon de vous dire que je vous tiens pour un Insolent, d'avoir ose port
un billet dans ma maison; and, que je ne pretens point, qu'aucun de mes gens,
soit regard comme relevant de la jurisdiction d'aucune cour dans ce pais icy,
ni d'aucune autre que de celles du Roy mon Maitre: Que si quelqu' un d'eux
commet quelque chose contre les loix, on n'a qu'a mien fair des plaintes, afin
que j'en fasse fair la justice, ou que je le livre de mon propre gre a la
rigueur des loix du pais, l'ayant prealablement congedie, and chasse de ma
maison. Je ne pretens donc pas etre expose, a une insolence pareille a celle
que vous venez de commettre contre moy, en me traitant comme un de vos
Bourgeois, tant par le billet laisse chez moy, que par le son de la cloche don't
vous faites mention. Tout ce que je viens de vous dire, vous pourrez le dire de
ma part a vos Maitres, par l'ordre des quels vous dites avoir agi. Au surplus,
and pour leur plus grand eclaircissement, qu'ils sachent, que durant mon sejour
en ce pais, je ne souffriray jamais que les Droits and les Privileges, accordez
depuis si long tems Jure gentium aux Ambassadeurs, and jusqu'icy observez and
respectez dans les Etats de tous les Princes de la Chretiente, soient violez,
ou le moins du monde alterez en ma person en ce pais, sous les pretextes
d'aucune souverainete particuliere d'une Province, ou le Privilege de quelque
ville, dans une Republique, ou j'ay l'honneur de servir un grand Roy en qualite
de son Ambassadeur.

To Monr -- upon the Death of his Daughter.
Hague, Sept. 1. S. N. 1670. SIR,
YEsterday late in the Evening, I received an Account of your Loss; and can
assure you, that my Wife, my Sister, and my Self, were so sensibly afflicted at
it, that if it were possible Grief could be lessened by being communicated with
real Friends, upon these sad Occasions, you would have immediately found some
Consolation in yours: I must confess, your Grief is lawful enough, and founded
not only upon the Dictates of Nature, but upon the Merits of her you lament; so
that, to pretend to comfort you by other Considerations, than those which your
Prudence, and above all which your Piety would suggest, would be to attempt an
unprofitable Work; God has pleased to impose this Tribute for the Continuance
of our Lives, often to lament the Death of our Friends. We must learn to submit
and resign to his Will, which is the wisest and most Christian Part we can
follow. To this I shall add, that the Desires of your Friends who yet remain,
and your Care of their Interests, do demand from you that you will preserve
your self to them. Among these, there is none who is more than I

SIR, Your most humble and most affectionate Servant.

A Monr -- sur la mort de sa Fille.
De la Hay, 1 Sept. S. N. 1670. Monsieur,
ON me donna avis hier au soir bien tard, de la perte que vous venez de fair,
and je puis vous assurer, que moy, ma femme, and ma soeur en avons ete si
sensiblement touches, que si l'affliction pouvoit etre diminuee par celle qui
se communique aux veritables amiss en ces tristes occasions, vous auriez sur le
champ eprouve du soulagement en la votre. Je le faut avouer, votre douleur est
bien legitimie, elle est fondes non seulement sur les devoirs de la nature,
mais encore sur le merit de la person que vous pleurez. Ainsi pretendre vous
consoler par d'autres reflections que celles que votre prudence, and sur tout
votre piete vous suggereront, ce seroit tenter une chose inutile. Je a plu a
Dieu imposer une peine durant le course de notre vie, qui est l'obligation de
pleurer frequemment sur la mort de nos proches and de nos amiss. Il faut se
soumettre, and a apprendre a se resiner a sa volonte; c'st la l'unique bo^
parti, and le seul qui soit and veritablement sage, and veritablement Chretien.
J'ajouteray a cela, que les prieres des amiss qui vous restent encore, and le
soin de leurs intcrets, demandent que vous vous conserviez. Parmis c^^x qui
prennent la qualite de vos amiss, il n'y a person qui vous soit plus acquis que

Monsieur, Votre tres-humble and tres affectionne Serviteur.

To my Lord Arlington.
Hague, Sept. 2. S. N. 1670. My LORD,
I MUST in the first Place rejoice with your Lordship upon your Return to Town,
and to the Exercise of your usual Cares, which are so necessary to the Service
of his Majesty and the Kingdom, that I cannot doubt, any Thing is meant us so
ill as the Danger of your Lordship's Health; though I find by your last of the
19th past, that you had fallen into some Indisposition upon your return: But
the Length as well as the Clearness of all your Lordship's Discourses in it,
give me the Confidence that it was already past.

I have understood from Monsieur de Wit, the Sum of all Monsieur Van
Beuninghen's Discourses with his Majesty upon the same Subject as those with
your Lordship, of which you were pleased to give me the Account: And do not
find, that Monsieur Van Beuninghen has failed of receiving all the Assurances
from the King that he could wish, concerning the Negotiations of the Duke of
Buckingham in France: For he has not only transmitted them to the States as he
received them at Court, but added likewise his own Opinion upon them; That as
far as Human Appearances will go, he has all the Reason that can be to believe,
that nothing has been treated of by the said Duke, nor was ever intended to be
so in the French Court to the Prejudice of his Majesty's Alliances here. For
the rest, they take it as well as they can, that they see no Advance made in
the Propositions of the Emperor's joining with those of the Triple Alliance in
the Guaranty of the Peace. Which I suppose touches them so much the more by the
News brought this Day to the States; which I am now to give your Lordship an
Account of, as of the way I received it.

Just as I was sitting down this Day to Dinner, the States Agent came to me,
desiring that their Commissioners might have the Liberty to speak with me
though at that unusual Hour; being of a Matter newly come to them, and of very
great Importance. I consented; and thereupon Monsieur de Wit came in the Head
of the other Commissioners; and told me, that the States had newly received
certain Advice from France of the Date of the 29th past, That the Chevalier de
la Fourrille, who had been dispatched secretly from Court some Days before the
breaking up of the Camp at St. Germains, and with the Troops quartered near the
Borders of Lorrain; made a sudden March into that Country, and seized upon the
City of Nancy; and that by so unexpected and quick an Attempt, that he failed
very little of surprising the Person of the Duke, and had taken the Duchess.
That the Duke escaping, had retired to a small but strong Place called Bidsch;
where he busied himself in assembling what Forces he could for his Defense.
That the Marshall de Crequy being dispatched from Paris had met this News upon
the way, and returned with it to Court; from whence he was dispatched in haste
the second time to Lorrain. That the French Camp near St. Germains was marched
toward Peronne under the Command of Monsieur Vaubrun; but that by Orders sent
after them upon the way, they were to be divided into two Bodies; of which one
was to march away to the Marshall de Crequy in Lorrain; and the other toward
Sedan; where they should make a stand, and face any Attempts that might be
designed from Flanders or this Country, toward interrupting the Success of
their Affairs in Lorrain. Monsieur de Wit told me further, That the States
having considered these Advices, had ordered them (the Commissioners)
immediately to acquaint me with them: And further, that though the States
esteemed it a Matter of so great Importance, that all the Parties of the Triple
Alliance ought to concern themselves in it, as wholly destructive to those Ends
of conserving the Spanish Dominions, which were mutually proposed in the said
Alliance; yet they (the States) should not, nor indeed could not proceed to any
Resolutions thereupon, without first knowing those of his Majesty, and being
assured of his vigorous Conjunction. And hereupon they desired me to give his
Majesty Notice immediately by an Express, to the End that I might know his
Sense and Intentions upon this Conjuncture; or at least be instructed to confer
with the States upon it.

After this, much was enlarged by Monsieur de Wit and the Commissioners,
concerning the very great Importance of the Seizure of Lorrain; as the cutting
off Burgundy wholly from the rest of the Spanish Dominions, as well as all
further Communication between any of the Netherlands, and many of the Princes
of Germany, with the Suitzers. So as they compared Lorrain to a Citadel in a
Town, from which all the rest would be commanded at pleasure. They added, That
the Duchy of Luxemburg would be in a manner blocked up, and maimed in their
mutual Assistance with the rest of the Spanish Provinces. That the Electors of
Mentz and Tryers would have the French Feet upon their Throats: And
consequently, that whenever France should begin with Flanders after the
Possession of Lorrain, the County of Burgundy would be their own in an Hour,
and Flanders in a very short Time; without greater and readier Assistances than
there seemed to be any reasonable Hopes for.

After this, they told me, They had received likewise a new Account by this
Post, of all the French Preparations at Sea, and the present Estate of their
own Fleet; of which they gave me this enclosed List. And by all I can gather
from their Discourses, I judge they are capable of any vigorous Resolution that
his Majesty should think fit to inspire them in Conjunction with us: But that
without it they are resolved, as they express it, To leave it to God, and to
see the French at their doors, without stirring a-foot.
De laisser agir au bon Dieu, and de voir la France a leurs Ports sans se
remuer. Upon all which they pretend, that the Disposal and Balance at this
Time of all Affairs in these Parts of Christendom, lie before his Majesty; from
whom both the Empire and Spain, as well as Sueden and this State, will receive
their Measures.

Three Days since the Baron d'Isola was with me, to communicate a Letter he had
newly received from the Emperor, declaring his Resolution to join with the
Triple Alliance in the Guaranty of the Peace of Aix; which he desired me to
give his Majesty part of by the Post: But having told me at the same time that
he resolved to give your Lordship the same Account, I omit to trouble you with
any further Particulars. He came to me again just upon the Close of what I have
written, and showed me a Letter from Monsieur Louvigni at Brussels, containing
the Particulars of what has happened in Lorrain, and little different from those
I had before received by Monsieur de Wit; only that the Duke of Lorrain
resolved to retire with all his Forces into the Mountains, and hopes to defend
himself some time, provided he might be sure of not being abandoned.

I am ever my Lord, your etc.

To my Lord Keeper.
Hague, Sept..... S. N. 1670. My LORD,
I Lately gave my Lord Arlington the Account which was given me by the States
Commissioners, of the Seizure of Lorrain, with their Reflections upon it, and
the Consequences it must needs have upon all the Affairs of Christendom; and
their Desires of my communicating all from them with Speed and Care to his
Majesty; which I did.

I have since received by last Post, and by a Letter from his Lordship, the
King's Orders for my immediate Repair into England, and for my acquainting the
States with it; and that it is only with Intentions of my informing his Majesty
better in the several Points that concern the present Conjunctures of my
Station here. This I have done in a Conference upon it with Monsieur de Wit. I
found him at first very pensive upon the News of it: and apt to reflect upon
this happening so soon and unexpectedly after the late Seizure of Lorrain; and
both after the many Delays and Difficulties raised by us (as he apprehends) in
admitting the Emperor to the Guaranty of the Peace of Aix in conjuction with
the Triple Alliance, which we formerly so much desired. He remembered at the
same time the many Instances we have made for many Months past about such a
Trifle as the carrying off our Planters from Surinam (whom he takes by the
Articles to become their Subjects,) and the invincible Difficulties in which we
have engaged Matters between our East India Companies; in which he says he is
assured our Merchants have no Part, but as they are instigated by some Persons
at Court; whose ill Intentions he fears toward the late Alliances contracted
between his Majesty and these States, both for our own mutual Safety and that
of all Christendom. He reflected upon a Coldness in all our Negotiations of
that kind, ever since Madame's Journey into England; and upon the late Journey of
the Duke of Buckingham's to Paris, which he could not think was, To see the
Country, or learn the Language.
Pour voir le Pais, ou apprendre la langue: And desired I would tell him what I
could make of all this laid together: For on the one side, there were
Circumstances enough to awake a suspicious Man; and on the other side, he could
never think it possible for any Nation or Court it self, to quit so certain a
Point of Interest and great a Point of Honor, as must be forfeited by our
breaking our Alliances with this State, or entering into any with France; whose
Greatness had occasioned our Measures for our own as well as our Neighbor's
Defense. He said, I knew the best of any, how all these Matters had passed: How
his Majesty had engaged these States in those common Measures, and even
prevailed with them to make a Sacrifice of the ancient Kindness and Alliance
this State had always before with France, to the Considerations of the present
Danger from the Greatness of that Crown to the rest of Christendom; though they
might have had what Terms they pleased from them for the dividing of Flanders.
That I knew with how inviolate Faith and Firmness the States had constantly
observed for these two Years past, their Friendship and Alliances with his
Majesty, and how great a Part I had in contracting and pursuing them, by the
particular Confidence the States and He especially had in my Person, as one
that was persuaded of our common Interests, that knew my Master's Mind, and
would not be an Instrument to deceive those that trusted me. For these Reasons
he said, he desired to know my Opinion upon this whole Matter, especially that
of my Journey into England; which, he said, would be very surprising to every
Body here, and therefore he would be glad to give the News of it to the States
in the best manner he could.

I protested to him that I had hitherto received constant Assurances from both
the Secretaries of State, of his Majesty's Resolutions to observe constantly
the Measures in which he was engaged to this State. And that I knew not a Word
more of the Reasons of my sudden Journey into England, than what I had told him.
That I had Orders to leave my Family behind me: And that his Majesty might
possibly think it necessary for his Information to speak with me upon the
present Conjunctures, and to return me immediately according to my Lord
Arlington's Letter. That I confessed, I was apt to make many of those
Reflections that he had done; but could not believe it possible for any Crown
ever to enter into Councils so destructive to their Honor and Safety as those
he suspected. That if such a Thing should ever happen, I desired him to
remember what I told him upon the Scruples he had made in trusting our Court
upon the Negotiations of the Triple Alliance: Which was, that I told him then
what I thought of his Majesty's Dispositions and Resolutions as well as those
of his Ministers; That I could not believe it possible for them to change in a
Point of so evident Interest, and which would be so understood by the whole
Nation. That however I could answer for nobody besides my self; but this I
would; and that if ever such a Thing should happen, I would never have any Part
in it. That I had told the King so as well as him; and would make it good. That
for the present, there was nothing more to be said, but that I must go away for
England. That if I returned he would know more; and I doubted by what he said,
that he would guess more if I returned not.

Monsieur de Wit smiled, and said, I was in the right. That in the mean time,
he would try to cure himself and Others of all Suspicions upon my Journey: And
would hope on the other side, it might be of use to the common Interests, by
possessing his Majesty of the great Importance of the late Seizure of Lorrain;
and of the States Resolutions to stick close to him in all Measures he should
take upon it. And so we parted.

I would have gone away immediately upon this Summons, but that it found me
very ill, and uncertain whether it would end in a Fever as it seemed to begin;
but since a great Swelling fallen upon my Face I hope it may pass. However,
being forced to delay my Journey some few Days, I could not but give your
Lordship this Account beforehand, and leave it to you to make what use of it
you think fit; without expecting any Answer, since I hope so soon to follow it.

But I know your Lordship fully persuaded of our Interest to preserve our
Alliances here, and the present Measures of Christendom which depend upon them.
And though you have said nothing yet to make me distrust our Counsels in that
Matter; yet I confess I have not the better Opinion of it from what I find of
your Lordship's estranging your self of late, or being estranged from the
Consultations of them.

I have likewise reflected upon the kind Hint your Lordship gave me some time
since, of my Lord Arlington's not being the same to me which he had formerly
been, and constantly since our first Acquaintance: Which made me, I confess,
then doubt rather some Mistake in your Lordship's Observation, than any Change
in his Friendship or Dispositions. From himself, I must needs say I yet find
nothing of it; and though his Style seems a little changed in what concerns our
Public Affairs, yet not at all in what is particular to me. When I come into
England I shall soon know the Truth of your Conjecture, and tell it you,
because by that I shall judge the Truth of mine: For having never said or done
any Thing to deserve the least Change in his Lordship's Friendship to me since
it first began; I am sure if it happens, it can be derived from nothing else
but a Change he foresees in those Measures at Court which he has been with your
Lordship so deeply engaged in; and which he knows as well as your Lordship that
I will never have any Part in the Councils of altering, till I can be convinced
that any others will be more for his Majesty's Honor and Safety.

All this I say in Confidence to your Lordship, without touching any Word of it
to my Lord Arlington, or any other Person: And shall increase this Trouble no
further because I hope to have so soon the Honor of seeing you, and assuring
you a nearer way, with how much Passion as well as Truth, I am and shall be ever

My Lord, your Lordship's etc.

To the Great Duke of Tuscany.
London, Nov. 4. 1670. SIR,
I Should not have satisfied my self barely to resent all the Favors of your
most Serene Highness, and particularly the Honor of your last of September the
30th, if I were any way capable of acknowledging them as I ought, either by my
Expressions or my Services. But your Highness being pleased to oblige so many
ways, so unprofitable a Person, can hope for no other Returns than the Pleasure
of your own Generosity, and the Devotion of a Heart so grateful as mine.

I should have extremely regretted the length of time your Letter was in
passing before it found me at London, after having missed me at the Hague; were
it not that your Highness is to consider me here as one of the commonest among
the King's Subjects, and not as a Minister who has any Part in Public Affairs.
And therefore you can expect nothing in my Letters but the tedious Complemen^
of an idle Man, instead of such Informations or Services as your Highness might
expect to receive from those who are devoted like me to your Service. But the
Marq. of Puzzi is too well received at the K. my Master's Court, and too well
informed, not to have given your Highness all Intelligence necessary, as well
of his Majesty's Friendship and Esteem, as of the general Devotion his Subjects
bear for the Person of your Highness. He must also have informed your Highness
of the happy Disposition his Majesty has found in his Parliament, for the
Increase of his Revenues, and by that means for the Establishment of his
Interests both within and without his Kingdoms. I am sorry the said Marquis has
found nothing here to please or keep him longer among us. But I hope your
Highness will not think that during my stay here, there can want a Person, as
ready to receive and obey all your Commands as any of your own Subjects, Since
I am so much,

SIR, Your Highness's etc.

Au Grand Duc de Toscane.
De Land. le 4 Nov. S. N. 1670. Monsieur,
JE ne me contenterois pas de ressentir comme je le fais and comme je le dois,
toutes les bontez de V. A. Sme. and particulierement l'honneur qu'elle m'a fait
par sa derniere lettre du 30 de Septembre, si je me trouvois le moins du monde
capable de les reconnoitre comme else le meritent, ou par mes expressions, ou
par mes services. Mais, V. A. ayant voulu par tant de manieres differentes
obliger un Sujet aussi inutile que je le suis, n'a pas du en esperer d'autres
fruits que la plaisir de jouir de sa propre generosite, and de s'attacher un
coeur aussi reconnoissant que le mien.

Je me serois fort plaint des longueurs a travers lesquelles la lettre de V.A.
est enfin venue me trouver a Londres, apres m'avoir manque a la Hay, si
desormais je devois etre regard de V.A. autrement que comme un homme prive,
and un des Sujets les plus ordinaires de sa Majeste, qui n'est plus ni Ministre
public, ni admis dans les affairs. Par consequent mes lettres ne peuvent
contenir que les complimens d'un homme oisif, au lieu des relations and des
instructions que V. A. attend de ceux qui sont aussi attachez a elle qu'elle
sait que je le suis. Mais, Monsieur le Marq. de Puzzi est trop bien a la Cour
du Roy mon Maitre, and d'ailleurs trop eclaire, and trop exact, pour n'avoir pu
informer V. A. de tout ce qu'elle doit savoir par rapport a notre Cour; sur
tout, il n'aura pas neglige, je m'assure de luy, parler de l'amitie and de
l'estime de sa Majeste pour la person de V. A. en cela secondee par
l'affection generale de tous ses Sujets. Il vous aura aussi entretenu des
heureuses disposi^ions que sa Majeste vient de trouver dans l'assemblee de son
Parliament, pour l'augmentation de ses Finances, and pour la seurete de ses
interets tant au dedans qu'aux dehors de ses Etats. Je suis bien marris que
Monsieur le Marquis n'ait pas trouve icy asses de charms pour s'y plaire, and
s'y sejourner un peu plus long tems. Mais j'ose esperer que V. A. ne croira pas
manquer dans Londres d'une person entierement devouee a son service, and
aussi empressee a recevoir ses ordres, qu'aucun de ses propres Sujets, tandis
que j'y feray mon sejeur, puisque je suis,

Monsieur, De V. A. Sme. etc.

To Sir John Temple.
London, November 22. 1670. SIR,
I MUST make you my humble Acknowledgments for so great a Present, as you have
been pleased to send me toward that Expense I have resolved to make at Sheen:
And assure you, no part of it shall either go any other way, or lessen what I
had intended of my own. I doubt not to compass what I told you of my Lord
Lisle, for enlarging my small Territories there; when that is done, I propose
to bestow a thousand Pounds upon the Conveniences of the House and Garden; and
hope that will reach all I care for: So that your five hundred Pounds may be
laid out rather for Ornament than Use, as you seem to desire, by ordering me to
make the Front perfectly uniform. Your Care of that, and me, in this Matter is
the more obliging, the less I find you concur with me in my Thoughts of
retiring wholly from public Affairs, and to that Purpose, of making my Nest at
this time as Pleasant and Commodious as I can afford it. Nor shall I easily
resolve to offer at any of those Advantages you think I might make upon such a
Retreat, of the King's Favor or good Opinion, by pretending either to Pension
or any other Employment. The Honor and Pay of such Posts as I have been in,
ought to be esteemed sufficient for the best Services of them: And if I have
Credit left with the present Ministers to get what is owing me upon my Ambassy,
I shall think my self enough rewarded; considering how different a Value is now
like to be put upon my Services in Holland, from what there was when they were
performed. It Is very likely at that Time, as you believe, there were few
reasonable Things the King would have denied me, while the Triple Alliance and
our League with Holland had so great a Vogue; and my Friends were not wanting
in their Advices to me to make use of it. But I have resolved never to ask him
any Thing, otherwise than by serving him well: And you will have the less
Reason perhaps to reproach me this Method, if you will please to remember how
the two Ambassasies of Aix la Chappelle and Holland were not only thrown upon
me without my seeking; but also, what my Lord Arlington told me was designed
for me upon Secretary Morris's Removal, in case the King had not thought my
Ambassy into Holland of the greatest Necessity in pursuance of those Measures
we had taken with that State.

For what you think of the Interest we have still to pursue them, and
consequently of the Use the King will still have of me upon that Occasion: I
will not enter into any Reasonings with you upon that Matter at this Distance;
but will only tell you some Passages of Fact upon which I ground the Judgment I
make of Affairs wherein I have no Part; and which I am not so sollicitous to
draw into the Light, as I doubt others are to keep them in the Dark. And when I
have told you these, I shall leave you to judge whether I take my Measures
right as to my own private Conduct.

You know first the Part I had in all our Alliances with Holland; how far my
own personal Credit was engaged upon them to Monsieur de Wit; and the
Resolutions I not only acquainted Him and You with, but his Majesty too; that I
would never have any Part in breaking them whatever should happen: Though that I
confess could hardly enter into any Bodies Head that understood the Interests
of Christendom as well as our own. I have given you some Intimations how cold I
have observed our Temper at Court in those Matters for this last Year; and how
different it was thought abroad from that Warmth with which we engaged in them:
So as it was a common Saying at the Hague, Qu'il faut avouer, qu'il y a eu neuf
mois du plus grand Ministere du monde en Angleterre: For they would hardly
allow a longer Term to the Vigor of that Council which made the Triple
Alliance, and the Peace of Aix, and sent me over into Holland this last Ambassy
to pursue the great Ends of them, and draw the Emperor and Princes of the
Empire into the common Guaranty of the Peace. Instead of this, our Pretensions
upon the Business of Surinam, and the East India Companies, have grown high and
been managed with Sharpness between Us and the States; and grounded (as
Monsieur de Wit conceives) more upon a Design of showing them our ill Humor
than our Reason. I was sensible, that my Conduct in all these Matters had
fallen short for many Months past of the Approbation at Court it used to
receive; and that Mr. Worden was sent over to me only to disparage it, or espy
the Faults of it; though I think he returned with the Opinion that the Business
would not bear it. It Is true, both my Lord Arlington and Sir John Trevor
continued to the last of my stay in Holland to assure me, that the King still
remained firm in his Measures with the States: But yet I found the Business of
admitting the Emperor into the Guaranty, went downright lame: And that my Lord
Keeper was in a manner out of the Foreign Councils; for so he writ to me
himself, and gave me notice at the same time, that my Lord Arlington was not at
all the same to me that he had been: Which I took for an ill Sign in our
public Business, and an ill Circumstance in my own; and the more, because I
was sure not to have deserved it; and found nothing of it in his own Letters,
but only that they came seldom, and run more upon indifferent Things than they
used to do.

Ever since Madame's Journey into England, the Dutch had grown jealous of
something between Us and France; and were not like to be cured by these
Particulars I have mentioned: But upon the Invasion and Seizure of Lorrain by
France, and my being sent for over so suddenly after it, Monsieur de Wit
himself could keep his Countenance no longer; though he be neither suspicious
in his Nature, nor thought it the best Course to discover any such Disposition
upon this Occasion, how much soever he had of it: But yet he told me at my
coming away, that he should make a Judgment of us by the suddenness of my
return, which the King had ordered me to assure him of.

When I came to Town, I went immediately to my Lord Arlington according to my
Custom. And whereas upon my several Journies over in the late Conjunctures, he
had ever quitted all Company to receive me, and did it always with open Arms,
and in the kindest manner that could be; he made me this last time stay an hour
and half in an outward Room before he came to me, while he was in private with
my Lord Ashly. He received me with a Coldness that I confess surprised me; and
after a quarter of an hours Talk of my Journey and his Friends at the Hague,
instead of telling me the Occasion of my being sent for over, or any thing else
material, he called in Tata that was in the next Room, and after that my Lord
Cro^ts, who came upon a common Visit; and in that Company the rest of mine
passed, till I found he had nothing more to say to me, and so went away.

The next Morning I went however to him again, desiring to be brought by him to
kiss the King's Hand, as I had used upon my former Journies. He thought fit to
bring me to his Majesty as he was walking in the Mall; who stopped to give me his
Hand, and ask me half a dozen Questions about my Journey, and about the Prince
of Orange, and so walked on. Since which Time, neither the King nor my Lord
Arlington have ever said three Words to me about any thing of Business; though
I have been as often in their way as agreed with such an ill Courtier as I am,
or a Man without Business as I found my self to be.

I have seen my Lord Keeper and Mr. Secretary Trevor: And find the first uneasy
and apprehensive of our present Councils; the last sufficient and confident
that no Endeavors can break the Measures between Us and Holland, because they
are esteemed so necessary abroad and so rational at home: But, I find them both
but barely in the Skirts of Business, and only in Right of their Posts: And
that in the Secret of it, the Duke of Buckingham, my Lord Arlington, my Lord
Ashly, and Sir Thomas Clifford, at present compose the Ministry. This I tell
you in short as the Constitution of our Affairs here at this Time, and which I
believe you may reckon upon.

You know how different Sir Thomas Clifford and I have always been since our
first Acquaintance, in our Scheams of Government, and many other Matters,
especially concerning our Alliance with Holland: And that has been the Reason I
suppose, of very little Commerce between us further than common Civility, in
our frequent Encounters at my Lord Arlington's for several Years past: This
made me a little surprised at his receiving me upon my first coming over, and
treating me since with a most wonderful Graciousness, till the other day, which I
suppose has ended that Style. Upon the first Visit he made me, after many
Civilities; he told me, he must needs have two hours Talk with, me at some Time
of Leisure and in private, upon our Affairs in Holland: And still repeated this
almost every time he saw me: Till one Day last Week, when we appointed the
Hour, and met in his Closet. He began with great Compliments to me about my
Services to the King in my Employments abroad; went on with the Necessity of
preserving our Measures with Holland, and the mutual Interest both Nations had
in it: And concluded with wond^ing why the States should have showed ^o much
Difficulty upon those two Affairs of Surinam and the East India Company,
wherein our Demands seemed so reasonable. And how it came about that I had
failed in compassing his Majesty's Satisfaction in those two Matters, after
having succeeded so much in all my other Negotiations. I thought he might not
have understood the Detail of those two Affairs; and so deduced it to him, with
the Dutch Reasons, which I confess seemed to me in many Points but too well
grounded. He seemed unsatisfied with them all, and told me I must undertake
that Matter again, and bring it to a Period; and asked me whether I did not
think I could bring them to Reason: I said plainly I believed I never could, to
what we called so, and therefore was very unwilling to undertake it: That I had
spent all my Shot in vain; and therefore thought their best way would be to
employ some Person in it that had more Wit or Ability than I. Upon this he grew
a little moved; and replied, That, for my Wit and Ability they all knew I had
enough; and all the Question was, whether I was willing to employ them upon
this Occasion, which so much concerned the King's Service and the Honor of the
Nation. Hereupon I told him, how I had used my utmost Endeavors in it already,
how many Representations I had made the States; how many Conferences I had had
with their Commissioners, how long and particular Accounts I had given them
hitherto; and how I had valued all the Reasons transmitted me from hence; and
how all to no purpose: And being, I confess, a little heated after so long and
unpleasant a Conversation (as well as he) I asked him in the Name of God what
he thought a Man could do more? Upon this in a great Rage he answered me; Yes,
he would tell me what a Man might do more, and what I ought to do more; which
was, to let the King and all the World know how basely and unworthily the
States had used him; and to declare publicly how their Ministers were a
Company of Rogues and Rascals, and not fit for his Majesty or any other Prince
to have any thing to do with: And this was a Part that no Body could do so well
as I. My Answer was very calm, That I was not a Man fit to make Declarations;
That whenever I did upon any Occasion, I should speak of all Men what I thought
of them; and so I should do of the States, and the Ministers I had dealt with
there; which was all I could say of this Business. And so our Conversation
ended.

Upon all these Passages, and some others not fit for a Letter, I have fixed my
Judgment of the Affairs and Counsels at present in Design or Deliberation here.
I apprehend Weather coming, that I shall have no mind to be abroad in; and
therefore resolved to get a warm House over my Head as soon as I could: And
neither apprehend any Uneasiness of Mind or Fortune in the private Life I
propose to my self; unless some public Revolutions should draw both upon me,
which cannot touch me alone, and must be born like a common Calamity.

I cannot find them willing yet to end my Ambassy in Form, or give me leave to
send over for my Wife and Family; which I easily apprehend the Reason of, and
must go through as well as I can; though my Expense at the Hague be great, and my
Hopes little here of getting my Pay, as I find Affairs go and Dispositions too
in the Treasury, where all is disposed in a manner by Sir Thomas Clifford. In
the mean time, I have sent over for my Spanish Horse, and intend to send a
Groom away with him to Dublin, in hopes you will be pleased with him. I can be
so with nothing more than the Occasions of expressing always that Duty
wherewith I am

Sir, your etc.

To Monsieur de Wit.
Sheen, July 25. 1671. SIR,
BY yours of the 14th Instant I received the Marks you were pleased to give me
of your Friendship and Memory, which I value as I ought, and as coming from a
Person who has already acquired the Esteem of all the World, and by that the
Right of doing much Honor to others to whom he gives any Testimony of his own.
I can pretend to no other Part in it, than what your Goodness gives me, and am
afraid that this may do Injury to your Judgment. But knowing that your Opinion
of me is solely founded upon your knowledge or my good Intentions, I shall
defend my self no longer; because in this Age there is so little Honor in
being a good Man, that none are suspected to employ their Vanity about it, any
more than their Pursuits. I should quit my Residence at the Hague with much
Regret, if I were of your Opinion in what regards me; for I think I should be
wholly useless there, and find I am better turned for making a good Gardener
than an able Minister. However, I shall ever bear much Respect and Esteem to
those who are well qualified for the latter, and therefore cannot fail of both
for your Person in particular, any more than of my Acknowledgments for your
Civilities to me at the Hague, whereof I shall ever preserve the Remembrance,
as well as the Passion wherewith I am

SIR, Your etc.

A Monsieur de Wit.
De Sheen, le 25 Juil. 1671. Monsieur,
J'Ay recu dans votre lettre du 14 de ce mois les marquis que vous avez bien
voulu me donner de votre souvenir, and de votre amity, je les estime ce
qu'elles valent, and comme venant d'une person qui s'est deja acquis l'estime
de tout le monde, and par la le droit de fair beaucoup d'honneur en donnant
des marquis de la sienne. Je n'y scaurois pretendre d'autre part que celle que
votre generosite m'y done and je crains meme que cela ne fasse quelque tort a
votre jugement. Mais, sachant que le bonne opinion que vous temoignez avoir de
moy, n'est fondee que sur la connoissance de mes bonnes intentions, je ne veux
plus me defendre; car, au rest, dans un siecle comme le notre, il y a trop peu
de gloire a etre homme de bien, pour s'attirer le soupcon d'avoir turn se
veues a ce cote la, and borne sa vanite a si peu de chose. Je quitterois avec
beaucoup de regret, le sejour de la Hay, si j'avois de moy meme, l'opinion que
vous voulez que j'en aye; mon sentiment est, que j'y serois tout-a fait
inutile; and je me sens beaucoup plus propre a pratiquer l'art d'un bon
jardinier, que celuy d'habile Ministre. J'auray pourtant toujours l'estime and
le respect qui sont dus a eux qui savent bien ce dernier, and par la je croy
dire assez clairement, que je n'en manqueray jamais pour votre person en
particulier. Je say de plus quelle reconnoissance je dois a toutes les
civilitez que j'ay receues de vous pendant mon sejour a la Hay; and mon coeur
en conservera eternellement le souvenir, ainsi que la passion avec laquelle je
suis,

Monsieur, Votre etc.

To Sir John Temple.
London, Sept. 14. 1671. SIR,
I AM sure you will be pleased with knowing that my Wife and Family are safe
arrived from Holland, after a Passage that might very well have met with other
Dangers besides those of Wind and Weather. I could not obtain Leave to send for
them till July, though I had for some Months solicited both That and the
ending of my Ambassy: But then his Majesty was pleased to grant me both that
Liberty, and also of writing to the States and to Monsieur de Wit, to take my
Leave of Them, and end my Ambassy as upon my own Desire, and my own private
Occasions; which were indeed enough to engage me in that Pursuit, considering
the Charge of maintaining an Ambassador's Family at the Hague, while my
Payments from the Exchequer went so heavy and so lame.

It Is true, I had other Reasons long about me, which I kept to my self: For,
soon after my coming over, my Wife writ me Word, That Monsieur Gioe the Danish
Envoy there, had told her in Confidence, and out of Kindness to me, that
Monsieur Pompone the French Ambassador at the Hague, had acquainted him, That
new Measures were taken between our Court and that of France; among which one
was, that I should be recalled and return no more.

At the same time Monsieur de Wit had upon the Delays of my Return, told my
Secretary Mr. Blaithwait, that he should take my stay or coming back for
certain Signs of what the King's Intentions were toward the preserving or
changing the Measures he had taken with the States: And had desired him to let
the Court know what he said. This I suppose made them unwilling to make a
Declaration by my recalling, of what they intended upon this Occasion, before
all Things necessary were more fully agreed or better concerted. Therefore they
continued not only my Family there for so many Months, and the Talk of my
Return, but entertained the Dutch Ministers here with such Language as gained
in them an Opinion of our Measures still continuing firm upon the same Bottom;
and with such a Credulity as was enough to make one doubt whether they were
willing to deceive their Masters or to be deceived themselves.




