A SERMON Concerning the Wandering of the Mind IN God's Service, Preached before
the QUEEN, AT WHITE HALL, FEBRUARY 15. 1690/1.

By THO. TENISON, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to THEIR MAJESTY'S.

LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, M DC XCI.

A SERMON CONCERNING THE Wandering of the MIND IN GOD's SERVICE.
1 COR. vii. 35. -- That you may attend upon the Lord without distraction.


THESE Words spoke St. Paul in a time of Persecution, and he spoke them with
special regard to it. During that season he recommended to Christians a single
Estate. He recommended it, but did not enjoin it, nor make a matter of
discretion, a necessary Duty. He gave not (therefore) this Counsel to all, but
to those who could receive it. And upon this account it was that he then
advised to that state of life* He considered that the Gospel was to be Preached
in many Countries, with great Pains, and amidst equal Perils. And he well
understood, that the less the Propagators of it were entangled in the Affairs
of this Life, the more they would be at liberty to promote their holy Faith:
The freer they would be from perplexity of Mind, and upon that account, the
better disposed to Attend upon the [Service of the] Lord [Jesus] without
distraction.

Upon occasion of these Words I shall (by God's help)

1 st. Enquire into the Nature of the Distraction, or wandering of the Mind.
Next to that,

2 dly. May be considered the great Evil of it, especially where it is
indulged; and more especially when it is affected in the Worship of God. That
Consideration will fitly introduce (in the

3 d Place) A Persuasive to Attention and fixedness of Thought in God's
Service; that the Grace of God, which is, in it self, of so inestimable a
Value, may not by us be received in vain.

I. The General nature of the Wandering of the Mind, consists neither in its
musing upon many things, which increases knowledge, nor in ballancing one thing
against another, which helps us to make a right judgment of them; nor yet in
its passing from one matter to another, tho the objects are at a great
distance; for they may have a Connection in reason, tho they have it not in time
or place; so it is (for example) with those great Objects, Moses and Christ,
Canaan and Heaven.

But then the Mind may be said to wander, when the Attention is removed from
the matter which was properly before it, to something foreign, even then when
the Meditation on that matter was fitly and usefully to be continued. So Pilate
asked what was Truth? But he pursued not the Enquiry, neither staid he for the
Answer of our Savior, who was the only Oracle that could have given him a
Resolution which would have left no doubt behind it.

This distraction of the Thought is sometimes a Natural Infirmity, and
sometimes a wilful and affected Practice.

Sometimes the temper of the Brain is either over-hot and volatile, or cloudy,
and heavy, and slow, in the Original frame of it; sometimes Afflictions and
Diseases and throngs of Worldly Affairs shatter that Temper which was at first
an apt instrument of Sobriety and composure of Mind. And generally the Mind is
apt, instead of maintaining an orderly connection of the Images of it, which
requires Pains and Judgment, to rove from one to another, by a kind of casual
coherence. As, for Example, when there is mention made in Scripture of Christ
and his Doctrine, as the true Bread which came down from Heaven; the
Imagination of the Reader or Hearer who has not had his Senses orderly
exercised and fixed, is very apt to wander from that Evangelical Food, to the
thought of the Manna of the Israelites; and from the Manna, to the Wilderness
in which it fell, and from thence to the Rock in the Desert, which God turned
into a springing Well; and then peradventure he thinks of the Impatience of
Thirst, and the refreshing of Water; and after that, the Fancy is led into as
many windings and turnings of musing, as the Jews say there were in that River
which followed them. Thus the Mind is carried to such a distance from the first
thought, as not to be able to tell, of a sudden, where the Imagination began,
and in what manner it was continued.

We see and hear a great deal of this in the Digressions which are continually
made both in Books and in Conversation; and may, to our great grief, feel the
Byas of it in our selves when we appear before God in his holy House; where
there is little need of our interrupting of one another by late coming, by
Talk, or by irreverent Gesture, seeing our own Minds give themselves too much
diversion.

The natural Infirmity which I have been speaking of, is, in some Persons
carried on with such Indulgence, that it becomes a Presumption. Such way is
given to it, such content is taken in it, that it is properly a Man's own Act.

I shall not here discourse of all the kinds of this wilful Wandering; but only
of the removing of the Attention, in part or in whole, from the Worship of God,
and the carrying of it to something that is vain or wicked, or indifferent; or
if good, as improper at that time, as would have been the practice of the
Impotent man at Bethesday, if he had desired to have been carried afar off to a
Physician, in that juncture when the Angel had been just moving the Waters, or
when Christ himself was by the Porch.

This is the manner of those who in God's House are present in body, and absent
in spirit; who with cold Formality, repeat religious Words, not minding the
important sense of them; who hear as if they heard not; who read with such
Negligence, as not to understand, even where the matter is not beyond a
Capacity which has not much depth; who see the Holy Elements, and think of
common Tables, and wander with their Appetite, as well as their Thought: Who
draw nigh to God with their lips, whilst their hearts are far from him; or
possibly their Hearts are elsewhere so perfectly engaged, that they neither
cause the lip to move, nor the knee to bow.

But,

2 dly. The distemper of wandering, whether it be natural or acquired, is no
small Evil, especially when we should draw nigh to God in Religious Assemblies.

1. Even there where it is a natural infirmity, it is attended with great
inconvenience.

It hinders us in the search of such Truths, as depend upon any number of
Consequences. Where there is not Attention, such Truths will not be found: It
is from the same Root, that both Credulity and Skepticism spring. It is from
want of closeness of Thought, that some believe any thing, and others nothing.
Hence also is prevented Resolution of Will, so necessary in a good matter, and
attained only by such a judgment, as, being fixed it self, fixes the Purpose.
And, for the utmost degree of Inconsistency of Thought, it is no other than
Madness. From lower degrees of it, proceed great defects in a Man's Duty to
God, his Neighbor, or himself, whilst the mind starts from that which is
before it, and leaves it unfinished, reversing the Counsel of the wiseman,
Eccl. 9.10.
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might. So serviceable to all
Business, Civil or Sacred, is the application of the mind.

It is true, that very devout Persons are subject to the Infirmity of Wandering;
it being difficult, amidst such a variety of Images in the head, to keep one
certain line of them straight and continued; and our great Adversary, in the
midst of our best Thoughts, is busy in darting in such Suggestions, as by
their suddenness, their incoherence, their contrariety, both to our present
Thoughts and Affections, and Prayers; their Black and Diabolical nature, show
that they are of their Father the Devil.

And tho it is in Divinity as in the Civil Law, by which the Trees planted in
another Man's Ground, are not, till they take root, judged the Property of the
Owner of the Soil; tho evil Suggestions, till by our consent they are rooted in
our hearts, are not our proper thoughts, but either the Devil's Temptations, or
natural Infirmities, which the Merciful God, who considers our Frame, will not
impute to such in whom the spirit is willing, and the flesh weak; yet it is an
unhappy and uncomfortable Circumstance which they ought to pray and strive
against, and to the utmost of their Skill and Power abate, bearing with
Patience the Weakness they cannot conquer, till God Almighty in his good time
shall work the blessed Alteration in them.

But then,

2 dly. When Men allow and indulge themselves in this roving of Imagination,
and when they do so even in the Worship of God,

Then 1 st. Their sin is exceeding sinful. And,

2 dly. Their Condition is very dangerous.

1. Their sin is exceeding sinful, both in it self, and the Fountain whence it
proceeds.

1. This Practice flows from a corrupt heart, which wants the love of God. For
where the Treasure is, there will the heart be also. If therefore the Heart
valued God and Goodness, if it truly loved his Honor, and its own Salvation,
it would not perpetually go astray from them, but be there fixed where true
joys are to be found. The Israelites when they were out of Egypt with their
Bodies, in their hearts they turned back again into Egypt; Acts 7.39.
its Idols pleasing their imaginations, and its fruits their Appetites; but the
holy woman in the Gospel, who chose the good part, whose Affection was chiefly
placed upon the One thing necessary, she sat, in the posture, and with the
attention, Luke 10.39, 42.
of a Disciple at Jesus feet, and heard his word.

2. The root of this practice, the want of the love of God, being so evil, the
practice cannot but partake of the irreligious nature of it.

Wilful Wandering in God's service is a kind of Contempt of God, and a coming
into his Presence to slight him; to affront him to his face; and it gives him
just occasion to complain, as in Jer. 23.11. In my House I have found
wickedness. It is a preferring of our own ways and thoughts before his: nay,
it is the preferring of the Injections of the Devil, to whom we give place, by
receiving of them into the room of pious meditations.

It is likewise a disobedient refusal of his call, when he says with
Importunity as well as Authority, Prove. 23.26.
My son give me thine heart.

It disappoints the Ends designed by God's wisdom in his Service, his own
glory, and the edification of the Worshippers; for, by such hypocrisy which
withdraws the best part of Man's Service (that which is inward, judicious,
hearty) and substitutes that which is scarce a show of Devotion, God is rather
mocked than honored: and those who are present in his House with thoughts
ranging in the world, can neither improve in Knowledge nor Faith, nor Devotion,
nor Morality; seeing they attend not to the means and exercises of them: For
our Spiritual is not like our Natural Stature, which grows up, whether we think
or think not of it. Observable are the words of the Apostle. Consider what I
say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

Add to this, the great aggravation of ingratitude in Sinners of this kind, who
stand in such need of the especial grace of God, and whom God's extraordinary
Goodness has obliged with the means of it; for after all this they despise his
and their own mercies, and use the Grace of God (as they ought to do the World)
with an indifferency, and as if they used it not.

This undervaluing of the Riches of God's Love, instead of giving him thanks;
this neglect of means, instead of embracing and using them for the improvement
of our very imperfect nature; this spending of good hours to such ill purpose,
is not only wicked, but

2 dly. Exceeding perilous, as indeed all wickedness is; for how pleasant
soever vain Thoughts are, and how charming soever this Paradise in which the
Fool wanders, may for a season seem to him; yet the immediate consequence is
evil, and the end of these things are shame and death.

Distraction abateth the zeal of the Heart, as the scattering of the Rays does
the heat of the Sun; and when Men are either cold or lukewarm in their duty,
they are robbed of the Comfort of it: they cannot take delight in that which
they mind not.

The service of God is a weariness to those whose Thoughts and Affections are
elsewhere entangled. So it was to the Israelites, who groaned even under their
Privilege, Amos 8.5.
and said, When will the Sabbath be over that we may set forth wheat?

And for Almighty God, how can we imagine that he will mind those Services of
ours, which we our selves do not; He cannot but observe them, but it is with
the Animadversion of a Judge, and in order to punishment: and it is a fearful
thing, (in such a manner, and in so ill a cause) to fall into the hands of the
living God. He will make good his threatening in Jer. 6.19. I will bring upon
this people the fruit of their thoughts.

Now the Considerations of the Wickedness, and the Peril of wilful and affected
wandering in the Service of God, do fitly prepare the way to the Third Part of
this Discourse.

3. A persuasive to Attention, without which we cannot be either innocent, or
safe, or useful.

Give, therefore, to God not a mechanical but a reasonable service. Let him
have more than the bodily Engine, and the natural spring of it, by which the
Eyes, and Hands, and Lips, and Knees, are moved. Consider that when all the
Forces of Soul and Body are united, They are still an imperfect Oblation; how
much more when they are divided and weak'ned by the Thoughts and Affections
running in many and in crooked Channels.

Offer, then, to him what is his due, and that which pleases him best, and
that which becomes a Man, the Soul, the intention, the inward reverence; give
him it with judgment; not repeating (for example sake) the Ministers proper
parts, such as Absolution and Benediction, as the manner of some is. Give him
it in its place and in its season; perform that sincerely which you come to do:
If any other thing be then thought of, though in its general nature, indifferent,
nay though good, it is improper, and takes us away from our particular duty at a
time when we should solemnly perform it. He (for instance) does ill in God's
Cause who reads the very Scriptures in the Time of the Prayers.

He that is in Honor and has understanding of it, he that considers how
excellent a Creature Man is as God made him, such a one will not be easy in
doing any thing unseasonably and impertinently; much less will he forgive
himself for thinking with pleasure on God's Day only on his own six days
Labors, Eccl. 2.14.
or (which are much worse) his Vanities and loosnesses of Life. Prove. 17.24.
The wise man's Eyes are in his Head, but a fools Eyes are at the ends of the
Earth: Endeavor, therefore, to attend on the Lord; not as fools but as wise,
saying in this sense, our hearts are fixed, O God, our hearts are fixed.

Now because we are subject to the Infirmity of giddiness and misattention, and
to an indulgence of infirm Nature; and, likewise to the Insults of that
Adversary, who studies to give the greatest interruption to us when we are most
religiously employed; a mere dissuasive from wandering is not sufficient for us,
unless we also understand and use fit Helps against Distraction of thought.

And for Helps, some are but pretended ones, and will deceive us.

Others are real, and will, at least prevent much of our Distemper, if they
cannot wholly cure it.

First, Amongst the pretended Helps which will deceive us, I shall mention two.

The First is that of the Romanists, who prescribe the use of an Image, as a
proper Instrument for the fixing the Mind by the Assistance of Sense. Whereas,
by this means the Eye draws down the Mind from the Prototype to the Type, from
the Creator to the Creature; and the Image is turned into an Idol, and the
Immediate Phantasm (which is made by the sight of it) is that which is most
thought of and adored. So that this second Object distracts the Mind, instead
of fixing it where it should be truly placed; and gives it a diversion by those
Bodily Appearances which do not at all appertain to the most high God whom we
worship, and whom only we should serve.

A second pretended Help against wandering of Mind, is unpremeditated Prayer.
For the Novelty of it will, they presume, engage the Attention, whilst that to
which Men are accustomed will be formally repeated.

To which it may be said, that such as come in good earnest to serve God, will
attend much more to an ancient Service, which is judicious and grave, than to
any new one which is raw and undigested.

That those who officiate (being not inspired) unless great Ability and long
Use have given them an extraordinary Talent, are distracted betwixt Invention
and Elocution; they are forced not so much to mind what they say, as to study
what they shall say: and those who hear are distracted also, betwixt Assenting
and saying Amen, and considering, in a new Matter, whether they can say Amen to
it or not.

Nor can it be imagined that the Hearers should not rove if the Speakers do.

Wherefore, not trusting to pretended Helps, let us (2 dly) make use of those
which are real. And they are many.

Our Infirmity of thought is helped.

By some Order in thinking, though it be not nice and Philosophical, but such as
we may learn even from common Catechisms, and Sums of Christian Religion.

By freeing our selves, as much as may be, from worldly Encumbrance; and by
banishing Care, which perplexeth the Mind, and choaketh the good thoughts of it.

By preserving the Temper from being broken with Adversity, through that
evenness which proceeds from Resignation to God.

By keeping the Affairs of the other days of the Week from intrenching too much
upon those of the first; so the Jews began their Sabbath about Midnight; and
how (for Example sake) is it possible for those to be undistracted in God's
Service, who come into a Church on the Lord's- Day, full of the Images of a
Theater frequented on the Eve of it?

Further our Infirmity is helped, by a particular Application to God against
wandering in his Service, when we are just entering upon it.

By our immediate checking and recalling of our Thoughts, as soon as we
perceive them to be stepping aside; and by taking a holy Revenge upon our
selves, especially in private, in repeating that to which we less attended,
till we are satisfied in our attention to it.

It is further assisted, by the consideration of the Majesty of him we worship;
by laying to Heart the moment of the Service it self, and making it case of
Life and Death eternal, which will almost force us to attend to it

By the Time considered, as separated from common Use and servile Labor.

By the Place, thought upon as dreadful, or as God's especial Presence.

By the decency of the Place fitted for a Religious Assembly, without variety
of superstitious Figures, such especially as we see in many Romish Churches,
where they serve for Pomp, rather than Edification, and for the refreshing of
those to whom the unedifying sound of an unknown Language would else be very
tedious.

Images, and suchlike Ornaments, amuse the Fancy, and draw away the Attention
from the Service of God, which is the Business for which such Buildings are
erected, and where it suffices if they be convenient, clean and decent.

Furthermore, our Infirmity is helped by Scriptures and Services in a known
Tongue; for how shall a Man attend to that which he does not understand?

Also by the good Method and Order of that which is delivered; and by
liturgical Words, well chosen, and ready prepared. For a Service, which is well
weighed, and generally approved of, and at hand for use, leaves the Mind at
more freedom for the exercise of its Devotion: It has nothing then to do, but
to add to good Words; religious fervor of Mind, which by the intenseness of
it, will keep off Foreign Ideas; The Birds will not light upon the Sacrifice
whilst it is flaming.

Nor are those frequent breaks in Liturgy inconsiderable Helps to the common
People, who are lost in a long-continued Service; whilst they are able to
attend to that which is short, and after a small pause, to renew their
Attention to a following Ejaculation or Collect: and to them those short
Ejaculations, which the ignorant revile as shreds of Prayer, are real Helps of
Devotion

Last of all; God, by his Spirit, helps the Spirit of Man in the use of good
Means, when, with profound Humility, and fervent Devotion, he prays for it.

After all this, let no Man excuse himself upon the impossibility of perfect
steadiness of Mind.

The first Motions to wandering can scarcely be, at all times, prevented; but
the continuance of them is our own Act and Choice. In Waters, a small Circle,
made by any thing cast in, is enlarged into a greater, and so multiplied, till
at last the whole Surface becomes uneven; but it needs not be so in the deep of
the Heart which is a voluntary Agent. That which cannot be helped, shall not be
answered for: but much may be helped; and if it be not, such distraction is
beyond Apology. All vain, all wicked Thoughts which we delight in, are our own;
and proceed not so much from the Frailty of Nature, as the Pollution of the
Heart.

And happier, much happier is the Condition of the Idiot, who cannot think with
any tolerable consistence; or the sick Person, whose Fever rages, and not
himself, than a Man who has a good Capacity, and is a Master of Method; yet,
when he is upon the great Business of saving his Soul, takes up all his
thoughts with his Farms and his Oxen, his Trade and Merchandise, his Politics
or secular Studies.

And for those pious Worshippers, whose minds are weak, and memories frail, and
by Age, or other Causes, past the recovery of the soundness of them, let them
not be so discouraged as to forbear God's Worship, because they do it with such
imperfection. The Paralitic must move on, though they shake every step, they make
way, though slowly; and they will, at last finish their Course with joy. That
which the Apostle says of Charity, is true of Piety; If there be a willing
mind it is accepted according to what a man has, and not according to what he
has not.

It is confessed, that one end of our coming together in Religious Assemblies,
is the giving a public Sign of our Communion with God's Church, which is done
by our presence, and our decent behavior there. But there is something more
required; the paying of our actual Homage to God, by the Dedication of Soul and
Body to him, and the attending to the holy Offices, as means appointed by God
for our instruction, reproof, encouragement, and comfort; and the conveying to
us his especial Grace and Blessing.

It is true, the Liturgy is a settled Form, and gives not daily new
entertainment to Men's Fancies; but it is such, as being often repeated, may yet
please and benefit the Devout.

The Scriptures are always the same, but they are a great deep of Divine
Wisdom; and every time a Man attends to them, he may possibly find something
instructive and useful, which before he observed not.

It is certain that we cannot hear Moses and the Prophets in Person: But God's
good Providence has conveyed their writings down to us, and we must read and
hear them.

It is true, that Solomon, whose Wisdom drew Hearers from the Ends of the
Earth, does not now speak himself, but his Works do.

It is confessed, that Christ who spoke as never man spoke, is in the Heavens,
but his written word is in his Church, and a mighty Power goes along with it
wheresoever there is a teachable and attentive Disposition.

It is also humbly acknowledged, that there are great Imperfections in the
Ministers of the Church; yet Christ has been pleased in earthen Vessels, to
convey to the World the rich Treasure of his Gospel.

Let us therefore receive the Gift without despising the meanness of the
Messengers; and mind not so much who the Person is that speaks, as that which
is said, and the Divine Authority, from whence he has Commission to preach the
Doctrine of the Messiah.

Finally, Let us make devout supplication to Almighty God, who has caused all
Holy Scriptures to be written for our Learning; praying him to grant, That we
may in such wise read, hear, mark, learn, and inwardly digest them, that by
patience and comfort of his Holy Word, we may embrace, and ever hold fast the
blessed Hope of everlasting Life, which he has given us in Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

