Ten Seasonable Queries, PROPOSED By a PROTESTANT that is for Liberty of
Conscience to all Persuasions.
I. WHether any Real and Zealous Papist was ever for Liberty of Conscience? it
being a fundamental Principle of their Religion, That all Christians that do
not believe as they do, are Heretics, and ought to be destroyed.

II. Whether the King be a Real and Zealous Papist? if he be; whether he can be
truly for Liberty of Conscience?

III. Whether this King in his Brother's Reign did not cause the Persecution
against Dissenters to be more violent than otherwife it would have been?

IV. Whether he does not now make use of the Dissenters to pull down the Church
of England, as he did of the Church of England to ruin the Dissenters, that the
Papists may be the better enabled, in a short time, to destroy them both?

V. Whether any ought to believe he will be for Liberty any longer than it
serves his turn? and whether his great eagerness to have the Penal Laws and
Test repealed be only in order to the easy establishing of Popery?

VI. Whether if these Penal Laws and Test were repealed, there would not many
turn Papists that now dare not?

VII. Whether the forcing of all that are in Offices of Profit or Trust in the
Nation, to lose their Places, or declare they will be for Repealing the Penal
Laws and Test, be not Violating his own Declaration for Liberty of Conscience,
and a new Test upon the People?

VIII. Whether the Suspending the Bishop of London, the Dispossessing of the
Fellows of Magdalen College of their Freeholds, the Imprisoning and
Prosecuting the Seven Bishops for Reasoning according to Law, are not
sufficient instances how well the King intends to Repeal his Declaration for
Liberty of Conscience, wherein he promises to protect and maintain all his
Bishops and Clergy, and all other his Subjects of the Church of England in
quiet and full enjoyment of all their Possessions, without any molestation or
disturbance whatsoever?

IX. Whether the Usage of the Protestants in France and Savoy, for these three
years past, be not a sufficient warning not to trust to the Declaration,
Promises or Oaths in matters of Religion of any Papist whatsoever?

X. Whether any Equivalent whatsoever under a Popish King, that has a standing
Army, and pretends to a Dispensing Power, can be as equal security as the Penal
Laws and Test, as affairs now stand in England?

If any think fit to Answer these Queries, they are desired to do it as plainly
and fairly as they are here put.


