IMPRIMATUR.

C. Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.
Julii 13. 1693.
A TREATISE relating to the Worship of GOD, Divided into SIX SECTIONS;
CONCERNING I. The Nature of Divine Worship. II. The peculiar Object of Worship.
III. The True Worshippers of God. IV. Assistance requisite to Worship. V. The
Place of Worship. VI. The Solemn Time of Worship.


By John Templer, D.D.

LONDON, Printed by R.N. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1694.

TO THE READER.
THE late Author of This Treatise, having sufficiently recommended himself to
the World, when Living, by his indefatigable Labors in his Priestly Function,
and by the Works he has already Printed; there will need the less to be said in
behalf of this Posthumous piece. For whosoever had the happiness of being
acquainted with the Author, will presently be apt to think, that nothing that
is mean or unworthy of the Public, could proceed from a person of that True
Worth and accomplished Learning; one whose excellent knowledge in all
Church-Controversies rendered him fit to write of any: and the soundness of
whose Judgment, and the sincerity of whose Life were sufficient demonstrations
to all that thoroughly knew him, That he would Write of none, but what were most
useful to the producing in the Minds of others a true love to Virtue, and a
firm adherence to Truth. And although his long continuance in the Country, and
constant residence at his Living, where he had not such frequent opportunities
of conversing with the Learned in his own Profession, may give occasion to some
to think, that his Parts and Genius must slag proportionably, and his Writings
be tinctured with the rudeness of a Country Abode; and by consequence render
him the less able to please and gratify the humors of this nice and critical
Age: yet, I hope, whoever will impartially consider and read over this small
Treatise, will be abundantly satisfied of the contrary. As a proof of which, I
appeal to the Treatise it self; where, if the Judgment of Men of known
Abilities may be trusted, there is solid Learning shown without any vain
Ostentation of it; Truth vindicated with a native Simplicity that becomes it;
and the Religious Duties of Christianity pressed with that Zeal and warmth,
that so adorned the first Professors of it, and rendered the Author whilst
living, the Joy and Admiration of his whole Flock. Nor had the Publication of
it been thus long deferred (it being composed long before the Author's death)
but that the native and uncommon kind of Modesty, which gave a Luster to all
his Actions, would not permit it in his Life time to see the light. He, though
fraught with so much admirable Knowledge, strength of Parts, and solidity of
Judgment in the opinion of all others; yet always was so diffident of any thing
of his own composure, that nothing but the strict Command of his Superiors, or
the passionate importunity of his Friends, could force him to appear in Print:
So great an esteem had he of the censures of other Men, and so little, and low
Thoughts of his own Worth. And although this is not altogether so commendable,
where there is just reason to be satisfied with, as well as conscious of, a
Man's own true Merit in respect of others (many on this account having deprived
the World of many advantageous Books) yet if it be a fault, it is such an one
as none but the best of Men have been, or can be guilty of; and for which
likewise their deserts when made known, have become the more illustrious:
Humility and Lowliness of Mind being Virtues of as great Excellency, as they
are rare, and as apt to beget a due esteem of those, that are endued with them,
as Pride and self conceit are to produce hatred and contempt.

But lest I should hinder the Reader by too long an Epistle from the pleasure
and advantage he may reap from the Author himself, or seem to allure his favor
by a too tedious bespeaking of him; I shall wholly submit this Treatise (it
having no other Patron) to his unbyassed Judgment; and hope, though it had not
the Author's last hand, yet it may meet with so kind a reception, as to conduce
something to the spiritual welfare and happiness of Mankind. And then I am sure
it will answer to all the ends and purposes the Pious Author designed it, and
be so far the more probable to show, who its Composer was; in that it will be
always employed in doing good.

THE CONTENTS.
SECT. I. Concerning the Nature of Divine Worship.
THE Introduction, from the importance of Divine Worship, Men's proneness to
mistake about it, and the Devil's readiness to cherish this proneness, page 1.
The notion of Worship in geneneral, p. 5, its Objects and Kinds, p. 6. The acts
of Divine Worship, either mediate, p. 7. or immediate, p. 10, these either
internal, p. 11, or external, p. 13: And these again either natural, as
Praying, Praising, Swearing, Vowing, ib. or instituted, as Preaching, Hearing,
Reading the Scriptures, and receiving the Sacraments, p. 17. The perpetuity of
the Sacraments, p. 20. Sacrifice no part of Divine Worship under the Gospel, p.
22.

SECT. II. Concerning the Object of Divine Worship.
THE Introduction, from the great and early mistakes of mankind about it; and
consequently the great circumspection we should use in our enquiries concerning
it, p. 29. To this purpose Five Propositions are laid down.

1. Proposition, There is a God who made the World. This proved, First, from
the World in general, p. 35. Secondly, from the particular parts of it; as the
Heavens, p. 39. the Earth, p. 41. the Body, 44. the Soul of Man, 47. They who
say they still want sufficient evidence of this Truth, should consider First,
there is as much evidence for it, as for those things we doubt not of, 54.
Secondly, as much as for the clearest axiom in Philosophy; nay Thirdly in some
respects more, 55. And then Lastly, the familiar dictates of our Understanding
will lead us to the acknowledgment of this truth, 57. The Objection that there
must be some pre-existent matter to frame the World out of, answered, ib.

2. Proposition, In the Godhead are Three Persons. For First, when God is
spoken of in Scripture, sometimes the plural number is used, 59. Secondly, This
Plurality is determined to Three in other places, ib. Thirdly, These three are
not three manifestations only of God, 60. Nor Fourthly, three names only of the
same God under diverse inadequate conceptions, ib. For Fifthly, All things
belonging to the nature of a person belong to each of them, 61. And then
Sixthly, Such actions are attributed to each, as belong to none but a person,
62. The Spirit and Power, and the Spirit and the effects or gifts of it are
distinguished, 64.

3. Proposition, These Three Persons are One God. For Unity is essential to the
Deity, 64. And the Scriptures say they are One, 65. as also that they have
Unity of Essence; inasmuch as it attributes to each the Name, Properties and
Attributes of the most high God, 66, etc. This truth acknowledged by all sorts
of men; the Primitive Christians, 69. the Jews, 71. the Heathen, 72. Our not
comprehending the difficulties of it, no reason against it, 73. Some
considerations added to lead us through 'em, ib.

4. Proposition, This One God is to be Worshipped. For First considered as
essentially, his nature and perfections justly challenge the deepest
veneration, 75. Then Secondly, considered personally, the Scriptures require
him to be Worshipped, 76.

5. Proposition, This God only is to be Worshipped. This shown, First, from
Scripture, 78. Secondly, from Reason, 79. Thirdly, from Antiquity, 81. What the
Papists say in opposition to this considered, with respect to the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper, Invocation of Saints, and Images, 84.

1. As to the Eucharist; That the Papists pay (...) to it, ib. and thereby put
the greatest affront upon Scripture, 91. upon the analogy of Faith, 94. upon
Antiquity, 97. upon Reason, 106. and upon Sense, 108. The declaration of their
Church in this matter, and the impossibility of an innovation considered, 110.

2. As to Invocation of Saints; This injurious to the peculiar honor of God,
115. and of Jesus Christ the only Mediator, 116. and has not the same grounds
and reasons, as our praying to each other here below. For First, the Saints and
Angels are at a distance, 117. And then Secondly, it is the prerogative of Jesus
Christ only to be our Mediator in Heaven, 118. as the Primitive Christians
thought, 119. The Origin of Invocation, etc. 122.

3. As to Images, 123. They who use them are of three sorts. First such as say
they use them only as memorials to quicken their devotions; which has no kindly
influence on Religion, 124. Secondly, such as say they give only inferior
worship to 'em; which yet is either vain, or sinful, 125. Thirdly, such as
profess to give the same worship to the Image as to the Prototype, in kind, tho
not in degree, i.e. relative or respective worship only, ib. the vanity of this
distinction shown, 126. and that it is Idolatry, 128. contrary to the Second
Commandment, 132. and unknown to the Primitive Church, 135.

SECT. III. Concerning the True Worshippers of God.
THE whole reduced to Three Inquiries, 142. I. Enquiry, Who they are that are
obliged to Worship, ib. And they are in general all rational Beings; as Angels,
142. and Men, whether secular, 143, or (more especially) Ecclesiastical and
consecrated to the performance of Religious Offices, 145. the necessity of
these shown, ib. such have been in all ages, 147. before the flood, ib. between
that and the Law, 150. that the Firstborn then were Priests, 151. such also
there were from the giving the Law till Christ, 154. as appears from the
Priests and Levites, ib. from the Schools of the Prophets, 155. from their
studies there, 156, from their Ordination by imposition of hands, 157, from the
place where they exercised their function, 159. such lastly there were under
the Gospel, ib.

II. Enquiry, How men are to Worship God, 163. This shown in several
Propositions.

1. Prop. We are to Worship him with all our Soul, and heart and strength; ib.
and

2. Prop. Outwardly with our Bodies, 165.

3. Prop. All the modes of external Worship must be decent, orderly, and to
edification, ib.

4. Prop. Different deductions from this general rule are no just grounds for
distinct Churches to differ among each other, and so violate the Unity of the
Universal, 166.

5. Prop. Yet in the same Church it is very expedient and desirable, That there
should be the same external mode of Religion, 167, but yet

6. Prop. If contests arise in the same Church about external modes, a ready
way to compose them, is, to appeal to Primitive Order, and give the preference
to those that come nighest to it, 169. And

7. Prop. If it cannot be known what the Primitive Order therein was, the next
step to Peace, is to make prudent condescensions on each side, before Authority
has made any determinations, 171. Then

8. Prop. If condescensions cannot be had, and yet a determination is
necessary, all, both weak and strong, are obliged to acquiesce in such a
determination, 173. which is neither against, nor inconsistent with the
perfection of Scripture, as a rule, 174. nor prejudicial to our Christian
Liberty, 175. nor yet induces any necessity of violating the Law about scandal,
176.

III. Enquiry, What ends we are to propose in the acts of Religious Worship,
ib. This shown in three particulars, First, and chiefly, The Glory of God, 177.
Secondly, The Salvation of our Souls, 178. Thirdly, The good of the Community,
179. The tendency of Religious Worship to all these, shown under each.

SECT. IV. Concerning Assistance relating to Divine Worship.
THE Introduction from the general and acknowledged depravation of our Natures;
whereby we want Light to direct, and Strength to enable us in the Worshipping
God a-right, and Merits to render our Services acceptable, 185.

Against all these God has provided sufficient helps and remedies, in that 1.
We have the holy Scriptures to direct us, 186 2. The Holy Spirit to communicate
strength, 186 3. The Merits of our Savior to procure acceptance. 186


All which are treated more largely of: And,

1. Of the holy Scriptures to direct us; which that we have grounds to depend
on, shown in several Propositions, as First, The Worshipping God is absolutely
necessary to Salvation, 187. Secondly, Moses and the Prophets, Christ and the
Apostles, did by Oral Tradition reveal all things necessary to this purpose,
ib. Thirdly, What they spoke was evidenced to be the real mind of God by inward
characters of Divinity, and external miraculous operations, ib. Fourthly, This
word of God thus evidenced was faithfully committed to writing, 192. Fifthly,
This Writing is digested into 24 books in the Old Testament, and 27 in the New,
193. Sixthly, These Books have been transmitted to us without corruption, 194.

Two opinions inconsistent with what has been said, considered, 1. That the
Church of Rome, as being infallible, is to be our guide in matters of Religion,
206. 2. That every one ought to rely upon the conduct of his own reason, ib.


As to the First, Proved that the Pope is not infallible, 207. nor a Council,
ib. nor the body of the People, 210. nor all these together, ib. nor are the
reasons they urge here sufficient, such as, first, The peremptory necessity of
such a Guide, 211. nor secondly, their having all reasonable evidence that the
Church of Rome is such a Guide, 216. For they have not first, The evidence of
Scripture, ib. shown as to the chief places they urge, 221. nor secondly,
Universal Tradition, 228. nor yet thirdly, the motives of credibility, 232.
shown particularly, as to Antiquity, Diuturnity, Amplitude, ib. uninterrupted
Succession of Bishops, 235. Agreement in doctrine with the Primitive Church,
236. Union among themselves, 237. holiness of doctrine, 239. efficacy of it,
240. holiness of life, 242. Lastly, the glory of Miracles, 247. Nay greater
motives of credibility on our side, That there is no such infallible Guide: as
First, It Is no where revealed by Jesus Christ, 251. Secondly, It Is inconsistent
with the nature of an intellectual Being, 252. It Is Thirdly destructive of True
Virtue, 253. Fourthly, It can be of no advantage in our present circumstances,
ib. Fifthly, It Is not reconcilable to the divine intention in giving the
sacred Oracles, 255. Sixthly, All the testimony for it comes only from the
Church of Rome her self, 256. Seventhly, The Primitive Constitution of the
Church plainly intimates that no one Guide was designed supreme over all the
Churches of the World, 257. Eighthly, No provision made of an infallible Guide
in a case of like importance, 260. Ninthly, Such a Guide not easily
reconcilable with the constitution of Civil Empires, 262. Tenthly, and lastly,
There is a plain prediction in Scripture of one, that would pretend to be that
infallible Guide, 264. Thus much in answer to the first opinion. Then as to the

2 Opinion inconsistent with the Scriptures being our Guide, namely, That we
ought to rely entirely upon the conduct of our own reason, shown First, that it
would have its effects with respect to Religion and the Church, 269. Secondly,
That it is not consistent with the interest of humane Society, 270. Thirdly,
disagreeable to the propensity of humane Nature, 273. Fourthly, Prejudicial to
the Souls of Men, 276. For speculative error in Religion is no such indifferent
thing, as some think, in that First Error is inclusive of disobedience, 278.
Secondly, Errors in Religion are not unavoidable, 279. Thirdly, It Is no
uncharitableness to say, Error is danmable, ib. Fourthly, The reason why a just
Catalogue of errors cannot be given is, because one error may be damnable in
one, that is not so in another, 280. Fifthly, The fault may be known by the
guilty, if they take care to look back and fully examine things, ib. Sixthly,
God does not put us here into a state of mere probability, 281. Seventhly, An
erroneous Conscience is not God's True Vicegerent, 282.

2. As to the assistance God affords us by his Holy Spirit to enable us to
Worship him; This is either general, or special; so as to leave men
inexcusable, 283, as is more largely proved, to p. 293.

3. Lastly, As to God's affording us the merits of our Savior to procure the
acceptance of our performance; This cleared by the following steps; First, The
acceptance of our Worship and Service is not upon its own account, 294. Nor
Secondly, Upon account of the favor of God, without the interposal of
satisfaction for sin, 295. This agreeable to Scripture, ib. and the propensity
of God's nature, 296. and cleared from the objections against it, 297. Thirdly,
This necessary satisfaction Christ has performed, 300. for First, He suffered
the punishment of our sins, ib. Secondly, What he suffered was in our stead,
311, whether it be considered as a Sacrifice, ib. or as a Ransom, 316. Thirdly,
By what be suffered in our stead, the damage done by sin is repaired, und God
appeased, and reconciled to us on the conditions of the New Covenant, 319.
Crellius here answered, 322. Fourthly, Our acceptance with God is upon account
of his meritorious satisfaction, 325. And Fifthly and lastly, upon acaccount of
that only, 326.

SECT. V. Concerning the Place of Divine Worship.
THIS Threefold according to the threefold capacity of Man may be considered
in, First, any solitary place whatever, as he is one single private person,
331. or Secondly, The family, of which we are members, ib. Such family worship
reasonable, ib. practiced by the Heathen, 332. agreeable to the Old Testament,
ib. and the New, 333. Thirdly, Churches or places of Public Worship, as such,
are members of an Ecclesiastical Community, 334. The reasons for such
Assemblies shown, from the nature of a Church, ib. and from the practice of
God's people in all ages; as before the Law, 336. under it, ib. and after it,
340.

SECT. VI. Concerning the Time of Divine Worship.
BEsides our worshipping God daily, 348. and upon particular occasions and
emergencies by fastings and thanksgivings, 349. there ought to be solemn set
times peculiarly devoted to his honor, 350; as will be better understood by
considering.

I. God requires not only an inward, but an outward Worship, 351.

II. This external Worship must not be only in private, but in public too, 352.

III. The time for this public worship ought to be stated, ib.

IV. It is expedient it should be taken out of some part of the week, ib.

V. This part of the week cannot in reason be less than one whole day, 353.
whether we consider the Object of our Worship, ib: or the Nature of it, ib: or
the pattern of the Triumphant Church, 354; or the practice of the Militant, ib;
or the early division of time into weeks, 355; or lastly, the writings of the
Heathens, 358.

VI. It Is highly reasonable to believe the setting out the just time should be
left to God himself, 361.

VII. This time is determined by God in the Fourth Commandment to one day in
seven, as a proportion perpetually to be devoted to Religious Worship, 363. For
First, It is one in seven, and not the seventh from the Creation, which is
enjoined by the Fourth Commandment, ib. Secondly, The Sabbath of the Fourth
Command, One in Seven, is perpetual, 372, for it is part of the Decalogue which
obliges in all ages, ib: as may be gathered First, from its being distinguished
in the Old Tastament from those Laws, which the time of Reformation has put a
period to, ib: Secondly, from many intimations in the New, that the Decalogue
as delivered by Moses is to continue as a perpetual Rule to Christians, 373;
all which is agreeable to the opinions of the Primitive Fathers, 378, and of
our own Church, 379, some Objections answered, 380, etc. and others, 385, etc.
Thirdly, This proportion of One in seven is by the Command to be devoted to
Divine Worship, and not only to bodily rest, 395. shown from the order of the
Commandments of the First Table, ib. from God's blessing the Sabbath day, 396.
and from the practice of the Israelites, and the modern Jews upon the Sabbath,
ib: some Objections by the Author of the Epilogue considered, 397, etc.

VIII Propos. This proportion, One in Seven, was determined to the Jewish day
by another Precept, which was to oblige only till the Jewish Economy had a
period put to it, 403.

IX Propos. When the last of the Week had a period put to it, the First was
substituted in the room of it, 414. as appears probable from the Law, ib. the
Prophets, 415. our Blessed Lord, 420. the holy Apostles and Disciples, 425. and
Lastly, the Testimony of the following Ages, 429.

ERRATA.
PAge 20. line 16. read (...), p. 58. l. 12, 13. r. in sensible, p. 84. l. 22.
r. contrived, p. 189. l. 30. r. (...), p. 190. l. 6. r. coveted, p. 234. l. 9.
r. enlarged, p. 294. l. 16. r. flaws, p. 302. l. 2. r. to induce, p. 315. l.
13. dele which, p. 318. l. 22. r. (...), p. 323. l. 31. r. are in, p. 345. l.
33. r. and the, p. 348. l. 21. r. used.

The Reader is desired to amend with his Pen what lesser faults and
mis-pointings he meets with.

A TREATISE relating to the Worship of GOD.
SECTION 1. Concerning the Nature of Divine Worship.
HE, who will give himself leisure to ponder the importance of Religious
Veneration, and the innate pronity in men to form incongruous Notions of it,
and the restless attempts of the Infernal Spirit to cherish this inclination,
and keep us from right conceptions about it, will easily be induced to justify
the present Inquiry.

Religious Worship is deservedly accounted by the Hebrews as one of the Pillars
which support the World, and prevent its retirement into its primitive Abyss.
It cannot be expected, that the Arm of Omnipotence, which bears up all Things,
should continue to be so propitious, where the Homage due to Heaven is not
paid. It is a provocation of the first magnitude to neglect the making our
reverential acknowledgments to Him, to whom we are indebted for our Existence,
and whatsoever contributes to our real Felicity. There cannot be a more open
affront put upon the indispensable Law of Gratitude. If we reflect upon the
Bounty of the Supreme Being, it will easily inform us, that some thankful
return is to be made: and to Worship and solemnly own the infinite Excellency
of our Benefactor, is all that we are in capacity to do. No real addition can
accrue to boundless perfection.

Of this Worship, which is so important; we are apt to entertain very
unsuitable apprehensions. A sense of the Deity is deeply rooted in humane
Nature: and by reason of the natural depravation it lies under, there is an
universal belief of our being obnoxious to Divine Justice. This raises fears
and jealousies, and puts the Soul upon devising ways, whereby the Supreme Being
may be atoned. Invention is set upon the Rack, and as many reconciling methods
thought upon, as there are diversities of Humors. (...).
This is the true fountain of that Superstition which we often meet with in the
Writings of the Heathens. They upon a deliberate view and survey of themselves,
finding that they were not in a temper agreeable to the Idea, which they had of
a Sovereign Being, and likewise unable to contest with his power, which they
had reason to believe their own delinquencies would not permit to be propitious
unto them: They fell to contrive several ways of Worship in order to the
procuring an Atonement. At first they Sacrificed Plants, afterward Beasts, at
last Men. The meanest creatures, as Apes, Onions, Garlic, they courted with
Divine Veneration, Eusebius. de laudibus Constable. p. 645 Vales.
fearing otherwise they might neglect the giving their due regards to that
transcendent power which appeared in the formation of them. They dressed up
their Religion with all the Ornaments of Art, thinking by their pompous
Addresses to reconcile the Deity, and induce him to favor them with a benign
Aspect.

To this we may add the uncessant endeavors of our Infernal Adversary to keep
us from right conceptions of Worship. He invents several ways, and keeps up the
credit of them by blending something with them, which he borrows from the
divine Institutions.

Correspondencies betwixt his Worship, and some rites recorded in the Bible,
are evident demonstrations of this truth.

The (...), Eusebius. praep. Evan. l. 1. p. 37. Plut. Symp.
to which religious Addresses were made, exactly answer to the Pillar of Stone
which Jacob erected in Bethel. The (...), at the solemn Feast of Bacchus is
agreeable to the bearing of boughs at the Feast of Tabernacles. The garment
embroidered with Gold worn by those, who were concerned in the Solemnity, bears
some similitude to the Sacerdotal Vestment worn by the High Priest. The two
Stones, Pausan. in Arcad. Fell. Sell. p. 173. (...). quasi (...) ignis Jehovae.
Delph. Phoeni. c. 11. p. 115.
within which the Rites of Ceres were kept, are parallel to the Two Tables upon
which the Decalogue was engraven.

The eternal Fire in the Temple of Vesta wants not a resemblance of the Fire,
which by the Law was always to burn upon the Altar.

At the place where the infernal Oracles used to be given forth, there was a
Curtain in imitation of the Tabernacle: A Tripos like to the Ark of the
Covenant. A Holmus made after the manner of the propitiatory: A Table
resembling that upon which the Shewbread was placed. Philost. vit. Apol. l. 3.
c. 3. p. 11^.
The most sacred Oath amongst the Indians by a Well did derive its Original
from Beersheba, the Well of the Oath, where Abraham swore to Abimelech. The
Well they style (...), the Well of Conviction. A little way off was placed a
Vessel of Fire, called (...), the fire of Pardon, where they purged themselves
from involuntary sins. It is believed This was an imitation of John's Baptism
by Water, and Christ's by Fire. The words of Tertullian concerning the Infernal
Spirit are agreeable to all this, Praescr. p. 339.
Res Sacramentorum Divinorum in Idolorum mysteriis aemulatur. These instances
make it obvious, that there has been in some particulars a similitude betwixt
the Worship of Jehovah, and the Rites which have been practiced in the Kingdom
of Darkness. This agreement must happen either fortuitously, or else be
designed by some intelligent Being. The first cannot be asserted with any good
reason. It is not conceivable, how there should be a harmony in so many things
of a positive nature, without the interposals of an intellectual Principle. If
it was designed, then God must either intend an imitation of the Worship of the
Devil, or the Devil the Worship of God: to assert the first is highly
incongruous, God forbids his people to enquire into his Worship, and learn the
ways he had seduced the Heathens into. It cannot be imagined, that he should
teach them that, which he forbids them to learn. The Mosaical Law was enacted
with a design to obliterate the memory of the Religion of the Idolaters: and
therefore we cannot think that he would make any of their injunctions a part of
his own. The Records of the Worship of Jehovah, are of a more early date than
those which represent unto us the Worship of the Heathens. And we cannot
conceive how the contents of the Ancient Record should be an imitation of what
is contained in the Modern. The Author of the Maccabees says, 1 Macc. 3.48.
that the Heathens set up Idols, which have some likeness to those things which
are contained in the Law. And the Fathers of the Christian Church, generally
accord in this, that the Ethnic constitutions did derive their Original from
Moses.

All this being considered, namely, the importance of Divine Worship, our
aptitude to be mistaken about it, the policy of the Tempter to cherish our
inclinations; it must necessarily be our concernment to gain a true Notion of
it. In order to this end, the following particulars are to be well weighed.

1. Worship in general, imports a reverential and humble acknowledgment of the
supereminent worth and excellency which is in another. We may honor our
inferiors or equals. But properly we Worship that only, which is vested in
some eminency, which we our selves are destitute of; and therefore the Act
always supposes an humble submission in the Mind. This Excellency is not only
power and authority, but goodness or any other perfection. We speak as
congruously, when we say, We adore the Wisdom and Benignity of the Supreme
Being as his sovereignty and dominion. Nebuchadnezar, who was in power
superior to Daniel, yet worshipped him upon the account of his superlative
understanding. Worship has several names according to the diversity of the
acts, whereby the acknowledgment of worth is made: if it be by entertaining a
high esteem of it in the mind, Internal Veneration; if by external acts
appropriated by nature or institution to signify this esteem, as an humble
bowing of the Body, (...): serving and obeying; (...) and (...).

2. The Worth which is to be acknowledged is either finite or infinite. Finite,
is that which is lodged in a limited Being: it is either Moral, as in those who
are eminent for some Moral Accomplishments; or Civil, as in Parents and
Magistrates. Both these challenge from us regards suitable to their Nature. The
first a Moral, the second a Civil Worship.

Infinite worth is that which is found only in the Supreme Being: and our
agnitions of it must be made by such acts as are congruous to the nature and
institution of him, in whom it resides.

It is as natural for an intellectual Soul rightly polished, to make this
reverential confession, as for a smooth body to make a reflection of the
Sunbeams which fall upon it. The Hebrew word (...) which imports glory,
signifies likewise a weight. The superlative glory of the Divine Nature (when
duly apprehended) is to the Soul, what a weight is to the Body: it naturally
produces a succumbency, and works it into a religious prostration. Those who
are most elevated in their imagination, when they meet with excellency
infinitely transcending what they themselves are possessed of, cannot but be so
just as to stoop and make their due acknowledgments. We never find it
controverted in any Nation, whether honorary Addresses ought to be made to the
Deity. All the Sons of Pride, upon discovery of boundless perfection, blush at
the thoughts of competition, and study by submissive applications to make it
propitious to themselves.

3. The Acts, whereby an Acknowledgment of infinite Excellency is made, are
either mediate or immediate. By mediate may be understood such as although they
do not import an immediate acknowledgment of Divine Perfection, yet have an
efficacious influence upon the production of those which do. That their nature
may be the better discerned, the following particulars must be considered, 1.
The World is formed by the infinite power of the Supreme Being. The
intellectual part of it increasing by his benediction, he has made it up into
families, families augmenting, he has out of them constituted Kingdoms and
Nations. By him Princes rule, and Subjects are obliged to give their due
regards to them. 2. Whatsoever is of his formation, he has made with a design
to manifest the glory of his goodness and benignity. Every wise Agent propounds
some worthy end to himself in all his operations; and there is no purpose, that
we know of, more worthy of and congruous to the Divine Nature than this. 3.
That which has an immediate connection with the glory of his goodness and
benignity, is the felicity of those whether particular persons, families, or
kingdoms which are produced by him. The health of the Patient is the glory of
the Physician. The prosperity of the Community the honor of the Prince. Much
more the felicity of the creatures is the glory of him, from whom they received
their Beings. 4. The felicity of Nations and Families consists in their
flourishing estate, when they are in an enjoyment of all things which the
nature of their constitution requires: The happiness of solitary persons in the
inward tranquillity of their mind, when there is no mutiny among their
faculties, but a transcendent contentment, springing from a sense of being
employed in those operations which are suitable to the dignity of humane nature.
5. There are many actions, which have a peculiar tendency to promote this
felicity. The flourishing state of Nations and Families is advanced, when the
deportment of every member is agreeable to the best rules of Policy and
Economy. When Superiors impose just commands, Inferiors render a cheerful
obedience, and every one moves as an Intelligence in his proper Orb. The inward
tranquillity of private persons, when they bound their desire of sublunary
gratifications with the rules of Temperance, are not transported with the
smiling aspects, nor dejected with the severest frowns of Fortune; keep an
equal temper amidst all those affronts, with which their Contentment is
assaulted, do not transgress the just bounds of Magnanimity or Meekness,
sweeten their conversation toward their enemies with gentleness and
affability, abate the acrimony of Justice with mixtures of Equity; encourage
beneficence with grateful returns, and are merciful to the objects of
compassion. The Soul having a sense of a turpitude in some actions, and that
while she is engaged in these, her demeanor is agreeable to the dignity of her
nature, and the grand design of her formation: she is eminently delighted with
them, and arrives at the very top of moral felicity.

These actions, accompanied with the benign influences of Heaven, being
exerted, will introduce such a happy temper into the Community, as will highly
conduce to the honor of the Supreme Rector, and excite all intellectual Beings
to fall down before him, and make the most reverential acknowledgments of his
infinite benignity and goodness. Upon this (...), they are represented as acts
of Religion, or Divine Worship. S. James says, C. 1. v. 27.
that Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the father, is this, to visit
the fatherless and the widow, and to keep themselves unspotted from the world.
Here is an abridgment of mediate Religion divided into two branches, the Duty
of Man toward others, and himself. The first is expressed in these words, to
visit the father less, etc. The second, to keep himself unspotted, etc. The
principal part of it in relation to others, consisting in being compassionate
toward those, whose condition requires his succor: toward himself, in being
watchful, that he be not infected with the impure conversation of the world:
these two by a Synecdoche are put for the whole, and styled (...), pure and
undefiled Religion or Worship.

Upon this account the giving relief to those who are in distress, is
represented under the notion of an Oblation. Ecclus. c. 35. v. 2. Act. 10.4.
He who gives alms sacrifices praise. Cornelius's Charity, like the smoke of
the Altar, did ascend and come up for a memorial before God. S. Paul tells the
Corinthians; that the things sent by them f^^ his support, Phil. 4.18.
were an odor of a sweet smell (...) sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to
God.

4. Immediate Acts (wherein Divine Worship properly consists) are such as
import an immediate acknowledgment of God, and are appropriated to his purpose.
For unlimited perfection being peculiar to the Supreme Being: there must be
^eculiarities in the agnition of it. The acknowledgment (...) analogy to the
thing acknowledged, therefore the object of the acknowledgment being in
communicable, the agnition it self ought to be so. This appropriation must be
not only in respect of degree, but the species. For infinite worth, being not
only of a diverse degree, but of a different species and kind from that which
is finite, there must be not only a gradual, but a specifical difference
betwixt the Worship which is terminated upon both. This makes it conspicuous,
that the same Divine Honor, which is one species of Worship, cannot with
justice be given to God and the Creature.

5. These immediate and appropriate acts are either internal or external. By
internal I mean the elicit acts of the Soul: By external the imperate acts of
the Body. God having a peculiar interest both in the Soul and Body, upon the
account of his Creation and Redemption of them: We lie under an obligation to
make our acknowledgments by such acts as flow from both. External performances
are eminently serviceable to the grand design of Religion. The actions of our
bodies conduce to the increase of inward devotion. When we present them as a
living sacrifice to God, this oblation has the same effect upon the mind, which
the fat of the Sacrifice had upon the fire of the Altar: it communicates
strength to our zeal, and a higher degree of ardency to our affections. It has
an influence upon the engaging of others in a similitude of practice. The light
of a Religious deportment shining before Men, will excite them to pay their
tribute of honor to their Father in Heaven. Their understanding being
illuminated with such divine rays, like a burning-glass, produces an
inflammation in the will, and puts all the faculties of the Soul into a due
temper and motion. It likewise tends to the advancement of the glory of God. We
glorify him when we manifest and fet forth his excellency. Corporal Worship,
which is visible and obvious to sense, cannot with justice be denied a share in
the promoting this work.

6. Internal Acts are either such as have a general aspect upon the excellency
of the Divine Nature: or else a more special upon some particular Attributes.
The universal excellency of the Deity is acknowledged, when we frame an Idea of
his infinite Majesty as exact, and agreeable to him, as our finite capacity
will permit; and in a sense of it prostrate our Souls with all humility before
him. The excellency of particular Attributes is owned by some particular Acts,
which are suitable to their nature. Believing, as it imports an assent, is an
owning of the veracity of God. When this Assent is so vigorous and efficacious,
as to bow the will into a cordial compliance with the import of that truth
which is assented to, and engage it in a cheerful obedience, it is a confession
of divine dominion and authority: fearing, if it be mixed with servility, is an
agnition of punitive justice; if sublimated into filial temper, of paternal
goodness. That which Moses calls fear, Deuteronomy. 6.13. Christ terms adoration, Mat.
4.10. The Chaldee word (...) signifies both to Fear and to Worship. The loving
of God is an acknowledgment of his Beneficence; Trusting in him, of his Power
and Goodness.

7. External Acts are either natural or instituted. God is pleased not only
that our agnitions of him be made by such acts as we are led unto by natural
light: but by such as have their foundation in positive institution. His (...)
is more signally owned by those performances, which depend upon his pure
pleasure, than such as are the dictates of universal reason. In the last case,
we own chiefly the reason of the thing: in the first the sovereign will and
pleasure of God only.

8. Natural, are either such as the whole Body is concerned in, as an humble
flexure of it. This accompanied with due circumstances, all Nations look upon,
as an indication of that esteem which we have of the worth of another; and
therefore amongst the Greeks, (...).
Worship is denominated from it. Or else such as some particular part is more
immediately interested in. The Tongue is the great instrument in the external
service of God. Four acts of Natural Worship I will enumerate, which are
performed by it; namely, Praying, Praising, (...), Euthyph. p. 53. (...).
Disser. 30. p. 300.
Swearing, Vowing.

Praying. The Heathens which had only the light of Nature for their conduct,
accounted vocal Prayer as a principal part of Religion. Holiness is defined by
Plato, to be a Science of Sacrificing and Praying. Maximus Tyrius says, that
the life of Socrates was full of Prayer. Simplicius has left a lively
expression of his devotion upon record at the end of his Commentaries upon
Epictetus. Arrian acquaints us with their usual form, (...). The Romans thought
this part of Worship to be so acceptable to their Deities, that they would deny
nothing to those who pray unto them. For this reason they use to conceal the
name of the Tutelar Genius of the City, lest their enemies being acquainted
with it, Plin. l. 29. c. 2.
might draw him from them by their supplications. Both Greeks and Romans being
strangers to the true God, that this honor might not miss of him, and be
terminated upon some inferior power, it was their custom to direct their
Petitions not exclusively to any particular Deity, but to leave their
Compellations ambiguous, sive Deo sive Deae, as the Inscriptions at Athens and
Rome do testify. Sanctity is styled by Plato, (...) an art of merchandising
betwixt God and Man: the Vessel that sails from Earth to Heaven is Prayer. It
imports those good things which are expedient for us; that which it exports is
(...), Honor and Worship. This, the Philosopher says, is all, that God is
capable of receiving from us. For this reason, Prayers are styled Incense, Rev.
5.8. Heb. 5.7.
and Christ is said to offer them up. They are as proper parts of Worship as
Sacrifices and Oblations were under the Law. Upon this piece of Spiritual
Homage an agnition of divine perfection is as conspicuous, as Caesar's Image
upon the Roman Penny. When we pray for wisdom and holiness, we cannot give a
more lively signification of our acknowledgment; that these perfections reside
in God in a peerless degree.

As Prayer, so Praises in Hymns and Psalms is a part of Natural Worship. All
Nations have expressed their esteem of their Deities in this way. It was in use
among the Greeks, as appears by their (...) whether (...) or (...), the first
sung to the gods or goddesses, which they believed did favor them: the second,
to those whom they accounted not to be propitious to them.

Amongst the Romans, the same way of Worship obtained: as is evident by their
Assamenta Junonia and Minervia, Poems composed in the Honor of those Deities
whose names they bear. Amongst the Hebrews, as is manifest from the poetical
compositions in the old Testament, the Christians, as is plain from the
Apostolical exhortation to the Ephesians and Colossians; and Pliny's report to
Trajan concerning their practice. Though Prayers and Praises may be directed to
men upon a civil account; yet this does not hinder them from being appropriate
parts of the Worship of God. When we say, that they with other actions are by
nature peculiar to the Deity, we mean not as they are taken materially. So they
are of a common nature, like matter considered in the abstract, without any
particular form. But we take them formally together with their individuating
circumstances, which do determine and limit them. We may pray to men, but to do
it when they are not present, for such things which none but the Supreme being
can confer; in such an assembly as is met solely upon a Religious account,
would be, by all impartial Expositors, interpreted an invading the right of
Heaven, and an inexcusable injury to the Divine Glory.

To Prayer and Praise we may add, the taking an Oath, the making a solemn Vow
to God, as parts of natural Worship. All the Heathens, which had nothing to
direct them but the light of Nature, were fully acquainted with them, as
appears by clear testimonies in their writings, which to mention would be
superfluous. They both involve a plain acknowledgment of the perfections of the
Divine Nature. He who takes an Oath invocates God to be a witness and a
revenger: which address includes a confession of his Omniscience, that he is
privy to that which is secret, and unknown to others: his Veracity, that he
takes pleasure in truth, and has a perfect detestation of that which is
opposite to it: his Power, that he is able to take vengeance, and assert the
dignity of the Law which is violated.

He who makes a solemn Vow, if it be to engage himself to some expressions of
gratitude, does thereby declare his deep sense of the Divine Benignity: if to
bind himself the faster to a loyal deportment in his conversation, the dominion
of Heaven over him.

If any doubt (notwithstanding what has been represented) whether this part of
Worship is to continue under the Evangelical dispensation, he may satisfy
himself by considering, that this is plainly foretold by the Prophet Isaiah, c.
19.21. The taking away of what was given to God by Vow is condemned by the
Apostle, Romans 2.22. and death was afflicted upon Ananias and Saphira for their
miscarriage in this particular, Act. 5.5, 10. The devoting of things to God by
Vow is grounded upon reason common to all ages; as well the times of the Gospel
as the Law. The whole world is a Community under the regency of one supreme
Monarch. This Community he has parcell'd out into Kingdoms, and committed the
government of them to his Vicegerents. In every kingdom the members have their
properties bounded and limited by Law. These rights they are so invested in,
that they have withal a power of alienation. The natural signs of their will,
when they exert this power, are promissory words. There is no reason why this
way of exchange may not as well prevail in the universal Community betwixt the
Supreme Rector and his Subjects, as in any particular betwixt his Vicegerents,
and those who are under their regency. A Vow is nothing but a solemn promise
made unto God.

9. Instituted Acts are such as have their foundation in positive institution.
For the right understanding of them, it must be premised, that the new
Covenant, of which our blessed Lord is the Mediator, was made by the positive
pleasure of the Divine Will. It is the product of free Grace, as is apparent by
the case of the fallen Angels. They have no overtures of reconciliation made to
them. Christ did not shed his blood to quench the fire of Hell for them. God
having a design to publish and make known this gracious Covenant, he has made
choice of his Word and Sacraments to do it by. The preaching, hearing, reading
this Word and receiving the Holy Sacraments may be truly styled acts of
instituted Worship, they become a duty to us by the positive institution of the
new Covenant, and import an acknowledgment of the benignity and goodness of God
to mankind.

Preaching and publishing with integrity of heart, the methods of divine Grace
in the work of redemption, is an undeniable expression of a serious and devout
sense of the benignity of Heaven. Those who preach Christ, who is the
brightness of the divine Glory, must necessarily by the same action give Glory
and Worship to God. Though preaching the Gospel as it imports teaching, is a
religious duty, and looks down upon men only: yet as it signifies the
proclaiming before men the inestimable goodness of Heaven, it looks upwards to
God, and may challenge a place amongst the parts of his Worship. Upon this
account Ministers are said to be a sweet favor unto God, whether their Hearers
will be saved or perish, admit or refuse their instructions. The word (...)
alludes to the perfumed offerings under the Law, and intimates, that God is as
really worshipped by the preaching of the Gospel, as he was by those Oblations.
Upon this account the Apostle represents himself as one that sacrifices the
Gospel, 2 Cor. c. 2. v. 14, 15.
Romans 15.16. (...), S. Chrysostom interprets (...). He calls a Preacher, (...),
Hom. (...) Cor. 2. c. 3.
a royal censer upon which this spiritual oblation is offered. This is part of
that pure offering which Malachi foretold, should in every place, as well among
the Gentiles, as the Jews be tendered unto God. This Sacrifice is like the
Peace-offerring, of which some was given unto God, and some to the people. It
is styled (...), the sacrifice of Faith, Phil. 2.17. The Faith of the Gospel is
of so excellent nature, that the Ministerial publishing of it implies a solemn
oblation of Praise to him, who is the fountain of it.

To this part of Worship, we may add Hearing, Reading, receiving the
Sacraments. The Liturgy joins together the setting forth the Praise of God, and
the hearing his Word; when we with holy reverence hearken to it, we set forth
the Praise of his Wisdom and Goodness, which by our devout and serious
attention, we acknowledge to be sufficient and ready to instruct us.

He who reads the Scripture as the Word of the living God, with an intention to
be made wise unto Salvation by it, does thereby manifest his deep sense of the
incomprehensible and profound understanding of the Author of it.

When Proselytes are admitted into the Church by Baptism, and have the
remission of their sins sealed unto them, upon the terms of the new Covenant;
it is an evident indication of their humble resentments of the infinite
goodness of God, in granting an act of Amnesty and pardon, after the violation
of the first Covenant. Their being baptized in the name of the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost is an expression of a reverential acknowledgment of, and an entire
devotion to the sacred and blessed Trinity.

The receiving the Symbols of the body and blood of our Lord, imports a
laudatory agnition of him. It is not an empty remembrance which is intended,
but a solemn commemoration, attended with the most emphatical expressions of
Praise and Gratitude. It is styled a showing forth, in allusion to the Jewish
(...) which was a declaration made in praise of the benignity of Heaven, in
procuring redemption from the Egyptian servitude. The Wine is styled by S.
Paul, (...), the Cup of Blessing, and the Bread by Justin Martyr, (...), the
Bread of Thanksgiving.

These two Sacraments were not designed for the primitive times only, but to
continue to the last period of the World. The reason of their continuance is
common to all Ages: we have now as much need to renounce our ghostly enemy,
profess our repentance, promote sanctification, be received into the Church:
commemorate the death of Christ, renew our covenant, gain a fuller Communion,
as they which lived in the first age. And it is not now inexpedient, that we
should be taught by some visible signs, our intellectual powers are in as much
dependence upon sense as formerly. Were the seize of the present Age
equal to the state of Paradise, this way of instruction would not be
disagreeable. Eden was not without Two Sacramental Trees.

Their permanency is likewise ascertained to us by a Divine Revelation. In the
Commission to Baptize, it is said, I will be with you to the end of the world.
To interpret baptising nothing else but an initiating by Doctrine without
Water, and the end of the world, the end of the age in which the Apostles
lived, is to offer too much violence to the Text. The proper Notion of Baptism
includes Water. We are not to depart from the proper signification of words,
and comply with a Metaphorical, without a peremptory necessity. The Context is
so far from obliging us to this departure, that on the contrary it holds forth
a manifest discrimination betwixt baptising and initiating by Doctrine. v. 19.
v. 20.
The first is expressed by the word (...), the second by (...). That phrase
(...), is of the same importance with (...) Mat. 13. v. 40. and there without
controversy it signifies the last period of the world, when the Angels shall
sever the wicked from the just. If (...) import the Age, it must be remembered,
that the Jews divided the time from the Creation, to the dissolution of all
things into two Ages; the first expiring at the coming of the Messiah: the
second, at the final period of the Universe, and so, I will be with you to the
end of the age, is as much as, I will be with you to the end of the world. The
Age before the coming of the Messiah, cannot be understood, he being in our
nature when he spoke these words; therefore the age after must.

When the Apostle says, as often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye
show forth the Lord's death till he come: He evidently declares, that the
institution of the Supper is to continue till the last appearing of Jesus
Christ. There are but four comings of his usually spoken of. The First in the
Flesh, when he assumed our nature: the Second in the Spirit to sanctify and
rule his Church: the Third in his vindicative Justice to destroy Jerusalem: the
Fourth in the last day to Judge the World. The two first cannot be understood.
They were past, when the Apostle wrote his Epistle. The Messiah was then come
in the Flesh to all mankind. In the Spirit at the solemn feast of Pentecost,
and in particular to the Corinthians; they were sanctified in Christ Jesus. 1
Ep. 1.2. But the coming which the Apostle aims at, is future, until I come.
Neither can we understand his coming to destroy Jerusalem. For these words are
inserted with a design to awake the Corinthians to a greater degree of
circumspection in their preparations for the holy Communion, intimating that it
shall continue, till Christ come to summon them before his Tribunal, and judge
them for their unworthy Approaches. There was no summons of the Corinthians at
the overthrow of Jerusalem, and therefore the last coming must be understood.

These Acts which have been enumerated, some in savor of the Mass, would
persuade us; that sacrificing is to be added as a part of Divine Worship under
the Gospel. If this be so, it must be warranted by some Divine Law, and this
must be either natural, or positive. Natural it is not, as will be evident by
the following considerations. 1. A Sacrifice is an Oblation of some material
thing unto God, and in the offering destroyed. The essential difference,
whereby it is distinguished from other Oblations, is the destructive mutation.
This change cannot reasonably be esteemed an act of Worship, but so far as it
is an acknowledgment of some excellency appertaining to the Divine Nature as
Sovereignty, Wisdom, Goodness, etc. In its self, before it has an institution
enstamped upon it, it imports no such agnition. Were we left to the conduct of
natural light, it would rather induce us to believe that the Godhead is
dishonored, than worshipped by a dissolution of the creature; in whose
composure, divine Power and Wisdom are eminently conspicuous. 2. If the light
of nature leads us to this practice, it must be, because it conduces to the
Honor of God; and if so, (we being under an obligation to honor him in the
superlative and most exalted degree) the same reason will dictate, that mankind
the most excellent part of the visible Creation, is to be singled out for this
sacred purpose: Nay, that Abraham wanted not the warranty of a revelation for
the offering up of Isaac: but was sufficiently instructed by the light of
Nature in that concernment. The more esteemable the sacrifice is, the more
honor must necessarily accrue to him, who has the tender of it. 3. The Law
concerning Sacrifice is distinguist from the Laws of Nature in holy Writ. We
find it placed in an inferior rank, Psalm. 50.8. we must not think that
sacrifices here, are put below the obligations of Nature, as offering ^^^^ks,
paying Vows, calling upon God, v. 14, 15. because they were offered with
unhallowed hands. The Psalmist speaks to holy Men, gather my Saints together,
v. 5. Hear O my people, v. 7. The wicked are not spoken to, till the discourse
concerning this matter is finished, v. 16. Parallel to this is what is
expressed in the book of Jer. c. 7. v. 22. Burnt-offerings are represented as
not primarily intended when the Law was given forth; but obedience to the voice
of Heaven, which is an undoubted dictate of Nature.

We never read that a conformity to the Laws of Nature is confined to
particular persons or places, as the Law of Sacrificing is in the Old
Testament. Nature being universal, under no such confinement, the duty to
comply with her demands must be of the same latitude. 4. The Heathens in whom
the Light of Nature was most refined did not account sacrificing to be of the
Law of Nature. They marked the sacrificing of Grass, (...). l. 2. de Abst. p.
53. Porph.
and the more simple and natural Fruits of the Earth, with a note of error, as
is evident by the words of Porphyry.

They did so highly condemn the offering of Myrr, C^sia, Frankincense; that
they pronounced a curse against those who deserted the primitive custom, and
thought to please the Deity with such perfumes: for this reason they were
styled (...) from (...) imprecatio.

They did inveigh against the offering up of brute-animals, as impious, unjust
and hurtful. (...) Eus. prae. Evan. l. 4. c. 14 p. 153. (...). l. 2. p. 98.
Porphyry says, that all sacrifice is either for the honoring of the gods, or
the expressing a grateful resentment of benefits received, or the procuring
those things we stand in need of, and makes it appear, that the killing of
animals has no congruity to any of these ends.

They condemn the sacrificing of men. For this reason, the ancient custom at
Rhodes of sacrificing an innocent person annually, was altered; and one
adjudged to die for his crimes, substituted in his room. The King of Cyprus
rescinded a Law of the same importance, (...). Amosis did the like in
Heliopolis. Instead of three men, which use to be sacrificed to Juno, he
appointed three images of wax equal to them to be offered up. (...), Eusebius. l.
4. c. 16. p. 155.
Adrian by the same reason, was induced to abrogate all humane sacrifices.

They disallowed the sacrificing of any thing which is of a material and
sensible nature; (...), Porphyr. apud Eusebius. praep. Ev. l. 4. p. 149. Porph. c.
2. p. 99. l. de sacrificiis. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 13. p. 150.
asserting that there is nothing material, which is not impure to him who is
immaterial.

They expressly say, that (...), a pure mind and soul free from exorbitant
passion, is the most acceptable sacrifice, that can be tendered to the Deity.

Apollonius Tianeus asserts, that the way to make God propitius to a man, is
not to kindle fire, and sacrifice sensible things; but to offer up his mind in
Prayer to him. These particulars being put together, it is evident, that the
sacrificing material things, is not grounded upon the Law of Nature. If there
be a positive institution for it, it must be either in the Old or New
Testament. In the Old I grant it even before the Law was given from mount
Sinai. This is evident from the general practice of men. Cain and Abel in the
land of Eden, Abraham in the land of Canaan, Job in the land of Vz, Jethro in
the land of Midian. If there had been nothing in the case but arbitrary
pleasure, and no settled institution even from the Creation: it cannot be
conceived how persons of different tempers, inhabiting at a great distance one
from another, should come all to conspire in the same practice. And if there
was an institution, it could be from none but God.

The grand design of Sacrifices, will contribute a further evidence to this
assertion. They all from the beginning were types of the Sacrifice of Christ,
the Lamb of God was slain in effigy from the foundation of the World. If the
Oblation of Christ has its foundation in a divine institution, which all must
grant, then sacrifices, which had always an aspect upon it, must have the same
basis. He who designs the end, appoints the means conducing to it.

The Faith of the Sacrificers is a further demonstration. Abel is said by Faith
to offer up a more excellent Sacrifice than Cain, Heb. 11.4. Faith, in this
chapter is mentioned several times, and is in every place of the same import.
Now it is expressed that the Faith of Noah and Abraham was founded upon
Revelation: the first was warned of God, the second called; therefore we have
reason to conclude the same concerning the Faith of Abel, when he made his
Oblation to the Divine Majesty. Lastly, God's acceptance of the Sacrifices then
tendered, gives assurance, that the Sacrificers had the warranty of the Divine
Will for what they did. The usual token was the descent of celestial Fire upon
the Sacrifice: We never read of any such testimony that was given of divine
complacency in mere arbitrary worship: but on the contrary, frequent
condemnation of it. Tho the worship at Tophet, was highly culpable upon several
accounts, yet they are all omitted, except this one: yet it never came into the
heart of God to command it. Jer. 7. v. 21. c. 19. v. 5. Though all this be
granted, it will not follow, that Sacrificing is to be continued under the New
Testament; but on the contrary, we have a clear repeal of the old Law, as is
manifest by the following considerations.

1. The Place, to which the offering of Sacrifice was appropriated, is
irrecoverably destroyed by the allowance of Heaven, as appears by the
predictions of the Prophets, and the words of our blessed Savior. When the
Jews had obtained a grant from Julian to rebuild it, and spared no cost (their
very shovels being of silver) in order to the accomplishment of their work:
Theod. Hist. l. 3. c. 17. p. 103.
yet they were not able to perfect it. What they did in the day, was undone by
an invisible hand in the night. Vast heaps of materials prepared for building
were dissipated by violent Tempests. They not desisting, nowtithstanding these
significations of displeasure; at last they were compelled by an Earthquake,
and an eruption of Fire, which consumed many of them.

2. The Priesthood, which was solely interested in the oblation of Sacrifice,
is changed, Heb. 7.18. When it is said, The Lord swear and will not repent,
thou art a Trust for ever, after the order of Melchisedeck, v. (...) implies he
did repent the setting up the Order of Aaron, that is, do as men use to do,
when they repent, revoke, and disannual it. Josephus observes, that a little
before the coming of Christ, the precious stones upon the shoulders and
pectoral of the Priest ceased to shine. It is certain; that within a little
while the glory of the Aaronical Priesthood was to disappear, and be swallowed
up in the brightness of the Priesthood of the Messiah. And the Priesthood being
changed, that there is made a necessity, a change of the Law concerning
Sacrifice, which the Priest only had power to execute.

3. The use, which Sacrifices were designed for, did cease at the death of
Christ. They were intended as figures of his Sacrifice. Heb. 10.1. Now he
having offered up himself really upon the Cross, all those shadows are vanished
and become useless. This is agreeable to Daniel's prediction, that the Messiah
would cause the Sacrifice and oblation to cease, c. 9, v. 27. and to the Author
of the Hebrews, that they were imposed till the time of reformation, Heb. 9.10.
Just. Mar. cum Tryph. p. 263.
They being not in the number of those things which are, (...), good in their
own nature, as Justin Martyr distinguishes: but such as belong, ad secundam
intentionem, as Maimonides glosseth upon Jer. 7. Maim. More Neb. p. 535.
v. 22. When Jesus Christ did reform the defects of the legal Constitution,
they with other carnal Ordinances were laid aside.

SECT. II. Concerning the peculiar Object of Divine Worship.
THose early deceptions which have been in the World, about the Object of
Religious Worship, may justly alarm us to use all the circumspection we can,
in our scrutinies about it.

Though before the flood, the protraction of Life to many hundred years, did
furnish men with an eminent advantage, to acquaint their posterity with the
True God, who created the World: and frustrate any attempts of innovation about
the Object of Worship: yet afterward, when their durance in this present state
came to be contracted, a very surprising alteration followed.

Noah and his three Sons, in a little time were better known to the World under
the notion of Gods, than of Men. It is believed that Sarurn was Noah, Jupiter
Ham, Neptune Japhet, Pluto Sem.

The golden Age, in which Saturn ruled, is like the hundred years betwixt the
flood, and the birth of Peleg, when Noah did paternally govern Mankind. The
Fable concerning Saturn's devouring all his Sons except three, did derive its
original from Noah's condemning the World in his holy Life and Doctrine, and
the saving only three Sons with him in the Ark.

Ham was worshipped in Africa. Eze. 30.15. LXX.
A Temple was dedicated to him in No a City of Egypt, styled Hammon No, and
(...), a City of Jupiter. Heaven was allotted to Jupiter for the place of his
regency, because Africa the portion of Ham enjoys the more direct beams of the
Sun, and was believed to be nearer the Celestial Throne, than other Countries.

Japhet comes from (...) which in Niphal makes (...), from which Neptune is
derived. Neptune is styled (...), answerable to what is expressed of Japhet.
God shall enlarge Japhet Genesis 9.27. The Ocean was assigned to him for his
Dominion; because that part of the world, which fell to Japhet, abounds with
Sea and Islands.

Sem, in whose Family True Religion was maintained, was hated by the profane
posterity of Ham, and therefore though they acknowledged him to be a God; yet
they placed him in the lowest rank. He was styled by them, Deus inferorum.

This Art of translating Men into Gods, was very early. c. 14, 15.
The Author of the Wisdom of Solomon, believes that the affection of Parents to
their Children untimely snate'd away by death: Lactantius, De sals. relig. p.
46, 47
that the love of Subjects to their Princes deceased, gave the first occasion
to the invention. When they could no longer enjoy the Original, they furnished
themselves with Copies and resemblances: and instead of using of them as civil
memorials, they made Idols of them, and courted them with religious veneration.
Of this kind was Bell. Isa. 46.1. It was the effigies of a puissant Prince,
known by the name of Belus. Nebuchadnezzar calls him his Progenitor, in his
Speech to the Babylonians recorded by Megasthenes and Abydenus, as Eusebius
relates. The plentiful provision made for his Table, argues him to be
originally a man invested with supereminent dignity. Every day were spent upon
him Twelve measures of fine Flower, Forty Sheep, six vessels of Wine. The words
of Jeremy give some credit to this relation. J will punish Bell in Babylon, I
will bring forth out of his mouth, that which he has swallowed up. Jer. 51.44.
The Romans were so propense to this kind of Idolatry, that they were willing to
be deceived by Julius Proculus, who asserted, that Romulus after his death
appeared to him, Lact. l. 1. de fall. Reli.
and commanded, that a Temple should be erected, and the people worship him
under the name of Quirinus.

Not only Men, but also the infernal Spirit, has been treated with a very early
Veneration. He having imposed upon our first Parents in the form of a Serpent,
ever-after affected the disguise, and did induce many to Worship him under it.

The Egyptians accounted a Serpent the most divine of all the Gods, and the
great preserver of the World. Amongst their Hieroglyphics, they had a flaming
Circle, with a Serpent drawn through the midst of it. The Circle did represent
the visible systeme of Heaven and Earth: The Serpent, the God which united the
parts of it together, and secured them against a dissolution.

They painted him with a Hawk-head, to express the quickness of his sight, and
styled him (...), from (...) ala, to signify, he is always upon the wing, in a
readiness to execute his designs.

The Phoenicians called him a good Genius. Zoroaster says, Eus. prae. Ev. l. 1.
p. 42
that he is the best of those which are good. The most Prudent of those that
are Prudent. The father of Equity and Justice. Sanconiathon represents Taautus
to be the first who attributed Divinity to him. Eus. prae. Ev. l. 1. p. 40


This kind of Idolatry did insinuate it self into many Nations, Greeks, Romans,
Indians, etc.

When the Oracle was consulted in the behalf of Plilip father of Alexander,
Plut.vit. Alex. p. 665
concerning the Dragon which he saw conversing with Olympias; The answer was,
that it was a God which Philip had seen in the shape of a Dragon, and that it
was his concernment to address himself to him with the deepest veneration.

When the City of Rome was infected with the Plague, Ambassadors were sent to
Epidaurus to fetch Aesculapius. Live. Ep. l. 11.
The Inhabitants of the Town, being unwilling to lose their God; while they
were consulting, what answer to return, a Serpent of a stupendous bigness came
of his own accord, to the Roman Galley, which the Ambassadors judging to be
Aesculapius, without giving any further trouble, sailed away with him to Rome,
paying in their passage such respects to him, as are agreeable to the nature of
a Deity.

Maximus Tyrius speaks of a Dragon five hundred foot long, which the Indians
worshipped. Diss. 38.
After the fatal blow given to this infernal Spirit by the Messiah; some
attempts were made amongst those, who pretended to be in the number of his
Disciples, to renew this kind of Worship. Epiphanius speaks of a sort of
Heretics styled, (...), which use to keep a Serpent in a chest. At the
celebration of their Mysteries, he did come forth and wind himself about the
Bread, which was set upon the Table for that purpose. The Bread consecrated by
such circumflections, they accounted their Eucharist, converting the Table of
the Lord into the Table of Devils.

To this Worship of the infernal Spirit, we may add the Worship of the Stars.
For this we have evidence from one of the most ancient Records now extant. If I
beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in brightness, and my heart
has been secretly enticed, and my mouth has kissed my hand, Job 31.26, 27.
These words are spoken by him, who lived before the times of Moses. The design
of them is not to purge himself from the imputation of arrogance, when the Sun
of prosperity shined upon him, but from the crime of Idolatry, which the
generality of mankind was then infected with. We have here the Object of their
Worship, the Sun; to whom they use to Sacrifice Horses, 2 Kings 23.11. Herodo^
The celerity of his diurnal motion made them believe, that those swift animals
would be an acceptable oblation. We have also the Moon, to whom they presented
Cakes with her essigies enstamped upon them, Jer. 7. v. 18.

Here is likewise the mode of Worship, namely, Kissing the Hand. Lucian.
Brisson. de form. l. 1.
This Ceremony was commonly used by those who addressed themselves to the Stars
with Divine Veneration.

These Luminaries, being the most conspicuous parts of the Universe, were very
generally entertained as Deities. Maimonides believes, that many branches of
the Law of Moses were designed to prevent the spreading of this Error. This
species of Idolatry had got some footing in the family of Laban. Elias This. p.
273.
The Teraphin which Rachel stole, were Images made on purpose to receive the
influences of the celestial Powers. We have a memorial of this Error in the
golden Mice and Emerands which the Philistines sent along with the Ark. They
believed the God of Israel to be a celestial Power, and that he would fill
those Images, with such a benign virtue, as would effectually remove the grief
they were affected with. These misapprehensions which so early prevailed about
the Object of Divine Worship, ought to make us the more cautelous in our
inquiries about it. What I have to say, I will reduce to the following
Propositions.

1. There is a God who has made the World. 2. In the Godhead, are Three
Persons. 3. These Three Persons are One God. 4. This One God is to be
Worshipped. 5. This One God, is only to be Worshipped.
1. There is a God who has made the World, Though his Existence is supposed in a
Discourse of Divine Worship: yet the Atheism of the age, in which we live,
makes it necessary to set it in as clear a light as possibly we can; which I
will endeavor to do, First, by considering the World in general, Secondly, in
its particular parts.

First, in General. If there be no God which has given Being to it; then it is
eternal in respect of Matter and Form: Or else the Matter is eternal, and in
process of Time did work it self into the present Form: or else both Matter and
Form did emerg and begin in time.

The World, as it is now in respect of Matter and Form with all the changes and
revolutions of it, could not be eternal; for then the springing and decay of
Plants, the generation and corruption of Animals, the birth and death of Men,
must be eternal: and if so, then all these things were always simultaneous;
Death as early as Life, Autumn as the Spring, the decay of Plants, as the
growth and flourishing of them. There is no inequality in respect of duration,
amongst those things that are eternal. If this Hypothesis prevail, the Sun,
Moon and Stars can no longer move; for their revolutions that are past, are
either finite or infinite: finite they cannot be, if they be eternal, for every
finite number has a first, and every first implies a beginning, and that which
has a beginning is not eternal: if infinite, then no addition can be made to
them. Infinity is incapable of an increase. According to this assertion it
would be a greater wonder that the Sun should persist in his diurnal motion,
than that he should stand still in Joshua's days. To this we may add, that the
most authentic Record extant, gives us an account of the beginning of the
World; how it was made and who was the efficient cause of it. The credit of the
relation did so far gain upon the belief of the generality of Mankind;
Historians, Poets, Philosophers, that it seems to be agreed amongst them, that
the World was made out of a rude Chaos, and digested by a Divine Hand into that
order which is visible to us. The opinion of Aristotle bears no proportion to
what is in the scale on the other side. If the World was eternal, how came it
to pass, that there is a remembrance but of five or six thousand years since
the beginning, when so many millions are past? or how Arts and Sciences should
not be brought to perfection long before the Epoch, that is usually given to
them? If men did eternally exist, nothing could have escaped their discovery by
this time. Their eternal studies, must necessarily have conquered all
difficulties, and set the most concealed mysteries of nature in the clearest
light.

If matter be eternal, and in process of time did work it self into its present
form: this matter must be from eternity one entire body, or else be divided
into several parts. If one; it cannot be imagined, how it should come to be
broken into so many fragments, as are necessary for the composition of the
Universe. It could not dissolve it self into particles; for its unity being
eternal, must be natural; and nothing but violence will make any thing depart
from its own nature. If the distinct particles were eternal, they must be at
rest or in motion. If at rest, there must be some eternal cause to disquiet
them, before the form of the World could be produced by them. It is natural for
matter to persevere in the state in which it is, till it meet with such an
agent. If they were in motion, this motion must be regulated by Laws, or else
be casual and fortuitous. If by Laws, there must be an Intelligent Being to
form and impress them upon the several particles, and this can be nothing but a
God. If casual and fortuitous, it is not imaginable, (they having no Commander
over them) how they should fall into their several ranks, and produce as
beautiful an order, as the most accurate wisdom could have contrived. We may
with less force to our understandings conceive, how millions of blind, deaf and
dumb men in a vast desert, without any General over them, may fall into a
military Order, march in their distinct ranks, keep to their proper colors,
charge their enemies, fall back without the least confusion: as, how an
innumerable company of material Particles ranging in an infinite space, without
any intelligence to regulate their motion, should produce all the curious
appearances with which the Universe is adorned. He must be exalted in his own
fancy, who can persuade himself, how, after all the dances which these
particles have had from eternity, they should at last come to embrace and clasp
together, some in the shape of Dogs, snarling and barking; some in the shape of
Horses, neighing and prancing; others in the shape of Men, talking and laughing
together.

How is it possible that the rational Soul which has no matter in it, should be
made by a combination of such material ingredients. That faculty which has a
perception of the habitudes, respects, and similitudes betwixt things, which
make no impression upon matter, must necessarily have a spiritual and
immaterial constitution.

If the matter and form of the World did emerg and begin in time; they must
either of their own accord, start out of the Abyss of nothing, or else be
fetched from thence by the energy of some superior power. The first must not
be asserted. Nothing can be the cause of it self, for then it would be before
it was in Being, and by consequence, be and not be, at the same time. If the
second, then that Superior Power must be lodged in some intelligent Being. This
Being must have an Aseity, and be entirely from himself, without dependence
upon any other; and therefore infinite in all perfection, there being nothing
higher to limit and set bounds unto him. And this is that which we mean by a
God.

As from the World in general, it appears there is a Deity: so likewise from
the several parts of which it consists, the Heavens, the Earth, the Body, the
Soul of Man. There is not a Star in the Firmament, but it shows forth the glory
of this Being. When we behold the heavenly Luminaries sailing in the fluid body
of the Air, we must necessarily conclude, that there is a skilful Pilot at the
stern. If one born and educated within the caverns of the earth, should be
suddenly set upon the supersicies of it in a clear night to take a prospect, he
would be inclined to ask the same question, which he did, who saw the first
ship arrive at Colchos, (...). He who can persuade himself, that all these
glorious Lights came there fortuitously, without the contrivance of an
intelligent Being; may with as much ease believe, that passing through a City
in a dark night, all the Candles which he meets with at every door, came there
by chance.

Indeed there are attempts made to salve the Celestial appearances with Matter,
Figure and Motion. We are told, that Matter in distinct pieces being moved
circularly, will by grinding one against the other, wear off the angular
protuberances, and become perfectly circular: and that the angulose parts,
which are broken off, will be of two sorts, the lesser, which are fit for
motion: the greater, and more course, which by reason of their unevenness, are
apt to entangle one within another, and not to make their rounds with the same
degree of celerity as the lesser do. The finer sort is called the first
Element. The globular pieces the second. The course rubbish the third. The
first is supposed to constitute the Sun and fixed Stars. The second, with some
irregular particles to fill up the triangular spaces betwixt them, the Heavens.
The third, the Planets and Comets. It being natural to all matter in motion to
move in a right line, there will be an endeavor in every part of it to recede
from the Center; and therefore that which is most solid and able to persevere
in motion, will be at the greatest distance from the middle point.

Yet all this does not represent such a composition of the Heavens, as to
exclude the interposals of an infinite Being. The Matter of which they consist,
the Laws, whereby the motion of the matter is regulated, have notwithstanding a
dependence upon some intelligent Agent. Matter cannot be of it self: when it is
made, it has no more motion than what is communicated to it. The motion
imparted could not produce so beautiful an Order, as is visible in the World,
were it not for some Laws which the Creator has impressed agreeable to his own
nature.

This Hypothesis does not only suppose a Deity as necessary upon the account of
these particulars: but likewise in order to the preservation of the several
Vortices within their due bounds and limits. For it represents the Heavens in a
perfect state of War; one Vortex discharging its Globuli, shooting the thinner
irregular Particles out of the Ecclypticks into the Poles, and constantly
thrusting one against another. If this be true, it cannot be imagined, how the
Heavens above five thousand years together, should continue with so few
alterations as Astronomers have observed, in case there be no God, to limit
every Vortex, and hinder the encroachment of the greater upon the less. No
doubt, by this time, had not there been a Moderator to keep the balance equal,
the greater would have swallowed up the rest; and the Star in the middle
obtained an universal Monarchy. We have the more reason to believe that a
divine hand is interested in this affair; because when the Vortex we live in,
has sucked in any other, the Star which belongs to it, degenerating into a
Comet, is always believed to be ominous, and prophetical of some great thing,
which the supreme Being is about to bring to pass.

As the Heavens, so likewise the Earth declares the existence of a Deity. When
we consider so vast a body encompassed with nothing which is visible, but a
fluid mass of Air; the curiosities of Nature locked up in the bowels of it; the
various sorts of Plants which beautify the superficies; it is natural to
conceive, that some invisible Power is concerned in these effects.

Indeed it is said, that there are three Principles, known by the names of Sal,
Sulphur and Mercury, which are formed in the interior Region of the Earth. The
Mercury rarefied by motion, being impatient of so close a confinement, takes
its flight with the other two blended with it, into the upper region of the
Earth, where they constitute Minerals, Plants, and whatsoever the earth we
tread upon, is adorned with.

This Hypothesis is no prejudice to us; for it supposes an intelligent Being
as the first Creator of matter, and Moderator of its motion. And when it is
managed with the greatest dexterity, comes very short of giving true
satisfaction about many terrestrial Phenomenon, how they are produced in a
Mechanical way. In it no provision is made for any reasonble account of the
variety of Plants; how it comes to pass, that out of one and the same soil
should spring such great diversity as the earth is beautified with. If these
did originally emerg out of a combination of various Particles ascending from
the interior region of the Earth; there must be a continuation of the like
emanations for the nourishing of them: and if so, it is unaccountable, how the
several streams of Particles should be able to find out amidst such great
variety, as is sometimes in a little spot of ground, all those roots which they
properly belong to. Neither can any good reason be given, in case all these
should be pulled up, and Wheat, or any other Grain sown in the room of them;
how all those Particles, (of which some are supposed inflexible) when they miss
of the roots, they are accustomed to, should presently change their figure, and
become as nutritive of the new body, as they had been formerly of the old. To
say the Succus of the Earth is modified by the figure of the Root or Seed, is
contrary to the Hypothesis under consideration; for it is supposed in it, that
the interior region of the Earth, is the shop where all the Particles are
forged. But let it be so, it is but necessary that those who say it, should
give some account in a Mechanical way, how the Seed came to be in such a mode
or figure.

This Hypothesis likewise leaves us as much at a loss, about the curiosities
which appear in the composure of Plants. Whatsoever Particles may be drawn out
of the bowels of the Earth, and elevated to the surface of it; yet it does not
appear by any Mechanical Law, how they should fall into such exact order, as to
produce the elegant colors and curious proportions which are visible in them.
Were Archimedes present with his Compasses: or Michael Angelo with his Pencil,
their imitations would fall very short of that exactness which is obvious to
every eye.

There are as great difficulties about their various virtues. Whatsoever Succus
ascends to the exterior part of the Earth; it is not conceivable, how it should
cause a Plant to spring up, which is hot in its operation, and within an inch
of it, another cold; one astringent, another laxative; one poisonous, another
nutritive; one grateful, another displeasing to the palate. If this variety
were the product only of some juice modified within the Earth, this juice must
be Homogeneous, or Heterogeneous. NOt the first, because it could not be the
cause of so much variety. Not the second, because the soil many times, where
such Plants grow, is found in every part of it to be of the same Nature; as
appears by its administering an equal nourishment (when the Plants are rooted
up) to any kind of Seed which is sown in the room of them.

Lastly, The Hypothesis we speak of, gives no account how a little kernel comes
to be improved into the vast body of a Tree. How a grain of Mustard the least
of all Seeds, should become the greatest of Herbs. Why the Thistle in Lebanon,
should not be as tall as the Cedar, or the Oak in Bashan as low as the Hyssop
upon the wall. It has not yet been made to appear, by what force the Succus
ascends contrary to its own gravity: How it comes to climb in some Trees a
yard, in others five: by what Law it is engaged to spread it self into Arms and
Branches, and what Principle has set bounds which cannot be exceeded. So
inscrutable is the Wisdom of him who framed the Earth; that the most profound
inquiries into Nature are not able to discover all the methods of it. Something
is industriously concealed, to teach us, that the Wisdom which formed the
Earth, far transcends all finite capacities.

As the Earth; so the Men which inhabit it, declare the existence of a Deity in
their Bodies and Souls. 1. Their Bodies: He who takes a deliberate view of the
composure of them, must necessarily be convinced of the interposals of Wisdom
in the contrivance. The usual indications of Wisdom are the aiming at some
worthy design; the election of congruous means for the accomplishment of it;
and the actual bringing to pass what is designed. All these are manifest to any
who consider the frame of a humane Body. It is manifestly intended to be a
convenient habitation for the Soul. This immortal Tenant, having a considerable
term of time to spend in it, and being of an active and vigorous nature,
delighted with variety of objects; it is necessary, that its dwelling should be
repaired, be moveable, and furnished with avenues, whereby it may entertain and
perceive those objects it meets with.

In order to repairs, there could not be a better provision of means contrived
by all the Wisdom in the World. Two rows of Teeth are formed to prepare the
nourishment by Mastication: an acid humor in the Ventricle, for the conversion
of it into Chyle: strait passages in the Intestines, for the separation of the
purer part from the excrementitious: a conveiance for it to the common
Receptacle: Ductus to derive it from thence into the Veins; where by the
potency of the Blood it is converted into the same nature: Ventricles in the
Heart, for the entertainment of it: Valvulae to prevent the recess, and the
Hearts being charged with too great a quantity at one time, which might
occasion a suffocation: a passage out of the Ventricle into the Lungs, where
the Air through the Larynk communicates a temper to it: a passage out of the
Lungs, into the left, and from thence, by the branches of the great Artery,
into all the parts of the Body: Anastomoses, or pores for the transmission of
it out of the Arteries into the Veins again; that the circulation may be
continued for the repetition of the same work.

That every part of the body may move, there is likewise a wise and accurate
provision. The immediate instruments of motion are the Muscles. Besides the
Flesh which is predominant in their composition, they have Filaments or Fibers,
which constitute the tendon or ligament, whereby the Muscle is tied to the part
which it is designed to move. Besides the Fibers, there are Nerves, which serve
as channels to convey the Spirits. For the providing matter for the generation
of Spirits, a vast quantity of Blood is prepared far exceeding what is found in
other Animals. The Blood in the body of Man, bears the same proportion to the
other parts of it, as one does to ten: So that if a Man weighs two hundred
pounds, the Blood makes twenty of them. Whereas in other Animals it is but as
one to twenty. For the distiling and straining of the Spirits out of this
matter, there is an elaboratory, namely the Brain, which in a Man is twice as
much as in a Beast four times bigger in body. As Men are designed for more
action than brute Animals: so the preparations conducing to that purpose are
greater. these Spirits commanded by the (...) of the Soul into any part of the
Body, swell the Muscle, and cause it to attract, and pull the part, which it is
tied unto.

That the Soul may have a sensation of external objects, their preparations are
not inferior to those for motion and nutrition. The Nerves, which arise in the
Brain are dispersed into all the parts of the Body: So that no member can be
touched by any object, but the impression is presently conveyed into the Head.
Though there is great variety in the modification of the external Senses, yet
there is nothing superfluous. I will instance only in the Eye. It is lapped
about with two coats, to defend it against the injuries of the Air: the outward
is diaphanous in the forepart, for the admission of the rays of light: The
inward has an aperture for the same reason, which like a Curtain is moveable,
that the Pupilla may be greater or less according to the dimensions or distance
of the object. These Coats are filled with three Humors, which refract the
rays proceeding from the same point, and make them to meet again at the bottom
of the Eye, which very much promotes distinct Vision. The Crystalline Humor has
on both sides, the Processus Ciliares, which serve as Tendons to alter the
figure of it, according as the object is nearer, or farther off.

It will never enter into the belief of any intelligent Man, that this
provision for nutrition, motion and sensation should be accidental; and if any
Wisdom be interested in the contrivance of it, it must be our own, or our
Parents, or the Wisdom of an invisible Being; neither we or they know any thing
of it, and therefore there must be a Being in the World infinitely Wise, which
can be no other, than what the true notion of a God imports.

As the Body, so the Soul of Man evidently demonstrates the existence of a
Deity. the Powers of it are Two, Understanding and Will. These Two are so
linked together; that what conduces to the perfection of the one, never tends
to the prejudice of the other. The Will is no loser by any accomplishment of
the Understanding: nor the Understanding by any thing which is of sincere
advantage to the Will. If there be no God, the contrary will be true. For it is
the perfection of the Understanding to know it, truth being its proper object;
but the greatest damage to the Will. No immorality will be disgusted, when it
comes to be informed; that there is no Supreme Being to punish Vice and reward
Virtue. If the Understanding know it not, this ignorance is a blemish to it;
but a true advantage to the Will: there being nothing more efficacious to
confine it within the bounds of Sobriety, than this persuasion, that there is a
God.

The Principles, as well as the Powers of the Soul, give evidence in this
matter. As the false gods, had their characters impressed upon the bodies of
those, who worshipped them: So the True God has set his signatures upon the
Soul. there is a Law and a Conscience in every Man, a Rule and a Judge: a Law
which points out the difference betwixt Just and Unjust, Good and Evil, Virtue
and Vice. This Rule is reduced in the Imperial Institutions to these Maxims.
Nothing must be done which is a violation of Piety, Modesty, Reputation. We
must not prejudice the estimation, liberty, and safety of others. We must give
to every one that, which is his own. These Axioms have the immediate effect of
a Law, which is to bind and take away our freedom to do that which is contrary.
Every Man is sensible that he is not at liberty to oppose the sense of these
Propositions in his conversation. In case he does (if there be any remains of
humane nature in him) he finds himself under remorse, and is really punished in
the loss of that contentment, which a sense of being employed in a good action
is always accompanied with. There cannot be a stricter obligation than this;
that a man must either do that, which the propositions import; or else lose his
true felicity. If this rule has the effect of a Law, which is to bind, it must
have the essence and nature: the operation is always a true indication of the
nature of every thing: and if the nature, it must be made and impressed by some
Sovereign Power. The Legislative Power is never vested in an Inferior. This
Sovereign which made and impressed this Law, must have a dominion over all
mankind; because all, whether Princes or Peasants, are sensible of their
obligations in this particular. Therefore there must be a Superior and
invisible Power in the World, which is that which we mean by the Deity.

As there is a Law in the Soul which argues the existence of God; so likewise a
Conscience. This signifies the judgment of every Man employed about his own
actions, as they bear a proportion or disproportion to the Divine Law. Upon a
discovery of guilt, condemnation presently passes, and as great a
consternation follows as that in a malefactor, when he hears the sentence of
death denounced against him. Though in a time of prosperity, when all things are
quiet and serene, the intellectual pulse may be very slow: yet when a storm
arises, it is quickly awakened in the most exorbitant persons. Every clap of
Thunder is believed to be a messenger sent from Heaven to serve an Arrest upon
them. When they make the fairest appearance in the World, they are like a
Tragedy bound up in guilt leather; without there is splendour, within tumults
and murder. Their external Triumphs, like the Drums of Tophet, help only to
drown the unwelcom reports of their uneasy Spirits. These direful fears, which
haunt the Soul, when it is no way obnoxious to the animadversions of humane
justice, evidently declare; that there is an invisible power in the World,
which has impressed them; and stands prepared to give it a taste of the most
severe animadversions of his displeasure. They cannot be imputed to melancholy;
because persons of all humors, the most airy Tempers have been molested by
them. The Poet speaks of all in general, But think thou, Curtman ho^ in a
vas^sse pute^, etc.
they go free, whose conscience make
Whips, that unheard, their guilty Soul does shake.


The Apostle asserts of the whole Community of the Gentiles, Romans 2.
that their thoughts accuse them. Neither are they the injections of politic
Princes to keep their Subjects in obedience: for then why are they as obnoxious
to them as other men. When Adonibezek's thumbs and toes were cut off; his
Conscience put him in mind, that God had done so to him; because he had done
the same to threescore and ten Kings. When the Archers hit Saul, the Wound,
formerly made in his Conscience, bled a-fresh. (...) Tostatus.
The Amalekite told David, that before he died, he cried out, the embroidered
garment (namely of the Priests which he had slain) has taken hold of me. When
Antiochus's Army was routed, this inward Monitor suggested to him; that the
calamity was befallen him for the evils, that he had done to Jerusalem. Plut.
Numa p. 75.
Tullus Hostilius, who had been a great despiser of the Deity, having his mind
awakened by a tormenting disease, applied himself to Religion. If Princes at
first out of policy terrified others, and propagated the consternation in all
succeeding generations, what Politician terrified them? The fear they
themselves are under the power of, argues the reality of what they make use of.

If it be said, that it is natural to the Soul to be disturbed, when it
perverts the order of Intellectual Nature, and acts contrary to its own
judgment; this is in effect to grant all that is contended for. Nature does not
only work a trouble upon this occasion; but raises fears upon the account of a
Deity, and a future state, in which the obliquities of this life are to be
punished: All which would be in vain and to no purpose, did not such an
Infinite Being exist: and it is usually entertained as a maxim, that Nature
acts nothing in vain.

As the Powers and Principles of Intellectual Nature argue the existence of a
Deity: so likewise the universal practice of all who are endued with it. All
Nations agree that there is a God, to whom they are obliged to pay their
reverential and honorary regards: the Wisest, who have more understanding than
to be imposed upon: the Foolishest, who have not so much as to give any just
reason to think, that they act with a design to impose upon others. The
Americans, who have been most suspected of not being concerned in the general
acknowledgment, are upon a diligent inquiry, found to have their Caribee or
Priests, which they believe do converse with Spirits, and think themselves
under an obligation to give to those Spirits a Religious Worship. This consent
and agreement amongst Nations at a great distance one from another, can have no
other original, than an universal impression made upon them by a Divine Hand.
No other cause can be conceived of an equal latitude to this effect.

If in this universal practice all are under a deception, they must be imposed
upon either by Spirits, or by Men, or by their own fancies.

If by Spirits, they must be good or bad. The good will not be so injurious as
to seduce Mankind. The bad are not so unpolitick, as to beget an error
contrary to their own interest.

If by Men, it must be before their dispersion, when they had opportunities of
converse together. If then such a Notion was started, and ever since
communicated from one generation to another, and received by all the people in
the World, it is an evident testimony of some reality in it. The fire will not
kindle, except the fuel be disposed. This notion would not have found so
universal an entertainment, had not the Soul been prepared for it by an innate
Principle and inclination. There is no fiction, of which there has been so
universal a retention. Polytheism, which lays the highest claim to
universality, was disowned by the wisest of the Heathens; as is evident by the
Treatise ascribed to Just in Martyr, De Monarchia Dei, by S. Cyprian, de
Idolorum vanitate, by Lactantius, de falsa religione. Plato, Plutarch, Celsus,
Porphyry, Hierocles, Julian, have plainly asserted, there is but one Supreme
Being. When more gods are mentioned, we are to understand either Angels, or
Deisied Men, or only various names of the Supreme Being, expressing the diverse
benefits, which Mankind receive from him. The Pagan Deity was either made, or
unmade. The Heathens had many Gods, which were made: but they had but One,
which was unmade, and usually known by the name of (...).

Lastly, All cannot be imposed upon in this particular, by their own Fancies.
Imagination is always floating, and inclined to change. It is unaccountable,
how all the World should come to fix upon the same fancy, and retain it with so
much resolution in all Ages, as not to be dispossessed of it, by the most
plausible insinuations: considering especially, that it has some opposition to
our natural tempers, as we are finite, corporeal, sinful. A Finite Being is
lost and swallowed up, when it applies it self to conceive of that which is
Infinite. We are so inured to corporeal objects; that the Idea of an immaterial
Being is with great difficulty impressed upon us.

By Nature we are under such strong propensions to Sin; that we are unwilling
to think of any thing, which may curb our enormous inclinations.

If the belief of a Deity, was the product of Imagination, it is strange, that
a Man, when besieged with the most potent arguments, and naturally disposed by
a depraved temper to comply with them, should not surrender up this Fancy; but
still persevere in its defense.

If, nowithstanding all this, any shall complain of the want of evidence for
the existence of a God; I desire them, in order to the getting loose from their
unbelief, seriously to ponder the following considerations.

1. We have as much evidence for it, as we have for those things, which we
doubt not of. If we hear at a distance an Instrument of Music, we question
not, but there is a hand which plays upon it, although we see it not. If we
discern a Ship upon the Sea, bending its course toward the Heaven, we conclude
there is a Pilot within, though he is not seen by us. We have as much reason to
believe; when we seriously ponder the harmonious composure of the parts of the
World, their regular tendencies, to their several ends; that there is an
Intelligent Being within, although he does not immediately fall under the notice
of any of our Senses. If we must believe nothing but what we see, we can have
no assurance of the reality of our Souls. We never saw that incorporeal
substance whereby we are animated. We must be as uncertain about the Principles
of our Bodies, they are made (as all other matter is) of such minute particles,
that when separated, are not big enough to make an impression upon the
Instruments of Sensation. The greatest body may by division be reduced to such
a state; that the parts cannot be seen, and yet we are assured, they are not
annihilated. The Particles which constantly swarm about the Lodestone; the
effluviums which issue out of some Bodies, and at their return apprehend, and
fetch in the matter, which lies within the Sphere of their activity. We
perceive not with any of our Senses, and yet the effects produced by them will
not suffer us to doubt of their reality.

2. We have as much assurance of the Truth of this Proposition (a Deity does
exist) as we have of the clearest Axiom in Philosophy. the ground of certainty
is nothing but a necessary and evident connection betwixt the Subject and
Predicate. But there is no Maxim, whose Subject and Predicate are more closely
united, than the parts of this Proposition. In the notion of a Deity necessary
existence is included: and in the notion of necessary existence the nature of a
Deity. God does necessarily exist: and that which necessarily exists, can be no
other but God. The parts of the Enunciation are reciprocal, which argues Truth
in the highest Degree.

3. This Proposition is not only equal to others: but has the advantage in some
respects. If it be supposed that the existence of a Deity is possible, it will
from thence follow that it is actual. For that is properly said to be possible,
when there is no repugnancy at all, why it may not exist: and if there be no
repugnancy to hinder the existence of a Deity, It is supposed, that there is a
cause in Being, which is able to make it exist. A passive power in any thing to
be what it is not, supposes an active power, which is able to make the
mutation. This active power cannot be lodged in the Deity it self, considered
only as possible. No mere possible can be the subject of an active power. If in
any thing distinct, it must be either an Inferior, or Superior, or that which
is equal to the Deity. An Inferior can produce nothing which is more excellent
than it self. There can be no Superior to that which is boundless in
perfection. If in an equal, then there is something already in Being, which is
infinite in power, which can be no other, but God.

If it be supposed as impossible, that a Deity should exist, the same
consequence will follow. For if it be impossible, then all Beings are naturally
finite, and limited: and if so, the number of them must be either infinite or
finite. An infinite number cannot be. The parts of all number being essentially
finite, the product must be of the same nature. If finite, then it must have
the common bounds, a first and a last. If a first, that first must be of it
self without any dependence in point of causality: for Entity in order of
Nature preceding Energy; if the first Being was produced by an operation, that
action must slow from a pre-existent Being: and if it be of it self, it must be
infinite. Whatsoever is finite, receives its bounds from some cause. Entity,
considered as possible, being limitable diverse ways, and indifferent to what
species it is determined to: there can be no account given, why it should come
forth into Act, and exist rather under one species than another, were there not
some pre-determining Cause. The thing it self cannot be this Cause; for then it
had a Being, before it was finite: nor any other distinct thing; because the
Being, we speak of, is supposed to be first. This Truth is so vigorous, that
the depressing of it with this supposition, makes it like the Palm, to arise
with the greater force.

Lastly, If we do but consult the familiar dictates of our understandings, they
will not fail to lead us into the knowledge of this Truth. They naturally
suggest to us, that something must be Eternal. This Eternal must be either the
present Systeme of the World, or the Cause of it. The first cannot be asserted
as I have before demonstrated. If the second, this Cause must be either mere
matter, or else an immaterial and spiritual substance. Matter it cannot be. In
its productions the deepest Wisdom is discovered, which Matter is utterly
incapable of. If an immaterial and intellectual substance; then there is an
eternal Spirit invested with supereminent Power and Wisdom, which is the true
notion of a God.

If it be objected, that such a Spirit cannot be the efficient of the World,
because he had no matter to frame it out of; and it is universally
acknowledged, that out of nothing, nothing can be made. I answer, that this
Maxim must be limited to a finite power. A Being invested with that, which is
infinite, must necessarily be able to create all things out of nothing. If an
imperfect Being is able out of nothing, to make a new mode, as we daily see in
the cogitations of the Mind, and in the motions of the Body, Much more must
that, which is absolute in perfection, be able to form a new substance. He who
eminently contains all things in himself cannot be denied a power to exert a
transient action, and by it to give some outward expression of what is in
himself, insensible and permanent effects. It is more difficult to conceive,
how a thing should be eternal without any cause, which all grant to be true:
than to apprehend, how a finite Being may be produced out of nothing by an
Infinite Power.

He who seriously ponders the evidence that is given for the existence of a
Deity, and yet continues in his infidelity, has nothing to lay the blame upon,
but his own obstinacy, or unwillingness to have any thing true, which may be a
curb to his enormous inclinations. If he will not be persuaded that any thing
is certain, but that, which is the object of his sense; all testimonies whether
divine or humane, to him are made of no signification; and no place will be
left for Faith, which is conversant about things not seen, and rests satisfied
with testimonies, whose verity there is no just reason to suspect. Every thing
is not capable of the same degree of evidence: but if it has so much, as its
nature requires, common reason will condemn us, if we believe it not.

Now I have finished the first Proposition; There is a God, who made the World.

2. In the Godhead there are Three Persons. That we may the better arrive at
the knowledge of this great Mystery, the following steps are to be taken.

1. When God is spoken of in the Sacred Oracles, sometimes the plural number is
used, Let us make man, Genesis 1.26. Behold man is as one of us, Genesis 3.23. Let us
go down and confound their language, Genesis 11.7. This is not done in imitation
of the style of Princes, who to express their grandeur, make use of this
number. If this mode of speaking had been occasioned by that custom, it would
have been constantly used at the giving of the Law, when the Divine Majesty was
displaied in the most awful circumstances: and yet then we meet with the
singular number. Princes use it only in the first person. We Constantine, We
Maximilian: In the Bible it frequently occurs in the third; and in such
construction, as is not to be paralleled in any Record, as (...) Jos. 24.19.
(...) Jer. 10.10. None speak of a Prince in the plural number but himself. In
the holy Bible, others speak of God in that number.

2. The plurality, intimated in these expressions, is determined to Three in
other places of Scripture. There are three which bear record in heaven, 1 John
5.7. They are represented under the name of The Father, the Son, the Holy
Ghost, Mat. 28.19. This was not so clearly revealed in the Old Testament: but
reserved for a more mature state. The Jews being under strong propensions to
Idolatry; this Doctrine was not then set in the fullest light, that no occasion
might be from thence taken to confirm them in their error.

3. These Three, are not three manifestations only of God. If they did import
nothing more, no reason can be given, why the number should be thus confined.
Since the Creation there have been many signal Manifestations of the Deity far
exceeding this number. A manifestation supposes some discovery of that which
was secret before, and by consequence must be made in time: but the holy
Scripture attributes Eternity to the Father, the Son, and the blessed Spirit.

4. These Three, are not three names only of the same God under diverse
inadequate conceptions. For then, when it is said, that Christ was baptized,
the Holy Ghost descended, a voice came from the Father, the meaning would be,
that one name of God was baptized, another descended in the form of a Dove, a
third uttered a voice; than which nothing can be more incongruous. Nay, when a
command is given to baptized in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, the sense will amount to no more than this: go and baptize in the name
of three Names. This explication of the Trinity is not reconcilable with the
scope of S. John, when he asserts, that there are three, which bear record in
heaven. For the reason, why he mentions three, is to evidence, that there is a
sufficient number of witnesses to testify, that Jesus is the Christ. Now if by
the Three are meant only three names of the same person, the Apostle fails of
his end, and is represented as guilty of a manifest collusion. He does, as if a
man should undertake to prove Oratory an excellent Art by three witnesses, and
produce only the three names of the Orator, Marcus, Tullius, Cicero.

5. All things required to the constitution of a person, belong to them. A
Person is an intelligent Being, which has a peculiar subsistence. This
definition agrees to the Father, the Son, and Holy Spirit. They have, all,
Intelligence and Knowledge. The Father is said to know the Son, and the Son the
Father. The Holy Ghost is styled a Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding. They
have peculiar subsistence. The Father is without communication from another.
The Son is from the Father. The Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son.
His procession from the Father is asserted in express words, John 15.26. From
the Son supposed in the Mission of the Comforter in the same Verse. For as the
Father is sent of none, because he is of himself; the Son is sent of the
Father, because he is of the Father: so the Spirit is represented as sent by
the Father and the Son, because he proceeds from both. Now he who is begotten
or proceeds, must necessarily be distinct from him, by whom he is begotten, and
from whom he proceeds; and by consequence have a peculiar mode of subsistence.
The Father's being in the Son, and the Son in the Father, does not destroy this
distinction. God is in every man, and every man in God. In him we live and move
and have our Being, and yet the discrimination remains betwixt the divine and
humane subsistence.

6. Such Actions are attributed to these three as belong to none but a person.
It will be superfluous to instance in those, which are ascribed to the Father
and the Son. All the doubt is about the Spirit; and yet the Scripture is very
clear in this particular. He is said to know, will, 1 Cor. 2.10, 11. 1 Cor.
12.11. Job 33.4. Psalm. 104.30.
create, preserve. These actions are undoubted indications of a person. Actions
are attributed to things either properly or improperly. Whenever they are
attributed to them in the first sense, they are infallible Arguments of
suppositality. Actiones sunt suppositorum. And it is apparent, that when they
are attributed to the Spirit, it is not always in an improper and figurative
sense. He is said to make intercession, Romans 8. v. If this action be assigned
to the Spirit improperly or tropically then it may be properly attributed to
the Father, who, according to the Socinian notion, uses the Spirit as a power
or virtue to produce what he designs, (even as those operations which are
ascribed to Charity, in a tropical sense, 1 Cor. 13. properly belong to the Man
which is endued with it, and makes use of it as a moral power or virtue.) But
Intertercession, betwixt the Father and us, cannot with any congruity, be said
to be made by the Father himself. The Father is one party, and we the other.
Where there are two parties, Intercession supposes the interposition of a third
person.

All this makes it manifest, why the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are
represented in Scripture, as Three Persons.

The personality of the Father is mentioned, Heb. 1.3. The Son is said to be
his express Image, which can import no less, than that he is a person like unto
his Father. The Holy Spirit is said to be (...), another Comforter like unto
the Son. He is set forth by the demonstrative Pronoun (...), an undoubted note
of personality. If in any humane Writing, the matter of which was never drawn
into controversy by the pride or prejudice of a Party, such expressions, as
these, should occur. He shall teach you. He shall bring all things to your
remembrance, He shall testify of me, He will reprove the World, He will guide
you into all Truth, He shall glorify me, and that He, who is to do all this,
proceeds from the Father, and is sent by the Son: We should account him a very
absurd Interpreter: that should say, that the He so often repeated is not a
person, nor personally distinct from him by whom he is sent, and from whom he
proceeds. All this is asserted in the Scripture of the Holy Ghost. The
Socinians willingly grant an eternal personality to the Father, but deny it to
the Son and the Spirit. They say, that the Son is a Person but not eternal,
that the Holy Ghost is neither a Person, nor eternal: but a Power and Virtue
from God, or an effect produced by that Power: and yet the personality of the
Son, must be as early as his Filiation, and his Filiation or Sonship is
undoubtedly eternal. The Prophet Micha says, His goings forth have been from
old, from everlasting, c. 5. v. 2.

The Spirit cannot always signify Power, or an effect produced by the Power.
The Spirit and Power are plainly distinguished. Jesus is said to return in the
power of the Spirit, Luke 14. S. Paul prays, that the Romans may abound in hope
through the power of the Holy Ghost, Romans 15, 14. Mighty signs and wonders are
said to be done by the power of the Spirit of God. If the Spirit in these
places did signify no more than a divine power, the meaning would be, that
Christ returned, the Romans abounded, miracles were wrought through the power of
a Power.

The Spirit is likewise evidently distinguished from effects or gifts. The
Apostle says, that There are diversity of gifts, but the same Spirit, 1 Cor.
12.4. To one is given by the Spirit, the word of Wisdom, to another the word of
Knowledge by the same Spirit, v. 8. And that all these works this one and the
same Spirit. So that there can be nothing left in these Texts for the Spirit to
signify but a Person: He being manifestly distinguished from the Divine Power,
and the gifts and products of that Power. Now I have finished the second
Proposition. In the Godhead there are Three Persons.

3. These Three are One God. Unity is essential to the Deity, Plurality
proceeds from the fecundity and fruitfulness of Causes: but God is of himself
without dependence upon any Cause. If there be more Gods, there must be more
Infinites in the same kind; which implies a contradiction, for one infinite
Being contains all perfection, not only as considered in the general notion,
but actually: and therefore there is none for any other Deity to be invested
with, and possessed of, in the same manner. If there be more Gods, they must be
distinct one from another. This distinction must arise from some diversity in
Nature; to attribute such diversity to the Divine Nature, is to make a
dishonorable reflection upon the simplicity of it. The Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost are this One God. 1. The Scripture plainly asserts that they are one, 1
John 5.7. Though these words are not found in some Copies, yet they are extant in
more than they are wanting in: and in that which is dubious, the decision is
according to the suffrage of the major part. If such an addition has been made
to the Text, it must be done before or after the two first General Councils. If
before, it was either accidental, or intentional. Not Accidental through the
inadvertency of the Scribe. For though a Scribe may mistake, and leave out
letters and words; yet it cannot be imagined, that he should casually without
any design, add a whole sentence; and not presently upon a review (which may be
justly presumed in a Writing of such importance) discover and correct his
error.

Not Intentional; no good reason can be given, why any should industriously
make such a spurious insertion, before the controversy concerning the Deity of
Christ and the Holy Ghost did commence.

Neither was the addition, which is pretended, made after the two first General
Councils. Because the words we speak of, are found in those Copies, which the
Fathers, who lived before those Councils, made use of. S. Cyprian asserts de
Patre, Filio, etc. Of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, it is written, and these
Three are One.

This gives us just reason to believe, that the Copies in which these words are
wanting, fell into the hands of the Arrians: and that a rasure was made by
them. 2. As the words of S. John assure us; that The Father, the Son and the
Spirit are One: so we are assured by other texts of Sacred Writ, that this
Unity is in the Divine Essence. They have all one and the same infinite Nature.
This is evident by the attribution of the Name, Properties, and peculiar
Operations of the most High God to them. None doubt of this relation to the
Father: The matter is likewise clear concerning the Son and the Spirit. Christ
is called the mighty God, Isa. 9.6. God blessed for evermore, Romans 9.5. The
true God, 1 John 5.20. The most high God, Psalm. 58.17, 56. The most High which
the Israelites tempted and provoked in the wilderness, is expressly called
Christ, 1 Cor. 10.9. The name of God is never attributed, in the sacred
Oracles, with such emphatical Epithets, to any finite Being. They are
intentionally inserted, to signify, that Jesus is styled God, not upon the
account of his Embassy from his Father, or a deification in the state of Glory;
but his infinite Nature. He, who is made God, and is not so essentially, cannot
be said to be the true, mighty, most High, God blessed for evermore.

As the Name of God, so the Properties of the Divine Nature are attributed to
him. Omniscience, Joh. 21.17. Immutability, Heb. 1.11. Omnipotence, Rev. 1.8.
Eternity. He is said to be (...), which is, which was, which is to come, v. 4.
Eternity comprehends all differences of time. Was he but a mere Creature, such
perfections could not reside in him. A finite Being, under the greatest
Elevation, has not a capacity large enough to entertain and receive such
boundless excellencies.

The peculiar Operations of God are likewise attributed to him, as Creation,
Joh. 1.2. Coloss. 1.16. God is said to create all things by Jesus Christ, Ephesians.
3.9. The Son did concur with the Father and the Spirit in this great Work, as a
coordinate cause. The Nature of Creation will not admit the interposals of an
instrument. There being no matter to prepare, a physical instrument has nothing
to do in the case: And Christ is represented as more than a Moral. The infinite
power, whereby all things are made, is often ascribed to him, which is never
done to a mere moral instrument, such as the Apostles were in the production of
Miracles.

Conservation is likewise ascribed to him. He is said to uphold all things with
the word of his power, Heb. 1.3. It was usual for the Jews to express the Deity
by the word (...) power, and therefore (...) is here inserted to assure them;
that Christ sustains the World, and prevents its relapse into its primitive
Abyss by virtue of his Deity. Lastly, He is said to work Miracles. He made the
blind to see, the lame to walk, the dead to revive. This he did not bring to
pass by any mutuatitious power. When he healed the multitude, it is said,
Virtue went out of him, Luke 6.19. The power, whereby he did it, was not
adventitious, but innate. When S. Peter wrought a miracle, that Christ by whose
power it was effected, might not be deprived of the glory of it, he names him
as the principal cause. His name through faith in his name has made this man
whole, Act. 3.16. As the name, properties and operations of the Divine Nature
are attributed to the Son of God: So likewise to the Holy Ghost. The Spirit of
the Lord, 2 Samuel 23.2. is styled the God of Israel. Ananias who lied unto the
Spirit, Act. 5.3. is said to lie unto God, v. 4. The body, which is the Temple
of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19 is styled the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3.16.

He is Eternal, Heb. 9.7. Omniscient, 1 Cor. 2.10. Omnipresent, Psalm. 139.7.
The whole Creation is represented as the effect of his power. The host of
Heaven, Psalm. 33.6. Man the principal Work of God upon the Earth, Job 33.4. The
Fish in the Sea, Psalm. 104.3. are all of his formation.

Before there was any Wind, Immeasusque Deus super aequora vasia meabat.
which is peculiar to the Firmament, a work of the second day, the Spirit of
the Lord is said to move upon the Waters. The Chaos by his incubation was
digested into Order, and brought to a state of Maturation.

Certainly, God, who composed the Scripture, and declares in it, that he will
not give his Glory to another, would never have assigned his name, nature and
peculiar operations to the Spirit, had he not been of the same Essence with
himself.

To assert, that all this is attributed to the Spirit; because God makes use of
him, as an instrument, to effect his Work, will not remove the difficulty. For
there is some work attributed to the Spirit, to which no instrument can concur,
as Creation. There are other operations, in doing of which God cannot be said
to use the Spirit according to the sentiments of the Socinians; as to know, and
search his deep things. For the Spirit in their apprehensions signifies a
Divine Power: and it is very incongruous to say that God knows, and searches
things by his Power.

This Truth concerning the Trinity in Unity, has been so fully discovered;
that all sorts of men have taken notice of it.

The Mind of the Christians, before Constantine, may be very well known by
Athanasuis; Orat. 1.121 Ad Serapio. tom. 1. p. 366. de Spi. San^^o. Apol. 2.
who wanted no opportunity to be acquainted with their Writings. He expressly
asserts, that there was nothing established by the Nicene Synod, but what was
agreeable to them. S. Basil cites several Authorities of the first Centuries
for the same purpose. In those Writings which are come to our hands, there are
many evident expressions of this doctrine. Justin Martyr, speaking of the Father
of righteousness, says, (...), etc. him and the Son coming from him, and the
prophetic Spirit we receive and adore. Athenagoras, in vindication of the
Christians, whom the Heathens accounted Atheists, says, (...), etc. who would
not admire to hear them called Atheists, who own God the Father, God the Son,
God the Holy Ghost. Clemens Alexandrinus ends his Paedagogus with very lively
expressions of this Truth, (...), etc. to the only Father, Son, etc. with the
Holy Ghost, all in one, etc. There are Testimonies of the same importance in
Tertullian, Cyprian, Lactantius. All these with many others agree; that there
is but one God, and that there are Three which participate of the Deity: and
that one of them is the fountain of the rest, from whence it inevitably
follows; that they must be personally distinct. The fountain and the streams
are always different one from the other.

Indeed there are some things spoken in the explication of this Mystery, which
are liable to an ambiguous construction; as is manifest in the discourse of
Justin Martyr with the Jew, T^^^h.
and the Treatise of Tertullian against Praxeas. This Truth being not then
encountered with so direct an opposition, as it was in the time of Arrius, some
degrees of caution in point of expression are wanting, and too great a
condescension made to the Sentiments of the Philosophers, by blending their
notions with the ineffable Mystery; that it might gain a more ready
entertainment among them. Such prudential accommodations must not be construed
in such a sense, as to prejudice the Truth, which in other places of the same
Authors is clearly acknowledged. The clear must not be expounded by that which
is obscure: but the obscure by that which is clear.

The Jews have not been without some knowledge of this Mystery. Pugio fidei, p.
397.
Raimundus Martini says that he scarcely ever conferred with any of them, who
were in any estimation for Wisdom, who would not grant, that God was Trinus and
Vnus. They have a Tradition, that when the Benediction, Number. 6.26. was
pronounced by the Priest, he used, when he came to the word Jehova, to lift
three fingers higher than the rest, to denote the Trinity.

It was their manner to call the Father, Son, Voisin in Pug. fidei p. 400.
and Spirit, (...) Subsistences: and to assert the unity of (...) the infinite
God.

Those words, The Lord our God is one God, are in Zohar applied to the Trinity.
(...) is interpreted the Father, (...) the Son, the second (...) the Spirit,
(...) is added with a great letter in the Hebrew Text, to denote their Unity.
The Hebrew Scholiast says, that the repetition of the name of God three times,
Psalm. 50.1, 2. is to denote the three (...), which created the World. These are
styled inward persons. It is observed, that all the names of God have a plural
termination, Voisin, p. 406. p. 400.
except Jehova his essential name; to import the plurality of Persons, and
unity of Essence. It is a saying among the Cabalists (...) etc. the Father is
God, the Son is God, the Holy Ghost is God. Three in One, and One in Three. By
the Abbreviature (...) they understand (...) the Father, and (...) the Son.
They say, they are put together, to express their Unity: and that the three
Letters do signify the three Hypostases in one Essence. Though this Doctrine is
very much disguised in the Writings of the Heathens: yet there is so much of it
left unmasked, as it may be plainly discerned they were not totally strangers
to it.

The chief God among the Persians was styled (...), threefold, with relation to
this Sacred Mystery. The first Hypostasis they called Oramas^les, the second
Mithras, the third Arimanes. Plato likewise mentions Three, (...). 5. l. 1. l.
3. c. 15.
(...) These by Plotinus are represented as the three Hypostases which are
Principles, or first causes in the Universe. When Thulis King of Egypt went to
the Oracle of Serapis to inquire, Saidas in (...)
who before him could do such exploits as he had done, and who would be after
him: The Answer was,

(...), First God, after him the Word, and then the Spirit concurring with
both. B^rnier's M^moirs, ^^m. 3. p. 130.
The Indians own Three in the Deity, known by the names of Brahma, Bischen, and
Meha^den^. Dervis ^rsielebi a Mohammedan acknowledged to a Christian, who was
disputing with him about Religion: that at the commencement of all their
Negotiations, Epito. de Turc. moribu^, c. 4. p. 130.
it was their custom to use these words, In the name of God, of Mercy, and of
their Spirit.

If any shall be so in love with his private Sentiments, as to deny this Truth,
which has gained so universal a Testimony, upon the account of some
difficulties, which our shallow Intellects cannot reach to the bottom of; he
may with the same reason assert there is no such thing as the Ocean, because he
cannot by his line find the depth of it in every place. If all this will not
satisfy; let him exercise his reason about some difficulties in nature, and he
will find the existence of things very plain where their contexture is so
concealed, and intricate; that the greatest Wits are at a loss in their
disquisition about it. If the intricacy of some modes in natural things be no
reasonable inducement to deny the reality of the things themselves: much less
is the ineffable union betwixt the Divine Essence and Subsistence, a
justifiable plea for the denial of the Sacred Trinity. He that shall think fit
to try the acuteness of his Intellect about some knots in Philosophy; will find
the edge of his reason so much blunted in the encounter; that it will not be
easy for him to persuade himself, that it is sharp enough to penetrate into
all the Mysteries in Divinity.

If this will not prevail, without an engagement with those difficulties, which
this Truth is usually assaulted with, let a Catalogue be made of them, and it
will not be difficult for him, to make his way through them, who is armed with
the following considerations.

1. Although there be Three Persons, or Subsistences in the Godhead: yet there
are not three Essences. Every Person distinctly considered has an Essence: but
every person has not a distinct Essence.

2. Though one finite individual Nature cannot be communicated to Three Persons:
yet an infinite may. If the whole Divine Essence is intimately in all created
persons at the same time; there is no reason to think, but that it may be
communicated to three increated. Whatsoever is alleged against this
Communication, holds as strong against the Universal Presence, which all
acknowledge, but those who deny the Deity.

3. Finite and infinite, perfect and imperfect, are not proper predicates of
Subsistence, but of Being. So that when we are interrogated, whether the three
persons in the Holy Trinity are finite or infinite, perfect or imperfect: if by
Person is meant only a mode of subsistence without the Nature, it is a very
incongruous question. For infinity and finity, perfection and imperfection are
but modes of Entity: and every mode imports variation; and one variation cannot
properly be predicated of another. If by Person is understood the Divine
Essence subsisting in a peculiar manner, then we answer, that every person
distinctly is infinitely perfect: though every person has not a distinct infinite
perfection.

4. Although the three Persons have one and the same Nature: yet the Son cannot
be said to be the Father, or the Spirit the Son. The same specifical Nature
agrees to Joh, Moses and Daniel. Every one of them has the whole nature of Man;
yet we have no reason to assert that Moses is Job, or Joh Daniel. As there is
some thing not contained in the common Nature, which does individuate them: So
there is a characteristical property appertaining to the Father, the Son and
holy Spirit, whereby they are distinguished; although they are all equally
interested in the same infinite Essence.

5. When it is said, that the only God is the Father, Jesus Christ is the only
God, therefore Jesus Christ is the Father; the major proposition is peccant.
For in every proposition the predicate is never less comprehensive than the
subject; but always of a greater latitude, and therefore bears the title of the
major term. But here the predicate, Father, is less comprehensive than the
subject, the only God.

Now I have finished the Third Proposition, The Three Persons are One God.

4. This One God is to be Worshipped. If we consider him essentially, his
peerless perfections do justly challenge the deepest veneration. They being
infinite cannot admit of any additions. All that We are capable of doing is to
own them with the decent significations of the most humble and submissive
regards. It is an Article in the Jewish Creed, Fag. in Deuteronomy. c. 14. v. 1.
The Blessed God is worthy to be Worshipped. It is a principal part of the
Confession of the Christian Church, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory
and Honor. It was usual among the Heathens to worship the Head of great
Rivers. Sax. Willworship.
He who considers God as the fountain of all that goodness which circulates in
the veins of the Creation, can conclude no less than that the most profound
veneration is due to him.

If the Deity be considered personally, every person does require Divine
Worship to be directed to him. The Father, Jo. 4.23. The Son, Heb. 1.6. Psalm.
2.12. Phil. 2.10. S. Stephen directed his Prayer to him, Act. 7.59. Ananias
enjoined S. Paul to call upon him, Act. 22. v. 16. Salvation is promised to
those, who express a conformity to this command, Romans 10.13. When we say, the
Son is to be Worshipped, we do not consider him without his humane Nature, but
as a person consisting both of Divine and Humane. Supreme Adoration is given
upon the account of the infinite excellency of the Divine Nature. This
excellency is communicated to the Person which has assumed our Nature, and
advanced it to the dignity of an Hypostatical union; but not to the nature it
self. And therefore the Worship which is due, must not be terminated upon the
nature considered abstractedly, but the person who is clothed with it. This
induced Athanasius to say, Epist. ad Adelph.
(...), etc. Let them know (meaning the Arrians) that when we Worship the Lord
in the flesh, we do not Worship a Creature: but the Creator clothed with a
created body.

Neither must our blessed. Lord be considered, without his Mediatorship. Though
supreme Adoration does not immediately terminate upon the relation of a
Mediator: yet it does upon him, who is invested with that Relation. Our Savior
in this respect is inferior to the Father, and nothing inferior to the Deity
can challenge Supreme Adoration. The taking up the mediatory Office was an act
of free Grace, and by consequence might not have been done. Now that which
might have been, or not been, must be inferior to that necessary and immutable
excellency, which is the proper Object of the highest Veneration. We must
distinguish betwixt the foundation of Worship and the Motives to it. Though the
free acts of the Divine Benignity, as redeeming, mediating, etc. are vigorous
inducements to Worship: yet the sole foundation and immediate object is
infinite excellency, which will not permit any thing which is inferior, to
share with it in the same degree of Honor. A Subject may have many motives
from the personal favors of his Prince, to pay the Rights which belong to the
Crown: yet the formal object and reason of his so doing, is the Sovereignty,
and dominion, which the Prince is invested with.

As the Son, so likewise the Spirit is the Object of Adoration. He is placed in
the same rank with the Father, and the Son, Mat. 28. v. 19. Jo. 1.5, 7. and
honored with the attribution of the peculiarities of the Deity, as Eternity,
Immensity, Omniscience. The dishonor done to him by Blasphemy has as black a
character in the Scripture, as the dishonor of the Father or Son. It is
represented as a delinquency of the first magnitude, and excluded the benefit
of pardon. He who is thus dignified, and secured by the most severe commination
against dishonor, must necessarily of right challenge the same degree of
Honor and Worship, which is due to the Father and the Son.

The Adoration, given to them all, must be so directed; that we may worship the
Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity. The ground of divine Veneration is the
unlimited and peerless perfection of God. The motives conducing to it are the
benefits, which none but so transcendent a Being can conferr. The same internal
eminency is common to the Three Persons. Every external benefit is the product
of their joint concurrence. They having all an equal interest in the foundation
of Religion, and the motives conducing to it; it is very reasonable, when we
direct an act of Worship to one; that we should not exclude the other. When we
name the Son only, the Father and holy Spirit are to be understood: or the
Father only, the Son and the Spirit: or the Spirit only, the Father and the
Son. Consonant to this doctrine are the words of Nazianzen, (...), etc. Let us
Worship in Three one Deity: and the practice of the universal Church, which is
apparent, by the Latin, and Greek Liturgies. Now I have done with the fourth
Proposition, This One God is to be Worshipped.

5. This God is only to be Worshipped. This is the express assertion of the Holy
Scripture, the dictate of Reason, the sense of the Ancient Church.

1. The assertion of Holy Scripture. It is the first of the moral Laws, Thou
shall have no other Gods but me: and placed in the front of the Gospel, Him
only shall thou serve. In a sense of this appropriate allegiance to Jehovah,
the Angel did forbid S. John, and S. Paul and Barnabas the people of Lycaonia
to pay them any Divine Veneration. Daniel's refusal of the portion of meat,
which was first consecrated to an Idol, will easily induce us to believe, that
he had an equal disgust of the Idolatrous worship, which was given to him. If
Abraham's deportment, when the Angels appeared, had more than a moral or civil
respect; The Son of God his being in the company will excuse him from Idolatry,
one of them is expressly dignified with the incommunicable name of the Deity.

2. The dictate of reason. Worship is either internal, or external. Internal
includes a deep and reverential esteem, as an ingredient essential to its
nature. This esteem must be of an elevation agreeable to the excellency of the
Object it is terminated upon. There being no object, that can be a Rival with
the Supreme Being in point of perfection, it is not possible, that the same
esteem, which his transcendent dignity challenges from us, should with justice
be given to any other.

External imports a declaration of inward esteem by some outward acts. As the
Veneration terminated upon God is peculiar and appropriate: So must the Acts
be, which are designed for the signification of it. Betwixt the sign and the
thing signified there ought to be such a similitude; that the one may be known
by the other. This cannot be done in the present case; except there be such an
appropriation, as we speak of.

The nature of Divine Supremacy requires in outward as well as inward Worship a
discrimination from that which is given to the Creature. Earthly Monarchs
expect an agnition of their Sovereignty to be made by the payment of an
appropriate homage. They have some Jewels in their Crown, which they will not
permit any of their Subjects to wear. Though Moral and Civil regards may be
tendered to a Creature: yet if they rise so high as to have any mixtures of
those peculiarities, which are devoted by nature or institution to signify
Divine Veneration: they are as distasteful to God, as it would be to a Prince
to stand by, and see the Allegiance, which is due only to himself, given to
another.

This Truth is warranted with so much clear reason; that those, who have had no
other advantage but the light of Nature, have taken notice of it. Among those
instructions which Orpheus left with Musaeus, Lib. de Monarch. Det, p. 104, 108.
This is one, (...). Adore him alone, who is the King of the World. It was the
advice of Menander, (...), to honor him alone who is Lord of all. Ad
Antolycum. p. 122.
The Verses of the Sibyl in Theophilus Antiochenus are of the same importance.

(...), La^t. de ^^lsa Relig. p. 20.

(...).
The Ruler of the World alone adore,
Who ever was, and shall be ever more.
3. The Sense of the Ancient Church. Among those Truths, which are owned by the
most early Writers, this is of the first magnitude; that God only is to be
Worshipped. They never mention the worshipping any thing else, as the
Sacrament, the Cross, the Relics of Saints.

When they delineate the rites appertaining to the Eucharist, there is not the
least intimation of that Veneration, which, the Romanist; say, is due to the
Sacrament. They were far from asserting, that (...), quae debetur vero Deo, is
to be given to it. Circumstances, purely accidental, as the time when the
Institution was made, the place where, the mingling Water with Wine, are
recorded. Those who had leisure to preserve the memory of these circumstances,
would not have omitted a point so material, in case any such thing had been
known to be agreeable to the mind of God.

As for the individual Cross, upon which our blessed Lord suffered; there could
be no Adoration directed to it, for the first three hundred years. It is
confessed, that it lay concealed under ground till the time of Helena, mother
to Constantine the Great. Neither is there the least signification of any
religious addresses made to artificial imitations of it. When the Veneration of
the Cross is objected by the Heathens, against the Christians, Mir^^. F^l.
it is answered by them, Cruces etiam nec colimus nec optamus. We neither
Worship Crosses nor wish for them. Bellarmine indeed infers; that the objection
implies, that some such practice was then in use: but he may by the same reason
persuade us, that the Christians Worshipped the Head of an Ass: because their
adversaries were as peremptory in this as the other charge. Tertullian reckons
the report, that the Christians were Crucis religiosi, amongst those scandals,
which were raised by malice, in order to the eclipsing their reputation.

As for the Relics of Saints; we find no mention of any religious respect,
which was paid to them. Those who have the greatest zeal for them, are usually
mounted upon tradition: but finding it not able to carry them through the first
Centuries in this particular, they think good to alight, and content themselves
with some instances in Scripture, which are nothing to the purpose: as the hemm
of Christ's garment, the shadow of S. Peter, the Handkerchiefs and Aprons, that
touched the body of S. Paul. Because the Woman diseased with an issue of blood,
was healed by touching the first: the sick were brought into the streets, that
they might be overshadowed by the second: many were delivered from evil spirits
by the third. They have a mind to persuade us without any good reason, that
these particulars, with all Relics of an equivalent Nature, challenge
religious veneration. No doubt, Peter himself was every way as valuable as his
shadow; and yet when Cornelius made an attempt to worship him, he prevented him
by an express prohibition. The Fathers in the ages next to the Apostles, were
not such good husbands, as to make such an advantageous improvement of these
instances: but on the contrary we find them charging the Heathens with
Superstition of a like nature; as the worshipping the Monuments of the Dead:
and we never read, that the Heathens did retort upon them their guilt in the
same kind, which, no doubt, they would have done, in case there had been any
such practice among them. Celsus, Lucian, etc. were not so dull as to overlook
so signal an advantage. They which use to charge them with too much, would have
paid them their own, in case there had been the least appearance of reason for
it.

As the most early Writers next to the Apostles never mention the Worshipping
any else but God: so all the words, which import Divine Worship, are by them
exclusively applied to him, (...), by Justin Martyr, Apel. 2.
(...), by Theophilus Antiochenus, (...), by Tatianus, (...), by Origin, (...).
L. 1. Cont. Cells.


Servire by Irenaeus. Huic servire soli oportet discipulos Christi. Colere and
adorare by Tertullian. Apol. c. 17. Inst. l. 1. c. 20.
Quod colimus unus Deus est. Praescribitur, ne quem alium adorem. Venerari by
Lactantius, veneratio nulla alia nisi unius Dei tenenda est.

Hitherto I have asserted the verity of this Proposition, God only is to be
Worshipped: In the next place I will consider the opposition that has been made
against it, by the Church of Rome, and those who adhere to Her.

Maldonate makes no scruple to pronounce, n Mat. 5. v. 34.
that it is a wicked error to maintain, that religious Honor is to be tendered
to none but God. The Inquisitors have blotted out such Words and Sentences out
of Books as cast a favorable aspect upon this Doctrine. In a Sentence cited
out of Gregory Nyssen by Antonius, in his mellifluous Sermons in these words,
eam vero folummodo naturam, quae increata est, colere, and venerari didicimus,
they condemn the word, Index Exp.
solummodo, to an expunction. The Index to Athanasius's Works Printed at Basil,
has been treated with the same respect. These words, adorari solius Dei est,
are not permitted to remain in it. The Gloss in the Margin of the Bible upon 1 Samuel 7.3. Prepare your hearts unto the Lord, and serve him only, has not
escaped their severity. Their decree concerning it runs in these terms,
deleantur illa verba, serviendum Deo soli. They have done with these
Testimonies, as Caesar Borgia used to do with men, namely, contrive the death
of those, who did impede the accomplishment of his designs. This practice does
evidently declare, that they are conscious, that their Worship cannot stand
without this Principle be taken out of the way. The sense of it is opposed by
them in many particulars; as the Worship of the Sacrament, the Invocation of
Saints, the Adoration of Images, etc.

1. The Worship of the Sacrament. The Church of Rome has given too much
occasion to believe, that the Accidents of the Bread and Wine, are to be
honored with supreme Veneration. The Council of Trent in plain words asserts,
that (...), (which is granted to signify supreme honors) is to be given to
the Sacrament. It does not say to a part only of it; but uses the Word in
general, which must necessarily imply the whole: and extend to all, which is
appointed to be received. Now it is evident, that the Accidents are a part of
the Sacrament, which is to be received. They constitute the outward and visible
sign. L. 4. Sa^r.
Bellarmine represents them as the principal; ratio Sacramenti magis convenit
speciebus, ut continent Corpus, quam corpori Christi, ut est sub speciebus.

The following words of the Council confirm this Interpretation, nec enim minus
adorandum, etc. neither is it (the Sacrament) to be less adored; because it
has been instituted by Christ the Lord that it may be taken: for him the same
God we believe to be present in it, whom the eternal Father bringing into the
World, says, Let all the Angels adore him, etc. Here the Sacrament is
represented as that in which our blessed Lord is present and contained under,
and by consequence as distinct from it. That which contains any thing is always
diverse from that which is contained in it. Now what is there left for the Word
Sacrament to import but the outward Elements, the signifying part, under which
it is supposed, that the Sacred Body of our blessed Lord is latent. His
Presence in the Sacrament is alleged as the reason of the Adoration given to
it. Though this is not sufficient to justify the practice: (for then every
thing, in which God is present, would be an adorable object, as the Sun and
Moon, and whole Creation.) yet it leads us into the meaning of the Word
Sacrament, as it lies in the Council, and assures us, that it imports some
thing besides our blessed Savior, which can be nothing but the outward
Elements, whereby he is represented. A command to give civil honor to the
Throne of a Prince, because the Prince himself sits in it, evidently implies,
that the Throne and the Prince are distinct one from the other.

To expound the Decree by the Canon, in which there is mention only of
Worshipping Christ in the Sacrament, is very preposterous. They aim at two
distinct things. The first obliges us to Worship the Sacrament: the second, to
Worship Christ, who is present in the Sacrament. These two are as different, as
to Worship the Palace, in which the Prince resides, and to Worship the Prince
residing in that Palace.

To say that no Catholic is bound to believe more than that Christ in the
Sacrament is to be Worshipped; because this is enjoined under a particular
Anathema: the other of Worshipping the Sacrament not, is nothing to the
purpose. The intent of the Decrees is, veritat^m dicere, to set forth the true
doctrine of the Church, as the Council has declared. Every jot of this doctrine
is to be received, whether there be a particular Curse denounced against the
Refusers of it, or no. The Curse does not make the obligation to comply with
the doctrine; but shows only the danger which those incur, who refuse it. If the
Church of Rome does not think fit always to set before us the danger in a
particular Anathema, upon some prudential considerations best known to her
self; yet the obligation to entertain her doctrine does not cease, but remain in
full force. Her Authority is as much in a Decree without an Anathema, as in a
Canon with one: and it is her authority which creates the obligation.

To say that the (...), which the Council speaks of, falls upon the Accidents
of the Bread and Wine in an inferior manner, cannot be reconciled with any
good reason. For (...) is either internal or external. Internal imports a
superlative esteem in the mind of infinite Excellency. External, the doing some
action or speaking such words, as are appropriated to signify this internal
veneration. Neither of these can be terminated upon the Bread and Wine in an
inferior manner. For what is outwardly done or spoken, being but an expression
or indication of internal veneration; and the inward veneration being of the
highest nature, if it falls upon any thing in an inferior manner or degree,
it cease to be what it was: the superlative degree being essential to it, and
not separable from it.

Neither do they mend the matter, who assert, that Latria, as it is terminated
upon the outward Elements is not absolute, but relative: Christ only under the
Elements is adored per se, or absolutely: the Symbols by virtue of their
relation to Christ; as the garments with which he was clothed, when he was
upon the Earth, were worshipped, when adoration was given to his person.

When the Council says, that (...) is due to the Sacrament, absolute, and not
relative Latria is intended. It is in express words, such a Latria quae debetur
vero Deo, and that is undoubtedly absolute. Though there may be relative honor,
yet (if we speak properly) there can be no such thing, as relative Latria. For
it is agreed, that the word signifies that Veneration, which is peculiar to the
Supreme Being: and if this be divided into two species Absolute, and Relative,
then it may be predicated of both: for every Genus is predicated of its
species: and if so, then either equally or unequally: not equally, for then the
relative species will participate as much of the nature of the Genus, as the
absolute: not unequally, because Latria (as I have before intimated) consists
in a point, of which there can be no unequal participations. An inferior
Latria is as much as an inferior Superiority. I grant an honor due to many
things upon the account of their relation to God; but to make this honor equal
to that, which is due immediately to God, is highly injurious. For the relation
which the Creature has to the Creator is but a finite mode or accident. And a
finite mode cannot merit the same species of Worship or Honor, which the
infinite perfection of the Divine Nature does.

When our blessed Lord was upon the Earth, (...) garments were not worshipped
by the same individual act, with which his person was. For Worship is an
acknowledgment of excellency: and none will assert, that the same
acknowledgment of excellency can without a palpable injury be terminated upon
his Person, and his Garment.

As the Accidents are worshipped, so likewise is the substance of the Bread and
Wine.

The Church of Rome believes, that by the Priest's pronouncing the words of
Consecration, the Body and Blood of Christ become corporally present upon the
Altar: that by the same words, in the same moment, the substance of the Bread
and Wine is changed into them: that what the substance of the Bread and Wine is
converted into, must have the same worship terminated upon it, which is
peculiar to the person of Christ, God-man. Now if there be no such change, as
is pretended, but the Bread and Wine retain their pristine nature: it must
necessarily follow, that the substance of the Bread is Worshipped in the place
of Christ. If it be said that this cannot with justice be charged upon a
Romanist, because he believes that the substance of the Bread and Wine do not
remain, and we must not impute the Worshipping of that to him, which he
believes not to be in the Sacrament. I answer, that though this excuse, at the
first sight, may appear plausible: yet upon a due examination it will be found
to be of no validity. By the same method of Reasoning it may be concluded that
a Jew reflects no dishonor upon the True Messiah, when in the Synagogue thrice
a day, he curses Jesus of Nazareth; because he believes that Jesus of Nazareth
is not the True Messiah: or that the Persians do not Worship a creature, when
they make their religious Addresses to the Sun; because they apprehend, he is
the first Being, and maker of all things: or that the Heathens did not
sacrifice to Devils, as they are accused in the holy Scripture; because they
were far from believing, that their Idols were animated by infernal Spirits.

It must be confessed, that an error springing from the nature of the object,
may contribute something to an excuse. Suppose there had been a Man, when our
blessed Lord was upon the Earth, every way like him in the features of his
face, and all the lineaments of his Body, and another induced by that
similitude, had given to him the veneration which is due only to Jesus Christ:
it had been tolerable in him, to have pleaded his error, it deriving its
original from that which it was not in his power to help. But wh^^ the error
springs from a voluntary distemper in the Subject, it can have no propitious
influence upon his justification. And this we have too much reason to believe
is the case of those, who adhere to the Community of Rome, who when they assert
the Body of Christ to be corporally present in the Eucharist, and the substance
of the Bread and Wine not, put the highest affront upon those Topics, from
which we usually derive our assurance in all other points of Divinity, namely
the Scripture, Antiquity, Reason, Sense.

1. Scripture, They affirm that which is contrary to the Words of the
institution, when Christ says, This is my Body, he means, This is a sign or
memorial of it. To this interpretation we are led by the context, This do in
remembrance of me. When he pronounces the demonstrative This, he points at that
which he took and had in his hand; and this is called Bread: and therefore in
the Latin Translation of the Aethiopick Version these words occur, Hic panis
Corpus meum, (...) must import his dead body, as it is in the Syriack, (...)
Hoc cadaver meum. (...) is derived from the Hebrew (...) which signifies a dead
body, 1 Samuel 17.46. Isa. 14.19. These, we have reason to believe, were the
words of our blessed Lord, who at the institution of the Sacrament did
undoubtedly use that language which was then familiar to the Jews, and that was
the Syriack, which by reason of its affinity with the Hebrew, is sometimes
called by the same name. Joh. 19.13, 17. Act. 21.20.
Now it is evident, that what Christ gave at his last Supper, could not be his
dead body in a literal sense: and therefore it must be so in a figurative,
which will amount to this; This is a memorial of my Body as crucified for you.
Christ's body in the Sacrament is not given as living, but dead upon our
account, and his blood not as contained in his veins, but shed for our sins.

We have not only the Words to justify our interpretation, but the scope aimed
at by him that spoke them. It is agreed on all sides, that God did design by
them the institution of a Sacrament. It is as unanimously asserted, that in
every Sacrament there must be a visible Sign, and a Thing signified. There is
nothing here to import the outward Sign, but the Demonstrative, This: or the
Thing signified, but that which is predicated of it, my Body. Now the sign is
never essentially, but always figuratively the thing which is signified by it.
As when we say of the formal sign or picture of Augustus or Tiberius; This is
Augustus, This is Tiberius; we do not mean their persons really, but
representations of them.

In the other part of the Sacrament, it is said, This Cup is the New Testament.
This cannot be true, essentially, as though the Cup was changed into the nature
of the New Testament: but figuratively only. We have just reason to believe the
same concerning the Words under debate; that the Bread is no otherwise the Body
of Christ, than the Cup is the New Testament. When this manner of Speech is
used in relation to other Sacraments, as Circumcision and the Passover;
Circumcision is my Covenant, the Lamb is the Lord's Passover, it constantly
bears this sense. Neither Circumcision or the Lamb were really and essentially
the things which are predicated of them, but signs and memorials only.

The admitting a Trope in the Words is not contrary to the design of Christ in
his last Will, which undoubtedly was to deliver his mind clearly. We may speak
as plainly, when we use a Trope or Figure, as when our speech is without it. If
we walk in a Gallery adorned with Pictures, and say this is Julius Caesar, this
is Constantine the Great, we are as well understood, as if we had said, this is
the Picture of such a Person. That is not obscure whether figuratively or
literally spoken, which is expressed according to the manner, which is familiar
to those, to whom the words are directed. The known custom at the time, when
these words, [This is my Body] were used, was to speak after the like manner
about the Passover, into whose place the Sacrament of the Supper came. It was
the usual language of the Jews to call the Lamb the Body of the Passover. The
Lamb being a Figure of Christ our Passover, and he putting a period to the old
Institution, and substituting Bread in the room of it, to be a memorial, and
Type of himself under the Gospel, he calls it by the same name. As the Paschal
Lamb had been his Typical Body under the Old Testament: So now he declares,
that the Bread shall be his figurative Body under the New.

If a Trope makes the Words obscure, and unfit to be a branch of the last Will
of Jesus Christ, then the interpretation of the Church of Rome is condemned by
her own acknowledgment. For she believes, that when it is said, This is my
Body, a living Body is meant: and therefore Body by a Synecdoche is put for the
Body and Soul.

The other part of the Sacrament is contained in his last Will as well as this:
and yet in the words which set it forth, there is no less than two Tropes. This
Cup is the New Testament in my Blood. The Cup is put for the Wine contained in
it: and the New Testament for the Sacrament of the New Covenant.

As the scope of our Savior confirms the sense, which we have given: So
likewise do the antecedents and consequences. Before these words, This is my
Body, were spoken, it is said, Jesus took Bread, and blessed and brake it, etc.
what can he mean by This, but that which he took into his hand and blessed and
brake? and that is expressly called Bread. After Consecration, as that which is
termed his Blood is styled the Fruit of the Vine: so that, which he named his
Body, is by his Spirit in the holy Apostle said to be Bread. As often as ye eat
this bread, 1 Cor. 11.26. Whosoever shall eat of this bread, v. 27. Let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, v. 28.

If before and after Consecration that which (...), This does import, is called
Bread, then no such mutation is made as is contended for, and the words must be
interpreted in a Sacramental and Figurative Sense.

We have not only the Antecedents and Consequences to favor our
interpretation, but likewise the Analogy of Faith. This says, that Christ as
man was made like unto his Brethren, Heb. 2.17. This car not be true, if he be
corporally in the Sacrament. The bodies of his Brethren are naturally confined
to a certain place. But according to this apprehension his Body may be in a
thousand places at once, even upon all the Altars in the World. Wheresoever the
Host is consecrated, it is wholly in the whole, and wholly in every part of it.

The Analogy of Faith asserts; that Christ it gone to heaven in his bodily
presence. I am no more in the world, Jo. 17.11. The interpretation which the
Church of Rome gives of the words under debate, makes him to be more in the
World, than when he conversed with his Disciples upon the Earth. For then he
was but in one place at a time: but now, according to the Creed of the
Romanists, he is the same moment, in Millions of places.

The Analogy of Faith assures us, that the body or flash of Christ shall see no
corruption, Act. 2.27, 31. But if it be in the Sacrament, then it is corporally
eaten, turned into Chyle, and Nutriment, and subject to all the corruption,
which the ingredients of a humane body are exposed unto. To what is received in
the Eucharist, the primitive Church in relation to the body attributes the
power of Nutrition.

The Analogy of Faith obliges us to believe, that God will not command
inhumanity. But if the sense of the Church of Rome be true, the greatest
inhumanity is practiced according to his Will. What is more savage, than to eat
the body of a living man? much more must it be to champ with our Teeth, and
swallow down the living Body of our blessed Lord, to whom supreme Veneration is
due. This made a Pagan to say, Who do thou think, Cott. in Cicer. de not.
Decr. l. 3.
can be so mad as to believe that to be his God, which he eats? It was an
abomination to the Egyptians to eat with the Hebrews, Genesis 43.32. The Chaldee
paraphrast gives the reason, because the Hebrews eat those Cattle which the
Egyptians use to worship. Those words, except ye eat the flesh of the son of
man, etc. Joh. 6.55. give no countenance to what is asserted by the Church of
Rome. By Flesh is meant the bread spoken of, v. 51. The bread that I will give
you is my flesh: and by the Bread we are to understand our blessed Lord
himself, I am the bread of life, v. 35. and by eating believing on him: as is
evident by the consequent words, he that comes to me shall never hunger, and
he that believes on me, shall never thirst. As eating and drinking satisfy
our natural appetite: so believing in Christ our spiritual. By faith we draw
out of his fullness and plenitude a supply of our necessities. This spiritual
Sense is pointed at, v. 56. and very agreeable to the manner of speaking
amongst the Jews with whom Christ conversed, when he spoke the words under
consideration. Maimon. More Nevo^. par. 1. c. 30.
The Hebrews use (...) comedere, not only to express the feeding upon that
which conduces to the nourishment of the body: but likewise the acquisition of
Learning and Wisdom (such as faith imports) which tends to the nutrition of the
Soul. Psalm. 33. or 34 v. 2.
S. Basil says, that there is, (...), an intellectual mouth of the inward Man.
With this we receive the impressions made by external objects, and ruminate
upon, and digest them by meditation. All this being considered, it is evident,
that Transubstantiation is contrary to the Holy Scripture.

2. Antiquity, Those who assert the Body of Christ to be corporally present in
the Sacrament, and the substance of the Bread and Wine not, speak contrary to
the sense of all the primitive Fathers.

Ignatius, who lived in the first Century, (...)
calls that which is broken and given in the Sacrament (...).

Justin Martyr in the second Century, Apol. 2.
styles it (...), and attributes to it a nutritive power in relation to the
body.

Tertullian in the third Century asserts, L. 4 cont. Marc.
that Christ made the bread, which he took, to be his body, that is, a figure
of his body.

Origin says, L. 8. cont. Celsum.
we have a symbol of thanksgiving to God, (...), bread which is called the
Eucharist.

S. Cyprian affirms, (...).
that the Lord calls the bread compounded of many grains, his Body.

Eusebius in the fourth Century terms, L. 1. ^emon, Evan. c. ult.
what is received in the Sacrament, symbols of the Body and blood of Christ.

Cyril of Jerusalem styles it Bread and Wine, Catech. Mystagog. 1.3.
and compares the change which is made by consecration, to that in consecrated
Oil, which does not lose its old Nature; but is dedicated and set apart to a
higher use and purpose.

S. Ambrose affirms, L. 4. de Sa^. c. 4.
that the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, sunt a ^^^e panis and vinum, although
changed into the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ.

Gregory Nissen owns that which he calls the Body of Christ by the name of
Bread, Orat. de San. Bapr.
and expresses at large, that the Bread and Wine being Consecrated, retain
their pristine nature: even as Baptismal Water, an Altar, a Priest do, after
Consecration has passed upon them.

Gaudentius represents the Sacrament as an image of the passion and figure of
the Body and Blood of Christ. Tract 2. in Exo.


S. Chrysostom in the fifth Century uses these words. Epist. ad Cas^arium
Monashum.
Before the Bread is sanctified, we call it Bread: when the Divine Grace has
sanctified it by means of the Priest, it loses the name of Bread, and is held
worthy to be called the Lord's Body: although the nature of the Bread does remain
in it, and is not called two bodies, but the body of the Son.

S. Austin says, Ad Adamantum, ^. 12.
That the Lord doubted not to say, This is my Body, when he gave the sign of
his Body.

Cyril of Alexandria asserts, L. 4. c. 14. in Evang. Joan.
that our Lord gave fragments of Bread, saying, Take, eat, This is my Body.

Theodoret affirms, 1. Dial. cont. Eutyc.
that our Savior honored the visible Symbols with the name of his Body and
Blood, not changing the nature; but adding grace to nature.

Gelasius is of the same mind. De duabus Christi naturis.
The Sacraments which we receive of the Body and Blood of Christ, are a divine
thing, by means whereof, we are made partakers of the Divine Nature: and yet
the substance of the Bread and Wine does not cease to be.

Bellarmine in his Polemical Discourse concerning the Eucharist, uses most of
the names which I have mentioned, to a contrary purpose, and brings them into
the field with a great deal of pomp. His policy seems to resemble that of a
great Commander. When he had drawn up his Soldiers into a military order, and
was ready to engage the enemy, a great part of them declared, they would not
fight. He being not in a capacity to retreat with honor or security, told
them, that the only kindness which he desired of them, was to march to a Hill a
little way of, and there be Spectators of the courage and fate of their fellow
Soldiers; hoping they might appear to the enemy as a Reserve, and prove as
great a discouragement to them, as if they had actually engaged them. I cannot
imagine, why these ancient Fathers, who have so positively declared in the
Testimonies above cited, that they will not fight, should be continued in view:
except it be with the like design to impose upon the Faith of those, who are
strangers to their intentions.

To the Authorities, already produced, I might add many more, which do
evidently manifest that the Church was a stranger to the doctrine of
Transubstantiation for many hundred years. What might be alleged, I will sum
up in the following particulars:

1. They all agree in an imitation of the style of Scripture, and call the
Bread and Wine in the Sacrament the Body and Blood of Christ.

2. They say, that they are not so essentially, but figuratively, and therefore
style them signs, Symbols, Figures, Antitypes, Memorials. It is usual to call
the sign and the thing signified by the same name.

3. They affirm that after Consecration, the substance of the Bread and Wine
remains; and the change made is only in respect of Use, Office, and Dignity.

4. They say, That they nourish our flesh and blood, and have the same effect
that other food has: and therefore they use to give the remains of the
Euchariscical Bread to boys, and to abstain from the Communion upon Fasting
days.

5. They assert, that wicked men do not eat and drink the Body and Blood of
Christ: but interpret the eating of his flesh, Jo. 6. the receiving of him in a
spiritual manner, namely, by Faith.

6. When they deny the Eucharist to be a figure or sign, they mean a bare sign.
The Sacrament is more than so. It feals and exhibits. It is a means, whereby we
receive the Body and Blood of Christ, not only the benefits of them, but Christ
himself, in a spiritual manner as crucified for us, and is a real pledge to
assure us thereof. Though the crucified body of Christ is in Heaven, yet that
spirit which dwells in it, being communicated to a worthy Receiver in the
Sacramental action (we are made to drink into one Spirit) it produces such a
union betwixt us and Christ Jesus, as lays a clear foundation of Communion
with, and participation of him.

7. When they say, there is a mutation in the nature of the Bread, they mean by
nature the use and property only, as is manifest by their own explications.
Before Consecration it was appropriated to the nourishment of the body: but now
by Consecration it is exalted to a higher purpose. A new dignity is put upon
it. It becomes a means, whereby a worthy Communicant gains Communion with our
blessed Lord.

8. When it is said, That the Senses are deceived, and no competent judges of
the mutation: this may be very true, although the change be Sacramental only. The
change is not the proper object of sense, but of faith. The knowledge of it,
with its effects is conveyed to us by a Divine Testimony extant in the holy
Scriptures.

9. When it is affirmed, That under the species of Bread is given the Body, and
under the species of Wine the Blood; by Species, we must not understand the
Accidents without their proper subjects. This apprehension never entered into
the thoughts of the ancient Fathers. They were perfect strangers to this kind
of Philosophy. S. Aust. l. 4. call. ^^ T^in. Sermon. de Temp. 38. S. Ambr. l. 4.
de Init.
By species they understand the specifical nature of a thing: and by the
species of Bread and Wine, True Bread and True Wine, as is manifest to any who
consult their discourses.

10. Where it is said, That the Lord who changed Water into Wine, could change
in the Eucharist Wine into Blood, the intention of Cyril is not to make these
two conversions in every thing parallel, Jerus.
as is manifest by the words that follow; he presently asserts, That the eating
of Christ's flesh must be understood spiritually, and calls the Table mystical
and intellectual. And therefore all that his words can import is this: He who
(...), changed Water into Wine by a corporal mutation, changed at his mystical
Table Wine into Blood, not corporally, but spiritually and mystically.

Lastly, It must be acknowledged, that there are many Hyperbolical expressions
in the Fathers, Hom 23. in Mat Par. (...).
as S. Chrysostom and others, in relation to the Sacrament. The design of them
is to secure it from contempt, and to elevate and raise the devotion of
Communicants. They being improper Speeches must not be expounded in such a
sense as is inconsistent with what is elsewhere expressed by the same Authors
in plain words without any figure. They all agree in this, in as clear
expressions as can be desired, That the substance of the Bread and Wine remain
in the Eucharist. Their Rhetorical flourishes cannot be interpreted to the
prejudice of that which is plain and manifest. When S. Chrysostom says, That
Christ mingles himself with us, and not by Faith only, but indeed makes us to
be his Body: His meaning is not, That there is any corporal mixture or
immediate contact betwixt us and his body; but that when we receive the figure
of his body which is in Heaven, the Spirit which dwells in it is communicated
to the worthy Receiver, and produces a union betwixt them; and therefore what
we receive, ^. 870.
he presently calls the Grace of the Spirit.

Damascen, who lived in the eighth Century, was one of the first who deserted
the Orthodox doctrine of the Fathers. He being concerned in the controversy
concerning Images, and the opposers of them asserting, that the Bread and Wine
in the Sacrament were the only Image and representation, which Christ allowed
of himself: he was transported with an intemperate zeal, and affirmed they were
no image or figure at all. L. 4. c. sid. O^t ^
(...). Though in these words, he did not design any real conversion of the
Elements: but rather a corporal presence, or consubstantiation: yet he gave
occasion to some in the ninth Age, to dispute for a substantial mutation.
Paschasius Ratbertus was the first who writ seriously and copiously about it,
as Bellarmine asserts. His sentiments about this argument were received with a
warm opposition. Rabanus Maurus, Bertram, Joannes Scotus Erigena, did strongly
assert the contrary doctrine. In the tenth Age, which was a night of ignorance,
all things fell asleep, controversies were laid aside. Darkness did reconcile
them, as the want of light does various colors. In the eleventh Age
Berengarius was awakened, and did with great perspicuity assert the Truth: Though
the violence of his enemies, and infirmity of his nature induced him to submit
to a recantation. The controversy all this while was managed with so much
ambiguity, that Joannes Duns Scotus asserts, That it was not necessary for any
to believe a substantial conversion or Transubstantiation, till the Lateran
Council held under Innocent the Third, in the year 1215. and therefore the
master of the Sentences, who flourished in the Century before, about the year
1145. uses these words: What kind of conversion it is, (...) illa (...).
whether formal or substantial, I am not able to determine. The truth is, that
Transubstantiation was brought forth by Paschasius, confirmed by Innocent the
Third, and at last so firmly married to the Sea of Rome by the Council of
Trent; that there was no possibility of a divorce; though there is just reason to
believe, that the most Learned of that Community could heartily desire it. The
issue produced by this unhappy conjunction, is the mutilation of the Sacrament,
the Adoration of the Host, the Sacrince of the Mass. (...) Christum esse in
Eucharistia, vere, realiter, substanitaliter, ut Concilium recle lequitur, non
corporaliter, etc. imo contradici possit spiritualiter, ut Bernardus dicit in
Sermon, etc. ubi affirmat in Sacram^nto exhiberi verron carnis substantiam sed
spiritualiter, non carnaliter. L. 1. de Sac. Euch. c. 2. p. 351.
The consideration of these particulars makes Bellarmine to shrink
(notwithstanding the great authorities he boasts of) when he comes to express
his own thoughts about the Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, as appears by
his own words.

Therefore we will say Christ is in the Eucharist, truly, really,
substantially, (as the Council rightly speaks) not corporally, etc. yea, on the
contrary, it may be said, spiritually, as Bernard speaks in his Sermon, etc.
where he affirms, that the true substance of the flesh is offered to us in the
Sacrament spiritually, but not carnally.

If the defenders of Transubstantiation did believe Antiquity to be favorable
to them, what is the reason, why they use so many devices to keep us from the
knowledge of it? S. Chrysostom's Epistle ad Caesarium Monachum, has been a
great while suppressed by the Romanists, because of the opposition which it
bears to their Sentiments about the Presence of Christ in the Sacrament. Peter
Martyr found the Manuscript at Florence. Bigotius of late has done the same;
and had published it, had he not been prevented by the interpoposals of some,
more biased with a respect to the interest of Rome, than a sincere love to the
Truth. It is at last come to light, though very imperfect and mutilated. If our
Adversaries did know Antiquity to be propitious to them in this and other
points of controversy, they would not use so much collusion as they do. In the
Proposition presented to Prince Henry, when he had thoughts to erect a Royal
Library, these words occur. The Pope gathers all the Manuscripts he can,
Fowlis p. 128.
into his Library the Vatican, and then uses them at his pleasure. One of his
Tricks is notorious. They have men which can counterfeit any hand, and write
the old hand 500. or 1000. years ago. Then they have artificial Ink, which
within three days after the writing looks as if it had been written 500. years
before. Thus having altered and taken out all that makes for us, they suppress
all the true Copies, and produce the new ones (they being written by themselves
as before) as the Authentic Books. All this will manifest, that what the
Church of Rome asserts concerning the Presence of Christ in the Eucharist, is
contrary to Antiquity.

3. Reason. If the Bread be converted into the Body of Christ, let us suppose
the conversion to be made in two places, at Paris and Rome; and the Body of
Christ in one of these places to stand upon the Altar, and in the other to be
carried in Procession. According to this Hypothesis, the same individual body
is moved, and not moved at the same time: God, whose concourse is requisite to
all motion, concurs and not concurs. His Will which is the spring of all
concourse, consents to the motion and not consents. His Intellect, which has a
knowledge of what he wills, knows and not knows the same individual: and all
this at the same time. In a word, God is represented as making at the same
instant two contrary declarations. Those who maintain the conversion under
debate, say, That the Essences of things do not fall immediately under the
notice of Sense; and the only way, which the Author of Nature has provided for
us to come to the knowledge of them, is by their external modes, and accidents.
If God declares in the Scripture, that what is in the Sacrament after
Consecration is not bread, and yet suffers at the same time all the accidents
to remain, which he has appointed to declare, that it is Bread; he makes two
declarations the same moment diametrically opposite one to the other. Such
contradictions are not reconcilable to his Nature. It is destructive of his
Veracity to speak two things contrary to each other, the same instant, in
relation to the same matter. Indeed it is said, That reason is not to be
admitted to this debate, there being a clear revelation on the contrary side.
The sacred Mystery of the Trinity is without hesitancy believed, although equal
exceptions from reason lie against it. To which I reply; that there is no
revelation of any such mutation in the Bread, as is contended for. Those words,
This is my Body, import no such matter, as I have before demonstrated. S. Paul
calls, what remains after Consecration in the Sacrament, by the name of bread,
1 Cor. 11.28. and we cannot have a better Interpreter of the mind of Christ,
than he is. The Revelation pretended cannot be true in any sense, which is
contradictory to reason. Though many things, before their manifestation, are
beyond the discovery of Reason. Though after a disclosure is made, it is not in
the power of reason to dive to the bottom of them: yet they are never
contradictory to it. Reason and Revelation differ but as a lesser and greater
light. The understanding which is the Candle of the Lord, is no more opposite
to Revelation, than the Lights, which are known by that name to the Celestial
Luminaries with which the Firmament is adorned. Though reason be not allowed in
the sacred mystery of the Trinity to judge what is contradictory; yet it may in
the present case. There the object is infinite, and far above the comprehension
of our narrow faculties: but here sinite, and every way fit and proportionable
to them. In the Eucharist we are conversant about a finite Body, the nature of
which is very agreeable to our measures: In the Trinity about an infinite and
incomprehensible Being. Reason is undoubtedly the gift of God. This gift is
bestowed for some purpose. The apparent design of it is to discern the true
nature of those objects which lie within its sphere. In this number we must
necessarily reckon, what appears in the Sacrament: it being so far from
exceeding the capacity of our intellect; that it falls under the notice of
Sense. If Reason in this case may not he permitted to judge what is
contradictory, the design in giving of it will be totally frustrated, and no
certainty attainable in the most obvious matter. Thus it is evident, that
Transubstantiation is contradictory to Reason.

4. Sense. Our blessed Lord has manifested, that it is a competent judge in the
present case by appealing to it concerning the reality of his Body, Luke 24.39.
Jo. 20.27. What appears in the Sacrament has all the conditions requisite to
qualify it for sensation. The parts of it are big enough to move the Nerves.
The distance from the object is very suitable and convenient. The space, through
which the Species pass, is clear and perspicuous. If Sense, rightly disposed,
may not be trusted (...) certainty of all things will fail. There can be no
evidence in Courts of Justice sufficient to ground a condemnatory Sentence
upon. Eyewitnesses, though of the greatest integrity, will be of no
signification, all will be left in a perfect state of Skepticism. The grand
pillars which support Religion, will be utterly overthrown and demolished. How
can we be assured that there is a God, but by his Word and Works? And how can
we perceive the Contents of his Word, or be acquainted with his Works, without
using our Senses? We cannot be sure that The Heavens declare the Glory of God,
or that this Proposition, This is my Body, is contained in the New Testament,
if we may not conside in our eyes. Miracles, the great Seals of Evangelical
Verity, are rendered insignificant; if the Senses of those who were present,
when they were wrought, may not be trusted to, their attestation will be of no
value.

Indeed we are told, that the Sense is not deceived in the Sacrament. The
accidents of the Bread and Wine are its proper objects, and they remain there,
according as they appear: but as for the Substance, that is miraculously
changed, and Sense is no competent Judge about it. To which the reply is easy.
Accidents alone are not the proper objects of Sense: but Accidents, together
with those material subjects, in which they inhere. It is matter, which
properly makes the impression upon our Nerves; the Particles of it are under
diverse modes and figures commonly styled Accidents. The Essence of these
consists in inhesion. Accidentis esse, est inesse: So that if they be
separated, they presently cease to be, and by consequence have no power to make
any impulse upon Sense. They can have no more a solitary existence, than the
height, breadth and length of a house, with all the colors and modes of every
room, may remain after the whole fabric is demolished. If there be any
miraculous change in the substance of the Bread and Wine, nothing can be more
sit to discern it than our Senses. The essential effect of a Miracle is to work
wonder and admiration: and nothing can produce this, but that which is manifest
to our faculties. Though the mode of doing is latent: yet the thing done is
clear, and accommodated to the apprehension of every Spectator.

These four Topics, Scripture, Antiquity, Reason, Sense, standing in an
irreconcilable opposition to the doctrine of Transubstantiation, nothing is
left to support it, except these two pretenses, the Declaration of the present
Church, and an impossibility that what she declares should be an Innovation.

As for the first: If by the Church we understand the Universal, no such thing
is done by her. The Eastern Churches declare the contrary. The Greeks in their
Liturgies have nothing of this nature expressed. They adhere to the seven first
General Councils only, which are wholly silent in this matter. Though they have a
proper word (...) to express Transubstantiation by, yet they never use it, when
they speak of the Eucharist. When they call the Bread the Body of Christ, it is
with an extenuating term, as (...), quasi, or the like. After Consecration they
give no adoration to it. They deny, that an unworthy Communicant receives the
Body and Blood of Christ. Cyril Patriarch of Constantinople says, in the name
of the Greek Church, Vid. Hotting. An. Appen. p. 422.
We confess and believe, (...), the true and firm Presence of our Lord Jesus,
to wit, that which Faith offers and gives us, and not that which (...), the
invented Transubstantiation does inconsiderately teach. These are his words in
his Oriental Confession of the Christian Faith. To say, notwithstanding all
this, that Transubstantiation is the declared belief of the Universal Church,
is to cut off the Greeks from being any part of it, although they receive the
Holy Scriptures, embrace the ancient Creeds, submit to the seven first General
Councils, have an uninterrupted succession of Bishops. If it be said, That
Schism and Heresy has deprived them, and all other Churches of this privilege
and dignity, who do not submit to the Papal Supremacy, this may be as easily
denied as asserted. The Universality of jurisdiction, contended for, is a
perfect usurpation, which can never be legitimated by length of time against
the institution of our blessed Lord, who constituted all the Apostles in a
parity. No Man can with justice be charged with Schism or Heresy for not
owning of that, which bears an opposition to the appointment of the Supreme
Head of the Church. If we must believe the declaration of the present Church in
the point under consideration, what were those obliged to do, who lived in the
time of Pope Gelasius, when there was a declaration diametrically opposite? The
present Pope declares, That the Bread and Wine do not remain in the Sacrament.
Gelasius, a person of equal Authority, and every jot as Infallible, declares,
That they do. Both these we cannot be obliged to believe, they being contrary
one to the other. If the present Church of Rome must be credited, whenever
she thinks sit to declare her self, How is this to be known? She has no
peculiar promise made to her. That to the Universal is nothing to the purpose,
she being but a part, and a very corrupt one too. All that the promise imports,
is that there shall be always a people with their Pastors in the World,
retaining all the points which are fundamental, and of peremptory necessity to
Salvation, which may be, though the Community of Rome utterly cease. As for any
Universal Tradition about this matter, it is but a futilous and vain pretense;
as is evident by the contests betwixt the Roman and African Bishops. If the
last had known of any such Tradition, and believed the first to be infallible,
a sudden stop would have been put to all contradiction. No man will dare to
oppose a Church, which he believes cannot err. Neither are there any motives of
Infallibility efficacious enough to induce us to receive this doctrine.
Bellarmine has reckoned up fifteen; but they are so far from evincing that the
Church of Rome is Infallible in her declarations, that they will not amount to
prove her a True Church, as will be manifest in the Fourth Section. As for the
Second pretense, the impossibility of Innovation, it is in vain to allege it
against so much evidence as may be produced for the matter of fact. The ancient
Church, for many Centuries, did assert, That the substance of the Bread and
Wine remains after Consecration, as I have already proved. The doctrine of the
present Church of Rome is, That it does not remain. Here is an undeniable
change: To set up an imaginary demonstration against so clear a matter of fact,
and to commend it to our belief with all the advantages of Art, is a method not
unlike to that of Pericles, who, when he had received a fair fall by his
Antagonist, attempted to impose upon his Spectators, with his Rhetorical
flourishes, and persuade them that no such thing was done. Not only Bellarmine
(as I have before intimated) but likewise Sirmondus acknowledge, That
Transubstantiation was not exposed to a clear light before the Ninth Century.
In the following Ages the profound ignorance of the people, and the ambition of
the Priests gave a great advance to it. The Priests being desirous of deference
and respect from the people, knew no method more expedient to promote their
purpose, than to adhere to that doctrine, which has a direct aspect upon it.
What could more readily commend them to the first place in the thoughts and
opinion of the Vulgar, than to persuade them, that they were so highly favored
in Heaven, as from thence to be invested with a power to turn Bread into the
body of Christ? This, if sincerely believed, must inevitably be as efficacious
to secure to themselves an eternal veneration, as the doing the greatest
miracle recorded in the Sacred Oracles. After all the commotions about this
doctrine, and the definition of Innocent the Third in the Fourth Lateran
Council, the greatest men for learning were at a loss what to six upon. Joannes
Parisiensis did afterward publicly maintain, That the Bread after
Consecration really remains, as the humane nature of Christ does, after its
being advanced to the dignity of the Hypostatical Union. At the Council of
Trent, This business was brought to its perfection; yet, when the definition
was to be made, the Dominicans and Franciscans could not agree, but fell into
warm contests; insomuch, that at the last, the General Congregation did
prudently resolve to use as few words as possible, and to make an expression so
Universal as might be accommodated to the meaning of both parties. All this,
(to which much more might be added) is sufficient to assure us of the novity of
Transubstantiation, and to give us some light into the steps which it took,
before it could arrive at the dignity of being an Article of Faith in the
Church of Rome.

Now if we will give our selves leisure to sum up what has been spoken, we
shall find too much reason to suspect, that the error of the Romanists about
the Annihilation of the Bread and Wine, in the Sacrament, does not arise from
the nature of the Object, but a voluntary distemper in the Subject; and
therefore can contribute little to an excuse from the Charge they lie under, of
alienating the Divine Honor, when they give supreme Worship to the Sacrament.
And now I have done with the first particular, the terminating (...) upon the
Eucharist.

2. Invocation of Saints. The Romanists in this, do that which is highly
injurious to the peculiar Honor of God. When they direct Mental Prayer to the
Saints, the action in its own nature imports an acknowledgment; That they
understand the Heart, which is a privilege appropriated to the Supreme Being,
in the Holy Scripture, Thou only know the hearts of the children of men, 2
Chro. 6.30. There is not a tittle in any part of Divine Revelation, whereby it
appears, that God makes known our Hearts to them, but on the contrary, many
clear intimations; That he reserves this knowledge entirely to himself. When
Vocal Prayer is made to them for Grace and Glory, it involves a confession of a
power residing in them to confer that, which is the gift of God alone, through
Jesus Christ. If it be said, That they are invocated not as Authors, but
Intercessors for these things, they contradict the style of their Devotion: O
Maria gratiosa, dulcis, mitis, and formosa, applica nobis gratiam. O Maria
gloriosa, in deliciis deliciosa, praepara nobis gloriam. In the Psalter of the
Virgin, all the Addresses made to God of whatsoever nature, are directed to
Her. It is said, That God the Father has done for Her, what Assuerus promised
to Esther, given one moiety of his Kingdom, namely, That of Mercy to Her,
reserving the other of Justice to himself. But let it be so, That one thing is
spoken and another meant, (which is not decent at any time, much less in the
Worship of God) and the Saints are prayed unto as Intercessors: yet this action
cannot be excused from the blame of usurping the Honor of the second Person in
the Sacred Trinity, who is appointed to be the only Mediator betwixt God and
Man. We know of no other in the Scripture: and it is not for mortal Man to
appoint new Advocates in the Kingdom of Heaven, and make them Rivals with the
great Master of Requests, who is of God's designation. An Earthly Prince looks
upon it, as an insufferable insolence for Subjects, to appoint, who shall be
his great Officers without his Order and Command.

If it be said, That the Saints are invocated, not as coordinate Intercessors,
but subordinate to Christ, this will not much mend the matter. For whether they
be the first or last, yet it is plain, that when one particular Saint is
Invocated the same hour and instant in diverse places for things of a different
nature, a capacity is supposed in that Saint to hear all their Petitions at
once, and by consequence to have an infinite Understanding. A Finite Intellect,
though in the fruition of the greatest advantages, either from the Revelation of
God, or Relation of Angels, can understand but one object at a time. To have an
actual apprehension of more than one at the same moment, is a peculiarity
belonging to an unlimited and infinite capacity.

If it be added, that the Sense of the Church is, That we must have recourse to
the Prayers of the Saints departed, as we have to them, while they are living
here; this will not amount to any reasonable satisfaction. There is not the
same reason for praying to Saints in Heaven, as there is for our desiring our
Brethren here to pray for us.

1. They are at a distance. These are present. If a man residing in England
should fall upon his knees, and supplicate his friend in the Indies to assist
him with his Prayers, the very Action in its own nature would import an
attribution of an immensity to him, which is peculiar to God. If he should
daily use his picture to excite his devotion, and kneeling before it, make such
religious applications, as are usually made to the glorified Saints before
their Images: every one would look upon him as a person doing that, which is
highly prejudicial to the Divine Honor. There is as much reason to believe,
that the Saints on Earth may hear our Prayers at a distance, as the Saints in
Heaven. There is not one Syllable in the Bible to assure us to the contrary.
Abraham is ignorant of us, Isa. 36. And if Abraham the Father of the Faithful
is a stranger to our concerns, much more his Children, who are in his Bosom.
God and Angels may reveal our necessities to our friends in any place: yet no
man looks upon this possibility as a sufficient ground to pray unto them, when
they are at a distance from us. The Prayer, which our holy Religion requires,
must be made in Faith, Faith must be grounded upon a Divine Testimony. There is
no Testimony of this nature to assure us, that our Prayers made upon the Earth,
are known to glorified Spirits in Heaven. If there be any way, whereby they
come to be acquainted with them: yet God has hid it from us, as he did the body
of Moses from the Israelites, to prevent the occasion of an abuse.

2. It is the prerogative of Jesus Christ to be the only Mediator for us in
Heaven, to whom we are to make our applications. He is entered into the Holy of
Holiest, and there alone offers to God our Incense, as the High Priest did here
upon the Earth. Upon this account it is said, There is one God, and one
Mediator betwixt God and man, the man Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 2.5. The Mediator is
here represented to be one as the Deity is one. As there is but one God, so
there is but one Mediator for us to address unto, in the state of Glory. When
he was about to leave the World, and enter into this Blessed State, he gave his
Disciples instructions to pray in his name only, Joh. 14.13.16.23. He does not
mention the name of any of the Saints. As he was alone in the Work of his
Meritorious Satisfaction: So He is alone in the application of it by his
Gracious Intercession. Therefore the Apostle says, Among the Gentiles there be
Gods many, and Lords many. They had their Sovereign Deities, and likewise their
Baalims, or Lords which they accounted as Mediators betwixt them and those
Supreme Powers: but to us, who embrace the Christian Faith, There is but one
God, and one Lord Jesus, Christ is the only Mediator for us in Heaven. This
dignity he has purchased with the inestimable price of his blood. He humbled
himself and became obedient to the death of the Cross: Wherefore God also has
highly exalted him, Phil. 2.8. He sits at his right hand, appears in his
presence for us, and lives for ever to make intercession. As the price which he
gave for this dignity could not be paid by any but himself; so the office
procured by it must be incommunicable, and peculiar to him. And therefore for
any to set up other Mediators, whether of Redemption or Intercession, without a
command from Heaven is an inexcusable injury to his prerogative. The Romanists
do not only Invocate Saints, that they may make a charitable Interecession for
them: but that by their Merits they would procure the favors, they are
Petitioners for.

This Truth concerning one Mediator is so evident, that the primitive
Christians were unanimous in the reception of it. For three Hundred years no
instance can be produced, out of any Authentic Record, that the Mediation of
any in Heaven beside our blessed Lord, was made use of. Two are chiefly
pretended to the contrary, and in both the Virgin Mary is concerned. In the
first She is represented as the Advocate of Eve; in the second as invocated by
Justina the Martyr. Irenaeus mentions the first, lib. 5. c. 19. Where he
compares the obedience of Eve to the word of the Evil Angel, with the obedience
of Mary, to the word of the Good. He asserts, that Eve was seduced; that she
might fall from God. Mary obedient, that she might be the mother of our Lord.
And adds this moreover as a further design of her obedience, Vt Virginis Evae
virgo Maria steret Advocata. All this comes very short of what is designed to
be proved by it. Advocata here is no more than Consolatrix. Because, (...) in
the Greek (in which language, it is believed, Irenaeus wrote) signifies both an
Advocate and Comforter: therefore advocare in the Latin Version is used for
consolari, as appears, L. 5. c. 15. Ego vos advocabo, and in Jerusalem
advocabimini. I will comfort you, and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. So
that his meaning will amount to no more than this. As Eve by being seduced by
the Evil Angel fell from God, and brought sorrow, dishonor, and death upon her
Sex: So the Virgin Mary by being obedient to the word, which was spoken by the
Good Angel, did make a full compensation, and restore the Honor, that Eve and
all her Sex were impaired in. This is the Consolation, which she is said to
receive from the Virgin Mary. If this had been considered by Feuardentius, he
would not have drawn so peremptory a conclusion as he has done. Ann. in. Iren.
Hinc evidentissimum est, etc. From hence it is most evident, That the ancient
Fathers and Martyrs from the very times of the Apostles did Invocate the Virgin
Mary.

The other instance concerning Justina is in Gregory Nazianzen. The story is
this, S. Cyprian before his conversion was inamoured with the beauty of
Justina. In order to the obtaining his unchaste desires, he made use of Magic.
She having a deep resentment of her danger, prayed to the Virgin Mary, (...).

To which I answer, Pontius the Deacon of S. Cyprian, who wrote his Life at
large, speaks no such matter: but on the contrary, That Cyprian before his
Conversion was studied in all good Arts, which tend to the utility of the Age:
amongst which Infernal Magic can have no place.

Indeed there was a Book extant in Nazianzen's time, styled Poenitentia
Cypriani, and now to be seen in the Oxford Edition of Cyprian, in which Justina
is mentioned: but it is accounted a fabulous relation, and was condemned under
that notion by Gelasius. Nazianzen from thence probably did borrow the sum of
what he has expressed. He using the freedom of an Orator, and not the exactness
of an Historian, might be induced to make use of that, which he found made
ready to his hand, without any strict examination, and set it off with some
Rhetorical Flourishes; amongst which we may reckon the application of the
Virgin Justina to the Virgin Mary. In this he did accommodate himself to the
inclination of the Age in which he lived, which by frequent Apostrophe's made
to Martyr's by some great Men in their Panegyricks, was disposed to think
favorably of such Addresses. It is usual for Writers, when they relate what
was done in former Ages, to dress it up in language and circumstances suitable
to their own times. Of this we have an evident instance in Nazianzen himself,
in his 22. Orat. Where he describes the Martyrdom of the seven Brethren, and
the deportment of their mother, 2 Macc. 7. He says, She snatched the drops of
blood, took the fragments of their members, worshipped the remains. If we
consult the Author of the Maccabees and the History of Josephus, where their
sufferings are described at large, no such thing is recorded. It cannot
reasonably be believed, That a Woman, who encouraged her children to die,
rather than to violate the Law of God, should at the same time openly break it,
by touching the Dead, contrary to the Masaical Institution. So that the words
of Nazianzen, can be nothing but an Oratorical excursion adapted to the
circumstances of his own Age, in which the remains of the Martyrs were held in
great estimation, sometimes expressed by such sort of Actions, as he attributes
to the Mother of the seven Brethren; though nothing was intended which did exceed
a civil deference and respect.

The Invocation of Saints by degrees did creep into the Church. The First step
was a belief, That the Saints departed did freely, without any asking, implore
the Divine Majesty in the behalf of those which were left upon the earth,
without any apprehension of a duty incumbent on them to address their Prayers
to them. The Second was the practice of some, who, when the Martyrs were going
out of the World, did before their departure entreat them, to remember them in
Heaven. The Third was occasioned by the Rhetorical Expressions of some in the
Fourth Age, who in their Panegyrical Orations made Apostrophe's to the Saints
departed, in order to the moving the Passions of their Auditors: but withal did
often insert such words, as plainly intimate, they had no assurance they were
heard by them: So that all that can be made of them, are rather Oratorical
Wishes, than proper Invocations.

When these Flowers of Rhetoric were transplanted into the minds of the
Vulgar, the badness of the Soil, made them to degenerate into Weeds. They not
rightly understanding the meaning of the Orators, did by their ill construction
encourage themselves to pray to Saints in their private Devotions: which
practice is fully condemned by S. Austin and Epiphanius, and manifestly
declared to be grounded upon the Superstition of the People, and not the
Doctrine of the Church. The public Offices of the Church are the proper
Standard, whereby we are to judge of the Worship of every Age: and none such
are found so early, in which Prayer is directed to Saints in a state of
separation.

Now I proceed to the last particular, which is plainly injurious to the divine
Honor, namely, the using of Images in the Worship of God. Those, who are
concerned in this practice, may be reduced to Three sorts.

1. Such as pretend, they give no Worship to Images: but use them as memorials
to quicken their Devotion and excite in them the remembrance of what they
represent. These do that which has no propitious influence upon Religion. It
will be difficult for them to kindle the fire of their Devotion at an Image:
and yet so to order the matter, that no sparks shall light upon the Image it
self. It is not easy to conceive, how they should kneel, pray, burn incense
before Images, and yet give no religious honor to them. This is contrary to
the Cathecisme ad Parochos, p. 321. and the Decree of the Council of Trent,
which say, That due honor and veneration is to be given to them.

Material representations of the Deity, though not intended for exact
similitudes, are very apt to indispose the mind, and produce apprehensions very
disagreeable to the nature of an insinite Spirit. Though they are said to be
Books adapted to the infirmity of the Vulgar, and very fit to instruct them:
yet in the sacred Oracles they are represented as holding forth a doctrine of
vanities, Jer. 20.8. and as teachers of lies, Hab. 2.18. They lessen
reverential fear, and impress incongruous notions upon the mind. The mischief
from them is greater than any good, that can reasonably be expected by them.
When Books are more apt to lead us into error, than acquaint us with truth, it
is better to lay them aside, than to use them. The humane nature of Christ in
glory, and the spirits of just men made perfect, cannot be represented in
colors by the most curious Artist. A blind man may as well draw a picture, as
those, who have not seen them, make a true delineation of them. The Images,
which are used, are as injurious to them, as a deformed picture would be to the
greatest beauty. The hurt, which they do to the Understanding by impressing
false Idea's upon it, is much greater than any advantage that can accrue to the
Will and Affections by them: That heat, which is in the Affection, is of small
moment, except it be produced by a true light in the Intellect.

2. There are others, which confess, they give Honor and Worship to the Image:
but say it is inferior to that which they give unto God. Now these ought to
declare, whether this inferior Worship be Religious, or Civil only. If Civil,
namely such a value, as a man has for the memorial of his friend, this nothing
concerns the matter under debate; the dispute being wholly about Religious
Worship, which ultimately terminates in God. If it be Religious, it is to be
inquired, whether it stays in the Image, or only passes through it to the
Prototype. If the first, then God is not Worshipped by the Image, which is
supposed in this discourse: for the Worship ends in the Image. If the second, a
Worship is given to him inferior to that which is due: and so a double fault
is committed. Too much is given to the Image, and too little to God.

3. There are those, who profess to give the same honor to an Image which is
due to the Prototype. They say, That the Saints and their Images are to be
honored with (...). The Virgin Mary and her Image with (...). God and his
Image with (...). When it is urged, That the Image of God is but a creature,
and therefore not to be joined with him in the same kind of Worship: They
endeavor to secure themselves against this inconvenience, by taking Sanctuary
under some nice distinctions: They say that the (...) given to the Image is not
terminative, but relative, not absolute but respective, such as is given to the
Commissioner of a Prince It does not stay in him, but redounds to the honor of
his Master. Though it is a fault to give the same absolute honor to God and his
Image; yet there is no hurt in giving the same relative.

But this will not salve the matter. Absolute Worship is that, which is given
to an Image absolutely considered: Relative, as it stands in relation to God.
Now the relation which is the formal object of Worship, being but an accident
or finite mode inherent in the Image, having no other foundation, but humane
invention: There is as much hurt in giving the same Worship which is due to
God, unto the Image upon the account of this relation, as if it was absolutely
considered. The Image is a substance, the relation an accident appertaining to
it. If it be an injury to God, to give his peculiar Honor to a finite
substance, which is of his own formation; it can be no less to give it to a
mode which is nothing but the product of imagination.

As for what is said concerning the honor done to a Commissioner; it is true,
it does not stay in him, but redounds upon the Prince, whose character he
bears, provided, that it keeps its proper bounds, and has none of those
peculiarities blended with it, which are peculiar to the Sovereignty. If
Subjects should put a Crown upon the head of a Commissioner, and instal him in
the Throne with all the rites and ceremonies which are annexed to the
Supremacy, and call it, not terminative, but relative Honor; the Prince would
have more cause to suspect Treason was designed against him, than believe any
honor accrues to him by such actions. The Gods on Earth are so far like him,
who is higher than the highest, that they have their Regalia, which are
incommunicable. If they should so far forget themselves, as to be willing to
part with them, yet God cannot with his; not because his Power is less, but his
Sovereignty greater. They are Sovereigns by positive institution only. His
Sovereignty is essential and immutable. He can no more allow the derivation of
his peculiar Honor to another, than he can deny himself. The holiness of his
essence will not permit him to do that which is intrinsecally evil. So long as
the honor done to a creature, which is appointed to represent him, has no
mixture of the peculiarities which belong to the Celestial Crown, it does
redound upon him, it being an act of obedience to his Will: but in case it has,
it degenerates into a palpable injury to the rights of Heaven.

Upon this account relative Worship is represented in the Scripture under the
notion of Idolatry. Three sorts of Idolaters it acquaints us with. Either such
as totally renounce the True God and his Law, and go after other Gods to serve
them; Deuteronomy. 13.1, 5. Or else such as retain the fear and worship of the True
God, and join strange Gods with him, 2 King. 17.33. Or lastly, those who
profess to Worship only the True God, but do it by external Symbols and
representations. This is nothing but relative Worship: and yet by the Penmen of
the Sacred Oracles, it is accounted Idolatry: as is manifest in the Calf which
Aaron made, which was designed for a Symbol of the presence of the True God.
Whether it was erected in imitation of the Cherub, which Aaron a little before
had seen in the Mount, or of the golden Bulls, the Symbols of Osyris, is not
much material. So much is certain, That, (whatsoever was the reason of forming
of it into this shape) none but the True God was intended to be represented by
it. This will be evident, if we consider the ground of the peoples desire. They
were under an expectation, that in their travel in the Wilderness they should
have a vilible Symbol of the presence of Jehova framed by Moses. He being so
long absent in the Mount, that they were at a loss in their thoughts, what was
become of him, they desired Aaron that he would act in his stead, and do it for
them. Here is no intention to change the True God, with whom they lately entered
into Covenant: but only to have a Symbol of his presence in the midst of those
difficulties which the Desert might expose them to. Their own words demonstrate
this to be their meaning. When they saw the Calf, they said, This is the God,
which brought thee out of Egypt, Neh. 9.18. They could not be so senceless, as
to think, That the Egyptian Deities had been propitious to them in their
deliverance from thence, when it was manifest; That the True Redeemer had
executed his judgments upon them, Exo. 12.12. and caused them to fall down, as
Dagon did before the Ark. How is it possible (after Moses had told them the
name of him, who was their deliverer, confirmed his commission by many
undoubted signs, brought them to the Mount, where the Divine Majesty manifested
himself in the most awful manner) to think that a strange God had set them
loose from their servitude? The words of Aaron put the matter beyond dispute.
When he saw the Symbol, he made Proclamation, and said, To morrow is a Feast to
Jehova, at which time they offered their usual Sacrifices, which were so far
from importing any honor to an Egyptian Deity; that the Egyptians accounted
them abominations of the first magnitude. Those beasts, which the Israelites
killed, were treated by them with Sovereign Veneration. The Egyptian Worship
was principally terminated upon the Host of Heaven: The Sun was called Osyris,
and the Moon Isis, both Deities of Egypt: But the Worship of the Golden Calf
is plainly distinguished from it. Diod. Sicul, Bibl. Dionys. Voss, p. 5.
Act. 7. v. 12. The Israelites being given up to Worship the Sun, Moon and
Stars is represented as the effect, and punishment of their Worshipping the
Calf: and the effect is always diverse from the cause.

Parallel to this are the Calves at Dan and Bethel. They were designed only for
Symbols of the True God. When Jeroboam erected them, it was no part of his
thoughts to renounce the God of Israel, who a little before had acquainted him
by his Prophet, That he should be vested in the Government over the Ten Tribes:
His error lay, in setting up external Representations, and Worshipping the True
God by them. 2 Kin. 17. v. 28.
The Samaritans are said to fear the Lord, notwithstanding they Worshipped the
Calves. 2 Kin. 10.16, 29. 1 Kin. 12.28, 29.
Jehu had a zeal for the Lord, although he departed not from the sin of Jeroboam.
Jeroboam, at the first erection, declares his intention to Worship that God,
which brought them out of the land of Egypt. The Heathen Idolatry, 1 Kin.
16.30, 32.
which Ahab fell into, is represented as distinct from the sin of Jeroboam. The
Israelites are accounted as a Church, notwithstanding their gross miscarriage
at Dan and Bethel: which could not have been, in case they had renounced the
True God. They retained the Law, had Prophets to instruct them in it. When
Elijah contested with the Prophets of Baal, he supposes the Israelites to
Worship the True God, before they fell to the Worship of Baal, as is manifest
by his words, 1 Kin. 18.21.
How long will ye. halt betwixt two opinions, if the Lord be God, follow him;
if Baal, follow him.

To the Calves of Jeroboam, we may add Micha's Molten Image, which was nothing
but a Symbol of the True God. Judge. 17.3.
The Silver of which it was made, was wholly dedicated to the Lord, which makes
it evident, That the Worship, given to it, was not absolute but relative;
directed indeed to the Image immediately, but with an intention to Worship the
True God by it: yet notwithstanding this, it lies in Scripture under the
imputation of Idolatry. Bellarmine is so sensible of the inconveniences which
attend the doctrine of giving (...) to an Image, that he would have it by no
means uttered before the people: his reason is very forcible, Cap. 22. de Imag.
Qui defendunt Imagines adorari latria, coguntur uti subtilissimis
distinctionibus, quas ipsimet vix intelligunt, nedum populus imperitus. Those,
who defend, that Images are to be worshipped with Latria, are compelled to use
most subtle distinctions, which they themselves scarcely understand, much less
the unskilful people.

And now if we look back, and consider, that those, who use Images in Divine
Worship, as memorials only, and instruments to excite devotion, do that which
has a tendency to impress upon the mind Ideas, very disagreeable and injurious
to the nature of the Deity: that Those who give an inferior Religious Worship
to them, designing by so doing to honor and worship God, give too much to
them, and too little to God: that Those who profess to give equal worship by
what name soever disguised, whether terminative or relative, absolute or
respective, put the highest affront upon the Deity, whose infinite nature will
not permit a finite Being to be joined with him in the same act of Worship; we
must be convinced from the reason of the thing, that the using Images in the
Worship of God is undeniably prejudicial to the Honor of Heaven. We have not
only the reason of the thing, but the express command of God to guide us in
this concernment, which prohibits the worshipping of him by Images. Let our
intentions be never so sincere, and our devotion screwed up to the highest
degree, yet we must necessarily dishonor God, when we are doing that which is
contrary to his precept. If Subjects set up a person to represent their King,
in contradiction to his express injunction, and pay to him the honor due to a
real Representative: The King will not think himself honored by their act on,
it being blended with an apparent disrespect to his Authority. Alexander the
Great gave a command, that none but Apelles should draw his Picture: If any
other had done it with the greatest exactness, and an unfeigned desire to
honor him, the respect would not have redounded upon him, being utterly
blasted by an act of disobedience to his order.

That God has forbidden us to Worship him by Images is manifest by the Second
Command, Where we are enjoined not to make any Images, whether carved or plain,
either of any thing in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath, or that
is in the Water under the Earth, in order to the bowing down to them and to the
worshipping and serving him by them. The First obliges us to Worship no other
God but Jehova. The Second not to worship him (as the Heathens use to do their
Deities) by addressing our Veneration to external Symbols and Representations.
This is plain from the explication of this Precept, Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. Take ye
therefore good heed to your selves (for ye saw no manner of similitude on the
day, the Lord spoke to you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire) lest you
corrupt your selves and make you a graven image, the similitude of any figure,
the likeness of male or female. No graven Image or similitude in relation to
the True God appeared in Horeb. Therefore, it is inferred, that none ought to
be erected, in order to the worshipping and giving honor to him.

It is no prejudice to this Interpretation, that (...) is translated by the
LXX. (...), for this word does not always import an Image, or similitude of a
False God. The golden Calf, which was a Symbol of the True, is styled by this
name, Act. 7.41. Any resemblance (to which Religious Worship is given) whether
of the True, or a False God, may without any incongruity, be called (...).

Images, either relating to the Worship of Jehova, or the Heathen Deities, must
be here prohibited in the Second Command. The last cannot be, because this is
sufficiently done in the First, Thou shall have no other Gods before me. For if
we may not serve the Heathen Deities, much less pay to their Images those
reverential regards, which the nature of a Deity does challenge.

These Images comprehend not only the Images of God, but of any creature
whether in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, formed with a design to
Worship God by them. The scope of the Precept, is to interdict the Worshipping
the True God, after the manner in which the Heathens use to worship their
Deities. They had two sorts of Numens, Sovereign and Inferior. They thinking
it a presumption to make an immediate access to the First, made use of the
mediation of the Second to procure their acceptance. The Images of these
Mediators they worshipped, conceiving, that Honor and Worship, by their so
doing, would accrue to the Sovereign Numens, whose Ministers they were believed
to be. So that the Command forbidding the Worship of the True God after that
mode, which the Heathens used in the Worship of their Deities, must comprehend
the interdiction of all Images, whether of God himself, or any Mediators, which
are supposed to intercede betwixt God and Men, provided that they be set up
with an intention to be bowed down unto, and worshipped, that thereby God may
be Worshipped and Honored.

God likes not, that the Worship, which is peculiar to him, should be strained
through an Image, before it comes to him: but declares, that he is jealous in
that case, and will not ^^^fer the appearance of an alienation of the Honor,
which is appropriated to him, whatsoever the intention of the Worshipper may be.

What is usually pretended concerning the Cherubims in the holy of holiest, and
the Command of God to Worship his footstool, is not sufficient to justify the
worshipping External Representations of him. The Cherubims over the Ark were
not designed for objects of Worship. A Veil was interposed betwixt them and
those, who came into the Temple. They were not so much as permitted the sight
of them. When the High Priest once a year went into the Sanctum Sanctorum, we
never read he gave them any adoration. God promised to commune with him from
betwixt the Cherubims, Exodus 25. Which intimates, that his adoration was not
terminated upon them, but the Supreme Being, who promised his special presence
in the space betwixt them.

There is no Command to worship his footstool, in the Hebrew it is (...), Psalm.
99.5.
which the Chaldee Paraphrast rightly interprets (...) in the House of the
Sanctuary. The like expression is used in the same Psalm v. 9. Worship (...) at
his holy Mountain. No man is so defective in his apprehensions, as to believe
the Divine Worship was to be given to the Mountain.

As the Second Command condemns the Worshipping God by Images: so likewise do
all those who enjoyed the best advantages to understand it. The Ages next to
the Apostles were perfect strangers to this practice; as is evident by the
silence of their Adversaries in their contests with them.

The Jews, who professed an enmity to this kind of Worship, ever since the
captivity, and were careful to publish any thing which tended to the defamation
of Christianity, never charge this crime upon the Primitive Professors of it.
Amongst the errors objected against them in the conference with Tryphon, in
the discourse of Tertullian, and many other disputations, we never read of the
Adoration of Images. The Mishna, which is believed to be Written about Two
Hundred years after Christ, is wholly silent in this matter, although the
Composer had a convenient opportunity to speak of it in his Treatise concerning
strange Worship. Their implacable enmity to the Laws of Christ, gives us the
highest degree of assurance, that nothing could be the cause of their silence,
but the innocence of the Christians. In the Gemara, which was finished about
the time that Images were brought into Churches, a Christian Temple is styled a
House of Idolatry.

The Heathens, when they were accused by the Christians for worshipping Idols,
never mention, in their vindication of themselves, the adoration of Images
among Christians: which certainly they would have done, in case there had been
any such practice. Dall. de Imag.
When the Idols of the Americans were demolished by the command of Alphonsus
Suasus, they sent four men to complain of the injury, who acquainted him, that
they did not expect such usage from Christians, who gave Divine Honor to
Images, and pointed to the Picture of Sebastian which hung in his chamber, and
told him, That the same honor which he gave that Picture, they gave to their
Idols. When he replied, That Christians did not worship such Pictures upon
their own account, but as they were representations of glorified Persons in
Heaven: They answered, Neither did they their Idols for their own sakes, but as
they represented the Sun, Moon, and Stars.

When Bernier told the East-Indians, That he was scandalized upon the account
of their worshipping Idols: he received a like answer from some of the chief of
them. Hist. of the Gent. of Indostan Vol. 3. p. 172.
We have indeed in our Deuras or Temples, store of diverse Statues, as those of
Brahma, Mehaden, Genick and Gavani, who are some of the chief and most perfect
Deutas: and we have also many other of less perfection, to whom we pay great
honor, prostrating our selves before them, and presenting them Flowers, Rice,
Scented Oiles, Saffron, and such other things with much Ceremony: But we do not
believe these Statues to be Brahma and Bechen, etc. but only their Images and
representations; and we do not give them that honor, but upon the account of
what they represent. They are in our Temples, because it is necessary for
praying well to have some thing before our eyes to six our mind: and when we
pray, it is not the Statue we pray to, but he who is represented by it. For the
rest we acknowledge that it is God, that is absolute, and only Omnipotent Lord
and Master.

If these barbarous People were so quick as to make so apposite a retort when
they were set upon by Christians, (the first expressly accusing them of the like
practice: the second drawing a representation of their own religion exactly
parallel to what they knew to be in use in the Roman Community:) No doubt
Tryphon and Celsus, etc. would have done the like, in case in their time there
had been the same reason.

The Primitive Christians in many places were so remote from the worshipping
Images, That they did not allow the making of them, as is plain by the words of
Clemens and Tertullian. Strom. 5. de Specta. c. 23.
In case they were made, they would not permit them to be brought into
Churches. When Adrian gave command, That Temples should be built without
Pictures, it was taken for granted, that he intended them for the Worship of
Christ. When Epiphanius found in a Church a Veil with the Picture of a Man
painted upon it, he presently rent it in pieces, and defended his action, by
alleging, that it was contrary to the Scripture, That the Picture of a Man
should be hanged up in the Church of Christ. When Images were brought into
Churches, the worship of them was utterly disallowed. Serenus was for the
banishing them out to prevent danger. Greg. Mor. lib. 9.
Gregory for the keeping them in, to instruct the illiterate. Both agree in
this; That they are not to be adored. When Philippicus, (being transported with
an intemperate love to the Monothelites) took down the Pictures of the first
Six General Councils, and by this action provoked Rome to a greater measure of
zeal for Images, than the adoration of them was thought upon. The hint that was
expressed, gave an alarm to the Synod called by Constantius Copronymus, and
occasioned the making a decree; That, to give religious veneration to Images is
nothing else, but to revive the Superstition of the Pagans. When the Council
under Irene. did rescind this decree, it is observable, that it did prohibit
the making the Picture of God. This impiety then had no Umbrage from Authority.

If we consult the Monuments of Antiquity, it will be apparent, That in the
Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth Ages, there were hot disputes about the worship of
Images: but no countenance given to the making or worshipping the Image of God.
In the Three Ages immediately before, They are sometimes mentioned as Ornaments
of Churches, and instruments to teach the ignorant, but not as the Objects of
Worship. In the Three first Centuries there is no mention of them at all in the
concerns of Religion.

The Resemblance upon the Chalice, which Tertullian speaks of, was an Emblem of
the Parable of the lost Sheep, and not a Picture of Christ, or any particular
Saint. It was not drawn with a design to be Worshipped; but to signify, That
those, who are gone astray, may, upon their repentance, be received into the
Communion of the Church.

The story in Eusebius, Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 18.
concerning the Statues of Christ, and the Woman cured by him of her issue of
blood, is too dubious to lay a foundation for a clear testimony. Eusebius
indeed asserts, That he saw two Statues of brass at Caesarea Philippi, but he
does not say, That they were the Statues of Christ and Woman; but that the
people said so. Nothing is more familiar, than for them to be mistaken in their
account of such public Monuments. It is incredible, that such famous
testimonies of the Truth of Christian Religion, should remain in the open
street untouched, for the space of Three Hundred Years, amidst the slames of
the hottest persecutions; when the greatest privacy could not secure any thing
appertaining to the Christians, from the rage and fury of the Heathens. Suppose
all this was so, yet the Romanists will gain no advantage by it. For no
Religious Addresses were made to these Statues. They were not in the Church but
the street. Not erected to be Objects of Worship, but Memorials of a Miracle.
That which was reputed to be the Statue of Christ, Philostorgius assures us,
had no adoration given to it; and adds his reason, (...), For it was not lawful
to worship brass, or any other matter.

All this, if duly pondered, will assure us; That there is no Commission from
God for Image Worship; but, on the contrary, an explicit prohibition. God has
made a peremptory declaration, that he will make no such grant, My Glory will I
not give to another, nor my Praise to graven Images, Isa. 42.8.48.11. the word
(...) does exclude every thing from having any interest in his Glory, which
has an essence distinct from the Divine Nature. It is not reconcilable with
his immutable Sanctity to condescend to any such Concession. To alienate his
peculiar Worship and Glory is an act intrinsecally evil. Indeed the Romanists
say, They do no such matter. His peculiar Worship is always accompanied with an
apprehension of infinite excellency residing in the Object, which it is
terminated upon: and no such thing is believed by them concerning Images. To
which we reply, That peculiar Worship is either internal or external. Though
internal, which includes such an apprehension, is not given to Images, yet
external is, which consists in outward signs appropriated by Nature or
Institution to import and signify it. He is not only injurious to God, who
alienates the whole, but he who exhibits any part of it to a Creature. He is
accounted a Traitor, who pays part of the Tribute to another Prince, which is
peculiar to his own. The Israelites, though they did not apprehend that Aaron and
Jeroboam's Calves were invested with the incommunicable perfections of the
Deity: yet they are charged with Idolatry, upon the account of the external
Worship, they gave to them. The Arrians lie under the same imputation in the
Writings of the Fathers, because they worshipped Christ, whom they believed not
to be God. The Christians in Julian's time did think they had contracted the
same guilt, when through fraud they were unwittingly induced to give external
Honor to those Idols, of which they had in their hearts a perfect abhorrence.

SECT. III. Concerning the True Worshippers of God.
WHat is to be spoken concerning this Head, I shall reduce to these Three
Particulars, I. Who they be that are obliged to Worship. II. How they are to
perform their duty. III. What end they are to propose to themselves in the
doing of it.


I. Who they are that lie under an obligation to Worship. Religion being a
reasonable Service, those who are concerned in it, must be endued with Reason
and Understanding: and these are either Angels or Men.

The Angels, Enjoying the favor of being admitted to the Beatifical Vision,
are under a willing necessity of being engaged in the highest acts of Religion.
The constant disclosures of the Divine Glory do command from them the most
reverential regards. They are styled Cherubims, to import, That they are always
upon the Wing, prepared to execute the Divine Pleasure: and Seraphim, to denote
their Zeal in the discharge of their obligations. Their conformity to the great
command of Love, we have an Apodictical Evidence of in their rejoicing at the
Conversion of a Sinner, and the Renovation of the Divine Image in him. They are
so absolute in the performance of the Duties of Religion, that their Practice
is propounded as the Pattern of our Obedience, Thy Will be done in earth as it
is in heaven. When the Second Person in the Sacred Trinity was introduced into
the World, that the infirmities of humane Nature, with which he was clothed,
might be no temptation to them to make any abatement in their usual addresses,
a special Command is given: Let all the Angels of God Worship him. Heb. 1.6.

Men (Who are those, whom we here inquire after,) are either Secular or
Ecclesiastical. Secular, are not exempted from Religious Worship. It is said,
That the Earth has a double motion, one about its own Axis, another about the
Sun. Secular men must imitate the Earth, besides their motion about their
Earthly affairs, they must have another about their Celestial. The Lord who
bestows the World upon them, has reserved a Rent to himself. Religion concerns
every man, in whatsoever Function he is engaged. Particular Vocations, like
Pharaoh's thin ears of Corn, must not devour the General. When any enter upon
their Civil Employments, they do not cease to be Creatures invested with
Reason: and so long as they continue in that capacity, they ly under an
indispensable obligation, to pay a Religious Homage to that Eternal Spirit, by
whose Incubation they were formed. Neither do they cease to have a passionate
desire for their own happiness, and no man can enjoy any measure of this,
without a union with the Supreme Good; (the dissatisfactions which often
emerge, while we are in the embraces of these sublunary fruitions, do openly
proclaim them, not to be the seat of real Beatitude) and Union with the Supreme
Good cannot be expected, except we with all integrity Serve and Worship God.

Whatsoever our employment is, we continue to be Creatures of that Species
toward whose redemption an infinite price has been deposited, and therefore
must remain under the strictest obligations to be Religious. This is the
Apostles argument, Ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God. It is an
hyperbole of ingratitude, not to be engaged in these actions, which have the
most direct aspect upon his honor, from whom so signal a benefit is received.
No worldly concern can cancel our obligations to him, who has parted with his
own Son, in order to the procurement of our Redemption from the greatest Misery
and Vassalage.

Lastly, God is the Fountain of all that Wisdom, whereby any are fitted for
their Callings. All from the Shovel to the Scepter, from the lowest to the
highest, are instructed by him. He teaches Princes to Rule, and guides the
Husbandman to manage the instruments of Agriculture. Those who have this
dependence upon God, offend against the clearest dictate of Reason, if they
refuse to intermit their labor, that they be employed in the most solemn
agnitions of him. The noise in this sublunary state about secular matters, will
make no harmony in the ear of the Supreme Being, except such Rests and Pauses
be intermingled with it. Upon this account the Apostle advises, That every one
abide in his Calling in which he is called with God. Let our Function require
never so much of our attendance, yet God must not be excluded. Some time must
be spared for the immediate acts of his Solemn Worship.

As Secular Men are concerned in this Sacred Work: So likewise much more those
who are Ecclesiastical. I mean such Persons as are solemnly Ordained and
Consecrated to the performance of some Religious Offices. The necessity of them
will be manifest, if we consider, that a part of that Service, which the Gospel
requires; in particular, the being an Ambassador to the Son of God, is a work
of such importance, that every capacity is not agreeable to it. It does not
become every one to stand in this relation to an Earthly Prince; much less to
the Heavenly. Now men usually are no competent Judges of their own ability. The
generality are very partial in their reflections upon themselves, are easily
flattered into a belief, that the dominion of their Reason is as large as those
Monarchs have fancied their Territories, who by the strength of imagination
have entitled themselves to the regency of the World, and expressed
displeasure against Cosmographers for not allowing them a bigger space in their
Tables. This unfitness in men to judge of themselves, devolves a necessity upon
others to do it for them; otherwise the ends of the Ministerial Function will
be disappointed by an intrusion of the unskilful, and confusion take place of
all good order. Those who judge, must be persons of Learning and experience in
the same employment. None can judge, but those who are fit; and none have such
a degree of idoneity, as those who are thus qualified. The business of a
Spiritual Pastor is not only to lead his flock into advantageous places to feed
in it, but to defend it against the rapine of Wolves; not only to exhort, but
convince gainsayers. Tit. 3.9. Many of those who contend against the Truth,
making use of their improvements in humane Studies for the accomplishment of
their end: it is but expedient, That they who are designed to enter the Lists
with them, should have skill at the same weapon. This was perceived by Julian
an irreconcilable enemy to the Faith of Christ, who commanded That the
Christians should be deprived of all Books of Learning: to compensate which
damage, Apollina the Elder turned the Books of Moses into Heroic Verse: the
Younger, the Gospel into Dialogues, after the method of Plato. Of this skill
which a Minister ought to be endued with, every Christian is not a competent
Judge. Not only the Law but the Gospel, does pronounce it reasonable, That
every man should be tried by his Peers. The judgment, which they give, must not
be concealed, but declared to the Church for her direction, That She may know
whom to refuse, and whom to accept as Ministers. And it cannot be better
declared than by some important actions, as Prayer, which has a tendency to
invite from Heaven a Benediction upon the Heads and Hearts of those, who are
found qualified; and Imposition of Hands, which solemnly points out unto the
People, whom they are to entertain as their Pastors. These actions being
exerted by one who is invested with authority, change the state of private Men,
and translate them out of a Civil into an Ecclesiastical capacity. A Sense of
the necessity of such Persons has been always so great, that there is no Age
but will furnish us with instances of them.

Before the Flood we meet with Preachers, which were solemnly Commissioned to
dispense the mind of Heaven. Noah is styled (...), 2 Pet. 2.5. (...) is a
Person in Commission, constituted to proclaim the Will of his Prince. Didym. in
Hom. ^^. 6. p. 183. Shrev.
The Scholiast upon Homer says, (...), every King has his proper Heralds. This
Office does not open to every one, who can persuade himself that he is endued
with abilities agreeable to the importance of it, but is peculiar only to those
who are ordained to it. Noah is styled the Eighth Preacher. It is more
congruous to refer (...), than to (...). He spared not the old World, but
(...), not the Eighth Noah, (there being none of the name before) but Noah the
Eighth Preacher. This contributes evidence to the act of Divine Justice in
drowning the World, which, (although eight eminent Preachers of Righteousness had
been employed in order to the promoting a reformation) neglected them all, and
entertained their advice with scorn and derision.

These Eight are Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, Mathusala, Lamech,
Noah.

Enos challenges the first place. Of his time it is said, (...) then Preaching
began in the name of the Lord. That (...) may admit of this interpretation is
evident, Jonah 3.2. It has a plain affinity with the Chaldee (...) from whence
(...) is derived, and is in the Septuagint expressed by (...), Genesis 41.43.
Exodus 32.5. Prove. 8.1. That which our Translation attributes to Men in general,
the Greek and Latin assigns to Enos only. So that we are not destitute of
authority, if we thus read the Text, Then Enos began to Preach in the name of
the Lord. Namely, concerning the desolation, which the profaneness of Cain's
posterity would certainly draw upon the World, if not prevented by a sincere
and timely Repentance.

The Second Preacher is Cainan. He was so eminent in this Sacred Function, that
the Kenites, who were Scribes, and solemnly ordained to expound the Divine Law,
1 Chronicles. 2.55. received their denomination from him (...) from (...).

The Third Mahalaleel. The Character of his Office is legible in his name. He
was set apart to Praise God and proclaim his Righteous Will.

The Fourth Jared, which word imports humility, from (...) descendere. The
humble God delights to teach, and he that is taught of God, is not unfit to
communicate instruction to others.

The Fifth Enoch. S. Jude represents him as a Prophet, declaring that the Lord
was coming to execute judgment upon all, v. 14, 15. His name is derived from
(...) to dedicate. He was devoted solemnly to the Ministry, and those words,
He walked with God, argue that he exercised his Sacred Function. The Jerusalem
Targum expounds them, He labored in Truth before God, even as the Elders are
said to labor in Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.

The Sixth is Methusala. He is the Son of a Prophet, and in his very Name did
foretell the Flood. It is compounded of (...) and (...) to import that when he
was dead, God would send a universal Deluge. He died according to this
prediction in the beginning of the year in which the Flood was.

The Seventh was Lamech. He gave an undoubted testimony of his being under the
power of a Prophetic Spirit, by naming his Son Noah, and expounding the
meaning of it in these words, The same shall comfort us concerning our work,
and the toil of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord has cursed,
Genesis 5.29. They plainly presage some signal consolation which would accrue to
mankind by him.

After the Flood, until the time of the Law, we are not without instances of a
like importance.

The Firstborn in every Family did execute the Sacerdotal Function.

We read of Priests, before the order of Aaron was instituted, and young men
sent by Moses to offer burnt offerings, which the Chaldee Paraphrase renders
the firstborn, Exodus 19.22. This is the reason why the Apostle in his Epistle
to the posterity of Heber, in allusion to this Institution, says, Ye are come
to the Church of the firstborn. Esau is styled profane, because he slighted
this sacred immunity. The Posterity of Levi, who ministered about holy things,
are said to be taken in the room of the firstborn, Numb. 3.

If there be any ambiguity in these Texts, Universal Tradition gives us no
small degree of assurance, that we are not mistaken in that sense which we have
chosen. It is the general belief of the Jews, and of the ancient Fathers of the
Christian Church, That the firstborn were invested with the power we have
attributed to them. Omnes primogeniti ex stirpe Noae, Epist. 126. ad Evag. Qu.
Heb. ^^1.
All the firstborn of Noah's stock were Priests, are the words of S. Jerome.

What is usually produced by those who are of a contrary mind, is not
sufficient to invalidate this Evidence.

It is said, That the Young men, Exo. 24. were not Priests. They did not
sprinkle the Blood upon the Altar. Esau is styled profane, for contemning his
Primogeniture, because the primacy and a double portion were annexed to it by a
divine institution. The Levites which were substituted in the room of the
firstborn, were not Priests. The Firstborn were not consecrated to God, till
the deliverance out of Egypt upon the account of their being preserved, when
the firstborn of the Egyptians were destroyed. The Younger Brother is
generally preferred before the Elder, as Jacob before Esau, Judah and Joseph
before Reuben, as Theodoret notes. In Genesis Qu. 108.
To all which I reply in order.

1. The Young Men mentioned, Exodus 24.5. are expressly called Priests, Exodus
19.22. The Order of Aaron was not then instituted: and who can they be, but
those whom Moses employed to offer Sacrifice? The Sacerdotal Work is attributed
to them, They are said to offer burnt-offerings, and sacrifice peace offerings
unto the Lord. A Priest was ordained for this very purpose, Heb. 5.1. If they
had been Ministers to Moses, and brought only the beasts in order to the being
offered up, the very act of Offering would not be ascribed to them, (...),
indeed some have thought that the word (...) imports only, LXX.
That the Young Men were appointed to bring the Sacrifices, but without any
just reason, for (...), when joined with Sacrifice by the Greek Interpreters,
generally signifies to offer up. If it should here denote only to bring, it
would not disappoint, what is designed to be proved by us; for it is said
(...), they sacrificed, as well as (...). Though the Young Men did not sprinkle
the Blood, yet there were other Sacerdotal actions which they were engaged in
the performance of, as the Dedication of the Offering, and the Mactation and
Oblation of it by Fire, which are sufficient to demonstrate that they were
vested in a Sacerdotal Power: (...) imports all these.

2. Esau is styled profane, because he slighted something which was Holy. That
is properly Holy which is dedicated unto God, and immediately related to him.
The double portion and the power to govern the Family, had no such Dedication,
They were Civil Matters, appertaining to the concerns of this Life, and
therefore, there is reason to believe, that this Epithete (...) is given to
him, not for the disvaluing of them, but the Priesthood, which was conversant
about things appertaining unto God. Though a Divine Precept did entitle him to
the Primacy and a double portion, yet it is not so proper to say, They were
Holy and he Profane, for neglecting of them. By a Divine Command, every man is
obliged to do his own business. Yet it is not very congruous to assert, that
every Man's Worldly business is Holy, and he profane, who is idle, or meddles
with other men's matters.

3. When it is said, That the Levites were taken instead of all the firstborn,
Number. 3.12. We may understand all which were descended from Levi, and then Aaron
and his Sons will be included, which were undoubtedly invested in the Priestly
Office.

If Levites be taken only for all the Sons of Levi, except Aaron's Family, yet
we have enough for our purpose. They were devoted to attend upon the
Priesthood, and minister about Sacred Things, when the Priests were so few,
That they could not slay all the burnt-offerings, they helped them, 2 Chronicles.
29.34. When one is said to be in the room of another, it does not argue a
similitude in every circumstance, but an agreement in the main. As the
Firstborn were devoted to the ministry of holy things, so were the Levites.

4. The preservation of the Firstborn of Israel, when the Firstborn of Egypt
were destroyed, gave occasion to the renewal of an old Charter. Sanctify all
the firstborn, whatsoever opens the womb among the children of Israel, both
of man and beast, it is mine, Exo. 13.2. It is not said it shall be mine, but
(...) it is mine. Which intimates some constitution, whereby the firstborn
were devoted to God, antecedent to the sanctification, here spoken of. After
the redemption from the Egyptian bondage, many of the Laws given to the people
were declaratory only of former constitutions, as the Precept concerning clean
and unclean beasts, blood, sacrifices, with many others. All these were ancient
constitutions which the practices of the Zabiists gave occasion to renew: and
why this concerning the Firstborn, might not be of the same nature, I see no
reason to think.

5. Though the Younger Brothers had the preference in some respects, yet not in
those which did relate to the Primogeniture. Though Jacob was designed to be the
object of the peculiar favors of Heaven: yet the right to the immunities of
the firstborn was in Esau until his voluntary alienation. The same privilege
was vested in Reuben till he forfeited it by desiling his Father's bed. The
preference which Theodoret speaks of, was upon the account of the Unction and
Graces which the Younger Brothers were endued with, and not the Function and
Office. Those who are Superior in Office, may be Inferior in Gifts to those
who are under an obligation of subjection.

From the giving of the Law to the times of the Messiah, we have likewise
sufficient evidence for Ecclesiastical Persons. It being the pleasure of God to
be Worshipped in two places, the Temple and the Synagogue, there were persons
solemnly set apart for the discharge of the duties of Religion required in both.

To the Temple-Service the Sons of Levi were devoted. The Rites belonging to
their Consecration are perspicuous in the Holy Scripture. These were divided
into Priests, and those who were assistant to them. The Priests were of the
house of Aaron, and their work to offer Sacrifice and to Bless in the name of
the Lord. The Levites had their several offices allotted to them. After the Ark
was fixed, and the work, which they were originally dedicated to, in part
brought to a period, they were digested into several Classes. Some of them were
employed to praise God upon instruments of Music, some to keep the doors of
the Sanctuary, 2 Chronicles. 25.6, 11. 2 Chronicles. 24.34. 2 Chronicles. 31.14.
some to attend upon the Priests, and do those things which were commanded by
them. We read of their killing the Sacrifices, and pulling off their skins, the
distributing the oblations.

As for the Service of the Synagogue another provision was made. Some Persons
were likewise set apart in a solemn manner for it. These are styled Prophets
and Scribes. Of their Nature and Office we may gain a full information, if we
consider the Schools of Learning erected for their Education. The Studies
enjoined them in those Schools. Their Solemn Ordination after an improvement in
those Studies. The places where they exercised the Function they were Ordained
unto.

First, The Schools of Learning. Of this nature was Jabez, where the Families
of the Scribes dwelt, 1 Chro. 2.55. It was an University which did derive its
name from Jabez, whose devotion is recorded, 1 Chro. 4.10. and whom the
Talmudists represent as a Teacher of the Law. The Hill of Moreh, Jud. 7.1. and
the Hill of God, 1 Samuel 10.5. were places of the same importance. The Chaldee
Paraphrast calls Naioth in Rama (...) a house of Learning. Samuel after his
retirement from his regency, was Head of this Society. He is said to be
standing as appointed over them, 1 Samuel 19.20. the Prophets being at his feet
in the posture of Disciples. We read of the Sons of the Prophets in Gilgal,
Bethel and Jericho: and express mention of a College in Jerusalem, 2 King.
22.14. If any credit may be given to Solomon Jarchi, there were no fewer than
four hundred and eighty in the time of the Prophet Isaiah. Isa. 1.21.


What kind of Studies they followed in these Colleges may be collected from the
words of that Prophet. Where is the Scribe, Where is the Weigher, Where is he
that counted the Towers, c. 33.18. At the time which the prediction has an
aspect upon, the righteous were in a prosperous state, and that they might not
fall into the usual temptations, which sublunary felicities are accompanied
with, and be transported by the pleasure of them beyond the due measures of
Sobriety, they are commanded to meditate upon their former terrors, as the
most proper allay: and call to remembrance their calamities, when their
circumstances were so intricate, that those who had devoted themselves to the
study of Wisdom, were so far from offering the least expedient, that it was
commonly said by way of reproach, Where is the Scribe? Where is the Weigher?
Where is he, who tells the Towers? Here are three sorts of Students. 1.
Scribes, They studied to give the Sense of the Law, as Ezra did. In order to
this end, they read over the Writings of former Prophets. Daniel was conversant
in the books of Jeremy, Dan. 9.22. Justin Martyr says, 2 Kin. 6. Dial. cum
Tryph. p. 313.
That in the College which the Sons of the Prophets were building in the days
of Elisha, They did design, (...) and (...). 2. Polemical Divines, These are
styled (...) Weighers. They did ponder and weigh in the intellectual balance,
all arguments for and against the received sense of the Law. (...) is
interpreted by S. Paul (...), the disputer of this World. 3. Mystical Divines,
These are styled (...) Tellers of the Towers. They applied themselves to find
out the sublime mysteries of the Gospel, concealed under the shadows of the
Law. S. Paul expounds (...), the Wise. There is no greater degree of
Understanding, than to arrive at a clear perception of the design of the
Messiah, who is the Wisdom of God. This was the study of Heman, He was a Seer,
in the words of the Lord, which did relate to the horn of Salvation, 1 Chr.
25.4, 5. That this was the principal inquiry of the Prophets, is evident, by
the words of S. Peter. Of which salvation the Prophets have enquired and
searched diligently into, 1 Pet. 1.10. (...) is a Word, which imports the
greatest degree of diligence and industry, such as those who dig in Mines use
in the bowels of the earth, they had not all their knowledge by Inspiration,
but took pains in their studies in order to the discovery of these Mysteries,
which were locked up in the figures of the Law.

After these Students were arrived at such a degree of maturity, as made them
fit for a public sphere, they were ordained by a solemn imposition of hands.
This was the usual rite, whereby the Doctors and Teachers of the Law were
created.

The Hebrews speak of a Threefold Ordination, Maimon. Seldom. de Syn. p. 282.
either of such as were set apart only to teach and expound the Sense of the
Law, which is styled Binding and Loosing in the Talmudical Records: or of them
who were Judges of the Law. Or lastly, Of those who had a faculty granted them,
to do both these Offices. This does make it evident, that the public teaching
the Law, did not lie open to every bold pretender, but was appropriated to such
as were solemnly Consecrated to that Sacred purpose.

This power of Ordination, so fan as it did relate to the making Judges of the
Law, might be exercised only within the confines of Palestine; (...) Maim. San.
c. 4. Buxt. vo. (...)
and by him only who was Ordained before. This is the reason why Rabbi Jehudi
Ben Baba, the only qualified person, who was left for the performance of this
Work did contrary to the Imperial Edict ordain Five in the open Field, that the
power of judiciary Ordination might not fail. The honor of which Heroic
Action he wears in his Title (...). But the Power, so far as it concerned the
constituting Teachers of the Law, might be exerted every where, as well without
as within the confines of Canaan. Benjamin Tudelensis says, P. 73. C. Lemper.
That the Synagogues of Babylon did receive power from the (...) to Ordain a
Preacher by the Imposition of Hands. Thesbites.
Elias Levita asserts the original of this Ceremony to be from Moses, who by
the Imposition of Hands, made Joshua a Rabbi.

After these Students were thus Ordained, the usual place, where they exercised
their Sacred Function, was either an Academy styled (...) from the sitting of
the Doctors there, to instruct their Disciples: or a Proseucha, and therefore
termed (...), a School of all Virtue, L. 3. de vit. Mosis.
by Philo Judaeus. Or else a Synagogue. The Scribes who had their Education in
the Schools of the Prophets, are said to sit in Moses's Chair. This Chair was
appropriated to the Minister of the Synagogue, and therefore styled Moses's,
because out of it, he used to Preach to the People the Law, which was delivered
by Moses from Mount Sinai. To this is very consonant, what is represented
concerning the Essaeans, (...), Philo Jud. l. omn. prob.
coming into the holy places called Synagogues, they sat down in ranks
according to their age. The Younger sort under the Elders, with a becoming
decency, being disposed to receive their instructions. Then one taking the Book
reads it, another of the most skilful afterward expounds what was most
difficult to be understood.

Under the Gospel, we have equal evidence for the existence of Ecclesiastical
Persons. Jesus Christ, the Apostle and High Priest of our Profession, was
solemnly Anointed by the Holy Spirit, Act. 10. He Ordained Twelve Disciples to
act in a subordination to himself, and afterward Seventy, to be assistant to
Him and Them. Though there were Priests, according to the Law, at that time, and
Scribes in Moses's Chair: Yet he was pleased, before the old Fabric was taken
down, to give them a Specimen of the New Order, and commend it by his own
practice, to the perpetual use of the Church. The Two Sacraments were
instituted, before a period was put to the Law, concerning Circumcision and the
Passover. Our Blessed Lord says, That the Kingdom of God is among you, (...).
Feuard. in Iren. p. 325.
and the Fathers, That the Kingdom of Heaven began at the Baptism of John.

After the Resurrection, we read of Three Orders, Apostles, Presbyters,
Deacons. The Apostles were primary, or secondary. This distinction, S. Paul
does insinuate, when he says, I am not a whit behind the very chiefest
Apostles, 2 Cor. 11. v. 5. c. 12. v. 11. The Secondary were helps and
suffragans to the first, in the promoting the concerns of Religion. That there
were more Apostles than Twelve is plain. Christ is said to be seen of the
Twelve, 1 Cor. 15.5. and then afterward of all the Apostles, v. 7. These
according to their Gifts had several Appellations, as Prophets and Evangelists:
and yet they were all of the same order. Silas or Silvanus, who was a Prophet,
Act. 15. and Timothy an Evangelist are said to be Apostles. They join with S.
Paul in the Epistle sent to the Thessalonians: and of all of them it is
affirmed we might have been burdensome as the Apostles of Christ, 1 Ep. 2. v.
6. Eusebius. l. 3. 21. l. 5. 2 ^.
Philip the Evangelist is called an Apostle by Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus.
These in the following ages had their Successors. None doubt of the succession
of Presbyters and Deacons: and if we consult the Monuments of Antiquity, they
will be found as clear for the succession of Apostles; as is evident from the
words of Irenaeus, Tertullian, S. Cyprian. It is asserted by Theodoret, and
Rabanus Maurus, That those who were styled Bishops in the ages in which they
lived, were called Apostles in the first age. By reason of a disparity in
Gifts, the Bishops thought it too much, ordinarily to assume the name, although
they enjoyed their power of Order and Jurisdiction.

The thing remained, although the name had many variations in diverse ages. When
the Empire was digested into Dioceses, As in Cities there were chief
Governors, styled Defensores, in the Metropoles Proconsuls, in the Head Cities
of Dioceses the Vicarii of the Four Praefecti Praetorio: So in every City there
was a Governor in Ecclesiastical concerns, styled a Bishop, in every
Metropolis an Archbishop, in the chief City of the Diocese, a Primate, except
four, Rome, Constantinople, Antioch, Alexandria, and there the Governor in
Church Affairs was honored with the name of Patriarch, in imitation of the
four Praefecti Praetorio, which did always attend the Emperor, and govern in
the head Cities of the Dioceses by their Deputies. This last Title is of no
earlier a date than the Second General Council. Socrates asserts, L. 5. c. 8.
That those of whom it consisted, did constitute Patriarchs. This name was
borrowed from the Jews. In their dispersion, in order to the preventing an
utter dissolution, they constituted Governors in the Eastern Cities, and
dignified them with this name. Their Authority continued till the Fourth
Century, and then being taken away, the name was translated to Christian Rulers
in Ecclesiastical affairs. This is the highest point of honor that ever
Bishops did arrive at. The Ecumenical Power is a perfect usurpation, and has
been gainsayed in all ages, except by some few, which the Bishop of Rome did
discipline, as Psapho did his Birds, and then send them forth to teach the
people the same lesson. The Church did never attempt to imitate the Empire so
far, as to set up one Supreme Bishop, as there was one Emperor. If a
conformity had been carried so high, it would have been repugnant to the
appointment of Christ, who constituted all the Apostles in a parity of power.
No intimations of Superiority were directed to S. Peter, but such as the rest
of the Apostles were equally concerned in. When Christ says, I will give thee
the Keys, he does not speak to him exclusively. The same thing is spoken to all
the Apostles. When he commands him to feed his Sheep, the words cannot import
any Superiority over the Apostles, who were Shepherds, and devoted to the same
Work. When it is said, upon this rock will I build my Church, Here is nothing
expressed peculiar to him. The Church is built upon the foundation of the
Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20. The Wall of the Holy Jerusalem has Twelve Foundations,
and in them, the name of the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb, Rev. 21.4. The
contention about superiority argues, That the Apostles knew nothing of the
interpretation, which the Romanists now give. If the words relate to S. Peter,
all that can be inserred from them, is, That he would be an eminent person,
like a rock, constant and firm to death in the Faith of Christ, as many of the
other Apostles were.

II. Now I proceed to the Second particular, the manner, How men are to Worship
God.

The modes and circumstance of Divine Worship, we are not always obliged to
justify with an express testimony out of the Sacred Oracles. It is sufficient
for their vindication, That they are consentaneous to the general rules of the
Bible, and bear no opposition to any particular injunction. In order to our
direction in this concern, I will lay down the following Propositions.

1. God must be Worshipped inwardly, with all our Soul, with all our Heart,
with all our Might. Our intellectual faculty must be engaged in the
performance. A material conformity to a Command without the knowledge of it, is
no worship at all. A blind man, who hits the mark by chance, may as well be
reputed a skilful Archer; as such a person a True Worshiper of God. If the
understanding be not concerned, it is not a humane, much less a divine act. If
the Intellect and Will, this present moment, concur to that which is truly
good, and the next, the Mind alters, and the Will continues its pursuit; that
which is now good in the appetitive faculty, will presently become evil,
because it acts contrary to its immediate rule. Though there may be policy, yet
there is but little piety in the practice of those, who persuade their
Proselytes, That light puts out the fire of devotion, and an implicit belief is
the perfection of Religion. The truth is, They are so conscious of the
infirmity of the foundation they build upon, that they use their best
endeavors to deprive others of their sight, that they may be in no capacity to
discover it.

As we must Worship with our Understanding, so likewise with our Will; that
which is free, and of our own election, is most acceptable to God. Josephus
says, That God rejected Cain, because he offered a Sacrifice which was extorted
by force out of the earth; and accepted Abel, because his victim was free and
natural. Though he missed of the true Reason, yet he hit upon a great Truth, That
a free and uncompelled obedience is most agreeable to the Divine Will. God
being a Spirit, is concerned chiefly in the frame of our Spirits, and disvalues
that Service which does not proceed from them. 1 Kin. 6.4.
The windows of the Temple which Solomon dedicated to him were broad within and
narrow without: his eye looks more within upon the temper and composure of our
hearts, than without upon our external performances.

All the faculties of our Soul must be screwed up to the highest pitch. In the
Intellect there must be a superlative esteem of the Divine Majesty, in the Will
the deepest devotion. Every sacred performance challenges the most reverential
regards. Although there may be culpable excesses in the imperate acts of the
Body, yet there is no fear of them in the elicite operations of the Soul. It is
impossible to value love, and obey God too much. An infinite good requires the
utmost vigor of a finite Spirit, when it is conversant about it.

2. God must be worshipped outwardly with the Body. It is to be presented as a
living Sacrifice, Romans 12.1.
holy and acceptable to him. We must not imitate them, who use to take to
themselves all the flesh of their victims, and offer up nothing but the Blood
and Soul to their Deities. Our Bodies being the Lords as well as our Spirits,
and very proper instruments to commend the practice of Religion to others, they
are not to be exempted from this Service. Outward profession, which cannot be
without the acts of the body, is a duty as well as inward devotion. Adam did
wear the skins of the beasts, which he sacrificed to God. The Scripture never
censures bodily Service, but the want of the heart, and a right direction of
the intentions in the performance of it. He who Worships God with his Body, and
suffers his Soul at the same time to be under irrelative motions, is like a
Soldier, who imploys his Scabbard in the service of his Commander, and his
Sword to some other purpose.

3. All the modes of the Body must be decent, orderly, and tending to
Edification. It is the pleasure of him, who is the Supreme Head of the Church,
to give this general rule, and to furnish subordinate Governors with such
discretion, as will enable them to make convenient deductions from it, in
particular cases. Upon this account the Apostle appeals to Nature, that is,
natural reason, when he treats about matters of order, 1 Cor. 11. and asserts,
That disorder will administer occasion to unbelievers, to charge the
Congregation with madness, that is, with a deportment contrary to the rule of
common reason, 1 Cor. 14.

4. Different deductions from this general rule, is no just ground for distinct
Churches to commence a contest one against another, and by this means, violate
the Unity of the Universal. Decency is not confined to a point, but has a
certain latitude: Under a Genus there are more Species than one. The
Carthaginian and Roman Army at Cannae, were not drawn up in the same form; and
yet in both there was a mode agreeable to the rules of Military Order. Upon
this account, the present Church has no quarrel with the ancient, although she
differs from her in matters of this nature. Formerly it was thought to be very
decent to stand at Prayer, on the Lord's day, in token of the Resurrection: To
plunge three times, those who were to be Baptized, in signification of the
Trinity; to cloth them, when they came out of the water, with a white garment.
Although these customs are now laid aside: yet we are so far from reproaching
those who did use them, that we highly value their authority in the important
concerns of Religion. The several parts of the ancient Church, although they
differed in things of this Nature: yet they had communion together. Eusebius. l.
5. c. 24.
Irenaeus in his Letter to Victor, says, That some conceived that they were to
fast but one day before the Passover, some Two, some Forty, nevertheless they
had Peace. Those Churches which dissented in such matters, Sozom.
use to send the Sacrament one to another, as a token of their agreement in the
Faith. They thought it a vain thing to be divorced, upon the account of some
different customs, when there was a harmony betwixt them in the great concerns
of Religion. Firmilianus asserts, Epist. ad Cypr.
That the same Rites were not at Rome, and Jerusalem: and the like differences
were in other places: yet the Unity and Peace of the Catholic Church was not
broken. S. Austin takes notice, Ep. ad Casulan, 86.
That in the garment of the King's Daughter, there is variety of work, to
import, that there may be diverse Rites in the Church, and yet all
reconcilable with the Unity of the Faith.

5. Though this variety is very excusable in different Churches, yet it is highly
expedient and desirable, that in the same Church there should be the same
external mode of Religion, Edification is the great design which ought to be
aimed at in an Ecclesiastical Community. There is nothing which is more
opposite to this end, than discord and contention; and nothing will sooner
kindle and blow up the fire of contention, than differences of this nature.
Though Men at distance do bear one with another in such variations, yet when they
are near, and in frequent Communion, under the same constitution, they are apt
to take great distaste. We like well the different fashions of another Country,
and treat Strangers which are in them with significations of a due respect: yet
if any of our own Community affect such an exotic Garb, they are usually the
object of vulgar scorn and derision. The different dress of one, is a reproach
to another, and charges him with folly and weakness, as though he was not able to
discern what is convenient; and under such an imputation Men are commonly very
uneasy, and break out into an exchange of the greatest unkindness. The
animosity occasioned by a variation in Religious Rites, is usually more violent
than that which arises from a diversity in Civil. The pretense of a Sacred
Institution communicates an edge to the Spirits of those who are concerned for
them. They are easily induced to believe, That they are engaged in the quarrel
of the Deity, and that their zeal for them will render the Divine Power
propitious to them. This consideration pushes them forward, and makes them as
fierce as the Poet represents the Combites to be against the Tentyrites.

An old grudge to immortal hatred turned, Juv. Sat. 15.

Betwixt the Tentyrites and Combites burned,
A wound in those adjacent towns past cure,
Because that neither people could endure
Their neighbors Deities, or would have more
Held to be Gods, than they themselves adore.
Such heats are frequently attended with very direful consequences. Rev. 8.5.
They produce strong Convulsion-fits in the Community. Thundrings, Lightnings,
and an Earthquake are represented as proceeding from the Fire of the Altar. The
Fire which consumed the Senate House in Constantinople began in the Church.
Socr. p. 727.
Nothing can be safe, when Men are inflamed with a zeal for their own private
Sentiments. They think every one is under an obligation to submit to them. The
want of power is the only thing which gives a temper to their deportment. So
soon as they are numerous and prevalent enough, nothing will satisfy but a
complete Conquest, all must stoop to their persuasions. They account it an
evidence of weakness, if they cannot; and of irreligion, if they will not
settle that which they conceive to be best. And they believe they are not
secure in the enjoyment of their power, except they suppress others, and bend
them into a compliance with them.

6. If Contests arise in the same Church about external modes, a ready way to
compose them, is to appeal to Primitive Order, and give the preference to those
who come nearest to it. If we view it as it lies in the Holy Scriptures, and
those undoubted Records which are next in Antiquity, we shall find it to be,
not pompous and theatrical, but grave and comely; not calculated for the
gratification of the Sensitive but Intellectual part, not apt to divert the
Intention from the import of Worship: and yet sufficient to secure it against
the assaults of Rudeness and Contempt. The Ministerial part was appropriated to
Three Orders of Men, Apostles, Elders and Deacons, persons sound in Doctrine,
Sober and unspotted in their Conversation. Presbyters were ordained in every
Church and City. The solemn time for Sacred Conventions was the first of the
week.

In the Assemblies, The Men were uncovered the Women veiled. The Minister began
with Prayer. This he directed to God with the most important expressions of
Devotion, without the help of such a Prompter as the Ethnic Priests use to
have, lest they might forget the names of any of their Gods which were very
numerous. After this, were read the Writings of the Apostles and Prophets. And
because some things are hard to be understood, and those which are easy, ought
not only to be entertained in the Head, but the Heart: in the next place
followed Preaching, with the most pathetical Exhortations to Practice. When the
Sermon was finished, all did rise from their seat, and join in Prayer. After
this, succeeded the celebration of the Holy Communion, in which the President
poured forth Thanksgiving and Supplication with all his might, the People
expressing their concurrence, by saying, Amen. All was concluded with a
contribution for the relief of the Poor.

Besides these circumstances, There were some Symbolical Rites in use, namely,
The Love Feasts, the Holy Kiss. As the laying of these aside in some time, does
plainly express, That the Church did not believe, they were grounded upon a
perpetual institution, but taken up upon Prudential Considerations, in a
Conformity to the general rules of Scripture: So the Practice of them in the
purest Age, when Christian Simplicity was in its greatest vigor, does
manifestly teach us, That we have no just grounds to condemn our own Church,
because she retains some Rites, not burdensome in their number, and as innocent
in their meaning as They were.

7. If by reason of paucity of records, or any obscurity in those which are
extant, it cannot be agreed what was the Primitive Order: The ready way to
Peace, before Authority has made any determination, is, for the several Members
of the Church to make prudent Condescensions one to another, so as none may be
nourished in their error, nor any have any just reason of offense administered
to them. This was the condition of the Romans, when S. Paul did address his
Epistle to them. Their contests were violent, Authority had not yet interposed.
The Counsel of the Apostle has an entire aspect upon this purpose. Let not him
that eats, despise him that eats not; and let not him who eats not, judge
him who eats. One man esteems one day above another, another man esteems
every day alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. Matters were
not then ripe enough in that Church for a decision. The converted Jews had not
a full insight into the liberty which Christ purchased for them. Therefore S.
Paul does not determine the case on either side, but advises every member to a
prudent demeanor, and To follow the things which make for peace, and things
with which one may edisie another.

The Apostle suspending the exercise of his authority in these circumstances,
cannot be brought into an argument against all determinations about things
which are adiaphorous, for he in other Churches did decide this matter, as
appears by his Epistles to the Galatians and Colossians. How turn ye again to
the weak and beggarly elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage, ye
observe days, months, times and years, Gal. 4.9, 10. Let no man therefore judge
ye in meat or in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the New Moon, or
Sabbath days, which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ,
Col. 2.16, 17. Certainly, if the Apostle had believed, That all Churches are to
enjoy a freedom, equal to that in which he left the Romans, he would not have
been so positive as he is with these eminent Churches.

8. If Condescensions cannot be procured, and circumstances become such, That
Rulers believe it prudential to make a determination, both weak and strong, are
bound to acquiesce in the decision. Such a determination is within the Sphere
of humane authority. God has commanded all that is Good, and interdicted all
Evil. The only things which are left to be the immediate object of Sublunary
Power, are those which are neither. They may become useful or not useful, as
circumstances happen, but in their own nature they are neither good or evil. If
any apply themselves to the doing of them, for the sake of some intrinsic
bonity, which they fancy to be in them, and others stand at a distance from
them, upon the account of some imaginary obliquity, and by this means the
Tranquillity of the Community is endangered, Rulers are undoubtedly concerned
to keep the Peace, and prevent those mischiefs, which they cannot but have a
prospect of, if such different practices continue. And this they cannot do
without making a determination. If things be let alone, and every one enjoys a
freedom to do that which seems best to him, the prevailing party will at last
carry all, and force others to be vassals to their pleasure.

Certainly, If God has invested Governors with a right to preserve the Peace
of the Community, he does by the same grant, entitle them to the use of such
means as have the most direct aspect upon this purpose; and nothing looks
fuller this way, than a prudent determination. What can be more expedient to
prevent the spreading of Fire, than to remove the fuel which foments it. And if
those who are over us, have a power to make a decision, it must necessarily be
a duty in us to submit to it. Otherwise their Authority will be in vain, and of
no signification.

What is objected against the Legality of such a determination, (That it
accuses the Scripture of imperfection, takes away our Christian Liberty,
necessitates us to violate the Law concerning scandal) will be found to be of
no moment, if duly considered.

1. The perfection of the Written Word, is to be estimated by its sufficiency
to accomplish those ends for which it was given. The end of the Penning of it,
is to acquaint us in particular rules, with all the essential parts of Worship,
and whatsoever is of peremptory necessity, in relation to our Eternal Beatitude
in a Future State. As for the modes of Religious Veneration nothing more is
intended for our direction than General Precepts, from which we may, by the aid
of that Reason, with which God has endued us, collect what is expedient in
particular cases. And when that Wisdom which presides over the Community, makes
an inference from the General Rule, and tenders it to our observation, the
dishonor of imperfection is not reflected upon the Bible; because nothing is
done, but that which is agreeable to its intention. Of this, We have a manifest
demonstration in the Old Testament. When the Law was so punctual as to name the
very Pins belonging to the Tabernacle, the Liberty which we contend for was
allowed. There were many constitutions in the Synagogues, which had nothing to
countenance them from the Scripture, but General Commands.

2. The determination of Authority is no prejudice to Christian Liberty. 1 Ep.
2.14, 16.
S. Peter does advise us to a submission to Governors, as free, which assures
us, That freedom is consistent with a subjection to their determinations.
Christian Liberty consists in a Manumission from that which our blessed Lord
has abolished. That which he did annul was the Typical Law. It being designed,
as a signification, That He was to come into the World, and transact the
desired Work of Atonement and Reconciliation, when this great affair was
accomplished, the shadows became useless, and none were obliged to believe that
they were tied up unto them any longer, by a Divine Appointment. This is that
which the Apostle has his eye upon, when he exhorts the Galatians, To stand
fast in the liberty, Gal. 5.^.
with which Jesus Christ had made them free. There were some amongst them,
which did attempt to influence them, with this persuasion, That the Typical
Precepts were still in force, and none could be justified without a compliance
with them. Governors now may determine some particular modes relating to
Divine Worship, and yet deprive us of none of this Liberty, provided that they
impress no such signification upon them, That the Messiah is yet to come; and
that they impose them, without any necessity of believing, That they are of
Divine Institution. And that the number of them be so small, as not to make
them burdensome to us, and prejudicial to Religion. External Rites may be so
multiplied, that although singly considered, They are innocuous, yet
conjunctively, They may be hurtful, in darkning the spirituality of Divine
Worship, and diverting the mind from the true import of it. A multitude of
leaves is a frequent impediment to the maturation of fruits.

Christ did put a period not only to the Ceremonial, but the Judicial Law; and
by consequence, our freedom from the obligation of it, is a branch of Christian
Liberty: and yet none will presume to assert, That this Liberty is lost, when
Christians in every Country where they inhabit, submit to the judicial
appointments of their Lawful Prince.

3. The determination we speak of, puts no necessity upon us to violate the Law
concerning scandal. The true meaning of that Law is, That we must comply with
the infirmity of our weak Brother in adiaphorous matters, so long as we are
left to our own freedom. But in case we come to be limited in the exercise of
our freedom by the Authority which presides over us, That obligation in these
circumstances is superseded. It is a greater duty to conform to Authority in
lawful Things, than to comport with the weakness of these who are in a private
capacity; and when two obligations meet, and both cannot be satisfied, the
lesser always gives place and yields to the greater.

III. Now I proceed to the Third Particular, The End we are to propose to our
selves in the acts of Religious Worship.

To render our performances acceptable, Two Things are of peremptory necessity.
The Act must be good, which we are engaged in: and our Intentions right in the
doing of it. As to the present case, namely, The Worship of God, none doubt of
the goodness of the Act. The most compendious way to discover how we are to
direct our Intention in the performance of it, is to consider, what it has a a
tendency to. The finis operis will lead us to the finis operantis.

He who duly ponders the nature of it, will discover that it has a tendency to
these Three Things: The Glory of God, The Salvation of the Soul, The
Preservation of the Community.

The Glory of God. This is Twofold, either Internal or External. Internal
consists in the resplendent and peerless perfection of his Nature, and this can
admit of no increase. It is boundless and infinite already.

External imports a similitude to, and a declaration of this intrinsic
excellency: and to this an addition may be made several ways, as in our
Thoughts, Words, and Works.

We do this in our Thoughts, When we entertain honorable apprehensions of the
Divine Majesty, and form Ideas agreeable to the glorious Attributes he is
invested with.

In our Words, When we make such articulate sounds, as are appropriated to the
signification of a sincere Confession and humble acknowledgment of his
Superlative Perfection. The Psalmist calls the Tongue his Glory, because it is
an Instrument adapted to this purpose: Ps. 10.31. Ps. 110.3. Ps. 148.13.
and the word (...) which signifies Glory, the Greek Interpreters expound
(...), Confession.

The Works whereby he is glorified, are either his own or ours. The Heavens
declare his Glory. All the productions of his hands, set forth his Power,
Wisdom and Goodness. The Ark, with a Propitiatory, a lively Emblem of
reconciling Mercy, is styled the Glory. His blessed Son, in whom shines forth
the whole constellation of divine perfections, The Brightness of his Glory.

We glorify him in our Works, When we are engaged in such as are Holy and
Good. Their similitude to the Divine Will and Nature, may without any
incongruity be called External Glory. They set forth what he is, and what he is
most pleased and delighted with. In the number of such actions we cannot deny a
place to Religious Worship, it being an humble acknowledgment of those
boundless perfections which reside in him. Praise is an ingredient diffused
through all the parts of Worship. In Prayer, Receiving the Sacraments; Reading,
Hearing his Holy Word, we set forth his most worthy Praise: and Whosoever offers
praise, glorifieth God, Ps. 50.23.

It likewise has a propitious aspect upon The eternal Salvation of the Soul.
The enjoyment of this felicity is to be expected only in Heaven, and God has
appointed, That none shall enter into that blessed place, but those who Worship
him in this present state. The way into the Holy of Holiest, by his
unchangeable appointment lies through the Temple, where all the parts of
Religious Worship are to be performed. The gate which opens into the Celestial
Mansions, is not only strait, but so low that none can enter into it, but those
who stoop, and are engaged here in humble and submissive agnitions of the
Divine Excellency. The grand work in Heaven being to perform the most signal
acts of Adoration. He that is not in some measure inured to them in this World,
is destitute of an aptitude and fitness for that blessed employment. It would
be as great a surprisal to any who are totally strangers here to the
Hallelujahs and Praises, which are due to the most high God, to be placed in a
moment in the midst of the Heavenly Quire, as it was to the Syrian host to be
unawares in the midst of Samaria. Heaven instead of being a place of rest,
would be a real disquiet to such unqualified persons.

Lastly, Divine Worship has a tendency to promote The Preservation of the
Community. It excellently disposes Princes to govern. Their honorary addresses
to him, who is higher than the highest, influence them with a due temper of
mind toward their Subjects. They cannot but desire to comport with the
pleasure of him, whom they in sincerity adore, and they must necessarily know,
That it is his pleasure that they should imitate him, in the acts of his
Clemency and Goodness. And such acts are the Cement, which unites the Hearts of
the Prince and People together, and secures the most lasting conjunction to all
the parts of the Community.

It likewise disposes Subjects to obey. They who in the integrity of their
hearts, Worship the Supreme Being, can do no less than pay their
acknowledgments to his Vicegerent. Infinite Sovereignty being the object of
their Veneration; wheresoever they meet with the Type and resemblance of it,
they cannot pass by it without an expression of their due regards for the
proto-types sake.

We may add to all this, That Worship rightly performed, draws a perpetuating
blessing upon the Community. Such Princes as have been most careful to advance
the due celebration of it, have been attended in their Government with signal
Felicities. David who made it his first and last work to settle Religion, did
thereby settle his Kingdom. His Subjects were united, his enemies dissipated,
his friends increased. But Solomon who divided Divine Worship betwixt Jehova
and other Gods, had his Kingdom divided: Then parts were given to his Servant,
and but Two to his Son.

These three particulars, The Glory of God, The Salvation of the Soul, The
Preservation of the Community, Religious Worship having a tendency to promote,
it must be our duty, when we are engaged in it, so to direct our intentions, as
to cast our eye upon them. But that which challenges the first place in our
thoughts, is, The Glory of God. The reason of this order will be very
conspicuous, if we consider, 1. The Obligations which we lie under to the
Supreme Being. His favors are so constant and superlative, that they admit of
no delay, but require in the first place, in every address to him, something to
be returned in point of gratitude. It is an undervaluing of the kindness we
every moment receive to prefer any other duty before it. Now by reason God is
infinite in Perfection, and by consequence incapable of receiving any thing
from us, but a decent and becoming acknowledgment, and setting forth of his
intrinsic Glory; this must necessarily take the upper hand of all other ends
in our Intentions.

2. The glorifying God is the first of those duties which are morally Good. It
is the Form which constitutes and makes them to be what they are. All Good
whatsoever, is either such, as God Wills, because it is so: or else so, because
God Wills it. The Essence of the first lies in a similitude to the immutable
perfection of the Divine Nature: of the Second, to the sacred determinations of
his Blessed Will. This similitude in the Creature to God, is that which we mean
by his External Glory. The whole Creation contributes to this purpose, so long
as it retains such a composure, as lively represents his Goodness, Wisdom and
Power. When any part degenerates into a frame, dislike to the Idea in the
Supreme Being according to which it was made, then his Glory is eclipsed.

3. The glorifying God, is the primary duty which Christian Religion devolves
upon us. Whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. Christ the
Institutor of our holy Profession, was ushered into the World by the Heavenly
Host with this Hymn, Glory be to God in the highest: when he was about to leave
it, He prayed in these words, Father, glorify thy Name. The design of his
whole Life was to annihilate all these imaginary excellencies, which impede the
shining of the Divine Glory. The People which he has redeemed, 1 Pet. 2.9.
are said to be A chosen generation; That they may show forth the Praises of
him who has called them out of darkness into his mavelous light. His Church
is represented with the Moon under her feet, to signify her disgust of all
selfish interposals which eclipse the Glory of the Sun of Righteousness.

He has made all things for himself, Prove. 16.4.
that is, with a purpose and design to set forth his intrinsic Glory. His
Glory primarily consists in his peerless and transcendent Goodness. He has made
his Creatures, as so many vessels to entertain the overflowings of it. The
earth is full of the goodness of the Lord. Psalm. 33.5.
The brightness and splendor of it is visible in all the productions of his
hand. Though the Glory of his Wisdom, Power and Justice is likewise conspicuous;
yet because his Goodness is the leading Attribute, and sets all these a-work,
his Wisdom to contrive the diversity of Creatures, his Power to fetch them out
of the Abyss of nothing, his Justice to correct irregularities and preserve a
due temper in the Universe; the Glory of all these in effect is nothing but the
Glory of his Goodness. Indeed in Men it is esteemed a character of Vanity to
mind their own glory, it having no real foundation to support it: if the
Supreme Being withdraw himself, all sublunary excellency is in a dependence,
and obnoxious to disappointment. But in God it is otherwise. His Goodness being
boundless, and his excellency unchangeable, he cannot but take an infinite
delight in it. And if it be no blemish to delight in the Original, it can be
none to be pleased with the Copy, and to require it as a duty from us, to set
forth his Glory in our Conversation; especially considering there is nothing
more agreeable to the end of our Creation, and perfective of Intellectual
Nature, than to be thus employed. Hieroc. p. 25
When he commands this from us, he enjoins us to be like unto himself, to
imitate his Goodness, to lead a virtuous life, to abstain from all things which
bear an opposition to his Nature and Will. And What can be more beneficial?
This lays a sure foundation for our inward Peace, it derives upon us many
external Benedictions, there is nothing more honorable than to be like unto
God, and engaged in a Conversation, in which the resemblance of his Holiness is
visible.

If the Glory of God has all these advantages to commend it, we have enough to
justify the order of our Thoughts, and induce us to believe, That it ought to
have the chief room in them, in all our addresses to Heaven. When This has
taken its place according to the dignity of its Nature, it is no infringement
of any precept, to have an eye upon the other subordinate ends, in particular,
upon eternal life. God has for this purpose exposed it to public view. He has
brought Immortality to Light by the Gospel, and styled it, The prize of the
high calling, Phil. 3.
in allusion to a custom at the Olympic Games, where the Prize was hung over
the Goal, as an invitation to the Racers, to exert the utmost of their vigor.
It can be no transgression in us to have an eye upon that, which God has set
forth, that it may be looked upon. This practice is no prejudice to his Glory,
which is so blended with our eternal interest, That he who aims at the one,
must necessarily hit the other. If we may eat and drink with a design to
preserve our Temporal Life, and yet not violate that injunction, Whether ye eat
or drink, do all to the Glory of God; without controversy we may Worship with
a purpose to gain Eternal Life, without contracting the guilt of an
infringement. There is no fear of falling under the imputation of a mercenary
Spirit, so long as we eye Salvation as an effect not of humane Merit, but
divine Bounty: not as the Sovereign End, but that which does minister and is
subservient to The Glory of God.

SECT. IV. Concerning Assistance relating to Worship.
OUR First Parent, by his fall from the Tree of Knowledge, did not only hurt
himself, but his posterity. All, descended from him, are under an Hereditary
distemper. How frequent is it for children to express an inclination to those
impieties, which they never saw acted? If they were not under some sinful
prepossessions, no reasonable account can be given, why a few bad Examples
should be more efficacious in the impressing of Vice upon them, than the most
Religious Education, of Virtue. If we look into the deportment of those who are
come to a mature Age, we shall find them, generally, violating the eternal
Order of the Divine Will, in giving precedence to the lesser Good, and
degrading that which of right does challenge the Priority. Nothing is more
manifest, than an universal propension to such objects as are incongruous to
intellectual Nature, and far below the dignity of an Immortal Spirit. This
distemper is so manifest, that all sorts of men have taken notice of it. The
Sacred Writers have set it forth in a very clear light. The Jews have a
Tradition, That the old Serpent did infuse poison into Eve, whereby the nature
of her offspring is vitiated: and That Circumcision was instituted as an
Antidote. Therefore when a Child is Circumcised, it is the custom, to have one
stand ready with a vessel filled with dust to receive the praeputium. This
figure of Original corruption they mingle with the food of the Serpent, to
signify, That through his contrivance, it was brought into the World. This they
account not only a disease but a sin, which makes them obnoxious to Hell: and
therefore in the form used at Circumcision, it is expressed, That that
Sacrament delivers them, ab inferis; which cannot be, when they are but eight
days old, in case they are not from their birth prepossessed with something,
which makes them liable to that condemnation.

In Pythagoras's verses, This hereditary disorder is styled (...), and in
Hierocles's Comment upon them (...).

By it we are deprived of an ability to Worship and serve God in an acceptable
manner, and come to labor under several defects. We want light to direct us
how to Worship him. Strength to perform, what we are directed to. Merit to
procure acceptance of what we perform. Help is provided for us under all these
necessities. We have the holy Scripture to give us light. The Holy Spirit to
communicate strength. The blessed Merits of our Saviviour to procure
acceptance. I will treat of these in their order.

I. We have the Holy Scripture to direct us. This is a perfect Digest of the
mind of Heaven concerning all things necessary to Salvation. We have in it not
only the true measures of Faith, without which none can please God; but the
exact rules of Holiness, without which none can see him. In order to the
understanding the ground of our dependence upon this infallible Directory, the
following Propositions are to be considered.

1. The Worshipping of God is of peremptory necessity in order to Salvation.
None can be admitted to a fruition of the beatifical Vision, but those, who
have paid their due acknowledgments to him in this life.

2. Moses and the Prophets, our blessed Lord and his Apostles did by Oral
Tradition reveal all things necessary to Salvation. The design of their Sermons
was nothing but a disclosure of the whole Counsel of God about this grand
concernment.

3. What they spoke, was evidenced to be the real mind of God, by inward
characters of Divinity, and external miraculous operations. As the Supreme
Being has set his Arms upon his Works, whereby it may be known, who is the
Maker of them: So he has impressed his Signatures upon his Word. There are some
particulars in it, which are evident demonstrations, That a Divine Hand is
concerned in the composure of it.

In the Prophetical part we have manifest indications of Divinity. It is
peculiar to God, to foretell things to come. This in the most exact manner is
frequently done. Josiah and Cyrus are by name expressed many years before they
appeared in the World. Alexander's conquest, with his miraculous expedition is
described by Daniel with as much clearness, as if he had been a Spectator of
his Military Achievements. The time, place, and manner of the Birth of our
blessed Lord is expressly foretold many Centuries, before it came to pass.

In the Preceptive part, Laws occur concerning the inward motions of the Soul,
with severe penalties to be inflicted upon transgressors, which can be framed
by none but God himself. If by Men, they must either be Wise and Good, or
Foolish and Bad. Not the first, because it is not consistent with the methods
of a Wise Legislator to make a Law, and fortify it with a minatory Sanction
about things, of which he is no competent Judge: Nor of a good Man, to ascribe
a Divine Original to that, which, he knows, has no other beginning, than what
it received from his own invention. Not the second, Because there is so much
superlative Wisdom and Goodness resplendent in them, as will not suffer us to
suspect, That they were the contrivance of ill Men, or such as were defective
in point of Understanding.

In the Dogmatical part, The desire of all Nations, together with the
redemption of Mankind, by him, from that burden, under which the whole Creation
groaned, is fully discovered. Though the greatest Wits spent themselves in their
inquiries about it; yet they were as ignorant of the true Fountain of this
Blessing, as of the Head of Nilus. They speak indeed, (in order to the atoning
of the Supreme Being) of the Sacrifices of Plants, Beasts and Men: but the
Sacrifice of him, who is both God and Man, never entered into their thoughts.
After their best endeavors, without that success, which they hoped for, a
discovery was made by the Prophets and Apostles. The wisest of Men did embrace
it, and made it their choice rather to lose their lives, than to renounce the
belief of it. It is natural for us to conceive That to be True, which such
persons entertain with so resolved an assent: and that Truth to be disclosed by
Divine Wisdom, which all humane Wisdom (though engaged in a diligent inquisition
after it) could make no discovery of. This great Blessing, which God had
prepared for them which love him, no eye had seen, nor ear heard, neither had
it entered into the heart of any man to conceive, till a Revelation from Heaven
was vouchsafed.

In the Promissory part, We have a clear account of the Future State of Men.
All the Heathens were very inquisitive about it. Every one of them desired
life, and that their life might be happy, and this happy life Eternal. This put
an edge upon them in their search: and yet they did not arrive at any true
satisfaction. Socrates, who was not inferior in Wisdom to the best of them,
was very dark in his apprehensions, as appears by his dying words, (...), Just.
Mar. Or. Coh. ad Graecos. p. 33.
etc. But now is the hour of going away, mine to die, yours to live; which of us
shall be most happy, is unknown to all except God himself. This, which natural
reason is so much puzzled about, The Doctrine of Christ has made a full
disclosure of. Life and Immortality are brought to light by the Gospel, and
represented in such clear colors, that many upon the discovery became
impatient of a confinement in this sublunary State, and earnestly covet their
Martyrdom, that they might be translated into an enjoyment of it. It is very
agreeable to us to conceive, That where Reason did end in its inquiries about
this matter, Revelation began: and that the Wisdom of Heaven is concerned in
this acceptable disclosure. The lineaments of it, are as conspicuous in it, as
the cotrivance of Joab in the speech of the Woman of Tekoa.

As innate characters, so external miraculous operations evidence the reality
of the Word of God. By reason of the slowness of Men to entertain it, it was
the Divine Pleasure to quicken their belief by Miracles.

Under the Old Testament, supernatural works were done by Moses and the
Prophets: Under the New, by Christ and the Apostles. After their Preaching (in
order to the confirmation of it) They did such things, as exceeded all the
productions of Nature. There was no collusion in them. They did not vanish, so
soon as they were done: but by their permanence did demonstrate their reality.
They were not done in corners but openly, in the presence of the most critical
Spectators. They were produced in an instant, at the speaking of a word. They
were so evidently great, That sublimated malice had not confidence to attribute
them to any thing less, than to him who has the regency in the Infernal
Kingdom: Which calumny was sufficiently refuted by the reply of our Savior;
That no Man can with reason apprehend, that the Prince of Darkness would be
accessory to the production of such works, as tend to the confirmation of a
Doctrine calculated for the ruin of his Kingdom. These Miracles were the
Credential Letters, whereby our blessed Lord did evidence, that both He and his
Doctrine came from God. No Man can produce them without the influence of an
extraordinary power: and it is not congruous to the Veracity and Goodness of
the Supreme Being, to lend such a power to any person in order to the
ratification of an error.

It is vain to pretend, That Miracles can be of no use in the present case,
because of the difficulty in discerning which are True, and which are False. It
may be as well said, That the Broad Seal is no certain evidence of the Royal
Authority, because there is a possibility, it may be counterfeited. A due
consideration of all circumstances will quickly deliver us from the fear of
being imposed upon. A diligent circumspection does often discover that to be
Brass, which is commonly received for current Coin. If Miracles were not
discernable from lying Wonders, our Savior would not so familiarly appeal unto
them, as he does, for the justification of his Doctrine. Though there may be some
difficulty, yet not always: a Miracle is a work that exceeds the bounds of
Nature. These bounds in many cases are not concealed, but obvious to every
capacity. It is clear, That a finite Being is so limited, as not to be able by
its own power to raise to life, one that has been four days dead, to give sight
to one who is born blind, to cure Chronical diseases in a moment, at the
speaking of a word. Where the bounds of Nature are clear, as they are in these
instances, there can be no difficulty in discerning, when they are exceeded,
and by consequence, when a true Miracle is produced.

4. The Word of God with its Internal Characters, together with a perfect
relation of the miraculous External effects whereby it was evidenced, are
faithfully committed to Writing. Supernal direction was given not only about
the matter, but the manner. S. Paul styles the letters (...), and says that
the (...) is of Divine Inspiration. The Men, employed about this Work, were
perfectly acquainted with all circumstances. Their information was so exact,
That had they been lest to the conduct of their own private Spirits, they could
not have been mistaken through ignorance in setting down matters of fact. Neither
have they made any misrepresentation out of design. If Moses had been
instigated by private regards to compose the Pentateuch, he would not have
recorded the infamy of his own family. If any fraud had been used in the
Penning the New Testament, no doubt many enemies as well as friends, who were
Spectators of the Miracles, and Auditors of the Doctrine, living to see the
relation in Writing; would have discovered it. Yet we never read of any attempt
of this nature: but on the contrary, Porphyry, Celsus and Julian, in their
cavils against Christian Religion, suppose the matter of fact, That such
Doctrine was Preached, and such Miracles done.

5. This Writing in the Old Testament is digested into four and twenty Books:
In the New into twenty seven, five Historical, one and twenty Epistolical, one
Prophetical. For this number we have the most clear Tradition. Ezra having
consigned the Canon of the Old Testament, S. John of the New, both of them
persons inspired by the Spirit of God, and of great Authority amongst Men; The
Tradition came in so full a stream from their hands, that in every age it has
born down all the opposition which has been made against it. This Tradition we
have just reason to embrace, although we reject others: because it adds nothing
to the doctrine of the Bible, as the Pipe adds nothing to the Water, which is
conveyed by it. It is virtually contained in the Scripture. It owes much of its
universality to the intrinsic excellency of the Sacred Oracles, which upon the
first consulting, commend themselves to the good opinion of every intelligent
Reader. It is of greater latitude, than any other Tradition, which is not
formally contained in the Scripture. As for others, the Romanists are able to
produce only the testimony of their party: but for this we have not only the
Testimony of all, which adhere to the Community of Rome, but that vast body of
Christians, which appertain to the Greek, Protestant, and all the Oriental
Churches. It must be acknowledged, That there was for a time some hesitancy in
some persons, about some part of the New Testament. The Christians concerned
being dispersed, and kept by persecution from holding correspondencies one with
another, could not possibly have an information equally early about those Books
which were last written. Upon this account, when they first arrived at their
hands, they made some demur, as the Apostles did at Christ, when they believed
him to be a Phantasin: but upon a deliberate view, consulting with those who
had a more perfect intelligence, they corrected the error of their
apprehension: Insomuch, That there is no instance, which can be produced of any
Church, or Council, which in any Decree, or Canon has disallowed their
Authority.

6. These Books of the Old and New Testament, have been transmitted to us
without corruption. We have the attestation of all sorts of men in every age
for their passage through it. Councils have made them the foundation of their
Theological divisions. The Fathers appeal to them in their Concertations, as
the most equal Arbitrators. Divines before their Homilies prefix a Text taken
out of them. The Heretics in every age, have drawn from them, whatsoever they
conceive may favor their Sentiments. Porphyrie's cavils at the Old Testament,
Hierocles comparing the Life of Christ in the New, with the Life of Apollonius,
Julian's spending his Winter-nights in the refutation of it, the Jews calling
of it a volume of iniquity, argue, That they were extant, and passed by them in
those ages in which they lived. Shimei's cursing, and throwing stones at David
at Bahurim make it evident, that he went that way.

As these Books of the Old and New Testament have passed through every age down
to us: So in their passage they have escaped depravation. What is spoken
concerning the Essential Word, may be applied to the Written. Thou will not
suffer thy holy one to see corruption.

If the Old Testament in any point material to Religion has been depraved, it
must be by the common fate, which all humane Writings are exposed unto: or else
out of design by the Jews, or by some unadvised neglect in those who copied it
out.

Not the first way. It is notorious, what a signal discrimination Divine
Providence has made betwixt the Scripture, and other Writings in point of
conservation. When the book of the Law was given forth, every Master of a
family was obliged to have a Copy of it in his house. The Prince was bound (as
is conceived) to Write it out with his own hand. Every Sabbath it was read in
the Synagogues in the audience of the people. Peculiar Persons were appointed
to prevent any mutation in Words or Letters. The Massorites who began in Ezra's
time, did reckon up all the Verses, in every Verse the Words, in every Word the
Letters, and have punctually expressed, how many times every Word is used, and
which is the middle Verse, Word and Letter in every Book. It does not appear,
That the like care has been used by Divine Providence for the securing any
other Book from depravation. The event has been answerable to the care. The
Writings of the Penmen of the Scripture which they composed by the aid and
conduct of their own Spirits, have been corrupted, and at last are utterly
perished, as Solomon's natural History. But what they composed by the help of
the Divine Spirit, is preserved in its purity. In all Copies of the best
account there is a miraculous harmony, in all material points. The burning of
the Book of the Law by Antiochus is very reconcilable with the vigilance of
Providence which has been asserted. Though he was permitted to destroy some
Copies: yet his rage was not suffered to reach to all. After this, The
Israelites in Maspha, are said to lay open the book of the Law, 1 Macc. 3.47.
This fire made the Jews more warm in the defense of the Scripture against
injurious attempts. It is observed, That from this time they began to be more
Critical about the Text. That which was designed for the ruin of it, was by
the propitious influence of Heaven, improved into a security. The burning the
sacred Oracles, like the burning the Sibyll's books, did make the Copies, which
remained, have the greater value set upon them. From that time the Jews divided
the Prophets into Sections, Elia. Tisbi. vo. (...).
and began to read them in their Synagogues.

As the Books of the Old Testament have not been corrupted by that fate, which
other Writings are exposed unto: So neither designedly by the Jews. If they had
been guilty in this respect, it must be either before or after the coming of
the Messiah. If before, this crime would not have been concealed in the New
Testament: The Apostle, who has noted That the Oracles of God are committed to
them, would undoubtedly have recorded their unfaithfulness in the discharge of
their trust, in case any such thing had been. If it be said, That the Apostles
have sufficiently discovered their thoughts touching this matter, in that they
have waved the Hebrew Text in their citations out of the Old Testament, and
made use of the Greek Version: I answer, That the Hebrew Text is never waved;
if the words be not directly followed, yet the sense, which is the Soul of the
Text, always is. If the Shell be wanting, yet we have the Kernel. The Penmen of
the New Testament represent the sense of the Old, in such words, as seem meet
to the Spirit of God. Those words being of great Authority, were put into the
Margin of the Greek Version, as a good illustration of it, Disser. in Appen. ad
Crit. Sacr. Capelli, p. 489.
and in process of time were inserted by the Transcribers into the Text it
self. Several insertions of this nature are visible to those, who diligently
peruse that Version.

If the corruption pretended was made after the Age in which our blessed Lord,
and the Apostles lived, it is very strange, That the Fathers should take no
notice of it. They speak of the depravation of the Greek Text, but never of the
Hebrew. It is unaccountable why the Corrupters should suffer those Texts to
continue in the Bible unaltered, which are most pertinent for the refutation of
their error. We desire no greater advantage against the Jews in our
concertations with them, than what the Bible, as it is now pointed, will give
unto us. None are able to nominate the Text, where this fraud has been
committed. If any such deceit has been used, no doubt, but those Jews which
were converted to the Christian Faith, would have disclosed it.

As the Books of the Old Testament have not been corrupted out of design: So
neither by any neglect of those, which copied them out. He who considers their
accuracy about Transcribing the Law, will not be inclinable to charge them with
this crime. They were careful that the Ink, which they used, might have no
corrosive ingredients in it. The Parchment, which they wrote upon, was made of
the skin of a clean beast, and prepared after the most exquisite manner. The
Columns were measured, and a computation made, how many lines were to be drawn
in every Column. These lines were accurately drawn out, and the distance
betwixt every word and letter limited. Though many of them did remember the Law
by heart; yet they did not write a word, till they looked upon it in the
Authentic Copy. All this, being duly pondered, does evidence, That the Books
of the Old Testament are not depraved.

Neither are the Books of the New. In order to the preventing corruption,
Divine Providence has signally appeared in waving the methods of Art, which
requires, That those things which are homogeneous be put together, and in
dispersing the fundamental points throughout the whole Volume. By this
disposition, all attempts to deprave it are easily detected. If we have several
pieces of money, it is not difficult to know, by comparing of them together,
whether any of them have been clipped. If the Truth should be rased out in one
place, yet it will be preserved in another. It is the pleasure of the Divine
Wisdom to divide the important Articles of our belief, as Jacob did his flock,
that in case Esau smite the one, the other might escape.

The divine care is equally conspicuous in ordering, That Versions should be
made into several Languages, and communicated to the World. Every Nation is in
a capacity to hear the Spirit of God speaking in their own tongue. All these
people living at a great distance one from another, could never combine
together to corrupt this sacred Canon. If any such attempt had been in any one
Nation, the Copies preserved in others, would presently have discovered the
fraud.

The Premises being seriously considered, it will be evident, That it is our
duty to entertain the Bible, both Old and New Testament, as the Word of God,
and depend upon it for our primary conduct in Divine Worship. Tradition does
put it into our hand as a complete Directory in the concerns of Religion. The
Testimony of the Church does prepare, and quicken our minds to look into it,
and begets a Moral certainty that it is the Word of God. There is no reason to
question that which has been asserted with so much unanimity in all Ages. We
may as well doubt of that, which we perceive with our senses, as that which has
been the sense of the best and wisest of Men at all times. When we are thus
prepared, and seriously consult the matter of the sacred Oracles, ponder the
internal characters of Divinity, and the external Seals of the Verity of them,
we find our Moral Certainty presently translated into a Divine Faith. When we
receive a letter from a friend, we believe it comes from him, because it is so
asserted by the bearer: but when we look upon the hand and seal, and find that
both are his, we are prefently exalted to a higher degree of assurance. The
inward characters are God's Hand, and the Miracles his Seal. Those who assert,
We believe the things contained in the Scripture to be True, because God who is
True has revealed them: and that we believe God has revealed them, because it
is so affirmed by the Church in all Ages, make the foundation of Faith weaker
than the superstructure. For the Revelation of God is more sure, than the
Universal Tradition of Men. Those who assert, That this Proposition [The Bible
is the Word of God] is capable of no other evidence, must ground their
persuasion either upon the want of Power, or Will, in God, to impress such
Characters upon it, as are sufficient to evidence the divine Original of it. We
cannot reasonably affirm the first. For if by the impressions of reason upon a
discourse, it may be known to be the composition of a Man of excellent
Learning, why may not such words of Wisdom be spoken by God, as need nothing to
attest their Original but their innate evidence? If God may be known by his
Works, there is just cause to believe, that he may be so by his Words. He can
imprint peculiar Characters upon the one, as well as upon the other. The second
cannot be asserted. For when he gave forth his Word, he willed that it should
be received as his. We cannot receive it as his Word, without a divine
Testimony. There can be no Testimony of this nature but innate evidence. If any
other revelation be asserted, how will it appear that it does derive its
original from God? If from another, the same doubt will return, and the enquiry
be endless. So that if God did Will, That the Bible should be received by us
under this notion as his Word, he did Will to impress upon it such evidence as
is sufficient to convince every considerate person. For this reason it is
compared to light, which does not stand in need of any other thing to manifest
its reality. Though there be many motives to communicate strength to our opinion;
yet our Faith properly, is ultimately resolved into that divine and innate
evidence, which has been asserted. If we compare it with those ideas of
Goodness, Mercy and Justice, impressed upon our minds by a divine hand, and
impartially consider their exact correspondencies, we are sensible of a
powerful conviction, That the Scripture comes from God, and is designed for a
sufficient directory in the great and necessary concerns of Religion.

Indeed it is said, That although it may be so to Men of ready perceptions and
elaborate improvements, yet it does not follow, that it can be of the same
convenience to those who are engaged in secular affairs, and have not time to
cultivate their minds with severe Study and Meditation. To which we reply, That
God has so placed the necessary points of Religion in the Sacred Scripture;
That not only persons of Learning, but very inferior capacities may arrive at
the knowledge of them. What Philosophy uses to affirm, concerning the rational
Soul, that it is wholly in the whole, and wholly in every part of the body, may
be with a greater degree of Verity asserted concerning fundamental Truth, which
is the Soul of the Sacred Oracles. It is disseminated through the whole body of
the Scripture, and likewise it is to be found wholly in many particular parts,
which are so small, that men of secular business, without any impediment to
their particular vocations, may peruse them, and gain an understanding of those
things which concern their Salvation. I will instance in the first Epistle of
S. John. All things necessary to eternal Life are contained in it. He says, He
writ it, That those who believe in the Lord Jesus, might know they have eternal
Life. This they cannot know by a perusal of it, except all things requisite to
the obtaining of future felicity be clearly expressed in it. Now I would
willingly understand, why a Man, whose subsistence depends upon his daily
labor, may not come to know the sum of what is contained in so small a
volume. It consists but of five small Chapters. He may peruse them every day:
if those intervals only be dedicated to this sacred purpose, which are usually
spent about that which is irrelative to his secular business. By this means he
may read the whole Epistle seven times every week, three hundred sixty five
times every year. This frequent perusal can effect no less than a deep
impression upon his memory: and if he will solicit the Supreme Being to open
the Book, and lead him by his Spirit into a right perception of the importance
of it, there is no doubt he may attain to the knowledge of that which is
requisite to his everlasting beatitude. If a Letter from an infallible hand, in
no clearer a style than the Apostle's, should be sent to one, whose livelihood
depends upon his daily labor, to acquaint him with a great estate that belongs
to him, and of the conditions which must be performed, before he can be
admitted to an enjoyment: no doubt he would cheerfully apply himself to the
doing as much as has been expressed, and at last obtain a right notion of his
duty. It is slothfulness and inconsideration, and not any defect in divine
provision, that keeps men in their ignorance. If an incapacity to understand,
what appertains to their future good, be contracted by an ill education, this
must not be charged upon God, who has amply provided for the instruction of the
meanest in his sacred Word. Experience teaches us, how a Mechanic will dive
into the mystery of his Trade, and comprehend all the intricacies of it. Though
the mystery of godliness is much deeper in it self; yet if we consider the
manner of the delivery of it to us in the sacred Scripture, it is not inferior
in perspicuity to the methods of many professions.

All this, which has been spoken, does not supersede the work of the
Ministry, and render the direction of the Church unnecessary. Though the Bible,
in that which has an inseparable connection with eternal beatitude, has such a
degree of Clarity, that he who is not defective in the use of those means,
which lie within his sphere, may be his own Interpreter: yet (by reason there
is a pronity in all to be seduced by their own fancies, blinded by the
prejudices of Education, influenced into so much obstinacy, as to shut their
eyes against the clearest light) The direction, explications and advice of the
Church cannot be but of singular advantage, and absolutely necessary in this
state of imperfection. Men are very backward to hearken to the most evident
information, in case it tends to the abatement of their satisfactions in those
sublunary fruitions and pleasures, which they are espoused unto. Though the
Decalogue, given to the people by God himself, was obvious to every
understanding rightly disposed, yet, for the reason specified, He was pleased
to give them a Deuteronomy in which there is a repetition of the same Law, and
a fuller explanation of it. Although S. Paul had acquainted the Corinthians in
the clearest terms with the Gospel of Christ: yet by reason of the policy of
the God of this World in blinding their minds, he was compelled to write two
Epistles, to explain and impress that which before was fully made known unto
them. The clearest water may be mudded by impure mixtures. The most beautiful
Flowers may be obscured, and overgrown with poisonous weeds. Let things be
never so manifest in themselves: yet the Church's help is highly necessary in
order to the quickening the perceptive faculty, and the removal of all the
impediments which may interpose, and lie in the way betwixt it and the object.

The Members of the Church are either Secular or Ecclesiastical. The Secular
have been sometimes of use in this particular. Some of them, like the
Nethinims, have devoted themselves to hew, and make plain, many knotty Texts;
and to draw the water of life out of the sacred Fountain.

Ecclesiastical may be considered either alone, or as together in Synods. In
their solitary capacity they resemble the Pillars in the way to the Cities of
Refuge, erected on purpose to prevent those who were flying thither, from
slipping into bypath. Their direction is not only an act of Charity but
Authority. The Key of Knowledge is committed to them, whereby they have a power
to unlock the Mysteries of the Gospel, and open a passage into the true
importance of them.

If we consider them as congregated in Synods, so their Authority is more
illustrious. As the Sun of righteousness immediately rules us in the day, that
is, in all perspicuous places of Scripture: So these Luminaries are fit to
govern us in the night, in all the dark and controversal passages. This we may
learn from the holy Apostles, who (when the Controversy, whether God was to be
Worshipped according to the Order of the Ceremonial Law did menace the Church
with vexation) were gathered together with the Elders, and in a solemn
Convention did determine the difference. This was no extraordinary Act, but
that which they did design to commend to the imitation of the Church, as is
evident by the method of their procedure. They did not appeal to any peculiar
revelation, but by rational discussions, which are common to all men, prepare
their way to a decision.

There are Two Opinions of no good consistency with what has been asserted. The
First is, That every man ought to be guided by the Church of Rome, in the
concerns of Religion: The Second is, That every one ought to rely upon the
conduct of his own Reason. Both which we will now examine.

1. The Church of Rome is to be our Guide. If we ask the membes of it about a
Guide, they presently name the Catholic Church. If we interrogate them, what
they mean by the Catholic Church, they answer, That Community which submits to
the Papal Power. If we object the notorious corruptions, which stain her
reputation, and discourage us from putting confidence in her conduct, they
reply, That her directions are not capable of error. Her rule is the Word of
God. This Word is either written or unwritten: for the knowledge of this Word,
which it is, and what is the Sense of it, we must depend upon her attestation.
She is an unerring Judge, an authorized Guide, and therefore when she propounds
her dictates, we have nothing to do, but assent. We must not chew, but, like
Pills, swallow them whole, and for our encouragement to give them an easy
passage, they are gilded over with the specious pretense of Infallibility.

If it be so, That the Church of Rome is Infallible; by the Church must be
meant either the Pope or a Council, or the body of the people which adhere to
them, or all these together. If the Pope, how can Zepherinus's compliance with
the error of Montanus, Foelix the 2d. his Arianism, Honorius's being a
Monothelite, John the 23d. his denial of the resurrection and life to come, be
reconciled with the presence, and influence of an unerring Spirit.

If a Council? How comes it to pass, That one Council has contradicted another?
The Council of Francford rescinded the Decrees of the second Council of Nice?
Why are some General Councils approved, some disallowed, some partly approved,
partly disallowed; some neither approved nor disallowed? Bellar. t^^. 2. c. 4.
de Council.
What is the reason of all the sinister methods which the Pope used, to obtain
his designs in the Council of Trent? The divine Spirit does not use to frequent
such crooked and oblique paths. The devices used in that Convention represent
rather the windings of the Serpent than the motions of the Dove. They are thus
expressed by one who was present in the Council in his Letter to Maximilian the
Second.

We daily saw hungry and needy Bishops come to Trent, Coun. of Tren. p. 841.
Youths for the most part given to luxury and riot, hired only to give their
voice as the Pope pleased. They were both unlearned and simple, yet fit for the
purpose, in regard of their impudent boldness. When these were added to the
Pope's old slatterers, iniquity triumphed, it was impossible to determine of
any thing, but as they pleased, who thought it to be the highest point of
Religion, to maintain the Authority and luxury of the Pope. There was a grave
and learned Man, who was not able to endure so great an indignity. He was
presently traduced as no good Catholic, and was terrified, threatened, and
persecuted, that he might approve of things against his will. In sum, Matters
were brought to that pass, by the iniquity of those, that came fitted and
prepared; that the Council seemed not to consist of Bishops, but of disguised
Maskers, not of Men but of Images, such as Dedalus made, moved by Nerves, none
of their own. They were hireling-Bishops, which, as country Bagpipes, could not
speak but as breath was put into them. The Holy Ghost had nothing to do in the
Assembly. All the Counsels given there, proceeded from humane policy, and
tended only to maintain the Popes immoderate and shameful domination, etc. He
who considers the chief inducements to the determinations made in that Council,
will not find himself under any propensity to disbelieve what has been
represented. Priests must not be allowed to marry, because having Wives and
Children, their dependence would not be so much upon the Pope as the secular
Prince, under whom they live. Their love to their Progeny would make them yield
to any thing, never so prejudicial to the Church. Besides, This would be a
temptation to them, to seek to make Benefices hereditary: and so in a short
time, the Authority of the Pope would be confined within Rome.

The Mass in the Vulgar Tongue must not be permitted, because then all would
think themselves Divines. The Authority of the Prelates would be disesteemed.
This resembles the policy of those, who to keep up the reputation of their
Profession, Pen their instructions in a Language unknown to the common people.

The Communion of the Chalice must not be granted, because then a gap would be
opened to demand an abrogation of all positive Constitutions, by which only the
Authority of the Church of Rome is preserved.

A Determination must not pass, That the Institution of a Bishop is from
Christ, for then it would follow, That the Keys were not given to Peter only,
and that the Bishops were equal to the Pope, and a Council above him. The
dignity of Cardinals would cease, Residence would be jure divino, and the Court
of Rome come to nothing; and therefore special order was given to Laynez
General of the Jesuits, to form an exact discourse to prove that Bishops are
not jure divino, but Pontificio. Though the Pope did in a compliment so far
humble himself to Heresy, as to invite Protestant Princes to the Council: yet
there were such conditions made, as in particular, That nothing should be
discussed, but what the Pope's Legates thought fit to propound: and so many
ambiguities in the conduct that was promised them, that their journey could
neither be safe, nor significant to any good purpose. To these intrigues may be
added, The Oath of Fidelity to the Pope, (who was a party) imposed upon all the
Members of the Convention, the continual directions by the mail from Rome, the
vast number of Titulars and Pensioners sent from that Court, with many other
devices, P. 18, 19, 20.
insomuch that a Romish Priest in his Letter to the Bishop of Ferns, says,
That the Council was neither Ecumenical, nor Occidental, nor free. He who
considers all this will be under no inclination to believe, That the Council of
Trent was inspired with any thing besides the infallible Spirit of Worldly
Policy.

As for the People, They can make no just plea to infallibility. If the Head
cannot justify his plea, much less the feet, which are guided by, and take
their measures from him. If the Head and Members together are the recipients of
it, (for it is not agreed, whether the Decrees of the Pope without a Council,
or the Decrees of a Council without the Pope, or the Decrees of the Pope and
Council without the acceptance of the whole body of the People be authentic.
Some say one thing, some another. Their Language is confounded, that they may
be hindered from building the aspiring tower of Infallibility.) it ought to be
examined how this comes to be known. Two things are alleged, 1. There is a
peremptory necessity for such a guide. 2. The Church of Rome has all the
evidence, that can be reasonably desired; that she is such a one.

1. The necessity is not apparent. It was necessary that the doctrine concerning
Religion should be revealed by God, the first Proponents of it infallibly
guided by the influence of the Divine Spirit: but there is no just reason, why
such persons should be continued in the Church to the end of the World. The
certainty of Religion may be secured without them. We have an infallible rule
to steer our course by. The Books, in which it is contained, are conveyed to
our hand, with all the desirable assurance, That they are not forged, but
really such as they pretend to be. We have as much evidence for this, as the
nature of the thing is capable of. The Tradition, whereby they are delivered to
us, is so universal, That could the like be produced for those points, which
are in controversy betwixt us and the Church of Rome, we should not be
backward in the entertainment of them. We have far less evidence for many
Writings, as Plato's, Tully's, Caesar's, which without any hesitancy we believe
to be genuine. These are conveyed unto us, but by a very few hands in
comparison: but the Books of the Scripture, being of general concernment, were
perused by all sorts, and by this means have gained the most universal
attestation. Porphyry and Julian, with other implacable enemies to the
Christian Faith, did acknowledge those books to be composed by those whose
names they bear.

The Books being thus delivered, when we come to consult the doctrine contained
in them, we find engraven upon it peculiar characters of Divinity agreeable to
the impressions of the Deity made upon the Souls of all men, together with the
broad Seal of Heaven annexed unto it, many Miracles which God never gives to
any a power to do, for the confirming an error.

In order to the gaining the true Sense and meaning of this doctrine, we have
great advantage from the clearness of the style, in all points of absolute
necessity to Salvation. Truths of this importance are set in a very clear
light. What is more manifest than the following particulars: There is a God; a
peculiar Worship is due to him: in the Deity are Three Persons. The Second
clothed himself with our Nature, that he might be in a capacity to transact
the work of our Redemption. Those that would have a title to the benefits of
his Redemption, must Believe, Repent, lead a holy Life. An eternal reward will
be given to those that do these things, and an everlasting punishment inflicted
upon those who neglect them. A day is appointed, when all must stand before the
judgment seat of Jesus Christ. These particulars, with many others of a-like
nature. are written with the greatest perspicuity. If any complain of
obscurity, it is in themselves, and not in the object. If men will divest
themselves of their prejudices, dissipate those mists which are cast before
them, they cannot remain long unacquainted with these Truths.

If any controversy arise, we have visible Guides to advise with, who are
devoted to the study of the Sacred Oracles, and solemnly set apart by a Divine
appointment to this purpose: even as in secular concerns there is not only a
Law to walk by, but Men wholly devoted to the search of the meaning of it, who
are able in difficult cases to assist us. Though these Persons, whether alone or
congregated in a Synod, are not infallible: yet when they are duly improved,
sincerely Religious, free from the Bias of an irrelative interest, they give us
a high degree of assurance, That their thoughts are agreeable to Truth, and
just Reason, if we cannot internally assent, to keep our Faith to our selves,
and not to disturb the Peace of the Church, by an imprudent publication.

We attribute to the Divine Spirit, speaking in the holy Scripture, supreme and
infallible Conduct: To the Governors of the Church, Subordinate and
Ministerial: To private Men, who are under their Government, we dare not deny
the judgment of discretion. God requires of them a reasonable Service, (...) a
compliance as is in brute creatures, who are entirely subject to the discretion
of those who use them, and can give no account of the action they are directed
to. He expects the concurrence of the Heart. He has endued us with a freedom to
determine our selves, and requires that our election be made upon such
evidence; that in case our Rulers command us to do otherwise, than we apprehend
to be right, we may be able to give a sober account of our dissatisfaction, an
answer to every one, that asks us a reason of the hope, which is in us, with
meekness and fear. We are obliged to prove all things, try the Spirits whether
they be of God. This Exhortation is not directed only to Fathers and Governors
in the Church; but such as are styled young men and children, who are under
their conduct.

This liberty in point of discretion does not lessen and impair the certainty
of Religion. Those, who use it, have a rational power conferred upon them by
the Supreme Being for the searching and finding out of Truth. They have visible
Guides to make their application to, in order to the removing their scruples.
They have the enjoyment of the public Ministry, which by Heaven is designed as
the ordinary means to convey information to them, the promise of the divine
Spirit, which does accompany it, and will be assistant to them, if they do not
resist it but expose themselves to its operations, a power to suspend their
assent, till the matter be clear and evident. When the object is so, and the
faculty duly prepared by the use of such means, as have been specified, it will
be unreasonable to assert, That we may in such circumstances be imposed upon.
He to whom veracity is essential, made the faculty. He formed it with a design
to find out Truth: He requires no other condition in any object, to qualify it
for assent, but clearness. We have as much clearness in all points necessary to
Salvation, as the nature of the thing will bear. So that in this case we have a
security from the divine Veracity and Goodness, with which it is no
reconcilable; That our faculty should be so formed, as to be deceived, when
the Proposition, we assent unto, is manifest and perspicuous. So that the
ultimate resolution of our Faith is not made into the fallible testimony of a
private Spirit, but a testimony given by an infallible attribute of the
immutable nature of the Deity, which assures us not only, That what God has
revealed, is true: but that those things are revealed by him in the Bible which
are plain and manifest to a duly qualified mind.

Error proceeds from the giving too hasty an assent to propositions upon such
grounds as are irrelative to their Nature, as Education, Interest, etc. He who
will divest himself of his prejudices, which way soever contracted, and
sincerely apply himself to the use of such means as are of Divine designation,
as Praying, Reading, Hearing, Meditating, consulting the living Guides, which
God has set up in his Church, will certainly arrive at the perception of that,
which is necessary to his Salvation. He has the highest degree of assurance,
that this sublunary (...) ^^pable of. Nothing can be thought (...) an addition
to it, but a new revelation; and if this was granted, as many difficulties
would emerge about the meaning of it, as there are about the true importance of
the old. No acquiescence in it could be obtained, but upon such considerations,
as now induce us to believe the Bible, and the clear sense of it, to be the
Word and mind of God. All this will evidence, That there is not a peremptory
necessity for such a Guide as the Church of Rome contends for.

2. It is not true: That the Church of Rome has all the evidence, that can be
reasonably desired, that she is such a one. Three Topics are commonly made use
of in this case, Scripture-promises, Universal Tradition, Motives of
Credibility.

As for the first, Let the Text be cited, where any such promise is made to the
Church of Rome. S. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans is so far from insinuating
any thing of this nature; that he gives them advice, which evidently imports
the possibility of their fall. He acquaints them, if they boast against the
branches, (as it is manifest they have done) and grow insolent, that they shall
be cut off. To mention those promises, which respect the Universal Church, is
wholly irrelative. The Church of Rome is so far from being the Universal, that
she is but a part exceedingly degenerated. Pessimum acetum ex optimo Vino. She
has obtained the title Catholic by the same method, which Abimelech used, to
make himself King, and Phocas Emperor. She attempts to murder the right Heirs,
and true Sons of the Church, with the unjust imputation of Heresy; that she
may enjoy the inheritance alone. Her deportment has been, as if one member of
the body which has a distemper in it, should value if self upon that account,
and pronounce all the other parts to have no interest in the whole, because
they are not infected with it. Indeed it is said, That the Catholic Church is
One and always visible, which can be applied to none, but the Church of Rome.
But this may as easily be denied as affirmed. She has not been in any age, the
One only Church. The Eastern Churches have had always an existence, as well as
the Western: in which from the first age there has been the Baptism of Christ,
the Creed of the Apostles, an uninterrupted succession of Bishops. In the
Western, when abuses began to insinuate themselves, there was always a number
not only of private, but public persons which gave their testimony against
them, as will be manifest to any who have leisure to peruse the History of the
Ages, betwixt Boniface the third, and Luther. These persons we have more reason
to account the Church, which God has promised always to preserve, than those
who were willing without any reluctance to submit to the grossest innovations.
Though they were not equal in number, yet there were enough of them to make the
little flock, to which a Kingdom is promised.

The Church of Rome, as it is now, has not been always visible. There was no
such thing in the three first Centuries. Where was then the doctrine of
Supremacy, Infallibility, Transubstantiation, worshipping of Images, Invocation
of Saints, Praying in an unknown Language, keeping the Scripture from the
People, mutilating the Sacrament, making the Apocryphal Books equal to the
Bible? These are some of the Characteristical notes of the present Church,
whereby she stands distinguished from others. Those Ages were utterly
unacquainted with these Tenants. We dare appeal from the Church of Rome, as it
is now, to the Church of Rome as it was then, and stand to her arbitration. In
the following Ages, errors began more to show themselves, yet they did not
grow to such a height, as to be received for the Faith of the Church. The
infernal Spirit has been always busy to sow his tares: yet those Ages were not
so blind, as to take them for wheat. Insomuch that we lawfully say, That there
was not a man in those days, which may be properly called a Papist.

As for the Promises, which respect the Universal Church; the utmost that can
be made of them, is, That there shall always be upon the Earth a people owning
the fundamentals of Religion, together with Teachers, which shall have a
sufficient assistance in order to the directing and inabling them to discharge
their duty. But there is no assurance given, that this aid shall be so
efficacious, as to furnish them with such an universal Infallibility as the
Church of Rome pretends to. Such help is promised, as is suitable to the
exigencies of every Age. In the Primitive, it was necessary, That it should be
so powerful, as to secure the first Proponents of our Religion from error. But
in after ages this necessity did not continue. Greater skill is required to
make an exact rule, than when it is made, to draw a line exactly conformable to
it. The foundation of Religion being completely laid, and the rule of Faith and
Worship given out by an unerring hand, such aid only is ordinarily to be
expected as (if we be not wanting to our selves, and prevent the effects of it
by a voluntary neglect) will lead us into the sense of what is revealed. God
has endued us with a faculty, whereby we are in a capacity to make a free
choice of that which is propounded unto us. He helps us to do it by such means
as are agreeable to an intellectual nature. He does always enough to enable us
to make an advantageous election: and therefore error is charged in sacred
Writ upon the Will, as the original of it.

This does not render Religion uncertain. Fallibility and certainty are not
inconsistent. There may be an actual certainty, where there is no absolute
infallibility. A Judge is not infallible, and yet he may be certain, that the
sentence which he pronounces, is right. A man may be sure of what he sees
plainly demonstrated before him, although he is not out of the power, and
influence of all deception. When a foundation is laid, and some build gold,
silver, and precious stone upon it, others wood, hay, stubble, it is as easy
for one who is not infallible to discern the difference betwixt these
superstructures, as to distinguish a wall of marble form that which is made of
brick. If there be no certainty without infallibility, Skepticism must be
admitted, and a stop put to all proceedings of Justice. No Man ought to be
condemned to suffer a penalty, except it be certain, that he deserves it, and
who are there, but fallible Men to give evidence, and judge of his demerits?

If the Promises of Scripture have s^^^ ^ sense as is contended for, how comes
it to be known? It is a received principle amongst those with whom we are
concerned, That they cannot be sure of the meaning of the Bible without the
interpretation of an infallible Spirit; and by consequence we must be sure,
that the Church is infallible, before we can be sure of the Sense of Scripture:
and if so, the promise cannot be alleged as an argument to prove
infallibility; for then there will be a perfect circle. The sense of the
promise is justified by the infallibility of the Church, and the infallibility
of the Church by the sense of the promise. From hence it is apparent, That the
meaning of the promise may be known without the interpretation of an infallible
Spirit: and if so, why not the sense of other places of Scripture?

If we should enter upon an examination of the particular Texts of Scripture,
which are pretended to favor the Infallibility which the Romanists contend
for, they would be found no way answerable to that purpose for which they are
produced. They are such as these, If he neglect to hear the Church, etc. Lo I
am with you to the end of the world. He will guide you into all truth. He that
hears you, hears me. It seems good to the Holy Ghost and to us. The
Church which is the pillar and ground of Truth. He, that will not hearken to
the Priest, shall die. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my
Church. I have prayed, that thy faith fail not. Feed my Sheep. To all which, we
briefly answer in order.

1. When we are commanded To hear the Church, This Church may be the Greek, or
Protestant, as well as the Roman: and hearing does not imply the infallibility
of it. Every Parishioner is commanded to hear the Minister which is set over
him, and yet no body from thence will infer, that he is infallible. This
Church, we are not to believe without making any scrutiny, but lie under
obligation to try all things, and hold fast that which is good. The command of
the Church does not free us from sin in our conformity to it. The Jews
contracted a deep guilt in compassing the death of our blessed Lord, though they
did it in obedience to their Governors. Not only Pastors, but the Sheep know
the voice of their supreme Shepherd, and are in a capacity to distinguish it
from the voice of a stranger.

2. When it is said, I will be with you to the end of the world, This assures
us of the presence of Christ with his Ministers, so long as the world endures:
but not that he will give the same measure of assistance, which the Apostles
did enjoy. That which is sufficient in every Age is ascertained by this
promise: but not that which is efficacious to such a degree, as will secure
them from all error; for then every particular Pastor will be as Infallible
as every Apostle was.

3. When it is asserted, That when the Spirit of Truth is come, He will guide
you into all truth, it cannot be proved, That this promise is made to any
besides the Apostles. The context plainly appropriates it to them. I have many
things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. These words have an
evident aspect upon the Disciples only. If we should grant, That not only the
Apostles, but their Successors, are the objects of the promise; what is
intended to be proved, will not follow, namely, Infallibility. The direction of
the Spirit may be opposed. He gives in all ages a sufficient, but not an
irresistible guidance. Many, though they are put into a right way by him, yet
desert it, and follow their own erroneous apprehensions.

4. Those words, He that hears you, hears me, are spoken of the Seventy
Disciples, not assembled in a Council, but as going up and down from place to
place to preach the Gospel. So that if they be construed in such a fence as to
favor Infallibility, they will prove more than is desired, namely, That this
privilege of not erring belongs to every Preacher, who has a lawful authority
conferred upon him to publish the Gospel.

5. Those words, It seems good to the Holy Ghost and to us, do not argue,
That the blessed Spirit will infallibly assist in all future Councils. They
assert what was done at this present Convention, but hold forth no promise of
the same degree of assistance in all Ages. The reason of this extraordinary aid
was peculiar to those times. The Apostles then were to lay the foundation, to
fix an unerring rule, both for the converted Jews and Gentiles. The rule being
once settled, the necessity of the continuance of the same degree of assistance
did cease. The Heavens did forbear to rain down Manna, so soon as the
Israelites were in possession of a Country furnished with all convenient
provision. It is no good consequence; That because the Sanhedrim in Moses's
time was endued with an extraordinary Spirit, therefore the same favor must be
indulged to all their Successors, even to the Council, which put the Lord of
Life to death.

6. In those words, The Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of
Truth. The word Church must import, That in which Timothy is directed how to
demean himself, and that undoubtedly was the Church of Ephesus, of which he had
the Ecclesiastical inspection. That Church did hold forth the True Doctrine of
the Gospel in its public Profession: even as pillars upon which the Edicts of
Princes are fastened, expose them to the view of all that pass by. The
expression alludes to the Temple of Diana, much celebrated for its magnificent
Pillars, upon which the rules of the Religion of that Goddess were inscribed.
The Apostle intimates, That those Columns were the Pillars of falsehood: but the
Church of Christ, in the City, the Pillar of Truth, holding forth the True
Doctrine of Heaven. The words do not speak the indefectibility of that Church,
but the present state only. This Pillar began to decay in Domitian's time, Rev.
2.5. and is at this day utterly demolished.

If it be granted, That the words under consideration have an aspect upon the
Universal Church, no advantage will from thence accrue to the plea for
Infallibility. She is not represented as the ground and pillar of all Truth,
but of Truth in general, which may be limited to that which is fundamental.
Though she cannot fail in this particular, (for then she will lose her essence,
and cease to be) yet she may in other points very useful to be known.

If by Truth, we understand all Truth, the words may set forth the duty of the
Church, what she ought to do, and not the actual performance, what she always
does. When the Disciples are styled the salt of the earth, this does not argue
an invincible quality in them whereby they are secured against the danger of
losing their savor; but a constant obligation upon them to retain it, and
season others with it.

7. When it is said, Dent. 17.12.
That man that will not hearken to the Priest shall die, no advantage will from
thence redound to the Bishop of Rome, except he can make it appear, That He is
Successor to the High Priest under the Law, and vested in the same
privileges, which he will never be able to do. If this was so, it would not
amount to prove him infallible. The high Priest with the whole Sanhedrim was
liable to mistake, as appears by the Sacrifice appointed for the expiation of
their error, Lev: 4.13. He, that would not hearken, was to die. not because he
was of a different opinion from the Priest, but by reason of his Pride and
contempt of the Supreme Authority, which is plainly intimated in those words,
That Man which will do presumptuously, etc. (...)
This is a common case in all Communities; In superbia;
where there is no such thing pretended to, as Infallibility. When a cause is
under debate, and the Law requires the last appeal to be made to the Supreme
Authority, and the person concerned so to do, turns his back upon it,
arrogantly refuses a submission, and by consequence evidently endangers the
Peace and Security of the whole Community, this is a fault of the first
magnitude, and justly deserves the most severe animadversion. If it could be
proved, That the Bishop of Rome with a Council called by him has as good
Authority over All the Churches of the World, as the high Priest with the
Sanhedrim had over the National Church of the Jews: Though from thence it would
not follow, That he is exempt from error, yet none would doubt to assert, That
his power is not to be treated with contempt.

8. That Text, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church, and
the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, is no more propitious to the
Infallibility contended for, than those, which have been already considered. It
is not agreed, Whether by the Rock is to be understood Peter himself, or Jesus
Christ who is styled a Rock, or the confession which Peter made. The ancient
Fathers incline to the two last. If they be preferred, the Church of Rome can
from thence reap no advantage. If we should grant, That S. Peter is the Rock
spoken of, it will not argue any Infallibility promised to him: but the
declaration of a Divine purpose to make him a firm and successful instrument in
the propagation of the Gospel, as the rest of the Apostles were, and many of
their Successors. Here is nothing peculiar to S. Peter. The other Apostles are
represented to be as intimately concerned in the foundation of the Church, as
he. Ephesians. 2.20. Rev. 21.14. The following words, the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it, rather prove, That the Church shall never cease to be, than
any universal indefectibility. It is certain, That, there shall be a Church
upon the Earth, teaching all truth of peremptory necessity to Salvation, until
the coming of our blessed Lord: But that it shall be exempt from error in all
matters of Faith, is contrary to experience. It was once received as a truth,
That Infants ought to have the Eucharist administered to them; and now it as
unanimously exploded for a grand mistake.

9. The Prayer of Christ, That the faith of Peter might not fail, argues
rather, his not finally falling away, than a total exemption from error. He
was under great misapprehensions after these words had been spoken to him. He
believed, That Christ would continue upon the Earth, and in those days restore
the Kingdom to Israel: That the Gentiles were not to be called in, and made
partakers of the like privileges with the Jews. If it should be granted, That
the Petition of our Lord did secure an Infallibility to Peter, this would be of
no advantage to our adversaries in the present controversy. It cannot be made
to appear, That the Bishop of Rome is concerned in all the Prayers which were
made for S. Peter. There is in them no mention of any Successor. If there had,
it would be difficult to prove, That the Pope is the person. Some doubt whether
S. Peter was ever at Rome. The Scripture is silent in this matter. The first
Asserters were but of a mean reputation. Many figments were devised to support
the credit of their relation. The common fame, which by degrees did grow out of
these beginnings cannot be accounted a demonstration, so long as there are
Catalogues of errors which not only the Vulgar, but Persons of Learning have
been surprised with. To erect Infallibility upon such a fluid foundation, is,
as if an attempt should be made to build a Castle in the Air. If S. Peter was
at Rome, and left the Bishop of that place to succeed him, this might be only
in his ordinary power, and not in his extraordinary qualifications, as personal
Infallibility, a power of doing Miracles. There is as much reason for the Pope
to challenge to himself the last as the first: and yet I cannot understand,
that he pretends to it. The Miracles in the Church of Rome are usually
attributed to some persons, that cannot easily be spoken with, in order to the
knowing the truth. If this power had been ascribed to the Pope, daily
experience would have given the Asserters a flat contradiction.

10. Those words, Feed my sheep, etc. do not import the conferring upon Peter
any privilege above the rest of the Apostles, but only the insuring to him his
interest in the general Commission given to them. They were commanded to teach
all nations. It might lie as an objection against him, That he was not included
in the number of those, who were thus commissioned. By his denial of Christ he
had in appearance forfeited his right to the Apostleship: as Judas by betraying
him fell really from it. To give him and others assurance, That he was one who
by a Divine appointment (notwithstanding his notorious miscarriage) was to join
with the rest of the Apostles in teaching all Nations, he is commanded by
Christ, as many times to feed his flock, as he had denied him. All this will
make it evident, That the Church of Rome has no promise made to her in the
Scripture of Infallibility.

As for Universal Tradition; That will be as hard to be found, as a
Scripture-promise. It imports, the delivery of this doctrine from one age to
another ever since the Apostles times, and an acknowledgment and reception of
it in all places by all true Christians. The following particulars cannot be
reconciled with such a Tradition. Many Heresies did emerge in the first Ages,
by which the Church was exceedingly disquieted. Yet we never read in any
authentic Record, that the Bishop of Rome did summon those which adhered to
them, to appear in his infallible Consistory. If any such Judicatory had been
then known, it is incredible, he should so far neglect his duty, as not to
attempt the reducing of them to a sober and orthodox mind by his unerring
Authority. The Bishops of that Church lived so near the Apostolical Age, that
they could not be ignorant of the power which Christ had left with them; and
they were so pious, and good, that it would be a manifest injury to their
memory, to think that they would not exert it in matter of such importance. If
these Heretics were summoned, (although no such thing is recorded) and did
refuse to submit to the Authority which is pretended, it is unaccountable, how
it comes to pass that Irenaeus, Epiphanius, Theodoret, who have composed
Catalogues of Heresies, with which the Church was then infested, should be so
forgetful as not to reckon That in the number which those were guilty of, who
would not acquiesce in the supposed Authority. This is now reputed an error of
the first magnitude. All others are esteemed but trifles in comparison. If it
had been so accounted then, it would not have been passed by in so profound a
silence.

The African Bishop's denial of a compliance with Sozimus, Boniface, and
Celestine: Cyprian's refusal of a submission to Stephanus, Irenaeus's opposing
the decree of Victor, do manifestly declare, That they knew nothing of the
Tradition, which is pretended. Had they been acquainted with it, their
integrity would not have suffered them to be engaged in so much disrespect
toward the Church of Rome.

When Tertullian and Vincentius Lirinensis apply themselves to prescribe the
best method, how to prevent the spreading of Heresy, they speak not one
syllable of an infallible Judicatory at Rome. If it had been known in their
days, no doubt, they would not have failed to mention it, as the most sovereign
expedient. If a Man sets himself to write a Book concerning the best way how to
cure the Plague, and knows of one infallible remedy, it is not consistent with
the rule of common honestly to pass it by in silence, and to entertain his
Reader with some uncertain conjectures.

It was anciently decreed, That Controversies should be determined in the
Province where they did arise. If it had been believed, That there was then
such an Oracular Judge, as is now asserted, this had been a very unjust decree.
What can be more injurious, than to oblige men to acquiesce in the decision of
those who may impose upon them, when they might (if left to their liberty) have
had recourse to one, in whom there is no possibility of deception?

A belief of this infallibility would have drawn such respects upon the Bishop
of Rome, That no other would have dared to account himself his equal: and yet
S. Cyprian treats him in such terms, as plainly import a parity. He styles him,
Frater, Collega, Co-episcopus, S. Jerome says, That all Bishops are of an equal
merit, and the same Priesthood, wheresoever they are, whether at Rome,
Eugubium, Constantinople, Rhegium, etc. In the Communicatory Letters no more
respect is expressed to him, than to others. The primacy which is some times
spoken is not of jurisdiction, but order. He living in the City, where the seat
of the Emperor was, when he did convene with other Bishops, some regard was
signified upon the account of his relation to that place, but none upon the
account of any Infallibility and Ecumenical jurisdiction, which he was
believed to be invested with. When applications were made to him by those who
were in distress, it was not done with an opinion, That he was inspired with an
unnerring Spirit to determine their case: but because he was of the same
Sentiment with them, and had great advantages, by reason of his residence in
the Imperial City, to procure their relief. What he did in favor of such
persons, as S. Athanasius and Chrysostom, was not done juridically, but
declaratively. He did not act as an authorized Judge, but a sincere and
resolved Friend to that Truth, for which they were oppressed.

The infirmity of these pleas for Infallibility makes the Defenders at last'to
fly to the Motives to Credibility, as the securest Sanctuary.

The chief of them are Antiquity, Diuturnity, Amplitude, uninterrupted
succession of Bishops, agreement in Doctrine with the ancient Church, union of
Members, holiness of Doctrine, efficacy of Doctrine, holiness of Life, the glory
of Miracles.

If we should enter upon a particular examination of these, they would be so
far from proving the Church of Rome infallible, that they will not amount to
prove her a True Church.

The Church of Rome, in those points, which are peculiar to her, is not so
ancient as is pretended. The novelty of those things, in which she differs from
the reformed Church, is notoriously manifest: as Supremacy, the Worship of
Images, Transubstantiation, etc. When she has screwed every thing to the
highest pin, it will not appear, That any point of difference was, before the
Mystery of Iniquity began to work.

Diuturnity, may with as much efficacy induce us to believe, That the
Mahometans are a True Church; for they have been a thousand years in the world,
much longer than some Articles in the Roman Creed.

Amplitude may as well prove the Community of Rome Apostatical, as Apostolical,
Antichristian, as Christian. Antichrist is described as sitting upon many
waters, and those Waters are interpreted, people and multitudes, Rev. 17.1, 15.
Those who have taken the greatest care to survey the World, assert, That if it
be divided into thirty parts, nineteen are inhabited by Polytheists. Of the
eleven that remain, six be Jews and Mahometans. Of the space which is left, the
greatest part is possessed by those who refuse a submission to the Bishop of
Rome, as Protestants, Greeks, Nestorians, Jacobites. He who takes a deliberate
view of the vast body of the first in Poland, Transylvania, Hungary, Germany,
Sweden, Denmark, Britany, France, and Ireland. Of the second, in Achaia,
Epirus, Macedon, Thrace, Bugaria, Walachia, Podolia, Moscovia, Russia, Natolia,
Syria. Of the third, in Assyria, Mesopotamia, Parthia, Media, India, Tartaria.
Of the fourth, in Armenia, Egypt, Aethiopia; will be under no temptation to
believe, That the Romanists have any such great cause to value themselves upon
the account of the amplitude of their Community. I know, that it will be said,
That all these are cut off from the Church by Heresy. But the best way to try,
whether it be so or no, will be to examine the Confessions of their Faith, and
compare them, with the unerring rule of Scripture. Upon an impartial inquiry,
it will be found, That the worst of them has a much better consistency with the
Primitive Standard, than the Creed of the Romanists has. The greatest fault
which is found with the Protestants, is their compliance with the advice of S.
John, Little children keep your selves from Idols: with the Greeks, The
believing the words of our Savior, which evidently import an equality among
the Apostles, and their refusing to stoop to the imaginary Supremacy of S.
Peter. Indeed the denial of the procession from the Son is pretended, which
although it be an error, yet was never accounted fundamental. The Pope has done
with the Church of Christ, as, the Jews say, Herod did with the Temple of
Solomon, enlarge the foundation. If the error of the Greeks be fundamental, it
is not because it is opposite to the foundation, which a greater than Solomon
laid, but the additional laid by the Bishop of Rome. Filioque in the Nicene
Creed, is believed to be inserted by Nicolaus the first, about eight hundred
and fifty years after Christ, when the animosities betwixt him and Photius,
Patriarch of Constantinople, were very high. Sguropulus has given assurance
enough, That what was done in the Council of Florence, was brought to pass by
the collusion of the Roman party: The Greeks being forced by their necessities,
and tempted, by the most alluring promises, into such concessions as their
whole Church was highly dissatisfied with. As for the Nest^rians, it is
evident, by their Confessions, that they have abandoned that error, which was
condemned by the Council of Ephesus. the Jacobites, Breerw. I^qu^.p. 15.4.
although they retain their denomination from Jacobus Sanzalus, a defender of the
Eutychian Heresy, yet they renounce his doctrine. Leonard, Legate of Pope
Gregory the Thirteenth, in those parts of the World, where the Jacobites live,
has recorded, that their Patriarch professed to him, That though indeed they
held but one personate nature in Christ, resulting of the unity of the two
natures, not personated: yet they acknowledge those two natures to be united in
his person without any mixtion and confusion: and that they themselves differ
not in understanding, but in terms from the Latin Church. From all this it is
evident, That the Romanists have no reason to insist upon their amplitude, as a
character of the Truth or Infallibility of their Church.

the next Motive, is the uninterrupted succession of Bishops; by which is meant
the coming of one Bishop into the place of another, from S. Peter to the
present Bishop of Rome, without the interposition of any unduly qualified. Such
a Succession they are never able to demonstrate. For those who are rightly
qualified according to their own Principles, must be no Symonists, no
Schisinaticks, no Heretics, Men and not Women. And yet it is confessed, That
some of them have obtained their dignities by Symoniacal contracts, as
Alexander the Sixth, Sextus the First. Others have been under the guilt of
Schism. The Council of Pisa deposed Benedict the Thirteenth, and Gregory the
Thirteenth under that notion, and elected Alexander the Fifth, who continued in
the place without deposition. the Council of Basil deposed Eugenius upon the
like account: And yet after the Council was ended, he recovered his dignity
without any Conciliary Act: And from him all to the present Bishop of Rome are
descended. So that whether the Pope be above a Council, or the Council above
the Pope, the Succession is interrupted.

Some of them have been under the imputation of Heresy. Liberius was an
Arrian, Anastasius a Nestorian, Vigilius an Eutychian, and it is believed by
some, That one of them was a Woman: For this we have the unanimous consent of
all the Romanists till Luther's time. They were so ingenuous as to confess the
thing, till the Protestants began to urge it to their prejudice. To all this I
may add, That those Churches, which have as good a Succession as they contend
for, are notwithstanding branded with the infamy of Heresy; as our own, and
the Greek Church. Therefore their Succession, which is only personal and not
doctrinal, can be no motive to induce us to believe, That they are a True, much
less an Infallible Church.

As for their agreement in Doctrine, with the ancient Primitive Church, This
would be a motive indeed, could they demonstrate any such harmony. Till they
have reconciled their Doctrine of withholding the Cup from the Disciples of
Christ, with the words of our Savior, drink ye all of it. Concerning Prayer in
an unknown Tongue, with the words of the Apostle, If I pray in an unknown
tongue, my understanding is unfruitful: Concerning the Worshipping of Images
with the Second Command, and the Primitive Christians not allowing so much as
the making of them, we shall not easily believe that there is a consent in all
things, betwixt their doctrine and the doctrine of the ancient Apostolical Church.

The next Motive is the Union of the Members amongst themselves. He who well
considers the Schisms betwixt the Anti-Popes, as Novatianus and Cornelius,
Foelix and Liberius, Vrsinus and Damasus, Eusebius and Bonifacius the second,
Vigilius and Sylverius, etc. with many others: Six and Twenty in Bellarmine's
account, Thirty according to Onuphrius; and thinks fit to enlarge his
Meditations with the consideration of the divisions betwixt the Emperors and
Popes, the last pretending a power from Christ to divest the former of their
Authority, and with the differences betwixt the Popes and the Bishops about
their Power, Whether it be derived immediately from the Pope or from Christ,
the Bishops and Regulars, these pleading an exemption from their jurisdiction,
the Regulars and the Parochial Priests, with all the diversities betwixt the
Jansenists and Molinists, Franciscans and Dominicans, the Sorbonists and the
followers of the doctrine of Lombard and Anquinas, together with the grand
contest about the fundamental Article, Infallibility, some making it Canonical,
some absolute; some saying it is in the Pope, some in a Council, will not find
himself under any strong inclination to believe; That the Concord so much
boasted of, is so perfect, as is pretended. Indeed, they say, Though they be not
actually agreed, yet they have the most ready way that leads to it. They all
acknowledge one visible Head, in whose judgment all are to acquiesce; So that
when differences arise, they have nothing to do, but to speak with him. But
this is nothing to the purpose. For the Motive is not potential but actual
Union; not what may be, but what is. It is no good consequence, that they are
United, because they have a way, whereby they may be brought into Union. When
the parts of a Watch are asunder, they cannot be said to be in conjunction,
because there is a hand which is able to put them together. Moreover, it is not
true, That they have such a certain way to Unity. It is not agreed where the
unerring Spirit resides. The Pope, who makes the most confident pretense to it,
does frequently decline a determination. When the parties on both sides are
great, he is in fear, lest he may give distaste to either of them: and so make
it his choice not to attempt their Union, but to couch down betwixt the two
burdens. Some times his determinations are delivered with so much ambiguity,
That the persons concerned are no nearer a reconciliation than they were
before. His decrees like the answers of the Oracle, are so flexible, that they
may be bent into a compliance with every humor. His Council at Trent was no
stranger to this kind of policy. The sense of some Decrees was so doubtful,
That Dominicus Soto, Rist. of the C^un. p. 229, 230.
and Catharinus, both present, did, during the Session, publish Books one
against the other concerning the meaning of them. Were their way to union, and
the product of it, as perfect as they pretend, yet it could be no motive to
induce us to believe their Infallibility. A Unity of the greatest elevation
cannot exceed that, which was betwixt the four hundred Prophets in the time of
Ahab, or betwixt those who make war with the Lamb, Rev. 17.13. The infernal
Spirit well knowing that his kingdom, if divided, cannot be assured of any
permanency, uses the utmost of his activity to unite his subjects.

The next inducement is Holiness of Doctrine. This can be no Motive, if we
impartially ponder the following particulars.

It teaches us to be unjust toward God, and to alienate the Worship which is
peculiar to him, and give it to the creature. The religious addresses made to
Saints departed this life, Images, the Bread in the Sacrament, are evident
demonstrations of this injury.

It is highly prejudicial to the rights of his Vicegerents. Diverse of the Roman
Councils have declared, That the Pope may absolve Subjects from their
Allegiance, and deprive Emperors and Princes of their Dominions. Several
crimes are reckoned up by approved Authors, which render Princes obnoxious to
this condemnation, and the Pope himself is made Judge, whether they are guilty
of the crimes they are suspected for.

It is destructive of True Devotion. This cannot be in Prayer, except the will
and affections be engaged. And the will cannot be rightly concerned and say
Amen to what is Prayed for, except it be duly informed concerning the matter
of the Petition. True Zeal in the will is always the product of light and
knowledge in the understanding, and the intellect can have no distinct
knowledge, if Prayer must be made in an unknown tongue, as the Church of Rome
teaches.

Lastly, It gives encouragement to a debauched life. According to the Papal
Theology, a man of a lewd conversation, after he has spent his days in the
gratification of his exorbitant lusts, if at last, he applies himself to a
Priest, expressing a sorrow springing from a fear, That the badness of his life
may expose him to everlasting torment, and obtains his Absolution; (which will
of course be granted) he shall certainly be freed from eternal pains: and as
for temporal, which are not remitted, but must be inflicted in Purgatory, he
may in a great measure escape them too, if he be so rich, as to leave money
enough behind him to oblige the Church to so much Charity, as to help him with
their suffrages, and to celebrate frequent Masses for him: So that it is hard
for none, let them be never so exorbitant, (except they be poor and indigent)
to obtain a quick dismission out of Purgatory, and to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven.

The next Attractive is the Essicacy of their Doctrine.

The Doctrine amongst them, is either such as is common to all Christians, or
proper to their Community. The Essicacy of the first, is a good evidence of the
reality of Christian Religion: but no demonstration of the Infallibility of
Rome. The prevalency of the second is not so conspicuous as is pretended. The
submission of multitudes to the Papal Yoke is to be imputed to the efficacy of
ignorance and tyranny, and not to any transcendent virtue in their Faith. Had
not there been better metal in their swords than their doctrine, they would not
have proselyted so many Americans, as they did. The Inhabitants of that part of
the World did not apply themselves to the Priests, as the Regions of Judaea did
unto John the Baptist, but they were driven like herds of Cattle to the
watering place. They were not persuaded, but by the most direful hostility
affrighted into Religion. Their resentments of the Spanish cruelty were so
great; That they made it their choice to kill themselves in order to the
avoiding of it: and could not be prevailed with to desist from this inhumanity,
until it was told them, That the Spaniards likewise intended to kill themselves
and to follow them into the other World, and there be as great a torment to
them, (...).
as they had been in this. In the East Indies, where their Power was less,
their Policy was greater. They finding there a people very stiff in the
maintenance of their Idolatry. They did not trust to the efficacy of their
Doctrine to work conviction in them, but devised an expedient, how they might
make them good Christians, and yet let them retain their old Religion. Mist.
Jes. Let. 5. p. 83.
They enjoined them to hide under their clothes an Image of Jesus Christ, and
mentally to direct their public adorations to it, which in outward appearance
were terminated upon the Idols Chacim-coan, and Keum-fucum. Had they been
assured of any eminent efficacy in their Doctrine, they would not have heen so
prodigal of their reputation, as to stain it by the using so prodigious a
method.

As for Holiness of Life, When they make this a Motive, They mean either the
internal or external part of it. The first cannot be a motive of credibility,
because it is not seen: the second may be dissembled. The infernal Spirit may
put on Samuel's Mantle. This Holiness which is so much boasted of, must be
either in the lives of the body of the people, or else of some select branches,
or else of the infallible Head.

The first cannot pretend to it. Debauchery no where more prevails, than where
the Papal Religion is entirely received.

As for the second, I am not ignorant That great things are spoken of some
select persons. Bartholomaeus de Pisis has not been afraid to compare
Franciscus to Christ, Lib. Conform.
and in some things prefer him. His Sanctity has brought such a reputation to
his Order, that it is verily believed, That no man can be damned, who dies,
having his body wrapped up in a Franciscan habit.

Of Dominicus, it is considently affirmed; That he never committed mortal sin,
from the day of his Birth. Ignatius (they say) was so much in favor with God,
That he talked with him, as he did with Moses face to face. Yet for all this
boasting, He that will impartially view the Lives of these Persons, and some
others, as they are represented by their own party, and put all their external
severities together, will find, they differ as much from true Holiness, as
Jezebel's paint from Esther's beauty.

As for the Heads of the Papal Community, some of them have had no more
Sanctity than the Pillars which upheld the House, where the Philistines were
gathered together. Their Pride, Murders, Usurpations, and all kind of
debauchery and inhumanity gives sufficient evidence to this truth.

1. Pride. Boniface the Third could give himself no contentment, till he
obtained of Phocas an universal Supremacy, and changed the Apostolical (...),
into the Imperial Volumus, and Jubemus. Theodatus decreed, That Maurus
Archbishop of Ravenna should not be honored with the rights of Christian
burial, because he refused to stoop to the Sea of Rome. Constantine the first,
was pleased so far to humble himself, as to let Justinian the second enjoy the
honor of kissing his feet. Gregory the seventh, made Henry the sourth, with
his Empress and Son, to wait three days barefooted in the extremity of Winter,
before he would vouchsafe to give them Audience. Adrian the fourth was highly
displeased with the Emperor Frederick the first, because he did not hold his
Stirrup on the right side. Alexander the second, set his foot upon the neck of
the same Emperor, using these words, super Aspidem and Basiliscum. By his
appointment King Henry the Second of England received Fourscore Lashes upon his
bare back, for his misdemeanour, in the case of Thomas Becket. Innocent the
third, by his Legate Pundolphus, made King John kneel down, and resign up his
Crown, which the Legate did keep five days. This transcendent humility has
appeared more or less in most of them. It was not peculiar to Zachary the first
to disallow of the Antipodes, and condemn Virgilius for maintaining their
existence. None of the Popes could with any degree of Patience endure to hear
of any which did walk opposite to them.

2. Murders. John the Twelfth poisoned Leo and Stephen to make way for himself
to the Papal dignity. Gregory the seventh dispatched no less than Six or Seven
in order to the accomplishment of the same purpose. After he was Pope, he hired
a miscreant to roll down a stone upon the head of the Emperor as he was at
Prayers. Nicholas the third, raised the quarrel betwixt Peter of Arragon, and
Charles of France, which occasioned the Sicilian Vespers. Pius the fifth, had a
hand in compassing the death of Prince Charles of Spain, and the father of King
James of Scotland. Gregory the thirteenth, procured the bloody Massacre at
Paris, and testified his approbation by public Triumphs at Rome. When Clement
had murdered Henry the third, Sixtus the fifth applauded the act, in a Speech
to his Cardinals. His carriage in it resembles the motions of a Cat when she is
possessed of her prey. Sometimes throws him up, as though he had a mind to
extol him, and then presently throws him down again, with the imputation of
Heresy. Some times he runs back from him, as though he was affrighted with so
inhumane a spectacle; and then comes forward again, and by purring over he
expresses the highest degree of satisfaction. When Ravaillac had stabbed Henry
the Fourth of France, the Abbot du Blois, who inveighed against the Jesuits,
and expressed himself, but as the nature of the thing required, was invited by
many specious pretenses, to take a journey into Italy, and when he came to
Rome, was imprisoned and murdered. If the death of this great Prince had not
been highly pleasing to his Holiness, so loyal a Subject would not have been
treated so unkindly upon his account.

3. Usurpations. Gregory the seventh demanded fealty of William the Conqueror,
and when the King had returned his answer, That he would give him none, because
he had never promised it, nor did he find, That his Predecessors had ever
performed it. He sent a Letter to Hubert his Legate, in which he complained,
That none of the Pagan Princes ever presumed to attempt That against the
Apostolical See, which the King had done without blushing. Paschalis made the
like attempt upon Henry the first, and received as peremptory a denial.
Alexander the third, s^nt an express to the Bishop of York and other Bishops
not to anoint the Son of Henry the Second: which insolency the King so highly
resented, That he caused all his Subjects from Twelve years old, to Sixty, to
abjure the Pope's Obedience. Innocent the third, upon a distaste taken in the
time of King John, who withstood his Usurpations, commanded, the Churchdoors in
England, for six years to be shut, Divine Service to be laid aside, the Bodies
of the Dead to be carried into the field, and tumbled like dogs into ditches
without Christ an Burial. These encroachments were so favorably thought on in
these dark times, That the enemies of Edward the second, to make the way more
facile to his deposition, raised a report, That John the 22d. had absolved his
Subjects from their allegiance. Thomas of Arundel, That he might with the
greater ease divest Richard the second of his regal dignity, produced the
Pope's Bull, promising remission of sins to all, who would stand for Henry
against him.

The People in those days had generally drank so deep of the Cup of the
fornication of Rome, that when they looked upon the Supreme Power, they saw
double, and fansied one Sovereign in their own Country, and another at Rome.

Lastly, I might add to what has been spoken (but that I take no delight in
representing such deformities) all manner of Inhumanity and Debauchery. John
the 13th. plucked out the eyes of diverse of his Cardinals, and cut off their
hands, for inclining to Otho the great. He defloured Raynora, set Houses on
fire, drank a health to the Devil. Boniface the 7th. stole away the
Church-Treasure. Sixtus the 4th. provided for his Concubine Tyresia Shoes
covered with Pearl, builded Stews at Rome. John the 23d. flayed a Bishop, and
afterward burnt him, because he had given him some distaste. Alexander the
sixth, took money of Bajazet to murder Gemes his Brother, who sled to him for
protection. He defloured his own daughter Lucretia, and gave himself to the
Devil. Leo the 10th told Cardinal Bembus, That Religion was but a profitable
Fable. Paul the 3d. prostituted his sister to the lust of Alexander the sixth,
that he might be made Cardinal, and committed incest with his daughter
Constantia, poisoned her husband, That he might have the freer enjoyment of her.

He who thinks fit to consult Platina, Onuphrius, Bellarmine, Baronius, and the
History of the Popish Treasons and Usurpations with some others, which
represent the Lives of the Popes, will see, That I have done them no injustice.
By all this it is visible, of what elevation Holiness has been at Rome, and
what little reason there is, to make it a motive of Credibility.

The last is the glory of Miracles. By Miracles we must understand Works which
are above the power and energy of finite Nature, and are plain and evident to
the Sense. None but God can effect them, and when he does them, they are
produced openly, and all circumstances are so perspicuous, that there cannot be
any reasonable suspicion of collusion. Such were the works of Jesus Christ.
They are confessed by all to be above the energy of finite Nature, whether
Angelical or Humane. All the Angelical Powers, had they conspired together,
could not, by the speaking a word, have raised Lazarus from the dead, after he
had been four days in the grave: or in a moment cured Chronical diseases which
had been upon the distempered persons, some Twelve, some Eighteen, some Thirty
Eight Years. These effects were produced in the clearest light. The Sun of
righteousness did not light a candle to operate by. They were done not only
before friends, who might be biased with inclinations to use their
Microscopes, and magnify every thing beyond its just dimensions: but in the
presence of the most implacable enemies, who were under the strongest
propensities to eclipse the glory of them.

Now we cannot learn, That such Miracles as these, are done by the Romanists.
Many, which are pretended to, are discovered to be mere collusions. Those that
they still continue to glory in, have not much evidence as is necessary to the
nature of a Miracle. They tell of wonders, done by the remains of S. James at
Compostella in Spain: by the Virgin Mary at Loretto in Italy in her Santa Casa:
by the Sacred Vial of S. Mary Magdalen in S. Maximine's Church in France: But
when we come to inquire not only into the Truth of what is pretended to be
done, but likewise for the evidence which they have, That the Vial in the
Church of S. Maximine's was Mary Magdalen's, and the blood boiling in it upon
the Passion-day the blood of our Savior: or, That the Santa Casa at Loretto is
the Chamber where the Virgin Mary was born, and saluted by the Angel: or, That
the Relics at Compostella are the real remains of S. James: Their account is
so defective, That all Wise Men of their own party are ashamed of it. The best
Testimonies, they have, are either dreams or visions and fables, devised by Men
wholly devoted to the advancement of their own designs. There is a Table in the
Church at Loretto in no less than Thirteen Languages for the edification of all
Nations, in which is given an account of the Transportation of the Santa Casa
by Angels. The whole certainly resolves it self at last into a dream, a vision,
and the talk of two old Men.

The best Evidence for the Miracles of Xaverius, are some posthumous relations
framed after his death. He himself in several Letters, in which he makes a
Narrative of his transactions amongst that People, speaks no such matter.
Franciscus de Victoria, says, That he could hear of no Miracles which were done
in those parts by the Emissaries of Rome. Fabulous inventions serve to buoy up
the devotion of the common people. Their Zeal for such public Tales, is
usually of the same elevation with that of Demetrius for his gainful
Manufactures. If it should be granted, That Miracles have been done in the
Church of Rome, there is no assurance, That the design of them is to confirm
the Infallibility which that Community pretends unto. Miracles in the Gospel,
are like Fines in the Common Law, they have Deeds to lead them, and declare
their proper use. There is no authentic declaration from Heaven concerning
this matter. We have more reason to think, if any such Miracles have been done,
That God by them did intend the confirmation of the Truth in which Protestants
and Papists do agree, and not the corrupt Additions, about which they differ.
When a Miscellaneous People planted in Samaria by the King of Assyria, did not
Worship Jehova according to his own order, and God in a miraculous manner, sent
Lions amongst them to destroy them; it would have been very unreasonable in the
Israelites to have asserted, That this Miracle was done to confirm the
Idolatrous Worship of Dan and Bethel: Whereas God had his eye, not upon the
justification of the corruptions, which the Israelites were stained with, but
so much of the Truth as was retained by them.

When the Papists have made the utmost, of what they can, of their pretended
Miracles, they will find every jot as good amongst those, whom they will be
very unwilling to grant to be infallible. False Christ's show great signs, Matt.
24.24. The coming of the man of sin, is with all power, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. The Beast
which comes out of the earth, does great wonders, Rev. Socrat. l. 7.17.
13.13. When a Jew, who counterfeited Christianity was brought by Paulus a
Novatian Bishop to the Font to be baptized, the water vanished. Tac. l. 4.
Vespatian restored strength to a Lame, and sight to a Blind man. Aust. de Civ.
l. 10, 16.
One born blind received sight by touching the dead body of Adrian. The Images
which Aeneas brought from Troy did locally move. Lact. l. 2. p. 105.
A vestal Virgin took up a Sieve out of Tyber full of Water. Accius Naevlus cut
a whetstone in two with a Razor. These Wonders deserve as much consideration,
as any which the Romanists pretend to. This may be sufficient to evidence, That
the glory of Miracles can be no motive to induce us to believe, That the Church
of Rome is infallible in her conduct in the concerns of Religion.

Before I leave this particular concerning the motives of Credibility, I will
lay down several on the other side, which may justly incline us to think, That
no such guide was ever intended.

1. It is no where revealed by Jesus Christ. If he had committed his Universal
Church to the guidance of any one visible, and infallible Head, certainly it
would have been expressed in the holy Bible. It is a matter of great
importance, not to be settled in doubtful expressions. No Prince, who appoints
another in his absence to govern his Subjects, does it in ambiguous terms: but
gives him a commission in such clear words, That no man can have any just
reason to dispute his Authority.

The Texts usually pretended to countenance such a Guide, as is contended for,
have been already examined, and found insufficient. There is more in that
expression relating to S. Paul [ That which comes upon me daily, the care of
all the Churches] than in any thing which is spoken of S. Peter: and yet no man
pretends to collect from thence; That S. Paul was exclusively an Ecumenical
Bishop, and the final decision of all points in Religion did belong only to him
and his Successors.

2. Such a Guide, as the Romanists would have, who must be followed blindfold,
and his dictates received with an implicit faith without examination, is not
consistent with the nature of an Intellectual Being. Our understanding is
appointed to be our immediate Guide, insomuch, That if we act contrary to it,
we pervert the order of Nature, and vitiate the action. It is designed by a
divine institution to make scrutiny and search into that which is propounded to
us. Therefore when there were infallible guides upon the Earth, the people were
commanded to look into the facred Oracles, and make trial by them of what was
tendered to them. They were not to rely only upon the words of them, who spoke,
but examine their Authority by a standing rule, and inquire into the sense of
what was spoken by them. Joh. 5. Act. 17.11.
Our blessed Lord directed the Jews to take this course, and the Beraeans are
commended for the using of it. To suffer our understandings to be lapped up in
an implicit belief, is to keep our talent in a napkin. Our Intellect was given
to us to be exerted to the uttermost, that all the Acts of our Religion might
become a reasonable Service.

3. Such a Guide is destructive of true Virtue in the Acts of Religion, (...)
is defined by the Philosopher, (...), an elective habit. It disposes us, when
good and evil are set before us, to make a free election: to choose the good and
reject the evil. Now the Guide supposed, who must be followed without scrutiny,
deprives us of this liberty. He must be believed, whatsoever he propounds,
whether right or wrong. If he commands us to believe that to be black, which
appears white to our sense, we must not dispute his dictate. Amongst the
Eighteen rules of the prevailing Order in the Church of Rome, the Thirteenth
runs in these words, Vt ipsi Catholicae Ecclesiae omnino unanimes conformesque
simus. Si quod oculis nostris albus apparet, nigrum illa definierit, debemus
itidem quod nigrum est, pronunciare. Bellarmine is very agreeable to this rule,
as is manifest by the following expression, Si autem Papa erraret, praecipiendo
vitia, vel prohibendo virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia credere vitia esse bona, and
virtutes malas, etc. If the Pope should err in commanding Vices or prohibiting
Virtues, the Church would be obliged to believe, Vices to be good and Virtues
evil.

4. Such a Guide can be of no advantage to us in our present circumstances. We
have already an infallible Rule to walk by, the true sense of which, if we
receive and comply with, we cannot err. Now this sense may as easily be
obtained, as the sense of an infallible, Guide. If there was such a one, as is
supposed, he could not be spoken with by one of a Thousand of those who are
concerned in the meaning of his determination. And therefore they must receive
it from the relation of others: or by some Writing under his hand. The Relators
being fallible, and obnoxious to the like infirmities with other men, can give
us no infallible assurance. They may be biased with partiality and irrelative
respects. A Writing from him is liable to the same exceptions, which are
usually formed against the Scripture. We see that all parties among the
Romanists pretend favor from the determinations of the Church. They are like
Pictures, which seem to look upon every one in the room, where they hang. When
interest is concerned, it will find out as many evasions, as the most subtle
Adversary can devise to elude any text of Scripture. There are many divisions
among the Romanists: yet all assert, the sense of the infallible Judge is on
their side. Why may not we as well understand the sense of the Bible
immediately, as the meaning of a Decree in Writing of such a Judge. The
Scripture was written by an unerring hand, with a sincere purpose, that it
might be understood. Clearness of style is a necessary condition in order to
this end, and therefore must be designed by the Composer. God undoubtedly is
able to write with as much perspicuity, and with as manifest accommodations to
the meanest capacity as men are. Thousands have had so firm a Faith grounded
upon the sense which they immediately derived from his Word, That rather than
they would depart from it, they have with alacrity endured the loss of their
sublunary comforts, and cheerfully resigned up their lives to the inhumanity of
their Persecutors. The Divine Spirit is ready to assist those who are sincerely
desirous of true knowledge. Peculiar persons are devoted to the study of the
Scripture in order to the dissipating of Clouds, and the clearing of what is
obscure. Why a Writing composed by an infinitely Wife Being, and attended with
these advantages, in order to the gaining the true meaning of it, may not be as
easily understood as the decrees of a Pope, or the Canons of a Council, I could
never discern any good reason.

5. Such a Guide is not reconcilable to the Divine Intention, in giving us the
sacred Oracles. These are evidently designed as a rule, which every one is
obliged to consult. Blessed is he which reads, Rev. 1.4. Reading is enjoined
in order to the gaining understanding. Let the word dwell richly in you in all
wisdom. The supreme Head of the Church commands us to search the Scriptures. S.
Peter (whom the Romanists assert to have been his Vicegerent upon the earth)
requires us to attend unto them, as unto a light, without suggesting the
necessity of having recourse to himself or his Successors for interpretation.
All this assures us, That we are to take our measures from the Bible, and judge
for our selves, what is to be done or not done with a judgment of discretion,
that our conformity to the Divine Will, may be an act of our Understanding.

Now a Guide, whose Dictates we are to swallow down without examination, is not
consistent with the practice here enjoined us. To be bound to examine the rule
with all diligence; and yet to resign up our selves to the decrees of a Guide
about the sense of it without any scrutiny, are two contrary obligations. If
the first be intended, (as it is plain it is) the last cannot. God never wills,
that we should be engaged to those things which are contradictory one to
another. In a civil Community; where there is a Law and a Judge: If it be
commanded, That every Subject read this Law, search it diligently, use his best
endeavors to understand it, That his conformity to it may be an act of his own
Reason, this would plainly signify, That the Judge is not to be followed
blindfold, whether right or wrong, but his Decree is to be compared and fully
considered. Though the Judge has the power of decision, which the subject is so
far to acquiesce in, as not to disturb the public order by any inutinous
demeanor: yet the judgment of discretion cannot be denied to him in this case,
which if it happens to be contrary to the sentence of the Judge, he must bear
without a tumultuous deportment the consequences of it.

6. All the Testimony we have, That such a Guide is intended, is from the
Church of Rome, which is the party concerned, and lays claim to this Dignity.
If we ask how it comes to be known, that the is vested in this immunity,
Scripture-promises are presently alleged. If we further demand, How we shall
know, that this is the sense of the promise? We are told, That we must adhere
to the interpretation of the Church, which understands it so. From which it
evidently appears, That the ultimate ground and reason of our belief in this
particular, is the Testimony of the Church of Rome. For no Community is
permitted to have the denomination of a true Church, besides that which submits
to the Papal Authority. If our Blessed Lord, the supreme Head of the Church,
says, If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true, Joh. 5.31. Much
more may this be applied to the Body, if it has no other evidence for this
fundamental point, but what is derived from her self. The bare testimony of a
party is not a sufficient foundation to build a legal determination upon in any
Court of Law.

7. The Primitive Constitution of the Church plainly intimates, That no one
Guide was designed to be Supreme over all the Churches in the World. Our
blessed Lord left the Apostles in a parity. Nothing was spoken to S. Peter,
concerning any Ecclesiastical Power, but what the others were equally concerned
in. These constituted Bishops over particular Churches in the same equality,
they themselves were left in. Though in every Church there is a subordination of
the Clergy and People to their own Bishop, yet there is none to any, which is
foreign. It is true, There is one Catholic Church, but the unity of it
consists in having one Lord, one Faith, and one Baptism, and not one Bishop and
Head to interpret for all, and impose what dictates he pleases upon them. The
ancient Churches did maintain correspondencies by Communicatory Letters; and
when extraordinary cases did emerge, send their prudential Expedients as the
effects of their Charity: But we no where read of the exercise of any pretended
authority one over the other. If there had been any one authorized Guide in
controversy for all Churches known in those early times, when Heresies and
Schisms did arise, no question, a speedy application would have been made to
him, for the curing of what was amiss: yet we read of no such matter. But on
the contrary, Appeals were prohibited to any foreign Bishop, and an express
order established, That differences should be decided within the Province,
where they did emerge. S. Cyprian asserts so much in his Epistle to Cornelius.
Epist. 55. Pamel. Epist. 59. Oxon.
Nam cum statutum sit omnibus nobis, and aequum sit, etc. For when it is
appointed to all of us, and it is both equal and just, That the cause of every
one should be heard, where the crime is committed, and a portion of the Flock
is assigned to particular Pastors, which every one must rule and govern, being
under an obligation, to give an account to the Lord of what he does: It behooves
those, whom we are set over, not to run up and down, nor break the firm concord
of Bishops by their subdolous and fallacious temerity, but there to plead their
cause, where the Accusers may have witnesses of their crime, etc. The fifth
Canon of the first Council of Nice, is of the same importance, and is so
interpreted by the next General Council held at Constantinople in the second
Canon.

As for the Canons of the Council of Sardica, which seem to favor Appeals,
there is just reason to suspect, that they are forged. The Fathers of the sixth
Council of Carthage knew nothing of them, though about Forty African Bishops were
present at that Convention, as Athanasius testifies. A matter of such moment
could not have been concealed from them, when so many of their own Countrymen,
were witnesses to what was transacted. The attempt that was made to father them
upon the Council of Nice, argues, That there was no fair dealing about them.

If the Canons are genuine, it must be remembered, That they were made, not by a
General, but a Provincial Synod. Though the Council was intended to be General,
yet it proved otherwise by the Oriental Bishops withdrawing themselves, and
refusing to act in it. The decrees of such a Convention have not efficacy
enough to rescind and annul what was done before in the Council of Nice. An
Inferior Authority cannot abolish, what is established by a Superior.

If the Council had been General, yet if we look well into the Canons pretended
to be framed by it, they will not amount to that which the Church of Rome
thinks to make of them. Three things are conceded to the Bishop of that See, 1.
A liberty in case of judgment already given, to deliberate, whether the matter
ought not to be considered again. 2. If he thought so, whether he would send
any to be present at the hearing of the Cause. 3. A freedom to appoint Judges
out of the neighboring Provinces finally to determine. Here is no bringing the
cause to Rome, but the judgment is to be ended, where the difference did begin.

If all this was as real, as it is pretended to be, it cannot be looked upon as
any more than a prudent Expedient in that present juncture. The Arians very
much prevailed. The Orthodox were highly oppressed. The Bishop of Rome favored
their cause. And to put him into a greater capacity of succouring them, such a
determination might be condescended unto. But the words of the Synod plainly
represent it as a novel thing, which the Church before was utterly unacquainted
with. Neither the Institution of Christ, nor Primitive Tradition are alleged
as the ground of it: but an honorary respect to the memory of S. Peter, the
Bishop of Rome being at that time esteemed as his Successor, and very steadfast
in that faith which he sacrificed his life for, (...), are the words of Hosius
of Corduba, who is represented as the person, who did steer all matters under
debate in that Convention.

8. No provision is made of one infallible Guide in a case of like importance.
The whole World is one Community under God the Father, as the Church is one
under Christ. All particular Kingdoms are united under some general Laws, as
the several Churches are in the same rules of Belief and Worship. They have all
the same light of Reason. There is a jus Gentium to which all the Empires of
the Universe are obliged to submit. Peace is as desirable betwixt them, as
Unity amongst the several parts of the Church. The records of every Nation give
an account of the direful effects of Civil as well as Ecclesiastical discord.
From hence arises the most desolating Wars, and the sudden ruin of millions
of Men, who are taken off in the height of their fury, before they have time
to settle their thoughts in relation to eternity. How are the innocent stripped
of their enjoyments, and have nothing left them but a deplorable state of
Misery. All this by inevitable necessity tends to the eclipsing the honor of
the Supreme Monarch, the glory of his regiment being much more conspicuous in a
peaceable order, than a polemical confusion. The image of the Sun cannot be
distinctly seen in troubled waters. For this important reason, we are under the
strictest obligations to follow peace with all men, and mutually to exchange
acts of kindness and humanity. Although Peace betwixt distinct Nations be of such
great moment, yet it is not the pleasure of the Supreme Rector to constitute
one visible infallible Guide for the conservation of it. If this was a means of
peremptory necessity, in order to the maintaining Unity and Concord; there is
as much reason, why it should be appointed for the securing Unity in the
several Kingdoms of the World, as the several Churches. No such constitution
being made in relation to the preserving their amicable correspondencies, no
argument can be drawn from the nature and necessity of the thing, that it must
be established in the Church.

9. If the Church has one suprme Guide vested in an authority to decide all
controversies, it will not be easy to reconcile this appointment to the
constitution of Civil Empires. The Militant Church cannot have an existence,
but within the territories of some secular Sovereign Power. The Prince is
undoubtedly invested by God, with authority to preserve the Peace of his
Community. This Peace is often disturbed by Ecclesiastical discords. If he has
not a power within his Dominion, (without addressing to foreign authority) to
compose them; He has an end appointed to him, and yet is not allowed the use of
the means which immediately conduces to it. All things may break out into a
combustion, and the Community be entombed in its own ashes, before the decision
of a Foreign Power can be obtained. It would not be accounted any discretion,
when a Prince's Palace is on Fire, to refuse the use of the River which runs by
it: and send into Italy for water in order to the quenching of it. Every
Sovereign within his own Dominions is the Supreme Moderator and Governor, in
all Causes as well Ecclesiastical as Civil; which cannot be, if there be one
authorized Guide, for all the Churches in the World, to whose determination
they are bound to submit, let it be never so contrary to the Will of their own
Sovereign. Though Secular Princes have not a Power in Sacris, that is, to Ordain,
Preach, Administer the Sacraments, Excommunicate, etc. yet they have an
undoubted Authority, circa Sacra, that is, to defend the Church in the doing of
these things, and see that the Governors rightly proceed in their
administrations: and when controversies arise, which have a tendency to trouble
the State, to convocate them, and ratify such resolutions, as conduce to the
securing the concord of the Community. Though the Church is immediately
constituted by Christ: yet it cannot be denied, That Secular Princes, within
whose Territories it is planted, are designed as Nursing Fathers to it, which
must necessarily import their duty, to see, That Poison be not administered
instead of Milk, to cherish it, and put a period to those molestations, which
will hinder the growth of it. If this power be vested in every Prince, there
can be no foreign authorized Guide, who has right to command within his
Dominions. These two constitutions are contrary one to the other, and instead
of Peace must necessarily produce War. Subjects would not know to whom to pay
their Allegiance, whether to submit to the Sword or the Keys. Whereas if there
be a power within every Nation, to reform it self, and to put a period to all
differences without the interposals of a foreign authority, the public Peace
is secured as much as can be expected in this sublunary state.

10. There is a plain prediction in the holy Scripture concerning one who will
pretend to be such an infallible Guide as we speak of. He is described, as
sitting in the Temple of God, showing himself, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
That he is God. God is undoubtedly infallible, and therefore he who sits in
his Temple, namely the Christian Church, 1 Cor. 3.14. and carries himself as
God, does make a manifest claim to that indefectibility that is peculiar to the
Deity.

This Pretender to infallibility is represented to be a great Impostor. He is
styled the man of sin, the son of perdition, whose coming is after the working
of Satan, with all deceivableness of unrighteousness.

The Character which is given of this Impostor exactly agrees to him, who now
pretends to be such an Authorized, Ecumenical Guide.

He is described as one professing the Christian Religion: as making a great
defection from the reality of it: as arising out of a low condition: as having
his growth in greatness impeded for a time by the Roman Empire: as exalting
himself by degrees, (as that obstruction was removed) above Kings and
Emperors, and all that is called God: as being invested with outward pomp and
splendour: as, having his Seat in the City upon seven Hills: as treating those
with the greatest severity, who refuse a submission to his Sentiments: as
comeing with all power, signs and lying wonders.

How agreeable this Character is to him who now pretends to be an infallible
Guide in the concerns of Religion, is undeniably evident. He is in profession a
Christian, pretending to maintain the whole Doctrine which was delivered by our
Blessed Lord. He is guilty of a great defection from it, by mixing many
injurious additions with it, and declaring all to lie under the guilt of
Heresy, who refuse to comply with them. He was in a low condition, so long as
the Roman Empire stood in its full force, and power. He sometime styled
himself, indignum famulum Imperatoris. As the (...) decayed, so he increased,
and at last grew to such a height, as he challenged an authority over Princes
and all that is called God. He made bold to depose them, to absolve their
Subjects from their Allegiance, to dispense with the Laws of Heaven, and make
them subservient to his worldly interest. He is attended with all outward
splendour and glory. He is not contented with a single Crown, but assumes a
Triple. He expects the most solemn adoration from those who apply themselves to
him. When the Ambassadors of Sicily prostrated themselves at his feet, using
these words three times, Molin. vates.
O Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the world, he was not displeased
with the civility of the address. The place of his residence is in the City
built upon seven Hills. He uses those, which dissent from him, in the most
savage and cruel manner. Miracles are one of the signs of that Church which he
is the Head of.

Indeed it is said, That the man of Sin is the same with him, who is styled
(...), and he is expressed to be one, who denies the Father and the Son; which
cannot be affirmed of him, who is the great pretender to infallibility. To
which we reply, That though he owns them in words, yet in reality he denies them,
by authorizing that Worship which is peculiar to them, to be given to created
Beings. Though a Subject does verbally own his True Sovereign; yet if he pays
that homage to another, which is due only to him; he does in truth deny him,
and will be treated by the Law as such a person. Actions are more faithful
indications of the mind, than verbal expressions.

As all this argues the agreeablenss of the Character of the Man of Sin to the
great pretender to Infallibility: So we know of no other, to which it can with
so much reason be applied. Three are pretended to have an interest in it. Caius
Caligula, Simon Magus, and a Jew of the Tribe of Dan.

As for Caius Caligula, He cannot be the person. Though he was a Man of Sin, yet
he was not the Man, which the Apostle had his eye upon. He was come and gone
before the writing of the Epistle to the Thessalonians, Baronius Capel. Appen.
aed Histor. Aposto. p. 3913.
which was about the end of the Ninth, or the beginning of the Tenth year of
Glaudius his Successor: and we must not so interpret S. Paul, as to make him
prophesy of that which was already past. The same exception lies against Simon
Magus. He was in his altitude and greatness about the beginning of Claudius.
His flying in his fiery Chariot, and being brought down headlong by the
Devotion of S. Peter, are usually believed to have happened about the Second
Year of his Reign, about Eight Years before the Prophecy was extant. The Man of
Sin was hindered from appearing in those times by the (...), that is, the
Secular Power of Rome, as Tertullian, S. Chrysostom and S. Austine assert. The
first calls it Romanum Statum, the second (...). The third Romanum Imperium.
This was not taken away till some Hundreds of Years after: and then the great
pretender to Infallibility did display himself in his proper colors. Indeed
the Mystery of Iniquity began to work in the Apostles days. There were then
many Antichrists. As Christ had his Types to represent him before his
Manifestation in our Nature: So had his great Antagonist. In the number of
these, Simon Magus may be reckoned: but to make him the person which the
Apostle has in his eye, in his prediction concerning the Man of Sin, cannot be
reconciled to any good reason.

Lastly, it is said, That a Jew of the Tribe of Dan is the Person aimed at by
the Apostle, who will abolish the Mass, oppress the Church, subdue the whole
World in Three Years and a half; and then presently shall be the comeing of
Christ to the last judgment. But this is as easily denied as affirmed. There is
not the least intimation of any such matter in the Holy Scripture. Genesis 49.
Number. 2. Jer. 8. Rev. 2.
The Texts, which have been sometimes produced, are so irrelative, That the
wisest of our Adversaries are ashamed to allege them. The Person which the
Apostle aims at, must be a Christian in Profession, who in reality makes a
great defection from the Doctrine of our Savior: which cannot be asserted of a
Jew, who is, and was always an open and professed enemy to it. There is an
impossibility in the thing, That one should subdue all the World in Three Years
and a half. It would be very difficult for him to visit every part (though very
well mounted) in so short a time, much more to conquer it. In the times
immediately preceding the last day, there will be worldly joy in the greatest
altitude, Eating and Drinking, Marrying and giving in Marriage, which cannot be
consistent with that Sorrow, which must be an inevitable product of the
universal oppression and tyranny of an insatiable Conqueror. It does not
appear, That there is any preparation for any such matter in any part of the
Universe. The Tribe of Dan (for any thing we know) is utterly extinct. There is
not a Jew now, that takes his denomination from it. It is strange, That the
Mystery of Iniquity should begin to work in the Apostles days, and now
altogether cease to make any progress. The infernal Spirit is as active, as
ever. It is his chief design to set up the person, whom the Apostle describes.
He cannot be imagined to be wanting in his endeavors to accomplish so grateful
a purpose. The Jews, to requite the Advancers of this Hypothesis, say, That
Antichrist shall be begotten in Rome, and his name called Armillus. Buxt. Rab.
Lex. in voc. Armillus.


Hitherto I have considered, the first Opinion, That the Church of Rome must be
our Guide. The Second is, That this privilege belongs to every Man's Reason.
By the Reason of every Man, we must understand, That Light which every one has
in his Intellect. Though this be the immediate Guide, yet it is not the Supreme:
and is no farther valuable for conduct in Religion, but so far as it is
conformable to the Supreme Rule. This rule is the revelation of God contained
in the Scripture. This was given to be a Lamp unto our feet, and a light unto
our paths. Those Texts which respect our Salvation, and promise to us a
security against the revenger of blood, like the Cities of Refuge in Palestine,
are placed upon Hills, and made very conspicuous. There is no need of Four
Hundred Camels (as the Jews speak) laden with Commentaries to give them light.
Matters of Faith and Worship necessary to the enjoyment of a future state of
happiness, are clear in them.

When it is said, That every Man must be guided by his own reason; if the
meaning is, That he must be ruled by the light of his Intellect, from
whatsoever Topic it is derived, without any limitation, many ill consequences
will be unavoidable.

1. Such conduct will necessarily produce an effect very disagreeable to the
mind of the Supreme Being. If it be allowed, there will be as great a diversity
of opinions and practices in Religion, as there is of tempers, educations and
interests. These usually mould the Intellect, and make the most prevailing
impressions upon it. From hence commonly proceeds the Light which the
generality pretends unto.

This variety will certainly suffocate the Spirit of Christian love. Men in
their several apartments are naturally propense to meditate their own defense,
and the justification of their separation. They usually believe, That the most
compendious way to it, is to weaken the reputation of those, who differ from
them. This creates on both sides the hottest jealousy, the most sinister
interpretation of each others actions, an exchange of the greatest unkindness,
and an utter suffocation of those breathings of Charity which the primitive Age
was so eminent for. So long as divisions are productive of such bad effects, it
is impossible that the Divine Nature should be atoned into an approbation of
them. This is the reason of the Apostle's pathetical entreaties to speak the
same thing to avoid divisions, to be perfectly joined in the same mind and
judgment. Not only a unity amongst religious persons is required in this, That
every one act according to his Conscience; but that every person have the same
judgment and conscience.

2. Such conduct cannot be agreeable to the interest of humane Society. It
gives a fatal blow to the Ecclesiastical Community. For if every one may follow
his private Sentiments, by whatsoever Topics they are impressed upon him,
Ecclesiastical Rulers will have nothing to do. Those Precepts, Obey them that
are over you, and submit your selves, for they watch over your souls, Heb.
13.17. Know them that labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, 1 Thessalonians.
5.12. are made insignificant.

The Civil Society will likewise quickly feel the effects of this Doctrine. The
diversity which is a natural consequence of it, will produce dislike amongst
the several parties.

This dislike by the fervor of Passion will quickly be boiled up into an
Enmity. Enmity, when any party has potency enough to give some reasonable
assurance of conquest, will break out into a combustion, and entomb the Society
in its own ashes.

Whereas it is said, That it is restraint that produces commotion: it may be
justly replied, That a prudent restraint cannot be charged with any such crime.
The things of Religion are either clear, and visibly essential to Salvation: or
else doubtful, and not of such peremptory necessity. A restraint in the first
case, to hinder men from opposing the most important propositions, and as clear
as the Sunbeams, is so reasonable, That it can administer no just occasion to
the rational part of the World to be mutinous. It is but a discreet provision
against Monsters in Morality and Divinity, who are obstinately resolved to
dispute the clearest dictates of Reason. Such persons notoriously reflect upon
the Divine Honor, do a manifest hurt to themselves, invite the displeasure of
Heaven to fall down upon the Community. In the second case, a charitable
forbearance, prudent condescensions are highly commendable. The speaking the
truth in love will be more efficacious than all external violence. If
Governors are necessitated to interpose their Authority, allay the heat of
debates, and prevent the mischiefs which may emerge from them: They must
remember the spirit and temper of the Gospel, which forbids the calling down
fire from Heaven, and the using sanguinary methods, for the reducing of those
whom they conceive to be in error. Where such a temper prevails; if commotions
arise, they must not be charged upon the Constitution, but the inordinate lusts
of men, which transport them beyond their due measures, and will not permit
them to persevere in a deportment suitable to their condition. Divine Wisdom has
digested the Community into Two Orders: Governors and Private Persons. To the
first belongs the judgment of Decision: to both the judgment of Discretion,
That they may know what to do, agreeable to their station. If the restraint be
from that which is evil, we ought cheerfully to submit, and be thankful to our
Rulers for the preventing our precipitation into ruin. If from that which is
really good, by reason of an antecedent obligation from God, we are to
persevere in well doing; and in the preservation of our integrity, so quietly
demean our selves, as it may be apparent, That we are biased with the most
tender regards to the Peace of the Community. If this Order was observed,
Governors might restrain what they conceive to be amiss, and the world
continue without Commotions. Wars arise from a violation of the Divine Order,
and the not being contented with that condition, which the Providence of Heaven
thinks fit to place us in.

3. Such Conduct is not agreeable to the propensities of Intellectual Nature.
Men are generally inclined, not to trust to the dictates of their own Reason in
the concerns of Religion without supernal direction. It is natural to believe,
That the Deity will be Worshipped, and Honored by some actions, which have
their sole dependence upon his Will. (By them the most emphatical
acknowledgments of his Sovereignty are made) And the knowledge of such Actions
can be conveyed to us in no other way but by revelation. This is the cause why
all Nations have given a ready ear to those who have pretended converse with
the Deity. We have an evident instance in the Sibyls, who were believed to be
admitted to the Counsels and privacies of the Gods, the memory of which is
still preserved in their name. (...) in the Aeolick Dialect, Deus, and (...)
consilium. When one of them presented some of their compositions to Tarquinius,
he committed them to the custody of the Duumviri. When the Regal power was
taken away, this care was devolved upon Fifteen select Persons. When they were
casually burnt with the Capitol, Three Ambassadors were dispatched abroad, to
make inquisition for such Verses as did bear their name. The like was done by
Augustus in many parts of the World in order to the reparation of this
inestimable loss. Those Verses, that were found, were committed to a College
of Priests, which continued to the time of Theodosius the first. They were of
such esteem, That nothing out of them might see the light, without the
allowance of the Senate. There was a fear upon Governors, lest the People
wholly captivated by their Authority, should under pretenses drawn from thence,
attempt an innovation in Religion.

An Honor, not inferior to this, was paid to the Oracles. Though Cato with some
others did discern, That their Responses did proceed from infernal Spirits: yet
the generality, who were not so quick-sighted, through a natural proclivity, to
give credit to revelation, had a superlative esteem for them. If it was so
natural, as is pretended, to rely upon our Reason only for our Guide in the
concerns of Religion, it cannot be imagined, how every Nation should be so
disposed to a renunciation of their own Sentiments, and with so much
cheerfulness acquiesce in this pretended Authority.

Our Reason in its most refined state would be no competent Guide alone, much
less in its present state of imperfection. As God has made Man for Religion, so
he has furnished him with a double advantage, Reason and Revelation. Reason has
a certain sphere, within which its activity is to be confined. If it
transgresses its limits, it becomes as prejudicial, as the Sea, when it rebels
against its bounds and makes an inundation. The Eye of the Intellect has its
Horizon as well as the Eye of Sense. Where Reason ends, Revelation begins. This
is the Telescope, which interprets, and makes plain, what the eye before had
but an imperfect discovery of: or else discloseth that, which before was under
a total concealment. Therefore God designing Man for Religion, has, besides
what he has discovered in the Law of Nature, diverse ways and manners revealed
himself in all Ages. In Paradise, by a Voice from Heaven conveyed in a Gale of
Wind, styled (...). Genesis 3. Aquil.
Afterward by the Vrim and Thummim, contained in the Sacerdotal Pectoral.
Sometimes by Prophecy, by which the Jews understand an influence from Heaven
transmitted, in a Vision, or dream, into the Soul, of which they make four
degrees. The first is, when the influence is terminated upon the rational
faculty only. The second, when the Imaginative is agitated: but the rational
part retains the predominancy. The third, when both are kept in a just poize,
and equally balance one another. The fourth, when the Fancy is uppermost, and
it becomes difficult for the Intellect, to comprehend the import of the
representation.

Sometimes God has revealed himself by the (...) namely, a celestial influx,
whereby Men, when they were awake, and had the ordinary use and vigor of their
Senses, were enabled to utter words of Wisdom, far exceeding their ordinary
strain. This is that, which is attributed by the Hebrews to those, who were
concerned in the composure of the Hagiographal part of the Old Testament: and
was certainly conferred upon the holy Men who framed the New.

What God was pleased to reveal these several ways, He by his Providence
communicated throughout the World. That which He discovered to Adam by the
(...), Adam communicated to his Sons and Daughters, from whom all mankind
proceed. The thread of their lives was spun out to such a length, That Three of
them, Methusalem, Sem, and Isaac, were in a capacity to carry on the Tradition,
till a little before Jacob's going down into Egypt. What was discovered by
prophecy was committed to a People, who had their habitation in the center of
the known World. From thence this celestial Light was communicated in the Greek
Tongue to all parts of the circumference. Upon this account we read of devout
Men at Jerusalem, out of every nation under heaven, Act. 2.5. The Queen of
Sheba was not the only person which heard of the Wisdom of Solomon.

What was revealed by the (...) was blessed with an universal communication.
Romans 10.18. Coloss. 1.6. Insomuch, That if any place wants this revelation, we
are not to accuse the goodness of God, but the impiety of Men, which provoked
him to withdraw so signal a favor.

4. Such Conduct will be prejudicial to the Souls of Men in relation to their
future state. They are in a ready way to fall into the grossest errors. Those
who have no other Compass to Sail by, but the light of their own Intellect,
whatsoever Topic it is derived from, will quickly make shipwreck of Faith and a
good Conscience. There is no superstition so barbarous, but they may be
reconciled to the belief of the reasonableness of it, and think, they are
obliged to a conformity unto it. It was a real trouble to the Votaries of
Moloch, to abstain from murdering their children, and offering them up to that
Idol. The Egyptians had no satisfaction in their own Spirits, if they did not
make religious addresses to Apes and Crocodiles.

He who is governed only by his own Reason will be apt to boggle at the
peculiar Object of our Worship, the most blessed and sacred Trinity. This
Mystery is too deep for the line of a finite understanding to reach to the
bottom of. He will be under strong inclinations to raise objections against it,
and err about that, which is necessary to his Salvation. And he who is tainted
with this distemper, and obstinately perseveres in it, the Apostle says, is
subverted and self-condemned, if not formally, yet virtually according to an
equitable interpretation, even as those who thrust from them the Word, are said
to judge themselves unworthy of eternal life.

Indeed we are told, That Speculative Errors, about the Mysteries of Religion,
have no hurt in them, and that we may be as safe on the lest as on the right
side. Because there is no disobedience in them. They are unavoidable. It is
uncharitable to think them damnable. A Catalogue of those which are so, cannot
be made. The sault cannot be known by the guilty. The probability of Truth on
both sides assures us, That God will not punish those that err. Such errors
cannot be displeasing, which have their allowance from Conscience, the
Vicegerent of God. To all which I will reply in order.

1. Error is inclusive of Disobedience. We are under an obligation to submit
our Intellects to Divine Revelation as well as our Wills, and we are commanded,
not only to endeavor to find out the Truth, but actually to find it. Try all
things, hold fast that which is good. To try, imports the search; to hold fast,
supposes the finding: the promise is made to those which are successful in
their inquiry. This is Life Eternal to know, and not only to endeavor it. Is
it not an act of disobedience, when God has given us the Light of his Word to
walk by, to make it our free choice to neglect this infallible Guide, and
prefer the Light of our own private judgment, which way soever communicated to
us. He who refuses the Light of the Sun in the day time for his conduct, and
travels only in the night by Moonshine, though he endeavors to the utmost to
find his way by those dim emanations: yet in case he lose it, the fault is
entirely to be resolved into himself, who might have enjoyed the benefit of a
greater Light, which would have effectually secured him against deviation.

2. Errors in Religion are not unavoidable. God has made a plentiful provision
for our direction. The Scripture is the Pandect of the Divine Will, sufficient
to instruct the Man of God, he, who errs, has nothing to charge but his own
will, in whose power it was to have continued the scrutiny, till the object had
been disintangled and set free from all real scruples. When the object is
arrived at such a degree of clarity, there is no fear of deception, it being
not reconcilable with the Divine Veracity, that our faculty should be so
composed, as to be deceived in that case. Error proceeds from our giving our
assent too hastily, before the proposition be clear to us. It being in the
power of the Will to suspend the assent till that time, we can with justice
charge nothing but the Will as the fountain of the aberration.

3. It is no uncharitableness to say, That error is damnable. Faith and
Charity go hand in hand. That Proposition which is the object of the first,
cannot be inconsistent with the second. Now it is evident, That it is a branch
of our Creed, that some errors are of this nature. Whosoever abides not in
the doctrine of Christ, has not God, Jo. 2. ep. v. 7. There shall be false
Teachers among you, who shall privily bring in damnable Heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1.
If any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him, let him know, that he
which converteth a sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul from
death, 1 Pet. 5.19, 20. If conversion from error procures Salvation,
perseverance in error must inevitably infer damnation. Heresies are reckoned
amongst those things, which shut men out of the kingdom of Heaven. All sins
whatsoever spring from error in the understanding. This is expressed in the
names which the Scripture gives to sin. (...) Romans 1.27. (...), Heb. 9.7. (...)
is an aberration from the mark. Sinners are styled (...) unreasonable, 2 Thessalonians.
3.2. (...) without understanding, Tit. 3.3. Fools, Act. 26.11. A deceived heart
is represented as the root of all miscarriages, Is. 44.19, 20. If the fruit be
damnable, it is no uncharitableness to think the root is so.

4. The reason why a just Catalogue of errors damnable to all men cannot be
made, is, because that error may be damnable to one which is not so to
another. Obligations to believe, spring out of those advantages, which Men have
to know the mind of God; therefore all not enjoying the same advantages, cannot
lie under an equal obligation. Though this makes it difficult to give the number
of errors: yet it is no impediment to the discretion of their quality. Number
and quality are different modes, and fall under distinct perceptions. That kind
of Locusts which destroyed the fruits of Egypt, were easily distinguished from
others of the same denomination: and yet it was impossible to make a Catalogue
of them.

5. The fault may be known by the guilty, if they please to look back, after
they have made that, which they call a mature search, and observe, how often
they have given their assent, before there has been such a degree of clarity in
the object, as could with justice lay a claim to it. Extrinsecal respects, and
not the merit of the Cause, do usually prevail with Men to take up an Opinion:
and when they have espoused it, the often repetition of that, which at first
they knew to be an uncertainty, makes them at last to give credit to it in good
earnest. Though they were Liars at the beginning, yet in the end became
believers. The best way, to discover the deception, is to make a review, and to
consider the first motives which did introduce their credence. They are usually
some excentrical regards to the persons of some, which are under the same
persuasion. The fallibility of such inducements will give us just reason to
look back, withdraw our assent, and not to terminate it upon any thing for the
future, but that which does manifest its truth by undeniable evidence.

6. God has not put us into a state of probability. Truths of peremptory
necessity are delivered to us in demonstrations. If they be hid, it is only to
those whose eyes are blinded by the God of this World. The light of the
glorious Gospel is plain and conspicuous enough in it self. If every thing must
be esteemed probable only, against which some luxuriant wits may devise
objections, the clearest propositions will not arrive at the honor of being
accounted certain, but must be contented to take their place amongst
probabilities It is as easy for a skeptical fancy to raise scruples, as for
Travelers in dry weather to raise dust in the high way. It is reported of Car.
Vedel. p. 27.
Perronius, when he had made an Oration before Henry the third of France, to
prove the existence of the Deity, with the great applause of the Auditory, he
made a tender to speak as much on the contrary side. There is nothing more
visible to us than local motion, and yet the certainty of it has not been
exempt from being encountered with opposition. Objections are like clouds, not
all of them obscure the Sun, and render his light dubious: but those only which
lie in a direct line betwixt that Luminary and the visive faculty. Many
objections may be started on either side. but if the splendor of the object be
so efficacious, as not to permit them to come in a direct line betwixt it, and
the perceptive faculty, they ought not to make any abatement, and degrade the
object from a state of certainty, to a state of probability.

7. An erroneous Conscience is no more the true Vicegerent of God, than the
Pseudo-Smerdis was the Brother of Cambyses: or Perkin Warbeck the Son of Edward
the fourth. An erroneous Conscience is but a Counterfeit, and no more to be
obeyed than those pretenders. If nothing falls under condemnation, which is
done according to Conscience, S. Paul before his conversion was as unblameable,
as he believed himself to be, when he expressed the highest degree of enmity to
the Church.

The Jews also by the same way of arguing will be discharged from all guilt,
who thought it an acceptable service to God to shed the blood of his Servants,
Joh. 16.3. Error in the Conscience is to be resolved into the Will as the
spring of it: and therefore cannot sanctisie those bad effects, which it does
naturally produce. Conscience is nothing but the Judgment: for the right
information of which a sufficient provision is made. We then err, when we
neglect to make use of this provision, and acquiesce in sudden dictates,
grounded upon something which is extrinsecal to the Cause, and do not persevere
in our scrutiny, till matters be brought to such a degree of perspicuity, as
duly qualifies them for assent.

I have now finished the first particular. Our Light to direct us in the
Worship of God, is to be directed from the Holy Scripture. I will proceed to
the next.

2. Our strength to perform, what we are directed unto, we must expect from the
Holy Spirit. His assistance is either General or Special. General. Where the
Gospel is preached, it is accompanied with a Divine Power, whereby the hearers
are put into a capacity of complying with the demands of it. Upon this account
it is styled the Administration of the Spirit, the Law of the Spirit of Life,
the Power of God unto Salvation. And Christ is represented as waiting to see
what improvement will be made of it. Behold I stand at the door and knock. And
those who frustrate the Divine Call, are said to resist the Holy Ghost. And
those who are obedient, to be begotten again by the Word, which is a work
appropriated to the Spirit, as the principal Agent. Such persons have a power
to know, That there is a Supreme Being, which governs the World: to discern
their own iniquity in breaking those Laws, by which he governs; to be filled
with consternation, upon the account of the eternal pains, which the Gospel
threatens to the disobedient; to have some hope of Amnesty and forgiveness in
consideration of the Evangelical Promises: and under these dispositions to cast
themselves down before the throne of the divine benignity, and with all
humility implore the communication of a higher assistance, That they may be
enabled to serve God with a Spirit of love and delight, and with an Eye
entirely fixed upon his Glory. Those who have made, by the help of this general
grace, so near an approach to the Kingdom of Heaven, and have so far wrought
out their Salvation with fear and trembling. It is the usual method of the
Divine Spirit to communicate unto them a more special aid, to work in them to
will and to do. Whereas the proud, who refuse to improve this talent are
rejected: these humble persons find acceptance, and have a greater measure of
grace communicated to them. Jam. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5. Is. 57.15. They are in the
ready way to be impregnated with a principle which is styled, a new heart,
Ezekiel. 36.26. the new creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. the new man. Ephesians. 4.24. the hidden
man of the heart, 1 Pet. 3.4. the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. the unction, 1 Jo.
2.27. And likewise to be excited by a supernal influence, to act according to
this principle. Though the habitual gift is perfect as it descends from the
Father of Lights: yet as it stands in relation to the Recipient, out of which
it does not expel all the remains of the Primitive Apostasy, it being but
imperfect, it has need of fresh influences to quicken it. Upon this account God
is pleased, not only to enkindle the sparks of grace, but to prevent their
decay by enlivening them with the breath of his Holy Spirit. He not only
enstamps a new bias upon the Heart; (...).
but with his own hand puts it forward toward the mark. This influence is that,
which David so importunately petitions for, show me thy ways, teach me thy
paths, lead me in thy truth, Ps. 25.4, 5. Open mine eyes, Ps. 119.18. make me
to understand the way of thy precepts, v. 27. Teach me the way of thy statutes,
v. 33. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, v. 26. Make me to go in the way
of thy commandments, v. 35. order my steps in thy word, v. 133. This holy Man
in these applications must aim at the obtaining of some thing, which he was
sensible of the want of. At the time of this address, he was invested with a
Religious Principle; and therefore must have his Eye upon a Divine Influence,
whereby his heart might be excited, and drawn forth to action. To this is
consonant what is expressed in Ezekiel 36.26, 27. I will put my Spirit within
you, and cause you to walk in my ways. The stony heart is not only removed, and
a tractable temper placed in the room, which is styled a heart of flesh: but
the Spirit is to be put into them, in order to the stirring them up to walk in
the ways of God. The same thing is asserted in the Ep. to the Hebrews, c.
13.20, 21. The God of peace make you perfect in every good work, to do his
will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus
Christ. That which is most pleasing is the Act of Religion; it having a nearer
affinity to the Divine Nature, which is a pure act, than the Power has. The
working of this by a Celestial influence is petitioned for. Faith, which is the
spring of Religious Worship is represented in the very act to be the gift of
God, Bhil. 1. v. 29. To you it is given not only to believe, but to suffer, as,
(...) imports actual suffering: So (...) actual belief: (...) which denotes the
Act of Worship is expressed as the effect of the Divine Donation, Luke 1. v.
73, 74. Parallel to all this are the words of the Apostle, Phil. 2.13. It is
God that works in you, to will and to do. It is not only the power to will
and to do, which is represented as the product of Divine Grace, but the
volition and action. The influence is so efficacious, That the acts, which are
freely exerted by Men, are attributed to him from whom it proceeds, as (...),
does not only signify him that is able to work, but him who works: so (...)
does not import only a power to do, but the doing or action it self. Those, who
are thus dealt with, are said to be drawn by the Father. Jo. 6.44. After they
have gone through the preparatory work by the help of his general grace: This
special effectually pulls their hearts, and brings them over to Christ. This is
the usual method of God's proceeding with those who live under the Gospel. He
puts a Talent into the hand of every one: and if it be rightly used, he secures
to the improver by promise the communication of a more powerful assistance: So
that if any want it, none are blameable for the defect, but themselves. He, who
is unfaithful in the discharge of an inferior trust, cannot expect to be
employed in a greater. He who has a stock of a hundred pounds, and imbezleth
it, may thank his own folly, That a greater sum is not committed to him. It is
no prejudice to what has been asserted, That God deals sometimes otherwise with
Men. S. Paul before his Conversion, was so far from being under any preparatory
disposition, That he was employing his strength to destroy the Faith of Christ,
at that time, when he was effectually called by him. There is no rule, but may
admit of some exception. God has his chosen vessels of Mercy. The Captain
General of our Salvation has, besides his other Regiments, Artic. 17.
one peculiar to himself. God has chosen in Christ some out of Mankind. Helps
are vouchsafed to many, which exceed the ordinary measures. In the family in
Heaven and Earth, every Child's portion, though it be sufficient, yet is not
equal. S. Paul was a special object of Divine dignation: and had extraordinary
communications to secure his permanency amidst all the disanimating
circumstances, he was cast into. He styles himself (...), one suddenly, and not
regularly brought forth, as Abortives use to be. The breathings of the Holy
Spirit are like to the (...), or Winds, which by Geographers are divided into
two sorts, (...), such are common to all places, and (...), such as are proper
to some. God having established Christ as a King for ever, he does ascertain to
him a people to rule over by the most efficacious motions of his holy Spirit,
whereby their reluctancies are conquered, and minds bowed into a resignation
and submission to the will of Heaven.

As for those, who have not the Gospel preached unto them, the divine procedure
with them is more concealed. As the Scripture does industriously give an
account of the Holy Seed, and but occasionally touch upon those generations,
which are out of that line: So it gives a most distinct representation of the
method of his operation with those to whom the Sacred Oracles are communicated,
but not so full a disclosure of it with others, which are not admitted to a
participation of that immunity. That, which is revealed is sufficient to
demonstrate, That God is not wanting to them; and if they miscarry, their
destruction is chargeable only upon themselves. It is manifest, That they with
all others are naturally so much under the power of that corruption, which is
contracted by the Fall: That the Image of God is obliterated in them, and they
rendered unable to do any thing, which is spiritually good. The Second Adam has
so far made a reparation, That the light of Reason, in some measure,
discovering their obligations to their Creator is impressed upon them. He who
is styled (...), lights every Man that comes into the World. That which may
be known of God is manifest in them: not so much upon the account of the
remains of the Divine Image, which they received in the state of innocence, as
a secondary discovery, (...), for God has manifested it unto them. There is a
spirit in every man enclosed with darkness, and the effects of the Primitive
Apostasy: but the inspiration of the Lord gives understanding. When men had
benighted themselves, it was the pleasure of the Lord to light a candle for
them, Prove. 20.27. This light is not only received, but a power to comport with
the meaning of it. For it is plain, they receive so much from God, that for
their defect in the glorifying of them, they are rendered inexcusable, Romans
1.20. If light had been imparted to discover their obligations, and a power
denied to satisfy them; no fairer excuse could have been devised than this,
That the Divine Benignity, since their Primitive Apostasy, whereby they lost
their Light and Power; has been pleased to give them some Light again, to see
their duty, but withhold a Power to discharge it.

To all this we may add, That the fault is in themselves, that they enjoy no
fuller a manifestation, and those assistances which accompany it. By not
improvement of that, which they have, they are deprived of a just claim to that
which is greater. The Sound of the Gospel, which went to the uttermost parts of
the Earth, was drowned with the clamor of their exorbitances. Divine
Providence notwithstanding these provocations, has placed the Candlestick at no
such distance from them, as renders them incapable of receiving benefit by it.
They traffic with those in temporal concerns which are acquainted with it: And
if their affection to him, who is the desire of all Nations, was not through a
voluntary defect grown very languid, they may do the same in Spirituals.

Though we are not able to delineate the manner of God's giving his aid to all in
the concerns of Religion: Yet we have no inferior degree of assurance in the
general, That all do receive such an assistance, as renders them inexcusable,
if they do not perform, what he requires. To assert, That he withholds such
help, makes a very dishonorable reflection upon him. It casts a cloud upon the
glorious constellation of his Attributes: in particular, upon his Goodness, as
though he was less kind under the Second Covenant, than under the First: His
Justice, as though he did condemn men for that, which it was never in their power
to prevent: His Mercy, in offering external means to those, who have no power
to make use of them. It has a tendency to deface that idea which we naturally
have of God in our Souls, and beget in the room of it very enormous
conceptions: As though he did require the Lame to walk, and yet not furnish them
with such supports as are of peremptory necessity to that motion. It leaves no
matter for the Worm of Conscience to breed out of. If the damned knew, That a
sufficient power, while they were upon the Theater of this World, was not given
to them to escape the Torment they are in, how can they reflect with
indignation upon their own folly, for the mis-spending their time, and the loss
of their opportunity, to gain a more easy state? No man is inclined to make
pensive reflections upon himself, for the not bringing to pass impossibilities.
It renders exhortation useless. Counsel supposes a power in him, to whom it is
directed, to comply with it. None will exhort a person, to see, who has
irrecoverably lost his visive faculty, or one, who is dead, to move. It
enervates the nature of repentance. Who will believe himself concerned to
grieve for the omission of that, which was never in his power to do; or for the
doing of that, which he never had power to omit?

As God created Angels with a Will confirmed to that which is Good; brute
Creatures with a Faculty determined to their proper Objects: So he has made Man
in a middle state, not secured, as the supernal Spirits are, nor determined as
inferior Animals. He has endued him with a sufficient power, which he may use,
or abuse, improve or neglect. This is evident in the first Adam, who
undoubtedly had a power to persevere in his innocence; and in those, who are
converted by the grace of the second Adam, whom all confess to have a power to
do more good than they do. He who works after the counsel of his will, is
pleased, to make man after his image, and leave him in the hands of his own
counsel, Ecclus. 15, 14. His concourse with him he adapts to his constitution.
As the sinite Spirit, which animates the body, has its several Organs by which
its operations are modified: So likewise the infinite Spirit, who by his
omnipotent interposal sustains the Universe. All the Creatures are his Organs,
some free, some necessary. Every one he uses according to its Nature. Those,
which are necessary, he concurrs necessarily with. Those which are free, he
ordinarily accommodates himself to their freedom, and by this means keeps up
the order which he has established.

This assertion is not prejudicial to his prescience. It is manifest, that he
knows, what Evil Men will do; although they determine themselves to the doing
of it. By a parity of reason he must know the Good, although they use their own
freedom in the doing of it.

Neither is it injurious to his Sovereignty. He has the hearts of all Men in
his own hand. He can interpose his determining influence. He can take away the
power whereby he inables them to determine themselves. All their determinations
he can so order, as to make them subservient to the design of his Providence.

Neither does it destroy the immediate dependence of the Will upon him. It is
dependent in its Being for conservation: in its acts for his prevenient grace,
and simultaneous concourse. Though God is the cause of every Being, yet not of
all the modes of a free Agent, as is evident in the evil of sin, which is such
a mode, and yet brought to pass without his efficiency.

If any difficulty arise about the manner of God's operating with the Will,
which we cannot comprehend, we must not let go the belief of that, which is
clear, for that which is obscure. Things many times are very perspicous, when
the modes are concealed. He would be accounted very vain, who should attempt to
deny, That there is any such thing as light, because it is difficult to explain
the way of its emanation from the great Luminary of the World. Every Man is
sensible of a determining Power within himself: That in the midst of his
intellectual discussions, he has a liberty to make his election of such an
object as he apprehends to be most agreeable to himself. To deny this, because
we are not fully satisfied about every mode in the doing of it, is the same
thing, as if we should affirm, That there is no such Sense as Seeing; because
it is not yet agreed, whether the Eye perform its office by the entertainment
of some Effluviums from the Object, or by the help of some pressure only upon
the Optic Nerve.

Now I have done with the second particular, namely, the strength, whereby we
are enabled to perform what we are directed to. This we must expect from the
Spirit of God. And now I proceed to the last.

3. The acceptance of what we perform, is procured by the satisfaction and
merit of Jesus Christ. In order to the clearing up of this Truth, the following
steps must be taken.

1. The acceptance of our Worship and Service is not upon its own account.
There are great defects in the best of our performances. Our Faith, though it be
unfeigned, yet it wants That firmness; our Love, though sincere, That fervor
which the Law requires. The Law is natural and immutable, and can no more abate
in its demands, than the fire can cease to be of a hot nature, or the Sun to be
a lucid Body. If our most plausible actions were examined according to the
rigor of it, many flames would be discovered in them. The Prophet tells us,
Isai. 64.6.
All our righteousnesses are as silthy rags, The word (...) though it be
variously interpreted, yet all the Glosses agree in charging our most valuable
services with imperfection. The precedent words justify the Exposition. We are
all as an unclean thing. The fountain being impure, the streams which issue
from it, will carry with them some signatures of the same impurity. The Apostle
says, We know but in part; it is as sure, That we love and obey but in part.
The Will being principally concerned in the Fall, must necessarily lie under a
depravation equal to that of the Understanding. It is a saying among the
Rabbis: Buxt. Rab. Lex. rad (...) 953. 1602.
So long as the just live, they are at war with concupiscence. They affirm,
there are Three Sins, which daily every man is guilty of, Sinful Thoughts, want
of attention in Prayer, evil words. The (...), which they represent as the
cause of these miscarriages, they tell us, That God will bring forth in the
world to come, and slay before the righteous and the wicked.

2. Acceptance is not upon the account of the favor of God, without the
interposal of satisfaction for sin: by satisfaction we must understand the
doing of something which repairs the damage, which is received by an injury,
and the quieting thereby the mind of the injured, who is provoked by reason of
the damage.

A great injury is done by Sin to the Supreme Rector of the World. His
Authority is trampled upon, and the Majesty of his Law diminished, his
Government exposed to contempt, public Order unhinged, and by this means he is
justly incensed. The ready way to repair the damage, and atone his displeasure,
is to require, That the penalties due to the transgression, or such as are
equivalent to them, be suffered; and in them to express his just indignation
against Sin, and impress upon all such a fear and reverence, as the Laws of
Heaven do challenge.

That this should be done antecedently to Pardon and Acceptance, is evidently
the Will of God, declared in the Holy Scripture. There we find, That there is
no acceptance without remission, and there is no remission without the shedding
of blood, and that this blood is the blood of a Mediator, through which we must
have redemption, Romans 3.24. Ephesians. 4.7. This is the reason why the Divine
Amnesty, from the time of the Primitive Apostasy, has had a constant aspect
upon this blood. When the Apostle asserts concerning the Mediator, if he had
been to offer up himself often, as the High Priest entered into the Holy of
Holiest every year with the blood of others, then must he often have suffered
since the foundation of the World. He plainly intimates, That from the
beginning the Father has had a regard to the blood and sufferings of his Son in
the remission of Sins. Though satisfaction was not then made, yet it was
promised. Captives are frequently set free, in consideration of the ransom
promised, before it be actually paid.

As satisfaction is certainly agreeable to the Will of God: So it seems to be
suitable to the propensity of his nature. Supposing the Creation, it is
necessary that he have a Sovereignty and Dominion over it: and if he be a
Sovereign Lord over the Creation, he must actually govern it. It is a defect to
be invested with Power, and not to exercise it in relation to the Community:
and if he governs, it must be by Law. Government supposes Obedience. Obedience
in the Intellectual part of Creation, must be an act of the Understanding. The
Understanding cannot act, except it has a knowledge of the Will of him who
governs. His Will published and made known is a Law. If there be a Law, it must
be holy, it being enacted by him, who is infinite in purity, and sanctity: and
if it be holy, he cannot but love it, the same necessity which does oblige him
to love himself, will engage him to love the resemblance. And if he love his
Law, he cannot but hate sin which is opposite to it. Hatred to that which is
contrary to Holiness, must be as natural to him, as to love and delight in
Holiness. And if it be natural to terminate his hatred upon sin, by an equal
necessity he is obliged to punish it. For hatred is never found in any without
a peremptory desire to do evil to that which is its object: and such a desire,
when it is in one, who wills nothing rashly, who is armed with sufficiency of
power to execute, whatsoever he wills, who cannot be diverted from execution by
any unseen emergency, must necessarily take effect, and whatsoever evil is done
to sin by him who cannot err in his administrations, must have the formality of
punishment, all evil being either the evil of sin or the evil of punishment.
This penalty must either be inflicted upon the Offender, and then there will be
no place left for Pardon and acceptance; or else upon some person, who is
willing to become a surety for the Delinquent, and is able by his sufferings to
restore that honor, which public order has been impaired in, and by this
means content the mind of the Supreme Rector, and this is properly satisfaction.

What is usually said, That if the nature of God does oblige him to punish sin,
then he is by the same necessity engaged to punish it in the offender, is of no
moment. His hatred being not primarily terminated upon the person, but the sin;
if the guilt be transferred by imputation to a Surety, it is not incongruous to
assert, That the sin may be punished in him. Some acts which are in general
natural to God, are free and undetermined in respect of the modification. To
Govern the World (supposing the Creation) is essential to him: yet the mode,
whether he will do it immediately by himself only, or make use of the Ministry
of Men is his free choice. So though to punish Sin is natural, yet the manner of
doing of it, whether in the person offending or his undertaker, is at his
election.

If it be further added, That if it be natural to punish, it must be done, so
soon as the transgression is committed, and in the extremity. That which is
natural, admits of no delay. The reply is easy, This is true of that which is
natural in Creatures which want freedom and life: but it is otherwise in the
Creator, who is an Intellectual Being. Supposing the Creation, it is natural to
him to do good: and yet it is free for him to time his bounty as he pleases,
and to communicate it in what degrees and methods he judges most convenient.
It is natural for him to give a Law to his Creature: but he is not determined
to the circumstances of publication, whether by innate Ideas only, or by
revelation. The necessity, he is under, is intellectual, which admits of the
interposal of Counsel about the modes, and circumstances of his actions. If it
be replied, That what is natural in God, though it may be free in these respects,
yet it must be always expressed in some measure or other, which cannot be
affirmed of his punishing sin. I answer, That Sin in some measure is always
punished, Jans. Augtom. 2. l. 3. cap. 3.
so soon as it is committed: from the first moment, the Transgressour is
deprived of that contentment, which does naturally emerge from a sense of a
compliance with the Law of Creation. The Worm of Conscience presently grows out
of the feculency and pollution, the Soul is defiled with. The serenity of mind,
wherein our present beatitude consists, is instantly lost; and the
anticipations of future torments succeed. The sparks of infernal fire are
quickly kindled. A sense of the just judgment of God, That he, who does such
things, is worthy of death, fills the Soul with horror and the deepest
consternation. Those blessings, which before, the Delinquent was encircled
with, are Metamorphised into curses, Plough-shares converted into Swords.
Pruning Hooks into Spears, every thing assumes a direful shape and menacing
aspect.

If it be added, That punishment is a debt, and every one has power freely to
remit his debts. I answer this is not true of all kinds of debt. There is a
debt of Active Obedience, which we owe to God, from which he cannot give us a
full discharge. The Law of Nature is as unchangeable, as his Essence. Those who
are guilty of open defamation are indebted to the defamed, and obliged by
pensive agnitions to re-invest them with that honor, they have robbed them of.
This debt the persons injured, have no more right to remit, than they have to
murder themselves: their credit being as valuable as their lives. Sin deprives
God of his glory, which he can by no means part with, and therefore in justice
must require restitution by some convenient satisfaction, before he remit the
penalty due to the Transgressour, and receive him into favor.

This satisfaction, which is so necessary, before we can have an interest in
the divine acceptance, Jesus Christ has made. He has repaied the damae which
public order and the Laws of Heaven received from our Sins: and fully
contented the mind of the Supreme Rector, who in justice was obliged to
vindicate the honor of his appointments. This will be manifest if we consider
the following particulars. Jesus Christ has suff^red the punishment of our sin.
What he suffered, was in our stead. The damage done by sin is repaired, and the
mind of the Supreme Rector fully appeased and reconciled unto us, upon the
terms of the New Covenant.

1. Christ Jesus has suffered the punishment of our Sin.

It is plain to every one who consults the Sacred Oracles, That his sufferings
were of the highest nature, if we consider the words, by which they are
represented. (...) sets forth the extremity of his grief, ad satietatem usque,
(...) speaks his sorrow to be so great, That it produced a stupefaction in him.
(...) imports nothing short of these two words, his Soul was (...), beseized on
every side, with grief. Heaven above did forsake him, in his apprehension. Hell
below did conspire against him. The Jews on the one hand, stood ready to betray
him: The Gentiles on the other were prepared to crucify him. Nothing but
occasions of grief were administered to his Senses. His Eyes beheld the fury of
his adversaries. His Ears were filled with their blasphemies. The most Nervous
parts of his body were pierced with instruments of cruelty. The drops of Blood
which fell from his sacred Body argue, That nothing was wanting to consummate
the most exquisite torment. The circumstances of his Passion were so amazing,
(...).
That Dionysius in Egypt (when he saw the Sun in mourning at his crucifixion)
used these words, Either the Divinity suffers, or sympathizeth with him that
does.

For all this, there must be some important reason. It cannot be imagined, That
he who was interested in the highest degree of the Love of his Father; That
never had done any thing to merit the least unkindness, should be treated with
so much severity upon some unnecessary grounds.

The could be no motives of an inferior Nature, which did induce the eternal
Father, to suffer his only Son the Lord of Life to die. The Lord of Glory to be
obscured with the clouds of ignominy and reproach. There must be something in
the case, which could not be accomplished in any other method. All confess
that, What the Socinians allege as the reason, might have been brought to pass
upon far easier terms. They tell us, That Christ suffered to confirm the
Covenant, induce us to perform the conditions of it, to make way for his
ingress into Heaven in order to the performing the Office of a Priest.

The First of these might have been done by the working of Miracles, which are
the broad Seal of Heaven. What can any reasonable Man desire more, than a clear
revelation concerning the terms upon which God will be reconciled, and an
assurance given by miraculous operations, That there is no collusion in the
Declaration.

The Exemplary Life of our Blessed Lord, is sufficient to invite us to be
agreeable in our Conversation to the conditions of the New Covenant. His Death,
with all the terrifying circumstances attending it, have a tendence to affright
Men from embracing his Doctrine. No Man is naturally inclined to espouse that
way, which may expose him to so much sorrow. Was there no more intended in the
Death of Christ, than what Socinus asserts, He might after his Immaculate Life
spent in this World, like Enoch and Elias, have been immediately translated
into Heaven, and there with as much advantage, as if he had suffered the pains
of death, have transacted all those things appertaining to our reconciliation,
which they attribute unto him. He was above Thirty Years in this sublunary
state, contesting with the anxieties of humane Life, and therefore must
necessarily be touched with a fence of our infirmities. His whole Life was
meritorious, and therefore, there is no reason to think, That the most easy
way to Heaven would have been denied him, had his sufferings imported no more
than what our Adversaries in this Cause affirm. The God of Nature and Grace
does not use to do any thing in vain.

Lastly, The reasons of the sufferings of our Blessed Lord, which must be
granted to be of more importance than any thing which has been alleged by the
Socinians, the Holy Scripture resolves into our sin, and represents his Passion
as the Punishment of it.

Man violating the Law of his Creation, if nothing did interpose to prevent the
infliction of Punishment, our condition would be a state of desperation,
destructive of that which is most essential to Religion, and pleasing unto God.
No place would be left for the emanations of his benignity, which he is
eminently delighted with. He being propense to pardon; and his hatred to Sin,
and love to his Law, inclining him not to do it, without some severe expression
of his detestation first made against the violation of his Command: in order to
the reconciling of these propensities, and making way for his clemency to exert
it self, his eternal Son has freely offered himself to bear the penalty due to
us upon the account of Sin. For this reason, he is said to be made a curse,
Gal. 3.13. (...) here is expounded by (...), and (...). That he might redeem us
from the curse, He has freely without any compulsion derived it upon himself.

Crellius tell us, That the word here cannot be taken in this fence, because
he, who is properly accursed, is the object of Divine Hatred, which cannot be
asserted of the Son of God: and the curse which he suffered, was the death of
the Cross; but the curse of the Law is Eternal death.

To which I reply, He which is accursed upon his own account, is the object of
Divine Hatred: but he, That is so upon the account of another, freely bearing
the curse in order to the satisfying Divine Justice, and the vindicating the
authority of the Law is not. The hatred is terminated upon the Sin which is
ours, and not upon the Person who undertakes to bear the demerit of it, and by
so doing, accomplish the ends which are highly agreeable to the desires of the
Supreme Rector.

The Death of our Blessed Lord upon the Cross, though it was not the same with
Eternal Death; yet it was equivalent. The want of eternity was compensated by
the dignity of the Person, who was so contumeliously treated. The degrees of
suffering, are usually estimated by the quality of the person who suffers. A
Magistrate suffers more by a contumelious usage, than a private Man: The
Supreme more than he who is subordinate. Therefore if he who suffers be
infinite in dignity, as the Son of God is, his punishment must have an infinity
in it. And an infinite punishment is equipollent to that, which is eternal.

Parallel to this, are the words of S. Peter, Who his own self bare our sins in
his own body on the tree, 1 Ep. 2.24. Christ is said to bear our sins, that is,
The punishment of them, (...), tulit sursum eundo. When he was upon the Cross,
he had the burden of them, upon his shoulders. Crellius, in order to the
disappointing the force of this Text, says, That (...), does not necessarily
denote to bear, it may as well be translated to take away: but supposing it
does, yet it does not follow, That the pain he bore was a punishment: one may
be said to bear the sins of another, who falls into any calamity occasioned by
them, although there be nothing of the formality of punishment in it. To which I
answer, That to bear, is the proper signification of the word, and we are not
to depart from the proper import, except the circumstances of the place put a
necessity upon us. The Context is so far from obliging us to any such thing;
That, in case it may be allowed to arbitrate, it will determine us to the
signification of bearing. The scope of the Apostle is to exhort those, to whom
he writes, to bear with patience the sufferings, which the profession of the
Gospel might expose them to. In order to this end, he draws an argument from
the pattern of our Blessed Lord, who did patiently bear the penalty of our sins
in his Body on the Tree, without any menacing returns to the Authors of his
Crucifixion. The word in conjunction with (...) is but once more found in the
New Testament; and, there it has evidently the fence we contend for. So Christ
was once offered (...), to bear the sins of many, and to them which look for
him, he shall appear the second time without sin, Heb. 9.28. Here are two
appearances of Christ set opposite one to the other, the last without sin, that
is, without bearing the burden of it, and therefore the first was with sin. He
was burdened with it, and did bear the demerit. This fence is favored by the
Context, He appeared to put away sin, by the sacrifice of himself, v. 26. A
Sacrifice did bear the punishment due to him for whom it was offered.

Crellius overthrows himself, in saying, That (...), here signifies, to take
away: for this taking away, must be performed upon the Tree. But Christ
according to his notion did not take away Sin upon the Cross. His suffering was
but preparatory to his ingress into Heaven, where he was first invested with a
power to forgive sin. S. Peter in the word (...), has a manifest aspect upon
the Prophecy of Esaias, c. 53.11. He shall bear their iniquities, (...) is a
word too stiff to be bent into a compliance with the Socinian persuasion. It
constantly signifies to bear or carry, and for this reason is interpreted by
(...), Matt. 8.17. He bore their sicknesses, that is, He did undergo much
trouble and pains in the curing of them. He had no respite all the day: and
when the even was come, (at which time others compose themselves for rest) he
was pressed upon by the multitude, and did attend this great work.

What Crellius says in the second place, (if (...) signifies to bear, it does
not follow, That he did bear the punishment of sin. He might accidentally
undergo sorrow, which was occasioned by our sins, in which there was nothing of
the nature of punishment in relation to him) is of no validity.

If it be granted, That it signifies to bear, the thing born must be the
punishment of sin. Punishment imports a natural evil inflicted by one in
authority, That the party offended, by the commission of some moral evil, may
receive satisfaction, and the ends of government be secured. All this agrees to
the Sufferings of Christ. They import a natural evil. They were displeasing to
humane Nature. They were inflicted by the Supreme Rector of the World. It
pleased the Lord to bruise him. The design of his Passion, was to make
Satisfaction to the injured. Our Sins robbed God of his Glory. This was
restored by the Sufferings of his Son. He was set forth to be a propitiation to
declare his Righteousness. The ends of Government are eminently secured. His
Sufferings must necessarily strike a consternation into all. If such things
were done in the green Tree, what may be expected in the dry? If he, who had
no sin of his own, was so severely treated, what can we look for, if we
persevere in our provocations?

If all things appertaining to the nature of a penalty, agree to the Sufferings
of Christ, there is no reason but to believe, when Christ is said to bear our
sins, that the meaning is, That he did bear the punishment of them.

It is true, A Man may be said to bear the miscarriages of another, who
accidentally falls under any disaster occasioned by them. But the case here is
quite otherwise. Nothing was fortuitous. The Person suffering was delivered
into the hands of his Crucifiers according to the determinate Counsel of
Heaven. The intent of his Passion, was to accomplish all those ends, which are
intended in punishment. And that which makes an affliction to be a penalty in a
proper sense, is nothing but the end, which is aimed at.

Consonant to this, is what S. Paul has expressed, 2 Cor. 5.21. For he has
made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him.

He was made sin for us, that is, Put under an obligation to suffer the
punishment which our sins had deserved. God laid upon him the Iniquity of us
all. The Transgressions of those who lived in the most opposite parts of the
Terrestrial Globe, did all meet together upon him. He is the center, upon which
the burden of them did settle.

Crellius tells us, That when Christ is said to be made Sin, the meaning is,
That he was by wicked Men, reputed and treated as a sinner. But if this was the
meaning, then Christ was made sin by his Crucifiers; whereas the action is
ascribed unto God. When he is said to be made sin, something must be
understood, which is peculiar to him. But if Crellius's sense of the words
prevails, the Martyrs may be said to be made sin when they were punished under
the notion of Malefactors by their inveterate enemies. The Antithesis betwixt
being made sin, and knowing no sin, is a clear justification of our
interpretation. Christ knew no sin, that is, was guilty of none, by any
deviation of his own. Therefore when it is said, He was made sin, the meaning
is, He was made guilty of ours by imputation, and by his own consent, together
with assent of his Father, brought under an obligation to suffer the penalty of
it. It is manifest from the Text, That he was so made sin for us; as we are
made righteousness, or righteous in him. Now it is manifest, That upon our
performing the conditions of the New Covenant, we are made righteous in
consideration of his meritorious satisfaction: and therefore he was made sin
for us, in consideration of our demerit, which he undertook to make expiation
for. That which induces the Socinians to endeavor the elusion of the evidence
of the Texts which are produced, is a persuasion, That the fence, we contend
for, is repugnant to reason. There can be no punishment, but where there is
guilt: there can be no guilt, where there is innocence; and there was nothing
but innocence in the Immaculate Lamb of God. But it must be remembered, That the
proper notion of guilt is nothing but an obligation to punishment. And it is
not disagreeable to reason, That such an obligation should be contracted by an
Innocent Person, in case he be willing to stand in the place of the Nocent, and
suffer the penalty due to him. If he be one, who has power to dispose of his
own life, as our Blessed Lord had; he may by an act of his Will, as well engage
himself to lay down his life, as to lay down a sum of Money. Every Man may do
with that, which is in his power, what he pleases. Though it be essential to
punishment to be inflicted for sin: yet it is not essential to be inflicted
upon the sinner. The merit of Virtue, is as personal and incommunicable, as the
merit of sin: yet it as not essential to the reward, to be always conferred
upon the person meriting. Chimham was rewarded by David for Barzillais's
kindness. Children frequently fare the better for their Parents deservings.
There is no reason to believe, That it is unjust in all cases to punish one for
the crime of another. God, who is not obnoxious to error in his
administrations, has done it. When he tells the people, That they should have
occasion no more to use this Proverb, The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and
the childrens teeth are set on edge: he intimates, That they had formerly
occasion so to do: and what was now said in this matter, was but a particular
favor granted to them at this time: and not to be a standing rule in all
succeeding generations. It is most evident, That Judah suffered in the reign of
Josiah for the provocations of Manasses, 2 Kin. 23.26. Though they had sins of
their own to irritate Divine Justice: yet they were not the cause of their
suffering. He, who punishes a Nocent Person in that respect in which he is
Innocent, does the same thing, as if he punished one, who is perfectly Innocent.

It is evident by the Second Command, That the iniquity of the fathers is
visited upon their children. If such Children are only understood, who imitate
their Parents transgression, no reason can be given of the limitation to the
third and fourth generation.

That one may be punished for another was not accounted unjust amongst those,
who were governed by the light of Nature; as is evident by the (...), or
sureties in capital matters, which did engage life for life. There can be no
pretense of injury, where the person suffering freely consents, and has a
dominion over his own life, he having power to dispose of himself, in his
submission to the greatest passion, he does no injury to any other; and he
consenting upon the clearest considerations, no injury is done to himself. When
the understanding is weak, and not a competent guide, an injury may be done,
although the party concerned be willing. But the case before us is quite
otherwise. Our Blessed Lord, upon the clearest dictate of reason, became
willing to bear our sins. He did in this comply with the propensities of his
own benignity; serve the necessities of Mankind; justify public Order; and
assert the Majesty of the Law, against all that contempt which our Sins had
exposed it unto.

The Premises, being well considered, will make it manifest, That Christ
suffered the punishment of our Sins.

2. What He suffered was in our stead. This will be evident, if we consider his
blood which he shed, either as a Sacrifice, or a ransom: as a Sacrifice. The
offering which he made to God, was expiatory, a Sacrifice for sin, Heb. 10.20.
This oblation must necessarily have the nature which is common to all offerings
under the Old Testament of the same kind. They were figures of this great
Oblation: and there must be an agreement betwixt the Type and the thing
typified, in that which is essential to the nature of the Type. Now, it is
manifest, That all the expiatory offerings in the Old Testament, were in lieu
of those persons, for whom they were offered. The Law did require death of
every one, that did not remain in the obedience of it. The offenses against it
were of two sorts, either such as were punished with the death of the offender,
as Murder and Idolatry, etc. without the benefit of Sacrifice: Or else such,
for the expiation of which, a Sacrifice was appointed, and slain in the room of
the Transgressour. The blood of the beast, in which the life consists, was
given upon the Altar to make atonement for the Souls of Men, Lev. 17.11. As the
Law was satisfied by the death of the offender in the first case: So likewise,
by the death of the Sacrifice in the second. The sin of the Delinquent was
symbolically derived upon the Piacular Sacrifice, and therefore he which
carried the skin and flesh without the Camp, to be burnt, did, by touching of
them, contract pollution, and might not be admitted into the Camp again, before
he had washed his clothes, and bathed his flesh in water, Lev. 16.28. This was
the cause, why he, for whom the offering was made, was obliged to lay his hand
upon the head of it. Theodoret says, That the hand did import action, and
signify, That the actions of the Transgressour were laid upon the Sacrifice.
This was the apprehension of the ancient Jews, as is evident by the form of
words used, when a sinoffering was made, (...) haec sit expiatio mea, which
they expound thus, The evil, which I have deserved, let it fall upon the head
of the Sacrifice.

Now, If the expiatory offerings under the Mosaical Economy, were Types of the
offering of Jesus Christ, and it was essential to them, to be slain in the room
of the Transgressour, we have just reason from hence to infer, That our blessed
Lord suffered not only for our good and advantage, but in our stead, and place.

In order to the disappointing the force of this argument, Crellius says, That
Christ was not a Priest till he came into Heaven; and that those Sacrifices
only, which were offered for the whole Congregation, and at some stated times,
especially, That upon the day of expiation, were Types of his oblation: and
that those which were designed for this use, did not represent him in his
mactation; but in that one action only, whereby their blood was carried into
the holy place, and sprinkled before the Lord. To all which I will reply in
order.

1. Christ did execute the office of a Priest here upon the earth. The Apostle
says, he gave himself as an Offering and Sacrifice unto God, Ephesians. 5.2. The word
(...) imports such a Sacrifice as is put to death, (...) is as much as (...),
Jo. 10. v. 10. Reconciliation the proper effect of a Sacrifice, is attributed
to the blood of the Cross, Col. 1.20. His purging our sins did precede his
sitting down on the right hand of the Majesty on high, Heb. 1.3. His having
obtained eternal redemption, is antecedent to his entering into the holy place,
Heb. 9.12. He is said to be once offered up, Heb. 9.28. And after this to sit
down at the right hand of God, Heb. 10.12. If this offering has been in Heaven,
it would not have been said to have been once done. The representation of this
oblation there is every day. He continually makes intercession. The offering,
upon which the Apostles words have an aspect, imports passion. For he says, in
case it was to be repeated, then Christ must have often suffered since the
foundation of the World: but the Passion of Christ was over, before he entered
into Heaven.

Those words, If he were on earth, he should not be a Priest, Heb. 8.4. do not
imply, That he did not execute his Sacerdotal Function, when he was upon the
earth. All, that can be collected from them, is, That if after he had made an
offering upon the Cross, he had remained upon the earth, he could not have been
our High Priest: Because, He, who was to bear this office, was not only to die
for us upon the Earth, but to appear in Heaven, and there by presenting the
merit of that oblation, which was made here below, procure those aids which we
stand in need of.

2. Those Sacrifices, which were offered for the whole Congregation at some set
times, were not the only Types of the offering of the Messiah. The Apostle,
when he tells us, That the Sacrifice of Christ was substituted in the room of
the Legal Offerings; and that the first was taken away, that the second might
be established, Heb. 10.9. He must necessarily have his eye upon such
oblations, which as if they were shadows, which, when the body came, did
disappear and vanish. Now it is plain, That the Apostle there, has his eye upon
more Sacrifices, than those which were offered for the whole Congregation. He
uses so many words as can comprehend no less than all the Mosaical Oblations,
as Sacrifice, Offering, Burnt-offerings, Offering for sin.

3. It is not true, That those Sacrifice which typified Christ, did represent
him only in that action, whereby the blood was carried into the holy place, and
sprinkled before the Lord. The Apostle says, That the very burning their bodies
without the Camp, was a Type of him. Heb. 13.11, 12. for the bodies of those
beasts, whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high Priest for sin,
are burnt without the Camp. Therefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the
people with his own blood, suffered without the Gate.

There was nothing in the ceremonial constitution less probable to be in the
number of the Types of the Law, than this circumstance of place. The mactation
has a more obvious correspondence with the design of our Redeemer. And if that,
which has the least appearance of being in that number, was notwithstanding
prefigurative and typical, much more that which has a greater.

Now I have considered Christ under the notion of a Sacrifice. In the next
place, if we look upon him as a Ransom, it will be evident that what he
suffered, was in our stead.

By Sin we brought our selves into a state of bondage, under an obligation to
undergo the penalty of the Law. The sentence of condemnation was denounced
against us, and we juridically bound to suffer. In order to the redeeming of us
from this condition, Jesus Christ has been pleased to lay down a sufficient
price in our stead agreeable to the expectation of the Law. This is styled
(...), which includes both a commutation and a compensation. It was laid down
in the place of that which was due from us. Our Blessed Lord redeemed us from
the Curse of the Law by being made a curse. He suffered that which was a
valuable consideration, and did answer all the ends of the legal Sanction.

The Socinians, to disappoint the strength of this Argument, say, That the word
(...) is not taken properly. Moses is said to be (...), and yet he laid down no
price, when he redeemed the Israelites out of Egypt. Every proper price is
paid to some body. It could not be paid to God, because he procured it: and
those, who are redeemed by it, are bought for his service. He, for whom the
redeemed are purchased, and who procures the price of redemption, does not use
to receive it. A price in a proper sense would destroy the nature of remission.

To which I reply,

1. If (...) be not taken properly, then the blood of Christ is styled a price
only, because the effusion of it intervenes, before we are delivered from our
bondage, as a price does; although it has no such influence, as a price, upon
our redemption. And if so, then some reason ought to be given, why our
redemption is attributed more to the blood and death of Christ, than to his
Doctrine, Miracles, Promises, the blood of Martyrs. All these have an influence
upon our Salvation of the same nature with that which Crellius attributes to
the blood of Christ. The Doctrine of Christ does show us the way to it. His
Miracles confirm the truth of that way. His Promises excite us to walk in it.
The blood of Martyrs, and their Heroic Patience, eminently conduce to the
establishment of our Faith. If the blood of Christ did not contribute to our
redemption, in some peculiar way, which is not common to these things, why is
it never attributed to them?

2. Moses is styled (...), Act. 7.37. because he was a Type of the true
Redeemer, and the blood of the Paschal Lamb, a Type of the price of redemption
which he laid down. It is no good consequence, because Moses did not pay a
price properly so called, therefore Christ did not. The similitude betwixt the
figure and the thing prefigured must not be extended beyond the bounds intended
in the institution, to every punctilio. Jonah in the Fish's belly was a Type of
Christ in the grave. Because Jonah was alive, it does not follow, That Christ
in the grave was not dead. The Brazen Serpent, when it was lifted up, was a
Type of Christ Crucified. From thence we must not infer, That Christ's blood
was not shed upon the Cross, because none did slow from the Brazen Serpet.

3. The price of our redemption was paid unto god. He held us captive. The
Apostle says, (...), we were kept, (as prisoners in a garrison) under the Law,
Gal. 3. v. 23. By whose warrant, we were committed to this prison, is expressed
in the precedent verse, (...), The Scripture has concluded, or shut up all
under sin. This Warrant was written with God's own hand. Parallel to this is
what is expressed in the Epistle to the Romans, God has shut up all under
disobedience, c. 11.32. We were imprisoned for our delinquency, and by a divine
appointment under an obligation to suffer punishment.

4. Though God procures the price, and the redeemed are ransomed for his service;
yet it does not follow, That the price was not paid to him. When a Subject
violates the Law of his Prince, and by his enormous deportment precipitates
himself into a state of thraldom; and it cannot be reconciled with the interest
of the community, and the immutable rule of justice to set him at liberty,
without satisfaction first made to the Law: the Prince out of his benignity may
contrive, how this may be done; and when it is done, accept it, and release the
person, with a design, that he may be in capacity to serve him.

5. The price of Redemption, properly taken, does not destroy the nature of
Pardon and Remission. He, on whom the Pardon is conferred, contributes nothing
of his own toward the meriting of it. The debt is cancelled, without any
payment made by him to the Creditor. Forgiveness is an entire act of Divine
Benignity. It is no diminution of the bounty of Heaven, to make choice of such
a way to do it in, as has a consistence with Wisdom and Justice. There is more
grace expressed in pardoning in and through Christ, than in pardoning without
him. Immediate Remission is but a single favor, Remission in and through Christ,
a double. For God does not only pardon sin, but give his own Son for the
procuring of it in such a method, as contributes no inferior degree of glory
to every attributed in the Divine Essence; and is equally advantageous to the
transgressour.

All this, duly considered, will evidence, That our Blessed Lord suffered in
our stead.

3. By what, He suffered in our stead, the damage done by sin is repaired; and
the mind of the Supreme Rector fully appeased and reconciled unto us upon the
terms of the New Covenant. The damage is repaired. By punishment Laws are
vindicated, and their just authority asserted. The greater the punishment is,
the clearer is the vindication. There cannot be a greater penalty, than That,
which was suffered by the Son of God. Penalties are estimated according tot he
dignity of the person, who suffers. It is a higher punishment for a Prince to
have marks of disgrace fastened upon him, than for a Peasant. Our Blessed Lord
infinitely transcending all others in dignity, there mast be a kind of infinity
in that penalty, which was laid upon him. Now what can be more efficacious than
this, to remove all contempt from the Laws, and put a check upon that aptitude
which is in Men, to take encouragement from a bad example, to violate them. Who
dare lightly think of that, the vindication of which cost no less than the
Death of the Lord of Life? That Authority will not easily be disvalued, when it
is manifest, That the crime, in neglecting of it, was expiated upon no easier
terms, than the Passion of the Son of God. Who will not be afraid to affront
that Order, which the Divine Wisdom has established; when he considers, the
drops of Blood, which fell from the face of our Blessed Lord; the wounds, which
were made in the most nervous parts of his Body; the greatness of the Agony
which he suffered.

As the damage done by Sin to the Laws is repaired by the Passion of Christ; so
likewise the mind of the Supreme Rector is fully appeased and reconciled. A
Reconciliation is attributed to his sufferings in the Holy Scriptures. This
reconciliation must import a reconciliation of God unto us. The Apostle in his
Epist. to the Romans speaks of our receiving the atonement, c. 5. v. 11. We
then receive it, when we lay aside our enmity, and are converted unto God; and
therefore this atonement must be made, before our enmity be deposited. The
thing received is always antecedent to the act of receiving, and by consequence
it can import nothing but God's reconciliation to us by the Blood of Christ,
provided we comply with the terms of that Covenant, of which he is the
Mediator. For this reason, mention is made of a reconciliation through the blood
of the Cross, Col. 1.20. And then after follows another reconciliation, when we
cease to be enemies in our minds to God, v. 21. parallel to this is what is
expressed 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself. And
then v. 20. We pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled unto God. Here are
evidently Two Reconciliations, One of God unto us, in case we perform the
conditions of the New Covenant: The Other of us unto God, when we are
converted. Then that Reconciliation, which was before conditional, becomes
absolute, and we fully stated in the possession of the Divine favor. Now this
reconciliation of God unto us, can import no less, than that his mind is fully
satisfied, and his displeasure appeased in consideration of the Sufferings of
Christ. Upon this account our Blessed Lord is styled (...), Romans 3. He is a
cover to the Law, and prevents the Penal part of it from being executed upon
us. He is said to be (...), a propitiation for our sins. God is made by his
precious blood (...), hilaris, or cheerful in his countenance, when he looks
upon a sinner. He who before was angry, is now propitious. His righteousness
being declared, and the authority of his Law, as fully vindicated by the
Passion of Christ, as if we had suffered: He is satisfied and contented upon
the terms of the Gospel to make us the objects of his favor.

Crellius in opposition to what has been asserted, affirms, 1. That the Apostle
in his Ep. to the Romans speaks of Conversion; and because Conversion
expresses only the amicable temper of our minds toward God, he uses the
word, Reconciliation, to import, That if there be a friendship wanting on God's
part by reason of our hostility to him in an unconverted state, it is then when
we are converted, fully completed. 2. The Apostle in his Epistle to the
Celossians cannot speak of a reconciliation of God unto us in a proper sense,
because in the reconciliation there mentioned things in Heaven are concerned,
namely, Good Angels, who were never in a state of enmity to God. 3. When the
Apostle says in his Epistle to the Corinthians, That God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself; 2 Ep. 5.18, 19.
the meaning is, That God did promote Conversion by the preaching of Jesus
Christ; as afterward he did by the Preaching of the Apostles. 4. When Christ
is said to be a Propitiation, the word cannot import any placation of the
Divine Anger. The love of God in sending Christ, evidently demonstrates a
reconciliation antecedent to the mission and coming of Christ into the world.

To all which I reply in order. 1. The granting, That the word Reconciliation
is used with a design to express, That if there be any friendship wanting on
God's part, it is completed at our Conversion, is a concession of the whole
cause. The Spirit of God, does not use to speak conjecturally. He has a full
comprehension of all the Mystery of Godliness. Had he not known, That there is
a reconciliation of God unto us, as well as of us unto God, he would not have
used a word with a design to express so much. Now this reconciliation is not
imputed to conversion, but the Death of the Son of God as the procuring cause:
and therefore to receive the atonement can be nothing but to receive the
reconciliation and friendship of God, which is merited by the sufferings of
Jesus Christ. 2. By Things in Heaven there is no necessity to understand
Angels. There were Men in Heaven, as well as Angels, who had been in a state of
enmity to God. These, God was reconciled unto, by the Blood of his Son, when
they were upon the earth; and now they were in a state of fruition, reaping the
advantages of his atonement. 3. When the Apostle says, God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, something more must be meant, than the
promoting Conversion by the preaching Christ. Our Blessed Lord did not preach
unto the World, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. If the
reconciling by Christ did import no more, than the converting of Men by his
Preaching, then it might have been as well said, That God was in the Apostles
reconciling the world unto himself. It will be difficult to prevail with any to
believe, That there is not something peculiar in this expression, which cannot
with justice to the honor of our Redeemer be attributed to any other. 4. The
Love of God in sending Christ is no argument of a reconciliation in God
antecedent to the sufferings of Christ. When so much love was expressed to
Eliphaz and his two friends, as to appoint Job to be an Intercessour for them,
and to direct them to offer up Seven Bullocks and Seven Rams: at that very time
the wrath of God was kindled against them. The Plague, an undoubted testimony
of divine displeasure, was at that time upon Israel, when God sent his Prophet
to instruct David, how to stop the spreading of the Contagion. All, which can
be reasonably deduced from the mission of Christ, is a design or purpose to be
reconciled, and not an actual reconciliation.

And now if we look back, and consider That Christ suffered the punishment of
our sin; what he suffered was in our stead: By his Sufferings, the damage done
by sin is repaired, and the mind of the Supreme Rector fully reconciled, the
verity of the third Proposition will be evident, That a full and complete
satisfaction is made by Jesus Christ.

4. Our acceptance with God is upon the account of this meritorious
satisfaction. It sets believers free from the Curse of the Law. The Curse of
the Law does include the loss of the Divine Favor. That which frees us from
this malediction, must necessarily restore us to our acceptance with God. The
ransom laid down by our Redeemer as it has an aspect upon the justice of
Heaven, is said to satisfy; as it stands in relation to those benefits, it
procures for us, to merit: So that our acceptance is upon the account of the
meritorious satisfaction of our Blessed Lord. Therefore, S. Paul asserts, That
God has made us accepted in the beloved, Epb. 1.6. and S. Peter represents our
Spiritual Services to be acceptable to God through Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. Of
this truth there are very early significations. Psalm. 80.15, 18.
David prays God, That he would visit the vineyard which he had made (...)
propter Regem Messiam, as the Chaldee Paraphrase expounds it. c. 9.17.
Daniel prays, That God would shine upon the Sanctuary for the Lord's sake. The
Israelites use to pray with their faces toward the Temple, Rev. 21.22.
it being a Type of the blessed Messiah, which they had a great expectation of.
When Ezekias turned his face to the wall and prayed, 2 Kin. 20.2. Jonathan in
his Targum says, He turned it to the wall of the house of the Sanctuary. (...)
At the hour of Prayer, Act. 10.9.
it was usual to go to the house top; That they might have the fairer prospect
that way. The Hebrews say, That in the fire, whereby God did declare his
acceptance of their Sacrifices, there was the appearance of a Lion, to
signify, That it was the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, which procured them an
interest in the Divine Favor.

5. Our acceptance with God is only upon the account of the meritorions
satisfaction of his Blessed Son. As he has trodden the Winepress alone: So the
honor of meriting for us is peculiar to him. The Romanists indeed speak of the
merits of Saints, and are not contented to attribute to them, so much only, as
is expedient for themselves: but assert an overplus, which being blended with
the surplusage of the merits of Christ, and laid up in a Treasury, are the
ground and foundation of the Papal Indulgencies. But he who considers the true
notion of Merit, will easily discover all this to be but a fiction. It imports
a dignity in the work adequate to the reward. In the choicest of those
services, which they perform, who arrive at the greatest degree of Sanctity, no
such worth can be found. If it may, it must be either innate, or derived from
without. It cannot be the first, for the reward is no less than God himself,
under the fullest disclosures of his Goodness; and none of the most Heroic
performances, can indignity be equal to him. Genesis 17.
If the Passions and Sufferings of this Life are not worthy to stand in
competition, and be compared with the Glory which shall be revealed, much less
the actions. There can be no action more noble, than with alacrity of mind, to
suffer what the profession of Religion may expose us to.

If it be acquired Worth, derived from something without, it must be either
from the Habit of Grace, the Spirit of God, the Merit of Christ, or the
Promise. All these are pretended by the Romanists as the fountain of it.

1. Not from the Habit of Grace. Although as it descends from the Father of
lights, it is a good and perfect gift; yet considered with relation to the
Recipient, into which it descends, and out of which it does not expel all the
remains of the Primitive Apostasy, it is but imperfect. Now it acting as a
quality of this subject, it is impossible, that it should invest its operations
with the highest degree of perfection. Nothing can communicate to another That,
which it has not in it self.

2. Not from the Spirit, which excites and moves the Soul to act according to
the Habit. If any such value be imparted, the Spirit in the communication must
act as a necessary, or a free Cause. Not as a necessary; for then every
Religious action will be meritorious: there is no good, but the Spirit of God
contributes to the production of it, and a necessary cause is uniform in all
its effects. Not as a free cause; For if it is not the will of the Holy Spirit
to invest us in this life with such a measure of Grace, as will prevent all
sinful defects: We have more than a usual presumption, That it is not his
pleasure to impress such a dignity upon our services, as is proportionable to
the eternal reward in the life to come.

3. Not from the Merit of Christ. If he has merited, That we may merit; then
his deservings communicate to our Services either a finite, or infinite value.
If a finite only, then they cannot merit that infinite love, which our
acceptance supposes. Finite worth is not commensurate to an unlimited and
infinite reward. If infinite, then the works of Holy Men are not inferior in
perfection to the Works of Christ; infinity will admit of no degrees. A work
which is finite in respect of the Principle, from whence it proceeds, has not
capacity enough to receive and entertain boundless dignity. The Ocean may as
well be included within the confines of a small vessel. Christ has procured for
us a power to do well, and acceptance for those actions, which flow from that
power; but not a power to merit. The nature of a mere creature is not
reconcilable with such an immunity. It cannot under the greatest elevation do
any service, but that, which God may challenge as a just debt, and the notion
of Merit includes and imports something which is not due.

4. Not from the Promise. The Promise does not communicate any excellency to
the Work, but supposes it to be in its perfection. In the Old Covenant, Do
this, and live; Do, which imports the work, is the Antecedent, Live, which is
the promise of compensation, the Consequent. The Consequent cannot be the Cause
of any thing in the Antecedent. If the Promise raises the value and dignity of
the Work, then the larger the Promise is, the greater will the value of the
Work be: which assertion runs the maintainers of it upon an inevitable
contradiction, for the more large the Promise is, the greater is the Mercy of
Heaven: and the more value there is in the service, the less mercy and kindness
there is in the reward. Now if the amplitude of the Promise adds a value to the
performance, Mercy will be the least, where it is the greatest. All this does
manifest, That there is no Merit in us to be a rival with the meritorious
satisfaction of Christ in procuring the acceptance of our persons and services
with God. And if there be no merit at all in the Saints, there cannot be an
overplus to be laid up by the Church in a Treasury. We cannot expect a tide,
where there is no water. We may with as little violence to our reason believe,
That one drop of water in a deep channel may swell above the banks and fill the
ditches on all hands; as that the works of Men may overflow the bounds of the
Law, and fill the pretended Repository.

What is usually said, concerning the overplus of the Merit of Christ, is of no
moment to help the Romanists in the present case. His infinite Merit is not of
such a nature, as that part of it may be expended one way, and the rest laid up
in a Treasury. For that, which may be divided, has parts, and every part must
be either finite or infinite. If the merit of Christ may be divided into finite
parts it is compounded of them: and that, which is composed of finite, cannot
be infinite. If into infinite, then every part is equal to the whole. There is
nothing bigger than that which is infinite. The truth is, every good Man is
accepted and saved by the whole merit of Jesus Christ. As infinite Merit is
sufficient to procure the Divine Favor for the whole World: So no less will
purchase it for any particular person. Omnipotence is requisite for the
creating of the Firmament, and no less is necessary to the making of one Star.
A Romanist may with as much reason conceive, because the infinite power,
whereby this World is made, is sufficient to make a thousand more; That he may
treasure up the overplus, and issue it forth at pleasure, for the creating
another World: as, because the infinite Merit of Christ is sufficient for the
redeeming and procuring favor for more, than it does; therefore some of it may
be laid up in a reconditory at Rome. The Papal Repository is not unlike the
Tomb of Semiramis, which Darius Hystaspis opened with a great expectation of
Treasure. It promises much without, but when looked into, nothing will be
found but vacuity and emptiness.

All this does demonstrate, That indulgence and favor from God is to be
expected only upon the account of the meritorious satisfaction of Jesus Christ.
The evidence for this doctrine is so clear, That Bellarmine who set forth, like
the Son of Peor, with a full purpose to curse it, was forced to bless it with a
tutissimum est, That it is the most safe to rely only upon the Merits of our
Blessed Lord.

SECT. V. Concerning the Place of Divine Worship.
THose who Worship God, may be considered under a Threefold respect, either as
alone, or else as parts of a Family, or as Members of an Ecclesiastical
Community.

I. Alone, And so we may Worship in any solitary Place. I will that men pray
every where lifting up holy hands, 1 Timothy 2.8. Isaac went out into the field
(...), which signifies both to Meditate and to pray. Daniel prayed in the
Lyon's den. Jonas in the Whale's belly. S. Peter upon the House top. We have a
stated rule for private Worship. When thou prayest, enter into thy Closet.
There we may take an impartial account of our sincerity. The Eye of the
Spectator, like a Burning-glass, does often kindle the fire of public Devotion.

II. As parts of a Family, And so we are obliged to join with those with whom
we live in an Oeconomical state. Every Master of a Family is invested with a
Domestic Power. His Authority over his Children is founded in generation: over
others in a tacit or explicit compact. This Power he is bound to use to the
utmost, in promoting the Glory of the Supreme Being. In every Society the chief
Governor lies under the strictest obligations to advance this end. He cannot
be said to do this, except he exerts it sometimes in the engaging those who are
under his inspection to perform such duties as have the most direct and
immediate aspect upon the Divine Honor. And there is no way more compendious
to do this in, than the joining with them in Prayers and Supplication to
Almighty God. Upon this account we read of Family Worship amongst those, who
had only the conduct of Natural light. The Heathens had their Penates, which
were placed in the innermost part of the house, to which their Devotion was
daily directed. Demipho in Terence says, Ego Deos penates hinc salutatum domum
divortar. I will from hence step aside to salute the houshold-gods. Salutatum,
Donatus interprets adoratum prece, to adore by Prayer. They likewise had their
Lares. Lar is a God, qui domi a familia colebatur, Cat. de re rust. c. 3.
who was worshipped at home by the family. In the domestic Chapel of
Alexander Severus, were the Images of Abraham, Christ, Orpheus, Apollonius, to
which he daily addressed himself with a Religious regard. Lamprid.


In the Holy Scriptures we read of a signal act of Religion in the first
family. Cain and Abel brought their Sacrifices. This is recorded as a pattern
to future generations. The firstborn of Noah's posterity was devoted to this
sacred purpose. Under the Law every House had a solemn consecration. Deuteronomy.
20.5. Two Schedules were six'd upon the Posts of the door, one containing part
of the 6. c. of Deuteronomy. from the 4th. to the 9th. ver. The other, part of the
11th. c. from the 13th. to 21. places chosen out on purpose to inculcate the
duty of Masters of Families, which is to sharpen and instruct those, in the
Law, who are under their inspection, and engage them in a conformity to its
demands. This custom Jonathan Ben Vziel has in his Eye, (...)
when he interprets those words, and has not dedicated it, and non fixit in ea
posts, (...) is put Metonymically for the Parchment fastened to the posts of
the door, in which those portions of the Law were written.

In the New Testament we have plain indications of this duty. S. Paul, after he
has declared the engagements incumbent upon those Relations which constitute a
Family, as Husbands, Wives, Parents, Children, Masters, Servants, he subjoyns
this exhortation, continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving,
Col. 4.2. And that we may understand, it is not solitary Prayer only, which he
means, it is added in the 3d. v. (...), praying together: (...) answers to the
Hebrew (...) and is an Adverb of Place, (...), The land was not able to bear
them, that they might dwell together, Genesis 13.6. (...), The Cow and the Bear
shall feed together, Es. 11.7. (...), We should live together with him, 1 Th.
5.10.

This Family-devotion S. Peter has his Eye upon, then he enjoins the Husband to
give honor to the wife, as the weaker vessel, lest their prayers be hindered, 1
Pet. 3.7. To this Apostolical rule, the practice of Constantine the Great is
very agreeable. His Palace was a lively resemblance of a Church, in it He,
together with all his Royal Retinue, did offer, (...), Eusebius. l. 4. de Vit.
Con. c. 17. Vales.
as Eusebius relates.

III. As Members of an Ecclesiastical Community, and so we are obliged to join
with the Church in public places of Worship. The reason of such Assemblies
will be very evident, if we consider the following particulars.

1. The Nature of the Church.

Every one who is admitted into it, enters into a Corporation. The Church is
styled a Body, 1 Cor. 12. The Members of every Corporation are not only to be
engaged in such solitary acts, as relate to themselves in a private capacity:
but lie under an obligation to meet together for the performance of such common
offices, as concern the utility of the whole. There is no Community, that has
not some solemn place appointed for the Convention of the Members of it. 2.
Christ's appointment of public Pastors and Teachers. The design of this
Ordination is to edify his body; if the several parts of this body do not
convene, in order to the receiving the instruction of these Teachers, the end
of this Holy Institution will be totally disappointed. 3. His Ordinances, as
Baptism, The Supper of the Lord, Excommunication, Absolution; All these suppose
the Duty of assembling publicly. By the First, We gain a right to External
Communion. In the Second, We have an enjoyment of it. The Third imports an
exclusion from it. The Fourth, a readmission to it. 4. The security of his
Disciples. Those who conscientiously frequent public assemblies have a
promise, That God will be a sun and a shield to them, Psalm. 84.11. They have
the protection of good Angels. The Walls of the Temple were carved with
Cherubims, to signify their surrounding them as a Guard to defend them from
danger. They are not so much exposed to the assaults of the Infernal Spirit.
The Devil made choice of the Wilderness as the most advantageous place to set
upon our Savior in. When we are united with others, we are not with so much
facility broken by the force of an adversary, as when alone. Such assemblies
are a good security against Apostasy. The Apostle insinuates, Heb. 10.25. That
the deserting the Church, is the next door to the desertion of the Faith. The
Zeal of those, whom we have Communion with, is of excellent use to repair the
decaies of our Love. Coals put together keep one another a-live, which a-sunder
would quickly die. 5. The Glory of God. We then glorify him, when we manifest
and set forth the peerless perfections of his Nature. The fuller this
manifestation is, the more Glory must necessarily accrue to him. It cannot but
be more full and clear in a joint performance of Religious duties, than in
solitary devotion. This made it so desirable to David to go with a multitude to
the House of God. The practice of the People of God in all Ages, Before the
Law, Under the Law, After the Law.

1. Before the Law, We read of Public Places set apart for this Sacred
purpose. Abraham erected an Altar betwixt Aai and Bethel, Genesis
13.4.21.33.33.20.35.7.
and planted a Grove in Beersheba, where He called upon the name of the Lord.
Rebecca went out to enquire of the Lord, which implies a known place, where God
use to manifest himself to his people. Jacob built an Altar at Salem and
Bethel. Fag. in loc.
Moriah is styled (...) the land of Divine Worship by the Chaldee Paraphrast,
Genesis 22.2. All the Hebrews assert, That it was the place where Noah, etc.
offered Sacrifice to God.

2. Under the Law, Mention is made of the Tabernacle, High Places, Temple,
Proseuchas, Synagogues.

Tabernacle. This was set up at Shilo, Jos. 18.1. And because of the assembling
of the People, styled the Tabernacle of the Congregation. This together with
the Ark, remained there from the fourteenth year of Joshua's government, until
the death of Eli, the High Priest. When the Ark was taken captive, and
profaned by the unhallowed hands of the Philistines, a liberty was granted for
the erection of Altars upon high places, like to that which Gideon built upon a
Rock, upon an extraordinary occasion, Jud. 6. v. In Ramoth the City of Samuel
there was such a high place where the Sacrifice of the People was offered up If
this had been contrary to the mind of God, no question but Samuel, who as a
Prophet had knowledge to understand his Will, and as a Judge Power to execute
it, and is upon record as a person who was faithful in the discharge of his
duty, would have exerted his authority in the demolition of it. The like we
read of in Gibeon, where the Ark and Tabernacle were, which Moses made in the
Wilderness. The censure passed upon Solomon and the succeeding Kings of Judah
upon the account of the high places, does not imply, That it was a sin to
frequent them in Samuel's time, and part of David's reign. For when the
Israelites were infested with the Plague, David was directed to rear an Altar
in the threshing Floor of Araunah in order to the appeasing of the Divine
displeasure. When he had done what he was enjoined, and was blessed in his
action with that success which he desired, he being under the guidance of the
Holy Spirit declared, That was the place of the divine Schecina. This is the
house of the Lord God, and this is the offering for the burnt offering of
Israel, 1 Chro. 22. v. 1. From that time it became a fault to have recourse to
the High Places. Solomon being young, when this command was given, did forget
it when he went to Gibeon: His offense, though recorded, yet was pardoned, and
his request fully answered.

After the Tabernacle we read of the Temple. In order to the performance of the
Service of God in it, the Priests were digested into Four and Twenty Courses,
in their several Courses they gave their attendance for a whole week together.
There they Prayed, Sang Praises, read the Commandments, Offered up the daily
Sacrifice for all Israel. As one Course did enter upon the Sabbath, the other
went forth, 1 Chronicles. 11.5, 7. So that within less than the space of half a year
it came to the turn of the same Persons to wait. It was lawful for all the
Courses to be present together at the Three great Feasts, with this caution,
That they only to whom it did appertain to attend that Week, might offer up the
Free Will Offerings, and the Daily Sacrifice.

The Hebrews say, as the Priests, so the Body of the People was divided into
Four and Twenty Stations. The Daily Sacrifice being offered for all Israel,
^ev. 1.3. c. 3.2, 8.
and the Law requiring, That those for whom the Sacrifice was offered, should
be present, and put their hands upon the head of it, and there being an
impossibility, That every Man should appear in his own Person, it was
appointed, That the several stations should appear in their turns, as the
representatives of the whole Community. These Maimonides styles (...) the Men
of the station. Those which were near to Jerusalem belonging to such a station,
constantly appeared in their course, according to what was appointed. Those who
lived at a greater distance, Vid. Temp. Service, 62.
used to assemble themselves in Synagogues, and to pray and read the Law, that
they might maintain Communion with their Brethren at Jerusalem.

Besides the Temple, the Jews had their Proseucha's and Synagogues. By the
express words of the Law, the Males were obliged to appear thrice a year at
Jerusalem. The same Law obliging them to the celebration of a Sabbath every
week, their reason did lead them to make choice of such places, where they
might conveniently assemble for that purpose. These are styled Proseucha's and
Synagogues. Such was the Sanctuary in Sichem, Jos. 24.26. And the place of
Prayer in Mizpeh, 1 Samuel 7.6. (...) 1 Macc. 3. ^ 40.
And the houses of God, Ps. 74.8. (...) Aquila translates (...). Jerusalem it
self was not without them, as is evident from S. Paul's words. He making an
Apology for his behavior there, says, They neither found him in the Temple
disputing with any man, nor raising up the people, neither in the Synagogues,
nor in the City, Act. 24.12. Though there is some distinction usually made
betwixt a Proseucha and a Synagogue: as that a Proseucha was in the Field, a
Synagogue in the City: The Proseucha open at top, The Synagogue covered: The
Proseucha built in some place near a River, The Synagogue in the highest place
of the City: The Proseucha might entertain the least number, The Synagogue no
fewer than Ten: yet we find the words promiscuously used by Philo Judaeus. He
calls the Synagogues (...). De vita M^sis, l. 3.
It is probable where the Magistrate would not permit the Jews the exercise of
their Religion in Cities, that they built places in the Fields equivalent to
them, where they might convene for the Worship of God: So that though a Proseucha
and a Synagogue might differ in some external modes, yet they did agree in the
main end.

After the Law, when the Messiah was come, these places were frequented for
some time. Notwithstanding there was corruption in the public administrations,
yet our Blessed Lord did not forsake them. The Scribes and Pharisees Ministers
in the Jewish Church were chargeable with many personal defects; by their
procurement, unnecessary Rites were blended with the Worship of God. The
persons, which they ministered unto, were so enormous in their conversion, That
the Temple upon the account of their presence is styled a Den of Thieves. Yet
for all this, our Savior did not withdraw himself from their Assemblies. Into
this Church he was admitted by Circumcision, Luke 4.16.
did frequently celebrate the Passover with them, honor their Synagogues with
his presence every Sabbath, and commands his Disciples to hear the Scribes and
Pharisees. Jo. 11.49.
Though there was an innovation about the Priesthood (the Office of the High
Priest which was perpetual by the Law of God, was made annual by the Law of
Man) yet when he had cured the Leper, he sends him to the Priest, Mat. 8.4.
He continued in a Proseucha, praying all night, Luke 6.12.

After his Death his Disciples did tread in his steps. So soon as he was
ascended, the principal of them, which were a Hundred and Twenty, did presently
gather together in an upper room belonging to the Temple, and continued in
Prayer and Supplication. When such multitudes of Converts were added to the
Church as one room would not contain them, they made use of diverse. They
continued in the Temple and brake Bread, (...), from room to room. S. Peter and
S. John went up to the Temple, at the hour of prayer, Act. 3.1. The Disciples
were all with one accord in Solomon 's Porch, Act. 5.12. The Apostles are bid
to speak in the Temple to the people, Act. 5.20. S. Paul preached Christ in the
Synagogues, Act. 9.20. At Antioch in Pisidia, he and Barnabas did repair
thither on the Sabbath day, Act. 13.14. This was his practice at Iconium,
Thessalonica, Corinth, Ephesus, and so much a general custom; That the
assembling of Christians together is styled (...), Heb. 10.

This Communion of the Christians with the Jews, continued as long as their
circumstances were reconcilable with it. Afterward they held their Assemblies
apart, and had peculiar places, for their Sacred Conventions, known by the name
of (...). When ye come together in the Church, 1 Cor. 11.18. Here is first, a
coming together, which makes the Congregation, and then, the place is expressed
where the Congregation is met, (...). The word imports something antecedent to,
and distinct from the Assembly. Upon this account the Church is opposed to
private houses. Have ye not houses to eat and drink in? or, despise ye the
Church of God? Let the women keep silence in the Churches, and if they will
learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home, 1 Cor. 14.34.

As Houses and home signify private dwellings; so the rule of opposition will
justify us in asserting, That the Church, or Churches which are opposed to
them, must signify public, set apart for Religious Conventions. Such were the
Houses of Nymphas, Philemon, Priscilla and Aquila. Col. 4.15. Romans 16.
Priscilla and Aquila. We read of the Church in them, that is, The Congregation
which use to meet there for the Worship of God, these persons having set apart
some part of their dwelling for that sacred purpose. If by the Church, in their
Houses, we must understand only the members of their families which were
converted to the Faith, no good reason can be given, why the same form of
salutation should not be addressed to others as well as to them. Romans 16.^. 10,
11.
There were many others, as Narcissus and Aristobulus, who had in their
households those who did embrace the Doctrine of Christ.

We are not destitute of very early Testimonies to the same effect in
Ecclesiastical Writers. L. 8. c. 1. ^u. l. 2. c. 17. Lamprid.
Eusebius styles the Churches (...), ancient edifices. Several of them were in
Alexandria in S. Mark's time. Alexander Severus upon a controversy did adjudge
such a public place to the Christians.

Irenaeus, and Clemens Alexandrinus use the word Ecclesia in the sense which we
contend for. Such a place is styled Domus Dei in Tertullian, and Dominicum in
S. Cyprian. These words import a resignation of the right which the owner was
vested in, and a solemn appropriation to the service of our Blessed Lord.

There is all the reason imaginable, why there should be such conveniences for
the Christians in those early times. They were passionate in their desires to
propagate their Religion. Known places for their Assemblies were signally
conducing to this end. Every one might have recourse to them, to gain
instructions in the Faith.

The severity of the Age, was not such as always to hinder them from building.
It was as great against the Jews. At first, The Disciples were persecuted under
that name, Act. 18.2. And yet they had their Synagogues in diverse places. From
Julius to Constantine the Great are reckoned above Forty Emperors and Ten
Persecutions. In the intervals betwixt these violent storms, there is no reason
to believe, but that the Christians might erect appropriate places for the
Worship of Christ. The Greeks at this day, though they live under severities not
unequal to those, which the Primitive Christians were exercised with: yet have
their Churches allowed them.

The several steps which the Penitents were to take before they could be
admitted to the Communion, is an evident demonstration of that which we argue
for. First, They must stand without the doors of the Oratory, and there with
the greatest importunity, beg the Prayers of those, who went in and came out of
it. These were named (...). After this part of their penance was finished, they
were admitted within the doors, and stood in the place called the (...), Ad
Longinum, not. p. 12.
and heard the Scriptures read and preached, these were styled (...). The next
step was to that part of the Church which was behind the Ambo, or Pulpit. These
did hear as the former, and went out with the Catechumens, and were termed
(...). The next step was their standing and remaining together with the
Faithful, and communicating in Prayers, and Psalms: but not in the Holy
Sacrament. These were known by the title of (...). All this can argue no less
than, That the Christians did not promiscuously meet in any place, but had
peculiar Edifices, digested into parts suitable to these ends. This way of
discipline was earlier than the times of Gregory Bishop of Neo-Caesaria. He
speaks of it as a thing which the Church had been familiarly accustomed to, and
He flourished about the middle of the Third Century.

The Concession of Origin, Minutius Foelix, Arnobius, Lactantius, That the
Christians had no Temples, is no prejudice to what has been asserted. These
Authors lived within the Third Century. In that age we have evident Testimonies
for peculiar places dedicated to Christian Worship. Therefore by the Temples
which the Christians had not, must be understood such as were in use amongst
the Heathens, namely, Edifices in which some Demon was enclosed, and kept from
wandering abroad by Magical incantations.

After the Three first Centuries were past, we have a cloud of Witnesses.
Churches were then made more conspicuous by a greater magnificence in the
structure of them. Constantine made a Law to build the Oratories higher, and to
enlarge both in breadth and length the Churches of God. Eusebius says, Eus^de
vita Con. l. 2. c. 44. Hist. l. 10. c. 2.
That Churches then were more splendid than those which had been demolished by
the Impiety of Tyrants.

There was likewise a more solemn Consecration, than the Imperial Laws did
permit before. Theod. Ecc. His. l. 1. c. 31.
When Constantine was settled in the Throne, he sent his Commands on every side,
to the Bishops, to Consecrate the Temples which were built by him.

The Historian says, That when Dedications were made according to this Imperial
Edict, it was (...), Eus. Eccl. H. l. 10. c. 3.
to all Christians a desirable Spectacle. This (...), in a little time, gained
so high a reputation, That it was thought to be an error, to meet in any
Church which had not been first solemnly Dedicated. Athan. Apol. ad Constable. tom.
1. p. 682. Seld de Syned. l. 3. c. 15. p. 343.
The Arrians accused Athanasius upon the account of his meeting in the great
Church in Alexandria, (...), before it was perfected by Consecration.

In after ages, None doubt whether there were such places, or no. All the
question is, Whether they may be used now, by reason of those abuses, which
have been formerly practiced in them, the too much Sanctity which some continue
to attribute to them.

To which I reply, 1. Former abuses can be no just ground for our not
frequenting of them. The corruptions are removed by the Reformation, as the
Buyers and Sellers were whipped out of the Temple.

Superstition does not like the Leprosy in Houses, so cleave to the Walls, as
not to be separated without pulling them down. The introduction of the True
Worship of Christ, does as naturally remove it, as Light expells Darkness. If
this principle of not using that which has been abused, was thoroughly followed,
it would lead us into Vaults and Caverns, and persuade us to make our perpetual
abode there; lest the light of the Sun, which to this day is stained with the
Idolatry of some Nations, should be useful to us.

Bethaven is changed into a Bethel, when God is worshipped there in a right
manner. The place which is styled the Mount of Corruption, when abuses were
removed, is called Mount Olivet.

The Censers of Korah and his Company were made into broad Plates for a
covering of the Altar. Number. 16. v. 38.
Gideon offered a burnt Sacrifice unto the Lord with the wood of an Idolatrous
Grove. Constantine the Great converted Heathen Temples into Christian Churches.

The Command to demolish Idolatrous Altars in Canaan, and break the Brazen
Serpent, is not applicable to the case in hand. The First was enjoined, because
the Law did allow but one Altar. The Second, Because the abuse was grown so
high, as to make the Serpent, the Object of the Supreme Veneration; and the
use, for which it was at first designed, had a period put unto it.

As for the Sanctity which some attribute to Churches, they allege in
justification of themselves, the following Considerations.

They are Holy, not upon the account of any inherent quality, but a Relation.

This Relation is produced by a Solemn Dedication. This Dedication is
countenanced by that general Command, Prove. 3.5. Honor the Lord with thy
substance. When Men expend their Estates in the erecting such Edifices, and
devote them to be places for the Celebration of Religious Worship, They lay out
their substance in that way, which has a tendency to promote the Divine Honor.

The Jews did attribute this kind of Sanctity to their Synagogues, and yet
Jesus Christ and his Apostles, Seld. de Syn. l. 3. c. 16.
did not decline the use of them.

SECT. VI. Concerning the Time of Divine Worship.
THE only excuse, why we are not constantly employed in those actions which
have the most direct aspect upon the Divine Honor, are the necessities of this
present Life. Now there is no person of what quality soever, so encumbered, but
he, without being wanting to his secular concerns, may spare some intervals
every day, and dedicate them to this sacred purpose. Deuteronomy. 17.19.
Princes who are exercised with the most important affairs, are required daily
to read in the Book of the Law. David was Seven times a day concerned in the
Praises of God. Psalm. 119. v. 164.
Alphred the Saxon King dedicated Eight Hours of every day, to the concerns of
Religion. Charles the Fifth (after his retirement) was so frequent in his
Devotion, that it is said of him, That he spoke oftener with God than with Men.
The Jews use to repair to their devotion in their Synagognes or Schools Three
Times a day in the Morning from Sunrising, till about the Fourth Hour. This
they styled (...) in the Afternoon about the Ninth Hour, Leo Moden. p. 32.
which they call (...), in the Evening at the beginning of the Night, this they
name (...) S. Cyprian represents the Christians as being always ready to give
their adoration unto God. De Orat. Dom. p. 154


Besides these Daily addresses, there are many occasional ones, which we are to
make to Heaven. The Supreme Moderator who rules the World, is various in the
methods of his government. He is pleased sometimes to interrupt the usual
course, and administer just occasion either of extraordinary joy and triumph,
or else of the deepest sorrow and dejection. The light of Reason has directed
all Nations to dedicate some portion of their Time to the remembrance of such
signal emergencies, and the honor and worship of him, by whose interposals
they are brought to pass. Of this kind are the Feasts of Purim, Jo. 10.22.
and Dedication: The First occasioned by the signal disappointment of Haman's
Policy: The Second by the Purification of the Temple by Jndas Maccabaeus. To
these we may reduce the Festival of the Law, Nehem. 8.9. which the Jews still
observe upon the Three and Twentieth day of Tisri, They style it (...) upon the
account of their joy for having finished the reading of the five books of
Moses, according to the division of them into so many Sections, as there be
weeks in the year. They had their Fasts likewise in the Tenth Month, occasioned
by the besieging of Jerusalem, in the Fourth, by the taking of it; in the
Fifth, by the overthrow and burning of the Temple; in the Seventh by the
killing of Gedaliah. Parallel to this, is the practice of the ancient
Christians, who weekly fasted upon the days, when Christ was betrayed and
Crucisied, yearly before the Passover. There were likewise in use among them
Solemn Days appointed to perpetuate the Memory of the Martyrs, and the goodness
of God in furnishing them with magnanimity, to give so signal a testimony of
the reality of the Christian Faith.

Besides these stated days occasioned by some particular dispensations, reason
does suggest unto us, That there ought to be a solemn time peculiarly devoted
to the honor of Jehovah.

If S. Peter and Paul have their particular days set apart to preserve their
memory, and those honorable thoughts in us, which their holy and exemplary
conversation deserves: certainly God does justly challenge a peculiar time to
be Consecrated to the remembrance and Adoration of his peerless Perfection,
transcendent Dominion, and unparalled Goodness.

The Wise Man tells us, Eccl. 3.1.
To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under heaven.
And if to every purpose, then certainly to the Solemn Worship and
acknowledgment of the matchless Excellency, and unlimited Sovereignty of the
Supreme Being. For this is the great purpose which God designs in the New
Creation; That he may have a chosen Generation, to show forth the Praises of
him, Who has brought them out of darkness, into his mavelous light.

Upon this account the Israelites had not only their daily Sacrifice Morning
and Evening, their Yearly Solemnities where the Males appeared: but likewise a
Solemn Day every Week, when all of both Sex were obliged to own the Sovereignty
of Jehovah, and their relation as Subjects to him. Therefore their Sabbath is
represented as a sign, That Jehovah was their God, Ezekiel. 20.20. Earthly Princes
are not only owned by the daily respect which the Court gives unto them, by the
occasional obeisance of their Subjects, upon the account of some particular
favors: but likewise there is usually a fixed and stated Time for the payment
of that homage whereby their Supremacy is owned. It is as reasonable, that
there should be as solemn and peculiar Times for all the Subjects of Jehovah to
make their due acknowledgments, and render their tribute of Honor and Worship
to him.

The Heathens by the light of Nature, Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 16. p. 226
were directed not only to appoint the dies intercisi, which were but in part
devoted to the honor of their Deities, but likewise a more solemn time, which
was entirely dedicated to this purpose.

That this most Solemn Time may be the better understood, I will lay down the
following Propositions.

1. God requires, That we give to him, not only a Mental and inward Worship,
but that we express it by external actions. Our Bodies as well as our Souls
being made and redeemed by him: we cannot but lie under an indispensable
obligation to Worship and Glorify him with both.

II. Our external acknowledgments of the Divine Majesty must not only be in
private, but in public: Not only when we are alone, but in Communion and
conjunction with others. For we undoubtedly are bound to Worship the Fountain
of all our Blessings in such a way, as has the most direct and efficacious
influence upon the promotion of his Honor. His Honor is more advanced by the
joint and united performances of his Servants, than by their solitary
devotions. For the more manifest and full, our Religious acknowledgments are,
the more Honor must necessarily accrue to him. And we cannot but believe, that
the Agnition is more full, and apert, when holy Men join together in their
Sacred Addresses, than when they act a-sunder, and confine themselves to their
several apartments.

III. The Solemn Time for these joint performances of Religion ought to be
stated and fixed by some known constitution, otherwise, How shall the several
members of the Ecclesiastical Community know, when to convene in order to the
discharge of their duty?

IV. It is expedient, That it should be taken out of some part of a Week. For
our Souls naturally being under an indisposition to the concerns of Religion,
the sooner the time for Solemn Worship returns, the more useful it will be, in
preventing that deadness, which will be apt to surprise us, before a larger
Circle (such as a Year, or Month) can come about.

V. It cannot in reason be less than one whole Day every Week, which will be
evident, if we consider, 1. The Object of our Worship. Were we to live the days
of Methusalem, he might challenge every moment of our time, as a just debt: and
if all be due, reason will not allow, That so considerable a portion, as a
Week, should pass without a solemn dedication of a Seventh part of it, to his
service. Let us suppose one man to owe unto another, as much or more, than his
whole estate is worth, the rule of equity will not allow him to offer less than
the Seventh part in order to the compounding his debt, and the just
satisfaction of his Creditor. 2. The Nature of Worship. In it the Glory of God,
the eternal happiness of the Soul, the temporal felicity of the Community are
highly interested. The difficulty in the right discharge of it is equal to the
importance. The Prince of this World, makes it his work to hinder it. The
natural tempers of Men, furnish him with a signal advantage to compass his
design. There is an inbred Love in us to sensible objects, which are apt to
ingenerate (...), as Athenagoras speaks. Leg. (...) Christianis p. 30.
This is the reason why the Second Commandment, which relates to Worship, is
fortified with so many inducements to obedience. One taken from the power of
God to punish offenders, (...) Another from his will to exert his power (...).
A Third from the execution of his Will upon the offspring of those which
offend, visiting the iniquity, etc. A Fourth from his kindness to the obedient,
showing mercy, etc. Had it not been difficult to confine our selves within the
bounds of this Precept, the fence, which is set about it, would not have been
so strong. If the Worship of God be a matter of such difficulty, and of the
greatest importance, then it requires a very large proportion of our time, to
be spent in the performance of it: and if so, was it left to our own disposal,
we could not in justice, allot less than the Seventh part. 3. The pattern of
the triumphant Church. In Heaven a perpetual Sabbath is celebrated. The
glorified Spirits are constantly employed in worshipping him, who lives for
ever and ever, Rev. 4.10. This heavenly example the Church Militant must makes
as near an approach unto as the circumstances of this present life will permit,
she being obliged to endeavor, That the will of God may be done on earth, as
it is in heaven, Matt. 6. v. 10. Those who are most exercised with the
encumbrances of this world, have nothing to plead in their own behalf, why they
may not come up so nigh to this celestial pattern, as to devote One Day of
every Week to the concerns of Religion. 4. The practice of the Militant Church,
not only under the Law but before. From the beginning of the Creation, the Time
for Solemn Worship was no less than One whole Day every Week, as is evident
from the testimony of the Author to the Hebrews, although the works were finished
from the foundation of the world. For he spoke in a certain place of the
Seventh Day on this wise, And God did rest the seventh day, from all his works,
Heb. 4.3, 4. Here is an evident remembrance of a day of rest, not only to God
but to Men. For the design of the Apostle is to prove, out of the 95. Psalm.
That there remains a rest to the people of God under the Gospel. In order to
this purpose, he shows it is not the rest of the Seventh from the Creation
which the Psalmist had his eye upon. If the Seventh here mentioned, had not
been a rest to the people of God, but only to God himself, there would have
been no necessity of such care to distinguish it from that other rest, which is
concluded still to remain to the people of God. 2. That time is expressed when
this rest commenced, from the foundation of the world. The works then finished
are represented as the ground, upon which the Sabbath was instituted. It cannot
with reason be imagined, That the foundation should be laid at the beginning,
and the superstruction not built upon it (as some think) till above Two
Thousand years after.

This Assertion receives a great deal of strength from the early division of
Time into Weeks. Noah had his eye upon the Hebdomadal Cycle, Genesis 8.10, 12. A
Week is represented as a period familiarly known in Jacob's time, Genesis 29.27.
God himself did point out this division by his own example, distinguishing the
Six Days by peculiar Works, the Seventh by rest. A universal consent prevailed
amongst all the Eastern Nations about this particular. The testimony of Joannes
Philoponus is known, (...). l. 7. c. 14.
(...), etc. It is agreed amongst all Nations, That there are Seven Days, which
by a constant revolution constitute all time. Georgius Syncellus in his
Chronology, which begins with Adam, and ends at Dioclesian, asserts, That the
Patriarchs divided their time (...), and that the division into Months and
Years, is of later date. Josephus against Appion says, (...), etc. There is no
City, whether Greek or Barbarian, to whom was unknown (...). If the division of
Time into Weeks was from the beginning, and a week consisted of seven days, and
one of those were a Sabbath, or a day of rest, the Sabbath must needs be from
the beginning. There is no record, which makes mention of a week, that does not
suppose the Sabbath to be a part of it, (...) amongst the Greeks is the same
with (...) among the Hebrows, which Theophilus Antiochenus says, E. z. ad
Autol. p. 91.
All Men had knowledge of (...) in the Sacred Oracles sometimes is put for a
week, the denomination of the whole being taken from the principal part, Lev.
23.15. In the book entitled (...), it is expressed, That for many weeks the
Seventh Day was celebrated as a day of rest. The Chaldee Paraphrast upon the
Title of Psalm 92. uses these words (...) the Song which the first Man sang on
the Sabbath Day, and upon the first verse of the Canticles, the first Song Adam
spoke at the time when his sin was pardoned, and the day of the Sabbath came
and protected him. Cain and Abel are said to bring their Sacrifices (...) at
the end of days, by which we must understand theh period of a year or a month,
or some other term: there being no division of time so early as that into
Weeeks, and nothing here can be so well understood by the end of Days, as the
end of a Week, which was the Sabbath.

Indeed it is objected; That if the Sabbath was so early, as has been
represented, it would have been observed by the Patriarchs, and the celebration
of it recorded in the book of Genesis: and that the Jews are generally of
opinion that it was not instituted, till after the Israelites were delivered
out of Egypt. To which, I reply, That Genesis is but a short History, and it
cannot be expected, That all things done by those Holy Men should be recorded
in it. Mat. 19.8.
The Law against Polygamy was from the beginning, and yet it is passed over in
silence in that History, and not to be found, but in obscure expressions
throughout the Old Testament. There is no doubt, but there was a positive Law
concerning Sacrifice, as early as the day of Abel, who is said by Faith to
offer up his oblation, Heb. 11. And yet the memory of it is not extant in
Genesis.

Though many of the Hebrews assert the Sabbath to be instituted after the coming
out of Egypt. Yet others every jot as considerable, as they, give it an
earlier date, as the Chaldee Paraphrast, Josephus, Philo Judaeus, Manasse Ben
Israel, and upon far better reasons.

It is not always the Major part (where we have a freedom of judgment) but the
Senior, which must be our guide: and which is so, we may discern by the
solidity of the grounds, which the testimony is built upon.

From all this it appears, That the solemn time for Worship, before the coming
of Christ, even from the beginning, was no less, than one whole Day in a week:
and if it was so frequent before his manifestation in our Nature, the signal
effusion of the Spirit, when the Sun of Righteousness was not many degrees
above the Horizon, it ought not to be less frequent among us, who are blessed
with the enjoyment of fuller disclosures. It is a rule which S Chrysostom
gives, (...), etc. It behooves us to show forth the more virtue, because the
grace of the Spirit has been poured out in larger measures.

It would be a bad requital, If we who have the fruition of more Spiritual
Blessings than the Jews, should be less frequent than they were in those acts,
which have the most direct aspect upon the Divine Honor.

Lastly, That no less than the Seventh part of a Week ought to be devoted to
the Solemn Worship of God, we may collect from the writings of the Heathens.
They speak of a Seventh Day every Week, which they accounted Sacred.
Testimonies of this nature are produced out of Linus by Aristobulus, Eusebius.
praep. Evan. l. 13. c. 12, 13.
and out of Callimachus, by Clemens Alexandrinus. This Seventh Day, they
accounted Sacred, not as the Dies (...), or (...) were: but in the same sense,
as the Jewish Sabbath. Aristobulus a Jew, speaking of it, says, (...), etc.
Homer and Hesiod plainly declare (having derived their knowledge from our
Bibles) that the Seventh Day is Sacred. Therefore it must be according to his
opinion Holy, as it lies in those Authors, in the same sense, as it is
accounted Sacred in the Bible. Clemens Alexandrinus affirms (...), etc. Stromd.
5.
only the Hebrews but the Greeks know the Seventh to be Sacred. This Seventh
day is not (as some would suggest) the seventh of the Month, but of the Week.
Clemens, and Eusebius cite the forementioned Authors to prove, That a weekly
Sabbath was known to the Heathens, and not a Monthly, and they were much more
competent Judges of their meaning, than any now can be. De Opisic.
What Philo asserts concerning the Seventh of the Week, is very agreeable to
their thoughts, (...), etc. It is not a feast only of one City, and Region, but
of all, and may be properly and worthily styled a universal solemnity, and the
Birthday of the World. Although at the first the Gentiles did derive this notion
from the Hebrews by Tradition; yet had it not been very consonant to the light
of reason, it would not have met with so universal an entertainment. The
Testimonies produced out of Tacitus, Seldom de jure Not. and Genesis
Ovid, Martial, etc. to evince That the Gentiles did look upon the weekly
Sabbath, as a rite peculiar to the Jewish Nation, are very reconcilable with
what is asserted. At the time when those Authors wrote (though it had been common
anciently) it was proper and peculiar to the Jews, in Two regards, 1. In
respect of the particular Day, it was the last of the week, whereas the Day
amongst the Gentiles was the first. When the several days of the week came to
be dedicated to the Planets, That Day which was devoted to the Sun, did
outstrip the rest, and in the thoughts of the Gentiles, as much outshine
them, as the Sun does the other six Planets. Upon this account Phoebus is
styled by Aeschylus (...), Seld. p. 435.
Venerandus septenarii princeps. He being the chief among the Seven, and
courted in a peculiar manner with religious veneration. 2. In respect of
observation. The Jews then were under a great degree of Superstition, and
placed the celebration of their Sabbath principally in bodily rest. The Romans,
who had conquered them, finding their Religion, in worshipping one God, was a
condemnation of their addresses to a plurality of Deities, they were highly
exasperated against them, and fastened upon this particular of bodily rest, to
disgrace them, representing as though the seventh part of their time was spent in
sloth and idleness, Septima quaeque dies turpi damnata veterno, Tanquam l^ssati
mollis imago Dei. These Two considerations make it plain, That although the
Heathens did devote one day every week to the honor of their Supreme God, yet
they might represent the Jewish Sabbath as a rite peculiar to a Jew: the Jewish
day being not the same with theirs, and the manner of the celebration quite
different. This may be the cause, why the Lord's Day was by those of them who
were converted to the Christian Faith, received without the least scruple, an
ancient custom had made it familiar to them; the alteration was only in the
object. Before it was dedicated to the Sun: now to the Sun of Righteousness.

And now I have finished the Fifth Proposition, The chief Solemn Time for
Worship, ought to be no less, than One whole Day in every Week.

VI. It is highly reasonable to believe, That the setting out the just Time
should be left to the Supreme Being. Though he has granted to the Church a
liberty to appoint days for Mourning, and Rejoicing, upon occasional
emergencies, as is evident by the practice of all Ages: Yet there is all the
appearance of reason to incline us to think, That he has reserved to himself
the appointment of the chief Solemn Time for the agnition of his Sovereignty,
and Dominion over us. He alone set forth this Time at the beginning. Though he
might have created the World in a moment: Yet, for our instruction, and better
information about this great concern, he was pleased to work Six Days and rest
One, and set it apart for his Worship and Service. This peculiar right he
challenges to himself in the Fourth Precept of the Decalogue. Six Days shall
thou labor, but the Seventh is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, That is a Day
of his own designation and appointment. In the New Testament our Blessed
Savior is declared to be Lord of the Sabbath, which can import no less, than
that he has an absolute power to determine it, and that none have authority to
alter what he is pleased to do. It is an evident injury to attempt to meddle
with that, of which another is the Lord, without his leave and privity. God
created Man, He best knows his strength and ability, He has a clear prospect of
the molestations and necessities, this sublunary state will expose him to. He
fully understands, what time is fit to be spent in worldly business, and what
in the concerns of Religion. Men have no certain rule, to determine by, for all
People and Nations. If it had been left to them, the result of such a
concession would have been nothing but ataxy and confusion. Their secular
employments are very various, some are more encumbered than others. Some live in
plenty and ease: some are exposed to penury and severe labor. It cannot be
expected, That they shall all agree about this time, being their condition is
so different. God, who is only able to increase supplies, and give more
strength, where more work is required, must necessarily be the most convenient
Arbitrator in this case, to set out, how much time is ordinarily to be allowed
to Men for their terrestrial affairs, and what proportion is to be reserved for
their celestial.

VII. This Time, which reason tells us, ought to be left to the Divine
designation, is determined in the Fourth Command to one in Seven, as a
proportion perpetually to be devoted to Religious Worship.

Here Three Things are to be proved, 1. That it is one in Seven, and not the
last of the Seven, which is enjoined by the Fourth Command. 2. That the Sabbath
of the Fourth Command, one in Seven, is perpetual and not to continue, only
during the Jewish Economy. 3. This proportion is by the Command to be devoted
to Worship, and not only to corporal rest.

1. It is one in Seven, and not the Seventh from the Creation, which is
enjoined by the Fourth Command. If we fully ponder the words, nothing else can
be concluded from them.

Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy. It is not said, Remember the Seventh
day from the Creation: but (...) a day of rest. All that the expression
signifies is, That a whole day must be set apart, and devoted to the honor of
the Supreme Being. And lest we should be at a loss, how often it must be done,
the quotum is set out, Six days shall thou labor, and do all that thou have to
do, but the seventh is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. The Seventh, not the
seventh from the Creation; but the Seventh with relation to the Six days of
labor: and as the Six do not signify those precise days on which the World
was made, but such a proportion of time as is fit for the dispatch of secular
concerns: so the Seventh, which follows, must be taken in the same sense, not
for the Seventh precisely from the formation of the World; but for one in
seven, whether the first, or the last, as God shall please to appoint. Even as
the fifth part of the increase of Egypt, which Pharaoh was to have, Genesis 47.
v. 24. does not signify the Fifth in order, but the Fifth in proportion, that
is one of five, the fruits being equally divided into so many portions.

After the proportion is thus set forth, the reason is expressed: For in six
days the Lord made heaven and earth, and rested the seventh. The force of this
reason lies not in the priority, or order of these days. God in the first six
days created the World, and rested the seventh; but in the quotum or number,
God took six days, neither more nor less, for the production of the Universe,
and rested one: Therefore thou shall work six days, and observe one as a day of
rest unto the Lord. Thus the harmony betwixt the reason and the concession of
six days for labor is very plain. For if the World was created within six
days, then the same allowance of time is sufficient (with the Divine
Benediction upon men's endeavors) to preserve it, and make a provision of all
things necessary for life This is not so conspicuous, if we lay the Emphasis
upon the first six days, and as they are taken, so must the Seventh be. So that
although it was the Seventh pricisely from the creation on which God rested, yet
the Seventh here is not intended to signify that precise day: but the quantity
and proportion of time only, which is contained in it. The rule of S. Austin is
applicable to the present case, propter illa, Bellarm. tom. 2. p. 683.
quae aliquid significant, illa, quae nihil significant, adferuntur.

The conclusion deduced from these premises, gives us a further evidence.
Wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it. Here is no mention
of the seventh, but a Sabbath day, a general word which may be applied as well
to the first, as the last of the week. This makes a clear discovery, That the
particular day, on which God rested is not intended in the reason of the
Command. For if that had been the design of it, no place had been more
convenient to express it in, than the conclusion, which is nothing but the
result of what went before. In other places the Seventh is mentioned, but here
only a Sabbath Day. Why the Spirit of God, who is not obnoxious to any defect
of memory, should change the phrase, cannot be imagined, except he intended by
using this general word, to give a greater latitude, and not to confine the
Sabbath to the particular Seventh from the Creation.

Nothing can be drawn from the words to discountenance this interpretation;
(...) is put without an article, whereas Exodus 16. v. 26. where the particular
day is set forth, the article is prefixed (...) the six days for labor are
expressed without any Emphatical character, (...) and as the six days are
taken, so must the seventh be.

What is objected, That the word (...) remember, intimates, That the Precept
enjoins that Sabbath which was given before, and that was the last of the week,
and that the article (...) before (...) and (...) determine them to the
signification of that day only, does not merit any great consideration.

One in Seven was enjoined long before. It bears the same date with the last of
the Seven. Now the Spirit of God being about to set out this proportion alone,
as a rule for all ages, as well under the Gospel as under the Law, and looking
back upon the great neglect of it in Egypt, and foreseeing the oppositions it
would meet with, tending to extinguish the memory of it, he is pleased in the
very front of the precept, which enjoins it, to place tins word Remember.

As for the article (...) before (...) and (...) nothing can be necessarily
collected from it, to enforce our belief that the last of the Seven is designed
in the Precept: for this article is many times found, where it has no such
determining influence, as Deuteronomy. 8.3. Man does not live by bread only, (...)
here does not signify, this or that kind of Bread, but leaves it in its
general signification, Lev. 18.5. Which if a man do, he shall live in them,
(...) here is without any Emphasis: and therefore (...) is expounded by (...)
without aw article, Romans 10.5.

When this article is Emphatical, it must be collected from the reason of the
thing, or the circumstances of the place. When the Holy Spirit does design a
peculiar determination by it, it is often joined with a separated Pronoun, as
(...) speak to this young man, Zach. 2.4. (...) in the self same day, Genesis
7.13. (...) this house and this City. Now we have nothing of this nature in the
Fourth Command to oblige us to believe such a determining Emphasis in it: but
on the contrary, the reason of the thing, and all circumstances duly
considered highly favor the sense which has been given. The Fourth Commandment
is encompassed with Moral Laws, and placed in the very Center of a perpetual
rule of righteousness. Our interpretation gives the most intelligible account,
why it should have this situation. It is generally asserted, That the last of
the week was Typical: but none have discovered the least tittle of
Ceremoniality in one in seven. This is reducible to the Laws of Nature, which
are usually reckoned to be of Two sorts, either such as are discovered by the
Light of Nature, or else such as being made known by revelation, are approved
of by that Light. Institut. Justinian. Arnold. vin. com. p. 52.
Although the equity of devoting just One in Seven to the Worship of God is not
so manifest as generally to be pitched upon, without the aid of revelation: yet
it being disclosed to be the mind of God, it finds a very ready entertainment.
All agree, That some time is to be set a part, and what proportion can be more
equal and convenient, Gell. l. 3. ^. 10. noc. At. de Etruriae originibus. Seld.
de jur. Not. and Genesis p. 376. Qu 69. p. 432.
than the Seventh. Varro made it his business to discover an excellency in this
number above others. Postellus observes, That anciently at Rome, one day in
seven was sacred, though not the same with the Jewish day. The Author of the
Question and Answer ad Orthodoxos, ascribed to Justin Martyr, takes notice of
some peculiar marks of honor upon this number, and says, it is (...), more
valuable and eminent than others. Now if the observation of one in seven
appertains to the Moral Law, and the last of the seven to the Ceremonial, we
ought to interpret the Fourth command, for one in seven, and not the last: For
the whole Decalogue being designed for a Royal Law, an everlasting rule and
standard for all ages, certainly every Command in it, is to be construed in
such a sense, as does most fully comply with this intention in the Lawgiver.

This interpretation makes the fourth Precept like to the others, it stands in
conjunction with, for they do not descend to any particulars. The First Command
does not name Saturn, Mars or Mercury, but keeps in the general, Thou shall
have no other Gods. The Second does not mention the image of any particular
Deity. The Third does not name assertory or promissory Oaths. The Fifth does
not nominate any individual, which stands in the relation of a Father or
Mother. So the Fourth does not express the particular day of Worship, but
confines it self to that, which is more general, One in Seven, whether it be
the first or last, as God shall please to appoint. It is not difficult to
discern the temper of this Law, by the genius of the other precepts, which are
its companions.

Lastly, There are many very considerable for Learning and Judgment, who favor
the interpretation which has been given.

S. Chrysostom, glossing upon these words, Hom. 16. Genesis 88. p. Fron. Duc.
God rested the seventh day and sanctified it, says, From hence we are taught
to set apart (...), one day in the circle of week for the exercise of
spiritual duties.

Aquinas affirms, That the last of the seven is not contained in the Fourth
Command, Preceptum de observatione Sabbati est secundum aliquid morale, etc.
and secundum hoc inter praecepta Decalogi computatur, non autem quantum ad
taxationem temporis, quia secundum hoc est ceremoniale. P. 2. Q. 100. art.
3.22. Q. 112. art. 4.
The Precept concerning the observation of the Sabbath, is in some respect
moral, and in that sense it is accounted amongst the Ten Commandments, and not
as it sets out the particular time, because that was ceremonial.

In the Homily of Time and Place, these words occur. By this Command (meaning
the Fourth) we ought to have a time, as one day in the week, wherein we ought
to rest, yea, from our lawful and needful works. For like as it appears by
this Commandment, That no Man in the six days ought to be slothful and idle,
but diligently to labor in that state wherein God has set him: even so God
has given express charge to all Men, That upon the Sabbath Day, which is now
our Sunday, they should cease from all weekly and work-day labor, etc.

Mr. Hooker asserts, Eccl. pol. l. 5. p. 378, 379.
That we are bound to account the Sanctification of one day in seven a duty,
which God's immutable Law does exact for ever.

Mr. Mede speaking of the Fourth Precept, Diatr. of the observation of the
Sabbath, etc. p. 240.
says, Where it is called in the Command the Seventh day, that is in respect of
Six days, and not otherwise: and therefore whenever it is so called, those
six days of labor are mentioned with it. The Seventh therefore is the Seventh
after six days of labor, nor can any more be inferred from it: The example of
the Creation is brought for the quotum, One day in Seven, as I have showed, and
not for the designation of any certain day for that Seventh.

Curcellaeus is of the same mind, De Esu. Sangu. p. 64.
Notare oportet nihil aliud in Decalogo praecipi, nisi, ut unam diem e septem a
labor feriemur (quod plerique Theologi morale and immutabile esse agnoscunt:)
quis vero sit septimus ille, non designari, etc. It is to be observed that
nothing else is commanded in the Decalogue, except that we abstain from labor,
and keep holy one day of seven, (which many Divines confess to be moral and
immutable) but which of the days that Seventh is, it is not expressed.

Against this interpretation it is objected, Epilogue.
That then it follows, That the Jews were not tied by the Fourth Command to
keep their Sabbath, or if they were, common sense cannot understand, how
Christians by the same Command should be tied to keep the First of the Week. To
which I reply, That supposing the sense to be true, which is given, there is no
difficulty in conceiving how all this may be done. The Command requires One day
of every Week to be observed, as the Lord shall appoint. He appointed by
another Law Saturday to be that One day during the Jewish Economy, and when a
period was put to that constitution, he did substitute the First of the Week in
the room of it. Common sense can do no otherwise than conceive, That the Last
of the Week during the Law must be obligatory to the Jews, by virtue of the
Fourth Command, it being one of seven of God's appointment: and likewise the
First of the Week to Christians, so soon as the Last was discharged, and that
appointed in the place of it. There is no greater mystery in the apprehending
of this, than there is to understand how the Fifth Command, which did oblige
the Jews to honor, Hezekias as the Father of their Community, should bind
Christians to pay the same respects to Constantine the Great.

The Eighth Precept did forbid a Jew to invade the right of another; what was
his right, the judicial Law did determine. Though that Law is at an end, and the
rights of Christians, settled by the Laws of the Country where they live: yet
the Eighth Commandment does as much oblige them, as it did formerly the Jews.

Now I pass to the Second branch of the Proposition. The Sabbath of the Fourth
Command, One in Seven is perpetual, and not to continue only during the Jewish
Economy. This will be manifest if we consider, it is part of the Decalogue,
which is intended to oblige in all ages. 1. In the Old Testament, it is plainly
distinguished from those Laws which the time of Reformation has put a period
to. The Decalogue was published without a restriction to any particular place.
The ceremonial and Judicial Laws are confined to the Land of Canaan. Deuteronomy.
10.14. Deuteronomy. 5.31.
The Decalogue was given immediately by God (...) from the mouth of power, as
the Talmudists speak, he being accompanied upon the Mount with his Angelical
retinne, as witnesses to the promulgation. The temporary Commandments were
delivered by the ministration of Moses. Abarb. fol. 209. Col. 2.
The Decalogue was written upon Tables of stone, to point out the durableness
of it; and delivered without any ceremonial solemnity. The other Precepts were
written by Moses in a Book, which was sprinkled with the blood of Calves and
Goats, Exodus 24.8. Heb. 9.19.
with Water, Scarlet, Wool and Hyssop. When Moses went up into the Mount to
receive the Two Tables, on which the Decalogue was written, he was attended
with Joshua, Exo. 24.13. When he received the other Precepts, with Aaron and
Nadab, etc. v. 1. to import that the Decalogue must be observed under the
Gospel, in times of Jesus, as well as Moses. The other Precepts only during the
Priesthood of Aaron. An Ark was prepared for the preserving of the Decalogue.
No such provision was made for the ceremonial Law. The Ark where the Decalogue
lay, was separated for many years from the Tabernacle, where all the ceremonial
service was performed, and never joined again to that which was of Moses's
erection: but David made a new Tent for it, at Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles 3.4.
and left the old in Gibeon, to show that when Moses's Tabernacle, with all the
ceremonial constitutions were laid aside, and a more perfect Tabernacle erected
by the Son of David, the Ten Commandments would retain their force and vigor.
He who will seriously consider, what is upon record in the Old Testament,
cannot but discern a very plain difference put betwixt the Ten Commandments,
and those Laws which were to be annulled in the time of the Gospel. 2. In the
New Testament, We have many evident intimations, That the Decalogue as
delivered by Moses is to continue as a perpetual rule to Christians, one jot or
one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, Matt. 5. By the Law we must
understand the Ten Commandments. Such a Law is spoken of, as is antecedent to
the times of Christ, and this must be the Law of Nature, as published by the
Light of Reason, or the Law as delivered by Moses. The first cannot be here
designed. For our Blessed Lord had that in his Eye, which the Scribes and
Pharisees had a zeal for. They endeavored to influence the Disciples with a
persuasion, That the intent of their Master was to destroy this Law, v. 17.20.
The Law which was the object of their fervor, was nto the Law of Nature, as it
lies out of the Scripture, but the Law of Moses. This Law of Moses does not
import one single Precept, but a System or Combination, for that which is here
called Law, is styled Commandments, v. 19. There are but three Systems of
Commands in the Pentateuch, The Ceremonial, The Judicial, and the Decalogue.
The Two first cannot be understood, for the Law here is such as none might
break, and teach Men so to do. The words have an aspect upon the future time,
when the Kingdom of Heaven or the Gospel-state should be more fully set up,
which was not till the Pentecost, when the Apostles were anointed by the
Spirit, and set upon their Thrones: but at that time it was lawful to act
contrary to the judicial and ceremonial Systeme, and teach others so to do.
Therefore by the Law, nothing is left to be understood, but that Combination of
Precepts, styled, The Decalogue: and that we may know, it is That in every
particular which is here established, it is expressed, That one jot or tittle
shall in no wise pass from it, all shall continue in full vigor and power: and
that we may have further assurance, That the Fourth Comandment, which is
usually reputed the least, is in the number of the Precepts here ratified, it
is added, Whosoever shall break one of these least Commandments, etc. to
intimate, That not only the great, such as are purely natural, and discoverable
without revelation, but the lesser, such as the Fourth Command is accounted to
be, are here included.

To the words of Christ, we may add the words of the Proto-Martyr, when he was
about to Seal the Faith of the Gospel with his blood. He asserts, That Moses
received the lively Oracles to give unto us, Act. 7.38. The lively Oracles are
the Ten Commandments. They are styled Oracles, because they were laid up in the
place from whence God used to give forth his Oracles: and lively in opposition
to the dead Oracles of the Heathens, which were observed to languish and fail
about the time of the manifestation of Jesus Christ: whereas the Ten
Commandments were then in their full vigor. These Precepts Stephen, a sincere
Convert to the Faith of Christ, says, Moses received, That he might deliver
them to us. In this number, he includes himself, as standing in the relation of
a Christian, the whole Chapter being intended as an Apology for that
profession. Therefore, the Decalogue concerns us not only by virtue of the
matter of it, but the Tradition and delivery by Moses.

To this are very consonant the words of S. Paul. Honor thy Father and thy
Mother, which is the first Commandment with promise: That it may be well with
thee, and thou may live long on the earth, Ephesians. 6.2, 3. This Promise is here
mentioned with a design to quicken those, who were Christians and no Israelites
by birth, to give a cheerful obedience to the Fifth Command. The Apostle
endeavors, That it may have this effect upon them, by declaring their
particular interest in it. This is the first Commandment with promise, as well
to you Ephesians, as those who are Jews. If his meaning had been, That this is
the first Command which was given with promise to the Jews only, therefore do
you who are Ephesians, conform to it, the strength of the argument had been
lost. It is no good consequence, That because length of days was promised to
the Jews, That therefore the Gentiles should enjoy the same privilege. Many
temporal blessings were entailed upon that people, which Christians can make no
just claim to. The Gospel is a more refined dispensation: under the Law there
was less of the Spirit, and more of Temporal things. While Christians are in
the Sea of this world they cannot expect that the tide of external blessings
should be as great, as it was under the Judaical Economy. Now there is nothing
in the whole Decalogue, which in appearance is more appropriated to the
Israelites than this Promise. Those words, That thy days may be long in the
Land, seem to have a particular aspect upon the land of Canaan: and if that in
the Decalogue which seems to be most appropriated, is notwithstanding not so,
but common to Christians, then that which seems to be less appropriated is
likewise common to them, and by consequence the whole Decalogue. It is a known
rule, (...), etc. If that which has a greater appearance of being, is not,
neither is that which has less.

Lastly, The words of S. James are of the same importance, For he that said, do
not commit adultery, said also, do not kill, c. 2.11. These two Commands are
perpetual, and oblige all Christians. The reason of their obligation is not
taken from their intrinsic nature, but the authority of him who published them
in the time of Moses. That that time and place is aimed at, is evident from v.
8. Fulfill the royal law according to the Scripture, that is, The Scripture and
Writings of Moses, where the Law is laid down, and the manner of its being
spoken by God upon the Mount related. This reason, whereby these Two Commands
become obligatory under the Gospel, extends to every particular precept in the
Decalogue. He that said, thou shall not kill, thou shall not commit adultery,
said likewise, Remember the sabbath day to keep it holy. All these were spoken
at the same time, in the same manner, immediately by the mouth of God unto the
People, which cannot be affirmed of any of the Laws, which are not contained in
that Combination. And if there be the same reason for the obligation of the
whole Decalogue amongst Christians, as there is for the Sixth and Seventh
Precepts, then the whole does oblige them, and will continue so to do to the
World's End.

Very consonant to this is the Testimony of Theophilus Antiochenus, who,
speaking of these Two Laws, which S. James mentions together with the other
parts of the Decalogue, which he styles, (...), uses these words, (...), Moses
the servant of God was a Minister of this divine Law to all the world. In this
he asserts no more, than what the Apostle had done before him, Romans 3.19. What
things soever the Law says, it says to them which are under the Law, that all
the world may become guilty before God. By the World we must understand, not
only Jews but Gentiles, as most evidently appears by the ninth verse. It is
impossible that the whole World should be obnoxious to guilt, upon the account
of disobedience to the Moral Law, as it lies in the Old Testament, had it not
been intentionally given to it. The Constitutions which go under the name of
Clemens Romanus, Constit. Apost. l. 6. c. 19.
represent the Decalogue, as a complete and perfect Law appertaining to
Christians. Irenaeus speaks of two sorts of Divine Precepts, L. 4. c. 26. p.
344.
particularia, which are appropriated to the Old Testament, and eminentiora and
summa, which are common to the Old and New. The Scholiast upon the place,
reckons the Decalogue amongst the last, it being designed by God, as a
perpetual rule for his people in all ages. For this Gloss he had authority
enough from Irenaeus himself, L. 4. c. 39. c. 31.
who afterward represents the Decalogue, as the Law of Nature, and at the
coming of Christ to receive extension and enlargement, but no dissolution.

To these Testimonies, we may add the consent of our own Church, which she has
sufficiently discovered in her placing the Ten Commandments, as delivered in
the Twentieth chap. of Exodus, in the very Catechism which Children are to
learn, and obliging the people in the Liturgy, after the reading of every
Precept, to use such words as import, That it is a Law obligatory to them. To
say, That She, by the word Law, understands sometimes the Law only in the
mystical and Spiritual sense, is very incongruous: for she makes no
discrimination, but enjoins the continuation of the same form of Speech to the
last Command. A Precept without the Letter, is no Law at all. It is a known
rule, That when the literal sense of a Law is repeated, the whole Law is
abrogated. For the Letter is the foundation, whatsoever is besides, is the
superstructure. The superstruction must necessarily fall, when the foundation
is removed. Though the spiritual sense of a Law may be of use, when the Letter is
discharged: yet it is not to be accounted as the sense of that which is now a
Law, but of that which was formerly so. The spiritual sense of the Ceremonial
Law is still of use, yet because the Literal is decayed and vanished, we say
the whole Law is annulled. The Law and the Letter of it always fall together.

Therefore, If the Church had not believed every Law in the Decalogue, in the
Letter to be binding to us, she would not have called every one of them a Law,
in that known form, Lord, incline our hearts to keep this Law.

Against all this it is objected, Epilog. l. 3. c. 21. p. 194.
That the first and last Command of the Second Table, are by the terms of them
appropriated to God's ancient People. The Land of Promise in the Letter belongs
to none but Israelites. The Tenth Command forbids to covet another man's
wife, although adultery was forbidden before; and therefore to covet onother
man's wife, is to compass another man's wife, which might be done, where the
Law allows divorces, as Moses's Law does.

To which I reply, 1. If these words, appropriated to the ancient People of
God, import no more than the being delivered with some accommodation to them,
it is no good consequence, because the first and last Precept in the second
Table, are thus appropriated, That therefore they concern no body else. The
ritual Law was adapted to the circumstances of those Israelites, More Nevochim,
p. 46.
which were in being at the time when it was enacted. The Law whereby the
eating of blood is interdicted, was therefore given, because the Zabiists
thought blood to be the food of infernal Gods, and conceived the way to
contract an acquaintance with them, was to eat of it. The Law which forbids
the eating of the fruits of the first three years, was occasioned by an
Idolatrous custom of the same People, who use to offer part of the
First Fruits of Trees to their Idol, and to eat the other part in their
Idol-Temple, being possessed with an apprehension, That the Trees would wither
and die, in case this custom was intermitted. The preceptive part of the
Writings of the Prophets, is plainly accommodated to the Nation of the Jews.
Many parts of the New Testament are adapted to the condition of the Primitive
times. S. John's Gospel was intended to affront the assertions of Ebion and
Cerinthus. S. Paul's Epistles are proportioned to those distempers, which some
particular Churches conflicted with. The Sermons of Christ were preached to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel. Both his Sacraments are not without their
peculiar aspects. In Baptism there is a special regard to the Jews, who were no
strangers to the custom of admitting Proselytes by Water. Some rites in the
Eucharist were derived from their Passover. Because the Law had a particular
aspect upon the circumstances of the Israelites, then living when it was first
enacted, it is no good consequence, That it was not obliging to future
generations, which were in a different condition: Or, Because the Prophets were
chiefly sent to the Jews, That therefore Christians are not concerned in the
mandatory part of their Writings: Or, Because the New Testament in the
doctrinal and sacramental part of it, was calculated for a Meridian different
from that which the Church is now under; That therefore it does not oblige the
Church in her present state. We see the same art which is used in undermining
the perpetuity of the Decalogue (should it prevail) would be as forcible
against the Old and New Testament. Dominicus a Soto, who maintained the
principle, did likewise own the consequence, so far as it concerns the Old
Testament. Bellarm. de justif. l. 4. c. 6. p. 930.
He did assert, Nullum testimonium ex libris Veteris Testamenti, quoad vim
obligandi adduci posse Christianis.

If those words, appropriated to the ancient people of God, be taken strictly,
it does not appear from any thing which has been produced, that there is any
such appropriation of those two Commands.

The first runs in these terms, Honor thy father and thy mother, This is the
whole which appertains to the Precept properly taken; what is annexed, is a
Promise, and not of the essence of the Mandatory part of the Decalogue. Neither
is the Promise so peculiar to the Jews, but that it may be applied unto others,
which will be evident, if we consider the words, That thy days may be long in
the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee. Long life was not only the reward
of obedience amongst the Jews, but likewise the Gentiles. Iliad. 4.
Homer says, That the life of Simoisius was short, because he did not cherish
his loving Parents. (...) is a word very general, and may import any land,
where the sons of Adam dwell. The Lord did not only give Canaan to the
Israelites, but Mount Seir to the children of Esau, and Ar to the children of
Lot. The Earth being the Lord's, what any Prince or People enjoy, it is by his
donation. This title was so well known, that the Heathens used to stand upon
it. Wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy God gives thee to possess,
Judge. 9.24. This being manifest, there is no Nation in the World, but may lay a
claim to this promise, upon a supposition of obedience to the Precept.

As for the last Command, I cannot find the least appearance of an
appropriation in it. The sense of what the Epilogue asserts, must amount to
this.

Because under the Law Divorce was allowed, and for that reason Men might be
induced to attempt the getting another man's wife from him, by suggesting
something against her, which might occasion a Bill of Divorce; therefore God
enjoined in the Tenth Command, That no Man should covet another's Wife.

If this was so, How comes it to pass that S. Paul represents this Command as
in force among Christians, who are not concerned in the Law of Divorce. Why is
it said not only that, Thou shall not covet thy neighbor's wife, but his
maidservant, which was never married, and his ox and his ass? If the Law of
Divorce was the only reason which did induce the supreme Legislator to give out
this Law, it must necessarily follow, That a Man might give a Bill of Divorce
not only to his Wife, but likewise to his Ox or his Ass, which supposes him to
be married to them.

I cannot see how to covet, should signify to compass. For to compass or
procure is an external act: but (...) which we translate to covet, is an
internal, and therefore it is interpreted by (...) to put the mind upon an
object. The mind being conversant about that which is evil, either it passes
through it without consent, or else it is entertained with some unadvised
delight, or else it procures not only a sudden delight, but a full and perfect
consent. In the first place, the mind does not sin, in the second and third it
does, and this is that which is interdicted in the Tenth Command, although
Adultery is prohibited before. In the Precept concerning Adultery the outward
act is forbidden explicitly, the inward implicitly only. Now, because of that
inclination which is in Men to believe, That the inward acts of the Soul are no
further sinful, but as they break out into external, it is the wisdom of the
supreme Lawgiver in the conclusion of those Laws which are intended as a
perpetual rule of righteousness, to annex one relating to these inward acts, on
purpose to undeceive, and to leave us without the least pretense, if we be not
concerned in the reformation of them.

All this being duly considered, it will be evident, That the Sabbath of the
Fourth Command, One in Seven, is therefore perpetual, because it is a part of
the Decalogue, which is designed to be a rule of our obedience in all ages.

It is said indeed, That this Precept cannot have the same privilege with the
rest, to bind always. Because, to all mankind it can import no more than a
circumstance of time, which is not of such consequence as to challenge a place
amongst the Moral Laws of God: Whereas to the Jews, it did import the Creation
of all things, by the True God; and their deliverance out of Egypt.

The maintaining the Morality of it gives a scandal to those who have been
seduced by it, to keep Saturday as their Sabbath.

It is plainly a ceremonial Law, the Rest of it was instituted to commemorate
the Egyptian servitude, and the deliverance from it, Deuteronomy. 5.15. We cannot be
bound to the Precept, and not to the same measure of rest which the Precept
limiteth. It forbids not only servile work, such as was prohibited on the first
and last days of the Passover: but all work, such as kindling fire, dressing
meat, which ought to be done on the Passeover-day. To all which I will reply in
order.

1. Mankind may be divided into Jews and Gentiles. Gentiles are such as are
converted to the Christian Faith, or not converted. Those who are, be the
persons here concerned. Whatsoever did make the Fourth Command a matter of
moment to the Jews, will make it of the like importance to them. As for the
Creation of the World by the True God, they are every jot as much concerned in
it, and do as sincerely believe it, as the Jews. As for the deliverance out of
Egypt, if it be considered, That they are accounted as Abraham's Seed,
ingrafted into the same stock with the Jews, and become one people with them,
the partition wall being taken down by Christ, it will follow, if the Jews were
concerned in that mercy, the converted Gentiles must be so too. Though they were
aliens formerly, yet after a naturalization is passed upon them, their
concernments are the same with those who were born subjects. The Christian
Church is divided into Twelve Tribes, Dial. cum Tryph. p. 353.
Rev. 7.4. Justin Martyr speaking of himself, and others which keep the
Commands of Christ, says, (...), etc. We are called, p. 365.
and are the true children of Jacob, and Israel, and Juda, and Joseph, and
David, and God: and afterward, (...), We are the true stock of Israel.
Lactantius gives the reason, quia in illorum locum adoptione successimus,
because we succeed, L. 4. de vera Sapient. p. 277.
and come into their place by adoption.

2. The maintaining of the morality of the Fourth Precept, gives no scandal. If
there be any in the case, it is taken and not given: What if they who keep
Saturday for their Sabbath, ground their practice upon the perpetuity of it?
Must we believe the ground is not good, because that which is built upon it by
such persons is bad? An infirm house may stand upon a good soil. Had the
Apostle any reason to dislike his foundation, because some did build wood, hay
and stubble upon it? If any scandal be given, upon inquiry it will be found
that the contrary doctrine does administer it in far greater measures. Those who
defend the Morality of the Command, deny Saturday to be contained in it. Their
reasons I have already laid down. The Epilogue which denies the Morality,
asserts that Saturday is expressly contained in it. Now when those who are
inclined to keep Saturday as a Sabbath, find it granted to their hand, That
that very day is enjoined by the Precept; and then consider, That this very
Precept is placed in the very heart of those Laws which were immediately given
by God, written upon Tables of Stone, preserved in the Ark, confirmed by
Christ, Bellar. l. 4. de just. c. 6. p. 930.
and commended by the Apostles, received by the Church, and inserted into her
Liturgy and Catechism. It is more than an even wager, That they will instantly
fall upon the observing Saturday as their Sabbath. It had been good, That the
contriver of this objection had considered the words of Origin, before he had
so deeply charged his adversary, L. 6. cont. Cel. p. 313.
(...), etc. It is a very great fault in disputing, if any accuse others of
opinions as unsound, when their own Sentiments are chargeable with the same
crime.

3. The Fourth Command is no ceremonial Law. I willingly grant, That the Jewish
day was Typical: but no such thing appears concerning the Sabbath enjoined by
this Precept. The reason taken from the bondage of the Israelites in Egypt,
and their deliverance from it, Deuteronomy. 5.15. does not demonstrate any such thing.
All that can be concluded from thence, is, That the rest required is a
commemoration of that condition, and their being taken out of it. The thing
commemorated being past, and a ceremony, a shadow of a thing to come: The rest
of the Fourth Precept cannot be ceremonial upon this account. If it be said,
That the deliverance out of Egypt was Typical, and therefore the rest,
designed to commemorate it, must be so too. I answer, That blessings may be
considered in a twofold respect, either as a benefit which was past, or as a
shadow of that which was to come. The rest commanded was to commemorate the
deliverance in the first sense. For the Law being given to all, certainly the
end of the rest was to commemorate the benefit which was obvious to all, and
not the shadow which was understood by few or none in comparison at that time.
Now this deliverance, as a real mercy, being of concernment to the Gentiles,
after their inoculation into the Jewish stock, I cannot see how the command is
in danger of being discharged upon the account of its relation to this favor.
Upon the same ground we may say, That the whole Decalogue is annulled because
this kindness is expressed in the Preface of it, as a motive to Obedience. The
reasons of the Fourth Command are either Primary or Secondary. The Primary is,
That God may have a fit time for his Solemn Worship. The Secondary, are to
commemorate the Creation and deliverance out of Egypt. The first is essential
to it, and cannot be divided from it. The secondary are extrinsecal and
separable; and therefore the whole command is said to be repeated, [ These
words the Lord spoke, and added no more, Deuteronomy. 5.22.] Although the reason taken
from the Creation of the World, Exo. 20. is totally omitted. If the absence of
this reason makes no alteration upon the Precept, but the whole Law is said to
be spoken, although it be wanting: then the presence of a new reason taken from
the deliverance out of the Egyptian servitude, cannot have any influence upon
it, either to make it Ceremonial or Moral. The secondary reasons of a
Ceremonial Command, may be Moral; and of a Moral, Ceremonial and Positive. It
is to be observed, That the reason we speak of, has relation but to one
particular in the Command, namely, the enjoining of Masters to make the Sabbath
a day of rest unto their Servants, as well as to themselves. Now to make the
whole Command Ceremonial, upon the account of an extrinsecal and secondary
reason, relating only to one circumstance in it, I leave it to every unbiassed
mind to determine, whether it be agreeable to the usual rules of discourse.

4. There is no inconvenience which will follow, if we assert, That as we are
bound to the Fourth Command, so likewise to the same measure of rest, which
that Precept limiteth. A rest only in general is required, and that in order to
the keeping of One Day in a Week Holy. This being the end, and the end always
modifying the means, we have assurance, That such a measure of rest is only
understood as has a tendency to promote this purpose. All who believe the
Lord's day to be grounded upon Apostolical authority must necessarily grant,
that we are bound to rest upon it from all those works, which are not
reconcilable with the end of the institution, namely, The devoting of the
whole day to the honor and worship of Christ. If there be any stricter
measures of rest, enjoined upon the particular Seventh from the Creation, by
any other Law, it nothing concerns us, no more than the day it self. It is not
true, That the Fourth Command does forbid all work whatsoever. For if this was
the sense of it, it would be repugnant to the Law of Nature, which requires,
That works of necessity, piety and mercy be done at all times. There was a Law
amongst the Heathens, That no work should be done on their feast days, when
Vmbro and Scaevola were consulted about the meaning of it, they,
notwithstanding the strictness of the words, made answer, That such work might
be done which did relate ad Deos, ad urgentem vitae utilitatem, quod
praetermissum noceret. What kind of work the Fourth Command prohibits, may be
collected from the words of it: Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy
work, but the Seventh is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall not
do any work, that is, any which appertains to thy particular calling or
function, which might with equal advantage have been dispatched in the week
time. Therefore when servile work is expressly forbidden on the Passover. etc.
and dressing of meat allowed; but on the Sabbath, in the Fourth Command all
work: all work imports no more than servile. Therefore the Chaldee Paraphrast
expounds (...) by (...) opus servile, and that which is called (...) Lev. 23.7.
is expressed by (...) only, Ex. 12.16. Deuteronomy. 16.8. All the difference is, That
what is expressed in more general terms in the Fourth Precept, is more
explicitly and particularly set down in the Law touching the Passover, etc.
This will be very evident, if we consider, That the Passover sometimes
happened to be upon the Sabbath, as in the year when our Blessed Lord was
crucified: and therefore by reason of these Two Solemnities meeting together,
That Sabbath is styled a high day, Jo. 19.31. If on the Passover, all servile
work is forbidden, and dressing of meat allowed but on the Sabbath, all work
whatsoever, whether servile or not servile: then by the Law of God the Jews
were bound to contradictions, when the Passover fell upon the Sabbath, they
were bound and not bound to dress meat, by the Law of the Sabbath they were
bound not to do it. By the Law of the Passover they were bound to do it. For
the Lamb by a divine Precept was to be roasted with fire.

Irenaeus and S. Cyprian limit the work prohibited in the Fourth Command to
servile work. The Alexandrian Edition of the LXX. L. 4. c. 19. c. 20. Cypr. de
Sp. San.
interprets (...), and the Syriack (...) opus servitutis, Number. 29.7.

It cannot in reason be thought, That the Fourth Command prohibits the dressing
of meat, or kindling of fire on the Sabbath, which speaks nothing of these
particulars: When as those particular Laws which carry a much fairer and more
probable appearance of such an interdiction, upon an exact inquiry, will be
found to import no such matter.

As for the dressing of meat, the words usually alleged are these. To morrow
is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord, bake that which will bake to
day, and seethe that which will seethe, and that which remains, lay up for
you to be kept until the morning, Exodus 16.23. This Text speaks of the Manna,
of which a double portion did descend from Heaven on the day preceding the
Sabbath. Of this portion, one they might bake and seethe and eat that day, the
other part they were to lay up unbak'd and unsodden. Bake that which you will
bake, and seethe that which you will seethe, and that which remains, not of
what was baked or sodden, but of what was gathered over and above the daily
proportion, That lay up to be kept till the morning. This is plain from the
miracle expressed in the next verse. They laid it up till the morning, and it
did not stink, neither was there any worm in it. If it had not been raw, the
glory of the miracle had been celypsed. Before they reserved some, which they
had gathered contrary to God's Command, and it was putrified in the morning;
and now they reserve a portion according to his Command, and no putrefaction is
in it. If it had been baked or sodden, it would have been thought, That that
was the reason, why it was not corrupted as before. Indeed in the fifth ver. it
is said, On the sixth day they shall prepare that which they shall bring in,
that is, If any have a mind not to eat it raw, but to prepare it for food,
whether by grinding it in Mills, beating it in a Mortar, Number. 11.8.
or any other toilsome way, all such elaborate preparations must be finished
upon the Sixth day, they containing too much servile work for a Sabbath. Yet
notwithstanding all this, it does not appear from the Text, but that upon the
Sabbath they might do in order to a more immediate preparation of it, what
Christians usually do about their food on the Lord's day.

As for the kindling of fire, it is manifest, That the Text commonly alleged,
Exodus 35.3. must undergo some restriction, for the Priests were bound to bake
the Shewbread, and set it hot upon the Table every Sabbath, Lev. 24.5, 8. 1 Samuel 21.6. And to offer up the Sacrifice of the Sabbath, which could not be
done without the kindling of fire. Although the fire which came down from heaven,
was constantly upon the Altar, and so continued till it came (...) into the
house of eternity or Temple, where it was renewed: yet it is plain, That it was
daily maintained by a supply of new fuel. The Priest was to lay wood every
morning on it, Lev. 6.12. And so soon as the old fire had disjoined the
particles, and put them into motion, new fire must necessarily be kindled. This
is taken notice of by Munster upon the Text, Judaei hoc praeceptum, etc. The
Jews think this Precept is to be observed in the Letter, and therefore they
hire Christians to kindle their fire on the Sabbath, not considering it was
lawful for the Priests to make a fire on the Sabbath, for the daily Sacrifice.
All this does manifest that the Text, which is under consideration, must not be
taken in that latitude, which it seems to have at the first view: and if it
must have some limitation, it cannot be better restrained than to what is
expressed in the Context. The thing treated of is the work of the Tabernacle,
though many cautions had been given concerning the forbearance of servile work on
the Sabbath, upon any private account: yet some might be apt to think, That
work tending to the preparing of materials for the composing that Sacred Tent
was lawful. For the prevention of such thoughts, before the description of what
was requisite is entered upon, this Precept is laid down, That in order to any
such work, whether the melting of Silver, Gold, or any other metal, which might
be necessary about the Sanctuary, not so much as a fire should be kindled.

And now I have finished the second branch of the Proposition, That the Sabbath
of the Fourth Command One in Seven is perpetual, and not to continue only
during the Jewish Economy.

I will proceed to the Third. This proportion One in Seven is by the Command to
be devoted to Divine Worship, and not only to corporal rest.

Besides Bodily rest, there is mention likewise of a Sanctification of the
Sabbath, as a thing distinct from it. Sanctification is represented as the end,
Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. The rest as a means to advance this
work, In it thou shall do no work, Corporal labor being an impediment to the
exercise of Religion. If the end and the means are always distinct, then
Sanctification must import something different from the rest of the day, and
this can be nothing but the devoting of it to the Solemn Worship of God. This
we may collect, first, From the order of the Commands, in the First is
prescribed, who we must Worship. Thou shall have no other Gods but me: In the
Second, How we must not Worship him, Thou shall not make any graven image of
him: In the Third, How we must, with holy reverence, Thou shall not take the
name of the Lord thy God in vain: In the Fourth, We have the solemn time when
this Service must be performed, Remember the Sabbath to sanctify, or set it
apart for this Sacred Work. Upon the account of the relation which this
Command has to the other Three Precepts of the first Table, The keeping of it
is put for the observation of them all, Isa. 56.2. And the Jews have a saying,
That the Sabbath is equivalent to all Commands. Secondly. The Blessing of the
Sabbath. God blessed the Sabbath Day. Here is something contained in these
words, which imports a special benediction. It is no such Emphatical Blessing
for a day to be devoted merely to idleness. That day is most blessed, on which
God is most honored. But God has more honor by the honest actions of Men in
those vocations in which he has placed them, than he can have by mere sloth,
and a total cessation from labor, without any respect to his Sacred Worship.
Thirdly, The practice of the Israelites upon the Sabbath, They had a holy
Convocation, Lev. 23. Reading and Preaching out of Moses and the Prophets, Act.
15.21. Luke 4.16, 17. Solemn places to resort unto, for the performance of
these sacred duties, Leo Modena, p. 114.
Ps. 74.8. To this the practice of the modern Jews is very agreeable, and
believed by them to be grounded upon the Fourth Command, as is manifest by the
words of Manasse Ben Israel, Council. p. 149.
in his Comment upon that Precept. Notabilis error est putare otii ergo
Sabbatum institutum esse, etc. It is a remarkable error to think, That the
Sabbath was instituted for rest. For idleness being the mother of all vice,
upon this supposition more hurt than good will come from the Sabbath, Quare
statuere omnino opertet, etc. Wherefore it is necessary to assert, That the
Sabbath was instituted that man might readily (all worldly cares being laid
aside) apply himself to the study of the Law, have recourse to Synagogues, and
Academies, consult his Teachers about weighty portions of Scripture, and hard
Questions, which he is ignorant of. Maimonides says, Huls p. 240
Five Precepts are necessary to be complied with, in order to a due observation
of the Sabbath. The first is, to rest on the Seventh; the Second, to Sanctify
the day. So that in his thoughts to rest from bodily labor, and to sanctify
or keep holy the Sabbath, are two distinct things. Philo Judaeus says, That the
Fourth Command enjoins that the Seventh day be spent (...), these words import
more than a sitting still. The Rabbis generally believe, that Divine Worship
is contained in it. L. 4. c. 30. Hist. l. 1. c. 4.
Irenaeus and Eusebius are of the same mind. So that I cannot see what reason
there is for that conclusion which we meet with in the Epilogue. I conclude
therefore that which will seem strange to unskilful people, L. 3. c. 21. p. 192.
That the only thing commanded by the Letter of the Fourth Command is to rest
from bodily labor upon the seventh day of the week, in which God rested, from
whence it is called a Sabbath.

The grounds of this persuasion are these, The Precept extends to Cattle, which
are in no capacity to do any thing appertaining to a Sabbath, but rest from
their labor: and likewise to strangers, that is, such as were not circumcised,
but Converts from Idols, and Proselytes of the Gate. As the Israelites were
bound to see their Cattle they did not work, so likewise to these strangers:
They of themselves were under no obligation, being tied only to the Seven
Precepts which the Sons of Noah received from him, of which number the Sabbath
was none.

To keep holy the Sabbath, signifies only to sit still on the Seventh day.
There is as much holiness in this, as in offering a brute beast unto God, being
stamped with a divine Command, and the Rest of the Body, signifying the Rest of
the Soul from sin, as the Sacrifice did the holiness of Christ. This is the
substance of what is asserted by the learned Author of the Epilogue. To which I
reply,

1. It is no good consequence, because the Precept extends to Cattle, which are
in no capacity to do any thing appertaining to the Sabbath, but only cease from
bodily labor; That therefore nothing but bodily rest is enjoined in it. The
Decree of the King of Niniveh concerning the Fast did reach to Cattle; yet it
is not true, That nothing was commanded the Inhabitants of the City, but what
might be performed by Cattle. We must take notice, That a part only of the
Command extends to Cattle. It is required of the Masters of them, That they
shall not be employed in that usual work they are designed for in the
week-time: but not that they keep holy the Sabbath Day. To assert, That Cattle
are concerned in the whole Precept, because they are in one part, is as if we
should affirm, That Jacob's sons Cattle had all Egypt for their pasture,
because they had Goshen which was a part of it.

As for Strangers they were capable both of resting and sanctifying the
Sabbath. If we suppose they were tied only to the Seven Precepts of the Sons of
Noah, how does it appear, That the Sabbath of the Fourth Command was not
contained under one of them? It is believed to belong to the Second, Mede Diat.
p. 85.
(...). Munster upon Jos. 9.7. uses these words, nec poterant Israelitae cum
Gibeonitis inire foedus, nisi hac condition; ut observarent septem praecepta
filiis Noae data, hoc est, Eliminarent Idololatriam, observarent Sabbatum,
abstinerent ab incestu, execrarentur homicidium, etc. The Israelites could not
enter in covenant with the Gibeonites, but upon this condition, That they would
observe the Seven Precepts given to the Sons of Noah, that is, cast out
Idolatry, observe the Sabbath, abstain from Incest, execrate Murder, etc. Here
the observation of the Sabbath is reckoned amongst the Seven Precepts of the
Sons of Noah.

If the Sabbath was none of them, yet it must be remembered, That the Tie was
made not by a divine, but a humane appointment.

Though the Precepts materially considered are in the Scripture: yet they are not
in that form and order in which they are delivered by the Talmudists: Nor is
there any intimation given, that it was the Will of God, That Proselytes or
Converts from Idols should be obliged to these and no other. I doubt not but
this was a decree of the Jewish Church, and that it might have the greater
reverence paid to it, the Rabbis generally ascribe it to God. If Proselytes or
strangers were tied only to these Seven Precepts by the will of Men: yet they
might be obliged to the observation of others, in particular the Sabbath of the
Fourth Command by the Will of God. A Stranger for the sin of ignorance was
bound to offer up a she-goat of the first year, Number. 15.27, 29. which
injunction is no part of the Seven Precepts of the Sons of Noah.

2. It is not true, That to keep holy the Sabbath, signifies no more, than
sitting still upon the Seventh Day. Besides the figurative holiness, there is
something discernable in a Sacrifice, which is not to be found in such a
slothful posture. The earth being the Lord's, and he granting the use of it to
Men, for a supply of their necessities, the giving back some part of it by way
of oblation, was accounted a piece of Homage, and an expression of their
agnitions of his Sovereignty over the whole. Judith c. 2. v. 7. Herodotus
To this end the Persians use to present their Kings with Earth and Water, to
signify and acknowledge, That they were Lords of Land and Sea.

Aquinas was so well pleased with this reason, 22. Q. 55. art. 1.
That he asserts sacrificing in general to be of the Law of Nature: Though the
determination of it, to this or that species of things be variable, and
grounded only upon positive institution. All this cannot be asserted of sitting
still, which gives nothing to God, but implies the withholding and suppression
of those actions, whereby the Body is in any capacity to honor him. If there
had been nothing in Sacrifice but a figurative holiness, no account can be
given why it should meet with so general and ready entertainment among the
Heathens who were strangers to the figure. Porphyry, De Abstin. l. 2. p. 70.
who applies himself to condemn the Sacrifice of Beasts, yet acknowledges the
universality of the custom, (...). The Inhabitants of Lystra are no sooner
possessed with a belief of the divinity of S. Paul and Barnabas, but they make
an attempt to Sacrifice Oxen to them, Act. 14.13. Whereas sitting still could
never gain the least approbation among them. The Jews who were grown into a
very superstitious practice in this particular were rather made the object of
their derision. They represent them as persons who spent the Seventh part of
their time in idleness. Though I am far from believing, That the oblation of
material things unto God, accompanied with a destruction of them, is warranted
by the Law of Nature; as I have expressed in the first Section: Yet it is
manifest from what has been spoken, That more reason may be alleged in savor
of it, than for sitting still.

3. Sitting still on the Seventh day was never stamped with the authority of
Heaven. If this was the meaning of the Fourth Precept, then God repeated it, so
soon as it was enacted by him in these particular Laws, in which he appointed,
That upon the Sabbath there should be a holy Convocation, and the offering up
of Sacrifice. The People could not convene nor the Priests Sacrifice without
bodily motion. When it is said, Let no man go out of his place on the Seventh
day: Exodus 16.29.
It must be understood with relation to the gathering of Manna, and the doing
such unnecessary work as might have been dispatched in the week-time.

4. It does not appear, That the Rest of the Body enjoined in the Fourth
Command, is designed as a figure to signify the Rest of the Soul from sin.
There is no Text of Scripture, which imports any such matter. And if fancy be
permitted to make Types and figures as it pleases, where there is no direction
from Heaven to steer our apprehensions by, there will be no end of them: a
figure being the effect of a positive institution cannot be discovered without
the knowledge of the cause of it.

If the Rest of the Body is a Type of the Rest of the Soul from sin, then it
signifies Rest from some, or from all sins. Not from some only. The Bible gives
no intimation of any particular delinquency, which the Rest of the Sabbath of
the Fourth Command typifies our cessation from. Not from all. For betwixt the
Type and the thing signified, there ought to be some resemblance which is not
discernable betwixt the Souls Rest from some enormities, and the Rest of the
Body. The Soul then rests from sins of omission, when it is conversant about
the discharge of those duties which are devolved upon it. This kind of
Spiritual Rest consists in operation, and the Rest of the Body bears no
resemblance to the operations of the Soul.

Now I have finished the Seventh Proposition, the solemn Time for Worship,
which ought to be no less than One Day every Week; determined in the Fourth
Command to One in Seven, as a proportion perpetually to be devoted to Divine
Worship.

VIII. This proportion One in Seven was determined to the Jewish day by another
Precept, which was to oblige only, till the Jewish Economy had a period put to
it.

Here are Two things to be evinced, 1. That the Jewish Sabbath was set out by a
Law distinct from the Fourth Command. 2. That this Law was to continue no
longer than the Jewish Economy.

1. The Jewish Sabbath was set out by a Law distinct from the Fourth Command.

This Law we find, Exodus 16.23. To morrow is the rest of the Sabbath, and
likewise, Exodus 31.15. In the seventh is the Sabbath of rest. Here in both
places, the word is double, (...) the rest of the Sabbath, and (...) the
Sabbath of rest: but in the Fourth Command it is single (...) which can import
no less than some difference, and distinction betwixt the Two Laws. The reason
of the duplication may be this. The Jews being under a twofold Command, the Law
concerning the particular Day, and the Law touching the Proportion: They had a
double Sabbath, namely, the last of the Week, and the Sabbath of the Fourth
Command which is One Day in a Week. The Fourth Command enjoining only vagum
quid, One in Seven, and this vagum taking up its rest for a time in the
particular Jewish day, That day is styled Sabbatum Sabbati, the rest of the
Sabbath of the Fourth Command. The calling afterward the Tenth Day of the
Seventh Month, and the Seventh Year of release by the same name does not weaken
this observation. The name is first given to the Jewish weekly Sabbath upon the
grounds expressed, and then afterward applied unto those times to signify,
That the Jews ought to make the Rest of the Sabbath, the pattern of their Rest
on those Solemnities, and therefore when the day of expiation is so styled,
Lev. 23.32. in the LXX. these words occur (...), You shall sabbatize or
imitate, in the observation of this yearly solemnity, the Rest of the weekly
Sabbath. When the year of release is so named, Lev. 25. The Vulgar Latin
plainly points at this imitation, Sabbatizes Sabbatum.

This Law is likewise mentioned, Nehem. 9.13, 14. In the Thirteenth verse, We
have an account of the whole Decalogue, under these names, Right judgments,
true laws, good statutes and commandments. That by these we are to understand
the Ten Commandments and nothing else, is clear, in that it is said, That God
himself gave them from Mount Sinai. God gave there immediately by himself the
whole Decalogue and no other Laws. After the Ten Commandments are thus
expressed, of which number the Fourth is one: it is said in the next Verse, And
thou made known unto them thy holy Sabbath, and commandedst them precepts,
and statutes and laws, by the hand of Moses thy servant. Here the particular
Jewish day is expressed as a thing distinct from the Sabbath of the Fourth
Command, and reckoned amongst the Precepts, Statutes and Laws which were given
by the hand of Moses. Therefore there must be some distinction betwixt the
Sabbath as it lies amongst the Ten Commandments, and the particular Jewish day.

The Tradition of the Jews is not disagreeable to what has been represented.
The Fourth Command reaches to the stranger within the gate, (...) as Solomon
Jarchius glosseth. The particular Jewish Sabbath according to the common
opinion, extends no further than to those of their own nation. More Nevo. P. 2.
c. 30. page 283. P. 3. c. 43. page 471
Maimonides intimates, That there was a Sabbath given to them in particular,
and a Sabbath likewise given to all: the scope of which was, That the Seventh
part of the life of a Man might be free of toil, and dedicated to the
remembrance of the Creation. In the Six Hundred and Thirteen Precepts commonly
reputed by the Rabbis to have been given to Moses upon Mount Sinai, the
Sabbath according to the collection of Abraham Ben Kattani as it lies in Exodus
20.8. makes the Twenty Seventh: as it lies in Exodus 23.12. makes the Seventy
Ninth. Now the Sabbath in the 23. of Exodus is undoubtedly the last of the week,
therefore the Sabbath in the Twentieth must be something else. Nothing can be
so properly thought upon, as the proportion of time, the immutable rule of the
Church's rest in all ages.

2. This Law concerning the particular day, on which the Jews rested, was to
continue no longer than the Jewish Economy.

The day of the resurrection of our Blessed Lord put a period to it. Upon the
Sabbath immediately preceding, it is said, That the Women which came with
Christ from Galilee, rested according to command, Luke 23.55, 56. Though the
Disciples had observed many of the Jewish Sabbaths before: yet this expression,
according to command, is never used till now, which intimates, That there must
be some special reason for it: and what can this be but only to show how far
the Disciples might go in the celebration of the old day according to Precept,
namely, to the Resurrection of Christ? If they went any further, it was without
command, That being designed to continue no longer. Indeed the Apostles did
afterward frequent the Synagogues upon the Jewish Sabbath, but it is never
said that they entered into them (...), but (...), according to custom, Act.
17.2. It was a custom for them for a while to comply with the Jews in some
things which were in reality abrogated, and to seek the gaining of them by
prudential condescensions and accommodations to their weakness. After this time
was in some measure over, and ignorance of the liberty procured by Christ from
the rites of the ceremonial, became less excusable, we find the Jewish Sabbath
by degrees fully declared against, as an antiquated rite. It is represented, 1.
As a day equal with others, 2. As a beggarly element, 3. As a shadow, that was
vanished away.

1. As a Day equal with others.

One man esteems one day above another, another esteems every day alike.
Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind, he that regards a day,
regards it to the Lord; and he that regards not a day, regards it not to
the Lord, Romans 14.5, 6.

By a Day here we must understand the Time then in controversy. Though (...) has
an indefinite sound: yet the Apostle does not intend that it should signify
any day, and by consequence include the Lord's day. As his representing meats
and drinks to be indifferent, ver. 2, 3. does not depretiate the Bread and Wine
in the Lord's Supper, and sink them into an equality with our common bread and
drink: so neither does his putting days upon the same level, make all days of
the same rank with the Lord's day. This word (...) ought to be limited to the
matter in hand. That which occasioned the Apostle to write thus, were the
different opinions among those who were converted to the Christian Religion.
He, who was formerly a Jew had an esteem for the old Sabbath-Passeover, etc.
above other days. The Converted Gentile had an equal regard for them. The old
Sabbath in particular was earnestly contended for by the Ebionites. Those who
regarded not this day, are set upon equal terms with those who did. If this day
in the Apostle's apprehension had not been equal with others, no account can be
given, why he, that did not regard it, is so gently treated; and not rather
sharply reproved for his contempt. The reason, why he who had a respect for it,
is so tenderly handled, is because he was brought up under the Mosaical
Economy, and it could not be expected, that he should in an instant be
disingaged from those impressions which his education had made upon him. The
Apostle was glad, That he had entertained the rudiments of Christian Religion,
and used all the tenderness imaginable toward him, that he might invite him
into a more intimate acquaintance with it. Lest this accommodation should seem
to import a compliance with his error, he styles him weak, v. 1. And lest too
great an advantage might be given to the Gentile, who was inclined to set him
at naught upon the account of this difference, v. 10. He (so far as prudence
would permit) draws at concealment over his own inclination to either party,
and exhorts them to ripen their minds to a Plerophory. Let every one be fully
persuaded in his own mind.

2. As a beggarly Element. How turn you again to the weak and beggarly
elements, ye observe days, months and times and years, Gal. 4.9, 10. The
Apostle writing to those, who were of greater growth, deals more roundly with
them. He tells them, That he was afraid of them, upon the account of their
adhering to the old Sabbath, which was now antiquated. That this very time is
intended, is plain from the word Days. Here are words enough besides to import
all other seasons which were set apart by the Law, as Months, Times, Years.
Months, Their New Moons: Times, Their Passover, Pentecost, Feast of
Tabernacles, with other Solemnities: Years, The Year of Release and the Year of
Jubilee. Therefore nothing is left for Days to signify but their weekly
Sabbaths. These days are styled (...) beggarly elements with relation to
Ebion's name, which signifies (...) a beggar, (...), as Eusebius notes. Hist.
l. 3. c. 21.
So that (...) are as much as elements formerly belonging to the Church in her
minority, and taken up by Ebion. In the number of those things, which he, and
his accomplices maintained; Eus. Hist. l. 3. c. 12.
we find the Jewish Sabbath to be one, (...), they observed the Sabbath.

The Days here mentioned being put indefinitely, must be interpreted of the
choicest of Days in the Jewish account; in the thoughts of those who adhered to
the ceremonial rites, none were comparable to their weekly Sabbaths. It was a
common saying amongst them, That he who denies the Sabbath, is like to him who
denies the whole Law; and he who observes the Sabbath, although he should
worship Idols, his sins would be forgiven.

Philo Judaeus calls the weekly day (...), Tract. (...)
and the Rabbis (...) the Queen, attributing to it a Sovereignty over other
days. Gem. Sanhe. c. 7.
In the Talmud, Turdnnus Rufus (who is conceived to be the same with Titus the
Emperor) is represented as asking Rabbi Akiba, why the Sabbath was more
excellent than other days. This question could arise from no other ground, but
that unusual esteem, which he observed the Jews to entertain of it.

Lastly, Days do signify such as the Jews were formerly in bondage to. This is
clear from the word (...), whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage, v. 9.
There were no days, to which that people were so much in bondage, as their
Saturday-Sabbaths. They were under such a degree of servitude, That they durst
not use the liberty Nature allows every man in his own defense. They and their
City were taken (...), Dio Hist. l. 56.
on the day of Saturn making no resistance. They were bound and tied by their
Superstition (...), Plutarch. (...)
as if they had been in a net. The Five radical Precepts, which Maimonides
recites as necessary to be submitted unto in order to a due celebration of the
Sabbath, they did beat out into an infinite number of niceties, and to each of
them they were so much in bondage, (...) Huls. p. 242.
that they believed, That the not observing of them had hitherto hindered the
coming of the Messiah. This being duly considered, will release us from that
fear which some have been possessed with, as though the pressing this Text might
prove prejudicial to the Lord's Day; for it is manifest, That such days only
are here condemned, as the Jews had formerly been in bondage to, which cannot
be asserted of the Lord's day, which was never owned by them.

3. As a shadow which is vanished. Let no man judge you in meat or in drink, or
in respect of an holy day, or of the new mons, or Sabbath days, which are a
shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ, Coloss. 2.16.

In order to a right understanding of this place, it is to be premised, That
many things under the Mosaical Law were of a figurative and typical Nature. The
Apostle treating of some of them, says, These things happened to them for types,
1 Cor. 10.11. and the Law has a shadow of good things to come, Heb. 10.1.
(...), are properly the first lineaments of an effigies (...) is opposed to
(...), that which is drawn in its full perfection. God having an intention to
give us Christ, the express image of his person under the Gospel, was pleased
according to the methods of Art, to furnish the Jews with the first lineaments
of this image under the Law. Amongst these shadows the old weekly Sabbath is
here reckoned. Let no man judge you in respect of Sabbath Days, which are
shadows, etc.

That by the Sabbath Days here we are to understand, the Jewish Saturdays will
appear, from the several words of the Text, (...) can import no less than the
early Feasts and Solemnities: (...) their monthly; and therefore there is
nothing left for (...) to signify, but their weekly Sabbaths. It is believed
that (...) answers to (...) in the Talmud, which, if true, Isaaci Casaub. ep.
24. Carolo Labbaeo, p. 23.
communicates a great deal of strength to our assertion, (...) are the lesser
Sections or parts, into which the Talmudical Treatises are divided. The first
division is into (...) ordines. The (...) are divided into (...) Books or
Treatises, The (...) into (...) Sections or Chapters. From hence the Doctors
which did expound, Justin. in Nov. de Hebr. 146.
and give the meaning of them are styled (...), that is, (...), the chief and
most eminent of them, (...).

In the Second Seder of the Mishna, there are several Treatises, one is
entitled (...) another (...) a third (...) all these have their (...) or
Sections. The words of the Text are exactly agreeable to these titles (...) to
(...) a feast day, (...) to (...) the beginning of the year, which was always
in novo lunio, (...) to (...). So that when the Apostle says, let no man judge
you, (...), etc. his meaning must be, give no occasion to any to condemn you
for the observation of what is contained in any Section of the Treatise or Book
called (...) or (...) or (...). Now the Treatise or Codex called (...) expressly
treats of the Jewish day, and enjoins the celebration of it. Therefore in this
phrase, (...), the Jewish weekly Sabbath must be included.

That which lies against this conjecture, is, That the Mishna was not so early
as S. Paul's Epistles; and therefore he could not have any respect to the
Sections in it. To which I reply, that Maimonides tells us, That the Head of
the Sanhedrim had a private Copy of the Traditions, as they were delivered from
the mouth of those, who were Doctors in Israel, long before the times of Rabbi
Jehuda, the compiler of the Mishna, and the Author of Halicoth Olam; That the
Disciples, for memory sake, wrote the Oral Law in Characters. The Book written
by them they might not divulge, and therefore called it the Book of Secrets. S.
Paul being trained up at the feet of Gamaliel, and in the deepest mysteries of
their Religion, no doubt had the perusal of it, and might very well have an eye
upon the (...) or Sections of it, in the words which are under debate. That
which Rabbi Jehuda did, was to join together what lay scattered in private
hands, and to make a publication of it in one entire Volume.

There is no just cause of fear, lest from this Text, the Sabbath of the Fourth
Command should receive any prejudice. Clear evidence has been already produced
for the Morality of it: Whereas the Sabbath here is represented to be of a
figurative nature. The Fourth Command enjoins only a Religious observation of
One in Seven every week. If the Apostle had condemned this, he had condemned
himself, and the whole Christian Church, which did devote the First of the
Week, which is One Day in Seven, to the Honor and Worship of the Supreme Being.

And now I have done with the Eighth Proposition. The Proportion, One in Seven
set out by the Fourth Command, was determined to the Jewish day by another
Precept, which was to continue no longer than the Jewish Economy.

IX. When the last of the Week had a period put unto it, The First was
substituted in the room of it.

This Substitution is favored by the Law, Prophets, our Blessed Lord, the Holy
Apostles, the Testimony of the following Ages.

1. The Law, The Hebdomadal observation of the Lord's day assures us, That the
Primitive Christians had their Eye upon the Law in the keeping of it. This
Weekly observation, which universally prevailed, could proceed from nothing but
a sense of some rule which they were all acquainted with. They might have
celebrated it once a Fortnight, or once a Month, or once a Year; as Easter is,
had they been left to their own conduct. Their general agreement in a weekly
observation does evidently argue a respect, which they had, to the proportion
of time set out by the Law under the Old Testament.

And if they had their Eye upon it, they could not but discern, what is
literally contained in it, and act in a conformity to it.

The old Sabbath being abrogated, the Letter of the Fourth Precept declares,
That the First of the Week must come into the place of it. For in it is
required one day perpetually, for Divine Worship, Six for Secular concernments:
and that the Six days come all together. Six days shall thou labor, not one or
two, and then rest; but upon Six days together, according to the example of God
himself, who in the space of six days without any interruption did create the
World. These two things being granted, which the very words of the Command will
extort from us, the determination of One in Seven to a particular Day, must
necessarily fall upon the First of the Week. For if upon any other, as the
Second, Third, Fourth or Fifth following the abolition of the old day, then the
six days for Secular employment could not come together. If the determination
was deferred till the second week following the abrogation, then a whole week
was past without any Sabbath, contrary to the plain sense of the Precept, which
requires One Day every Week to be perpetually observed as a Sabbath.

2. The Prophets, They represent the First of the Week either expressly under
the notion of a Sabbath, or else in such terms, as are equivalent. Thy people
shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness: from the
womb of the morning thou have the dew of thy youth, Ps. 110.3. Here is a
particular day in the time of the Messiah, styled the day of power which the
Holy Ghost prophesyeth of. The whole Psalm has an evident aspect upon our
Blessed Lord. This is manifest from the New Testament, and the records of the
ancient Jews, who generally account it, Just. Mart. Dial. cum Tryp. p. 309.
as a prediction concerning the Kingdom of the Messiah. It appears likewise
That this day of power must be celebrated as a Sabbath. Upon it the people
shall be (...) populus devotionum, a people wholly devoted to the Lord, then
they shall offer to him their solemn Services, and voluntary oblations, styled
by the Hebrews (...). We have likewise the place where this devotion shall be,
in the beauties of holiness: So the Sanctuary is styled, Psalm. 29.2. This day
of devotion must be the Resurrection-day, and by consequence the First of the
Week: It is styled (...) the day of thy power, which intimates such a day; as
in the time of Messiah is most eminent for the manifestation of a Divine Power,
there is no day equal in this respect to the day of Resurrection. In the
raising Christ from the dead, was put forth the exceeding greatness of his
power, the operation of the might of his strength, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. When he was
raised, All power was given to him, both in heaven and earth, Mat. 28.18. Though
these words were not spoken upon the Resurrection-day, yet the power mentioned
in them was then conferred. At the conclusion of that day we read of the
effects of it, in giving a Commission to the Disciples To teach all nations;
and preach the Gospel to every creature, Mark: 16.15. It is not strange that
the day of Solemn Worship should be styled a day of Power and Strength. The
Seventh Month, which answers to our September, is called Ethanim mensis
fortium, 1 Kings 8.2. from (...) robur. The Jews give the reason, because in
that Month the Solemn Worship of God, which is the safeguard of the Community
was more frequent than in any other. On the First Day was the Feast of
Trumpets, on the Tenth the Feast of Expiation, on the Fifteenth the Feast of
Tabernacles, on the Three and Twentieth Festum retentionis. The Hebrews did
account their Sabbath as a day of Power. They say Circumcision was deferred to
the Eighth day, That the Child might have the advantage of a Sabbath, to
strengthen it against that Time.

As the Title, so the action appropriated to this day, argues it to be the
First of the Week, namely, The generation of the Son of God. It is said of the
Resurrection-day, This day have I begotten thee, Acts 13.33. Then was he
declared to be The Son of God with power, Romans 1.3. The same thing in a
Poetical manner is affirmed to be done upon the Morning of this day of Power.
From the womb of the morning, thou have the dew of thy Youth. This Morning must
be related to some day, and to what day better than the day of Power. These
words (...) Thou have the dew of thy youth, the Septuagint interpret (...), or,
I have begotten thee. This exposition being Literal has some encouragement from
the common rule, That in the expounding of Scripture, we are not to let go the
proper, and adhere to an improper sense, except we are compelled to it from
some other Text. Other Scriptures are so far from putting this necessity upon
us, That they conspire to cast a favorable aspect upon the interpretation
which is given.

The next Prophetical Testimony is in the 118. Psalm. v. 24. This is the day
which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it.

Here is mention of the Resurrection-day: For upon the day here spoken of, The
stone which the builders refused, became the head of the corner, v. 22. The
same thing is said to be done on the day, on which Christ rose from the dead,
Act. 4.10, 11. The stamp of divine Authority is impressed upon this day. This
is the Day which the Lord has made, not by Creation, so he has made every day,
but by a special Institution. Here is the end for which it is made, That we may
joy and be glad in it. The Worship of God is always to be performed with
Spiritual rejoicing at this time for the Mercies of the Messiah. Gangren. Syn.
Can. 18.
The ancient Church did never appoint a Fast upon the Lord's Day, mourning
being not reconcilable with the reason of its Institution. Lastly, Here is the
place where this day is to be observed, the Sanctuary, Open to me the gates of
righteousness, into which the righteous shall enter, v. 19, 20. The gates of
righteousness import, as under the Law the doors of Tabernacle, Temple,
Synagogue; so under the Gospel the doors of Churches into which the Righteous
are to enter upon the First of the Week to Worship God, and express their
grateful acknowledgments of the love of Christ in the work of Redemption.

To this we may add the prediction of Isaiah. From one new moon to another, and
from one sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, says
the Lord, Is. 66.23 This Prophecy has an evident aspect upon the times of the
Gospel. God promises the bringing in a People to Christ. They shall bring all
your brethren for an offering to the Lord, says the Lord, v. 20. He promises
Ministers to instruct this People under the name of Priests and Levites, v. 21.
Evangelical Ordinances under the name of new heavens and new earth, v. 22. The
time is foretold when this People are to attend upon these Ordinances, From one
new moon unto another, and from one Sabbath to another. As there will be
Festivals confined to certain months: So likewise a solemn day every week under
the Gospel, when all flesh shall come to Worship. What can this be but the
Lord's day, which all Christians, whether formerly Jews or Gentiles, did devote
to the acts of Religious Veneration. If the words may be read as they are in
the Margin of our Bibles; from Sabbath to his Sabbath, which is very agreeable
to the Hebrew (...), a great advantage will accrue to the Cause we maintain.
For as the People here spoken of are the People of Christ; the Ministers, the
Ministers of Christ; the Ordinances, the Ordinances of Christ: So by his
Sabbath, we must understand the Sabbath of Christ. According to this
interpretation it is predicted, That all would depart (...) from the old
Sabbath, and come together upon a new one, called his Sabbath, to Worship God.

3. Our Blessed Lord. For the Son of man is Lord even of the Sabbath day, Matt.
12.8. Our Savior here assumes unto himself a title of Power, He calls himself
Lord of the Sabbath. This power was communicated unto him, He had it as he was
Son of Man.

This Communication was not made without a design, and some ponderous reason.
The only design visible to us, is, That he might make some alteration about the
Sabbath. He is said, not only to be Lord, but Lord even or also, which imports,
That he has a power over something else in this place, besides the Sabbath; and
that his power over the Sabbath is to the same purpose with that power over
those things whatsoever they be. The things mentioned in the former Verses, are
the Shewbread, and Sacrifices, which he put a period to, and did erect other
constitutions in the room of them. We have already proved, That the old day is
annulled by him. The First of the Week is styled the Lord's day: what can (...)
be, but an effect of that power, which the (...) was invested with?

Pray, That your flight be not on the Sabbath Day, Mat. 24.20. It appears from
hence, That a Sabbath would be observed about Forty Years after these words
were spoken: for the flight mentioned in them was upon the account of the Roman
Army, styled, the abomination of desolation, which about that time besieged,
and took Jerusalem, called the holy place. It is not said, Pray that you be not
put upon this extremity (...), on the Sabbath then in use, but (...), a general
word which may be applied to the first as well as the last of the Week. This
Sabbath is to be celebrated by the Disciples, for he treats them privately, v.
3. and we cannot think he would use such an emphatical expression, which has a
tendency to beget an awful regard to the Sabbath here mentioned, in case they
had not been concerned in the observation of it: about the time which Christ
had his Eye upon, no other Sabbath was observed by the Disciples, but the First
of the Week. About Two and Twenty Years after his Death, we find it kept in a
very full Assembly, Act. 20.7. After which there is not the least mention of
the celebration of the Jewish day in the New Testament: but on the contrary, S.
Paul condemns the observation of it, Coloss. 2.16. This Epistle was written not
long before his Martyrdom, when he was in his bonds at Rome, c. 4. v. 18.
Therefore we have reason to believe, That our Blessed Savior had his Eye upon
the First of the Week, when he exhorted the Disciples to pray, That their
flight might not be on the Sabbath day. As a Winter-flight would have been
prejudicial to their bodies: So likewise to fly upon the Sabbath, when they
were to be engaged in the most solemn addresses to the Divine Majesty, would be
really disadvantageous to their Souls.

Indeed it is pretended, That our Savior's words were occasioned, either by
the foresight of some trouble to the Disciples from the superstitious Jews, who
would certainly hinder them in their flight upon their Sabbath: or else of some
molestation in their own Consciences, arising from their being not fully weaned
from the observation of the Ceremonial Rites. To which I reply, That no such
thing could in reason be feared, as the being hindered by the Jews; because,
before the time which is spoken of, they had laid aside their Superstitious
conceits about sitting still, or the going only a Sabbath Days journey, when
they were in capital dangers, and received it as a Maxim, (...)
That when life is exposed to hazard, the rest of the Sabbath may be dispensed
with. Though the Essenes refused to submit to this rule, yet they being a very
inconsiderable party in respect of the Pharisees and Sadducees, and without any
power of inflicting penalties, they could be no impediment to the Christians in
their flight. As for the trouble arising from their own Consciences, That
cannot be supposed, because they had full instructions before this time about
the abolition of the Ceremonial Appointments. All S. Paul's Epistles, in which
there are clear expressions about this matter, were written before the
destruction of Jerusalem. If his Doctrine was not prevalent with them, yet it
cannot be imagined, that they should be more superstitious in this particular
than the Jews, which were not converted: and they made no scruple before this
time, either to fight or fly upon the Sabbath, in case of danger, as I have
already intimated.

I pass from the words of Christ to his Actions; as his Resurrection, his
appearing after his Resurrection; the particular Acts done by him at his
appearance.

The old Sabbath being discharged, and the Fourth Command still for One in
Seven, as is evident by the premises, we have a fair indication, from the
Resurrection, of our duty to put a peculiar honor upon the First of the Week
above all other days, and account it the Christian Sabbath. All days in
themselves are equal, That which alters this equality and advances one day
above another, is the eminence of the work which is done upon it. The
Resurrection of Christ being the consummation of the new Creation and of our
redemption from the direful effects of the primitive Apostasy, is the most
eminent performance the World has been acquainted with. Were we left to our own
conduct, what day could we make choice of to be the day of our Solemn Worship,
and rest from those labors which are not reconcilable with it, Eusebius. de
laud. Constable. Eusebius. vit. Constable. 628. Vales. l. 4. c. 18. Nazian. (...) 43.
Basil. Hexam. Hom. 2.
but this which is ennobled with so transcendent a work? Upon this account the
ancient Christians styled it (...) really the first, the highest of all, the
first fruits of days. Samuel made it an argument, That Saul was chosen King,
because there was none like him, a man higher than the people from the
shoulders upwards. The First of the Week being advanced by the Resurrection,
and made much taller than any other of the Seven, we may truly say, Behold the
Day which the Lord has chosen to be the Queen of Days, as Ignatius styles it.

As the rising of Christ from the dead upon the First of the Week, promotes our
belief, that it is the day which God has appointed in the room of the old
Sabbath. So likewise his appearing upon it after the Resurrection, no less than
five times upon the self-same day, once to Mary Magdalen, Mat. 28.9, 10, 11.
Luke 24.33, 34. Jo. 2.19. v. 26.
then to the Women, the third time to the Two Disciples, the fourth to Peter,
the last to the Eleven. Eight days after taken inclusively, he appeared again,
when the Disciples were met, which was punctually upon the First of the Week.
This day was singled out by him for the first and last most eminent
manifestation of himself by his Spirit. The first to the Disciples at
Pentecost, when the Holy Ghost descended upon them in cloven Tongues. Rev. 1.10.
The last to S. John, to whom the future state of the Church was revealed. For
what end were all these appearances, but to inform future ages, That the First
of the Week is a day most acceptable to him, and to assure them of his special
presence when they convene upon it for his solemn Worship? To all this I might
add, the particular acts which he did at his appearance. He invested his
Disciples with power to exercise the Ministerial function, employed Peter to
Preach, and by his Sermon at the Third Hour converted Three thousand, at the
Ninth hour Five Thousand. He held the Angels of the Asian Churches in his right
hand, and out of his mouth went a two-edged sword, the Sword of the Spirit,
namely, the Word of God. All this is very agreeable to the nature of a day
wholly devoted to Religion.

4. The Holy Apostles and Disciples.

Upon the First of the Week, when the Disciples came together to break Bread,
Paul preached to them, Act. 20.7.

Here are actions very suitable to the design of a Sabbath, Preaching and
Administering the Holy Sacrament. The Time when these actions were performed, is
the First of the Week, This was a constant custom, we never read that the
Apostle in any place, where he found none but Disciples, did upon the old
Sabbath, communicate with them in those Ordinances, which the Gospel has
appointed.

Now as touching a Collection for the Saints, as I have given order to the
Churches of Galatia, so do ye. Upon the first of the week, let every one of you
lay up by him in store, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2.

The duty here enjoined, is a Collection for the Saints. The Apostle did
design, That it should be very liberal, according to the estate of every Man.
Why he should wave the second, third, fourth, fifth day of the Week, and pitch
upon the First, for the doing of this generous and pious Work, cannot be
conceived; except upon the First of the Week the Disciples of Christ use to
meet and be engaged in such Religious performances, as have a tendency to
excite the mind to Christian liberality. These were the thoughts of S.
Chrysostom, Hom. 43.
(...). There was an idoneity and fitness in the day to dispose and lead them
to the acts of Charity. This custom was not only amongst the Corinthians, but
all other Christians. The Epistle is addressed to all who in every place call
upon the name of Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1.2. and it was not only upon one or two
First days, but (...), the First day of every Week.

There remains therefore (...) the keeping a Sabbath to the people of God.
For he that is entered into his rest, he also has ceased from his works, as God
did from his, Heb. 4.9, 10.

These words are directed to the Hebrews, who were inclinable, through the
efficaey of former impressions, to disvalue the institutions of the Gospel.
That the Apostle might prevail with them to yield a cheerful conformity to
those appointments. He demonstrates That Christ is more valuable than Moses,
and styles their deserting the Gospel, a departure from the living God, and
cites Psalm 95. which has a peculiar aspect upon the state of the Church under
the Messiah. In it are described his Disciples under these names, the People of
his pasture, the Sheep of his hand. Their solemn meeting to Worship, O come let
us worship: the duties performed at this meeting, as Prayer, Let us kneel
before the Lord our maker, v. 6. Singing of Psalms, Let us make a joyful noise
unto him with Psalms, v. 2, 3. Hearing the word, if you will hear his voice, v.
7. a particular day, on which all these duties are to be performed, To day if
you will hear. This day being intended for a Sabbath, at which time all
spiritual advantages are administered, which tend to the bringing the Soul into
truest satisfaction and rest, an exhortation is given to the People not to
harden their hearts, as the Israelites did in the provocation, lest they be
deprived of this rest, as the Israelites were of theirs in the land of Canaan.
Now because there are several sorts of rests recorded in the Scripture. The
heavenly rest in the world to come, the rest of the old Sabbath, rest in the
land of Canaan, the Apostle makes it manifest, that it is none of these which
the Psalmist means, but the rest of a Sabbath under the Gospel. Not the
heavenly; for the rest here spoken is confined to a certain day, v. 7. Whereas
the rest above is every day without interruption. Not the rest of the old
Sabbath; for that was at the beginning, when the works were finished, from the
Creation of the World. But the rest mentioned by the Psalmist is some future
thing under the Gospel, as I have sworn, if they shall enter. Not the Rest in
the land of Canaan. If Jesus had given them rest then, he would not afterward
have spoken of another day. From these premises it is concluded; there
remains therefore (...) the keeping a Sabbath day to the people of God under
the Gospel. And that we may know this Sabbath is the Resurrection-day, and by
consequence, the First of the Week: it is added, for he which entered into his
rest, has ceased from his works, as God did from his. God the Father upon the
Last of the Week ceased from his works, and made it a day of rest unto his
people. Therefore God the Son has done the like with the First of the Week, he
then putting a period to his state of Humiliation, and ceasing from his labor
and trouble which he did undergo in the accomplishment of the work of our
redemption.

I was in the Spirit upon the Lord's day, Rev. 1.10.

By the Lord's day we can understand no less than a day appointed by our
Blessed Lord, and devoted to his Honor and Worship. This day must necessarily
be the First of the Week. For S. John in expressing this circumstance of Time,
designs a credit to his relation, and therefore must necessarily mean some day,
which was very well known by this name, at the writing of the Revelation. It is
manifest by Ignatius, who was his contemporary, That the common name then given
to the First of the Week was (...). This day God was pleased to signalize by a
communication of the Holy Ghost in some extraordinary measures: S. John was in
the Spirit upon it. In the words there is an allusion to the manner of speaking
amongst the Hebrews, who say that a man besides the Soul which he is ordinarily
endued with, has another Spirit given to him upon the Sabbath, which they style
(...) an excellent Soul. Manass. Ben. Is. reconc. Buxt. Syna. Jud. c. 11. p.
288.
Such allusions we have in the very Context. The Seven Spirits, v. 4. have a
plain aspect upon the Seven Angels, which, the Jews say, do constantly attend
the throne of God. And the Governors of the Asian Churches are called Angels,
with respect to the Rulers in the Synagogues, which were known by that name.

5. The testimony of the following ages. He who consults the Writings, which
are extant, will meet with these four Things, which being laid together, will
amount to what has been asserted.

1. That the First of the Week was owned by Christians as a Day of Worship. 2.
As a Sabbath day. 3. As a Day preferred before the old Sabbath. 4. As a Day
instituted by Christ in the place of the old Day.

The First is manifest from Justin Martyr, Apol. 2. p. 99. Apol. c. 39.
who says, That all Christians use to meet together upon it for the Worship of
God.

Tertullian gives an account of the whole Solemnity of the day. Eusebius says,
Hier. de Script. Ecc. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 22.
That it was celebrated by all Christians dispersed throughout the World.

If it had not been universally observed, no account can be given why the
Ebionites, who did keep Saturday in a conformity to the Jews, should celebrate
the Lord's day, That they might be agreeable in their practice to the
Christians: and why the contest grew so high about Easter, whether it should be
upon the Lord's day. There had been no ground for this dispute, in case the
First of the Week had not then been honored above all other days. If this day
was so generally devoted to Religion, then there was a cessation upon it from
all those secular employments, which are not reconcilable with so sacred a
purpose: and such a cessation is an ingredient essential to the constitution of
a Sabbath.

Secondly, We find sometimes the First of the Week to be expressly called a
Sabbath Day, as appears by the words of Gregory Nyssen. He styles it (...), De
resurr. Christitom. 2. p. 814. Par. Ed. In Psalm. explan. Prologus p. 335. De
temp. p. 257.
and represents this as the reason, because the only begotten Son of God rested
upon it from all his works. S. Hilary owns it by the same name, Nos octava die,
quae and ipsa prima est perfecti Sabbati, festivitate laetamur.

S. Austin speaking, How the glory of the old Sabbath was transferred to the
First of the Week, concludes in these words, Sic quoque rite sanctificamus
Sabbatum Domini.

Isychius says concerning the Resurrectionday, In Lev. 23.
Haec est altera dies Sabbati.

The name whereby the Lord's day was anciently called amongst Ethiopian
Christians, Scaliger de emend. tem. l. 7. p. 645.
is Sanbath Zachristos, the Sabbath of Christ.

The Rythmes concerning a Jew in the time of Henry the Third, make it manifest,
That this name was familiarly applied to the First of the Week. The Jews words
to those who offered him their help to pull him off the Jakes upon Saturday,
were, Sabbata nostra colo, de stercore surgere nolo. Mat. Par.


Our Sabbath I so highly prize,
That from this dung I will not rise.
The Christians did reply, the Lord's day being next, Sabbata nostra quidem,
Solomon, celebrabis ibidem.

Then, Solomon, it must be thy fate,
Our Sabbath there to celebrate.
It is styled by our own Church the Sabbathday in the Ecclesiastical
Constitutions. Can. 70.


Thirdly, It is represented as a day much preferred by Christians, before the
Jewish Sabbath. It had so much the pre-eminence, That the Last of the Week by
Spectators out of the Church, and the better and sounder part of those within,
had little or no notice taken of it, or deference paid to it.

The Jews observing the singular regard the Christians had for the First of the
Week, called it (...) the day of the Nazarites. Avodah Zar. Hor: Hebr. 320.
It was a common maxim among them, On the day of the Nazarites, a Jew must not
negotiate with a Christian.

The Gloss interprets a Nazarite to be one, who follows the error of him, who
commanded his Disciples to keep holy the First of the Week. Buxt. L. Rab. 1384.
In voc. (...)
Rab. Bechai commenting upon that expression, behind one in the midst, Is.
66.7. says, That it either denotes the cross of the Edomites, or their solemn
Feast Day. By the Edomites, he means Christians. For the Jews in their private
records, where they give a greater indulgence to their blasphemous humor,
assert, That the same Soul which was in Esau, Lex Rab. (...)
did pass into Christ: from thence his followers are called by this name. The
Feast Day, which he terms (...) the fixed or stated time for Christian Worship,
is no other but the Lord's day.

When Pliny attempts to represent the crimes, which the Christians were guilty
of, he sets this in the front, Quod soliti essent stato die ante lucem
convenire, carmenque Christo tanquam Deo dicere, That they were wont to meet
upon a certain day, and to sing a Hymn unto Christ, as unto God. If it had been
usual for them to meet upon the old Sabbath, as well as the Lord's day; Pliny
who made it his business to inquire into their practice would have discovered
it: and then it would have been, statis diebus, not stato die. Here is only
mention of one particular day. That this was the Lord's day, is apparent from
Ignatius, Ad Magnes.
who lived in the time of Trajan, to whom Pliny wrote. He represents the Jewish
Sabbath as a working day, and attributes to the Lord's day a dominion over it.
The celebration of Sunday was so constant amongst the Christians, that the
Heathens conceived, That they gave some veneration to the Sun. Which
misapprehension occasioned the words of Tertullian, Diem Solis laetitiae
indulgemus, alia long ratione, Cor. M^l.
quam religione Solis. The Heathen Inquisition use to put this question to the
Martyrs, Dominicum servasti? have thou kept the Lord's day. The answer was, I
am a Christian, I cannot intermit it.

Ignatius calls the First of the Week the Queen of days, and if it was the
Queen, it had a Sovereignty over all other days, and would not permit the old
Sabbath to sit in the same Throne with it, Non been convenient, nec in una sede
morantur Majestas and Amor.

Queens and Lovers will not agree,
In the same Throne long to be.
Justin Martyr asserts, That the old Sabbath is of no use after the time of
Christ: Whereas when he speaks of the Lord's day, he says, That all Christians
meet upon it, hear the Prophets read, have a word of Exhortation spoken to
them: and the whole performance is concluded with Prayer, and a collection for
those who are in distress. These duties use to be discharged in the Synagogues
upon the Old Sabbath, but that being abrogated, they are now translated to the
New. The Council of Laodicea declares, That Christians ought not to rest on the
Jewish Sabbath, but work, preferring the Lord's day before it. The Church
anciently was so far from having any respect to the old day; Or. 29. p. 282.
H^er. 30.31. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 22. Buxt. l. Rab. vo. (...)
that those who believed, That they were under an obligation to observe it,
were branded with the infamy of heresy, (...) the (...) in Nazianzen, the
(...) Epiphanius, the (...) in Eusebius, They are the same which the Rabbis
call (...) Sahbatharii.

Lastly, The First of the Week is represented as a day instituted by Christ in
the place of the Jewish Sabbath. For this we have the plain words of
Athanasius, Hom. de Semente.
(...), The Lord has translated the day of the Sabbath to the Lord's day.

In the Homily of the Place and Time of Prayer, Sunday is Three times called
the Sabbath, and it is plainly asserted, That there is both the Example and
Commandment of God for the celebration of this day: That this Example and
Commandment the godly Christians began to follow immediately after the
Ascension of our Lord Christ; That we are bound to keep the same day not only
for that it is God's express Commandment, but also to declare our selves to be
loving children in following the example of our gracious Lord and Father.

And now if we look back, and consider, what has been represented from the Law,
Prophets, our Blessed Lord, the Holy Apostles, the Christians which lived in
the following Ages, we may find just reason to believe, That when the Old
Sabbath was abrogated, the First of the Week was substituted in the room of it.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed at the Theater in Oxford, and Sold by Walter Kettilby at the
Bishop's Head in S. Paul's Churchyard.
1. INstitutiones Grammaticae Anglo-Saxonicae, and Maeso-Gothicae. Auctore G.
Hickesio Ecclesiae Anglicanae Presbytero. Quarto. 2. Chr. Wasii Senarius, sive
de Legibus and Licentia veterum Poetarum, Quarto. 3. Misnae Pars: Ordinis primi
Zeraim Titul septem. Latin verrit and Commentario illustravit Guiliel.
Guisius. Accedit Mosis Maimonidis Praefatio in Misnam Edv. Pocockio Interpret.
Quar. 4. A Reply to two Discourses lately printed at Oxford concerning the
Adoration of our B. Savior in the Holy Eucharist. Quar. 5. Some Reflections
upon a Treatise called Pietas Romana and Parisiensis, lately printed at Oxford.
To which are added, I. A vindication of Protestant Charity, in Answer to some
Passages in Mr. E.M's Remarks on a late Conference. II. A Defense of the Oxford
Reply to two Discourses there printed, A.D. 1687. quar. 6. Animadversions on
the Eight Theses laid down, and the Inferences deduced from them in a Discourse
Entitled Church Government. Part V. lately printed at Oxford. Quar. 7.
Reflections on the Historical part of Church Government, Part V. Quar. 8. An
Answer to some Considerations on the Spirit of Martin Luther, and the Original
of the Reformation; lately printed at Ox.quar. 9. Of the Unity of the Church; a
Discourse written 1430 years since, in the time of Decius the Persecuting
Emperor. By Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage and Martin. Most useful for allaying
the present Heats, and reconciling the Differences among us. 10. The Judgment
and Decree of the University of Oxford past in their Convocation July 21.1683.
against certain pernicious Books and damnable Doctrines, destructive to the
Sacred Persons of Princes, their State and Government, and of all Humane
Society; rendered into English, and published by Command. Fol. 11.
Diadascaloeophus, or the Deaf and Dumb Man's Tutor. To which is added, A
Discourse of the Nature and Number of double Consonants. Both which Tracts
being the first (for what the Author knows) that have been published upon
either of the Subjects. By G. Dalgarno. Oct. 12. The Depth and Mystery of the
Roman Mass laid open and explained, for the use of reformed and unreformed
Christians. By Dan. Brevint, D. D. Twelves.
There are lately Printed for Walter Kettilby these following Books.
Dr. Burnet's Theory of the Earth, the two last Books; concerning the
Conflagration of the World, and the new Heavens, and the new Earth. Fol. --
Answer to Mr. Warren's Exceptions against the first Part. -- Consideration of
Mr. Warren's Defense. -- Relation of the Proceedings at Charter House, upon
occasion of K. James II. his presenting a Papist to be admitted into that
Hospital, in virtue of his Letters Dispensatory. Fol. -- Telluris Theoria
Sacra, Libri duo posteriores de Conflagratione Mundi and de futuro rerum statu.
Quarto. -- Archaeologiae Philosophicae: Sive Doctrina antiqua de Rerum
Originibus. Libri Duo. Bishop Overal's Convocation Book, 1606. concerning the
Government of God's Catholic Church, and the Kingdoms of the whole World.
Quarto. Mr. Nicholl's Answer to an Heretical Book called The Naked Gospel.
Quarto. Turner de Lapsu Angelorum and Hominum. Mr. Lamb's Dialogues about the
Lord's Supper. Octavo. Mr. Raymond's Pattern of pure and undefiled Religion.
Octavo. -- Exposition on the Church Catechism. Oct. Animadversions on Mr.
Johnson's Answer to Jovian in Three Letters. Octavo. Mr. Dodwell's Two Letters
of Advice about Susception of Holy Orders, etc. Mr. Milbourn's Mysteries in
Religion Vindicated: Or, Filiation, Deity, and Satisfaction of our Savior,
asserted against Socinians and others; with occasional Reflections on several
late Pamphlets. Octavo. Bishop of Rath and Well's Reflections on a French
Testament printed at Bourdeaux. Quar. Dr. Sharp's (now A. B. of York) Sermon
before the Queen, April 11. 1690. on Gal. 15.13. -- Fast Sermon before the
House of Commons, May 21. 1690. on Deuteronomy. 5.21. -- Farewell Sermon at S. Giles's,
June 28. 1691. on Phil. 4.8. -- Sermon before the House of Lords, November, 5.
1691. on Romans 10.2. -- Sermon before the King and Queen on Christmas Day, 1691.
on Heb. 19.26. -- Sermon on Easter Day, 1692. on Ph. 3.10. -- Sermon of the
Things that make for Peace, before the Lord Mayor, Aug. 23. 1674. on Romans
14.19. -- Sermon before the L. Mayor, Jan. 1675. on 1 Timothy 4.8. both new
Printed. Archbishop of York's Thanksgiving Sermon before the King and Queen,
Novem. 12. 1693. Dr. Grove's (now L. Bishop of Chichester) Sermon before the
King and Q. June 1. 1690. Dr. Pelling's Sermon before the King and Queen, Dec.
8. 1689. -- Vindication of those that have taken the Oaths. Quarto. Dr.
Hooper's Sermon before the Queen, Jan. 24. 1690. Kelsey Concio de Aeterno
Christi Sacerdotio. -- Sermon of Christ crucified, Aug. 23. 1691. Dr. Hickman's
Thanksgiving Sermon before the House of Commons, October. 19. 1690. -- Sermon
before the Queen. Oct. 26. 1690. Mr. Lamb's Sermon before the King and Queen,
Jan. 19. 1689. -- Sermon before the Queen, Jan. 24. 1690. Dr. Worthington, of
Christian Love. Octavo. Faith and Practice of a Church of England Man. Twelves.
Fourth Edition. Mr. Jeffery's Religion the Perfection of Man. Octav. Dr. Scot's
Sermon before the Q. May 22. 1692. Mr. Marriot's Sermon before the L. Mayor, on
Easter Day, 1689. -- Sermon of Union, at the Election of the L. Mayor. Mich.
1689. Mr. Stainforth's Sermon. Jan. 30. 1688. at York. Dr. Lynford's before the
Lord Mayor, Feb. 24. 1688. Mr. Young's Sermon of Union, May, 20. 1688. The
Protestant and Popish Way of interpreting Scripture in Answer to Pax vobis. Dr.
Resbury's before the Lord Mayor, Oct. 21. 1688. Amiraldus of Divine Dreams.
Discourse of the Nature of Man, both in his Natural and Political Capacity,
both as he is a Rational Creature and member of a Civil Society; with an
Examination of some of Mr. Hobbs's opinions relating hereunto: both by J.
Loud, Rector of Vttrington in Yorkshire, sometime Fellow of Clare-Hall in
Cambridge. True Conduct of Persons of Quality, Translated out of French. The
Interest of England, considered in an Essay upon Wool, our Woolen Manufactures
and the Improvement of Trade, with some Remarks upon the Conceptions of Sir
Josiah Child. Mr. Young's Sermon concerning the Wisdom of Fearing God, Preached
at Salisbury, Sunday July 30. being the time of the Assizes. Printed at the
request of the Lawyers. A Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor of the City of London and the Court of Aldermen, at Guild Hall Chapel, on
Sunday Aug. 20. 1693. By Jonas Warly, M. A. Vicar of Witham in Essex. A Sermon
Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Livery-men of
the City of London, in the Parish Church of S. Lawrence-Jewry on the Feast of
S. Michael, 1693. at the Election of the Lord Mayor for the year ensuing, by
William Strengfellow, M. A. Lecturer of S. Dunstan's East.
FINIS.

