Miscellanea.

I. A Survey of the Constitutions and Interests of the Empire, Sueden, Denmark,
Spain, Holland, France, and Flanders; with their Relation to England, in the
Year 1671. II. An Essay upon the Original and Nature of Government. III. An
Essay upon the Advancement of Trade in IRELAND. IV. Upon the Conjuncture of
Affairs in October. 1673. V. Upon the Excesses of Grief. VI. An Essay upon the
Cure of the GOUT by Moxa.
By a Person of Honor

LONDON: Printed by A. M. and R. R. for Edw. Gellibrand, at the Golden-Ball in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1680.

The AUTHOR's Letter to the Stationer, upon occasion of the following Papers.
I Have received both your Excuses and Desires about those Papers I left in
your Fathers hands upon my several journeys into Holland, with a charge That
none ever should see them, unless I happened to dye before my return: In that
case only I gave him leave to Print them, because I found it would be a
satisfaction to him, and he thought an advantage. I will examine no further how
several of them came to run abroad both in Print and Manuscript, since you
justify your felf; and I will not accuse your Father, whom I ever esteemed a
good man. All I can say of the matter is, That the Two Copies at first
dispersed, came from two of your Fathers Friends, and that you confess to have
Printed ten by order of one of Mine while I was abroad, upon the belief he
would not have desired it without my Consent; But that you ought not to have
concluded without knowing it from me, as you might easily have done in ten days
time.

You pretend to be sure the Press was broken after tbat number was taken off;
which is a thing you cannot answer for, without your Printers leave; nor if it
were so, do I make any difference between Ten and a Hundred. This I am sure of,
that how few soever were Printed, very many have seen them, and more have heard
of them, and so many of my acquaintance pressed me for Copies, that I have been
troubled to refuse them, and to be so hardly believed when I assured them I had
none.

Now for what you tell me of the great care and pains you have taken, since I
spoke to you last, to discover how they went out, and to call them in, and that
you find this last is impossible, and apprehend every day that some or other
will Print them without your knowledge or mine, and thereupon ground your
desires for my leave to do it; I know not well what to say, having said so much
to you already upon this occasion, and think it is best troubling my self no
longer about a thing that is past remedy: Therefore I am content you should
publish them, rather than any other should do it without my leave, and rather
than any further mystery should be made of those that are abroad, which has
given the occasion of two other Books being laid to my charge, that I have been
so far from writing, as never to have seen.

For the Order and Titles of the several Papers, they must, I doubt, be the
same with the Copies already dispersed, since these cannot be recalled. For any
general Title, I leave it wholly to you, as well as the time; nor are you to
expect from me either any Correction of Press, or trouble of Preface; being
resolved, since they first run away without my consent, to own them no longer,
and to concern my self in them no more than if they had never been mine. What
advantages soever you can propose to your self by them, I can expect but one
(and that will agree very ill with yours) which is, That the publishing of them
may possibly suppress them; and that they may be talked of no more when once
they grow common; since nothing but the scarcity of them can give them any
vogue. If this happens, I shall be at quiet, which is all I ask of them or of
you.

June 12. 1679.
A SVRVEY of the Constitutions and Interests of the Empire, Sweden, Denmark,
Spain, Holland, France, and Flanders; with their Relation to England in the
Year 1671. And then given to One of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of
State, upon the ending of my Embassy at the Hague.
THE Decay and Dissolution of Civil, as well as Natural Bodies, proceeding
usually from outward Blows and Accidents, as well as inward Distempers or
Infirmities; it seems equally necessary for any Government to know and reflect
upon the Constitutions, Forces, and Conjunctures among their Neighboring
States, as well as the Factions, Humors, and Interests of their own Subjects;
For all Power is but comparative, nor can any Kingdom take a just measure of
its safety by its own riches or strength at home, without casting up at the
same time what Invasions may be feared, and what Defenses expected from Enemies
or Allies abroad.

It Is certain, That so advantageous a Situation as that of His Majesty's
Dominions in these Islands of Great Britain and Ireland, makes any foreign
consideration less important to us, than to any other Nation: Because the
Numbers and Native courage of our men, with the strength of our Shipping, have
for many ages past (and still for ought we yet know) made us a match for the
greatest of our Neighbors at Land; and an overmatch for the strongest of them
at Sea: Whereas whoever hurts us without our own Arms, must be able to master
us in both those Elements. Yet in regard there are the names of several
Conquests remaining still upon Record (though all of them the mere effects of
our own divisions or invitations); when Trade is grown the design of all
Nations in Europe, that are possessed of any Maritime Provinces, as being the
only unexhausted Mine, and out of whose Treasures all greatness at Sea
naturally arises: When instead of a King of France surrounded and bearded by
Dukes of Brittany, and Burgundy, as well as our own possessions in Normandy and
Guienne; Instead of a Count of Flanders or Holland, who served for no more,
than like the smaller weights to make the balance sometimes a little even in
the greater scales of the English, French, and German Powers; We now behold in
France the greatest Landforces that perhaps have ever been known under the
Command of any Christian Prince; And in the United Provinces, the greatest
numbers both of Ships and Mariners that were ever yet heard of under any State
in the World; And which have hitherto been only awed by the strength of our
Oak, the Art of our Shipwrights, and chiefly by the invincible hearts of our
Seamen: When the prospect of these two Powers brings us to consider, that any
firm conjunction of them, either by Confederacy or the Submission of Holland,
will prove the nearest approach that was ever made to our ruin and servitude:
It may perhaps import us in this calm we enjoy, to hearken a little more than
we have done of late, to the storms that are now raising abroad; and by the
best Perspectives we can find, to discover from what Coast they break, what
course they are like to hold, how much we can lie in their danger, and whether
the shelter expected from us by our Neighbors, will be only a strain of
Generosity and Humanity, or the best provision we can make hereafter for our
own safety.

Those Countries in whose Actions or Interests we have at any time concerned
our selves, have been the Empire, France, Spain, Sweden, Denmark, and the
Low Countries, in the two several bodies usually distinguished by the names of
Flanders and Holland. For with Poland we have never gone further, than our good
wishes toward their defense against the Turk. Nor with Italy, than the Offices
of Ceremony, or Interests of Traffic, unless sometimes some short Negotiation
that served the present turn to stop the aspiring growth of either the French
or Spanish greatness in those as well as nearer parts.

THE Foreign Interests of the Empire are the defense of the Eastern parts
against the Turk, and the preservation of the Western Circles against the
growth of France. The Domestique are the limited constitution of the Imperial
Power, and the balance of the several free Princes and States of the Empire
among themselves. The two last have raised no dust since the Peace of Munster,
which seems chiefly occasioned by the Swedes coming in to be a Member of the
Empire, upon the share then yielded to him in Pomerania and Bremen. These give
him an immediate entrance into the heart of Germany, where the Native poverty
of his own Country makes him considered, as still upon the wing, and ready to
stoop at the first Quarry he can meet with upon any divisions in the Empire, so
as there seems a general resolution not to furnish him with such occasions.
Their defense against the Turk will be provided and pursued by Common
Inclinations and Forces, unless those Princes of the Western Circles should at
the same time be busied in some nearer danger from France. But if the Grand
Vizier be so great a man as he is reputed in Politics as well as Arms, he will
never consent by an Invasion of Hungary, to make way for the advance of the
French Progress into the Empire, which a Conquest of the Low Countries would
make easy and obvious: And so great accessions (with others that would lie
fair and open in the Spanish Provinces upon the Mediterranian) would make
France a formidable Power to the Turk himself, and greater than I suppose he
desires to see any in Christendom; So that it seems not improbable, that the
present Peace between the Emperor and the Turk, may last longer than is
generally calculated by the fears or desires of those who are most concerned in
it.

In the preservation of the Western Circles (especially that of Burgundy and
the Rhine) against the Progress of the French Greatness; the Dispositions, if
not Interests of the several Members of the Empire, seem much more divided. The
Emperor himself is firm in resolving it, because he has nothing to fear so much
as the Power and Ambition of France, in regard of their Common Pretensions to
Spain after the young Kings death, and a jealousy of the Empire it self after
a further course of success: But he will be faint in any execution of such a
Counsel, unless spirited by the unanimous Decrees of a general Diet, from his
own dispositions, which are thought rather generous and just than ambitious and
enterprizing, from the influence of the Jesuits in that Court, who are observed
to grow generally French as they were Spanish in the last age; from the fear of
the Turks, who are still like a Cloud that hangs over his head; And from a
jealousy of Swedens joining absolutely with France, which might share a great
part of the Empire between them.

The Elector of Saxony would fall entirely into the Interests of the Emperor in
this point, as a Prince that is a true German, loves the liberty of the Empire;
Forefees, that if it should fall into the French hands, all the Princes would
grow little Companions to what they are, or return to be the several Officers
of his Court; as they were in the unlimited greatness of some Ancient Emperors.
Besides, his distance from France, though it does not instruct him to think
wiser than other Princes, Yet it helps him to speak boldlier what he thinks
upon these Conjunctures.

The Elector of Brandenburgh and Langrave of Hesse, and at least two of the
Dukes of Lunenburgh, are in their Dispositions and Judgments upon the same
Interests; But will be influenced and awed by Sweden, whose ill Talent will be
still suspected to Brandenburgh, upon the differences in Prussia; and to
Lunenburgh upon the late disappointment at Bremen.

The Electors of Mentz and Triers have the same Inclinations, but lying at the
mercy of France, in so near and so imperious a Neighborhood, They will take no
measures wherein they may not see their own safety provided for, as well as
that of the Empire; Wherein no Prince has greater reputation of Prudence and
Caution, than the Bishop of Mentz.

The Elector Palatine, either upon remainders of the ancient Leagues with
France, or quarrels with the House of Austria, has been thought inclined to the
French; But as a wife Prince will be found generally in the true Interests of
the Empire as far as the seat of his Country will give him leave, which in a
War will be so much exposed.

The Elector of Bavaria has been esteemed wholly in the French Interests since
the Treaty of Munster; But by what ties or motives, has not fallen under my
observation, in regard of the distance of his Country, and small Commerce out
of the limits of the Empire.

The Elector of Colen is a person of much natural goodness and candor, but of
age and infirmities, and whom Devotion and Chemistry have shared between them,
and in a manner removed from the affairs of his State; which have been long and
entirely devolved upon the Bishop of Strasburgh; A man busy, and always in
motion or intrigue: But for the rest, whether upon future ambition, or present
advantages, Esteemed to be perfectly in the French Interests; So as whatever
use can be made by France of that Electors Name or Country, may be reckoned
upon as wholly at the devotion of that Crown.

The Duke of Nieuburgh is in his person and mien, rather like an Italian than a
German; and should be so in his disposition, by playing the Game of an Italian
Prince; In declaring no partialities, provoking no enemies, and living more
retired than the other Princes of his Country; Having never showed any
ambition, but for the Crown of Poland, which design helped to inspire him with
great compliance toward all his Neighbors, and other Princes, who were able
to do him good or ill offices in that point. But the failing of it, was thought
to have something disobliged him from France (upon whose assistance he
reckoned) and has sunk him in a debt which he will hardly recover.

The Bishop of Munster is made only considerable by his situation, which lies
the fittest of all others to invade Holland; And by the dispositions of this
man, which are unquiet, and Ambitious to raise a name in the World. An old
implacable hatred to the Dutch upon their intelligence with his chief Town of
Munster; Their Usurpation (as he pretends) of Borkloe, and some other small
places in his Country; Their protection of the Countess of Benthem, and the
hopes of sharing Overyssel or Friesland, if ever their spoils come to be
divided; make him a certain friend to what Prince soever is Enemy to them, and
will furnish him with men, or money enough to appear in the head of an Army
against them.

The general Interest that the several Princes of the Empire have with us, is
grounded wholly upon the Esteem of His Majesty's Power, and the veneration of
his Name, which is so great amongst them, That most of them are resolved in the
present Conjuncture of Affairs in Christendom, to understand perfectly His
language, before they speak their own.

THE Government of Sweden is esteemed steady and wise, as their people warlike
and numerous. The digestion of their Counsels is made in a Senate consisting of
forty Counselors, who are generally the greatest men of the Kingdom in Office,
Estates, or Abilities; and who have most of them been Commanders in the German
Wars, or are so in the present Militia, which makes their Counsels generally
Warlike and Ambitious, though something tempered by the Minority of their King.
This has turned them for some years since their last Kings death, rather to
make advantages by the name and reputation of their Alliances, than by the
appearance of their Arms. But if their King grow a Man, and of Martial
thoughts, as may be presaged from so great a Father, We may see great actions
and revolutions grow again out of this Northern Climate. For the names of Goth,
and Vandal, and their famons successes both in Poland and Germany this last
age, inspire them with great thoughts; And the bodies and courages of their
common men, as well as the Prudence and Conduct of their great Officers, seem
to have framed them for great undertakings. Besides their Application of late
years to trade, has much increast their Shipping and Seamen (which they found
to be their weak-side in their last attempts). All these may in time make way
for their great design, which is the Dominion of the Baltic Sea by the
Conquest of Denmark. This was about the year 59, wrested out of their hands by
the Dutch Assistances, and can hardly escape them, if ever that Commonwealth
should be broken. And if they arrive once at this point, there will grow a
Power in that rough Climate, which both at Land and Sea may equal most others
that are now in Christendom; by being Masters of such numbers of strong and
valiant men, as well as of all the Naval Stores that furnish the World.

They have a nearer prospect upon the City of Bremen, by the Addition whereof
to the Bishopric already in their possession, They design to lay a great
foundation both of Trade and Strength in the nearer parts of Germany.

Their next Interest seems to be a long knocking War in the Empire or the
Low Countries, which will make them Courted by all, till they think fit to
declare; And then will bring them to a share in the Game; And those often go
away with the greatest, who bring in least when the Stake begins. The neglects
of France since the peace of Munster, and the late courtship of Spain, seem to
have left them open for the fairest offer from either of those Crowns: But
rather inclined to Spain, which has still the surest fonds of treasure (if they
could fall into good method or direction) and to whom they are more necessary
than to France, which has out-grown almost all measures with their Neighbors.
They have a peek to Holland something in show, but more at heart; As lying
cross to their three designs, the Dominion of the Baltic, their Acquisition of
Bremen, and a War in the upper or lower Germany. And they are so wise a State
as to be found commonly in their Interest; which for these reasons, is either
an absolute breaking, or a great weakening of that Commonwealth. Besides, they
esteemed themselves at least neglected by them in the late Negotiation of the
Tripple Alliance, wherein they expected constant Subsidies in the time of
peace, from Spain and Holland, to engage them in the defense of all those
Provinces against the threatening power of France.

An old friendship to our Nation, and Alliance, proceeding from a long
conjunction of Interests, besides the necessity of keeping well with one of the
greatest Maritime Powers, will (as may be conjectured) persuade them to follow
His Majesty's measures the closest and furthest of any State in Europe. This
gave them the first design of entering into the Tripple Alliance; And into the
commerce with Spain in the year 68; And their resolution of keeping pace with
His Majesty in both those points, as well as the consequences of them; Which
they will do, unless the present Scene should wholly change, and open new
Councels and Interests not yet thought of in the world.

THE Kingdom of Denmark seems less considerable than their Neighbour-Crown,
From a fainter Spirit which appears of late in their people, and in their
Government it self; as well as a great inequality of number in their Forces
both at Sea and Land; For the last change of their Government, from Elective to
Hereditary, has made it seem hitherto of less Force, and unfitter for Action
abroad. As all great Changes brought about by Force or Address in an old
Constitution of Government (rooted in the Hearts and Customs of the people),
though they may in time prove an increase of Strength and Greatness (when
fallen into Method, and grown easy by Use); Yet for many years they must needs
weaken it, by the divisions and distractions of men's minds, and discontents of
their humors; And so turn the Counsels upon Designs within, desisting from any
without; And advantages upon Enemies, must give way to those upon Subjects: So
as the breaking down an old frame of Government, and erecting a new, seems like
the cutting down an old Oak (because the fruit decays, and the branches grow
thin), and planting a young one in the room. It Is true, the Son or Grandson (if
it prospers) may enjoy the shade and the maste; But the Planter, besides the
pleasure of Imagination, has no other benefit to recompense the pains of
Setting and Digging, the care of Watering and Pruning, the fears of every Storm
and every Drougth. And it is well, If he escapes a blow from the fall of the old
Tree, or its Boughs, as they are lopt off.

The Change in Denmark* was the safer by having to deal with a soft easy
people, and with Nobles grown to have small power or interest amongst them, and
of whom many were gained by the Crown. Besides, that nothing seemed to concern
Property in the change of Successive, for Elective. And the example of all
Christian Crowns (besides that of Poland) made way for it; And yet it is
certain, that Denmark has continued ever since weak and unspirited, bent only
upon safety, and enjoying the Revenues of the Sound (which are the chief
belonging to that Crown); So as their great Interest is their defense against
Sweden, And for the rest a general Peace, by which Traffic increasing they
may come in for a share, and see their Customs grow in the Sound and Norway.
They reckoned chiefly upon their support from Holland, till seeing them fall
into closer measures with Us and Sweden, upon the Tripple Alliance; They have
tacked some points nearer France, and the rather, because of the unkindness
grown in the last Dutch War, between us and them; Yet they have it at heart,
that Holland has ever used them insolently, if not scornfully, in the whole
course of their Treaties and Alliances, as well as the differences between them
about the payments of the Sound, And will be ever ready and resolute in the
defense of Hamborough, whenever the Danes shall have strength and heart enough
to attaque it, which seems the chief Ambition they have left them abroad.

THE Crown of Spain was in all Philip the Second's time looked upon as both the
terror and defense of Christendom; No Monarchy having ever grasped at so great
an Empire there, and at the same time pursued an open War against so great a
power as the Turks. This greatness was grown up by the Union of the House of
Castile and Arragon, of that of Burgundy and the Netherlands, with that of
Naples and Sicily; By the accession or conquest of Portugal, By that of the
Indies (when their Mines bled fresh, as they did many years after their first
opening), By the number of brave Troops and Leaders; which were raised and made
by the various and continual Wars of Charles the Fifth; But chiefly by the
uninterrupted succession of three great Princes, Ferdinand, Charles, and
Philip; Which can never fail of raising a small Kingdom to a great, no more
than the contrary of bringing down a great one to a small. But whoever measures
the Crown of Spain now, by the Scale of that Age, may fancy a man of Fourscore,
by a Picture drawn of him at Thirty; It Is like a great old Tree which has lost
its Branches and Leaves, Et trunco non frondibus efficit umbram. Though no man
knows, whether out of this old Root a Sucker may not spring, that with a little
shelter at first, and good seasons, may in time prove a mighty Tree; For there
seems still to remain strength and sap in the Root to furnish a fair growth,
though not in proportion to the first. These decays have been occasioned by so
long a War with Holland (supported by all the Neighbors who envied or feared
the greatness of Spain), By the exhausting in a great degree of their Indian
Mines; By that of their Natives to furnish the Indian Conquests, and secure all
their Provinces both in Italy and Flanders; But most of all by two Successions
(which we may at least call) of unactive Princes, And the want of any great
Ministry to repair either them, or the Minority of this King, in which they
ended. Unless this Crown out-grow its present weakness, by some great Spirit
rising up at the head of the Monarchy, who shall digest their Councels, reform
the vast and impertinent profusions of their Treasures, by suppressing all
unnecessary Pensions and Expenses, And restore the vigor of their Nation by
Martial designs and examples; We may reckon the Interest of Spain to lie wholly
in the preservation and defense of Flanders from France, of Sicily from the
Turks, and of their Indies from Us. That of Sicily seems more remote, because
both Hungary and Poland is a nearer Game for the Turk, And will not so
generally alarm or unite the Christian Princes, as the Invasion of Sicily,
wherein France as well as Italy is so near concerned. The jealousy of their
Indies has been much nearer them since our possession of Jamaica; And aches at
heart upon every fit which the desperate Sallies of our Privateers there bring
upon them. But they hope to make fair weather in those Seas, by opening to us
some advantages of Trade there, And by a Conjunction of Interests in Europe,
which they think the greatness of France makes as necessary to us as to them.

Their quarrel to France by a course of almost continual Wars ever since
Charles the Fifth's time, by the late pretensions to Flanders, set on foot by
France since the death of their last King, and pursued by the late Invasion
(which the Spaniards pretend to have been against all Faith, as well as Right)
seems to be grown wholly incurable, Though dissembled by the sense of their own
weakness, which makes them rather willing to deceive themselves with a Peace,
that they know must fail them, than break out into a War they fear must ruin
them, without the assistance of their Neighbors. And this they hope some
breach of the Peace at Aix on the French side, or other accidents, may at one
time or other engage for them. And though as they stand single, their present
Interest is but bare defense, and wearing out their Kings Minority without
further losses; Yet a greater Interest, and far more at heart, Is a War with
France in Conjunction with the Tripple-Alliance, or at least with Us and
Holland. For though the Peace holds, Yet while France continues so great Forces
and Designs on foot, the preservation of Flanders will cost Spain 200 m. pounds
a year, besides the Revenues of the Country. And what is left them in those
Provinces remains so locked and interwoven with the last French Conquests, that
upon the first breach of a War, It is all endangered; and indeed cannot be any
ways secured, but by a strong diversion, which may employ the greatest part of
the French Forces in some other places. These regards, and that of being hardly
used (as they conceive) by Us and Holland, in the Peace of Aix, which forced
them to quit so much of their Country to France, and of their money to Sweden,
Have raised up a party in their Council, that would make and secure the best
Peace they can with France, by a Cession of Flanders to that Crown, in exchange
for other Provinces toward Spain, and of some other pretensions. But this will
not be carried in a Minority of their King; at least without greater fears of a
sudden Invasion from France, and greater despairs of help from us. Because
whenever they quit Flanders, they must be content to shut themselves up within
their Mountains, and signify nothing more in the Affairs of Europe; Nor could
they perhaps long be safe either in Spain or Italy, if they were there to
sustain all the Forces of France, without the great diversion they have always
made by Flanders; out of which whenever they are Masters of the field, they
march in four or five days up into the very Isle of France.

To compass these two Interests either of defense or a war in Confederacy, they
would fain engage Sweden, but will endanger this Aim, by the fear of venturing
their money before the Game begins. They reckon themselves sure of Holland as
far as their defense, but know, they will never be brought to begin a War with
France. And the old rancours between Spaniard and Dutch, are not yet enough
worn out of the dispositions of the People or the Governments, to make room for
such an absolute turn. Their great hope is in England, where their inclination
carries them as well as their interest. Besides, they think our old as well as
fresh quarrels with France, and the jealousy of their present growth, will
temper us for their turn at one time or other, so that their measures will ever
be fair with us; But no more toward preserving their Peace, because they think
our Interest as well as our Treaties will be enough to engage us so far without
other motives. Though to head a War against France, wherein both Sweden and
Holland, would (as they think) follow our paces; There is no advantage which
the Crown of Spain could make us in Trade, nor money they could spare from
their own necessities (in the share of the quarrel) which they would not
willingly furnish us, and trust to the events of a War how uncertain soever.

THE State of Holland in point both of riches, and strength, is the most
prodigious growth that has been seen in the world; if we reckon it from their
Peace with Spain; before which time, though their Forces were great both at
Land and Sea, yet they were kept down by too violent exercise; And that
Government could not be said to stand upon its own legs, Leaning always on
their Neighbors, who were willing to support them against Spain, and feared
nothing from a State so narrow in compass of Land, and so weak in Native
Subjects, That the strength of their Armies has ever been made up of foreign
Troops. But since that time, What with the benefit of their Situation and
Orders of their Government, The Conduct of their Ministers (driving on steady
and public Interests), The Art, Industry, and Parsimony of their people; All
conspiring to derive almost the Trade of the whole World into their Circle,
(while their Neighbors were taken up either in Civil or Foreign Wars) They
have grown so considerable in the World, that for many years they have treated
upon an equal Foot with all the great Princes of Europe, and concluded no
Negotiation without advantage. And in the last War with Us and Munster, were
able at the same time to bring above a hundred men of War to Sea, and maintain
threescore and ten thousand men at Land. Besides, the Establishment or
Conquests of their Companies in the East Indies, have in a manner erected
another subordinate Commonwealth in those parts; Where upon occasion they have
armed five and forty men of War, and thirty thousand Land-men by the modestest
computations. Yet the frame of this State (as of most great Machines made for
rest and not for motion) is absolutely incapable of making any considerable
enlargements or conquests upon their neighbors; Which is evident to all that
know their Constitutions: But needs no other argument besides their want of
Native Subjects to manage any such attempts; What men they can spare being
drawn so wholly into their trade, and their East Indies; That they cannot so
much as furnish a Colony for Surinam, proportioned to the safety and plantation
of that place; And no Nation ever made and held a Conquest by Mercenary Arms.
So that the wounds and fears they can give their neighbors consists in point
of Trade; In injuries or insolences at Sea; In falling with great weight into
a balance with other Princes; In protecting their Rebels or Fugitives, And in
an arrogant way of treating with other Princes and States, a quality natural to
men bred in popular Governments, and derived of late years from the great
successes of theirs, under the present Ministry.

It may be laid (I believe) for a Maxim, That no wise State will ever begin a
War unless it be upon designs of Conquests, or necessity of Defense; For all
other Wars serve only to exhaust Forces and Treasure, and end in untoward
Peaces, patcht up out of weakness or weariness of the parties: Therefore the
Hollanders, unless invaded either at home or in Flanders (which they esteem now
the same case, if it comes from France), can have no interest to offer at a
War; But find their greatest in continuing their course of Traffic
uninterrupted, and enjoying the advantages which in that point their industry
and address will gain them from all their Neighbors. And for these ends they
will endeavor to preserve the Peace now in being, And bandy by Leagues and
Negotiations against any from whom they shall fear a breach of it.

They will ever seek to preserve themselves by an Alliance with England against
France, and by that of France against England, as they did formerly by both
against Spain. And they will fall into all Conjuctures which may serve to
balance in some measure the two lesser Crowns of Sweden and Denmark, as well
as the greater of France and Spain. But because they believe, that good Arms
are as necessary to keep Peace, as to make War; They will always be Great in
their preparations of that kind, especially at Sea; By which they may in all
cases, advance or secure their Trade, And upon a War with France, make up that
way the weakness of their Landforces, Which a long rust of Peace, and a swarm
of Officers preferred by the Magistrates in favor of their relations, has
brought to be very disproportioned in Force to what they are in Number. They
esteem themselves secure from Spain and their German Neighbors (upon what has
been said of the present condition of those Princes). And from Us, not so much
upon our late Treaties with them, as upon what they take to be the common
Interest, which they think a Nation can never run over, and believe is the
opposing any further progress of the French greatness. Their only danger they
apprehend, is from France, and that not immediately to themselves, but to
Flanders; where any Flame would soon scorch them, and consume them, if not
quenched in time. But in regard of the weakness of Spain, The slow motions of
the Empire, The different paces among the Princes of it, And the distance of
Sweden; They esteem the Peace of Christendom to depend wholly upon His Majesty,
as well as the safety of Flanders, in case of a War. For they think France will
be dared, and never take wing while they see such a Naval Power as Ours and the
Dutch hovering about all their Coasts; And so many other Princes ready to fall
in, whenever His Majesty declares, united by the same jealousies or dangers.
And if they should open a War, they foresee the consumption which France must
fall into by the stop of their Wine, Salts, and other Commodities (now in a
manner wholly taken off by our two Nations). And the head that may be made
against their Forces in the Field it self, by a Body of English Infantry (so
much renowned abroad). So as though their first Interest be to continue the
Peace, while it may be done with any safety; yet when that fails, their next
is, to open a War in favor of Spain, and conjunction with us. And the greatest
they have in the world, is to preserve and increase their Alliance with us;
Which will make them follow our measures absolutely in all the present
Conjunctures.

THE Crown of France considered in the extent of Country, in the number of
People, in the riches of Commodities, in the Revenues of the King, the
greatness of the Landforces now on foot, and the growth of those at Sea
(within these two years past), the number and bravery of their Officers, the
conduct of their Ministers, and chiefly in the Genius of their present King; A
Prince of great aspiring thoughts, unwearied application to whatever is in
pursuit, severe in the institution and preservation of Order and Discipline; In
the main, a Manager of his Treasure, and yet bountiful from his own motions,
wherever he intends the marks of Favor, and discerns particular Merit. To
this, in the flower of his Age, at the head of all his Armies, and hitherto
unfoiled in any of his attempts, either at home or abroad: I say, considered in
all these circumstances, France may appear to be designed for greater
Achievements and Empires, than have been seen in Christendom since that of
Charlemaigne.

The present Greatness of this Crown, may be chiefly derived from the fortune
it has had of two great Ministers (Richelieu and Mazarine) succeeding one
another, between two great Kings, Henry the Fourth and this present Prince; so
as during the course of one unactive life, and of a long Minority, That Crown
gained a great deal of ground both at home and abroad, instead of losing it;
Which is the common fate of Kingdoms upon those occasions.

The latter greatness of this Crown began in the time of Lewis the 11th, by the
Spoils of the House of Burgundy, and the Divisions of the Princes, which gave
that King the heart of attempting to bring the Government (as he called it)
Horse de Page; Being before controlled by their Princes, and restrained by their
States; And in point of Revenue, kept within the bounds of the Kings Demesnes,
and the Subjects voluntary Contributions.

It Is not here necessary to observe, by what difficulties and dangers to the
Crown, this design of Lewis was pursued by many succeeding Kings, like a great
Stone forced up a Hill, and upon every slacking of either strength or care,
rolling a great way back, often to the very bottom of the Hill, and sometimes
with the destruction of those that forced it on, till the time of Cardinal
Richelieu. It was in this great Minister most to be admired, that finding the
Regency shaken by the Factions of so many great ones within, and awed by the
terror of the Spanish greatness without; He durst resolve to look them both in
the face, and begin a War, by the course of which for so many years (being
pursued by Mazarine till the year 60), The Crown of France grew to be
powerfully armed, The Peasants were accustomed to Payments (which could have
seemed necessary only by a War, and which none but a successful one could have
helped to digest), and grew heartless as they grew poor. The Princes were
sometimes satisfied with Commands of the Army, sometimes mortified and suppressed
by the absoluteness or addresses of the Ministry; The most boiling blood of the
Nobility and Gentry was let out in so long a War, or wasted with Age and
Exercise; At last it ended at the Pireenes in a Peace, and a Match so
advantageous to France; As the reputation of them contributed much to the
Authority of the young King, who bred up in the Councils, and served by the
tried Instruments of the former Ministry, But most of all advantaged by his own
personal Qualities, fit to make him obeyed; Grew absolute Master of the
Factions of the great men, as well as the purses of his people. In the
beginning of his Minority, the two disputes, with the Pope about the outrage of
the Corsi, and with the King of Spain about the encounter at London, between
the Count D'Estrades and the Baron De Batteville (Ambassadors from those
Crowns), both carried so high, and both ended so honorably, and to the very
will of France, Were enough to give a young Prince the humor and appetite of
trying yet further what there was could oppose him. The Invasion and easy
success in Flanders, fed his Glory, and encreast the reputation of his Power;
Till this career was interrupted by the Peace at first, then the Alliances
between Us and Holland, and afterward the Peace at Aix, and the Tripple
Alliance (contracted purposely to secure it), since which time the Counsels of
that Court have turned wholly from Action to Negotiation; Of which no man can
yet see the success, nor judge whether it may not be more prosperous to them
than that of their Arms.

If there were any certain height where the flights of Power and Ambition use
to end, one might imagine, that the Interest of France were but to conserve its
present Greatness, so feared by its Neighbors, and so glorious in the world:
But besides, that the motions and desires of human minds are endless, It may
perhaps be necessary for France (from respects within) to have some War or
other in pursuit abroad, which may amuse the Nation, and keep them from
reflecting upon their condition at home, Hard and uneasy to all but such as
are in charge, or in pay from the Court. I do not say miserable (the term
usually given it), because no condition is so, but to him that esteems it so;
And if a Paisan of France thinks of no more, than his coarse Bread and his
Onions, his Canvass Clothes and Wooden Shoes, labors contentedly on
Working-days, and dances or plays merrily on Holydays; He may, for ought I
know, live as well as a Boor of Holland, who is either weary of his very ease,
or whose cares of growing still richer and richer, waste his life in toils at
Land, or dangers at Sea; and perhaps fool him so far, as to make him enjoy less
of all kind in his riches, than the other in his poverty.

But to leave strains of Philosophy, which are ill mingled with discourses of
Interest: The common people of France are as little considerable in the
Government, as the Children; so that the Nobles and the Soldiers may in a
manner be esteemed the Nation; Whose Interest and Hopes carry them all to War;
And whatever is the general humor and bent of a Nation, ought ever to be much
considered by a State, which can hardly miscarry in the pursuit of it. Besides,
the Personal Dispositions of the King, Active and Aspiring, And many
circumstances in the Government (fitter for persons of that Court, than
Strangers to pretend the knowledge of), The continual increase of their Forces
in time of peace, and their fresh Invasion of Lorrain, are enough to persuade
most men, that the design of this Crown is a War, whenever they can open it
with a prospect of succeeding to purpose; For their Counsels are too wise, To
venture much upon the hopes of little gains. What the aims of France are in
this kind, I will not pretend to judge by common fears, or the Schemes of men
too ingeniously politic; Nor perhaps can any one tell any more than a man
that leaps into the water in strength and vigor, and with pleasure, can say how
far he will swim; Which will be, till he is stopped by currents, or accidents, or
grows weary, or has a mind to do something else. One may judge, that if France
will begin a War, it would be naturally upon Flanders; unless discouraged by
the same Alliances which prevailed with them to end the last; so as the plain
present Interest of France, is one way or other to break the confidence or the
force of that Tripple Alliance, which alone seems to bound their prospect,
which way soever they look; And if once laid open, they have the World and
their Fortunes before them; which is enough for a Crown that has so much Force,
and so much Conduct to manage them. Having little hopes of breaking this on the
Dutch side, and knowing the Swede will follow our measures in it, We may be
sure of all address, and all the Courtship that can any way be infused; and in
short, all sorts of endeavors and applications that can be used, to break it
on ours, Which seems to be the present Game of that Crown, and that they will
begin no other till they see an end of this.

FLanders cannot be considered distinct from Spain in the Government, but may
in the inclinations of the people, which must ever have a great influence upon
it. They are the best Subjects in the World, but may have some reason to be
weary of being the Theater of almost perpetual Wars; and where those two mighty
Crowns have fought so many Battles, and seem to have still so many more to
fight, If the Neighbour-assistances fall in to balance their powers, now so
unequally matched. Therefore the Interest of the Inhabitants of those Spanish
Provinces seems to be, either that the present Peace should be kept inviolate
by the strength and reputation of the present Alliances; Or else, that a War
when it opens should have a sudden issue; Which might be expected, either from
the French Conquest, or a Proposition of Exchange. They are naturally averse
from the French Government, as they are inclined to the Spanish; but have so
little kindness for the Hollanders, or esteem of their Landforces, that they
hardly either hope or care to be saved by their assistances. So as the
reputation of His Majesty's Protection and Alliance, is all that can inspire
them with the hopes of a lasting Peace, or the courage to defend themselves by
a War.

FRom the Survey of all these several Interests, and Forces, and Dispositions
that compose the present state of all our Neighbors; It may be naturally, and
unquestionably concluded, That a continuance of the present measures, The
opening of new ones, Or an absolute revolution of all, depends wholly upon
those His Majesty shall take or pursue in this great Conjuncture, wherein He
seems to be generally allowed for the sole Arbiter of the Affairs of
Christendom.

OUR Interest abroad must lie in one of these points.

Either to preserve our present Alliances, and thereby the Peace of Christendom
as it now stands.

Or to encourage France to an Invasion of Holland, with assurance of our
Neutrality.

Or else to join with France upon the advantages they can offer us, for the
ruin of the Dutch.

Upon the first is to be considered, Whether with a longer Peace, the Power of
France and Holland, with so great Revenues, and such application as is seen in
their Governments, will not increase every year out of proportion to what ours
will do; The Revenues of France arising originally from the vent of their
Native Commodities; and those of Holland growing wholly out of Trade, and that
out of Peace.

Upon the second, Whether France will ever resolve upon the Invasion of
Holland; Or Holland upon its own resolute defense, without our share in the
War, which would otherwise leave us to enjoy the Trade of the World, and
thereby to grow vastly both in Strength and Treasures, whilst both these
Powers were breaking one another. Or whether the jealousy of such a design in
us, would not induce France and Holland, either before a War, or soon after it
begins, To close upon some measures between them to our disadvantage, as We and
Holland did after the last War, to the disadvantage of France.

Upon the last, Whether by the ruin of Holland, we can reap as great advantages
as France (though perhaps greater were necessary to make some equality in our
Powers). And to gain a fair prospect of this, it must be considered, Whether
Holland upon its fall would grow an accession to the French, or to Us; Or live
under the Prince of Orange as a Sovereign Prince, with our support or
protection. Whether France would be content with either of these last; or to
see us grow absolute Masters of the Sea, by the fall or subjection of Holland,
any more than by their Conjunction and Alliance. Whether we could be able to
defend the Maritime Provinces, either in our own subjection, or in that of the
Prince, whilst France remained possessed of all the Outworks of that State
(which are their Inland Provinces, their Towns in Brabant and upon the Rhine);
Whether we could on the other side hinder the accession of Holland to France,
either as Subjects in a Maritime Province (with great Privileges and
Immunities for continuance and encouragement of Trade), Or as an inferior and
dependant Ally under their protection. Whether in either of these cases, our
Government would have credit enough in Holland to invite their Shipping and
Traders to come over and settle in England, and so leave those Provinces
destitute of both. Whether it be possible to preserve Flanders after the loss
of Holland, Or upon the Conquest of those Countries by France, For us to
preserve our peace or good intelligence with that King, Or upon a War to defend
our selves, either by our own Forces, or the Alliances of our Neighbors.

But though these Arguments may deserve the most serious deliberations of
Ministers at home; Yet I know they lie out of the compass of my duty, and are
improper for the representations of a man, the course of whose Employments and
thoughts for so long a time has lain wholly abroad.

AN ESSAY UPON THE ORIGINAL and NATURE OF GOVERNMENT.
Written in the Year 1672.
THE Nature of Man seems to be the same in all times and places, but varyed
like their statures, complexions, and features: by the force and influence of
the several Climates where they are born and bred; which produce in them by a
different mixture of the humors and operation of the Air, a different and
unequal course of Imaginations and Passions, and consequently of Discourses and
Actions.

These differences incline men to several Customs, Educations, Opinions and
Laws; which Form and Govern the several Nations of the World, where they are
not interrupted by the violence of some force from without, or some faction
within; which like a great blow, or a great disease, may either change or
destroy the very frame of a body, though if it lives to recover strength and
vigor, it commonly returns in time to its natural constitution or something
near it.

(I speak not of those changes and revolutions of State, or Institutions of
Government that are made by the more immediate and evident operation of Divine
Will and Providence, being the Themes of Divines, and not of common men; and
the Subjects of our Faith, not of our Reason).

This may be the cause that the same Countries have generally in all times been
used to Forms of Government much of a sort: The same Nature ever continuing
under the same Climate, and making returns into its old Channel, though
sometimes led out of it by persuasions, and sometimes beaten out by force.

Thus the more Northern, and more Southern Nations (extremes as they say still
agreeing) have ever lived under single and Arbitrary Dominions; as all the
Regions of Tartary, and Muscovy on the one side: and of Africa and India on the
other. While those under the more temperate Climates, especially in Europe,
have ever been used to more moderate Governments, Running anciently much into
Commonwealths, and of latter ages into Principalities bounded by Laws, which
differ less in Nature than in Name.

For though the old distinctions run otherwise, there seem to be but two
general kinds of Government in the world. The one exercised according to the
Arbitrary commands and will of some single Person. And the other according to
certain Orders or Laws introduced by agreement or custom, and not to be changed
without the consent of many.

But under each of these may fall many more particular kinds, than can be
reduced to the common heads of Government received in the Schools. For those of
the first sort, differ according to the dispositions and humors of Him that
Rules, and of them that obey: As Fevers do according to the temper of the
persons, and accidents of the seasons. And those of the other sort, differ
according to the quality or number of the persons upon whom is devolved the
authority of making, or power of executing Laws.

Nor will any man, that understands the State of Poland, and the United
Provinces, be well able to range them under any particular names of Government
that have been yet invented.

The great Scenes of Action, and Subjects of Ancient Story, Greece, Italy, and
Sicily, were all divided into small Commonwealths, till swallowed up and made
Provinces by that mighty one of Rome, together with Spain, Gaul, and Germany.
These were before composed of many small Governments, among which the Cities
were generally under Commonwealths, and the Countries under several Princes:
Who were Generals in their Wars, but in peace lived without Armies or Guards,
or any Instruments of Arbitrary Power: And were only chief of their Councils,
and of those Assemblies by whose consultations, and authority, the great
affairs and actions among them were resolved and enterprized.

Through all these Regions some of the smaller States, but chiefly those of the
Cities, fell often under Tyrannies: Which spring naturally out of Popular
Governments. While the meaner sort of the people oppressed, or ill protected by
the richer, and greater, give themselves up to the conduct of some one man in
chief credit among them; and submit all to his will and discretion: either
running easily from one extreme to another, or contented to see those they
hated and feared before, now in equal condition with themselves. Or, because a
multitude is incapable of framing Orders, though capable of conserving them: Or
that every man comes to find by experience, that confusion and popular tumults
have worse effects upon common safety than the rankest Tyranny. For it is
easier to please the humor, and either appease or resist the fury of one
single man, than of a multitude. And taking each of them in their extremes, the
rage of a Tyrant may be like that of fire, which consumes what it reaches but
by degrees, and devouring one house after another; whereas the rage of people
is like that of the Sea, which once breaking bounds, overflows a Country with
that suddenness and violence, as leaves no hopes either of flying or resisting,
till with the change of tides or winds it returns of it self.

The force and variety of accidents is so great, that it will not perhaps bear
reasoning, or enquiry how it comes about, that single Arbitrary Dominion seems
to have been natural to Asia and Africa: and the other sort to Europe. For
though Carthage was indeed a Commonwealth in Africa, and Macedon a Kingdom in
Europe; yet the first was not Native of that Soil (being a Colony of the
Tyrians, as there were some other small ones of he Grecians upon the same
Coasts) and the Kings of Macedon Governed by Laws, and the consent as well as
Councils of the Nobles. Not like the Kings of Persia by humor and will, as
appears by the event of their quarrel, while so few Subjects conquered so many
Slaves.

Yet one reason may be that Sicily, Greece, and Italy (which were the Regions
of Commonwealths) were planted thick with rich and populous Cities (occasioned
by their being so far encompassed with the Sea). And the vein of all rich
Cities ever inclines to that kind of Government. Whether it be that where many
grow Rich, many grow to power, and are harder to be subjected. Or where men
grow to great possessions, they grow more intent upon safety, and therefore
desire to be Governed by Laws and Magistrates of their own choice, fearing all
Armed and Arbitrary Power: Or that the small compass of Cities makes the ease
and convenience of Assemblies and Councils. Or that conversation sharpens men's
wits, and makes too many reasoners in matters of Government.

The contrary of all this happens in Countries thin inhabited, and especially
in vast Campania's, such as are extended through Asia, and Africa, where there
are few Cities, besides what grow by the residence of the Kings or their
Governors. The people are poorer, and having little to lose, have little to
care for, and are less exposed to the designs of power or violence. The
assembling of persons deputed from people at great distances one from another,
is trouble to them that are sent, and charge to them that send. And where
ambition and avarice have made no entrance, the desire of leisure is much more
natural, than of business and care; besides, Men conversing all their lives
with the Woods, and the Fields, and the Herds, more than with one another, come
to know as little as they desire. Use their Senses a great deal more than their
Reasons, examine not the nature or the tenure of Power and Authority; find only
they are fit to obey, because they are not fit to Govern. And so come to submit
to the will of him they found in Power, as they do the will of Heaven, and
consider all changes of conditions that happen to them under good or bad
Princes, like good or ill Seasons that happen in the Weather and the Air.

It may be said further, that in the more intemperate Climates, the spirits
either exhaled by heat, or comprest by cold, are rendered faint and sluggish,
and by that reason the men grow tamer, and fitter for servitude. That in more
temperate Regions the spirits are stronger, and more active, whereby men become
bolder in the defense or recovery of their liberties.

But all Government is a restraint upon liberty; And under all, The Dominion is
equally absolute, where it is in the last resort.

So that when men seem to contend for Liberty, it is indeed but for the change
of those that rule, or for the forms of Government they have formerly been used
to; and (being grown weary of the present) now begin to regret; though when
they enjoyed them, it was not without some pressure and complaint. Nor can it
be in the other case; that when vast numbers of men submit their lives and
fortunes absolutely to the Will of one, it should be want of heart, but must be
force of custom, or opinion, the true ground and foundation of all Government,
and that which subjects Power to Authority. For Power arising from Strength, is
always in those that are governed, who are many: But Authority arising from
opinion, is in those that Govern, who are few.

This distinction is plain in the forms of the old Roman State, where Laws were
made, and resolutions taken, Authoritate Senatus, and Jussu populi. The Senate
were Authors of all Counsels in the State; and what was by them consulted and
agreed, was proposed to the People: By whom it was enacted, or commanded,
because in them was the power to make it be obeyed. But the great opinion which
the people had at first of the persons of the Senators, and afterward of their
families (which were called Patricians) gained easy assent to what was thus
proposed; the Authority of the persons adding great weight to the reason of the
things. And this went so far, that though the choice of all Magistrates was
wholly in the people, yet for a long course of years, they chose none but
Patricians into the great Offices of State, either Civil or Military. But when
the People began to lose the general opinion they had of the Patricians, or at
least so far as to believe some among themselves were as able, and fit as
these, to advise the State, and lead their Armies: They then pretended to share
with the Senate in the Magistracy, and bring in Plebeians to the Offices of
chiefest Power and Dignity. And hereupon began those seditions which so long
distempered, and at length ruined that State.

AUthority arises from the opinion of Wisdom, Goodness, and Valor in the
persons who possess it.

Wisdom, As that which makes men judge what are the best ends, and what the best
means to attain them; and gives a man advantage among the weak and the
ignorant; as sight among the blind, which is that of Counsel and Direction.
This gives Authority to Age among the younger, till these begin at certain
years to change their opinion of the old, and of themselves. This gives it more
absolute to a Pilot at Sea, whom all the passengers suffer to steer them as he
pleases.

Goodness, As that which makes men prefer their Duty and their Promise, before
their Passions, or their Interest; and is properly the object of Trust. In our
Language, it goes rather by the name of Honesty; though what we call an honest
man, the Romans called a good man; and honesty in their Language, as well as in
French, rather signifies a composition of those qualities which generally
acquire honor and esteem to those who possess them.

Valor, As it gives awe, and promises protection to those who want either
heart or strength to defend themselves. This makes the Authority of Men among
Women; and that of a Master-Buck in a numerous herd, though perhaps not strong
enough for any two of them; but the impression of single fear holds when they
are all together, by the ignorance of Uniting.

Eloquence, As it passes for a mark of Wisdom; Beauty of Goodness, And Nobility
of Valor (which was its original) have likewise ever some effect upon the
opinion of the People; but a very great one when they are really joined with
the qualities they promise or resemble.

There is yet another source from which usually springs greater Authority than
from all the rest, which is the opinion of Divine Favor, or designation of the
persons, or of the races that Govern. This made the Kings among the Heathens
ever derive themselves, or their Ancestors from some god; passing thereby for
Heroes, that is, persons issued from the mixture of divine and humane race, and
of a middle nature between gods and men: others joined the Miter to the Crown,
and thereby the reverence of Divine, to the respect of Civil Power.

This made the Caliphs of Persia and Egypt, and the great Emperors of Arabia,
derive themselves by several branches from their great Prophet Mahomet: The
Yncas in Peru from the Sun: And the Ottoman race to be adored among the Turks,
as designed by Heaven for perpetual Empire. And the sacring of the Kings of
France (as Loysel says) is the sign of their Sovereign Priesthood, as well as
Kingdom; and in the right thereof they are capable of holding all vacant
Benefices of the Church.

Piety, As it is thought a way to the favor of God, and Fortune as it looks
like the effect either of that or at least of Prudence and Courage, beget
Authority. As likewise splendour of living in great Palaces, with numerous
attendance, much observance, and rich habits differing from common men: Both as
it seems to be the reward of those Virtues already named, or the effect of
Fortune; or as it is a mark of being obeyed by many.

From all these Authority arises, but is by nothing so much strengthened and
confirmed as by custom. For no man easily distrusts the persons, or disputes
the things which he and all men that he knows of, have been always bred up to
observe, and believe; or if he does, he will hardly hope, or venture to
introduce opinions wherein he knows none, or few of his mind, and thinks all
others will defend those already received; so as no man, nor party can offer at
the change of a Government established, without first gaining new Authority by
the steps already traced out; and in some degree debasing the old, by
appearance or impressions of contrary qualities in those who before enjoyed it.
This induces a general change of opinion, concerning the person or party like
to be obeyed, or followed by the greatect or strongest part of the people:
according to which the power or weakness of each is to be measured. So as in
effect all Government may be esteemed to grow strong or weak, as the general
opinion of these qualities in those that Govern, is seen to lessen or increase.

And Power must be allowed to follow Authority in all Civil Bodies; as in
Natural the motions of the body follow those of the mind, great numbers ever
acting and pursuing what the few (whom they trust) begin or advise.

FRom this Principle, and from the discovery of some natural Authority, may
perhaps be deduced a truer original of all Governments among men, than from any
Contracts: though these be given us by the great Writers concerning Politics
and Laws. Some of them lay for their foundation, That men are sociable
creatures, and naturally disposed to live in numbers and troops together.
Others, That they are naturally creatures of prey, and in a state of war one
upon another; so as to avoid confusion in the first case, and violence in the
other, they found out the necessity of agreeing upon some Orders and Rules, by
which every man gives up his common Right for some particular possession, and
his power to hurt and spoil others, for the privilege of not being hurt or
spoiled himself. And the agreement upon such Orders, by mutual Contract, with
the consent to execute them, by common strength and endeavors, They make to be
the rise of all Civil Governments.

I know not whether they consider what it is that makes some creatures
sociable, and others live and range more alone, or in smaller companies; but I
suppose those creatures whose natural and necessary food is easy and
plentiful, as Grass, or Plants, or Fruits (the common product of the earth) are
the sociable creatures, because wherever they go, they usually find what they
want, and enough for them all without industry or contention. And those live
more alone whose food (and therefore prey) is upon other sensitive creatures,
and so not attained without pursuit and violence, and seldom in such quantities
at once, as to satisfy the hunger of great numbers together. Yet this does not
hold so far, but that Ravens are seen in flocks where a Carrion lies, and
Wolves in herds to run down a Deer. Nay they feed quietly together while there
is enough for them all: Quarrel only when it begins to fail, and when it is
ended they scatter to seek out new encounters. Besides, those called sociable,
quarrel in hunger and in lust, as well as the others; and the Bull and the Ram
appear then as much in fury and war, as the Lion and the Bear. So that if
Mankind must be ranged to one of these sorts, I know not well to which it will
be: and considering the great differences of customs and dispositions in
several men, and even in the same men at several times, I very much doubt they
must be divided into several forms. Nor do I know, if men are like sheep, why
they need any Government: or if they are like Wolves, how they can suffer it.
Nor have I read where the Orders of any State have been agreed on by mutual
Contract among great numbers of men, meeting together in that natural state of
War; where every man takes himself to have equal right to every thing. But
often where such Orders have been invented by the Wisdom, and received by the
Authority of some one man, under the name of a Lawgiver; And where this has not
happened, the original of Government lies as undiscovered in story, as that of
Time. All Nations appearing upon the first Records that are left us, under the
Authority of Kings, or Princes, or some other Magistrates.

Besides, this principle of contract as the original of Government, seems
calculated for the account, given by some of the old Poets of the original of
man; whom they raise out of the ground by great numbers at a time in perfect
Stature and Strength. Whereas if we deduce the several races of mankind in the
several parts of the World from generation; we must imagine the first numbers
of them who in any place agree upon any civil constitutions, to assemble not as
so many single heads, but as so many heads of families, whom they represent, in
the framing any Compact or common accord; and consequently as persons, who have
already an Authority over such numbers as their families are composed of.

For if we consider a Man multiplying his Kind by the birth of many Children,
and his Cares by providing even necessary food for them, till they are able to
do it for themselves (which happens much later to the generations of men, and
makes a much longer dependence of children upon Parents, than we can observe
among any other creatures) If we consider not only the cares but the industry
he is forced to, for the necessary sustenance of his helpless brood, either in
gathering the natural fruits, or raising those which are purchased with labor
and toil; if he be forced for supply of this stock to catch the tamer
creatures, and hunt the wilder, sometimes to exercise his courage in defending
his little Family, and fighting with the strong and Savage Beasts (that would
prey upon him, as he does upon the weak and the mild) if we suppose him
disposing with discretion and order, whatever he gets among his Children,
according to each of their hunger or need, sometimes laying up for to morrow,
what was more than enough for to day: at other times pinching himself rather
than suffering any of them should want. And as each of them grows up, and able
to share in the common support, teaching him both by lesson and example, what
he is now to do as the Son of this family, and what hereafter as the Father of
another; instructing them all, what qualities are good, and what are ill for
their health and life, or common Society (which will certainly comprehend
whatever is generally esteemed virtue or vice among men) cherishing and
encouraging dispositions to the good; disfavouring and punishing those to the
ill: And lastly, Among the various accidents of Life, lifting up his eyes to
Heaven, when the earth affords him no relief; and having recourse to a higher
and a greater nature, whenever he finds the frailty of his own: We must needs
conclude, that the Children of this Man cannot fail of being bred up with a
great opinion of his Wisdom, his Goodness, his Valor, and his Piety. And if
they see constant plenty in the Family, they believe well of his fortune too.

And from all this must naturally arise a great paternal Authority, which
disposes his Children (at least till the age when they grow Fathers themselves)
to believe what he teaches, to follow what he advises, and obey what he
commands.

Thus the Father, by a natural Right as well as Authority, becomes a Governor
in this little State: and if his life be long, and his generations many (as
well as those of his Children) He grows the Governor or King of a Nation, and
is indeed a Pater patriae, as the best Kings are, and as all should be; and as
those which are not, are yet content to be called. Thus the peculiar
compellation of the Kings in France, is by the name of Sire, which in their
ancient language is nothing else but Father, and denotes the Prince to be the
Father of the Nation. For a Nation properly signifies a great number of
Families, derived from the same Blood, born in the same Country, and living
under the same Government and Civil Constitutions: As Patria does the land of
our Father; and so the Dutch by expressions of deerness, instead of our
Country, say our Father-land. With such Nations we find in Scripture all the
Lands of Judea, and the adjacent Territories, were planted of old. With such
the many several Provinces of Greece and Italy, when they began first to appear
upon the Records of Ancient Story or Tradition. And with such was the main Land
of Gaul inhabited in the time of Caesar; and Germany in that of Tacitus. Such
were the many Branches of the old British Nation; the Scepts among the Irish.
And such the infinite variety and numbers of Nations in Africa and America upon
the first discoveries, distinguished by their several names, and living under
their several Kings or Princes, till they came to be swallowed up by greater
Empires.

These seem to have been the natural and original Governments of the World,
springing from a tacit deference of many to the Authority of one single
Person. Under Him (if the Father of the Family or Nation) the elder of his
Children comes to acquire a degree of Authority among the younger by the same
means the Father did among them; and to share with him in the consultation and
conduct of their common affairs. And this, together with an opinion of Wisdom
from experience, may have brought in the Authority of the Elders, so often
mentioned among the Jews; and in general of aged men, not only in Sparta and
Rome, but all other places in some degree, both civil and barbarous. For the
names of Lord, Signior, Seigneur, Senor, in the Italian, French, and Spanish
Languages, seem to have at first imported only elder men, who thereby were
grown into Authority among the several Governments and Nations, which seated
themselves in those Countries upon the fall of the Roman Empire.

This perhaps brought in Vogue that which is called the Authority of the
Ancients in matters of opinion, though by a mistaken sense: for I suppose
Authority may be reasonably allowed to the opinions of ancient men in the
present age; but I know not why it should be so to those of men in general that
lived in ages long since past; nor why one age of the World should be wiser
than another; or if it be, why it should not be rather the latter than the
former; as having the same advantage of the general experience of the World,
that an old man has of the more particular experiments of life.

THus a Family seems to become a little Kingdom, and a Kingdom to be but a
great Family.

Nor is it unlikely that this Paternal Jurisdiction in its successions, and
with the help of accidents, may have branched out into the several heads of
Government commonly received in the Schools. For a Family Governed with order,
will fall naturally to the several Trades of Husbandry, which are Tillage,
Gardening, and Pasturage (the product whereof was the original riches) For the
managing of these, and their increase, and the assistance of one man, who
perhaps is to feed twenty, it may be a hundred children (since it is not easily
told how far Generations may extend, with the Arbitrary choice and numbers of
women, practiced anciently in most Countries) the use of servants comes to be
necessary. These are gained by victory and captives, or by fugitives out of
some worse governed Family, where either they cannot or like not to live, and
so sell their liberty to be assured of what is necessary to life. Or else by
the debased nature of some of the Children who seem born to drudgery, or who
are content to increase their pains that they may lessen their cares; and upon
such terms become servants to some of their brothers, whom they most esteem or
choose soonest to live with.

The Family thus increased, is still under the Fathers common, though not equal
care; that what is due to the servants by Contract, or what is fit for them to
enjoy, may be provided, as well as the portions of the Children: And that
whatever they acquire by their industry or ingenuity (beyond what the Masters
expect, or exact from them by the conditions of their servitude) should be as
much their property, as any divisions of Land or of Stock that are made to the
Sons; and the possession as secure, unless forfeited by any demerit or offense
against the customs of the Family, which grow with time to be the orders of
this little State.

Now the Father of a Family or Nation, that uses his Servants like Children in
point of Justice and Care; and advises with his Children in what concerns the
Commonweal, and thereby is willingly followed and obeyed by them all: Is what I
suppose the Schools mean by a Monarch. And he that by harshness of nature,
wilfulness of humor, intemperance of passions, and arbitrariness of commands,
uses his Children like Servants, is what they mean by a Tyrant. And whereas the
first thought himself safe in the love and obedience of his Children, the other
knowing that he is feared, and hated by them; thinks he cannot be safe among
his children, but by putting arms into the hands of such of his Servants as he
thinks most at his will; which is the original of Guards. For against a
Foreign Enemy, and for defense of evident Interest, all that can bear Arms in
a Nation are Soldiers. Their Cause is common safety; their Pay is Honor: And
when they have purchased these, they return to their homes, and former
conditions of peaceable lives. Such were all the Armies of Greece, and of Rome,
in the first Ages of their States. Such were their Gens d' ordonnance in
France, and the Trainbands in England: but standing Troops, and in constant
pay, are properly Servants armed, who use the Lance and the Sword, as other
servants do the Sickle, or the Bill at the command and will of those who
entertain them. And therefore Martial Law is of all other the most absolute,
and not like the Government of a Father, but a Master.

And this brings in another sort of Power, distinct from that already
described, which follows Authority, and consists in the willing obedience of
the people: But this in the command of Soldiers who as Servants are bound to
execute the Will and Orders of those that Lead them. And as Authority follows
the qualities beforementioned; so this Power follows Riches, or the opinion of
it; a multitude of Servants being his that is able to maintain them. And these
kind of forces come to be used by good Princes only upon necessity of providing
for their defense against great and armed neighbors or enemies; But by ill
ones as a support of decayed Authority, or as they lose the force of that which
is Natural and Paternal, and so grow to set up an Interest of those that
Govern, different from that of those that are Governed, which ought ever to be
the same.

Yet this seems a much weaker principle of Government than the other; for the
number of Soldiers can never be great in proportion to that of People, no more
than the number of those that are idle in a Country, to that of those who live
by labor or industry: so as if the people come to unite by any strong passion,
or general interest, or under the wise conduct of any Authority well rooted in
their minds, They are Masters of Armies. Besides, the humor of the People runs
insensibly among the very Soldiers, so as it seems much alike to keep off by
Guards, a general infection, or an universal sedition: for the distemper in
both kinds is contagious, and seizes upon the defenders themselves. Besides,
common pay is a faint principle of Courage and Action, in comparison of
Religion, Liberty, Honor, Revenge, or Necessity; which make every Soldier have
the quarrel as much at heart as their Leaders, and seem to have spirited all
the great Actions, and Revolutions of the World. And lastly, without the force
of Authority, this Power of Soldiers grows pernicious to their Master, who
becomes their Servant, and is in danger of their mutinies, as much as any
Government can be of the seditions of a people.

If the Father of our Family govern it with Prudence, Goodness, and Success;
and his eldest Son appear Heir to the virtues and worth of his Father; He
succeeds in the Government by a Natural Right, and by the Strength of an
Authority both derived from his Father, and acquired by His own personal
qualities: but if either the eldest Son by qualities degenerate and ill, happen
to lose all trust and opinion, and thereby (Authority) in the Family, Or else
to dye before his time, and leave a Child in his room; when the Father comes to
fail, then the Children fall into Councils of Election, and either prefer the
eldest of the Sons then living, or perhaps one later, and so remoter in birth,
according as He may have acquired Authority by those qualities which naturally
produce it, and promise the best conduct and protection to the common affairs
of the Family.

Where the Father comes to lose his Authority, many of the elder, or wiser, or
braver of the Sons increase in theirs by the same degree: and when both these
arrive at a certain height, the Nature of the Government is ready for a
change; and upon the Fathers death, or general defection of the Family, they
succeed in his Authority, whilst the humor of the whole body runs against the
succession, or election of any single person, which they are grown weary of by
so late an example. And thus comes in what they call an Aristocracy: But
Authority contracting it self (as it seems naturally to do till it ends in a
point or single Person) this Government falls sometimes into the hands of a few
who establish it in their Families: and that is called an Oligarchy. If the
Authority come to be lost in either of these forms; while the Children of the
Family grow into the manners, and qualities, and perhaps into the condition and
poverty of Servants: and while many of the Servants by industry and virtue,
arrive at riches and esteem, then the nature of the Government inclines to a
Democracy or Popular State, which is nearest confusion, or Anarchy; and often
runs into it, unless upheld or directed by the Authority of one, or of some few
in the State; though perhaps without Titles or marks of any extraordinary
Office or Dignity.

GOvernments founded upon Contract, may have succeeded those founded upon
Authority: But the first of them should rather seem to have been agreed between
Princes and Subjects, than between men of equal Rank and Power. For the
original of Subjection was, I suppose, when one Nation warring* against another
(for things necessary to Life, or for Women, or for extent of Land) overcame
their enemies: if they only won a Battle, and put their enemies to flight,
those they took Prisoners became their Slaves, and continued so in their
Generations, unless infranchized by their Masters: But if by great slaughter or
frequent victories, they subdued the very courages of their enemies, while
great numbers of them remained alive; then the vanquished Nation became subject
to the Conquerors by Agreement, and upon certain conditions of safety and
protection; and perhaps equal enjoyment of liberties and customs, with the
common Natives under the other Government: If by such frequent successes and
additions, a Nation extended it self over vast Tracts of Land and numbers of
People; it thereby arrived in time at the ancient name of Kingdom, or Modern of
Empire.

After such a victory, the chiefest of the conquering Nations, become Rich and
Great upon the divisions of Lands, of Spoils, and of Slaves: By all which they
grow into Power, are Lords in their own Lands, and over those that inhabit
them, with certain Rights or Jurisdictions, and upon certain homages reserved
to the Prince. The custom of employing these great persons in all great
Offices, and Councils, grows to pass for a Right; as all Custom does with
length and force of time.

The Prince that Governs according to the conditions of subjection at first
agreed upon (of which Use is the Authentic record) and according to the
ancient Customs, which are the original Laws (and by which the Right of
succession in the Crown, as well as private Inheritance and Common Justice is
directed and established) is called a Lawful Sovereign: He that breaks and
violates these ancient Constitutions (especially that of Succession) is termed
an Usurper.

A Free Nation is that, which has never been conquered or thereby entered into
any conditions of Subjection, as the Romans were, before they were subdued by
the Goths and Vandals: and as the Turks seem to be at this time; who having
been called from Scythia to assist the Grecian Empire against that of the
Saracens, made themselves Masters of both.

In Countries safer from Foreign Invasions either by Seas or Rivers, by
Mountains and Passes, or great Tracts of rough barren and uninhabited Lands,
People lived generally in scattered dwellings, or small Villages: But where
Invasion is easy and passage open, and bordering Nations are great and
valiant; men crowd together and seek their safety from number better united,
and from Walls and other Fortifications, the use whereof is to make the few a
match for the many, so as they may Fight or Treat on equal terms. And this is
the original of Cities; but the greatness and riches of them increase according
to the commodiousness of their situation, in fertile Countries, or upon Rivers
and Havens; which surpass the greatest fertility of any Soil, in furnishing
plenty of all things necessary to Life or Luxury.

When Families meet together, surround themselves by Walls; fall into Order and
Laws (either invented by the wisdom of some one, or some few men; and from the
evidence of their public utility received by all; or else introduced by
experience and time) and these Cities preserve themselves in the enjoyment of
their Possessions, and observance of their Institutions, against all Invasions;
and never are forced to submit to the will of any Conqueror, or conditions of
any absolute Subjection; They are called free Cities, and of such there were
many of old, in Greece and Sicily, deducing their original from some one
Founder or Lawgiver: And are many now in Germany subject to no Laws but their
own, and those of the Empire, which is an Union of many Sovereign Powers, by
whose general consent in their Dyets, all its Constitutions are framed and
established.

Commonwealths were nothing more in their original, but free Cities, though
sometimes by force of orders, and discipline, or of a numerous and valiant
people, they have extended themselves into mighty Dominions: and often by
Situation and Trade, grow to vast Riches, and thereby to great Power by force
of mercenary Arms. And these seem to be the more artificial, as those of a
single Person the more Natural Governments; being forced to supply the want of
Authority by wise inventions, orders and institutions.

For Authority can never be so great in many as in one, because the opinion of
those qualities which acquire it, cannot be equal in several persons.

These Governments seem to be introduced either by the wisdom and moderation of
some one Lawgiver, who has Authority enough with the people to be followed and
observed in all his orders and advices; and yet prefers that which he esteems
public utility, before any interest or greatness of his own (such were
Lycurgus in Sparta, and Solon in Athens, and Timoleon in Syracuse); Or else by
the confluence of many Families out of some Countries exposed to some fierce or
barbarous invasions, into places fortified by Nature, and secure from the fury
and misery of such Conquests. Such were Rhodes of old, and several small
Islands upon the Coasts of Ionia; and such was Venice founded upon the
Inundation of the barbarous Nations over Italy: Or lastly, by the suppression
and extinction of some Tyranny, which being thrown off by the violent
indignation of an oppressed people, makes way for a Popular Government, or at
least some form very contrary to that which they lately execrated, and
detested: Such were Rome upon the expulsion of the Tarquins; and the United
Provinces upon their revolt from Spain: Yet are none of these forms to be
raised or upheld without the influence of Authority, acquired by the force or
opinion of those virtues abovementioned, which concurred in Brutus among the
Romans, and in Prince William of Orange among those of the Netherlands.

I will not enter into the Arguments or comparisons of the several forms of
Government that have been, or are in the World; wherein that cause seems
commonly the better, that has the better advocate, or is advantaged by fresher
experience and impressions of good or evil from any of the Forms among those
that judge: They have all their heighths and their falls, their strong and weak
sides; are capable of great perfections, and subject to great corruptions: and
though the preference seem already decided in what has been said of a single
Persons being the original and natural Government; and that it is capable of
the greatest Authority (which is the foundation of all ease, safety, and order,
in the Governments of the World) yet it may perhaps be the most reasonably
concluded, That those forms are best, which have been longest received and
authorized in a Nation by custom and use; and into which the humors and
manners of the people run with the most general and strongest current.

Or else, that those are the best Governments, where the best men Govern; and
that the difference is not so great in the forms of Magistracy, as in the
persons of Magistrates; which may be the sense of what was said of old (taking
wise and good men, to be meant by Philosophers) that the best Governments were
those, where Kings were Philosophers, or Philosophers Kings.

THE safety and firmness of any frame of Government, may be best judged by the
rules of Architecture, which teach us that the Pyramid is of all figures the
firmest, and least subject to be shaken or overthrown by any concussions, or
accidents from the Earth or Air: and it grows still so much the firmer, by how
much broader the bottom and sharper the top.

The ground upon which all Government stands, is the consent of the people, or
the greatest or strongest part of them; whether this proceed from reflections
upon what is past by the reverence of an Authority under which they and their
Ancestors have for many Ages been born and bred; or from sense of what is
present, by the ease, plenty, and safety they enjoy: or from opinions of what
is to come, by the fears they have from the present Government, or hopes from
another. Now that Government which by any of these, or all these ways takes in
the consent of the greatest number of the People, and consequently their
desires and resolutions to support it, may justly be said to have the broadest
bottom, and to stand upon the largest compass of ground: and if it terminate in
the Authority of one single person, it may likewise be said to have the
narrowest top, and so to make the figure of the firmest sort of Pyramid.

On the contrary, a Government which by alienating the affections, losing the
opinions, and crossing the interests of the people, leaves out of its compass
the greatest part of their consent; may justly be said, in the same degrees it
thus loses ground, to narrow its bottom: and if this be done to serve the
Ambition, humor the Passion, satisfy the Appetites, or advance the Power and
Interests not only of one man, but of two, or more, or many that come to share
in the Government: By this means the top may be justly said to grow broader; as
the bottom narrower by the other: Now by the same degrees that either of these
happen, the stability of the figure is by the same lessened and impaired; so as
at certain degrees it begins to grow subject to accidents of wind, and of
weather, and at certain others, it is sure to fall of it self, or by the least
shake that happens, to the ground.

By these measures it will appear, that a Monarchy where the Prince governs by
the affections, and according to the opinions and interests of his people; or
the bulk of them (that is, by many degrees the greatest or strongest part of
them) makes of all others the safest and firmest Government: and on the
contrary a Popular State which is not founded in the general humors and
interests of the people, but only of the persons who share in the Government,
or depend upon it, is of all others the most uncertain, unstable, and subject
to the most frequent and easy changes.

That a Monarchy the less it takes in of the Peoples opinions and interests,
and the more it takes in of the passions and interests of particular men
(Besides those of the Prince, and contrary to those of the people) the more
unstable it grows, and the more endangered by every storm in the Air, or every
shake of the earth: and a Commonwealth, the more it takes in of the general
humor and bent of the People, and the more it spires up to a head by the
Authority of some one Person founded upon the love and esteem of the People;
the firmer it stands, and less subject to danger or change by any concussions
of earth or of air.

It Is true that a Pyramid reversed may stand for a while upon its point, if
balanced by admirable skill, and held up by perpetual care, and there be a
calm in the Air about it: Nay if the point be very hard and strong, and the
soil very yielding and soft; it may pierce into the ground with time, so as to
grow the firmer the longer it stands: But this last can never happen if either
the top of the figure be weak or soft, or if the soil be hard and rough; and at
the best it is subject to be overthrown, if not by its own weight, yet when
ever any foreign weight shall chance to fall upon any part of it: and the
first must overturn when ever there happens any inequality in the balance, or
any negligence in the hands that set it up; and even without either of those
when ever there arrives any violence to shake it, either from the winds abroad,
or those in the bowels of the earth where it stands.

I will not pretend from this Scheme to presage, or judge of the future events
that may attend any Governments, which is the business of those that are more
concerned in them than I am, and write with other design than that alone of
discovering or clearing truth: But I think any man may deduce from it the
causes of the several revolutions that we find upon record to have happened in
the Governments of the World: Except such as have been brought about by the
unresistable force and conquests of some Nations over others whom they very
much surmounted in Strength, Courage, and Numbers: Yet the brave, long, and
almost incredible defenses that have still been made by those Governments which
were rooted in the general affections, esteem and interests of the Nation; make
it seem probable that almost all the Conquests we read of have been made way
for, or in some measure facilitated, if not assisted by the weakness of the
conquered Government, grown from the disesteem, dissatisfaction, or
indifferency of the People: or from those vicious and effeminate constitutions
of body and mind among them, which ever grow up in the corrupt Air of a weak or
loose, a vicious or a factious State: And such can never be strong in the
hearts of the People; nor consequently firm upon that which is the true bottom
of all Governments in the World.

Thus the small Athenian State resisted with success the vast Power and Forces
of the Persians in the time of Miltiades and Themistocles; Rome those of the
Gauls in the time of Camillus: And the vast Armies collected from Africa,
Spain, and the greatest part of Italy in the Carthaginian Wars (under the
conduct of several great Captains; but chiefly Fabius and Scipio); The little
Principality of Epire was Invincible by the whole Power of the Turks in Three
several Invasions under their Prince Castriot (commonly called Scanderbeg); the
Kingdom of Leon and Oviedo by all the Wars of the Moors, or Saracens for many
ages: The State of Venice by those of the Turks; The Switzers by the Power of
the Emperors; and the Hollanders by that of Spain: Because in all these Wars
the People were both united, and spirited by the common Love of their Country,
their Liberty, or Religion: Or by the more particular esteem and love of their
Princes and Leaders.

In the Conquests of the Lydians by Cyrus, and the Persians by Alexander; of
the great Asian and Egyptian Kings by the Roman State, and of all the Roman
Provinces by the several Northern (or as they were usually called barbarous)
Nations; of the Spaniards by the Moors; and of our Ancient Britains by the
Saxons: It is easy and obvious to observe that the resistances were rendered
faint and weak; either by the soft and effeminate dispositions of the people
grown up under the easiness, or examples of Vicious or Luxurious Princes, whom
they neither honored nor willingly obeyed: Or else by the common hatred and
disdain of their present servitude, which they were content to change for any
other that came in their way: Or lastly, by the distracted factions of a
discontented Nation, who agreed in no one common design or dedefence; nor under
any Authority grounded upon the general love, or esteem of the People.

Of Instability and changes of Governments arrived by narrowing their bottoms,
which are the consent or concurrence of the peoples affections and interests;
all stories and ages afford continual examples. From hence proceeded the
frequent tumults, seditions, and alterations in the Commonwealths of Athens,
and Rome, as often as either by the charms of Orators, or the sway of men grown
to unusual Power and Riches; the Governments were engaged in Counsels or
Actions contrary to the general interests of the People. Hence the several
violent changes that have arrived in the Races, or Persons of the Princes of
England, France, or Spain: Nor has the force hereof appeared any where more
visible than in France, during the Reign of Henry the Third, and a constant
Succession of Minions (as they were then called) where all was conducted by the
private passions, humors, and interests of a few persons in sole confidence
with the King, contrary to those more public and current of the people; till
He came to lose at first all esteem, afterward obedience, and at last his Life
in the troubles given him by the League.

That Government was in the same manner exposed to the Dominion of succeeding
Favorites, during the Regency of the Queen Mother in the Minority of Lewis the
13th, which occasioned perpetual commotions in that State, and changes of the
Ministry, and would certainly have produced those in the Government too; if
Richelieu having gained the absolute ascendant in that Court, had not engaged
in the designs at first of a War upon the Hugonotts, and after that was ended,
upon Spain; In both which he fell in with the current humor and dispositions
of the People: which with the prosperous successes of both those enterprises,
helped to bear up him and the Government, against all the hatred and continual
practices of the great Ones in the Kingdom.

But the two freshest examples may be drawn from the Revolutions of England in
the year Sixty; and of Holland in Seventy two: In the First, The usurped Powers
that had either designed no Root, or at least drawn none but only in the
affections and interests of those that were engaged with the Government;
thought themselves Secure in the Strength of an unfoiled Army of above Sixty
thousand men, and in a Revenue proportionable, raised by the awe of their
Forces, though with the mock-forms of Legal Supplies by pretended Parliaments:
Yet we saw them forced to give way to the bent, and current humor of the
People, in favor of their Ancient and Lawful Government; and this mighty Army
of a sudden lose their Heart and their Strength, abandon what they had so long
called their Cause, and their Interest, and content themselves to be molded
again into the Mass of the People; and by conspiring with the general humor of
the Nation, make way for the Kings glorious restoration without a drop of
blood drawn, in the end of a quarrel the beginning and course whereof had been
so fatal to the Kingdom.

For the other in Holland, the constitution of their Government had continued
Twenty years in the hands of their Popular Magistrates, after the exclusion or
intermission of the Authority of the House of Orange upon the death of the last
Prince, and infancy of this. The chief direction of their affairs had for
Eighteen years lain constantly in the hands of their Pensioner de Wit, a
Minister of the greatest Authority and Sufficiency, the greatest Application
and Industry that was ever known in their State. In the course of his Ministry,
He and his Party had reduced not only all the Civil charges of the Government
in his Province, but in a manner all the Military Commands in the Army out of
the hands of persons affectionate to the House of Orange, into those esteemed
sure and fast to the Interests of their more Popular State. And all this had
been attended for so long a course of years with the perpetual success of their
affairs, by the growth of their Trade, Riches, and Power at home, and the
consideration of their Neighbors abroad: Yet the general humor of kindness in
the people to their old form of Government under the Princes of Orange, grew up
with the Age and Virtues of the young Prince, so as to raise the prospect of
some unavoidable revolutions among them for several years before it arrived.
And we have seen it grow to that height in this present year, upon the Princes
coming to the Two and twentieth of his Age (the time assigned him by their
Constitutions for his entering upon the public charges of their Milice) that
though it had found them in Peace, it must have occasioned some violent
sedition in their State: But meeting with the conjuncture of a Foreign
Invasion, It broke out into so furious a rage of the People, and such general
tumults through the whole Country, as ended in the Blood of their chief
Ministers: In the displacing all that were suspected to be of their party
throughout the Government; In the full restitution of the Princes Authority, to
the highest point any of his Ancestors ever enjoyed: But withal, in such a
distraction of their Councils, and their Actions, as made way for the easy
successes of the French Invasion; for the loss of almost Five of their
Provinces in Two months time, and for the general presages of utter ruin to
their State.

Dublin July 22d, 1673.
AN ESSAY UPON THE ADVANCEMENT OF TRADE in IRELAND.
Written to the Earl of Essex, Lord Lieutenant of that Kingdom.
My LORD,
I Know not what it was that fell into discourse the other day, and gave your
Excellency the occasion of desiring me to digest into some Method and upon
Paper, the means and ways I esteemed most proper for the advancing of Trade in
Ireland: This I know very well, that you did it in a manner, and with
Expressions too obliging to be refused, and out of a design so public and
generous, as ought not to be discouraged. I had therefore much rather obey your
Lordship in this point, how ill soever I do it, than excuse my self, though
never so well, which were much easier than the other. For I might alledg that
neither my Birth nor my Breeding has been at all in this Country: That I have
passed only one short period of my life here, and the greatest part thereof
wholly out of business and public thoughts; That I have since been Ten years
absent from it; and am now here upon no other occasion than of a short Visit to
some of my Friends: Which are all Circumstances that make me a very improper
subject for such a command. But I suppose the vein I have had of running into
speculations of this kind upon a greater scene of Trade, and in a Country
where I was more a stranger; and the too partial favor your Lordship has
expressed to another Discourse of this nature, have cost me this present service;
and you have thought fit to punish me for one folly, by engaging me to commit
another; like the Confessor, that prescribed a Drunkard the penance of being
drunk again. However it is, your Lordship shall be obeyed, and therein I hope
to be enough excused; which is all I pretend to upon this occasion.

Before I enter upon the considerations of Trade which are more general, and
may be more lasting in this Kingdom; I will observe to your Lordship some
particular Circumstances in the Constitution and Government, which have been
hitherto, and may be long the great discouragers of Trade and Riches here; And
some others in the present Conjuncture, which are absolutely mortal to it; that
so you may not expect to find remedies where indeed there is none; nor suffer
men, like busy ignorant Physicians, to apply such as are contrary to the
disease, because they cannot find such as are proper for it.

The true and natural ground of Trade and Riches, is number of People, in
proportion to the compass of Ground they inhabit. This makes all things
necessary to life dear, and that forces men to industry and parsimony. These
Customs which grow first from necessity, come with time to be habitual in a
Country. And wherever they are so, that place must grow great in Traffic
and Riches, if not disturbed by some accidents or revolutions, as of Wars, of
Plagues, or Famines, by which the People come to be either scattered or
destroyed.

People are multiplied in a Country by the temper of the Climate favorable to
Generation, to Health, and longlife. Or else by the Circumstances of safety and
ease under the Government, the credit whereof invites men over to it, when they
cannot be either safe or easy at home. When things are once in motion, Trade
begets Trade, as fire does fire, and People go much where much People are
already gone. So men run still to a crowd where they see it in the streets, or
the fields, though it be only to do as others do, to see or to be entertained.

The want of Trade in Ireland proceeds from the want of People, and this is not
grown from any ill qualities of the Climate or Air, but chiefly from the
frequent Revolutions of so many Wars and Rebellions, so great Slaughters and
Calamities of Mankind as have at several Intervals of time succeeded the first
Conquest of this Kingdom in Henry the Seconds time, until the year 1653; Two
very great Plagues followed the two great Wars, those of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, and the last; which helped to drain the current stream of Generation in
the Country.

The discredit which is grown upon the Constitutions or Settlements of this
Kingdom, by so frequent and unhappy Revolutions that for many ages have
infested it, has been the great discouragement to other Nations to transplant
themselves hither, and prevailed further than all the invitations which the
cheapness and plenty of the Country has made them. So that had it not been for
the numbers of the British, which the necessity of the late Wars at first drew
over, and of such who either as Adventurers or Soldiers seated themselves here
upon account of the satisfaction made to them in Land, the Country had by the
last War and Plague been left in a manner desolate.

Besides, the subordinancy of the Government changing hands so often, makes an
unsteddiness in the pursuit of the public Interests of the Kingdom, gives way
to the emulations of the different Factions, and draws the favor or
countenance of the Government sometimes to one party or interest, sometimes to
another; this makes different motions in men's minds, raising hopes and fears,
and opinions of uncertainty in their possessions; and thereby in the peace of
the Country.

This subordinacy in the Government, and emulation of parties, with the want
sometimes of Authority in the Governor (by the weakness of his credit and
support at Court) occasions the perpetual agencies or journeys into England of
all persons that have any considerable pretenses in Ireland, and money to
pursue them; which end many times in long abodes, and frequent habituating of
Families there, though they have no money to support them but what is drawn out
of Ireland. Besides, the young Gentlemen go of course for their breeding there,
some seek their health, and others their entertainment in a better Climate or
Scene; By these means the Country loses the expense of many of the richest
persons or families at home, and mighty sums of money must needs go over from
hence into England, which the great stock of rich Native Commodities here can
make the only amends for.

These Circumstances so prejudicial to the increase of Trade and Riches in a
Country, seem natural or at least have ever been incident to the Government
here, and without them the Native fertility of the Soil and Seas in so many
rich Commodities improved by multitude of people and industry, with the
advantage of so many excellent Havens, and a Situation so commodious for all
sorts of foreign Trade, must needs have rendered this Kingdom one of the
richest in Europe, and made a mighty increase both of strength and revenue to
the Crown of England; whereas it has hitherto been rather esteemed and found to
be our weak side, and to have cost us more blood and treasure than it is worth.

Since my late arrival in Ireland, I have found a very unusual, but I doubt
very just complaint concerning the scarcity of Money, which occasioned many
airy Propositions for the remedy of it, and among the rest that of raising
some, or all of the Coyns here. This was chiefly grounded upon the experience
made as they say about the Duke of Ormonds coming first over hither in 1663,
when the Plate-pieces of Eight were raised three pence in the piece, and a
mighty plenty of money was observed to grow in Ireland for a year or two after.
But this seems to me a very mistaken account, and to have depended wholly upon
other circumstances little taken notice of, and not at all upon the raising of
the Money to which it is by some great men attributed. For first, there was
about that time a general peace and serenity which had newly succeeded a
general trouble and cloud throughout all His Majesty's Kingdoms; then after two
years attendance in England upon the settlement of Ireland (there on the forge)
by all persons and parties here that were considerably interested in it, the
Parliament being called here, and the main settlement of Ireland wound up in
England, and put into the Duke of Ormonds hands to pass here into an Act; all
persons came over in a shoal either to attend their own concernments in the
main, or more particularly to make their Court to the Lord Lieutenant upon
whom His Majesty had at that time in a manner wholly devolved the care and
disposition of all affairs in this Kingdom: This made a sudden and mighty stop
of that issue of Money which had for two years run perpetually out of Ireland
into England, and kept it all at home. Nor is the very expense of the Duke of
Ormonds own great Patrimonial estate with that of several other Families that
came over at that time, of small consideration in the stock of this Kingdom.
Besides, there was a great sum of Money in ready Coin brought over out of
England at the same time toward the arrears of the Army: Which are all
circumstances that must needs have made a mighty change in the course of ready
money here. All the effect that I conceive was made by crying up the pieces of
Eight, was to bring in much more of that Species instead of others current here
(as indeed all the Money brought from England was of that sort, and complained
of in Parliament to be of a worse allay), and to carry away much English Money
in exchange for Plate-pieces, by which a Trade was driven very beneficial to
the Traders, but of mighty loss to the Kingdom in the intrinsic value of their
Money.

The Circumstances at this time seem to be just the reverse of what they were
then; The Nations engaged in a War the most fatal to trade of any that could
arise; The settlement of Ireland shaken at the Court, and falling into new
disquisitions (whether in truth or in common opinion, is all a case): This
draws continual Agencies and Journeys of People concerned into England, to
watch the motions of the main wheel there. Besides, the Lieutenants of Ireland
since the Duke of Ormond's time, have had little in their disposition here, and
only executed the resolutions daily taken at Court in particular as well as
general affairs, which has drawn thither the attendance of all private
pretenders. The great Estates of this Kingdom have been four or five years
constantly spent in England. Money, instead of coming over hither for pay of
the Army, has since the War began, been transmitted thither for pay of those
Forces that were called from hence. And lastly, This War has had a more
particular and mortal influence upon the Trade of this Country, than upon any
other of His Majesty's Kingdoms.

For by the Act against Transportation of Cattle into England, the Trade of
this Country which run wholly thither before, was turned very much into
foreign parts; but by this War the last is stopped, and the other not being
opened, there is in a manner no vent for any Commodity but of Wool. This
necessity has forced the Kingdom to go on still with their foreign Trade, but
that has been with such mighty losses, by the great number of Dutch Privateers
plying about the Coasts, and the want of English Fregats to secure them, that
the stock of the Kingdom must be extremely diminished. Yet by the continuance
of the same expense and luxury in point of living, Money goes over into England
to fetch what must supply it, though little Commodities goes either there or
abroad to make any considerable balance; By all which it must happen, that
with another years continuance of the War, there will hardly be Money left in
this Kingdom to turn the common Markets, or pay any Rents, or leave any
circulation further than the receipts of the Customs and Quit-rents, and the
Pays of the Army, which in both kinds must be the last that fail.

In such a conjuncture, the crying up of any species of money will but increase
the want of it in general; for while there goes not out commodity to balance
that which is brought in, and no degree of gains by exportation will make
amends for the venture; what should money come in for, unless it be to carry
out other money as it did before, and leave the stock that remains equal indeed
in denomination, but lower in the intrinsique value than it was before? In
short, while this War lasts, and our Seas are ill guarded, all that can be done
toward preserving the small remainder of Money in this Kingdom, is, First, to
introduce as far as can be, a vein of Parsimony throughout the Country in all
things that are not perfectly the native growths and manufactures: Then by
severity and steddiness of the Government (as far as will be permitted) to keep
up in some credit the present peace and settlement. And lastly, To force men to
a degree of industry, by suffering none to hope that they shall be able to live
by rapine or fraud. For in some diseases of a Civil as well as a Natural body,
all that can be done is to fast and to rest, to watch and to prevent accidents,
to trust to methods rather than medicines or remedies: and with patience to
expect till the humors being spent, and the Crisis past, way may be made for
the natural returns of health and of strength.

This being premised as peculiar either to the Government in general, or to the
present conjuncture; I shall proceed to such Observations as occur concerning
the ways of advancing the common and standing Trade of this Kingdom.

The Trade of a Country arises from the native growths of the Soil, or Seas,
the Manufactures, the commodiousness of Ports, and the store of Shipping which
belong to it. The improvement therefore of Trade in Ireland, must be considered
in the survey of all these Particulars, the defects to which at present they
are subject, and the increases they are capable of receiving either from the
course of time, the change of customs, or the conduct and application of the
Government.

The native Commodities or common easy Manufactures which make up the
Exportation of this Kingdom, and consequently furnish both the stock of
foreign Commodities consumed in the Country, and that likewise of current
Money, by which all Trade is turned; are Wool, Butter, Beef, Cattle, Fish,
Iron; and by the improvement of these, either in the quantity, the credit, or
the further Manufacture, the Trade of Ireland seems chiefly to be advanced.

In this Survey one thing must be taken notice of as peculiar to this Country,
which is, That as in the nature of its Government, so in the very improvement
of its Trade and Riches, it ought to be considered not only in its own proper
interest, but likewise in its relation to England, to which it is subordinate,
and upon whose weal in the main, that of this Kingdom depends; and therefore a
regard must be had of those points wherein the Trade of Ireland comes to
interfere with any main branches of the Trade of England, in which cases the
encouragement of such Trade ought to be either declined or moderated, and so
give way to the interest of Trade in England, upon the health and vigor
whereof, the strength, riches and glory of His Majesty's Crowns seem chiefly to
depend. But on the other side, some such branches of Trade ought not wholly to
be suppressed, but rather so far admitted as may serve the general consumption of
this Kingdom, lest by too great an importation of Commodities, though out of
England it self, the Money of this Kingdom happen to be drawn away in such a
degree as not to leave a stock sufficient for turning the Trade at home; the
effect hereof would be general discontents among the People, complaints, or at
least ill impressions of the Government, which in a Country composed of three
several Nations different to a great degree in Language, Customs and Religion,
as well as Interests (both of property and dependances) may prove not only
dangerous to this Kingdom, but to England it self. Since a sore in the leg may
affect the whole body, and in time grow as difficult a cure as if it were in
the head; especially where humors abound.

The Wool of Ireland seems not to be capable of any increase, nor to suffer
under any defect, the Country being generally full stockt with sheep, cleared
of Wolves, the Soil little subject to other rotts than of hunger; and all the
considerable flocks being of English breed, and the staple of Wool generally
equal with that of Northampton or Leicestershire, the improvement of this
Commodity by Manufactures in this Kingdom would give so great a damp to the
Trade of England (of which Cloths, Stuffs and Stockins, make so mighty a part)
that it seems not fit to be encouraged here, at least no further than to such a
quantity of one or two Summer-stuffs, Irish-freeze, and Cloth from Six
shillings to Fourteen, as may supply in some measure the ordinary consumption
of the Kingdom. That which seems most necessary in this branch is the careful
and severe execution of the Statutes provided to forbid the Exportation of Wool
to any other parts but to England, which is the more to be watched and feared,
since thereby the present Riches of this Kingdom would be mightily increased,
and great advantages might be made by the connivance of Governors; whereas on
the other side this would prove a most sensible decay, if not destruction of
Manufactures both here and in England it self.

Yarn is a Commodity very proper to this Country, but made in no great
quantities in any parts besides the North, nor any where into Linen to any
great degree, or of sorts fit for the better uses at home, or exportion abroad;
though of all others this ought most to be encouraged, and was therefore
chiefly designed by the Earl of Strafford. The Soil produces Flax kindly and
well, and fine too, answerable to the care used in choice of seed and exercise
of Husbandry; and much Land is fit for it here, which is not so for Corn. The
Manufacture of it in gathering or beating, is of little toil or application,
and so the fitter for the Natives of the Country. Besides, no Women are apter
to spin it well than the Irish, who laboring little in any kind with their
hands, have their fingers more supple and soft than other Women of the poorer
condition among us. And this may certainly be advanced and improved into a
great Manufacture of Linen, so as to beat down the Trade both of France and
Holland, and draw much of the Money which goes from England to those parts upon
this occasion into the hands of His Majesty's Subjects of Ireland, without
crossing any interest of Trade in England. For besides what has been said of
Flax and Spinning, the Soil and Climate are proper for whitening both by the
frequency of Brooks, and also of Winds in the Country.

Much care was spent upon this design in an Act of Parliament past the last
Session, and something may have been advanced by it; but the too great rigor
imposed upon the sowing of certain quantities of Flax, has caused (and perhaps
justly) a general neglect in the execution; and common guilt has made the
penalties impracticable; so as the main effect has been spoiled by too much
diligence, and the Child killed with kindness. For the Money applied by that
Act to the encouragement of making fine Linen, and broad (which I think is
twenty pounds every year in each County), though the institution was good, yet
it has not reached the end, by encouraging any considerable application that
way; so that sometimes one share of that Money is paid to a single pretender at
the Sizes, or Sessions; and sometimes a share is saved for want of any
pretender at all.

This Trade may be advanced by some amendments to the last Act in another
Session, whereby the necessity of sowing Flax may be so limited, as to be made
easily practicable, and so may be forced by the severity of levying the
penalties Enacted. And for the Money allotted in the Counties, no person ought
to carry the first, second or third price, without producing two pieces of
Linen of each sort (whereas one only now is necessary.) And severe defenses
may be made against weaving any Linen under a certain breadth, such as may be
of better use to the poorest People, and in the coarsest Linen, than the
narrow Irish Cloth; and may bear some price abroad when ever more comes to be
made than is consumed at home. But after all these or such like provisions,
there are but two things which can make any extraordinary advance in this
branch of Trade, and those are: First, An increase of People in the Country to
such a degree as may make things necessary to life dear, and thereby force
general industry from each member of a Family (Women as well as Men), and in as
many sorts as they can well turn to, which among others may in time come to run
the vein this way. The second is a particular application in the Government.
And this must be made either by some Governor upon his own private account,
who has a great stock that he is content to turn that way, and is invited by
the gains, or else by the honor of bringing to pass a Work of so much public
utility both to England and Ireland (which circumstances I suppose concurred
both in the Earl of Strafford's design); and when ever they meet again, can
have no better copy to follow in all particulars, than that begun at the Naas
in his time. Or else by a considerable sum of Money being laid aside either out
of His Majesty's present Revenue, or some future Subsidy to be granted for this
occasion: And this either to be employed in setting up of some great Linen
Manufacture in some certain place, and to be managed by some certain hands both
for making all sorts of fine Clothes, and of those for Sails too. The benefit
or loss of such a Trade accruing to the Government, until it comes to take root
in the Nation. Or else if this seem too great an undertaking for the humor of
our age, then such a sum of money to lie ready in hands appointed by the
Government, for taking off at common moderate prices all such pieces of Cloth
as shall be brought in by any persons at certain times to the chief Town of
each County; and all such pieces of Cloth as are fit for Sails, to be carried
into the stores of the Navy. All that are fit for the use of the Army, to be
given the Soldiers (as Clothes are) in part of their Pay: And all siner pieces
to be sold, and the money still applied to the increase or constant supply of
the main stock. The effect hereof would be, That people finding a certain
Market for this Commodity, and that of others so uncertain as it is in this
Kingdom, would turn so much of their industry this way, as would serve to
furnish a great part of that Money, which is most absolutely necessary for
payment of Taxes, Rents, or subsistence of Families.

Hide, Tallow, Butter, Beef, arise all from one sort of Cattle, and are subject
to the same general defects, and capable of the same common improvements.

The three first are certain Commodities, and yield the readiest Money of any
that are turned in this Kingdom, because they never fail of a price abroad.
Beef is a drug, finding no constant vent abroad, and therefore yielding no rate
at home: for the consumption of the Kingdom holds no proportion with the
product that is usually made of Cattle in it; so that in many parts at this
time an Ox may be bought in the Countrey-Markets, and the Hide and Tallow sold
at the next Trading-Town for near as much as it cost. The defects of these
Commodities lie either in the age and feeding of the Cattle that are killed, or
in the Manufacture and making them up for exportation abroad.

Until the Transportation of Cattle into England was forbidden by the late Act
of Parliament, the quickest Trade of ready Money here was driven by the sale of
young Bullocks, which for four or five Summer-months of the year were carried
over in very great numbers, and this made all the breeders in the Kingdom turn
their lands and stocks chiefly to that sort of Cattle. Few Cows were bred up
for the Dairy, more than served the consumption within; and few Oxen for
draught, which was all performed by rascally small Horses; so as the Cattle
generally sold either for slaughter within, or Exportation abroad, were of two,
three, or at best four years old, and those such as had never been either
handled or wintered at hand-meat, but bred wholly upon the Mountains in Summer,
and upon the withered long grass of the lower lands in the Winter. The effect
hereof was very pernicious to this Kingdom in what concerned all these
Commodities: The Hides were small, thin and lank: The Tallow much less in
quantity, and of quicker consumption. Little Butter was exported abroad, and
that discredited by the huswifery of the Irish, in making it up; most of what
was sent coming from their hands, who alone kept up the Trade of Dairies,
because the breed of their Cattle was not fit for the English-Markets. But
above all, the Trade of Beef for foreign Exportation* was prejudiced and
almost sunk, for the flesh being young, and only grass-fed (and that on a
sudden by the sweetness of the Summers pasture, after the Cattle being almost
starved in the Winter) was thin, light and moist, and not of a substance to
endure the salt, or be preserved by it, for long Voyages, or a slow
consumption. Besides, either the unskilfulness or carelessness, or Knavery of
the Traders, added much to the undervalue and discredit of these Commodities
abroad; for the Hides were often made up very dirty, which increased the weight
by which that Commodity is sold when it comes in quantities abroad. The Butter
would be better on the top and bottom of the Barrels, than in the middle, which
would be sometimes filled up, or mingled with Tallow; nay, sometimes with
stones. The Beef would be so ill chosen, or so ill cured, as to stink many
times before it came so far as Holland, or at least not prove a Commodity that
would defray the first charge of the Merchant before it was shipped. Nay, I have
known Merchants there, fain to throw away great quantities after having lain
long in their hands without any Market at all.

After the Act in England had wholly stopped the Transportation of Cattle, the
Trade of this Kingdom was forced to find out a new Channel, a great deal of
Land was turned to sheep, because Wool gave ready Money for the
English-Markets, and by stealth for those abroad. The breeders of English
Cattle turned much to Dairy, or else by keeping their Cattle to six and seven
year old, and wintering them dry, made them fit for the Beef-trade abroad; and
some of the Merchants fell into care and exactness in Barrelling them up; and
hereby the improvements of this Trade were grown so sensible in the course of a
few years, that in the year 1669, some Merchants in Holland assured me, that
they had received parcels of Beef out of Ireland which sold current, and very
near the English; and of Butter which sold beyond it; and that they had
observed it spent as if it came from the richer soil of the two. It Is most
evident that if the Dutch War had not broken out so soon after the improvements
of all these Trades (forced at first by necessity, and growing afterward
habitual by use) would a few years have very much advanced the Trade and Riches
of this Kingdom, and made it a great gainer instead of losing by the Act
against Transportation of their Cattle: But the War gave a sudden damp to this
and all other Trade, which is sunk to nothing by the continuance of it.

However having marked the defects that were even in time of peace, it may not
be useless to set down the Remedies, though little practicable while the War
lasts. For that great one of killing Cattle young, and only grass-fed, I know
none so effectual as introducing a general custom of using Oxen for all sorts
of draught, which would be perhaps the greatest improvement that could be made
in many kinds throughout the Kingdom. By this means the great slaughter would
be made of fullgrown, large, and well wintered Cattle, which would double the
income made by Hide, Tallow and Beef, and raise their credit in all foreign
Markets; every man would be forced to provide Winter-fodder for his Teem
(whereas common Garrans shift upon grass the year round); and this would force
men to the enclosing of Grounds, and improving Bog into Meadows; the race of
Garrans would decrease, and so make room for the Countries maintaining the
greater number of Cattle, which makes a foreign Commodity, though they die by
accident or age, whereas the other makes none at all.

No great or useful thing is to be achieved without difficulties, and
therefore what may be raised against this Proposal ought not to discourage the
attempting it. First, the Statutes against that barbarous custom of Plowing by
the tail, ought to be renewed, and upon absolute forfeitures instead of
penalties; the constant and easy compositions whereof have proved rather an
allowing than forbidding it. Now if this were wholly disused, the Harness for
Horses being dearer than for Oxen, the Irish would turn their draught to the
last, wherever they have hitherto used the Plowing by the Tail. Next a
Standard might be made, under which no Horse should be used for draught; this
would not only enlarge the breed of Horses, but make way for the use of Oxen,
because they would be cheaper kept than large good Horses, which could not be
wintered like Garrans without housing or fodder. And lastly, a Tax might be
laid upon every Horse of draught throughout the Kingdom, which besides the main
use here intended, would increase the Kings Revenue by one of the easiest ways
that is any where in use.

For the miscarriages mentioned in the making up of those several Commodities
for foreign Markets, they must likewise be remedied by severe Laws, or else
the improvements of the Commodities themselves will not serve to bring them in
credit, upon which all Trade turns. First, the Ports out of which such
Commodities shall be shipped, may be restrained to a certain number, such as lie
most convenient for the vent of the Inland Provinces, and such as either are
already or are capable of being made regular Corporations. Whatever of them
shall be carried out of any other Port, shall be penal both to the Merchant
that delivers, and to the Master that receives them. In the Ports allowed shall
be published rules agreed on by the skilfullest Merchants in those Wares, to be
observed in the making up of all such as are intended for foreign
Transportation, and declaring that what is not found agreeable to those rules
shall not be suffered to go out. Two Officers may be appointed to be chosen
every three years by the body of the Corporation, whose business shall be to
inspect all Barrels of Beef, Tallow, Butter, and all Packs of Hides, and put to
them the seal or mark of the Corporation, without which none shall be suffered
to go abroad; Nor shall this mark be affixed to any parcels by those Officers,
but such as they have viewed and found agreeable to the rules set forth for
that purpose. Whereof one ought to be certain, That every Barrel be of the same
constant weight, or something over. If this were observed for a small course of
time, under any certain marks, the credit of them both as to quality and weight
would rise to that degree, that the Barrels or Packs would go off in the
Markets they used abroad, upon sight of the mark, like silver-plate upon sight
of the Cities mark where it is made.

The great difficulty will lie in the good execution of the Offices; But the
interest of such Corporations lying so deep in the credit of their mark, will
make emulation among them, every one vying to raise their own as high as they
can; and this will make them careful in the choice of men fit for that turn.
Besides, the Offices ought to be made beneficial to a good degree by a certain
fee upon every seal; and yet the Office to be forfeited upon every miscarriage
of the Officer, which shall be judged so by the chief Magistrates of the Town,
and thereupon a new Election be made by the body of the Corporation.

Cattle for Exportation, are Sheep, Bullocks, Horses, and of one or other of
these kinds the Country seems to be full-stockt, no ground that I hear of
being untenanted; the two first seem sufficiently improved in the kinds as well
as the number, most of both being of the English breed. And though it were
better for the Country if the number of Horses being lessened made room for
that of increasing Sheep, and great Cattle; yet it seems indifferent which of
these two were most turned to, and that will be regulated by the liberty or
restraint of carrying live Cattle into England. When the passage is open, Land
will be turned most to great Cattle; when shut, to Sheep, as it is at present,
though I am not of opinion it can last, because that Act seems to have been
carried on rather by the interest of particular Counties in England, than by
that of the whole, which in my opinion must be evidently a loser by it. For
first, the freight, of all Cattle that were brought over, being in English
Vessels, was so much clear gain to England, and this was one with another near
a third, or at least a fourth part of the price. Then there coming over young
and very cheap to the first Market, made them double the price by one years
feeding, which was the greatest improvement to be made of our dry Pasture-land
in England. The Trade of Hides, and Tallow, or else of Leather, was mightily
advanced in England, which will be beaten down in foreign Markets by Ireland,
if they come to kill all their Cattle at home. The young Irish Cattle served
for the common consumption in England, while their own large old fat Cattle
went into the Barrel for the foreign Trade, in which Irish Beef had in a
manner no part, though by the continuance of this restraint it will be forced
upon improvement, and come to share with England in the Beef-Trade abroad.
Grounds were turned much in England from breeding, either to feeding or Dairy,
and this advanced the Trade of English Butter, which will be extremely beaten
down when Ireland turns to it too (and in the way of English Huswifery, as it
has done a great deal since the restraint upon Cattle.) And lastly, whereas
Ireland had before very little Trade but with England, and with the Money for
their Cattle bought all the Commodities there which they wanted: By this
restraint they are forced to seek a foreign Market, and where they sell, they
will be sure to buy too; and all the foreign Merchandise which they had before
from Bristow, Chester, and London, they will have in time from Roan, Amsterdam,
Lisbon and the Streights. As for the true causes of the decay of Rents in
England, which made the occasion of that Act, they were to be found in the want
of People, in the mighty consumption of foreign Commodities among the better
sort, and in a higher way of living among all, and not in this Transportation
of Irish Cattle, which would have been complained of in former times if it had
been found a prejudice to England. Besides, the Rents have been far from
increasing since; and though that may be by other accidents, yet as to what
concerns Ireland, it comes all to one, unless Wool be forbidden as well as
Cattle; for the less Cattle comes over from thence, there comes the more Wool,
which goes as far as the other toward beating down the price of Pasturelands in
England; and yet the Transportaion of Wool cannot be forbidden, since that
would force the Irish Wool either by stealth into foreign Markets, or else in
Cloth by the advance of that Manufacture; either of which would bring a sudden
decay upon the principal branch of the English Trade.

Horses in Ireland are a drug, but might be improved to a Commodity, not only
of greater use at home, but also fit for Exportation into other Countries. The
Soil is of a sweet and plentiful grass, which will raise a large breed; and the
Hills, especially near the Seacoast, are hard and rough, and so fit to give
them shape and breath, and sound feet. The present defects in them, are
breeding without choice of Stallions either in shape or size, and trusting so
far to the gentleness of the Climate, as to winter them abroad, without ever
handling Colts till they are four year old: This both checks the growth of the
common breeds, and gives them an incurable shyness, which is the general vice
of Irish Horses, and is hardly ever seen in Flanders, because the hardness of
the Winters in those parts forces the breeders there to house and handle their
Colts for at least six months every year. In the Studds of persons of quality
in Ireland where care is taken, and cost is not spared, we see Horses bred of
excellent shape and vigor, and size, so as to reach great prices at home, and
encourage strangers to find the Market here; among whom I met with one this
Summer that came over on that errand, and bought about twenty Horses to carry
over into the French Army, from twenty to threescore pounds price at the first
hand.

The improvement of Horses here may be made by a standard prescribed to all
Stallions, and all Horses that shall be used for draught, the main point being
to make the common breed large, for then whether they have shape or no, they
have ever some reasonable price both at home and abroad. And besides, being not
to be raised without wintering, they will help to force men into improvement of
Land by a necessity of fodder. But for encouragement of finer breed, and in the
better hands, some other institutions may be invented by which emulation may be
raised among the Breeders by a prospect both of particular honor and profit to
those who succeed best, and of good ordinary gains and ready vent to such as by
aiming at the best though they fail, yet go beyond the common sorts. To this
purpose there may be set up both a Horse-Fair, and Races to be held at a
certain time every year for the space of a Week; the first in the fairest Green
near the City of Dublin, the later in that place designed by your Lordship in
the Park for some such purpose. During this Week, the Monday, Wednesday and
Friday, may be the Races; the Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, the Fairs may be
held. At each Race may be two Plates given by the King, one of Thirty pounds,
and the other of Twenty (besides the fashion) as the Prizes for the first and
second Horse; the first Engraven with a Horse Crowned with a Crown; the second
with a Coronet, and under it the day of the Month, and the year. Besides these
Plates, the Wagers may be as the persons please among themselves, but the
Horses must be evidenced by good Testimonies to have been bred in Ireland. For
honor, the Lord Lieutenant may ever be present himself, or at least name a
Deputy in his room, and two Judges of the field, who shall decide all
Controversies, and with sound of Trumpet declare the two Victors. The Masters
of these two Horses may be admitted to ride from the Field to the Castle with
the Lord Lieutenant, or his Deputy, and to Dine with him that day, and there
receive all the honor of the Table. This to be done, what quality soever the
persons are of; for the lower that is, the more will be the honor; and perhaps
the more the sport: and the encouragement of breeding will by that means extend
to all sorts of men.

For the Fairs, the Lord Lieutenant may likewise be present every day in the
height of them, by himself or Deputy, and may with the advice of the two chief
Officers of the Army then present, choose out one of the best Horses, and two
of the best Geldings that appear in the Fair, not under four, nor above seven
years old. For which shall be paid to the owners of them, after sufficient
Testimony of their being bred in Ireland, One hundred pounds for the Horse, and
fifty pounds a piece for the Geldings. These Sums, as that for the Plates, to
issue out of the Revenue of Ireland, and without trouble or fee; and the three
Horses to be sent over every year to the Kings Stables. Both those that won the
Plate, and those which are thus sold, ought immediately to be marked so as they
may never return a second time, either to the Race or to the Sale.

The benefit by such an institution as this, will be very great and various:
For besides the encouragement to breed the best Horses, from the honor and
gain already mentioned; there will be a sort of public entertainment for one
whole week, during which the Lord Lieutenant, the Lord Mayor of the City, and
the great Officers both Civil and Military, ought to keep open Tables for all
strangers. This will draw a confluence of people from all parts of the Country.
Many perhaps from the nearer parts of England may come, not only as to a
public kind of solemnity, but as to a great Mart of the best Horses. This will
enrich the City by the expense of such a concourse, and the Country by the sale
of many Horses into England, and in time (or from thence) into foreign parts.
This will make general acquaintances among the Gentry of the Kingdom, and bring
the Lord Lieutenant to be more personally known, and more honored by his
appearing in more greatness, and with more solemnity than usual upon these
occasions. And all this with expense only of Three hundred and fifty pounds a
year to the Crown, for which the King shall have three the best Horses bred
that year in Ireland.

The Fishing of Ireland might prove a Mine under water, as rich as any under
ground, if it were improved to those vast advantages it is capable of, and that
we see it raised to in other Countries. But this is impossible under so great a
want of people, and cheapness of all things necessary to life throughout the
Country, which are in all places invincible enemies of industry and
improvements. While these continue, I know no way of advancing this Trade to
any considerable degree, unless it be the erecting four Companies of Fishery,
one in each Province of Ireland, into which every man that enters, shall bring
a certain Capital, and receive a proportionable share of the gain or loss, and
have a proportional voice in the Election of a President and Council, by whom
the whole business in each Province shall be managed. If into each of these
Companies the King or Lord Lieutenant would enter for a considerable share at
the first, toward building such a number of Boats and Busses as each Company
could easily manage, it would be an encouragement both of honor and advantage.
Certain Privileges likewise, or Immunities, might be granted from charges of
trouble or expense, nay from Taxes, and all unusual payments to the public, in
favor of such as brought in a proportion to a certain height into the Stock
of the Fishery. Nay, it seems a matter of so great importance to His Majesty's
Crowns, both as to the improving the Riches of this Kingdom, and impairing the
mighty gains of His Neighbors by this Trade, that perhaps there were no hurt
if an Act were made, by which none should be capable of being either chosen
into a Parliament, or the Commission of the Peace, who had not manifested his
desires of advancing the public good by entering in some certain proportion
into the stock and Companies of the Fishery, since the greatness of one, and
application of the other, seem the only present means of improving so rich and
so important a Trade. It will afterward be the business of the Companies
themselves, or their directors, to fall into the best methods and rules for the
curing and barrelling up all their Fish, and to see them so exactly observed,
as may bring all those quantities of them that shall be sent abroad, or spent
at home, into the highest and most general credit; which with advancing the
Seasons all that can be, so as to find the first foreign Markets, will be a
way to the greatest and surest gains. In Holland there have been above thirty
Placaerts or Acts of State concerning the ouring, salting, and barrelling of
Herrings alone, with such severity in the Imposition and execution of
Penalties, that the business is now grown to an habitual skill, and care, and
honesty, so as hardly any example is seen of failing in that matter, or thereby
impairing the general credit of that Commodity among them, or in the foreign
Markets they use.

Iron seems to me the Manufacture that of all others ought the least to be
encouraged in Ireland; or if it be, which requires the most restriction to
certain places and Rules. For I do not remember to have heard that there is any
Oar in Ireland, at least I am sure the greatest part is fetched from England;
so that all this Country affords of its own growth toward this Manufacture, is
but the Wood, which has met but with too great consumptions already in most
parts of this Kingdom, and needs not this to destroy what is left. So that
Iron-works ought to be confined to certain places, where either the Woods
continue vast, and make the Country savage, or where they are not at all fit
for Timber, or likely to grow to it, or where there is no conveyance for Timber
to places of vent, so as to quit the cost of the carriage.

Having run through the Commodities of Ireland, with their defects and
improvements, I will only touch the other two Points mentioned at first, as the
grounds likewise of Trade in a Country; those are the Commodiousness of Ports,
and the store of Shipping; in one of which this Kingdom as much abounds, as it
fails in the other. The Haven of Dublin is barred to that degree, as very much
to obstruct the Trade of the City; the clearing or opening of it were a great
work, and proper either for the City, or the whole Province of Lemster to
undertake. But whether it be feasible, or at such charges as will quit cost, I
will not judge, especially considering the many good Havens that are scattered
upon that whole Eastern Coast of Ireland. Besides this, I know not what to
propose upon this head, unless it be the making of two free Ports, one in
Kerry, and the other upon the Northwest Coast, which may thereby grow to be
Magazines for the West-Indy Trade, and from thence those Commodities may be
dispersed unto all other parts of Europe, after having paid the Customs which
they ought to pay in England, where this must be concerted.

For the last Point, I doubt there is hardly any other Country lying upon the
Seacoast, and not wholly out of the way of Trade, which has so little Shipping
of its own as Ireland, and which might be capable of employing more. The reason
of this must be in part the scarcity of Timber proper for this built; but more,
the want of Merchants, and uncertainty of Trade in the Country. For preventing
the further destruction of Timber, a Law may be made, forbidding any man to cut
down any Oak that is of a certain height, unless it be of a certain scantling,
as twelve inches diameter, or some such measure as usually makes a Tree useful
Timber. And further, the severest Penalties ought to be put upon Barking any
Tree that is not felled; a custom barbarous and peculiar to this Country, and
by which infinite quantities of Timber have been destroyed.

Most Traders in these parts, at least of Ireland, are but Factors; nor do I
hear of any number of Merchants in the Kingdom. The cause of this must be
rather an ill opinion of security, than of gain; for those are the two baits
which draw Merchants to a place: the last intices the poorer Traders, or the
young beginners, or those of passage; but without the first, the substantial
and the rich will never settle in a Country. This opinion can be attained only
by a course of time, of good conduct, and good government, and thereby of
justice, and of peace, which lie out of the compass of this Discourse. But to
make some amends for this want at present, encouragement may be given to any
Merchants that shall come over and turn a certain stock of their own here, as
Naturalization upon any terms; freedom from Customs the two first years, and
from any Offices of trouble or expense the first seven years. I see no hurt if
the King should give leave to the Merchants in eight or ten of the chief
Trading-Ports of Ireland, to name for each Town one of their number, out of
which the Lord Lieutenant should choose two to be of the Privy Council of
Ireland, with a certain Salary from the King to defray their attendance: This
would be an honor and encouragement to so worthy a Calling, and would
introduce an interest of Trade into the Council, which being now composed
wholly of the Nobility or Gentry, the Civil or Military Officers; the Traders
seem to be left without Patrons in the Government, and thereby without favor
to the particular concernments of a chief member in the Politic body; and upon
whose prospering the wealth of the whole Kingdom seems chiefly to depend.

But this is enough for your Excellencies trouble, and for the discharge of my
promise, and too much I doubt for the humor of our age to bring into practice,
or so much as to admit into consideration. Your Lordship I know has generous
thoughts, and turned to such Speculations as these. But that is not enough
toward the raising such buildings as I have drawn you here the lines of,
unless the direction of all affairs here were wholly in your hands, or at least
the opinion lost of other men's being able to contest with you those points of
public utility, which you ought best to know and most to be believed in, while
you deserve or discharge so great a trust as the government of this Kingdom.
For I think a Prince cannot too much consider whom to choose for such
employments; but when he has chosen, cannot trust them too far, or thereby give
them too much Authority; no more than end it too soon, whenever he finds it
abused. In short, it is left only to Princes to mend the world, whose Commands
find general obedience; and Examples, imitation. For all other men, they must
take it as they find it; and good men enter into commerce with it, rather upon
cautions of not being spoiled themselves, than upon hopes of mending the World.
At least, this opinion becomes men of my level, amongst whom I have observed
all set-quarrels with the Age, and pretenses of reforming it by their own
models, to end commonly like the pains of a man in a little Boat, who tugs at a
Rope that is fast to a Ship, it looks as if he resolved to draw the ship to him,
but the truth and his meaning is, to draw himself to the Ship, where he gets in
when he can, and does like the rest of the Crew when he is there. When I have
such designs, I will begin such contentions; in the mean time the bent of my
thoughts shall be rather to mend my self, than the World, which I reckon upon
leaving much what I found it. Nor should I have reason in complaining too far
of an Age, which does your Lordship so much justice by the honor of so great
an Employment, In which as I know no man deserves greater successes than you
do, so I am sure no man wishes you greater than I do.

Written to the Duke of ORMOND in October 1673. upon his Graces desiring me to
give Him my Opinion what was to be done in that Conjuncture.
THERE never was any Conjuncture wherein it was more necessary for His Majesty
to fall into a Course of Wise and steady Councels, nor ever any wherein it was
more difficult to advise him. To make reflections upon what is past, is the
part of ingenious, but irresolute men, or else of such as intend to value
themselves by comparison with others whose corruptions or follies they condemn.
But in all matters of Counsel, the good and prudent part is to take things as
they are (since the past cannot be recalled) to propose Remedies for the
present Evils, and provisions against future events.

The King finds himself engaged in the second year of a War with the Dutch, and
for prosecution thereof in a strict Alliance with France; and now in danger of
being entangled in the quarrel broken out upon this occasion between France and
the House of Austria: In this state of affairs, it is to be considered whether
we can pursue our War with Holland and yet preserve our peace with Spain;
whether we are able to maintain the War with both in conjunction with France;
and if not, what there is left for His Majesty to do with the best regard to
His Honor and Safety.

For the first we shall soon be out of doubt; but in the mean time it is very
unlikely that upon the late conjunction between Holland and Spain, the Dutch
should have obliged themselves to make no Peace without the inclusion of their
Allies; and that Spain should not have yielded to break with Us, in case they
could not effect a Peace between Us and Holland; since the Dutch know nothing
could farther induce us to it, than the fear of a breach with Spain, and so
great a loss of Trade in those Dominions. The Spaniards have but one temptation
of their own to quarrel with Us, which is an occasion of recovering Jamaica,
for that has ever lien at their hearts, and it is to be feared their Conjunction
with Holland has not been perfected without early measures between them for the
surprise of that Island, unless our care has been as early in providing for its
defense. And if we should lose it, I foresee little hurt we could do Spain in
their Indies, guarded as they would be, and attended by the Shipping of the
Dutch; but His Majesty will, I suppose, soon know from Spain what He is to
trust to in this point.

To judge whether upon a breach with Spain we are able to maintain the War,
must be considered; the present state of the Kings Treasure, the rise or fall
that may happen in his constant Revenue by the Spanish War; the hopes that may
be grounded upon supplies from France, the assurance or measure of those
expected from the Parliament, the credit of the Exchequer to raise present
money wherever any of these fall short, and the humor of the Nation toward
carrying on or ending the War.

For the present state of the Treasury, the King best knows it Himself, or His
Officers can best give the account; for the changes that may happen in His
Revenue, it is evident they must be much for the worse the very first year of a
Spanish War. The main branch of it, which is the Customs, must wither away in a
very great measure, since all the Trade in a manner left us upon the Dutch War
(that has turned to any account) has been that with Spain and into the Straits:
The first upon a Spanish War will be wholly lost, the last can neither be
secured by our own Convoys, nor by the French Fleets in the Mediterranean, from
the Dutch Capers that will fill the Spanish Havens, and from those of Biscay,
Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica, Majorca, which in all Wars have been the Nests of
Picaroons; so that no way seems left of beginning this War, but as the Dutch
began theirs, by leaving off all Trade in the Nation while it lasts: But the
case is very different between them and us, for they have still a Trade left
from the North, which running upon a sandy Coast from Hamborough, is secured
from our Fleets: and they have driven a great Commerce by Collusion with the
Swedes, Danes, Hamburgers, Bremeners and Flemish, ever since the War began.
Besides, the hearts of their People (which would otherwise have sunk by the
loss of Trade) have been kept up by the necessity of their defense, by the last
extremities which were threatened them from the War, and by the general opinion
of justice in their Cause both from these circumstances, and the manner of Ours
and of the French beginning the War.

This makes the States content to impose and the people to fuffer the utmost
payments; and besides, in a manner all men of Fortunes among them have a great
part of their estates lying in the Cantores of the States or the Provinces,
which would all be lost upon the conquest of their Country, so as they will
lend to the last for securing so much as is already in danger. And these are
circumstances which will not be found in our Dispositions or Constitutions.

For supplies from France, it must be considered how their money has been
drained out of that Kingdom since this War began, by their payments to Us, and
to Sweden, to the Bishops of Colen and Munster and some other Princes of
Germany; by their Armies in Germany and the new Conquests in Holland; all which
returns no more into France, as money did in their former Wars with Spain, that
were made chiefly upon their Confines; for then the Pays of their Armies being
made only in the Winter Quarters which were in France or its Frontiers, the
money fell back again into the circulation of their own Country; yet now their
expense must upon a Spanish War be increased by new Armies in Catalonia, and
Italy, and new Fleets in the Mediterranean; so that all these circumstances
with the general decay of Trade by the War, must in few years time leave that
Kingdom poorer than it has been this age. And where money is not, the King of
France himself cannot have it.

For what supplies may come from the Parliament toward carrying on the War,
some few days I suppose will inform us, and no measures can be taken unless by
what past in the former Session, which was not very favorable to that design.

For the Credit of the Exchequer (at least to any measure that may supply the
Course or Necessities of a War) I fear it is irrecoverably lost by the last
breach with the Bankers; for credit is gained by custom and course of time, and
seldom recovers a strain; but if broken, is never well set again. I have heard
a great Example given of this (by some of our Merchants) that happened upon the
last Kings seizing 200000 l. that was in the Mint about the year 38, which had
then the credit of a Bank, and for several years had been the Treasury of all
the vast payments transmitted from Spain to Flanders. But after this invasion
of it, though the King paid back the money within very few months, yet the Mint
has never since recovered its Credit among foreign Merchants.

If the business of money should happen to go lame upon any or all of these
feet, then all that will be left to carry on the War is the humor of the
Nation: And that sometimes may go farther than any Treasures, if spirited by
Hatred or Revenge, by the love of Religion or Liberty, or the necessity of
Defense: But the good will of the Nation to the present War (as it was foreseen
by those who gave the Desperate Counsels of beginning it with the Proroguing of
the Parliament, and stopping of the Exchequer; so it) has been since but too
much experienced by the successes have attended it, which will ever depend upon
the humors and opinions of those that serve, as well as the Abilities and
Conduct of those that Command; and not to speak of those incurable jealousies
which have been so generally raised or infused into the People about the first
designs of this War, and so much increased by the Professions or Actions, or at
least the general Reputation of those who pass for the chief Authors of it:
It Is at least observable, that after so long hostility and Four Battles, yet
the Nation does not seem at all to be angry, though that is the first thing
should be brought about, if we would have men fight.

It is, I doubt, little to be hoped, that a breach with Spain should make us
any kinder to the War than we were before; since that must grow wholly upon
occasion of the French, We having no quarrel there of our own. And our kindness
to France will spirit us as little as our hatred to Spain, at least till their
fortunes change, and the Balance rise again on the Spanish side, which has
risen so long and to such a height on the French; for by the course of Humane
Nature there will ever be a degree of hatred mingled with fear, and of kindness
with compassion.

Upon the survey of these provisions and dispositions, it must be concluded
necessary for His Majesty either to make a peace, or else to turn the War
directly upon such points of Honor, Justice and Safety, as may engage both the
Parliament and Nation in the support and prosecution of the War. And to do
this, He must at least offer at a Peace, and upon terms into which the humor
and spirit of the Nation will run.

The Conjunction now perfected between Holland and Spain seems the happiest
thing that could have arrived to His Majesty's affairs upon this Occasion; for
whilst Holland stood alone, in case we had been forced to offer at any measures
with them, France might upon the first jealousy have been before Us, and
slipping one knot might have tied another in three days time; But now the
Interests of the Empire, Spain and Lorrain, are woven together with those of
Holland, it will not be a short or easy work to adjust those of France with
the Emperor in the matters of Alsatia, with Spain in Flanders, or the Duke of
Lorrain in that Duchy; nor is the Conjunction between Holland and their Allies
likely to be broken unless by the revolutions of War the Dutch come to
apprehend a nearer and greater danger from Spain, in which case they will not
fail of returning to their old measures with France.

The first pace which seems necessary for his Majesty to make, is to fall into
Confidence with Spain as far as possibly he can, by assuring them he resolves
upon a neutrality in the War between them and France; that if he comes to a
peace with Holland, he intends it shall pass by their Mediation; and if that be
effected, he will employ his own toward the general Peace of Christendom, and
particularly that between France and Spain.

The next point is to resolve upon the Conditions necessary to a Peace. The
best way to this is to seek without passion where the justice lies, and the
true interests of his Majesty's Crowns, as it is generally understood by his
People, of which the sense of his Parliament is the best Testimony; for their
concurrence will give weight to his demands of Peace, or to the support of a
War.

Between Us and Holland the points of Justice must be grounded upon the
infraction of Treaties, and so will reach only to the business of the Flag and
of Surinam. For the Flag, it has been agreed by three several Treaties in the
same form; but the Articles still referring to former use, it remains to
discuss and agree particularly what that has been, and to explain the manner
and circumstances of observing it. Without this, no peace we can have will seem
to be made with intentions to keep it long, while the interpretation of that
Article about the Flag is a ground at pleasure for opening a War. And this
point can only be gained by a separate Peace between Us and Holland; for if the
War should come to end in a general Treaty, like that of Munster; As His
Majesty's interest would be less considered in a crowd of so many others, and
would hardly be suffered to obstruct a general Peace; so this Right of the Flag
in particular, would be at least disfavoured, if not opposed by our Friends as
well as our Enemies, that is, by France, Sweden, Denmark, as well as Spain and
Holland.

The business of Surinam is a trifle, and the disputes upon it arose rather
from an unkind and jealous humor growing between the Nations, than from any
difference or difficulty in adjusting it; so as that is not a thing will lie
much in the way, being soon decided by plain Articles upon the surrenrender of
the Place.

There are two points more wherein the honor and interest of the Nation is
concerned and ought to be insisted upon, so far at least as to find a temper in
them, though they can hardly be said to be points of Justice, because they are
not regulated by Treaties. The first is the point of the East India trade,
wherein we desire new agreements between us, upon suspicion of what may happen,
rather than complain of any Breach in the old; and though our East India
Company never urged their desires as a just ground for a Quarrel, yet a great
deal might have been gained in this point from the Dutch, while they depended
upon our Alliance; and I suppose may be still, if we fall into it again.

The second is an acknowledgment to His Majesty for the leave of fishing upon
His Coasts; and though this may not be grounded upon any Treaty, yet if it
appear to have been an ancient Right on our side, and custom on theirs, and not
determined or extinguished by any Treaty between us; it may with Justice be
insisted on, though it will pass harder with the Dutch than any of the rest,
who will much easier be induced to buy off the pretense with a great sum of
money at one or more payments, than acknowledge it by a constant tribute.

The last thing His Majesty can demand from Holland is money for the charges of
the War. But unless the Justice or Necessity of it were agreed on between us,
that will have but a weak ground. And if we expect money, it must be to
purchase what is to come, and not to pay for what is past; and it is very
probable that if His Majesty should resolve with a peace of Holland to enter
into a Mediation between France and Spain upon the evident points of justice
between them, and to join against that Crown which refuses the Peace, both
Spain and Holland would be content to part with their money upon such an
agreement. But the measure and manner must be left to private Treaty, and would
depend upon the confidence between us.

Whatever in any of these points or any other His Majesty should be content to
release, ought to be done upon the satisfaction He should declare to have
received in the advancement of the Prince of Orange to the charges of his
Ancestors. But for His Majesty to insist upon any further advantages to the
Prince than are already devolved upon him, would not only raise invincible
difficulties in our Treaty with the States, but prejudice the Princes affairs
among them in a very great measure. And the Prince I believe knows their
Constitution so well, as to understand it so.

If upon good terms in these particulars a Peace can be effected with Holland,
the honor of this Crown will certainly be provided for, and the interest of it
to a higher degree than could have been gained even without the events of the
War; since we should be left in Peace to enjoy the Trade of the world, while
the House of Austria and Holland would be engaged in a long War with France;
and whenever they grow weary, His Majesty would have the glory and advantage of
mediating the Peace.

For the measures to be observed in all this with France, and the preserving
His Majesty's Honor on that side; First, the humor of the Parliament as to
this War, and the interest of the Nation in the Trade with Spain, ought to be
represented to them as difficulties invincible, unless France can furnish the
charge which the War will cost beyond what can be spared out of His Majesty's
constant Revenue. Then His Majesty may propose to them His design of Neutrality
between them and Spain, which I suppose was not a point that entered into any
Agreements against Holland; and lastly, He may desire their consent, since he
cannot prosecute the War, to make his peace with Holland, upon the assurance of
employing afterward his Mediation between them and Spain, in which the
concurrence of His Parliament will make Him able to effect a Peace, as the want
of it has made Him unable to pursue the War. If France will not consent either
to furnish us with money sufficient to carry on the War, nor to our Neutrality
with Spain, nor peace with Holland: it would then be considered whether France
in the like case would suffer such a Conjuncture as this to escape them upon
any Ties or Treaties between us: or whether indeed any Prince or State would do
so. A conjuncture whereby the honor and interest of His Majesty's Crowns may
be provided for, the Trade of the Nation raised to a height it has not reached
before; the passionate bent and humor of the people pleased, and their
jealousies in a great measure allayed, the true balance of Christendom
maintained; all the Princes and States of it (besides France alone) satisfied;
and in short, by which His Majesty may grow again insensibly into the hearts of
his people at home, and into the influence upon all affairs of his Neighbors
abroad.

It is a rude thing which is commonly said, that we may come off from France
with as much honor as we came on. But it is a true thing, that he has always
the honor of the War that has the advantage of it, and it is I doubt, so of a
Peace too; and that cannot fail us here, provided we make sure of Spain (in
case we apprehend our losing of France), to which their dispositions and
interests must certainly concur with ours in all points, unless that of Jamaica
make an exception.

All the difficulty His Majesty can meet with in this pursuit, will be some
want of reputation and trust with the Government of Spain and Holland, which
have been foiled of late by the breach of our former Alliances, so much (as
they think) against our own interests as well as theirs; for all Treaties are
grounded upon the common belief, That every State will be ever found in their
own Interests, among which their Honor and observance of Faith grows to be one
very considerable (Because while the minds of men are generally possessed with a
belief of God Almighty's concerning Himself in affairs here below, the opinion
of Justice or Injustice in a Quarrel will never fail of having mighty effect
upon the successes of a War): therefore our reputation cannot any way be so far
recovered with our Neighbors, as by their finding that His Majesty's Councels
return into the true interests of His Kingdoms, which will make the Spaniards
believe our Measures may be firm with them upon the same reason which has
shaken them with France. Thus much is certain, that whatever means will restore
or raise the credit of His Majesty's Government at home, will do it abroad too;
for a King of England at the head of his Parliament and People, and in their
hearts and interests, can never fail of making what figure he pleases in the
world, nor of being safe and easy at home; and may despise all the designs of
factious men, who can only make themselves considered by seeming to be in the
interest of the Nation, when the Court seems to be out of it. But in running on
Councels contrary to the general humor and spirit of the People, the King
indeed may make His Ministers great Subjects, but they can never make Him a
Great Prince.

Shene Jan. 29. 1674.
TO THE COUNTESS OF ESSEX UPON Her Grief occasioned by the loss of Her only
Daughter.
THE Honor I received by a Letter from your Ladyship, was too great and too
sensible not to be acknowledged; but yet I doubted whether that occasion could
bear me out in the confidence of giving your Ladyship any further troubles of
this kind, without as good an errand as my last. This I have reckoned upon a
good while by another visit my Sister and I had designed to my Lord Capell. How
we came to have deferred it so long, I think we are neither of us like to tell
you at this distance, though we make our selves believe it could not be helped.
Your Ladyship at least has had the advantage of being thereby excused sometime
from this trouble, which I could no longer forbear upon the sensible wounds
that have so often of late been given your friends here by such desperate
expressions in several of your Letters concerning your Humor, your Health, and
your Life; in all which if they are your Friends, you must allow them to be
extremely concerned. Perhaps none can be at heart more partial than I am to
whatever touches your Ladyship, nor more inclined to defend you upon this very
occasion, how unjust and unkind soever you are to your self. But when you go
about to throw away your Health, or your Life, so great a remainder of your own
Family, and so great hopes of that into which you are entered, and all by a
desperate melancholy, upon an accident past remedy, and to which all mortal
race is perpetually subject; For God's sake, Madam, give me leave to tell you,
that what you do is not at all agreeable either with so good a Christian, or so
reasonable, and so great a person as your Ladyship appears to the World in all
other lights.

I know no duty in Religion more generally agreed on, nor more justly required
by God Almighty than a perfect submission to His Will in all things; nor do I
think any disposition of mind can either please Him more, or become us better,
than that of being satisfied with all He gives, and contented with all He takes
away. None I am sure can be of more Honor to God, nor of more ease to our
selves; for if we consider him as our Maker, we cannot contend with him; if as
our Father, we ought not to distrust him; So that we may be confident, whatever
He does is intended for our good, and whatever happens that we interpret
otherwise, yet we can get nothing by repining, nor save any thing by resisting.

But if it were fit for us to reason with God Almighty, and your Ladyships loss
be acknowledged as great as it could have been to any one alive; Yet, I doubt,
you would have but ill grace to complain at the rate you have done, or rather
as you do; for the first motions of passions how violent soever, may be
pardoned; and it is only the course of them which makes them inexcusable. In
this world, Madam, there is nothing perfectly good, and whatever is called so,
is but either comparatively with other things of its kind, or else with the
evil that is mingled in its composition; so he is a good man that is better
than men commonly are, or in whom the good qualities are more than the bad; so
in the course of life, his condition is esteemed good, which is better than
that of most other men, or wherein the good circumstances are more than the
ill; By this measure, I doubt Madam, your complaints ought to be turned into
acknowledgments, and your Friends would have cause to rejoice rather than
condole with you; For the goods or blessings of life are usually esteemed to
be, Birth, Health, Beauty, Friends, Children, Honor, Riches. Now when your
Ladyship has fairly considered how God Almighty has dealt with you in what He
has given you of all these, you may be left to judge your self how you have
dealt with Him in your complaints for what he has taken away. But if you look
about you, and consider other lives as well as your own, and what your lot is
in comparison with those that have been drawn in the circle of your knowledge;
If you think how few are born with Honor, how many dye without Name or
Children, how little Beauty we see, how few Friends we hear of, how many
Diseases, and how much Poverty there is in the world, you will fall down upon
your knees, and instead of repining at one affliction, will admire so many
blessings as you have received at the hand of God.

To put your Ladyship in mind of what you are, and the advantages you have in
all these points, would look like a design to flatter you: But this I may say,
that we will pity you as much as you please, if you will tell us who they are
that you think upon all circumstances you have reason to envy. Now if I had a
Master that gave me all I could ask, but thought fit to take one thing from me
again, either because I used it ill, or gave my self so much over to it, as to
neglect what I owed either to him or the rest of the world; Or perhaps because
he would show his power, and put me in mind from whom I held all the rest;
would you think I had much reason to complain of hard usage, and never to
remember any more what was left me, never to forget what was taken away.

It Is true, you have lost a Child, and therein all that could be lost in a
Child of that age; but you have kept one Child, and are likely to do so long;
you have the assurance of another, and the hopes of many more. You have kept a
Husband great in employment, and in fortune, and (which is more) in the esteem
of good men. You have kept your Beauty, and your Health, unless you have
destroyed them your self, or discouraged them to stay with you by using them
ill. You have Friends that are as kind to you as you can wish, or as you will
give them leave to be by your fears of losing you, and being thereby so much
the unhappier, the kinder they are to you; But you have Honor and Esteem from
all that know you; or if ever it fails in any degree, it is only upon that point
of your seeming to be fallen out with God and the whole World, and neither to
care for your self, or any thing else after what you have lost.

You will say perhaps that one thing was all to you, and your fondness of it
made you indifferent to every thing else; But this, I doubt, will be so far
from justifying you, that it will prove to be your fault as well as your
misfortune. God Almighty gave you all the blessings of life, and you set your
heart wholly upon one, and despise or undervalue all the rest: Is this His
fault or yours? Nay, is it not to be very unthankful to Heaven, as well as very
scornful to the rest of the world? Is it not to say, because you have lost one
thing God had given you, you thank Him for nothing he has left, and care not
what he takes away? Is it not to say, since that one thing is gone out of the
world, there is nothing left in it which you think can deserve your kindness or
esteem? A friend makes me a feast, and sets all before me that his care or
kindness could provide; but I set my heart upon one dish alone, and if that
happen to be thrown down, I scorn all the rest; and though he sends for another
of the same, yet I rise from the Table in a rage, and say my friend is my
enemy, and has done me the greatest wrong in the world; Have I reason, Madam,
or good grace in what I do? Or would it become me better to eat of the rest
that is before me, and think no more of what had happened and could not be
remedied?

All the Precepts of Christianity agree to teach and command us to moderate our
passions, to temper our affections toward all things below; to be thankful for
the possession, and patient under the loss whenever He that gave it shall see
fit to take away. Your extreme fondness was perhaps as displeasing to God
before, as now your extreme affliction, and your loss may have been a
punishment for your faults in the manner of enjoying what you had; It Is at
least pious to ascribe all the ill that befalls us to our own demerits rather
than to injustice in God; and becomes us better to adore all the issues of His
Providence in the effects, than inquire into the causes; For submission is the
only way of reasoning between a creature and its Maker; and contentment in His
Will is the greatest duty we can pretend to, and the best remedy we can apply
to all our misfortunes.

But, Madam, though Religion were no party in your case, and that for so
violent and injurious a grief you had nothing to answer to God, but only to the
world and your self; yet I very much doubt how you would be acquitted. We bring
into the world with us a poor needy uncertain life, short at the longest, and
unquiet at the best; All the imaginations of the witty and the wise have been
perpetually busied to find out the ways how to revive it with pleasures, or
relieve it with diversions; how to compose it with ease, and settle it with
safety; To some of these ends have been employed the institutions of Lawgivers,
the reasonings of Philosophers, the inventions of Poets, the pains of
laboring, and the extravagances of voluptuous men. All the world is
perpetually at work about nothing else, but only that our poor mortal lives
should pass the easier and happier for that little time we possess them, or
else end the better when we lose them; Upon this occasion Riches came to be
coveted, Honors to be esteemed, Friendship and Love to be pursued, and Virtues
themselves to be admired in the world. Now, Madam, is it not to bid defiance to
all mankind, to condemn their universal opinions and designs, if instead of
passing your life as well and easily, you resolve to pass it as ill and as
miserably as you can? You grow insensible to the conveniences of Riches, the
delights of Honor and Praise, the charms of kindness, or Friendship, nay to
the observance or applause of Virtues themselves; For who can you expect in
these excesses of passion, will allow you to show either temperance or
fortitude, to be either prudent or just? And for your Friends, I suppose, you
reckon upon losing their kindness, when you have sufficiently convinced them,
they can never hope for any of yours, since you have none left for your self,
or any thing else. You declare upon all occasions, you are incapable of
receiving any comfort or pleasure in any thing that is left in this world; and,
I assure you Madam, none can ever love you, that can have no hopes ever to
please you.

Among the several inquiries and endeavors after the happiness of life, the
sensual men agree in pursuit of every pleasure they can start, without
regarding the pains of the chase, the weariness when it ends, or how little the
quarry is worth: The busy and ambitious fall into the more lasting pursuits of
Power and Riches; The speculative men prefer tranquillity of mind, before the
different motions of passion and appetite, or the common successions of desire
and satiety, of pleasure and pain; but this may seem too dull a principle for
the happiness of life, which is ever in motion; and though passions are perhaps
the stings, without which they say no honey is made; yet I think all sorts of
men have ever agreed, they ought to be our Servants, and not our Masters; to
give us some agitation for entertainment, or exercise, but never to throw our
reason out of its seat. Perhaps I would not always sit still, or would be
sometimes on horseback; but I would never ride a Horse that galls my flesh, or
shakes my bones, or that runs away with me as he pleases, so as I can neither
stop at a River or Precipice. Better no passions at all, than have them too
violent; or such alone, as instead of heightening our pleasures, afford us
nothing but vexation and pain.

In all such losses as your Ladyships has been, there is something that common
nature cannot be denied, there is a great deal that good nature may be allowed;
but all excessive and outrageous grief or lamentation for the dead, was
accounted among the ancient Christians, to have something of heathenish; and
among the Civil Nations of old, to have something of barbarous; and therefore
it has been the care of the first to moderate it by their Precepts, and the
latter to restrain it by their Laws: The longest time that has been allowed to
the forms of Mourning by the custom of any Country, and in any Relation, has
been but that of a year; in which space the body is commonly supposed to be
mouldered away to earth, and to retain no more figure of what it was; but this
has been given only to the loss of Parents, of Husband, or Wife. On the other
side, to Children under age, nothing has been allowed; and I suppose with
particular reason (the common Ground of all general customs), perhaps because
they dye in innocence, and without having tasted the miseries of life, so as we
are sure they are well when they leave us, and escape much ill would in all
appearance have befallen them if they had stayed longer with us. Besides, a
Parent may have twenty Children, and so his mourning may run through all the
best of his life, if his losses are frequent of that kind; and our kindness to
Children so young, is taken to proceed from common opinions, or fond
imaginations, not Friendship or Esteem; and to be grounded upon entertainment
rather than use in the many offices of life; nor would it pass from any person
besides your Ladyship, to say you lost a companion and a friend at Nine year
old, though you lost one indeed who gave the fairest hopes that could be of
being both in time, and every thing else that was esteembable and good; But
yet, that it self God only knows, considering the changes of humor and
disposition, which are as great as those of feature and shape the first sixteen
years of our lives; considering the chances of time, the infection of company,
the snares of the world, and the passions of youth; so that the most excellent
and agreeable creature of that tender age, and that seemed born under the
happiest Stars, might by the course of years and accidents, come to be the most
miserable her self, and more trouble to her Friends by living long, than she
could have been by dying young.

Yet after all, Madam, I think your loss so great, and some measure of your
grief so deserved, that would all your passionate complaints, all the anguish
of your heart do any thing to retrieve it; Could tears water the lovely plant,
so as to make it grow again after once it is cut down. Would sighs furnish new
breath, or could it draw life and spirits from the wasting of yours; I am sure
your Friends would be so far from accusing your passion, that they would
encourage it as much, and share it as deep as they could. But alas, the eternal
Laws of the Creation extinguish all such hopes, forbid all such designs; Nature
gives us many Children and Friends to take them away, but takes none away to
give them us again. And this makes the excesses of grief to have been so
universally condemned as a thing unnatural, because so much in vain; whereas
nature they say does nothing in vain: As a thing so unreasonable, because so
contrary to our own designs; for we all design to be well, and at ease, and by
grief we make our selves ill of imaginary wounds, and raise our selves troubles
most properly out of the dust, while our ravings and complaints are but like
arrows shot up into the air, at no mark, and so to no purpose; but only to fall
back upon our heads, and destroy our selves instead of recovering, or revenging
our Friends.

Perhaps, Madam, you will say this is your design, or if not your desire; but I
hope you are not yet so far gone, or so desperately bent; Your Ladyship knows
very well your life is not your own, but His that lent it you to manage, and
preserve the best you could, and not throw it away, as if it came from some
common hand. It belongs in a great measure to your Country, and your Family,
and therefore by all humane Laws, as well as divine, self-murder has ever been
agreed on as the greatest crime, and is punished here with the utmost shame,
which is all that can be inflicted upon the dead. But is the crime much less to
kill our selves by a slow poison, than by a sudden wound? Now if we do it, and
know we do it by a long and a continual grief, can we think our selves
innocent? What great difference is there if we break our hearts, or consume
them; if we pierce them, or bruise them, since all determines in the same
death, as all arises from the same despair? But what if it goes not so far?
it is not indeed so bad as might be, but that does not excuse it from being very
ill: Though I do not kill my neighbor, is it no hurt to wound him, or to spoil
him of the conveniences of life? The greatest crime is for a man to kill
himself; is it a small one to wound himself by anguish of heart, by grief, or
despair, to ruin his health, to shorten his age, to deprive himself of all the
pleasures, or eases, or enjoyments of life?

Next to the mischiefs we do our selves, are those we do our Children, and our
Friends, as those who deserve best of us, or at least deserve no ill; The Child
you carry about you, what has that done that you should endeavor to deprive it
of life, almost as soon as you bestow it? or if at the best you suffer it to
live to be born, yet by your ill usage of your self, should so much impair the
strength of its body and health, and perhaps the very temper of its mind, by
giving it such an infusion of melancholy, as may serve to discolor the
objects, and disrelish the accidents it may meet with in the common train of
life? But this is one you are not yet acquainted with; what will you say to
another you are? Were it a small injury to my Lord Capell to deprive him of a
Mother, whose prudence and kindness he may justly expect, the cares of his
health and education, the forming of his body, and the cultivating of his mind;
the seeds of Honor and Virtue, and thereby the true Principles of a happy
life? How has my Lord of Essex deserved that you should go about to lose him a
Wife He loves with so much passion, and which is more, with so much reason; so
great an honor and support to His Family, so great a hope to His Fortune, and
comfort to His Life? Are there so many left of your own great Family, that you
should desire in a manner wholly to reduce it, by suffering the greatest and
almost last branch of it to wither away before its time? Or is your Country in
this age so stored with great persons, that you should envy it those we may
justly expect from so noble a race.

Whilst I had any hopes your tears would ease you, or that your grief would
consume it self by liberty and time, your Ladyship knows very well I never once
accused it, nor ever increased it like many others by the common formal ways of
asswaging it; and this I am sure is the first office of this kind I ever went
about to perform otherwise than in the most ordinary forms. I was in hope what
was so violent, could not be so long; but when I observed it to grow stronger
with age, and increase like a stream the further it run; when I saw it draw out
to such unhappy consequences, and threaten no less than your Child, your
Health, and your Life; I could no longer forbear this endeavor, nor end it
without begging of your Ladyship for God's sake and for your own, for your
Childrens and your Friends, for your Countries and your Families, that you
would no longer abandon your self to so disconsolate a passion, but that you
would at length awaken your Piety, give way to your Prudence, or at least rowse
up the invincible Spirit of the Piercys, that never yet shrunk at any disaster;
that you would sometimes remember the great Honors and Fortunes of your
Family, not always the losses, cherish those veins of good humor that are
sometimes so natural to you, and sear up those of ill that would make you so
unnatural to your Children, and to your self; But above all, that you would
enter upon the cares of your health, and your life, for your Friends sake at
least, if not for your own. For my part, I know nothing could be to me so great
an honor and satisfaction, as if your Ladyship would own me to have
contributed toward this Cure; but however, none can perhaps more justly
pretend to your pardon for the attempt, since there is none, I am sure, that
has always had at heart a greater Honor for your Ladyships Family, nor can
have for your Person more devotion and esteem than,

Madam, Your Ladyships most Obedient, and most humble Servant,

Nimmeguen June 18. 1677.
AN ESSAY Upon the CURE of the GOUT BY MOXA*
Written to Monsieur de Zulichem.
I Never thought it would have befallen me to be the first that should try a
new experiment, any more than to be Author of any new invention, being little
inclined to practice upon others, and as little that others should practice
upon me. The same warmth of head disposes men to both, though one be commonly
esteemed an honor, and the other a reproach. I am sorry the first, and the
worse of the two is fallen to my share, by which all a man can hope is to avoid
censure, and that is much harder than to gain applause; For this may be done by
one great or wise action in an age; but to avoid censure, a man must pass his
life without saying or doing one ill or foolish thing.

This might serve the turn, if all men were just; but as they are, I doubt
nothing will, and that it is the idlest pretension in the world to live without
it; The meanest Subjects censuring the actions of the greatest Prince; The
silliest Servants of the wisest Master; and young Children of the oldest
Parents. Therefore I have not troubled my self to give any account of an
experiment I made by your persuasion, to satisfy those who imputed it to
folly, rashness, or impatience; but to satisfy you who proposed the thing in
kindness to me, and desired the Relation of it in kindness to other men.

I confess, your engaging me first in this adventure of the Moxa, and desiring
the story of it from me, is like giving one the torture, and then asking his
confession, which is hard usage to an innocent man, and a friend; Besides,
having suffered the first, I took my self to have a right of refusing the
other; But I find your Authority with me is too great to be disputed in either;
and the pretense of public good is a cheat that will ever pass in the world,
though so often abused by ill men, that I wonder the good do not grow ashamed
to use it any longer. Let it be as it will, you have what you asked, and cannot
but say that I have done, as well as suffered what you had a mind to engage me
in. I have told you the story with the more circumstance, because many
questioned the Disease, that they might not allow of the Cure; though the
certainty of one, and force of the other, has been enough evidenced by two
returns since I left you at the Hague, which past with the same success. The
reasonings upon this method, which seem to confirm the experiment, and other
Remedies for the Gout here reflected on, are aimed at the same end for which
you seemed so much to desire this Relation. The digressions I cannot excuse
otherwise, than by the confidence that no man will read them, who has not at
least as much leisure as I had when I writ them; and whosoever dislikes, or
grows weary of them, may throw them away. For those about temperance, age, or
their effects and periods in reference to public business, they could be
better addressed to none, than to you, who have past the longest life with the
most temperance, and the best health and humor of any man I know; and having
run through so much great and public business, have found out the secret so
little known, that there is a time to give it over.

I will pretend but to one piece of merit in this Relation, which is to have
writ it for you in English, being the Language I always observed to have most
of your kindness among so many others of your acquaintance. If your partiality
to that, and to me, and to your own request, will not excuse all the faults of
this Paper; I have nothing more to say for it, and so will leave you to judge
of it as you please.

AMong all the Diseases, to which the intemperance of this age disposes it (at
least in these Northern Climates), I have observed none to increase so much
within the compass of my memory and conversation, as the Gout, nor any I think
of worse consequence to mankind; because it falls generally upon persons
engaged in public affairs, and great employments, upon whose thoughts and
cares (if not their motions and their pains) the common good and service of
their Country so much depends. The General Officers of Armies, the Governors
of Provinces, the public Ministers in Councels at home, and Embassies abroad
(that have fallen in my way) being generally subject to it in one degree or
other. I suppose the reason of this may be, that men seldom come into those
Posts till after forty year old, about which time the natural heat beginning to
decay, makes way for those distempers they are most inclined to by their Native
Constitutions, or by their customs and habits of life. Besides, persons in
those Posts are usually born of Families Noble and Rich, and so derive a
weakness of constitution from the ease and luxury of their Ancestors, and the
delicacy of their own Education; Or if not, yet the plenty of their fortunes
from those very employments, and the general custom of living in them at much
expense, engages men in the constant use of great Tables, and in frequent
excesses of several kinds, which must end in diseases when the vigor of youth
is past, and the force of exercise (that served before to spend the humor) is
given over for a sedentary and unactive life.

These I take to be the reasons of such persons being so generally subject to
such accidents more than other men; and they are so plain, that they must needs
occur to any one that thinks; But the ill consequence of it is not so obvious,
though perhaps as evident to men that observe, and may be equally confirmed by
Reasons, and Examples. It is that the vigor of the mind decays with that of the
body, and not only humor and invention, but even judgment and resolution,
change and languish, with ill constitution of body, and of health; And by this
means public business comes to suffer by private infirmities, and Kingdoms or
States fall into weaknesses and distempers, by the diseases or decays of those
persons that manage them.

Within these fifteen years past, I have known a great Fleet disabled for two
Months, and thereby lose great occasions by an indisposition of the Admiral,
while he was neither well enough to exercise, nor ill enough to leave the
command. I have known two Towns of the greatest consequence lost, contrary to
all forms, by the Governors falling ill in the time of the Sieges.

I have observed the fate of a Campania determine contrary to all appearances,
by the caution and conduct of a General, which were attributed by those that
knew him to his age and infirmities, rather than his own true qualities,
acknowledged otherwise to have been as great as most men of the age. I have
seen the Councels of a noble Country grow bold, or timorous, according to the
Fits of his good or ill health that managed them, and the pulse of the
Government beat high or low with that of the Governor; and this unequal
Conduct make way for great accidents in the world; Nay, I have often reflected
upon the Councels and Fortunes of the greatest Monarchies rising and decaying
sensibly with the ages and healths of the Princes and chief Officers that
governed them. And I remember one great Minister that confessed to me, when he
fell into one of his usual Fits of the Gout, He was no longer able to bend his
mind or thoughts to any public business, nor give Audiences beyond two or
three of his own Domestics, though it were to save a Kingdom; and that this
proceeded not from any violence of pain, but from a general languishing and
faintness of Spirits, which made him in those Fits think nothing worth the
trouble of one careful or solicitous thought. For the approaches, or lurkings
of the Gout, the Spleen, or the Scurvy, nay the very fumes of indigestion, may
indispose men to thought and to care, as well as diseases of danger and pain.

Thus accidents of Health grow to be accidents of State, and public
constitutions come to depend in a great measure upon those of particular men,
which makes it perhaps seem necessary in the choice of persons for great
employments (at least such as require constant application and pains) to
consider their bodies as well as their minds, and ages and health as well as
their abilities.

When I was younger than I am, and thereby a worse judge of age; I have often
said, that what great thing soever a man proposed to do in his life, He should
think of atchieving it by fifty year old. Now I am approaching that age, I
think it much more than I did before; and that no man rides to an end of that
Stage without feeling his journey in all parts, whatever distinctions are made
between the mind and the body, or between judgment and memory. And though I
have known some few, who might perhaps be of use in Council upon great
occasions, till after threescore and ten; and have heard that the two late
Ministers in Spain. Counts of Castriglio and Pignoranda, were so till
fourscore; Yet I will not answer, that the very conduct of public affairs
under their Ministry has not always tasted of the lees of their age.

I observe in this Assembly at Nimmeguen, from so many several parts of
Christendom, that so one and twenty Ambassadors, there are but three above
fifty years old; which seems an Argument, of my opinion being in a manner
general; Nor can I think the period ill calculated, at least for a great
General of Armies, or Minister of State, in times, or scenes of great Action,
when the care of a State or an Army ought to be as constant as the Chymicks
fire, to make any great production; and if it goes out for an hour, perhaps the
whole operation fails. Now I doubt whether any man after fifty be capable of
such constant application of thought, any more than of long and violent labor
or exercise, which that certainly is, and of the finest parts. Besides, none
that feels sensibly the decays of age, and his life wearing off, can figure to
himself those imaginary charms in Riches and Praise, that men are apt to do in
the warmth of their blood; and those are the usual Incentives toward the
attempt of great dangers, and support of great trouble and pains.

To confirm this by Examples, I have heard that Cardinal Mazarine, about five
and fifty, found it was time to give over. That the present Grand Vizier, who
passes for one of the greatest men of that Empire, or this age, began His
Ministry about twenty eight; and the greatest I have observed, which was that
of Monsieur de Wit, began at three and thirty, and lasted to forty eight, and
could not, I believe, have gone on many years longer at that height, even
without that fatal end. Among other qualities which entered into the
composition of this Minister, the great care he had of his health, and the
little of his life, were not, I think, the least considerable; since from the
first He derived his great temperance, as well as his great boldness and
constancy from the other. And if intemperance be allowed to be the common
Mother of Gout, of Dropsy, and of Scurvy, and most other lingering Diseases,
which are those that infest the State; I think Temperance deserves the first
rank among public Virtues, as well as those of private men, and doubt whether
any can pretend to the constant steady exercise of Prudence, Justice, or
Fortitude, without it.

Upon these Grounds, whoever can propose a way of Curing, or preventing the
Gout (which entered chiefly into those examples I have mentioned of public
affairs suffering by private indispositions) would perhaps do a service to
Princes and States, as well as to particular men, which makes me the more
willing to tell my Story, and talk out of my Trade, being strongly possessed with
a belief, that what I have tried, or thought, or heard upon this subject, may
go a great way in preventing the growth of this disease where it is but new,
though perhaps longer methods are necessary to deal with it when it is old.

From my Grandfathers death I had reason to apprehend the Stone, and from my
Fathers life the Gout, who has been for this many years, and still continues
much afflicted with it. The first apprehension has been, I confess with me,
ever the strongest, and the other hardly in my thoughts, having never deserved
it by the usual forms; Nor had I ever, I thank God, the least threat from
either of them, till the last year at the Hague, being then in the seven and
fortieth of my age; when about the end of February, one night at Supper, I felt
a sudden pain in my right foot, which from the first moment it began, increased
sensibly, and in an hours time to that degree, that though I said nothing, yet
others took notice of it in my face, and said, They were sure I was not well,
and would have had me go to bed. I confessed I was in pain, and thought it was
with some sprain at Tennis; I pulled off my shoe, and with some ease that gave
me, stirred not till the Company broke up, which was about three hours after my
pain began. I went away to bed, but it raged so much all night, that I could
not sleep a wink. I endured it till about eight next morning, in hopes still of
stealing some rest; but then making my complaints, and showing my foot, they
found it very red and angry; and to relieve my extremity of pain, began to
apply common Poultives to it; and by the frequent change of them I found some
ease, and continued this exercise all that day, and a great part of the
following night, which I past with very little rest. The morning after, my foot
began to swell, and the violence of my pain to assuage, though it left such a
soreness, that I could hardly suffer the Clothes of my bed, nor stir my foot
but as it was lifted.

By this time my illness being enquired after about the Town, was concluded to
be the Gout; and being no longer feverish, or in any extremity of pain, I was
content to see company: Every body that came to visit me, found something to
say upon the occasion; some made a jest of it, or a little reproach; others
were serious in their mirth, and made me Compliments as upon a happy accident
and sign of long life. The Spaniards asked me Albricias for telling me the news,
that I might be sure 'twas the Gout; and in short, none of the company was in
ill humor but I, who had rather by half have had a Fever, or a worse disease
at that time, where the danger might have been greater, but the trouble and the
melancholy would I am sure have been less.

Though I had never feared the Gout, yet I had always scorned it as an effect
commonly of intemperance; and hated it, as that I thought made men unfit for
any thing after they were once deep engaged in it; Besides, I was pressed in my
journey at that time to Nimmeguen by His Majesty's Commands to assist at the
Treaty there. Most of the Ambassadors from the several parts of Christendom
were upon their way; One of my Colleagues was already upon the place, and I had
promised immediately to follow; for by our Commission we were to be two to act
in that Mediation; and to help at this pinch, I had always heard that a Fit of
the Gout used to have six weeks at the least for its ordinary period. With
these comforts about me, and sullenness enough to use no Remedy of a hundred
that were told me, Monsieur Zulichem came to see me (among the rest of my
Friends) who I think never came into company without saying something that was
new, and so he did upon my occasion. For talking of my illness, and approving
of my obstinacy against all the common prescriptions; he asked me whether I had
never heard the Indian way of Curing the Gout by Moxa? I told him no, and asked
him what it was? He said it was a certain kind of Moss that grew in the
East Indies; that their way was, when ever any body fell into a Fit of the
Gout, to take a small quantity of it, and form it into a figure, broad at
bottom as a twopence, and pointed at top; To set the bottom exactly upon the
place where the violence of the pain was fixed, then with a small round
perfumed Match (made likewise in the Indies) to give fire to the top of the
Moss; which burning down by degrees, came at length to the skin, and burnt it
till the Moss was consumed to ashes; That many times the first burning would
remove the pain; if not, it was to be renewed a second, third and fourth time,
till it went away, and till the person found he could set his foot boldly to
the ground and walk.

I desired him to tell me how he had come acquainted with this new Operation;
He said by the Relation of several who had seen and tried it in the Indies, but
particularly by an ingenious little Book, written of it by a Dutch Minister at
Batavia, who being extremely tormented with a Fit of the Gout, an old
Indian-woman coming to see him, undertook to Cure him, and did it immediately
by this Moxa; and after many experiments of it there, had written this Treatise
of it in Dutch for the use of his Countrymen, and sent over a quantity of the
Moss and Matches to his Son at Utrecht, to be sold, if any would be persuaded
to use them; That though he could not say whether experiment had been made of
it here, yet the Book was worth reading; and for his part, He thought He should
try it if ever he should fall into that Disease.

I desired the Book, which He promised to send me next morning; and this
discourse of Monsieur Zulichem busied my head all night: I hated the very name
of the Gout, and thought it a reproach: and for the good sign, people called
it, I could not find that mended an ill thing, nor could I like any sign of
living long in weakness, or in pain; I deplored the loss of my legs, and
confinement to my Chamber at an age that left me little pleasure but of walking
and of air; but the worst circumstance of all, was the sentence past upon it of
being without Cure.

I had past Twenty years of my life, and several accidents of danger in my
health, without any use of Physicians; and from some experiments of my own, as
well as much reading and thought upon that subject, had reasoned my self into
an opinion, that the use of them and their methods (unless in some sudden and
acute disease) was it self a very great venture, and that their greatest
practisers practiced least upon themselves, or their friends. I had ever
quarrelled with their studying art more than nature, and applying themselves to
methods, rather than to remedies; whereas the knowledge of the last is all that
nine parts in ten of the world have trusted to in all ages.

But for the common Remedies of the Gout, I found exceptions to them all; the
time of Purging was past with me, which otherwise I should certainly have tried
upon the authority of the great Hypocrates, who says it should be done upon the
first motion of the humor in the Gout. For Poultives, I knew they allayed
pain; but withal, that they drew down the humors, and suppled the parts,
thereby making the passages wider, and apter to receive them in greater
quantity; and I had often heard it concluded, that the use of them ended in
losing that of ones limbs, by weakening the joint upon every fit. For Plasters
that had any effect, I thought it must be by dispersing or repelling the
humors, which could not be done without endangering perhaps some other disease
of the bowels, the stomach, or the head. Rest and warmth either of clothes or
bathings, I doubted would in a degree have the effects of Poultives; and
Sweating was proper for prevention rather than remedy. So that all I could end
in with any satisfaction, was patience and abstinence; and though I easily
resolved of the last, yet the first was hard to be found in the circumstances
of my business, as well as of my health.

All this made me rave upon Monsieur Zulichem's new operation; and for the way
of curing by fire, I found twenty things to give me an opinion of it. I
remembered what I had read of the Egyptians of old, who used it in most
diseases; and what I had often heard of that practice still continuing among
the Moors of Africa; so that a slave is seldom taken (as both Spaniards and
Portugueses affirm) who has not many scars of the hot iron upon his body, which
they use upon most distempers, but especially those of the head, and
consequently in Physic as well as in Surgery. In the time of the Yncas reign
in Peru, (which I take to have been one of the greatest Constitutions of
Absolute Monarchy that has been in the world) no composition was allowed by the
Laws to be used in point of Medicine, but only Simples proper to each Disease.
Burning was much in use, either by natural or artificial fires; particularly
for all ilnesses of teeth, and soreness or swelling of the gums (which they
were subject to from their nearness to the Sea) they had an herb which never
failed of curing it, and being laid to the gums, burnt away all the flesh that
was swelled or corrupted, and made way for new that came again as sound as that
of a Child. I remembered to have had my self in my youth, one cruel wound cured
by scalding Medicaments, after it was grown so putrified as to have (in the
Surgeons opinion) endangered the bone; and the violent swelling and bruise of
another, taken away as soon as I received it, by scalding it with Milk. I
remembered the cure of Chilblanes when I was a boy (which may be called the
Childrens Gout) by burning at the fire, or else by scalding brine, that has (I
suppose) the same effect. I had heard of curing the stings of Adders, and bites
of mad Dogs, by immediately burning the part with a hot iron; and of some
strange cures of Frenzies, by casual applications of fire to the lower parts;
which seems reasonable enough, by the violent revulsion it may make of humors
from the head; and agrees with the opinions and practice I mentioned before, of
Egypt and Africa. Perhaps blistering in the neck, and hot Pigeons, may be in
use among us upon the same grounds; and in our Methods of Surgery, nothing is
found of such effect in the case of old Ulcers, as fire, which is certainly the
greatest drawer and dryer, and thereby the greatest cleanser that can be found.
I knew very well, that in Diseases of Cattle, there is nothing more commonly
used, nor with greater success; and concluded it was but a tenderness to
Mankind that made it less in use amongst us, and which had introduced
Corrosives and Causticks to supply the place of it, which are indeed but
artificial fires.

I mention all these reflections, to show that the experiment I resolved to
make, was upon thought, and not rashness or impatience (as those called it that
would have dissuaded me from it); but the chief reason was, that I liked no
other, because I knew they failed every day, and left men in despair of being
ever well cured of the Gout.

Next morning I looked over the Book which Monsieur Zulichem had promised me,
written by the Minister at Batavia. I pretended not to judge of the Indian
Philosophy, or reasonings upon the cause of the Gout; but yet thought them as
probable as those of Physicians here; and liked them so much the better,
because it seems their opinion in the point is general among them, as well as
their method of curing; whereas the differences among ours are almost as many
in both, as there are Physicians that reason upon the causes, or practice upon
the cure of that disease. They hold that the cause of the Gout is a malignant
vapor that falls upon the joint between the bone and the skin that covers it,
which being the most sensible of all parts of the body, causes the violence of
the pain. That the swelling is no part of the disease, but only an effect of
it, and of a kindness in nature, that to relieve the part affected, calls down
humors to damp the malignity of the vapor, and thereby assuage the sharpness
of the pain, which seldom fails whenever the part grows very much swelled. That
consequently the swellings and returns of the Gout, are chiefly occasioned by
the ill methods of curing it at first. That this vapor falling upon joints
which have not motion, and thereby heat enough to dispel it, cannot be cured
otherwise than by burning, by which it immediately evaporates; and that this is
evident by the present ceasing of the pain upon the second, third, or fourth
application of the Moxa, which are performed in a few minutes time. And the
Author affirms it happens often there, that upon the last burning, an extreme
stench comes out of the skin where the fire had opened it.

Whatever the reasonings were, which yet seemed ingenious enough; the
experiments alleged with so much confidence, and to be so generally in those
parts, and told by an Author that writ like a plain man, and one whose
profession was to tell truth, helped me to resolve upon making the trial. I was
confirmed in this resolution by a German Physician, Doctor Theodore Coleby, who
was then in my Family, a sober and intelligent man, whom I dispatched
immediately to Vtrecht, to bring me some of the Moxa, and learn the exact
method of using it, from the man that sold it, who was Son to the Minister of
Batavia. He returned with all that belonged to this Cure, having performed the
whole operation upon his hand by the man's direction. I immediately made the
experiment in the manner before related, setting the Moxa just upon the place
where the first violence of my pain began, which was the joint of the great
toe, and where the greatest anger and soreness still continued, notwithstanding
the swelling of my foot, so that I had never yet in five days been able to stir
it, but as it was lifted.

Upon the first burning I found the skin shrink all round the place; and
whether the greater pain of the fire had taken away the sense of a smaller or
no, I could not tell; but I thought it less than it was: I burnt it the second
time, and upon it observed the skin about it to shrink, and the swelling to
flat yet more than at first. I began to move my toe, which I had not done
before; but I found some remainders of pain. I burnt it the third time, and
observed still the same effects without, but a much greater within; for I
stirred the joint several times at ease; and growing bolder, I set my foot to
the ground without any pain at all. After this I pursued the method prescribed
by the Book, and the Authors Son at Vtrecht, and had a bruised Clove of Garlic
laid to the place that was burnt, and covered with a large Plaster of
Diapalma, to keep it fixed there; and when this was done, feeling no more pain,
and treading still bolder and firmer upon it, I cut a slipper to let in my foot
swelled as it was, and walked half a dozen turns about the room without any pain
or trouble, and much to the surprise of those that were about me, as well as to
my own. For though I had reasoned my self beforehand into an opinion of the
thing, yet I could not expect such an effect as I found, which seldom reaches
to the degree that is promised by the prescribers of any remedies, whereas this
went beyond it, having been applied so late, and the prescription reaching only
to the first attaque of the pain, and before the part begins to swell.

For the pain of the burning it self, the first time it is sharp, so that a man
may be allowed to complain; I resolved I would not, but that I would count to a
certain number as the best measure how long it lasted. I told six-score and
four, as fast as I could; and when the fire of the Moxa was out, all pain of
burning was over. The second time was not near so sharp as the first, and the
third a great deal less than the second. The wound was not raw, as I expected,
but looked only scorched and black; and I had rather endure the whole trouble
of the operation, than half a quarter of an hours pain in the degree I felt it
the first whole night.

After four and twenty hours, I had it opened, and found a great blister drawn
by the Garlic, which I used no more, but had the blister cut, which run a good
deal of water, but filled again by next night; and this continued for three
days, with only a Plaster of Diapalma upon it; after which time the blister
dried up, and left a sore about as big as a twopence, which healed and went
away in about a weeks time longer; but I continued to walk every day, and
without the least return of pain, the swelling still growing less, though it
were near six weeks before it was wholly gone. I favored it all this while
more than I needed, upon the common opinion that walking too much might draw
down the humor, which I have since had reason to conclude a great mistake, and
that if I had walked as much as I could from the first day the pain left me,
the swelling might have left me too in a much less time.

The talk of this Cure run about the Hague, and made the conversation in other
places, as well as in the visits I received while I kept my Chamber, which was
about a fortnight after the burning. Monsieur Zulichem came to me among the
rest of the good company of the Town, and much pleased with my success, as well
from his own great humanity, and particular kindness to me, as from the part he
had in being the first prescriber of my Cure, and from the opinion it gave him
of a common good fortune befallen all that felt, or were in danger of the Gout.

Among others he told it to Monsieur Serinchamps was one, an Envoy of the Duke
of Lorrains then in Town; a person very much, and very deservedly esteemed
among all the good company in Town, and to whom every body was kind upon the
score of his own good humor, or his Masters ill fortunes: He had been long
subject to the Gout, and with constant returns of long and violent fits two or
three times in a year. He was a man frank and generous, and loved to enjoy
health whilst he had it, without making too much reflection upon what was to
follow; and so when he was well, denied himself nothing of what he had a mind
to eat or drink, which gave him a body full of humors, and made his fits of
the Gout as frequent and violent as most I have known; When they came, he bore
them as he could, and forgot them as soon as they were past, till a new
remembrance. At this time he lay ill of a cruel fit, which was fallen upon his
knee, and with extreme pain; When he heard of my Cure, he sent to me first for
the Relation of it, and upon it, for my Moxa, and for Coleby to apply it; He
did so, and after his pleasant way roared out, and swore at me all the while it
was burning; and asked if I took him for a Sorcerer that I sent to burn him
alive. But with all this, the pain went away upon it, and returned no more to
the same place; but he was something discouraged by a new pain falling some
days after upon his elbow on the other side, which gave him a new fit, though
gentler and shorter than they used to be.

About the same time one of the Maids of my house was grown almost desperate
with the Toothache, and want of sleep upon it, and was without remedy. The Book
gives the same Cure for certain in that illness, by burning upon the great Vein
under the Ear; and the man who sold it at Vtrecht, had assured Coleby he had
seen many Cures by it in that kind. We resolved to try, which was done, and the
pain immediately taken away, and the Wench perfectly well, without hearing of
it any more, at least while she was in my house.

Thus passed the first experiment, upon which Monsieur Zulichem giving an
account of it to some of his Friends at Gresham-Colledg, came to me before I
left the Hague, formally to desire me from them, and from himself, that I would
give a Relation of it that might be made public, as a thing which might prove
in appearance of common utility to so great numbers as were subject to that
disease; And told me that some of Gresham-Colledg had already given order for
Translating into English the little Batavian Treatise. I commended the care of
publishing it among us, and thereby inviting others to an experiment I had
reason to approve; but excused my self from any Relation of my own, as having
too much business at that time, and at all times caring little to appear in
public. I had another reason to decline it, that ever uses to go far with me
upon all new inventions or experiments, which is, that the best trial of them
is by time, and observing whether they live or no; and that one or two trials
can pretend to make no rule, no more than one Swallow a Summer; and so before I
told my story to more than my friends, I had a mind to make more trials my
self, or see them made by other people as wise as I had been.

During the confinement of this fit, I fell into some methods, and into much
discourse upon the subject of the Gout, that may be perhaps as well worth
reflection by such as feel or apprehend it, as what I have told of this Indian
Cure. In the first place from the day I kept my Chamber, till I left it, and
began to walk abroad, I restrained my self to so regular a diet, as to eat
flesh but once a day, and little at a time, without Salt or Vinegar; and to one
moderate draught, either of Water or small Ale. I concluded to trust to
abstinence and exercise, as I had ever resolved, if I fell into this disease;
and if it continued, to confine my self wholly to the Milk-dyet, of which I had
met with very many and great examples, and had a great opinion even in long and
inveterate Gouts. Besides, this refuge I met with, in my visits and
conversation arising upon my illness, many notions or medicines very new to me,
and reflections that may be so perhaps to other men. Old Prince Maurice of
Nassaw told me, he laughed at the Gout, and he had been several times attaqued,
yet it never gave him care nor trouble. That he used but one remedy, which was
when ever he felt it, to boil a good quantity of Horse-dung from a Stone-horse
of the Hermelinne color, as he called it in French, which is a native white,
with a sort of raw nose, and the same commonly about the eyes. That when this
was well boiled in water, he set his leg in a pale-full of it, as hot as he
could well endure it, renewing it as it grew cool for above an hour together;
That after it, he drew his leg immediately into a warm bed, to continue the
perspiration as long as he could, and never failed of being cured. Whether the
remedy be good, or the circumstances of color signify any thing more, than to
make more mystery, I know not; but I observed that he ever had a set of such
Hermelinne Horses in his Coach, which he told me was on purpose, that he might
never want this remedy.

The Count Kinski, Ambassador from the Emperor, to the Treaty at Nimmeguen,
gave me a Receipt of the Salt of Hartshorn, by which a famous
Italian-Physician of the Emperors, had performed mighty Cures upon many others
as well as Himself, and the last year upon the Count Montecuculi; The use of
this, I am apt to esteem both from the quality given it of provoking Sweat
extremely, and of taking away all sharpness from whatever you put it in, which
must both be of good effect in the Cure of the Gout.

The Rhyngrave, who was killed last Summer before Mastricht, told me his Father
the old Rhyngrave, whom I knew very well, had been long subject to the Gout,
and never used other method or remedy, than upon the very first fit he felt, to
go out immediately and walk, whatever the weather was, and as long as he was
able to stand, and pressing still most upon the foot that threatened him; when
he came home, he went to a warm bed, and was rubbed very well, and chiefly upon
the place where the pain begun. If it continued or returned next day, he
repeated the same course, and was never laid up with it; and before his death
recommended this course to his Son, if he should ever fall into that accident.

A Dutchman, who had been long in the East Indies, told me, in one part of
them where he had lived some time, the general remedy of all that were subject
to the Gout, was rubbing with hands; and that whoever had Slaves enough to do
that constantly every day, and relieve one another by turns till the motion
raised a violent heat about the joints where it was chiefly used, was never
troubled much, or laid up by that disease.

My youngest Brother told me he had a Keeper very subject to it, but that it
never laid him up, but he was still walking after his Deer or his Stud while he
had the fits upon him, as at other times, and often from morning to night,
though in pain all the while; This he gave me as one instance, that poor and
toiling men have sometimes the Gout, and that many more may have it, who take
no more notice of it than his Keeper did, who yet he confessed used to bring the
fits of Gout upon him, by fits of drinking, which no doubt is a receipt that
will hardly fail if men grow old in the custom.

Monsieur Serinchamps told me, a Lorrain Surgeon had undertaken to cure it by a
more extraordinary way than any of these, which was by whipping the naked part
with a great Rod of Nettles till it grew all over blistered; and that he had
once persuaded him to perform this penance in a sharp fit he had, and the pain
in his knee so violent, as helped him to endure this remedy. He said it was
cruel, that all where he was whipped, grew so angry, and swelled as well as
blister'd, that he thought it had given him a Fever that night; The next
morning the part was all stiff as a boot, and the skin like parchmin; but that
keeping it anointed with a certain Oil likewise of Nettles, it past in two
days, and the Gout too, without feeling any more pain that Fit.

All these things put together, with what a great Physician writes of Cures by
whipping with Rods, and another with Holly, and by other cruelties of cutting,
or burning, made me certainly conclude, that the Gout was a companion that
ought to be treated like an enemy, and by no means like a friend, and that grew
troublesome chiefly by good usage; and this was confirmed to me, by considering
that it haunted usually the easy and the rich, the nice and the lazy, who grow
to endure much, because they can endure little; That make much of it as soon as
it comes, and yet leave not making much of themselves too; That take care to
carry it presently to bed, and keep it safe and warm, and indeed lay up the
Gout for two or three months, while they give out, that the Gout lays up them.
On the other side, it hardly approaches the rough and the poor, such as labor
for meat, and eat only for hunger; that drink water, either pure, or but
discolored with Malt; that know no use of wine, but for a Cordial, as it is,
and perhaps was only intended; Or if such men happen by their native
constitutions to fall into the Gout, either they mind it not at all, having no
leisure to be sick; or they use it like a Dog, they walk on, or they toil and
work as they did before, they keep it wet and cold; or if they are laid up,
they are perhaps forced by that to fast more than before; and if it lasts, they
grow impatient, and fall to beat it, or whip it, or cut it, or burn it, and all
this while perhaps never know the very name of the Gout.

But to follow my experiment: I past that Summer here at Nimmeguen, without the
least remembrance of what had happened to me in the Spring, till about the end
of September, and then began to feel a pain that I knew not what to make of, in
the same joint, but of my other foot: I had flattered my self with hopes, that
the vapor had been exhaled, as my learned Authors had taught me, and that
thereby the business had been ended; This made me neglect my Moxa for two days,
the pain not being violent, till at last my foot begun to swell, and I could
set it no longer to the ground. Then I fell to my Moxa again, and burnt it four
times before the pain went clear away, as it did upon the last, and I walked at
ease, as I had done the first time, and within six days after above a League
without the least return of any pain.

I continued well till this Spring, when about the end of March feeling again
the same pain, and in the same joint, but of the first foot; and finding it
grow violent, I immediately burnt it, and felt no more after the third time;
was never off my legs, nor kept my Chamber a day. Upon both these last
experiments, I omitted the application of Garlic, and contented my self with a
Plaster only of Diapalma upon the place that was burnt, which crusted and
healed in very few days, and without any trouble. I have since continued
perfectly well to this present June; and with so much confidence of the Cure,
that I have been content to trouble my self some hours with telling the story,
which, it is possible, may at one time or other be thought worth making public,
if I am further confirmed by more time and experiments of my own, or of others.
And thereby I may not only satisfy Monsieur Zulichem, but my self too, who
should be sorry to omit any good I thought I could do to other men, though
never so unknown.

But this Cure, I suppose, cannot pretend to deal with inveterate Gouts, grown
habitual by long and frequent returns, by dispositions of the stomach, to
convert even the best nourishment into those humors, and the vessels to
receive them. For such constitutions, by all I have discovered, or considered
upon this subject, the Remedies (if any) are to be proposed either from a
constant course of the Milken-dyet, continued at least for a year together; Or
else from some of those methods, commonly used in the Cure of a worse disease
(if at least I may be so bold with one that is much in vogue), the usual
exceptions to the first, are not only so long a constraint, but the weakness of
Spirits whilst it continues, and the danger of Fevers whenever it is left off.
There may, I believe, be some Care necessary in this last point, upon so great
a change; but for the other, I have met with no complaints among those that
have used it; and Count Egmont, who has done so, more, I believe, than any
other man, has told me He never found himself in so much vigor, as in the
midst of that course. I have known so many great examples of this Cure, and
heard of its being so familiar in Austria, that I wonder it has gained no more
ground in other places, and am apt to conclude from it, that the loss of pain
is generally thought to be purchased too dear by the loss of pleasure.

For the other, I met with a Physician whom I esteemed a man of truth, that
told me of several great Cures of the Gout, by a course of Guiacum, and of two
Patients of his own that had gone so far as to be fluxed for it, and with
success. And indeed there seems nothing so proper, as what pretends to change
the whole mass of the blood, or else a long course of violent perspiration. But
the mischief is, that the Gout is commonly the disease of aged men, who cannot
go through with these strong Remedies, which young men play with upon other
occasions; and the reason, I suppose, why these ways are so little practiced,
is because it happens so seldom that young men have the Gout.

Let the disease be new or old, and the remedies either of common or foreign
growth, there is one Ingredient of absolute necessity in all cases: For whoever
thinks of curing the Gout without great Temperance, had better resolve to
endure it with patience: And I know not whether some desperate degrees of
Abstinence would not have the same effect upon other men, as they had upon
Atticus, who weary of his Life as well as his Physicians, by long and cruel
pains of a Dropsical Gout, and despairing of any Cure, resolved by degrees to
starve himself to death, and went so far, that the Physicians found he had
ended his disease instead of his Life; and told him, that to be well, there
would need nothing but only resolving to live. His Answer was noble, That since
dying was a thing to be done, and he was now so far on his way, he did not
think it worth the while to return. This was said and done, and could indeed
have been so by none but such a man as Atticus, who was singular in his Life,
as well as his Death; and has been ever, I confess, by me as much esteemed in
both, as any of those that have made greater figures upon the busy Scenes of
their own times, and since in Records of Story and of Fame.

But perhaps some such Methods might succeed with others upon the designs to
live, as they did with him upon those to dye; and though such degrees may be
too desperate, yet none of Temperance can, I think, be too great for those that
pretend the Cure of inveterate Gouts, or indeed of most other Diseases to which
Mankind is exposed rather by the viciousness than by the frailty of their
natures. Temperance, That Virtue without Pride, and Fortune without Envy, that
gives indolence of body, and tranquillity of mind; the best Guardian of youth
and support of old age: The Precept of Reason, as well as Religion; and
Physician of the Soul as well as the Body; The Tutelar Goddess of Health, and
universal medicine of Life, that clears the head, and cleanses the blood, that
eases the stomach, and purges the bowels, that strengthens the nerves,
enlightens the eyes, and comforts the heart. In a word, that secures and
perfects digestion, and thereby avoids the fumes and winds to which we owe the
Collique and the Spleen; those crudities and sharp humors that feed the
Scurvey and the Gout, and those slimy dregs, out of which the Gravel and Stone
are formed within us. Diseases by which we often condemn our selves to greater
torments and miseries of life, than have perhaps been yet invented by Anger or
Revenge, or inflicted by the greatest Tyrants upon the worst of men.

I do not allow the pretense of Temperance to all such as are seldom or never
drunk, or fall into Surfeits; for men may lose their health without losing
their senses; and be intemperate every day, without being drunk perhaps once in
their lives: Nay, for ought I know, if a man should pass the month in a
Colledg-diet, without excess or variety of Meats or of Drinks, but only the
last day give a loose in them both, and so far till it comes to serve him for
Physic rather than food, and he utter his stomach as well as his heart; He may
as to the considerations of Health, do much better than another that eats every
day but as men do generally in England, who pretend to live well in Court or in
Town; that is in Plenty and Luxury, with great variety of meats, and a dozen
glasses of Wine at a meal, still spurring up appetite when it would lie down of
it self; flusht every day, but never drunk; and with the help of dozing three
hours after dinner, as sober and wise as they were before.

But that which I call Temperance, and reckon so necessary in all attemps and
methods of curing the Gout, is a regular and simple diet, limited by every man's
experience of his own easy digestion, and thereby proportioning as near, as
well as can be, the daily repairs to the daily decays of our wasting bodies.
Nor can this be determined by measures and weights, or any general Lessian
rules; but must vary with the vigor or decays of Age or of Health, and the use
or disuse of Air, or of Exercise, with the changes of Appetite; and then by
what every man may find or suspect of the present strength or weakness of
digestion: And in case of Excesses, I take the German Proverbial Cure by a hair
of the same beast, to be the worst in the world; and the best to be that which
is called the Monks Diet, to eat till you are sick, and fast till you are well
again. In all courses of the Gout, the most effectual point I take to be
abstinence from Wine, further than as a Cordial where faintness or want of
spirits require it; And the use of water, where the stomach will bear it, as I
believe most men's will, and with great advantage of digestion, unless they are
spoiled with long and constant use of Wines or other strong drinks. In that
case they must be weaned, and the habit changed by degrees, and with time, for
fear of falling into Consumptions, instead of recovering Dropsies or Gouts. But
the Wines used by those that feel or fear this Disease, or pursue the Cure,
should rather be Spanish or Portugal, than either French or Rhenish; and of the
French, rather the Provence or Languedoc, than the Bordeaux or Champagne; and
of the Rhenish, the Ringaw and Bleker, of which at least it may be said that
they do not so much harm as the others.

But I have known so great Cures, and so many, done by obstinate resolutions of
drinking no Wine at all, that I put more weight upon that part of Temperance,
than any other. And I doubt very much whether the great increase of that
Disease in England within these twenty years, may not have been occasioned by
the custom of much Wine introduced into our constant and common Tables. For
this use may be more pernicious to health, than that of Taverns and Debauches
according to the old style, which were but by fits, and upon set or casual
encounters. I have sometimes thought that this custom of using Wine for our
common drink, may alter in time the very Constitution of our Nation, I mean the
native tempers of our bodies and minds, and cause a heat and sharpness in our
humors, which is not natural to our Climate. Our having been denied it by
nature, is argument enough that it was never intended us for common use; nor do
I believe it was so in any other Countries, there being so small a part of the
world where it grows; and where it does, the use of it pure being so little
practiced, and in some places defended by Customs or Laws. So the Turks have
not known it, unless of late years; and I have met with many Spaniards that
never tasted it pure in their lives; Nor in the time when I was in France, did
I observe any I converst with to drink it unmixt at meals. The true use of
Wine, is either as I mentioned, for a Cordial; and I believe there is not a
better to such as drink it seldom; Or else what the Mother of Lemuel tells her
son, Give strong drink to him that is ready to perish, and wine to those that
are heavy of heart; let him drink and forget his poverty, and remember his
misery no more. At least it ought to be reserved for the times and occasions of
feasts and of joy, and be treated like a Mistress rather than a Wife, without
abandoning either our wits to our humors, or our health to our pleasure, or
that of one sense to those of all the rest, which I doubt it impairs. This
Philosophy I suppose may pass with the youngest and most sensual men, while
they pretend to be reasonable; but whenever they have a mind to be otherwise,
the best way they can take, is to drink or to sleep, and either of them will
serve the turn.

FINIS.

