ADVERTISEMENT.
Lex Parliamentaria: Or, a Treatise of the Law and Customs of the Parliaments
of England; by G. P. Esquire. With an Appendix of a Case in Parliament between Sir
Francis Goodwin, and Sir John Fortescue, for the Knight's Place for the County
of Bucks. From an Original French Manuscript; Translated into English.

Printed for Tim. Goodwin.

AN ESSAY UPON TAXES, Calculated for the Present Juncture of AFFAIRS IN ENGLAND.

LONDON: Printed for Tim. Goodwin at the Maidenhead, over against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1693.

AN ESSAY UPON TAXES, etc.
SINCE it is of the last Consequence to every true Englishman, that the
present War should be carried on for the Preservation of our Liberties and
Religion, against the Common Enemy of both; and notwithstanding the false and
foolish Insinuations of some Discontented Jacobites, That a Peace with France
were more necessary than a War; and that it is more carried on for the sake of
others, than our selves; and that if it were necessary, it might be better
carried on by our selves alone, than in Conjunction with Confederates; and that
the only way to secure our Religion and Liberty, obtain a safe and secure
Peace, and avoid the great Burdens we are subject to for the carrying on the
War, were to cast off the Present Government, and take Measures with King
James, and the King of France; yet there is nothing more clear than that these
Notions are altogether absurd and impracticable; and that the true meaning of
it is, only to give up all that is dear to us, into the Hands of two Princes,
who have always preferred the design of Subverting our Religion and Liberties,
to all other Considerations whatsoever; and that it is much better to Fight for
Flanders than for England, and in Conjunction with Confederates, than alone, is
what will bear no Dispute. All that admits of a doubt is, What are the best
means and methods to carry on this War. As to the first, relating only to the
raising of Aids sufficient for this Undertaking, I thought I could not do a
more acceptable Service to my Country, than at this time to contribute my poor
Endeavors. As to the latter, relating to the Military Designs, and manner of
executing them, I must acknowledge my self wholly incompetent both by my
Education and Experience; and shall choose therefore to recommend that matter,
with my good Wishes, to those whose Province it is, and especially to my
Sovereign; who I judge must needs be better informed in this matter than any
other Prince or Person whatsoever.

The Method I shall pursue to set this matter in a clear Light, shall be to lay
down some General Rules or Maxims by which our Ancestors have steered in the
laying of Impositions, which had great regard to the Constitution of the
Government, and Condition of the People, and therefore are not easily to be
departed from.

In the next place, I shall endavour to examine the several Taxes that are now
in use, and such Foreign Taxes and Projects as are most in Vogue, and by some
thought to be more eligible to be introduced, especially that of a Home-Excise,
and show how far they are consistent or inconsistent with the Government, Ease,
and Liberty of the People; and in the last place upon the whole, offer my
Opinion, what are the best Methods and Expedients to raise Money by.

As to the matter of those Aids, our Ancestors have observed these Rules.

First, They must not consist of things of Common Necessity or Livelihood, but
rather Superfluity.

Secondly, They must not burden our Native Commodities and Manufactures,
Materials, or other things relating thereunto.

Thirdly, They have always avoided to impose upon things wherein the People had
no Benefit or Advantage, but rather upon Land, Trade, and other gainful
Professions.

Fourthly, Rot. Parliam. 9 Edw. 3d. nu. 5.
They have always avoided New and Foreign Taxes; and when proposed, have
declared they could not grant them without advising with those that sent them;
Vide Co. Instit. 4 Parl. fol. 34.
and several Rebellions have happened on this occasion.

Fifthly, They have had always great regard to the Condition of the several
Ranks of Men among us, to support them in the Condition they are in, and
consequently to preserve the Monarchy.

Sixthly, To charge Money and Personal Estate not employed in Trade, double to
Land and Trade.

Seventhly, Above all, That Equality should be observed in the Imposition.

As to the Persons, these Rules were observed: First, The dignified Clergy
usually gave double to the Laity, considering that they were freed from all
personal Services, and most other Taxes; that their Revenues were all upon old
Rents not subject to Defalcations, Repairs, or Loss by Tenants, or for want of
them, or other Diminution; and had great Advantages in point of Fines by
Renewal. And as for the other Clergy, their Tithes, and other Profits, came
into their hands with little Charge, and that as well the Dignified, as others,
were provided for by Laws, not to come in by Purchase but Free-gift, and are
now exempted from all Foreign Payments to Rome, and its Dependence, to which
all Foreign Popish Clergy are subject.

Secondly, As to the greater and lesser Nobility, they were always treated
Favorably, being the chief Basis and support of the Monarchy, and were allowed
for their Port and necessary Support of their Dignities, and did rarely exceed
in the Payment of their Subsidy, the Sum of 20 l. for 1000 l. which they called
a Spareable Part.

Thirdly, As to the Rich Usurer or Tradesman, whose Family and Expense was
small, and Gains great, and escaped most Burdens, as not being so visible as
Lands; and the Considerable Freeholder, whose Estate is generally held in his
own hands, and managed by himself, and consequently was less discovered than
the Nobleman and Gentleman's that were Rented, and made both the Profit of
Landlord and Tenant; which, according to the Old Maxim, is double the Rent in
Greensod, and treble in Arable; the Charge of the latter amounting to a Third
more than Greensod: So that in truth, they have all their Livelihood allowed,
and more in the value; and none of all these being obliged by their Quality or
Custom to any Port, and are the proper Basis of a Democracy, or Commonwealth;
these were generally Rated more strictly without any allowance, to prevent the
increase of their Number and Growth.

Fourthly, The Common Artificer and Labourer having a dependence upon the
Nobility and Gentry, and not being able to subsist without them, and
consequently a farther support to the Monarchy, were usually Exempted, unless
by reason of Money or Personal Estate they fell within the limits of the
Subsidy; from hence grew that Ancient saying, That in Taxes, Size-cinq, was to
be easy, Quatretrois, to be fully charged, and Deaux ace, to be exempted.
Nevertheless, in the Poll-Acts, which came but rarely, these Inferior sort were
sometimes brought in to bear their part.

Thirdly, As to the Quantum, manner of Collection, and Equality of Imposition,
these Rules were observed: First, That it did not exceed by any means the
Common Necessity; and that the Prince as well as the Parliament, should show a
great tenderness of the People in their Demands and Levies upon them; of which
we have a notable instance in Q. Elizabeth, who released half the Subsidies
granted her, when her Occasions did not require it; which had a mighty
influence upon future Grants. And it is observeable, That all those Princes who
have not stretched Prerogative to Levy Taxes not warrantable by Law, or to Levy
them with too much rigor and exactness, or to impoverish the People, and have
expressed a care and regard to their Ease, Wealth, and Welfare, have ever been
the most Fortunate, Great, and Prosperous; contrary to the Maxims of the
present Age.

As to the manner of Collection, they have taken great Care that there should
be as much Ease, and as little Charge to the King or People in the Collection
as may be, by the multiplication of Officers, Penalties, or Subjecting their
Houses, or Estates, to the Inquiries, or Informations of Officers, etc.

As to the Equality of Imposition; this has been strictly observed, being
always the same Rate in the Pound. Nevertheless, with such Qualifications, and
Exceptions, as made it rather a Moral Equality, than a Mathematical one, having
respect to the condition of the Persons, as I have before showed. Limiting the
Sums both for Real and Personal Estates, below which they should not be
Charged, viz. Allowing Defalcations for Debts to be assertain'd by the Oaths of
the Parties Charged, and for the Decay of Cities and Towns in Tenths and
Fifteenths.

Lastly, In all Cases the King appointed the Commissioners generally of Persons
unconcerned in the Places where they acted, and at his own Charge, that it
might be done with the more Indifference and Equality, to whom, in truth, by
the Constitution, the appointing of all Officers for the execution of the Laws
does belong; and once at least in every Age, as I could easily show, the
Parliament had granted that the Commissioners and Assessors should be Sworn,
and have liberty to examine all Persons, not exempting the Parties themselves,
upon Oath. For the better discovery of their Real and Personal Estates, that
length of time might not produce too great an Inequality; and that the Aids
might be improved in some proportion to the value of things, of Labor, and of
Service, and the Improvement of the Wealth of the People.

As to the Second Point concerning the Taxes now in being, or in Vogue: And
First, as to the Land Tax, or Monthly Assessment, being nothing but a Military
Contribution taken up in the Civil War, and proportion to the Condition of the
Kingdom, as it then stood Forty Years ago; the inequality is so exorbitant,
both between County and County, Division and Division, Parish and Parish, and
impossible to be rectified without a punctual Survey of the whole, and lying
wholly upon the Landlord, where Estates are not upon Lives or Fines; wherein
the Dignified Clergy pay not one Groat, nor Money, nor Personal Estate come in
to the Aid; and which lies so heavy upon the Nobility and Gentry above all
others, to the weakening and diminishing their Estates, who are the chief
Support of the Monarchy: I take it to be the most Impolitick and Unreasonable
method of Raising great Sums by, that ever was introduced in any Nation, and
impossible to be long born and continued.

Secondly, As to the double Excise; though this has some influence upon our
Barley and Malt, and lies hardest upon our Innkeepers and Alehouse keepers,
by the discouragement of the Vent; yet were the Armies well paid, which is
their greater hardship, I see no great inconveniency in the continuance of it,
during this occasion of the War, especially since it introduces no new Charge
in the Collection, nor subjects any new Persons to Penalties or Officers.

Thirdly, As to the new Impositions upon the Customs, during this War at least,
they may be born, though that of Sugars, which began before the War, may
require some relief, at least when the War is ended.

Fourthly, The Poll-Tax, as it now stands, is grievous to the meaner sort, as
to their Children, and deserves to be better considered; and tho much exclaimed
against, yet is an Ancient Way of Taxing upon extraordinary occasions; and in
all other things far more equal than the former were, which taxed Titles and
Professions alike: And tho it be objected, That all Noblemen and Gentlemen pay
alike, notwithstanding the difference of Estates; yet considering that the
Lands are all under a double Tax, and that they multiply that Tax according to
the Horses that they find in the Militia, I think they are sufficiently
charged, and much more equal than in former methods: And that this Tax is not
wholly to be laid aside, but may be easily rectified and made useful.

As to New Projects that have been much discoursed of, I shall reduce them to
Two Heads. First, Things of large Credit, upon some Perpetual Funds. And
secondly, The Home-Excises. As to the first, There are two Difficulties to be
overcome, to make these practicable; first, To find out such a Fund; which if
upon the present Revenue, will be a lessening of it; if upon any Fund being
perpetual, may meet with some Difficulties in the Grant; and in the next place,
the Novelty of the thing, the loss of a Principal for a Perpetual Interest, or
the long distance of time if it be repaid; upon which Calculation all these
Projects are founded; the Breach of the Exchequer-Credit by King Charles, and
ever since, and the frequent breaking of the Bankers, will make men very shy of
parting with their Money upon new Projects at a distance. Nevertheless if it
were tried for a small Sum at the beginning, it having been experienced to be
so useful, beneficial, and practicable by our Neighbors the Dutch, and is in
it self very reasonable, it might gain some Place and Credit here, and would
supply the Want of Money in Specie; which, for want of bringing our Coin down
to the value of Silver and Gold, the Obstruction and Balance of Trade, and the
occasions for Money abroad to our Armies and Confederates, is so much lessened,
that it does very much require some Expedient; especially when Public Taxes
are so great.

In the next place, I shall proceed to consider of that of raising Moneys by
Excise upon our Home-Commodities.

First, A General Excise upon Home Commodities is a Real Land Tax, and will
have the same Influence upon the Value of Lands and Rents, as that we call a
Land Tax, or Monthly-Assessment, has; and will raise at least Seven, if not
Ten times as much, and consequently be as bad as a Land Tax so many times
double. Which I thus prove: The difference must be either in the Matter, or the
Manner.

As to the Matter first; A General Excise upon Home Commodities, and a Land
Tax, or Monthly Contribution, differ not essentially, since both are a Duty
upon the same Commodities, which are the Product of Land; only in this their
main difference consists, That a Monthly Contribution is a Composition in gross
per Mensem, for all the Commodities the Land produces; and a General Excise is
by Retail upon every Particular and Parcel thereof.

As to the Manner, their main difference consists in Three things: First, As to
the Persons that pay it. 2dly, As to the Time of Payment. 3dly, As to the
Equality of the Imposition. All which shall be considered in this Second Head.

Secondly, That it will have the same influence as a Monthly Contribution so
many times double, and not prove an insensible Tax, as is commonly alleged,
will easily appear by considering two things: First, Whether it will chiefly
lie upon the Buyer or the Seller, and consequently cause a Rise or Fall upon
Commodities. Secondly, Whether it be likely in point of Time and Equality, to
afford any considerable Advantage to the Seller.

As to the first, It must be measured by the Necessity of the Buyer or Seller;
for it is an undoubted Truth, That if the Necessity of the Buyer be greater
than the Seller, the Market will rise; but if that of the Seller be greater
than the Buyer, the Price of Commodities must fall; and any Duty laid upon
Commodities will lie upon either accordingly. But as to the present Case in
England, I think there is nothing more apparent, than the Plenty of
Home-Commodities, and the want of People to cousume them, which is in truth the
principal Cause of the present Fall of Rents, and the Price of Commodities; the
consequence of which necessarily will be, That whatever Duty is imposed upon
the Commodity, the Buyer will have it so much the cheaper, since it is in his
choice of whom to buy, and indeed who shall sell, and who not. As to Time and
Equality, it must be allowed that the Excise has some advantage of the Land
Tax, since the time of Payment is not until Sale, and all men seem to pay alike
for the same thing; yet when it shall be considered, that most of the Trade of
this kind is upon Credit, and not for Ready-Money, and that when Ready-Money is
paid, a great Abatement of the Price is expected; and that the Commodity does
vastly differ in Price and Goodness, and yet shall pay all alike, as Beef,
Mutton, and Corn, etc. and above all, that the Commodity will be burdened
above seven fold by this Payment in parcels; it will be found these Advantages
will be much over-ballanced; to which I may add the vast charge, trouble and
slavery in the Collection, which draw forth from the Subject twice as much as
will come to the King's Coffers, and beget an Army of Officers, and a further
Army of Soldiers to second them; a Consideration of importance, more than all
the rest, and renders it of all Practices the worst.

Secondly, A general Home-Excise will destroy Trade, which will appear thus:
Whether the Fund of Trade in England be Money, or Home-Commodities; now there
is nothing more evident, than that the main Trade of England is in the return
of our Home-Commodities, and not that of Money, which is the main that the
Dutch Trade is driven withal, they having few Commodities of their own
Countries to export, nor indeed enough to support the 20th part of their own
people, which renders this kind of Tax most proper there, though very
destructive here, all Impositions still discouraging the Vent of the
Commodities on which they are imposed, as the Experience of all former times
and places does abundantly prove; besides the great consumption of all Foreign
Commodities here, is by such as have dependence on the product of their
Country, and not upon Trade, as they all do in Holland; the Vent of which, if
discouraged or lessened, abates the Foreign Trade likewise, and the Commodities
imposed upon there, are most Foreign, but here Native; and Estates there
personal, but here real.

Thirdly, This will overthrow the substance of all the Nobility and Gentry of
England by the fall of the Value of their Lands and Rents; for if the present
Land Tax has produced an Effect to such a degree already, and that by
experience we find the Land Tax draws more Money out of the Country than what
it can bear, disabling the Tenant to pay his Rent, or carry on the Trade in the
Country, otherwise than upon Credit; what must the Case be when 7, or 10 times
as much will be raised upon the same thing by this New way?

Fourthly, A General Excise puts an end to the use of Parliaments, and quite
changes the present Constitution of the Government; for having already given
duties in all Foreign Commodities, should they admit of this upon Native, there
were no more to be given, nor could it be carried on without a Military Power
to second it, and might possibly hazard the Government it self, if the people
should not swallow it; and if once got up, will never be laid down.

Fifthly, It can be of no use to a present Supply, since it will ask a long
time to settle it; and neither afford much Money, or Credit, till it be so
settled; and that the Experiment be tried, whether it can, or will be born,
which this Town, under the Oppression of a War and Power of an Army, would not
yield to.

If it be objected, That the Dutch raise greater Sums thereby, than we can any
other way, and by that are enabled to make War more powerfully than We.

This is a perfect mistake; for their Excise is not able to answer the ordinary
Charge of the Government, and is in truth their ordinary Revenue; and their War
is maintained by their 200, and 100 Penny-Tax, by way of our Subsidy upon
Personal Estate.

Sixthly, That this will raise near thrice as much as will come to the King,
will thus appear; In the Vent of all our Home-Commodities, especially in any
considerable Quantities, there is one at least that goes between the Grower and
first Seller, and the Consumer; as the Malster, and Brewer, or Alehouse-keeper,
between the Barley, and the Drink; the Engrosser, Meal-man or Baker, between
our Wheat and our Bread; the Butchers between our Meat; and the Butcher and
Tallow-Chandler, between our Suet and Candles; the Higler, Carrier, or
Polterer, between our Poltrey and Wild-fowl; Iron, Lead, Wool, Tin, Leather and
Salt, between the first Founder and Maker, their Retailers, and other Trades
that are employed in the Manufactures that are made of them. Now it cannot
reasonably be supposed, That whoever is the first Buyer of these things, or any
other that goes between the Buyer and the Consumer, will pay the full Price to
the Grower, and pay the Duty of Excise out of his own Purse, which will require
a greater Stock; and gather it in again of the Consumer, without Interest, or
Profit, much of which Trade will be upon Credit, some of it comes short home,
especially since it is in his power to abate it in the Price from the first
Grower.

Nevertheless, he will certainly raise it in the Price to the Consumer again;
and so the Penny will be doubled, and probably raise the Price more than the
Duty, upon supposition that he pays the Duty, and may come to be a loser by it;
and this being dispersed all the Kingdom over, must needs create a vast number
of Officers and charge in the Collection to the King; to which I may add, the
great Penalties with which it must be supported, and attended; and the keenness
of the Officers to exact them, and the great discouragement all this will bring
upon the Consumption, with the great disturbance and slavery that it will bring
upon the people, to have their Houses subjected to the Searches of Officers,
and their Persons and Estates to Entries of Goods, and to Penalties upon that
account. Now the Case is not the same in Holland as to any of the particulars
beforementioned, as will appear by these following:

First, For that it is their interest to discourage the Consumption, and to
occasion Parcimony, most of the Commodities being Foreign; and to encourage the
Export of them, upon which their whole Trade and Livelihood depends, but ours
the quite contrary.

Secendly, They can certainly raise the Price upon the first Buyer, because of
the Scarcity of the Commodity; and that besides that little which the Country
affords, it is all in the hands of some few Merchants or Engrossers; and the
Necessity of the Buyer is far greater than that of the Seller, through the
Multitude of Inhabitants, and the Smalness of the Product for Necessaries for
Life.

Thirdly, Their Collection is very easy and cheap; for the Merchant secures the
Excise upon his first Entry at the Custom-House; and for the rest, they have no
Market but in Walled and Populous Towns; so that it is all collected there with
few hands, and little Trouble to the People.

Lastly, All the Excises of Holland, both upon Foreign Commodities and Home,
though multiplied and advanced to the last degree, together with the other
Revenues that belong to the Crown of Spain, and the Church, have been computed
but at Two Millions a Year, Monasteries and Tithes included, and are
anticipated by Debts for several Years; and but sufficient to pay the Interest;
and it is the 200 Penny, and 100 Penny upon Personal Estates; that is the thing
that supports their Wars upon extraordinary Occasions; and therefore probably,
the Excises here will not raise such Sums as we imagine, especially upon some
few things; and yet the Charge, Slavery, and the Inconveniences before
mentioned, will be equal; and the hazard the Government will run in rendering it
odious and disgustful to the People, are so great; and above all it can turn to
no account but for a continuance of time; and that it is a foundation for any
Government, or Ambitious Prince that would subvert the Constitution, and
enslave the People, to support an Army, and carry on his designs if once
introduced, by the continuance of it; and therefore I think no English man will
be willing to make the experiment.

As to the last Particular I undertook, which was to give my Opinion what
methods were the most eligible to raise Money by; having in some measure
prevented it by passing my Censure upon those that are now in practice and
vogue; I shall conclude all with proposing that of the Ancient way of Subsidy
upon a true Pound Rate, according to the Wisdom and constant practice of our
Ancestors, as the most equal, most reasonable, and most suitable to our
Constitution; and therefore most eligible above all others: Which I shall
endeavor to prove by these Arguments following, and by Answering those
Objections that are usually made against it.

But before I come to these particulars, I think it necessary to give some
general Account of the Ancient Form and Method of Subsidies, Tenths and
Fifteenths; the Two latter having been totally disused, and the former but
rarely, and not pursuant to the old Method, since the beginning of the Civil
War; Vide L. Coke's Instit. 4. pa. 33, and 34.
a Subsidy before the War did usually amount to 70,000 Pound, the last
Subsidy-Book being the Rule by which the future were given; wherein every man's
Land was valued at a certain Rate beyond Reprises; and this was not altered but
once in an Age, when there was an Act made on purpose to make a review by the
Oaths of the Commissioners, Assessors, and examination of the Parties
themselves, or any other person knowing therein; and all the variation
otherwise in the Subsidies, was in the Personal Estate and Money, and the
allowance for Debts, and a great number of Children, to which they had regard
upon application made by the Parties, pursuant to the Provision in those Acts;
all Persons under Five pound in Personal, and Three Pound in Real, as formerly
Rated in the King's Books above Reprises, were excep^ed; and all Goods and
Stock in Trade and Household Stuff, except wearing Apparel, were included: And a
Subsidy was Four Shillings in the Pound upon Real Estate, and Two Shillings
Eight-pence upon Personal, payable by Two Payments. And Although Two Shillings
Eight-pence may seem to be less upon Goods, than Four Shillings upon Lands; yet
when it is considered, that Lands are Rated according to the Annual Profits;
and not their intrinsic Value of Purchase; and that this is almost treble the
profit of Money at Five per Cent. and that all other Goods have no Profit or
Interest to attend them, Personal Estate is more than doubly Charged, as I have
before Asserted.

As to the Tenths and Fifteenths, they were a certain Rate imposed on Cities,
Towns, and Boroughs, in respect of their Moveable Goods, and did amount to
about 20,000 Pound; but there was usually a Clause, to reserve a Sum for such
Cities and Towns as were decayed.

As to the Arguments for the Subsidy or Pound-Rate, having said so much
already, I shall reduce them to very few Heads.

First, That it is equal in the Imposition, no body can deny; nor that none can
pay more than he is rated, by any body's being undervalued.

Secondly, That it is made more equal and reasonable, by the allowance of
Debts, empty Houses, drowned or unprofitable Lands: But as for Lands, Let or
Unlet, since the Profits may be made in hand, as well as otherwise, there was
never any Allowance; the Reasons not being the same with Houses, which are a
burden, and yield no Profit.

Thirdly, Here the Clergy, and all that have Estates upon old Rents, and
Personal Estates in Money, Goods, etc. shall pay; though the Assessments
brought in the full Value, yet the Commissioners did make an Allowance for the
Port of the Person, according to his Quality.

But I come now to those Objections which are usually made against it; viz.

First, That it is impracticable, as late Experience has proved.

And Secondly, That it will not raise such Sums as are requisite for the
present Juncture.

To the first of these I answer, That the Experience of all former Ages is a
sufficient Evidence; and the Reasons of the late Failure have been two visible
ones:

First, The Countenance that the Monthly Assessment has met with from the
Court; and the Discountenance this has found, when the Parliament granted the
first 12d. Aid, and the King to name Commissioners, that they put in all the
same again which were in the Monthly Assessment; which as it was the highest
Disservice imaginable to the Crown, in favor of their particular Countries; so
it is like to prove the most fatal to the Nation, disabling it to raise any
great Sums from the great inequality of it, and inclining the Party oppressed
to embrace any New Project that may hazard the present Government, or prove
destructive to the Nation.

Secondly, The zealous Endeavors of the Western and Northern Members to
continue the Monthly Assessment, which is so favorable to them; which when
they consider the Consequences beforementioned, I hope will be no longer
insisted on, at such a time as this, when all that is dear to them is at stake.
But to show that this is easily practicable, if the Parli^ment will follow the
Methods heretofore used by their Ancestors, I shall refer you to the Quotations
in the Margin 32 Hen. 8. Ca. 50 p. 715. the Assessors and Parties paying upon
Oath.
, and to those Acts, which you will find in the Statutes at large, 34 Hen. 8.
Ca. 28. p. 833. the same.
where the Assessors were upon Oath, 37 Hen. 8. Ca. 25. p. 893. the same.
and the Commissioners named by the King with power to examine all Persons upon
Oath. 2 and 3 Edw. the 6th. Ca. 36. p. 970, and 971. the same.
But if these Methods be thought too rigorous, 3 and 4 Edw. the 6th. Ca. 23. p.
1004, 1005. the same.
I propose that the Commissioners may only be of his Nomination, 7 Edward the
6th Ca. 12. p. 1052, 1053. the same.
according to the Right of the Crown, 4 and 5 Phil. and Mar. Ca. 13. p. 1158,
and 1159. the same.
and the Practice of all Ages, whose only Power is to see the Assessors do
their duty to put the law in just Execution; and that every man may be bound to
deliver into the Assessor the true Value of the Lands in the place where it
lies, according as it is rented; and if in their Hands, according to the
highest value that it pays in Parish-Taxes, with any thing that is Rented,
under pain to Forfeit a Year's Value for every concealment of all that he has
in that Place. And that the Commissioners have Power to examine any other but
the Person himself concerning the Value of the Lands, and the Parish-Taxes, in
order to an equal Pound Rate, and to Levy the Penalties upon concealments. And
if it shall be thought reasonable to allow any thing for the Port of the
person, that it be ascertained by a tenth, or any other part to be deducted to
the Commissioners from Persons above a Certain Quality, but to lose that
benefit upon any Concealment.

As to the not raising a Considerable Sum, there can by no way be so much
raised, as by this; for we find by Experience, that the Monthly Assessment,
though now screwed up higher than ever, does not raise above 1651702 l. 18 s.
but every 12 d. in the Pound will raise a Million, and the Four Shillings that
were given by way of 12 d. Aid the first year, would have raised Four Millions,
which I prove thus: The Monthly Assessment at 70,000 l. per mensem, raises
840,000 l. per annum* and of this I am sure not near a third part of England
pays above 12 d. in the Pound, and some not above Three pence, and so upward to
a Shilling: Now if these two thirds were brought to pay a Shilling, and the
others reduced, I leave it to any reasonable man to judge, Whether the
remaining 160,000 l. would not have been raised, especially if Money and
Personal Estate are called in to aid; and this I shall observe to you, That all
the Home-Excise of the Province of Holland, as I have been credibly informed,
do not raise above a Million, and the rest of the Provinces not above half a
one, tho multiplied and extended to the utmost: And therefore if laid only upon
some few things here, would not raise such Sums as are imagined; and for that
reason also not worth the Experiment, to change the Ancient Methods of our
Ancestors, which will be found in the Conclusion the most Equal and Reasonable
of all others.

POSTSCRIPT.
THis Paper being writ and calculated for the Year 1692. before the Parliament
Sat, and had adjusted their Aids, a full and successful Experiment has been
made for a Million upon a perpetual Fund, and probably might bear half a
Million more, if the time for Subscription and Fund were enlarged; there has
also been trial of another 4 s. Pound-Rate, which by reason all Oaths were
waved, and very small Penalties put upon the Concealment, and the Commissioners
not of the King's Nomination, as I am informed, has fallen short of the Two
Millions that were expected from it; so that other Methods must be taken, as
are herein before proposed, if you would make it any thing equal or effectual.
There has also been new Impositions laid on several Commodities, which by the
Neglect and Miscarriage of Convoys, and want of Station-Ships and Cruizers to
clear the Channel from Privateers, as to Trade in General, but more
Particularly to the Mediterranean, Turkey, and West India Trade, have produced
but very little; also the Duties upon Sugar have been wholly taken off, which
might have been born during the War. These things I thought necessary to
observe, since they have made Alterations in some Matters contained in this
Essay.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
TRavels into diverse Parts of Europe and Asia, undertaken by the French King's
Order, to discover a New Way by Land into China; containing many curious
Remarks in Natural Philosophy, Geography, Hydrography, and History. Together
with a Description of Great Tartary, and of the different People who Inhabit
there. By Father Avril of the Order of the Jesuits* Done out of French. To
which is added a Supplement, extracted from Hakluyt and Purchase, giving an
Account of several Journeys over Land from Russia, Persia, and the Mogul's
Country to China: Together with the Roads and Distances of Places.

Politica Sacra and Civilis: Or a Model of Civil and Ecclesiastical Government;
wherein, besides the Positive Doctrine, the State and Church in General, are
debated the Principal Controversies of the Times, concerning the Constitution
of the State and Church of England. By George Lawson, Rector of Moore in Salop.

Both Printed for Tim. Goodwin.


