OBSERVATIONS UPON THE United Provinces OF THE NETHERLANDS.

By Sir WILLIAM TEMPLE of Shene, in the County of Surrey, Baronet, Ambassador
at the Hague, and at Aix la Chappelle, in the year 1668.

LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell for Sa. Gellibrand at the Golden Ball in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1673.

THE PREFACE.
HAving lately seen the State of the United Provinces, after a prodigious
growth in Riches, Beauty, extent of Commerce, and number of Inhabitants,
arrived at length to such a height (by the strength of their Navies, their
fortified Towns and standing-Forces, with a constant Revenue proportioned to
the support of all this Greatness), As made them the Envy of some, the Fear of
others, and the Wonder of all their Neighbors.

We have this Summer past, beheld the same State, in the midst of great
appearing Safety, Order, Strength, and Vigor, Almost ruined and broken to
pieces in some few days and by very few blows; And reduced in a manner to its
first Principles of Weakness and Distress; Exposed, oppressed, and very near at
Mercy. Their Inland-Provinces swallowed up by an Invasion, almost as sudden and
unresisted, as the Inundations to which the others are subject. And the
remainders of their State rather kept alive by neglect or disconcert of its
Enemies, than by any strength of Nature, or endeavors at its own recovery.

Now because such a Greatness, and such a Fall of this State, seem Revolutions
unparalled in any Story, and hardly conceived even by those who have lately
seen them; I thought it might be worth an idle man's time, to give some account
of the Rise and Progress of this Commonwealth, The Causes of their Greatness,
And the steps toward their fall: Which were all made by motions perhaps little
taken notice of by common eyes, and almost undiscernable to any man that was
not placed to the best advantage, and something concerned, as well as much
inclined to observe them.

The usual Duty of Employments abroad, imposed not only by Custom, but by
Orders of State, made it fit for me to prepare some formal Account of this
Country and Government, after Two years Ambassy, in the midst of so great
Conjunctures and Negotiations among them. And such a Revolution as has since
happened there, though it may have made these Discourses little important to
His Majesty, or His Council; Yet it will not have rendered them less agreeable
to common eyes, who, like men that live near the Sea, will run out upon the
Cliffs to gaze at it in a Storm, though they would not look out of their
Windows to see it in a Calm.

Besides, at a time when the Actions of this Scene take up so generally the
eyes and discourses of their Neighbors; And the Maps of their Country grow so
much in request: I thought a Map of their State and Government would not be
unwelcome to the World, since it is full as necessary as the others, To
understand the late Revolutions and Changes among them. And as no man's Story
can be well written till he is dead; so the account of this State could not be
well given till its fall, which may justly be dated from the Events of last
Summer (whatever fortunes may further attend them), since therein we have seen
the sudden and violent dissolution of that more Popular Government, which had
continued and made so much noise for above Twenty years in the World, without
the exercise or influence of the Authority of the Princes of Orange, A part so
essential in the first Constitutions of their State. Nor can I wholly lose my
pains in this Adventure, when I shall gain the ease of answering this way at
once, those many Questions I have lately been used to upon this occasion: Which
made me first observe and wonder, how ignorant we were generally in the Affairs
and Constitutions of a Country so much in our eye, the common road of our
travels, as well as subject of our talk; and which we have been of late not
only curious, but concerned to know.

I am very sensible how ill a Trade it is to write, where much is ventured, and
little can be gained; since whoever does it ill, is sure of contempt, and the
justliest that can be, when no man provokes him to discover his own follies, or
to trouble the world. If he writes well, he raises the envy of those Wits that
are possessed of the Vogue, and are jealous of their Preferment there, as if it
were in Love, or in State; And have found, that the nearest way to their own
Reputation, lies right, or wrong, by the derision of other men. But however, I
am not in pain: for it is the affectation of Praise, that makes the fear of
Reproach; And I write without other design than of entertaining very idle men,
and among them my self. For I must confess, that being wholly useless to the
Public, And unacquainted with the cares of increasing Riches (which busy the
World): Being grown cold to the pleasures of younger or livelier men; And
having ended the Entertainments of Building and Planting (which use to succeed
them); Finding little taste in common Conversation; And trouble in much
Reading, from the care of my eyes (since an illness contracted by many
unnecessary diligences in my Employments abroad): There can hardly be found an
idler man than I; Nor consequently one more excusable for giving way to such
amusements as this: Having nothing to do, but to enjoy the ease of a private
Life and Fortune; which as I know no man envies, so (I thank God) no man can
reproach.

I am not ignorant, that the vein of Reading never run lower than in this Age;
and seldom goes further than the design of raising a Stock to furnish some
Calling or Conversation. The desire of Knowledge being either laughed out of
doors by the Wit that pleases the Age; or beaten out by Interest, that so much
possesses it: And the amusement of Books giving way to the liberties or
refinements of Pleasure, that were formerly less known, or less avowed than
now. Yet some there will always be found in the world, who ask no more at their
idle hours, than to forget themselves. And whether that be brought about by
Drink or Play, by Love or Business, or by some diversions as idle as this, It Is
all a case.

Besides, it may possibly fall out, at one time or other, that some Prince or
great Minister may not be ill pleased in these kind of Memorials (upon such a
Subject), to trace the steps of Trade and Riches, of Order and Power in a
State; and those likewise of weak or violent Counsels, of corrupt or ill
Conduct, of Faction or Obstinacy, which decay and dissolve the firmest
Governments: That so by reflections upon Foreign Events, they may provide the
better and the earlier against those at home, and raise their own Honor and
Happiness by equal degrees with the Prosperity and Safety of the Nations they
govern.

For under favor of those who would pass for Wits in our Age, by saying things
which David tells us the fool said in His; And set up with bringing those Wares
to Market, which (God knows) have been always in the World, though kept up in
corners, because they used to mark their Owners, in former Ages, with the Names
of Buffoons, Profane or Impudent men. Who deride all Form and Order, as well
as Piety and Truth; And under the notion of Fopperies, endeavor to dissolve
the very Bonds of all Civil Society; Though by the favor and protection
thereof, They themselves enjoy so much greater proportions of Wealth and of
Pleasures, than would fall to their share if all lay in common, as they seem to
design (for then such Possessions would belong of right to the strongest and
bravest among us).

Under favor of such men, I believe it will be found at one time or other, by
all who shall try, That whilst Human Nature continues what it is, The same
Orders in State, The same Discipline in Armies, The same Reverence for things
Sacred, And Respect of Civil Institutions, The same Virtues and Dispositions of
Princes and Magistrates, derived by interest or imitation into the Customs and
Humors of the people, Will ever have the same effects upon the Strength and
Greatness of all Governments, and upon the Honor and Authority of those that
Rule, as well as the Happiness and Safety of those that Obey.

Nor are we to think Princes themselves losers, or less entertained, when we
see them employ their time and their thoughts in so useful Speculations, and to
so glorious Ends: But that rather thereby they attain their true Prerogative of
being Happier, as well as Greater than Subjects can be. For all the Pleasures
of Sense that any man can enjoy, are within the reach of a private Fortune, and
ordinary Contrivance; Grow fainter with age, and duller with use; Must be
revived with intermissions, and wait upon the returns of Appetite, which are no
more at call of the Rich, than the Poor. The slashes of Wit and good Humor
that rise from the Vapors of Wine, are little different from those that
proceed from the heats of blood in the first approaches of Fevers or Frenzies;
And are to be valued but as (indeed) they are the effects of Distemper. But the
pleasures of Imagination, as they heighten and refine the very pleasures of
Sense, so they are of larger extent, and longer duration. And if the most
sensual man will confess there is a Pleasure in Pleasing, He must likewise
allow, there is good to a man's self in doing good to others. And the further
this extends, the higher it rises, and the longer it lasts. Besides, there is
Beauty in Order; and there are Charms in well-deserved Praise: And both are the
greater, by how much greater the Subject; As the first appearing in a
well-framed and well-governed State; And the other arising from Noble and
Generous Actions. Nor can any veins of good Humor be greater than those that
swell by the success of wise Counsels, and by the fortunate Events of public
Affairs; since a man that takes pleasure in doing good to Ten thousand, must
needs have more, than he that takes none but in doing good to himself.

But these thoughts lead me too far, and to little purpose: Therefore I shall
leave them for those I had first in my head concerning the State of the United
Provinces.

And whereas the greatness of their Strength and Revenues, grew out of the
vastness of their Trade, into which, Their Religion, their Manners and
Dispositions, their Situation, and the form of their Government, were the
chief Ingredients. And this last had been raised partly upon an old foundation,
And partly with Materials brought together by many and various Accidents; It
will be necessary for the survey of this great Frame, to give some account of
the Rise and Progress of their State, by pointing out the most remarkable
occasions of the first, and periods of the other. To discover the Nature and
Constitutions of their Government in its several parts, and the motions of it
from the first and smallest wheels. To observe what is peculiar to them in
their Situation or Dispositions, And what in their Religion. To take a survey
of their Trade, and the Causes of it; Of the Forces and Revenues which composed
their Greatness; And the Circumstances* and Conjunctures which conspired to
their Fall. And these are the Heads that shall make the Order and Arguments in
the several parts of these Observations.

The Contents.
CHap. I. Of the Rise and Progress of their State. Chap. II. Of their
Government. Chap. III. Of their Situation. Chap. IV. Of their People and
Dispositions. Chap. V. Of their Religion. Chap. VI. Of their Trade. Chap. VII.
Of their Forces and Revenues Chap. VIII. Of the Causes of their fall in 1672.
The Printer to the Reader.
THE Author having not concerned himself in the publication of these Papers; It
has happened that for want of his Care in revising the Impression, several
faults are slipped in, and some such as alter the sense; For which I am to ask
the Reader's pardon, and desire his trouble in correcting such as occur to me,
according to the following

ERRATA.
Page 20. l 20. r. retaining, p. 25. l. 26. r executions, p. 46. l. 6. r. goes
on, p. 61. l. 2. r. forming, p. 66. l. 9. r. eluded, p. 90. l. 23. r.
Gecommitteerde, p. 91. l. 20. dele either, p. 124. l. 28. r. being so much, p.
173. l. 17. r. seemed.

CHAP. I. Of the Rise and Progress of the United Provinces.
WHoever will take a view of the Rise of this Commonwealth, must trace it up as
high as the first Commotions in the Seventeen Provinces, under the Duchess of
Parma's Government; and the true Causes of that more avowed and general Revolt
in the Duke of Alva's time. And to find out the natural Springs of those
Revolutions, must reflect upon that sort of Government under which the
Inhabitants of those Provinces lived for so many Ages past, in the subjection
of their several Dukes or Counts; till by Marriages, Successions, or Conquest,
they came to be united in the House of Burgundy, under Philip surnamed The
Good: And afterward in that of Austria, under Philip Father of Charles the
Fifth: And lastly, in the Person of that great Emperor incorporated with those
vast Dominions of Germany and Spain, Italy and the Indies.

Nor will it be from the purpose upon this search, to run a little higher into
the Antiquities of these Countries: For though most men are contented only to
see a River as it runs by them, and talk of the changes in it as they happen;
when it is troubled, or when clear; when it drowns the Country in a Flood, or
forsakes it in a Drowth: Yet he that would know the nature of the water, and
the Causes of those Accidents (so as to guess at their continuance or return),
must find out its source, and observe with what strength it rises, what length
it runs, and how many small streams fall in, and feed it to such a height, as
make it either delightful or terrible to the eye, and useful or dangerous to
the Country about it.

The Numbers and Fury of the Northern Nations under many different names,
having by several Inundations broken down the whole frame of the Roman Empire,
extended in their Provinces as far as the Rhine; either gave a birth, or made
way for the several Kingdoms and Principalities that have since continued in
the parts of Europe on this side that River, which made the ancient limits of
the Gaul and German Nations. The Tract of Land which we usually call the
Low Countries, was so wasted by the Invasions or Marches of this raging people
(who past by them to greater Conquests), that the Inhabitants grew thin; and
being secure of nothing they possessed, fell to seek the support of their lives
rather by hunting, or by violence, than by labor and industry: and thereby the
grounds came to be uncultivated, and in the course of years turned either to
Forest, or Marshes; which are the two natural soyls of all desolated Lands in
the more temperate Regions. For by soaking of frequent showrs, and the course
of waters from the higher into lower grounds, when there is no issue that helps
them to break out into a Channel, the flat Land grows to be a mixture of earth
and water, and neither of common use nor passage to Man or Beast, which is
called a Marsh. Tho higher, and so the dryer parts, moistened by the Rain, and
warmed by the Sun, shoot forth some sorts of Plants, as naturally as Bodies do
some sorts of Hair; which being preserved by the desolateness of a place
untrodden, as well as untilled, grow to such Trees or Shrubs as are natural to
the Soil; and those in time producing both food and shelter for several kind
of Beasts, make the sort of Country we call a Forest.

And such was Flanders for many years before Charlemaign's time, when the Power
of the Francs having raised and established a great Kingdom of their own upon
the entire Conquest of Gaul, Began to reduce the disorders of that Country to
the form of a Civil, or (at least) Military Government; To make divisions and
distributions of Lands and Jurisdictions, by the Bounty of the Prince, or the
Services of his chief Followers and Commanders; To one of whom, a great extent
of this Land was given, with the title of Forester of Flanders. This Office
continued for several descents, and began to civilize the Country, by
repressing the violence of Robbers and Spoylers, who infested the woody and
fast-places, and by encouraging the milder people to fall into Civil Societies,
to trust to their Industry for subsistence, to Laws for protection, and to
their Arms united under the care and conduct of their Governors, for safety
and defense.

In the time of Charlemaigne, as some write; or as others, in that of Charles
the Bald, Flanders was erected into a County, which changed the Title of
Forester for that of Count, without interrupting the Succession.

What the extent of this County was at first, or how far the Jurisdiction of
Foresters reached, I cannot affirm; nor whether it only bordered upon, or
included the lower parts of the vast VVoods of Ardenne, which in Charlemaign's
time was all Forest as high as Aix and the rough Country for some Leagues
beyond it, and was used commonly by that Emperor for his Hunting: This appears
by the ancient Records of that City, which attribute the discovery, or at least
retrieving the knowledge of those hot Baths, to the fortune of that Prince while
he was Hunting: For his Horse poching one of his legs into some hollow ground,
made way for the smoking water to break out, and gave occasion for the
Emperors building that City, and making it his usual Seat, and the place of
Coronation for the following Emperors.

Holland being an Island made by the dividing-branches of the ancient Rhyne,
and called formerly Batavia, was esteemed rather a part of Germany, than Gaul
(between which it was seated), in regard of its being planted by the Catti, a
great and ancient people of Germany, and was treated by the Romans rather as an
Allied than Subjected Province; who drew from thence no other Tribute besides
Bands of Soldiers, much esteemed for their Valor, and joined as Auxiliaries to
their Legions in their Gallick, German, and British Wars.

It Is probable this Island changed in a great measure Inhabitants and Customs,
as well as Names, upon the inroads of the barbarous Nations, but chiefly of the
Normans and Danes, from whose Countries and Language the Names of Holland and
Zealand seem to be derived. But about the year 860, a Son of the Count of
Frize, by a Daughter of the Emperor Lewis the second, was by him instituted
Count of Holland, and gave beginning to that Title; which running since that
time through so many direct or collateral Successions and some Usurpations,
ended at last in Philip the second, King of Spain, by the defection of the
United Provinces.

Under these first Foresters, and Counts, who began to take those wasted
Countries and mixed People into their care, and to intend the growth, strength
and riches of their Subjects, which they esteemed to be their own; Many old and
demolisht Castles were rebuilt, many new ones erected, and given by the
Princes to those of their Subjects or Friends whom they most loved or esteemed,
with large circuits of Lands for their support, and Seigneurial Jurisdiction
over the Inhabitants. And this upon several easy Conditions, but chiefly of
attendance on their Prince at the necessary times of either honoring him in
Peace, or serving him in War. Nay possibly, some of these Seigneuries and
their Jurisdictions, may, as they pretend, have been the remains of some old
Principalities in those Countries among the Gallick and German Nations, the
first Institutions whereof were lost in the immensity of time that preceded the
Roman Discoveries or Conquest, and might be derived perhaps from the first
Paternal dominion or concurrence of loose people into orderly Neighbourhoods,
with a deference, if not subjection to the wisest or bravest among them.

Under the same Counts were either founded or restored many Cities and Towns;
of which the old had their ancient Freedoms and Jurisdictions confirmed, or
others annexed; and the New had either the same granted to them by example of
the others; or great Immunities and Privileges for the encouragement of
Inhabitants to come and people in them: All these Constitutions agreeing much
in substance perhaps by imitation, or else by the agreeing-nature of the people
for whom or by whom they were framed; but differing in form according to the
difference of their Original, or the several Natures, Customs and Interests of
the Princes, whose Concessions many of them were, and all their Permissions.

Another Constitution which entered deep into their Government, may be derived
from another source. For those Northern Nations whose unknown Language and
Country perhaps made them be called Barbarous (though indeed almost all
Nations out of Italy and Greece were styled so by the Romans), but whose
Victories in obtaining new Seats, and Orders in possessing them, might make us
allow them for a better polici'd people than they appeared by the vastness of
their Multitude, or the rage of their Battles.

VVherever they past, and seated their Colonies and Dominions, they left a
Constitution which has since been called in most European Languages, The
States; consisting of Three Orders, Noble, Ecclesiastical, and Popular, under
the limited Principality of one Person, with the style of King, Prince, Duke,
or Count. The remainders at least, or traces hereof, appear still in all the
Principalities founded by those people in Italy, France, and Spain; and were of
a piece with the present Constitutions in most of the great Dominions on
the other side the Rhyne: And it seems to have been a temper first introduced by
them between the Tyranny of the Eastern Kingdoms, and the Liberty of the
Grecian or Roman Commonwealths.

It Is true, the Goths were Gentiles when they first broke into the Roman
Empire, till one great swarm of this people, upon treaty with one of the Roman
Emperors, and upon Concessions of a great Tract of Land to be a Seat for their
Nation, embraced at once the Christian Faith. After which, the same people
breaking out of the limits had been allowed them, and by fresh numbers bearing
all down where they bent their march; as they were a great means of propagating
Religion in many parts of Europe where they extended their Conquests; so the
zeal of these new Proselytes, warmed by the veneration they had for their
Bishops and Pastors, and enriched by the spoils and possessions of so vast
Countries, seem to have been the First that introduced the maintenance of the
Churches and Clergy, by endowments of Lands, Lordships and Vassals,
appropriated to them: For before this time the Authority of the Priesthood in
all Religions seemed wholly to consist in the peoples opinion of their Piety,
Learning and Virtues, or a reverence for their Character and Mystical
Ceremonies and Institutions; their Support, or their Revenues, in the voluntary
Oblations of pious men, the Bounty of Princes, or in a certain share out of the
Labors and Gains of those who lived under their Cure, and not in any
subjection of men's Lives or Fortunes, which belonged wholly to the Civil Power:
And Ammianus, though he taxes the Luxury of the Bishops in Valentinian's time;
yet he speaks of their Riches which occasioned or fomented it, as arising
wholly from the Oblations of the people. But the Devotion of these new
Christians introducing this new form of endowing their Churches; and afterward
Pepin and Charlemaign, King of the Franks, upon their Victories in Italy, and
the favor of the Roman Bishop to their Title and Arms, having annexed great
Territories and Jurisdictions to that See; This Example or Custom was followed
by most Princes of the Northern Races through the rest of Europe, and brought
into the Clergy great possessions of Lands, and by a necessary consequence a
great share of Temporal Power, from the dependances of their Subjects or
Tenants; by which means they came to be generally one of the Three Orders that
composed the Assembly of the States in every Country.

This Constitution of the States had been established from time immemorial in
the several Provinces of the Low Countries, and was often assembled for
determining Disputes about succession of their Princes, where doubtful or
contested; For deciding those between the great Towns; For raising a Milice for
the defense of their Countries in the wars of their Neighbors; For Advice in
time of Dangers abroad, or Discontents at home; But always upon the new
Succession of a Prince, and upon any new Impositions that were necessary on the
people. The use of this Assembly was another of those Liberties whereof the
Inhabitants of these Provinces were so fond and so tenacious. The rest, besides
those ancient Privileges already mentioned of their Towns, were Concessions
and Graces of several Princes, in particular Exemptions or Immunities,
Jurisdiction both in choice and exercise of Magigistracy and Civil Judicature
within themselves; or else in the customs of using none but Natives in Charges
and Offices, and passing all weighty Affairs by the great Council composed of
the great Lords of the Country, who were in a manner all Temporal, there being
but three Bishops in all the Seventeen Provinces, till the time of Philip the
second of Spain.

The Revenues of these Princes consisted in their ancient Demesnes, in small
Customs (which yet grew considerable by the greatness of Trade in the Maritime
Towns), and in the voluntary Contributions of their Subjects, either in the
States, or in particular Cities, according to the necessities of their Prince,
or the affections of the people. Nor were these frequent; for the Forces of
these Counts were composed of such Lords who either by their Governments, or
other Offices; or by the tenure of their Lands, were obliged to attend their
Prince on Horseback, with certain numbers of men, upon all his wars: or else
of a Milice, which was called Les gens d' ordonnance, who served on foot, and
were not unlike our Train-bands; the use, or at least style whereof, was
renewed in Flanders upon the last War with France in 1667, when the Count
Egmont was made by the Governor, General de gens d' ordonnance.

These Forces were defrayed by the Cities or Countries, as the others were
raised by the Lords when occasion required; and all were licensed immediately
when it was past, so that they were of little charge to the Prince. His wars
were but with other Princes of his own size, or Competitors to his
Principality; or sometimes with the Mutineys of his great Towns: Short, though
violent; and decided by one Battle or Siege; unless they fell into the quarrels
between England and France, and then they were engaged but in the skirts of the
War, the gross of it being waged between the two Kings, and these smaller
Princes made use of for the credit of Alliance, or sometimes the commodiousness
of a Diversion, rather than for any great weight they made in the main of the
Affair.

The most frequent Wars of the Counts of Holland, were with the Frisons, a
part of the old Saxons; and the fiercest battles of some of the Counts of
Flanders, were with the Normans, who past that way into France, and were the
last of those Nations that have infested the more Southern parts of Europe. I
have sometimes thought, how it should have come to pass, that the infinite
swarm of that vast Northern-Hive, which so often shook the world like a great
Tempest, and overflowed it like a great Torrent; changing Names, and Customs,
and Government, and Language, and the very face of Nature, wherever they seated
themselves; which upon record of story, under the name of Gauls, pierced into
Greece and Italy, sacking Rome, and besieging the Capitol in Camillus his time;
under that of the Cimbers, marched through France to the very confines of Italy,
defended by Marius; under that of Huns or Lombards, Visigoths, Goths, and
Vandals, conquered the whole Forces of the Roman Empire, sacked Rome thrice in a
small compass of years; seated their Kingdoms in Spain and Africa, as well as
Lombardy; and under that of Danes or Normans, possessed themselves of England, a
great part of France, and even of Naples and Sicily: How (I say) these Nations,
which seemed to spawn in every Age, and at some intervals of time discharged
their own native Countries of so vast Numbers, and with such terror to the
world, should about seven or eight hundred years ago leave off the use of these
furious expeditions, as if on a sudden they should have grown barren, or tame,
or better contented with their own ill Climates. But I suppose we owe this
benefit wholly to the growth and progress of Christianity in the North; by
which, early and undistinguisht Copulation, or multitude of Wives, were either
restrained or abrogated; By the same means Learning and Civility got footing
among them in some degree, and enclosed certain Circuits of those vast Regions,
by the distinctions and bounds of Kingdoms, Principalities, or Commonalties.
Men began to leave their wilder lives, spent without other cares or pleasures
than of Food, or of Lust; and betook themselves to the ease and entertainment
of Societies: With Order and Labor, Riches began, and Trade followed; and
these made way for Luxury, and that for many Diseases or ill habits of body,
which, unknown to the former and simpler Ages, began to shorten and weaken both
Life and Procreation. Besides, the divisions and circles of Dominion,
occasioned Wars between the several Nations, though of one Faith; and those of
the Poles, Hungarians, and Muscovites, with the Turks or Tartars, made greater
slaughters; and by these Accidents I suppose the Numbers of those fertile Broods
have been lessened, and their Limits in a measure confined; and we have had
thereby for so long together in these parts of the world, the honor and
liberty of drawing our own blood, upon the quarrels of Humor or Avarice,
Ambition or Pride, without the assistance or need of any Barbarons Nations to
destroy us.

But to end this disgression, and return to the Low Countries, where the
Government lasted in the form and manner described (though in several
Principalities), till Philip of Burgundy, in whom all the Seventeen Provinces
came to be united.

By this great extent of a populous Country, and the mighty growth of Trade in
Bruges, Gant, and Antwerp, attributed by Comines to the goodness of the
Princes, and ease and safety of the people; both Philip and his Son Charles the
Hardy, found themselves a Match for France, then much weakened, as well by the
late wars of England, as the Factions of their Princes. And in the wars with
France, was the House of Burgundy under Charles and Maximilian of Austria (who
married his Daughter and Heir), and afterward under Charles the Fifth, their
Grandchild, almost constantly engaged; the course, successes, and revolutions
whereof are commonly known.

Philip of Burgundy, who began them, was a good and wise Prince, loved by his
Subjects and esteemed by his Enemies; and took his measures so well, that upon
the declining of the English Greatness abroad, by their Dissentions at home, he
ended his quarrels in France, by a Peace with Safety and Honor. So that he
took no pretense from his Greatness, or his Wars, to change any thing in the
Forms of his Government: But Charles the Hardy, engaged more rashly against
France and the Switzers, began to ask greater and frequent Contributions of his
Subjects; which gained at first by the credit of his Father's Government and
his own great Designs, but spent in an unfortunate War, made his people
discontented and him disesteemed, till he ended an unhappy life, by an untimely
death, in the Battle of Nancy.

In the time of Maximilian, several German-troops were brought down into
Flanders for their defense against France; and in that of Charles the Fifth,
much greater Forces of Spaniards and Italians, upon the same occasion; a thing
unknown to the Low-Countrey-men in the time of their former Princes. But
through the whole course of this Emperor's Reign, who was commonly on the
fortunate hand, his Greatness and Fame increasing together, either diverted or
suppressed any discontents of his Subjects upon the increase of their Payments,
or the grievance of so many Foreign Troops among them. Besides, Charles was of
a gentle and a generous nature; and being born in the Low Countries, was
naturally kind and easy to that people, whose Customs and Language he always
used when he was among them, and employed all their great men in the Charges of
his Court, his Government, or his Armies, through the several parts of his vast
Dominions; so that upon the last great Action of his life, which was the
resignation of his Crowns to his Son and Brother, He left to Philip the Second,
the Seventeen Provinces, in a condition as Peaceable, and as Loyal, as either
Prince or Subjects could desire.

Philip the Second coming to the possession of so many and great Dominions,
about the year 1556, after some trial of good and ill fortune in the War with
France (which was left him by his Father like an encumbrance upon a great
Estate), restored by the Peace of Cambrey not only the quiet of his own
Countries, but in a manner of all Christendom, which was in some degree or
other engaged in the quarrel of these Princes. After this he resolved to return
into Spain, and leave the Low Countries under a subordinate Government, which
had been till Charles the Fifth's time the constant Seat of their Princes, and
shared the Presence of that great Emperor with the rest of his Dominions. But
Philip a Spaniard born, receiving from the Climate or Education of that
Country, the Severeness and Gravity of the Nation, which the Flemings called
Reservedness and Pride; Conferring the Offices of his House, and the Honor of
his Council and Confidence, upon Spaniards, and thereby introducing their
Customs, Habits, and Language, into the Court of Flanders. Continuing, after
the peace, those Spanish and Italian Forces, and the demand of Supplies from
the States, which the War had made necessary, and the easier supported; He soon
left off being loved, and began to be feared by the Inhabitants of those
Provinces.

But Philip the Second thought it not agreeing with the Pomp and Greatness of
the House of Austria, already at the head of so mighty Dominions; nor with his
Designs of a yet greater Empire, to consider the Discontents or Grievances of
so small a Country; nor to be limited by their ancient Forms of Government:
And therefore at his departure for Spain, and substitution of his natural
Sister the Duchess of Parma, for Governess of the Low Countries, assisted by
the Ministry of Granvell; He left her instructed to continue the Foreign
Troops, and the demand of money from the States for their support, which was
now by a long course of War grown customary among them, and the Sums only
disputed between the Prince and the States: To establish the Fourteen Bishops,
he had agreed with the Pope, should be added to the Three that were anciently
in the Low Countries, To revive the Edicts of Charles the Fifth against Luther,
published in a Diet of the Empire about the year 1550, but eluded in the
Low Countries even in that Emperor's time; and thereby to make way for the
Inquisition with the same course it had received in Spain; of which the
Lutherans here, and the Moors there, were made an equal pretense. And these
Points, as they came to be owned and executed, made the first Commotions of
men's minds in the Provinces.

The hatred of the people against the Spaniards, and the Insolences of those
Troops, with the charge of their support, made them looked upon by the
Inhabitants in general, as the Instruments of their Oppression and Slavery, and
not of their Defense, when a general Peace had left them no Enemies: And
therefore the States began here their Complaints, with a general Consent and
Passion of all the Nobles, as well as Towns and Country. And upon the Delays
that were contrived, or fell in; the States first refused to raise any more
moneys either for the Spaniards pay, or their own standing-Troops; and the
people run into so great despair, that in Zealand they absolutely gave over the
working at their Digues, suffering the Sea to gain every Tide upon the
Country; and resolving (as they said) rather to be devoured by that Element,
than by the Spanish Soldiers: So that after many Disputes and Intrigues between
the Governess and the Provinces, the King upon her Remonstrances was induced to
their removal; which was accordingly performed with great joy and applause of
the people.

The erecting of Fourteen new Bishops Sees, raised the next Contest. The great
Lords looked upon this Innovation as a lessening of their Power, by introducing
so many new men into the great Council. The Abbots (out of whose Lands they
were to be endowed) pleaded against it as a violent usurpation upon the Rights
of the Church, and the Will of the Dead, who had given those Lands to a
particular use. The Commons murmured at it as a new degree of Oppression upon
their Conscience or Liberty, by the erecting so many new Spiritual Courts of
Judicature, and so great a number of Judges, being Seventeen for Three, that
were before in the Country; and those depending absolutely upon the Pope, or
the King. And all men declaimed against it as a breach of the Kings Oath at his
accession to the Government, for the preserving the Church and the Laws in the
same state he found them. However, this Point was gained entirely by the
Governess, and carried over the head of all opposition, though not without
leaving a general discontent.

In the midst of these ill Humors stirring in Flanders, the Wars of Religion
breaking out in France, drove great numbers of Calvinists into all those parts
of the Low Countries that confine upon France, as the Troubles of Germany had
before of Lutherans into the Provinces about the Rhyne; and the Persecutions
under Queen Mary, those of the Church of England into Flanders and Brabant, by
the great commerce of this Kingdom with Bruges and Antwerp.

These Accidents and Neighbourhoods filled these Countries in a small tract of
time with swarms of the Reformed Professors: And the admiration of their Zeal,
the opinion of their Doctrine and Piety, the compassion of their Sufferings,
the infusion of their Discontents, or the Humor of the Age, gained them every
day many Proselytes in the Low Countries, some among the Nobles, many among the
Villages, but most among the Cities, whose Trade and Riches were much increased
by these new Inhabitants; and whose Interest thereby, as well as Conversation,
drew them on to their favor.

This made work for the Inquisition, though moderately exercised by the
prudence and temper of the Governess, mediating between the rigor of Granvell,
in straining up to the highest his Master's Authority and the execution of his
Commands upon all occasions; And the resoluteness of the Lords of the
Provinces, to temper the King's Edicts, and protect the Liberties of their
Country against the admission of this New and Arbitrary Judicature, unknown to
all ancient Laws and Customs of the Country; and for that, not less odious to
the people, than for the cruelty of their executions. For before the
Inquisition, the care of Religion was in the Bishops; and before that, in the
Civil Magistrates throughout the Provinces.

Upon angry Debates in Council, but chiefly upon the universal Ministry of
Granvell, a Burgundian of mean birth, grown at last to be a Cardinal; and more
famous for the greatness of his Parts, than the goodness of his Life. The chief
Lords of the Country (among whom the Prince of Orange, Counts Egmont and Horn,
the Marquess of Bergen and Montigny, were most considerable) grew to so violent
and implacable a hatred of the Cardinal (whether from Passion or Interest),
which was so universally spread through the whole Body of the People, either by
the Causes of it, or the Example; That the Lords first refused their attendance
in Council, protesting, Not to endure the sight of a man so absolute there, and
to the ruin of their Country: And afterward petitioned the King in the name
of the whole Country, for his removal: Upon the delay whereof and the
continuance of the Inquisition, the people appeared upon daily occasions and
accidents, heated to that degree, as threatened a general Combustion in the
whole Body, when ever the least Flame should break out in any part.

But the King at length consented to Granvell's recess, by the opinion of the
Duchess of Parma, as well as the pursuit of the Provinces: Whereupon the Lords
reassumed their places in Council; Count Egmont was sent into Spain to
represent the Grievances of the Provinces; and being favorably dispatched by
the King, especially by remitting the rigor of the Edicts about Religion, and
the Inquisition; All noise of discontent and tumult was appeased, the Lords
were made use of by the Governess in the Council, and conduct of Affairs; and
the Governess was by the Lords both obeyed and honored.

In the beginning of the year 1565, there was a Conference at Bayonne between
Katharine Queen Mother of France, and her Son Charles the Ninth (though very
young), with his Sister Isabella Queen of Spain: In which no other person but
the Duke of Alva intervened, being deputed thither by Philip, who excused his
own presence, and thereby made this Enterview pass for an effect or expression
of kindness between the Mother and her Children. Whether great Resolutions are
the more suspected, where great Secrecy is observed; or it be true, what the
Prince of Orange affirmed to have by accident discovered, That the extirpation
of all Families which should profess the New Religion in the French or Spanish
Dominions, was here agreed on, with mutual assistance of the two Crowns; It Is
certain, and was owned, that Matters of Religion were the subject of that
Conference; and that soon after, in the same year, came Letters from King
Philip to the Duchess of Parma, disclaiming the Interpretation which had been
given to his Letters by Count Egmont; declaring, His Pleasure was, That all
Heretics should be put to death without remission: That the Emperor's Edicts,
and the Council of Trent, should be published and observed; and commanding,
That the utmost Assistance of the Civil Power should be given to the
Inquisition.

When this was divulged, at first, the astonishment was great throughout their
Provinces; but that soon gave way to their Rage, which began to appear in their
Looks, in their Speeches, their bold Meetings and Libels; and was increased by
the miserable spectacles of so many Executions upon account of Religion. The
Constancy of the Sufferers, and Compassion of the Beholders, conspiring
generally to lessen the opinion of Guilt or Crime, and highten a detestation of
the Punishment and Revenge, against the Authors of that Counsel, of whom the
Duke of Alva was esteemed the Chief.

In the beginning of the year 1566, began an open Mutiny of the Citizens in
many Towns, hindering Executions, and forcing Prisons and Officers; and this was
followed by a Confederacy of the Lords, Never to suffer the Inquisition in the
Low Countries, as contrary to all Laws, both Sacred and Profane, and exceeding
the Cruelty of all former Tyrannies. Upon which all resolutions of Force or
Rigor grew unsafe for the Government, now too weak for such a revolution of the
people; and on the other side, Brederode in confidence of the general Favor,
came in the head of Two hundred Gentlemen, through the Provinces to Brussels,
and in bold terms petitioned the Governess for abolishing the Inquisition, and
Edicts about Religion; and that new ones should be framed by a Convention of
the States.

The Governess was forced to use gentle Remedies to so violent a Disease; to
receive the Petition without show of the resentment she had at heart, and to
promise a representation of their Desires to the King; which was accordingly
done: But though the King was startled with such consequences of his last
Commands, and at length induced to recall them; yet whether by the slowness of
his nature, or the forms of the Spanish Court, the Answer came too late: and as
all his former Concessions, either, by delay or testimonies of ill will or
meaning in them, had lost the good grace; so this lost absolutely the effect,
and came into the Low Countries when all was in flame by an insurrection of the
meaner people through many great Towns of Flanders, Holland, and Utrecht; who
fell violently upon the spoil of Churches, and destruction of Images, with a
thousand circumstances of barbarous and brutish fury; which with the
Institution of Consistories and Magistrates in each Town among those of the
Reformed Profession, with public Confederacies and Distinctions, and private
Contributions agreed upon for the support of their common Cause, gave the first
date in this year of 1566, to the revolt of the Low Countries.

But the Nobility of the Country, and the richest of the people in the Cities,
though unsatisfied with the Government, yet feeling the Effects, and abhorring
the Rage of Popular Tumults, as the worst mischief that can befall any State;
And encouraged by the arrival of the King's Concessions, began to unite their
Councels and Forces with those of the Governess, and to employ themselves both
with great Vigor and Loyalty, for suppressing the late Insurrections that had
seized upon many, and shaked most of the Cities of the Provinces; in which the
Prince of Orange, and Count Egmont, were great Instruments, by the authority of
their great Charges (One being Governor of Holland and Zealand, and the other
of Flanders); but more by the general love and confidence of the people; Till
by the reducing Valenciens, Maestricht, and the Burse, by Arms; The submission
of Antwerp and other Towns; The defection of Count Egmont from the Councels of
the Confederate Lords (as they were called); The retreat of the Prince of
Orange into Germany; and the death of Brederode, with the news and preparations
of King Philip's sudden journey into the Low Countries, as well as the Prudence
and Moderation of the Duchess in governing all these circumstances; The whole
Estate of the Provinces was perfectly restored to its former Peace, Obedience,
and at least Appearance of Loyalty.

King Philip, whether having never really decreed his journey into Flanders, or
diverted by the pacification of the Provinces, and apprehension of the Moors
rebelling in Spain, or a distrust of his Son Prince Charles his violent
Passions and Dispositions, or the expectation of what had been resolved at
Bayonne, growing ripe for execution in France, gave over the discourse of
seeing the Low Countries; But at the same time took up the resolution for
dispatching the Duke of Alva thither at the head of an Army of Ten thousand
Veterane Spanish, and Italian Troops, for the assistance of the Governess, the
execution of the Laws, the suppressing and punishment of all who had been
Authors or Fomentors of the late Seditions.

This Result was put suddenly in execution, though wholly against the Advice of
the Duchess of Parma in Flanders, and the Duke of Feria (one of the chief
Ministers) in Spain: Who thought the present Peace of the Provinces ought not
to be invaded by new occasions; nor the Royal Authority lessened, by being made
a party in a War upon his Subjects; nor a Minister employed where he was so
professedly both hating and hated, as the Duke of Alva in the Low Countries.

But the King was unmovable; so that in the end of the year 1567, the Duke of
Alva arrived there with an Army of Ten thousand, the best Spanish and Italian
Soldiers, under the Command of the choicest Officers which the Wars of Charles
the Fifth, or Philip the Second, had bred up in Europe; which with Two thousand
Germans the Duchess of Parma had raised in the last Tumults; and under the
Command of so Old and Renowned a General as the Duke of Alva, made up a Force,
which nothing in the Low Countries could look in the face with other eyes, than
of Astonishment, Submission, or Despair.

Upon the first report of this Expedition, the Trading-people of the Towns and
Country began in vast numbers to retire out of the Provinces; so as the
Duchess wrote to the King, That in few days above a Hundred thousand men had
left the Country, and withdrawn both their Money and Goods, and more were
following every day: So great antipathy there ever appears between Merchants
and Soldiers; whilst one pretends to be safe under Laws, which the other
pretends shall be subject to his Sword and his Will. And upon the first Action
of the Duke of Alva after his arrival, which was the seizing Count Egmont and
Horn, as well as the suspected death of the Marquess of Berghen, and
imprisonment of Montigny in Spain (whither some Months before, they had been
sent with Commission and Instructions from the Duchess), she immediately
desired leave of the King to retire out of the Low Countries.

This was easily obtained, and the Duke of Alva invested in the Government,
with Powers never given before to any Governor: A Council of Twelve was
erected for trial of all Crimes committed against the King's Authority, which
was called by the people The Council of Blood. Great numbers were condemned and
executed by Sentence of this Council, upon account of the late Insurrections;
More by that of the Inquisition, against the parting-advice of the Duchess of
Parma, and the Exclamations of the people at those Illegal Courts. The Towns
stomached the breach of their Charters, the people of their Liberties, the
Knights of the Golden-Fleece the Charters of their Order, by these new and
odious Courts of Judicature; All complain of the disuse of the States, of the
introduction of Armies, but all in vain: The King was constant to what he had
determined; Alva was in his nature cruel and inexorable; the new Army was
fierce and brave, and desirous of nothing so much as a Rebellion in the
Country; The people were enraged, but awed and unheaded; All was Seizure and
Process, Confiscation, and Imprisonment, Blood and Horror, Insolence and
Dejection, punishments executed, and meditated Revenge: The smaller Branches
were lopt off apace; the great ones were longer a hewing down. Count Egmont and
Horn, lasted several Months; but at length in spite of all their Services to
Charles the Fifth, and to Philip; as well as of their new Merits in the
quieting of the Provinces, and of so great Supplications and Intercessions as
were made in their favor both in Spain and in Flanders, They were publicly
beheaded at Brussels, which seemed to break all patience in the people; and by
their end, to give those Commotions a beginning, which cost Europe so much
Blood, and Spain a great part of the Low-Countrey-Provinces.

After the process of Egmont and Horn, the Prince of Orange, who was retired
into Germany, was summoned to his Trial for the same Crimes of which the others
had been accused; and upon his not appearing, was condemned, proclaimed
Traitor, and his whole Estate (which was very great in the Provinces, and in
Burgundy) seized upon as forfeited to the King. The Prince treated in this
manner while he was quiet and unarmed in Germany, employs all his Credit with
those Princes engaged to him by Alliance, or by common fears of the House of
Austria; throws off all obedience to the Duke of Alva, raises Forces, joins
with great numbers flocking to him out of the Provinces; All enraged at the
Duke of Alva's cruel and arbitrary Government, and resolved to revenge the
Count Egmont's death (who had ever been the Darling of the people). With these
Troops he enters Freizland, and invades the outward parts of Brabant, receives
succors from the Protestants of France then in arms under the Prince of Conde:
And after many various Encounters and Successes, by the great Conduct of Alva
and Valor of his Veterane Army, being hindered from seizing upon any Town in
Brabant (which both of them knew would shake the fidelity of the Provinces), he
is at length forced to break up his Army, and to retire into Germany. Hereupon
Alva returns in Triumph to Brussels; and, as if he had made a Conquest instead
of a Defense, causes out of the Cannon taken from Lewis of Nassau, his Statue
to be cast in Brass, treading and insulting upon two smaller Statues that
represented the Two Estates of the Low Countries; And this to be erected in the
Citadel he had built at Antwerp for the absolute subjecting of that rich,
populous, and mutinous Town.

Nothing had raised greater indignation among the Flemings, than the public
sight and ostentation of this Statue; and the more, because they knew the boast
to be true, finding their ancient Liberties and Privileges (the Inheritance of
so many Ages, or Bounty of so many Princes) all now prostrate before this one
man's Sword and Will, who from the time of Charles the Fifth had ever been
esteemed an Enemy of their Nation, and Author of all the Counsels for the
absolute subduing their Country.

But Alva moved with no Rumors, terrified with no Threats from a broken and
unarmed people, and thinking no Measures nor Forms were any more necessary to
be observed in the Low Countries; pretends greater sums are necessary for the
pay and reward of his Victorious Troops, than were annually granted upon the
King's Request, by the States of the Provinces: And therefore demands a general
Tax of the Hundredth part of every man's Estate in the Low Countries, to be
raised at once: And for the future, the Twentieth of all Immovables, and the
Tenth of all that was sold.

The States with much reluctance consent to the first as a thing that ended at
once; but refused the other two, alleging the poverty of the Provinces, and
the ruin of Trade. Upon the Duke's persisting, they petition the King by
Messengers into Spain, but without redress; draw out the year in Contests,
sometimes stomachful, sometimes humble with the Governor; Till the Duke
impatient of further delay, causes the Edict, without consent of the States, to
be published at Brussels. The people refuse to pay, the Soldiers begin to levy
by force; the Townsmen all shut up their Shops; the people in the Country
forbear the Market, so as not so much as Bread or Meat is to be bought in the
Town. The Duke is enraged, and calls the Soldiers to arms, and commands several
of the Inhabitants, who refused the payments, to be hanged that very night upon
their Sign-posts; Which nothing moves the Obstinacy of the people. And now the
Officers and the Guards are ready to begin the Executions, when news comes to
Town of the taking of the Briel by the Geusses, and of the expectation that had
given of a sudden Revolt in the Province of Holland.

This unexpected blow struck the Duke of Alva; and foreseeing the consequences
of it, because he knew the Stubble was dry, and now he found the Fire was
fallen in, He thought it an ill time to make an end of the Tragedy in Brabant,
whilst a new Scene was ready in Holland; and so giving over for the present his
Taxes and Executions, applies his thoughts to the suppression of this new Enemy
that broke in upon him from the Sea; and for that reason the bottom and reach
of the Design as well as the nature and strength of their Forces, were to the
Duke the less known, and the more suspected. Now because this seizure of the
Briel began the second great Commotion of the Low Countries in 1570; and that
which indeed never ended but in the loss of those Provinces, where the death of
the Spanish and Royal Government, gave life to a new Commonwealth; It will be
necessary to know what sort of men, and by what Accidents united, and by what
Fears or Hopes emboldned, were the first Authors of this Adventure.

Upon Brederod's delivering a Petition to the Duchess of Parma, against the
Inquisition, and for some liberty in point of Religion; Those persons which
attended him, looking mean in their Clothes and their Garb, were called by one
of the Courtiers at their entrance into the Palace, Gueses, which signifies
Beggars; a Name though raised by chance or by scorn, yet affected by the Party
as an Expression of Humility and Distress, and used ever after by both sides as
a Name of distinction, comprehending all who dissented from the Roman Church,
how different soever in opinion among themselves.

These men spread in great numbers through the whole extent of the Provinces,
by the accidents and dispositions already mentioned; After the appeasing of
their first Sedition, were broken in their common Counsels; and by the Cruelty
of the Inquisition, and Rigor of Alva, were in great multitudes forced to
retire out of the Provinces, at least such as had means or hopes of subsisting
abroad: Many of the poorer and more desperate, fled into the Woods of the upper
Countries (where they are thick and wild), and lived upon spoil; and in the
first descent of the Prince of Orange his Forces, did great mischiefs to all
scattered parties of the Duke of Alva's Troops in their march through those
parts. But after that attempt of the Prince ended without success, and he was
forced back into Germany; the Count of Marcke; a violent and implacable Enemy
to the Duke of Alva and his Government, with many others of the broken Troops
(whom the same fortune and disposition had left together in Friezland), manned
out some Ships of small force, and betook themselves to Sea; and with
Commissions from the Prince of Orange, began to prey upon all they could
master, that belonged to the Spaniards. They sometimes sheltered and watered,
and sold their Prizes in some Crekes or small Harbors of England, though
forbidden by Queen Elizabeth (then in peace with Spain); sometimes in the River
Ems, or some small ports of Friezland; till at length, having gained
considerable Riches by these Adventures; whether to sell, or to refresh;
whether driven by storm, or led by design (upon knowledge of the ill blood which
the new Taxes had bred in all the Provinces) they landed in the Island of the
Briel, assaulted and carried the Town, pulled down the Images in the Churches,
professed openly their Religion, declared against the Taxes and Tyranny of the
Spanish Government, and were immediately followed by the revolt of most of the
Towns of Holland, Zealand, and West-Friezland, who threw out the Spanish
Garrisons, renounced their obedience to King Philip, and swore Fidelity to the
Prince of Orange.

The Prince returned out of Germany with new Forces; and making use of this
fury of the people, contented himself not with Holland and Zealand, but marched
up into the very heart of the Provinces, within five Leagues of Brussels,
seizing upon Mechlin, and many other Towns, with so great Consent, Applause,
and Concourse of people, that the whole Spanish Dominions seemed now ready to
expire in the Low Countries, if it had not been revived by the Massacre of the
Protestants at Paris; which contrived by joint Councels with King Philip* and
acted by a Spanish party in the Court of France, and with so fatal a blow to
the contrary Faction, encouraged the Duke of Alva, and dampt the Prince of
Orange in the same degree; so that one gathers strength enough to defend the
heart of the Provinces, and the other retires into Holland, and makes that the
seat of the War.

This Country was strong by its nature and seat among the Waters that
encompass and divide it; but more by a rougher sort of people at that time,
less softened by Trade, or by Riches; less used to Grants of Money and Taxes;
and proud of their ancient Fame recorded in the Roman Stories, of being
obstinate Defenders of their Liberties, and now most implacable haters of the
Spanish Name.

All these dispositions were increased and hardened in the War that ensued
under the Duke of Alva's Conduct, or his Sons; By the slaughter of all innocent
persons and sexes, upon the taking of Naerden, where the Houses were burnt, and
the Walls levelled to the ground; By the desperate defense of Haerlem for ten
months, with all the practices and returns of ignominy, cruelty, and scorn on
both sides; while the very Women listed themselves in companies, repaired
breaches, gave alarms, and beat up quarters, till all being famisht, Four
hundred Burgers (after the surrender) were killed in cold blood, among many
other Examples of an incensed Conqueror; Which made the Humor of the parties
grow more desperate, and their hatred to Spain and Alva incurable.

The same Army broken and forced to rise from before Alcmaer, after a long and
fierce siege in Alva's time; and from before Leyden in the time of Requisenes
(where the Boors themselves opened the Sluyces, and drowned the Country,
resolving to mischief the Spaniards at the charge of their own ruin), gave the
great turn to Affairs in Holland.

The King grows sensible of Danger, and apprehensive of the total defection of
the Provinces; Alva weary of his Government, finding His violent Counsels and
Proceedings had raised a Spirit, which was quiet before he came, and was never
to be laid any more. The Duke is recalled, and the War goes under Requisenes;
who dying suddenly, and without provisions made by the King for a Successor;
the Government, by customs of the Country, devolved by way of interim upon the
great Council, which lasted some time by the delay of Don John of Austria's
coming, who was declared the new Governor.

But in this Interim the strength of the Disease appears; for upon the Mutiny
of some Spanish Troops for want of their pay, and their seizing Alost, a Town
near Brussels, the people grow into a rage, the Tradesmen give over their
Shops, and the Contrymen their Labor, and all run to Arms; In Brussels they
force the Senate, pull out those men they knew to be most addicted to the
Spaniards, kill such of that Nation as they meet in the streets, and all in
general cry out for the expulsion of Foreigners out of the Low Countries, and
the assembling of the States; to which the Council is forced to consent. In the
mean time the chief persons of the Provinces enter into an agreement with the
Prince of Orange, to carry on the common Affairs of the Provinces by the same
Counsels; so as when the Estates assembled at Ghent, without any contest they
agreed upon that Act which was called The Pacification of Ghent, in the year
1576, whereof the chief Articles were, The expulsion of all Foreign Soldiers
out of the Provinces; Restoring all the ancient Forms of Government; And
referring matters of Religion in each Province to the Provincial Estates; And
that for performance hereof the rest of the Provinces should for ever be
confederate with Holland and Zealand. And this made the first period of the
Low Country Troubles, proving to King Philip a dear Experience how little the
best Conduct and boldest Armies are able to withstand the Torrent of a stubborn
and enraged people, which ever bears all down before it, till it comes to be
divided into different Channels by Arts or by Chance; or till the Springs,
which are the Humors that fed it, come to be spent, or dry up of themselves.

The Foreign Forces refusing to depart, are declared Rebels; whereupon the
Spanish Troops force and plunder several Towns, and Antwerp among the rest (by
advantage of the Citadel), with equal Courage and Avarice; And defend
themselves in several Holds from the Forces of the States, till Don John's
arrival at Luxenburgh, the only Town of the Provinces where he thought himself
safe, as not involved in the defection of the rest.

The Estates refuse to admit him without his accepting and confirming the
Pacification of Ghent; which at length he does by leave from the King, and
enters upon the Government with the dismission of all Foreign Troops, which
return into Italy. But soon after Don John, whether out of indignation to see
himself but a precarious Governor, without force or dependence; Or desiring
new occasions of Fame by a War; or instructed from Spain upon new Councels; He
takes the occasion of complementing Queen Margaret upon her journey out of
France to the Spaw, and on a sudden seizes upon the Castle of Namur. Whereupon
the Provinces for the third time throw off their obedience, call the Prince of
Orange to Brussels, where he is made Protector of Brabant by the States of that
Province, and preparations are made on both sides for the War; While Spain is
busy to form new Armies, and draw them together in Namur and Luxenburgh, the
only Provinces obedient to that Crown; And all the rest agree to elect a
Governor of their own, and send to Matthias the Emperors Brother, to offer him
the Charge.

At this time began to be formed the Malecontent-party in the Low Countries;
which though agreeing with the rest in their hatred to the Spaniards, and
defense of their Liberties and Laws; yet were not inclined to shake off their
Allegiance to their Prince, nor change their old and established Religion: And
these were headed by the Duke of Areschot, and several great men; the more
averse from a general defection, by emulation or envy of the Prince of Orange
his Greatness, who was now grown to have all the influence and credit in the
Counsels of the League.

By the assistance of this party after Don John's sudden death, the Duke of
Parma succeeding him, gained strength and reputation upon his coming to the
Government, and an entrance upon that great Scene of Glory and Victory, which
made both his Person so renowned, and the time of his Government signallized by
so many Sieges and Battles, and the reduction of so great a part of the Body of
the Provinces to the subjection of Spain.

Upon the growth of this Party, and for distinction from them, who pursuing a
middle and dangerous Council, were at length to become an accession to one of
the Extremes; The Seven Northern Provinces meeting by their Deputies at
Utrecht, in the year 1579, framed that Act or Alliance, which was ever after
called The Union of Utrecht; and was the Original Constitution and Frame of
that Commonwealth, which has since been so well known in the World by the Name
of The United Provinces.

This Union was grounded upon the Spaniards breach of the Pacification of
Ghent, and new invasion of some Towns in Gelderland; and was not pretended to
divide these Provinces from the generality, nor from the said Pacification; but
to strengthen and pursue the Ends of it, by more vigorous and united Counsels
and Arms.

The chief force of this Union consists in these points drawn out of the
Instrument it self.

The Seven Provinces unite themselves so, as if they were but one Province, and
so as never to be divided by Testament, Donation, Exchange, Sale, or Agreement:
Reserving to each particular Province and City, all Privileges, Rights,
Customs and Statutes; In adjudging whereof, or differences that shall arise
between any of the Provinces, the rest shall not intermeddle further, than to
intercede toward an Agreement.

They bind themselves to assist one another with Life and Fortunes against all
Force and Assault made upon any of them, whether upon pretense of Royal
Majesty, of restoring Catholic Religion, or any other whatsoever.

All frontier-Towns belonging to the Union, if old, to be fortified at the
charge of the Province where they lie; if new, to be erected at the charge of
the Generality.

All Imposts and Customs from three Months to three Months, to be offered to
them that bid most; and with the Incomes of the Royal Majesty, to be employed
for the Common defense.

All Inhabitants to be Listed and Trained within a Month, from 18 to 60 years
old. Peace and War not to be made without consent of all the Provinces; Other
cases that concern the management of both, by most Voices. Differences that
shall arise upon the first, between the Provinces, to be submitted to the
Stadtholders.

Neighbouring-Princes, Lords, Lands, and Cities, to be admitted into the Union
by consent of the Provinces.

For Religion, those of Holland and Zealand to act in it as seems good unto
themselves. The other Provinces may regulate themselves according to the tenor
established by Matthias, or else as they shall judge to be most for the peace and
welfare of their particular Provinces; provided every one remain free in his
Religion, and no man be examined or entrapped for that cause, according to the
Pacification of Ghent.

In case of any dissension or differences between Provinces, if it concern one
in particular, it shall be accommodated by the others; if it concern all in
general, by the Stadtholders; In both which cases, sentence to be pronounced
within a Month, and without Appeal or Revision.

The States to be held as has been formerly used; and the Mint in such manner
as shall hereafter be agreed by all the Provinces.

Interpretation of these Articles to remain in the States; but in case of their
differences, in the Stadtholders.

They bind themselves to fall upon, and imprison any that shall act contrary to
these Articles; in which case no Privilege nor Exemption to be valid.

This Act was signed by the Deputies of Gelderland, Zutphen, Holland, Zealand,
Utrecht, and the Omlands of Frize, Jan. 23, 1579; but was not signed by the
Prince of Orange till May following; and with this Signification, judging that
by the same the Superiority and Authority of Archduke Matthias is not lessened.

In the same year this Union was entered and signed by the Cities of Ghent,
Nimmegue, Arnhem, Leewarden, with some particular Nobles of Frizeland, Venlo,
Ypers, Antwerp, Breda, and Bruges. And thus these Provinces became a
Commonwealth, but in so low and uncertain a state of Affairs, by reason of the
various motions and affections of men's minds, the different Ends and Interests
of the several Parties, especially in the other Provinces; and the mighty Power
and Preparations of the Spanish Monarchy to oppress them, That in their first
Coin they caused a Ship to be stamped, laboring among the Waves without Sails
or Oars; and these words: Incertum quo fata ferant.

I thought so particular a deduction necessary to discover the natural causes
of this Revolution in the Low Countries, which has since had so great a part,
for near a hundred years, in all the Actions and Negotiations of Christendom;
And to find out the true Incentives of that obstinate love for their Liberties,
and invincible hatred for the Spanish Nation and Government, which laid the
foundation of this Commonwealth: And this last I take to have been the stronger
passion, and of the greater effect, both in the bold Counsels of contracting
their Union, and the desperate Resolutions of defending it. For not long after,
The whole Council of this new State being pressed by the extremities of their
Affairs, passing by the form of Government in the way of a Commonwealth, made
an earnest and solemn Offer of the Dominion of these Provinces both to England
and France; but were refused by both Crowns: And though they retained the Name
of a Free People, yet they soon lost the ease of the Liberties they contended
for, by the absoluteness of their Magistrates in the several Cities and
Provinces, and by the extreme pressure of their Taxes, which so long a War with
so mighty an Enemy made necessary for the support of their State.

But the hatred of the Spanish Government under Alva, was so universal, that it
made the Revolt general through the Provinces, running through all Religions,
and all Orders of men, as appeared by the Pacification of Ghent; Till by the
division of the Parties, by the Powers of so vast a Monarchy as Spain at that
time, and by the matchless Conduct and Valor of the Duke of Parma, This
Humor, like Poison in a strong Constitution, and with the help of violent
Physic, was expelled from the heart, which was Flanders and Brabant (with the
rest of the Ten Provinces) into the outward Members; and by their being cut
off, the Body was saved. After which, the most enflamed spirits being driven by
the Arms of Spain, or drawn by the hopes of Liberty and Safety, into the United
Provinces out of the rest, the hatred of Spain grew to that height, that they
were not only willing to submit to any new Dominion, rather than return to the
old; but when they could find no Master to protect them, and their Affairs grew
desperate, they were once certainly upon the Counsel of burning their great
Towns, wasting and drowning what they could of their Country, and going to
seek some new Seats in the Indies. Which they might have executed, if they had
found Shipping enough to carry off all their Numbers, and had not been detained
by the compassion of those which must have been left behind, at the mercy of an
incensed and conquering Master.

The Spanish and Italian Writers content themselves to attribute the causes of
these Revolutions to the change of Religion, to the native stubbornness of the
people, and to the Ambition of the Prince of Orange: But Religion without
mixtures of Ambition and Interest, works no such violent effects; and produces
rather the Examples of constant Sufferings, than of desperate Actions. The
nature of the People cannot change of a sudden, no more than the Climate which
infuses it; and no Country has brought forth better Subjects, than many of
these Provinces, both before and since these Commotions among them: And the
Ambition of one man could neither have designed nor achieved so great an
Adventure, had it not been seconded with universal Discontent: Nor could that
have been raised to so great a height and heat, without so many circumstances
as fell in from an unhappy course of the Spanish Counsels, to kindle and foment
it. For though it had been hard to Head such a Body, and give it so strong a
principle of Life, and so regular Motions, without the accident of so great a
Governor in the Provinces, as Prince William of Orange; A man of equal
Abilities in Council and in Arms; Cautious and Resolute, Affable and Severe,
Supple to Occasions, and yet Constant to his Ends; of mighty Revenues and
Dependence in the Provinces, of great Credit and Alliances in Germany; esteemed
and honored abroad, but at home infinitely loved and trusted by the people,
who thought him affectionate to their Country, sincere in his Professions and
Designs, able and willing to defend their Liberties, and unlikely to invade
them by any Ambition of his own. Yet all these Qualities might very well have
been confined to the Duty and Services of a Subject, as they were in Charles
the Fifth's time; Without the absence of the King, and the peoples opinion of
his ill will to their Nation and their Laws; Without the continuance of
Foreign Troops after the Wars were ended; The erecting of the new Bishops
Sees, and introducing the Inquisition; The sole Ministry of Granvell, and
exclusion of the Lords from their usual part in Counsels and Affairs; The
Government of a man so hated as the Duke of Alva; The rigor of his
Prosecutions, and the insolence of his Statue: And lastly, Without the death of
Egmont, and the imposition of the Tenth and Twentieth part, against the Legal
Forms of Government in a Country, where a long derived Succession had made the
people fond and tenacious of their ancient Customs and Laws.

These were the seeds of their hatred to Spain; which increasing by the course
of about Threescore years, War, was not allayed by a long succeeding Peace, but
will appear to have been an Ingredient into the Fall, as it was into the Rise
of this State; which having been thus planted, came to be conserved and
cultivated by many Accidents and Influences from abroad; But those having had
no part in the Constitution of their State, nor the Frame of their Government.
I will content my self to mention only the chief of them, which most
contributed to preserve the Infancy of this Commonwealth, and make way for its
growth. The Causes of its succeeding Greatness and Riches being not to be
sought for in the Events of their Wars, but in the Institutions and Orders of
their Government, their Customs and Trade, which will make the Arguments of the
ensuing Chapters.

When Don John threw off the Conditions he had at first accepted of the
Pacification of Ghent, and by the surprise of Namur broke out into Arms; The
Estate of the Provinces offered the Government of their Country to Matthias
Brother to the Emperor, as a temper between their return to the obedience of
Spain, and the Popular Government which was moulding in the Northern Provinces.
But Matthias arriving without the advice or support of the Emperor, or Credit
in the Provinces; And having the Prince of Orange given him for his
Lieutenant General, was only a Cipher, and his Government a piece of Pageantry,
which past without effect, and was soon ended; So that upon the Duke of Parma's
taking on him the Government, some new protection was necessary to this
Infant-State, that had not legs to support it against such a storm as was
threatened upon the return of the Spanish and Italian Forces, to make the Body
of a formidable Army, which the Duke of Parma was framing in Namur and
Luxenburgh.

Since the Conference of Bayonne between the Queen Mother of France, and her
Daughter Queen of Spain; Those two Crowns had continued in the Reign of Francis
and Charles, to assist one another in the common Design there agreed on, of
prosecuting with violence those they called the Heretics, in both their
Dominions. The Peace held constant, if not kind, between England and Spain; so
as King Philip had no Wars upon his hands in Christendom during these
Commotions in the Low Countries; And the boldness of the Confederates in their
first Revolt and Union, seemed greater at such a time, than the success of
their Resistances afterward, when so many occasions fell in to weaken and
divert the Forces of the Spanish Monarchy.

For Henry the Third coming to the Crown of France, and at first only fettered
and controlled by the Faction of the Guises, but afterward engaged in an open
War (which They had raised against him upon pretext of preserving the
Catholic Religion, and in a conjunction of Councels with Spain) was forced
into better measures with the Hugonots of his Kingdom, and fell into ill
intelligence with Philip the Second, so as Queen Elizabeth having declined to
undertake openly the protection of the Low Country Provinces, It was by the
concurring-resolution of the States, and the consent of the French Court,
devolved upon the Duke of Alencon, Brother to Henry the Third.

But this Prince entered Antwerp with an ill presage to the Flemings, by an
attempt which a Biscainer made the same day upon the Prince of Orange's Life,
shooting him, though not mortally, in the head; and He continued his short
Government with such mutual distasts between the French and the Flemings (the
Heat and Violence of one Nation agreeing ill with the Customs and Liberties of
the other) that the Duke attempting to make himself absolute Master of the City
of Antwerp by force, was driven out of the Town, and thereupon retired out of
the Country with extreme resentment of the Flemings, and indignation of the
French; so as the Prince of Orange being not long after assasin'd at Delph, and
the Duke of Parma increasing daily in Reputation and in Force, and the
Malecontent Party falling back apace to his obedience, an end was presaged by
most men to the Affairs of the Confederates.

But the Root was deeper, and not so easily shaken: For the United Provinces,
after the unhappy Transactions with the French under the Duke of Alencon,
reassumed their Union in 583; binding themselves, in case by fury of the War
any point of it had not been observed, To endeavor from that time to see it
effected, In case any doubt had happened, to see it cleared, And any
Difficulties, composed: And in regard the Article concerning Religion had been
so framed in the Union, because in all the other Provinces besides Holland and
Zealand, The Romish Religion was then used, but now the Evangelical; It was
agreed by all the Provinces of the Union, That from this time in them all, the
Evangelical Reformed Religion should alone be openly preached and exercised.

They were so far from being broken in their Designs by the Prince of Orange's
death, That they did all the honor that could be to his Memory, substituted
Prince Maurice his Son, though but Sixteen years old, in all his Honors and
Commands, and obstinately refused all Overtures that were made them of Peace;
resolving upon all the most desperate Actions and Sufferings, rather than
return under the Spanish Obedience.

But these Spirits were fed and heighthen'd in a great degree, by the hopes and
countenance given them about this time from England: for Queen Elizabeth, and
Philip the Second, though they still preserved the Name of Peace, yet had worn
out in a manner the Effects as well as the Dispositions of it, whilst the
Spaniard fomented and assisted the Insurrections of the Irish, and Queen
Elizabeth the new Commonwealth in the Low Countries; Though neither directly,
yet by Countenance, Money, voluntary Troops, and ways that were equally felt on
both sides, and equally understood.

King Philip had lately increased the greatness of his Empire, by the
Inheritance or Invasion of the Kingdoms of Portugal, upon King Sebastian's loss
in Africa; But I know not whether he had encreast his Power, by the accession
of a Kingdom, with disputed Title, and a discontented People, who could neither
be used like good Subjects and governed without Armies; nor like a Conquered
Nation and so made to bear the charge of their forced obedience; But this
addition of Empire, with the vast Treasure flowing every year out of the
Indies, had without question raised King Philip's Ambition to vaster designs;
which made him embrace at once the protection of the League in France against
Henry the Third and Fourth, and the Donation made him of Ireland by the Pope,
and so embarque himself in a War with both those Crowns, while He was bearded
with the open Arms and Defiance of his own Subjects in the Low Countries.

But it is hard to be imagined how far the Spirit of one Great man goes in the
Fortunes of any Army or State. The Duke of Parma coming to the Government
without any footing in more than two of the smallest Provinces, collecting an
Army from Spain, Italy, Germany, and the broken Troops of the Country left him
by Don John, having all the other Provinces confederated against him, and both
England and France beginning to take open part in their defense; yet by force
of his own Valor, Conduct, and the Discipline of his Army, with the
dis-interessed and generous Qualities of his mind, winning equally upon the
Hearts and Arms of the Revolted Countries, and piercing through the Provinces
with an uninterrupted course of Successes, and the recovery of the most
important Towns in Flanders; At last by the taking of Anwerp and Groningue,
reduced the Affairs of the Union to so extreme distress, that being grown
destitute of all hopes and succors from France (then deep engaged in their own
Civil Wars), They threw themselves wholly at the feet of Queen Elizabeth,
imploring her Protection, and offering her the Sovereignty of their Country.
The Queen refused the Dominion, but entered into Articles with their Deputies
in 585, obliging her self to very great Supplies of Men and of Moneys, lent
them upon the security of the Briel, Flussing, and Ramekins; which were
performed, and Sir John Norrice sent over to command her Forces; and afterward
in 87, upon the War broken out with Spain, and the mighty threats of the
Spanish Armada, she sent over yet greater Forces under the Earl of Leicester,
whom the States admitted, and swore obedience to him, as Governor of their
United Provinces.

But this Government lasted not long, distastes and suspicion soon breaking out
between Leicester and the States; Partly from the jealousy of his affecting an
Absolute Dominion and Arbitrary disposal of all Offices; But chiefly, of the
Queen's Intentions to make a Peace with Spain; And the easy loss of some of
their Towns by Governors placed in them by the Earl of Leicester, increased
their discontents. Notwithstanding this ill intercourse, the Queen re-assures
them in both those points, disapproves some of Leicester's proceedings,
receives franc and hearty assistances from them in her Naval Preparations
against the Spaniards; and at length upon the disorders increasing between the
Earl of Leicester and the States, commands him to resign his Government, and
release the States of the Oath they had taken to obey him. And after all this
had past, the Queen easily sacrificing all particular resentments to the
Interest of her Crown, continued her Favor, Protection, and Assistances to the
States, during the whole course of Her Reign, which were returned with the
greatest deference and veneration to her Person, that was ever paid by them to
any Foreign Prince, and continues still to her Name in the remembrance, and
frequently in the mouths of all sorts of people among them.

After Leicester's departure, Prince Maurice was by the consent of the Union
chosen their Governor, but with a reservation to Queen Elizabeth; and entered
that Command with the hopes, which he made good in the execution of it for many
years; proving the greatest Captain of his Age, famous particularly in the
discipline and ordonance of his Armies, and the ways of Fortification by him
first invented or perfected, and since his time imitated by all.

But the great breath that was given the States in the heat of their Affairs,
was by the sharp Wars made by Queen Elizabeth upon the Spaniards at Sea in the
Indies, and the Expeditions of Lisbon and Cadiz, and by the declining-affairs
of the League in France, for whose support Philip the Second was so
passionately engaged, that twice he commanded the Duke of Parma to interrupt
the course of his Victories in the Low Countries, and march into France, for
the relief of Roan and Paris; Which much augmented the Renown of this great
Captain, but as much impaired the state of the Spanish Affairs in Flanders. For
in the Duke of Parma's absence, Prince Maurice took in all the places held by
the Spaniard on the other side the Rhine, which gave them entrance into the
United Provinces.

The succession of Henry the Fourth to the Crown of France, gave a mighty blow
to the Designs of King Philip; and much greater, The general obedience and
acknowledgment of him upon his change of Religion. With this King the States
began to enter a confidence and kindness, and the more by that which interceded
between Him and the Queen of England, who had all their dependence during her
life; But after her death, King Henry grew to have greater credit than ever in
the United Provinces; though upon the decay of the Spanish Power under the
Ascendent of this King, the States fell into very early jealousies of his
growing too great and too near them in Flanders.

With the Duke of Parma died all the Discipline, and with that, all the
Fortunes of the Spanish Arms in Flanders; The frequent Mutinies of their
Soldiers, dangerous in effect and in example, were more talked of, than any
other of their actions, in the short Government of Manstsield, Ernest, and
Fuentes. Till the old Discipline of their Armies began to revive, and their
Fortune a little to respire under the new Government of Cardinal Albert, who
came into Flanders both Governor and Prince of the Low Countries, in the head
of a mighty Army drawn out of Germany and Italy, to try the last effort of the
Spanish Power, either in a prosperous War, or at least in making way for a
necessary Peace.

But the choice of the Archduke and this new Authority, had a deeper root and
design than at first appeared: For that mighty King, Philip the Second, born to
so vast Possessions, and to so much vaster Desires; after a long dream of
raising his head into the Clouds, found it now ready to lie down in the dust:
His Body broken with age and infirmities, his Mind with cares and distempered
thoughts, and the Royal servitude of a sollicitous life, He began to see in the
glass of Time and Experience, the true shapes of all human Greatness and
Designs; And finding to what Airy Figures he had hitherto sacrificed his
Health, and Ease, and the Good of his Life, He now turned his thoughts wholly
to rest and quiet, which he had never yet allowed either the World or Himself:
His Designs upon England, and his Invincible Armada, had ended in smoke; Those
upon France, in Events the most contrary to what he had proposed; And instead
of mastering the Liberties, and breaking the Stomach of his Low Country
Subjects, He had lost Seven of his Provinces, and held the rest by the tenure
of a War, that cost him more than they were worth. He had made lately a Peace
with England, and desired it with France; and though he scorned it with his
revolted Subjects in his own Name, yet he wished it in another's; and was
unwilling to entail a quarrel upon his Son, which had crossed his Fortunes, and
busied his thoughts all the course of his Reign. He therefore resolved to
commit these two Designs to the management of Archduke Albert, with the style
of Governor and Prince of the Low Countries; to the end that if he could
reduce the Provinces to their old subjection, He should govern them as Spanish
Dominions; If that was once more in vain attempted, He should by a Marriage
with Clara Isabella Eugenia (King Philip's beloved Daughter) receive those
Provinces as a Dowry, and become the Prince of them, with a condition only of
their returning to Spain, in case of Isabella's dying without Issue. King
Philip believed that the presence of a natural Prince among his Subjects; That
the Birth and Customs of Archduke Albert, being a German; The generous and
obliging dispositions of Isabella, might gain further upon this stubborn
people, than all the Force and Rigor of his former Counsels: And at the worst;
That they might make a Peace, if they could not a War, and without interessing
the Honor and Greatness of the Spanish Crown.

In pursuit of this determination, like a wise King, while he intended nothing
but Peace, He made Preparations as if he designed nothing but War; knowing that
his own desires of Peace would signify nothing, unless he could force his
Enemies to desire it too. He therefore sent the Archduke into Flanders, at the
head of such an Army, that believing the Peace with France must be the first in
order, and make way for either the War or Peace afterward in the Low Countries,
He marched into France, and took Amiens the chief City of Picardy, and thereby
gave such an Alarm to the French Court, as they little expected, and had never
received in the former Wars. But while Albert bent the whole force of the War
upon France, till he determined it in a Peace with that Crown, Prince Maurice
who had taken Groningue in the time of Ernest, now mastered Linghen, Groll, and
other places in Overyssel, thereby adding those Provinces entire, to the Body
of the Union; and at Albert's return into Flanders, entertained him with the
Battle of Newport, won by the desperate Courage of the English under Sir
Francis Vere, where Albert was wounded and very near being taken.

After this Loss the Archduke was yet comforted and relieved, by the
obsequious affections and obedience of his new Subjects, so far as to resolve
upon the Siege of Ostend; which having some time continued, and being almost
disheartened by the strength of the place, and invincible Courage of the
Defendants; He was recruited by a Body of Eight thousand Italians under the
Marquess Spinola, to whom the prosecution of this Siege was committed: He took
the place after Three years siege, not by any want of Men or Provisions within
(the Haven and relief by Sea being open all the time); but perfectly for want
of ground, which was gained foot by foot, till not so much was left, as would
hold men to defend it; a great example how impossible it is to defend any Town
that cannot be relieved by an Army strong enough to raise the Siege.

Prince Maurice, though he could not save Ostend, made yet amends for its loss,
by the taking of Grave and Sluyce; so as the Spaniards gained little but the
honor of the Enterprise: And Philip the Second being dead about the time of
the Archdukes and Dutchesses arrival in Flanders, and with him the personal
resentment of that War, The Archduke by consent of the Spanish Court, began to
apply his thoughts wholly to a Peace; which another circumstance had made more
necessary than any of those already mentioned.

As the Dutch Commonwealth was born out of the Sea, so out of the same Element
it drew its first strength and consideration, as well as afterward its Riches
and Greatness: For before the Revolt, the Subjects of the Low Countries, though
never allowed the Trade of the Indies, but in the Spanish Fleets, and under
Spanish Covert; yet many of them had in that manner made the Voyages, and
become skilful Pilots, as well as verst in the ways, and sensible of the
infinite gains of that Trade. And after the Union, a greater confluence* of
people falling down into the United Provinces, than could manage their Stock,
or find employment at Land; Great multitudes turned their endeavors to Sea;
and having lost the Trade of Spain and the Streights, fell not only into that
of England, France, and the Northern Seas, but ventured upon that of the
East Indies, at first with small Forces and Success; But in course of time, and
by the institution of an East India Company, This came to be pursued with so
general application of the Provinces, and so great advantage, that they made
themselves Masters of most of the Collonies and Forts planted there by the
Portuguesses (now Subjects of Spain). The Dutch Seamen grew as well acquainted
with those vast Seas and Coasts, as with their own; and Holland became the
great Magazine of all the Commodities of those Eastern Regions.

In the West Indies their attempts were neither so frequent nor prosperous, the
Spanish Plantations there being too numerous and strong; But by the multitude
of their Shipping set out with public or private Commissions, they infested
the Seas, and began to wait for, and threaten the Spanish Indian Fleets, and
sometimes to attempt their Coasts in that new World (which was to touch Spain
in the most sensible part), and gave their Court the strongest motives to
endeavor a Peace, That might secure those Treasures in their way, and preserve
them in Spain, by stopping the issue of those vast sums which were continually
transmitted to entertain the Low Country Wars.

These respects gave the first rise to a Treaty of Peace, the Proposal whereof
came wholly from the Spaniards; and the very mention of it could hardly at
first be fast'ned upon the States; nor could they ever be prevailed with to
make way for any Negotiation by a suspension of Arms, till the Archduke had
declared, He would treat with them as with free Provinces, upon whom neither He
nor Spain had any pretense. However, the Affair was pursued with so much Art
and Industry on the Archdukes part, and with so passionate Desires of the
Spanish Court, to end this War, That they were content to treat it at the
Hague, the Seat of the States General; And for the greater Honor and better
Conduct of the whole Business, appointed the Four chief Ministers of the
Archdukes, Their Commissioners to attend and pursue it there; who were, Their
Camp-Master-General Spinola, The President of the Council, and the Two
Secretaries of State and of War in Flanders.

On the other side, in Holland, all the paces toward this Treaty were made
with great coldness and arrogance, raising punctillious-difficulties upon every
word of the Archdukes Declaration of treating them as Free Provinces, and upon
Spain's Ratification of that Form; And forcing them to send Expresses into
Spain upon every occasion, and to attend the length of those returns. For the
prosperous success of their Arms at Land, in the course of above Thirty years
War; and the mighty growth of their Naval Power, and (under that protection) of
their Trade, Had made the whole Body of their Militia both at Land and Sea,
averse from this Treaty, as well as the greatest part of the People; Whose
inveterate hatred against Spain, was still as fierce as ever; and who had the
hopes or dispositions of raising their Fortunes by the War, of which they had
so many and great Examples among them.

But there was at the bottom, one Foreign and another Domestic Consideration,
which made way for this Treaty, more than all those Arguments that were the
common Theams, or than all the Offices of the Neighbour-Princes, who concerned
themselves in this Affair, either from interest of their own, or the desires of
ending a War which had so long exercised in a manner the Arms of all
Christendom upon the Stage of the Low Countries. The greatness of the Spanish
Monarchy, so formidable under Charles the Fifth and Philip the Second, began
now to decline by the vast Designs and unfortunate Events of so many Ambitious
Counsels: And on the other side the Affairs of Henry the Fourth of France were
now at the greatest height and felicity, after having achieved so many
Adventures with incredible Constancy and Valor, and ended all his Wars in a
Peace with Spain. The Dutch imagined that the hot spirits of the French could
not continue long without some Exercise; and that to prevent it at home, it
might be necessary for that King to give it them abroad; That no Enterprise lay
so convenient for Him, as that upon Flanders, which had anciently been part of
the Gallick Nation, and whose first Princes derived and held of the Kings of
France. Besides, they had intimations that Henry the Fourth was taken up in
great Preparations of War, which they doubted would at one time or other fall
on that side, at least if they were invited by any greater decays of the
Spanish Power in Flanders: And they knew very well, they should lie as much at
the mercy of such a Neighbor as France, as they had formerly done of such a
Master as Spain. For the Spanish Power in Flanders was fed by Treasures that
came by long and perilous Voyages out of Spain; By Troops drawn either from
thence, or from Italy or Germany, with much Casualty, and more Expense: Their
Territory of the Ten Provinces was small, and awed by the Neighborhood and
Jealousies both of England and France. But if France were once Master of
Flanders, The Body of that Empire would be so great, and so entire; so
abounding in People, and in Riches, That whenever they found or made an
occasion of invading the United Provinces, They had no hopes of preserving
themselves by any opposition or diversion: And the end of their mighty
resistances against Spain, was to have no Master; and not to change one for
another, as they should do in this case: Therefore the most intelligent among
their Civil Ministers thought it safest, by a Peace to give breath to the
Arch-Duke's and Spanish Power, and by that means to lessen the invitation of
the Arms of France into Flanders under so great a King.

For what was Domestique, The Credit and Power of Prince Maurice built at first
upon that of his Father, but much raised by his own Personal Virtues and
Qualities, and the success of his Arms; Was now grown so high (the Prince being
Governor or Stadtholder of Four of the Provinces, and two of his Cousins of
the other Three), that several of the States, headed by Barnevelt, Pensioner of
Holland, and a man of great Abilities and Authority among them, became jealous
of the Prince's Power, and pretended to fear the growth of it to an Absolute
Dominion: They knew it would increase by the continuance of a War, which was
wholly managed by the Prince; and thought that in a Peace it would diminish,
and give way to the Authority of Civil Power: Which disposed this whole Party
to desire the Treaty, and to advance the progress and issue of it by all their
assistances. And these different humors stirring in the heart of the States,
with almost equal strength and vigor; The Negotiation of a Peace came to be
ended after long debates and infinite endeavors; Breaking in appearance upon
the points of Religion, and the Indian Trade: But yet came to knit again and
conclude in a Truce of Twelve years, dated in the year 1609, whereof the most
essential points were, The Declaration of treating with them as Free Provinces:
The Cessation of all Acts of Hostility on both sides during the Truce: The
enjoyment, for that space, of all that each party possessed at the time of the
Treaty. That no new Fortification should be raised on either side; And that
free Commerce should be restored on all parts in the same manner as it was
before the Wars.

And thus the State of the United Provinces came to be acknowledged as a Free
Commonwealth by their ancient Master, having before been treated so by most of
the Kings and Princes of Europe, in frequent Ambassies and Negotiations. Among
which, a particular preference was given to the English Crown, whose Ambassador
had Session and Vote in their Council of State, by Agreement with Queen
Elizabeth, and in acknowledgment of those great Assistances, which gave life to
their State when it was upon the point of expiring: Though the Dutch pretend
that Privilege was given to the Ambassador by virtue of the possession This
Crown had of the Briel, Flussingue, and Ramekins; and that it was to cease upon
the restitution of those Towns, and repayment of those Sums lent by the Queen.

In the very time of treating this Truce, a League was concluded between Henry
the Fourth of France, and the States, for preserving the Peace, if it came to
be concluded; or in case of its failing, for assistance of one another, With
Ten thousand men on the Kings part, and Five thousand on the States. Nor did
that King make any difficulty of continuing the Two Regiments of Foot and Two
hundred Horse in the States Service, at his own charge, after the Truce, which
he had maintained for several years before it; Omitting no provisions that
might tie that State to his interests, and make him at present Arbiter of the
Peace, and for the future of the War, if the Truce should come to be broken, or
to expire of it self.

By what has been related, it will easily appear, That no State was ever born
with stronger throws, or nursed up with harder fare, or inured to greater
labors or dangers in the whole course of its youth; which are circumstances
that usually make strong and healthy bodies: And so this has proved, having
never had more than one Disease break out, in the space of Ninety three years,
which may be accounted the Age of this State, reckoning from the Union of
Utrecht, entered by the Provinces in 1579: But this Disease, like those of the
Seed or Conception in a natural body, Though it first appeared in Barnevelt's
time, breaking out upon the Negotiations with Spain, and seemed to end with his
death (who was beheaded not many years after); yet has it ever since continued
lurking in the veins of this State, and appearing upon all Revolutions, that
seem to favor the predominancy of the one or other Humor in the Body; And
under the Names of the Prince of Orange's, and the Arminian Party, has ever
made the weak side of this State; and whenever their period comes, will prove
the occasion of their Fall.

The ground of this Name of Arminian was, That whilst Barnevelt's Party accused
those of the Prince of Orange's, as being careless of their Liberties, So
dearly bought, as devoted to the House of Orange, and disposed to the admission
of an Absolute Principality, and in order thereunto as promoters of a perpetual
War with Spain: So those of the Princes Party, accused the others, as leaning
still, and looking kindly upon their old Servitude, and relishing the Spaniard
both in their Politics, by so eagerly affecting a Peace with that Crown; and
in their Religion, by being generally Arminians (which was esteemed the middle
part between the Calvinist and the Roman Religion). And besides these mutual
Reproaches, the two Parties have ever valued themselves upon the asserting, One
of the true and purer Reformed Religion; and the other, of the true and freer
Liberties of the State.

The Fortunes of this Commonwealth, that have happened in their Wars or
Negotiations, since the Truce with Spain, and what Circumstances or Accidents
both abroad and at home, served to cultivate their mighty growth, and conspired
to the Greatness wherein they appeared to the World in the beginning of the
year 1665, being not only the subject of the Relations, but even the
Observations of this present Age; I shall either leave as more obvious, and
less necessary to the account I intend of the Civil Government of this
Commonwealth; Or else reserve them till the same vein of Leisure or Humor
invite me to continue this Deduction to the present time, The Affairs of this
State having been complicated with all the variety and memorable Revolutions
both of Actions and Counsels, that have since happened in the rest of
Christendom.

In the mean time, I will close this Relation with an Event, which arrived soon
after the conclusion of the Truce, and had like to have broken it within the
very year, if not prevented by the Offices of the Neighbor Princes, but more
by a change of Humor in the United States, conspiring to the conservation of
the new-restored Peace in these parts of the World.

In the end of the year 1609, dyed the Duke of Cleves and Juliers, without
Heir-male, leaving those Dutchies to the pretensions of his Daughters, in whose
Right the Duke of Brandenburgh and Nieuburgh possessed themselves of such parts
of those Territories as they first could invade; each of them pretending right
to the whole Inheritance. Brandenburgh seeks protection and favor to his
Title, from the United Provinces; Nieuburgh from Archduke Albert, and from
Spain. The Archduke newly respiring from so long a War, had no desire to
interess himself in this Quarrel, further than the care that the Dutch should
not take advantage of it; and under pretext of assisting one of the Parties,
seize upon some of those Dominions lying contiguous to their own. The Dutch
were not so equal, nor content to lose so fair an occasion, and surprised the
Town of Juliers (though pretending only to keep it till the Parties agreed).
And believing that Spain, after having parted with so much in the late Truce,
to end a quarrel of their own, would not venture the breach of it upon a
quarrel of their Neighbors. But the Archduke, having first taken his measures
with Spain, and foreseeing the consequence of this Affair, resolved to venture
the whole State of Flanders in a new War, rather than suffer such an increase
of Power and Dominion to the States. And thereupon first in the behalf of the
Duke of Nieuburgh, requires from them the restitution of Juliers; and upon
their artificious and dilatory Answers, immediately draws his Forces together,
and with an Army under the Command of Spinola, marches toward Juliers (which
the States were in no care of, as well provided for a bold defense); But makes
a sudden turn, and sits down before Wesel, with such a terror and surprise to
the Inhabitants, that he carries the Town before the Dutch could come in to
their assistance. Wesel was a strong Town upon the Rhine, which the Duke of
Brandenburgh pretended to, as belonging to the Duchy of Cleve; but the
Citizens held it at this time as an Imperial Town, and under protection of the
Dutch; Who amazed at this sudden and bold attempt of Spinola, which made him
Master of a Pass that lay fair for any further Invasion upon their Provinces
(especially those on the other side the Rhine), engage the Offices of both the
English and French Crowns, to mediate an Agreement, which at length they
conclude, so as neither Party should upon any pretense draw their Forces into
any part of these Dutchies. Thus the Archduke having by the fondness of Peace,
newly made a Truce upon Conditions imposed by the Dutch; now by the Resolution
of making War, obtains a Peace upon the very Terms proposed by himself, and by
Spain. An Event of great Instruction and Example, how dangerous it ever proves
for weak Princes to call in greater to their aid, which makes them a prey to
their Friend, instead of their Enemy; How the only time of making an
advantageous Peace, is when your Enemy desires it, and when you are in the best
condition of pursuing a War: And how vain a Counsel it is, to avoid a War by
yiedling any point of Interest or Honor; which does but invite new Injuries,
encourage Enemies, and dishearten Friends.

CHAP. II. Of Their GOVERNMENT.
IT is evident by what has been discoursed in the former Chapter concerning the
Rise of this State (which is to be dated from the Union of Utrecht), that It
cannot properly be styled a Commonwealth, but is rather a Confederacy of Seven
Sovereign Provinces united together for their common and mutual defense,
without any dependence one upon the other. But to discover the nature of their
Government from the first springs and motions, It must be taken yet into
smaller pieces, by which it will appear, that each of these Provinces is
likewise composed of many little States or Cities, which have several marks of
Sovereign Power within themselves, and are not subject to the Sovereignty of
their Province; Not being concluded in many things by the majority, but only by
the universal concurrence of Voices in the Provincial-States. For as the
States General cannot make War or Peace, or any new Alliance, or Levies of
Money, without the consent of every Province; so cannot the States-Provincial
conclude any of those points without the consent of each of the Cities, that by
their Constitution has a voice in that Assembly. And though in many Civil
Causes there lies an Appeal from the Common Judicature of the Cities, to the
Provincial Courts of Justice; yet in Criminals there lies none at all; nor can
the Sovereignty of a Province exercise any Judicature, seize upon any Offender,
or pardon any Offense within the Jurisdiction of a City, or execute any common
Resolution or Law, but by the Justice and Officers of the City it self. By this
a certain Sovereignty in each City is discerned, the chief marks whereof are,
The power of exercising Judicature, levying of Money, and making War and Peace:
For the other of Coining Money, is neither in particular Cities or Provinces,
but in the generalty of the Union by common Agreement.

The main Ingredients therefore into the Composition of this State, are the
Freedom of the Cities, the Sovereignty of the Provinces, the Agreements or
Constitutions of the Union, and the Authority of the Princes of Orange; Which
make the Order I shall follow in the Account intended of this Government. But
whereas the several Provinces in the Union, and the several Cities in each
Province, as they have in their Orders and Constitutions some particular
differences, as well as a general resemblance; and the account of each
distinctly would swell this Discourse out of measure, and to little purpose; I
shall confine my self to the account of Holland, as the richest, strongest, and
of most authority among the Provinces; and of Amsterdam, as that which has the
same Preheminencies among the Cities.

The Sovereign Authority of the City of Amsterdam, Government of the City of
Amsterdam.
consists in the Decrees or Results of their Senate, which is composed of Six
and thirty men, by whom the Justice is administered, according to ancient forms,
in the names of Officers and Places of Judicature. But Moneys are levied by
Arbitrary Resolutions and Proportions, according to what appears convenient or
necessary upon the change or emergency of occasions. These Senators are for
their lives, and the Senate was anciently chosen by the voices of the richer
Burghers or Freemen of the City, who upon the death of a Senator met together
either in a Church, a Market, or some other place spacious enough to receive
their numbers; And there made an election of the person to succeed, by the
majority of voices. But about a hundred and thirty or forty years ago, when the
Towns of Holland began to increase in circuit, and in people, so as these
frequent Assemblies grew into danger of tumuit and disorders upon every
occasion, by reason of their Numbers and Contention; This election of Senators
came by the resolution of the Burghers, in one of their General Assemblies, to
be devolved for ever upon the standing-Senate at that time; So as ever since,
when any one of their number dies, a new one is chosen by the rest of the
Senate, without any intervention of the other Burghers; Which makes the
Government a sort of Oligarchy, and very different from a Popular Government,
as it is generally esteemed by those who passing or living in these Countries,
content themselves with common Observations or Inquiries. And this Resolution
of the Burghers, either was agreed upon, or followed by general Consent or
Example, about the same time, in all the Towns of the Province, though with
some difference in number of their Senators.

By this Senate are chosen the chief Magistrates of the Town, which are the
Burgomasters and the Eschevins: The Burgomasters of Amsterdam are Four, whereof
three are chosen every year; so as one of them stays in office two years; but
the three last chosen, are called the Reigning-Burgomasters for that year, and
preside by turns, after the first three Months; for so long after a new
Election, the Burgomaster of the year before presides; in which time it is
supposed the new ones will grow instructed in the Forms and Duties of their
Office, and acquainted with the state of the City's Affairs.

The Burgomasters are chosen by most voices of all those persons in the Senate
who have been either Burgomasters or Eschevins; and their Authority resembles
that of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen in our Cities. They represent the Dignity
of the Government, and do the Honor of the City upon all occasions: They
dispose of all under-offices that fall in their time; and issue out all Moneys
out of the Common Stock or Treasure, judging alone what is necessary for the
Safety, Convenience, or Dignity of the City. They keep the Key of the Bank of
Amsterdam (the Common Treasure of so many Nations), which is never opened
without the presence of one of them; And they inspect and pursue all the great
Public Works of the City, as the Ramparts and Stadt-house, now almost
finished with so great Magnificence, and so vast Expense.

This Office is a Charge of the greatest Trust, Authority, and Dignity; and so
much the greater, by not being of Profit or Advantage, but only as a way to
other constant Employments in the City that are so. The Salary of a Burgomaster
of Amsterdam, is but Five hundred Gilders a year, though there are Offices
worth Five thousand in their disposal; But yet none of them known to have taken
money upon such occasions, which would lose all their Credit in the Town, and
thereby their Fortunes by any Public Employments. They are obliged to no sort
of Expense, more than ordinary modest Citizens, in their Habits, their
Attendance, their Tables, or any part of their own Domestique. They are upon
all Public Occasions waited on by men in Salary from the Town; and whatever
Feasts they make upon Solemn Days, or for the Entertainment of any Princes or
Foreign Ministers, the Charge is defrayed out of the Common Treasure; but
proportioned by their own discretion. At other times they appear in all places
with the simplicity and modesty of other private Citizens. When the
Burgomaster's Office expires, they are of course disposed into the other
Charges or Employments of the Town, which are very many and beneficial; unless
they lose their Credit with the Senate, by any want of Diligence or Fidelity in
the discharge of their Office, which seldom arrives.

The Eschevins are the Court of Justice in every Town. They are at Amsterdam
Nine in number; of which Seven are chosen Annually; but two of the preceding
year continue in office. A double number is named by the Senate, out of which
the Burgomasters now choose, as the Prince of Orange did in the former
Constitution. They are Sovereign Judges in all Criminal Causes. In Civil, after
a certain value, there lies Appeal to the Court of Justice of the Province. But
they pass sentence of death upon no man, without first advising with the
Burgomasters; though after that form is past, they proceed themselves, and are
not bound to follow the Burgomasters opinion, but are left to their own: This
being only a care or favor of supererogation to the life of man, which is so
soon cut off, and never to be retrieved or made amends for.

Under these Sovereign Magistrates, the chief subordinate Officers of the Town
are the Treasurers, who receive and issue out all moneys that are properly the
Revenues or Stock of the City: The Scout, who takes care of the Peace, seizes
all Criminals, and sees the Sentences of Justice executed, and whose Authority
is like that of a Sheriff in a County with us, or a Constable in a Parish. The
Pensioner, who is a Civil-Lawyer, verst in the Customs, and Records, and
Privileges of the Town, concerning which he informs the Magistracy upon
occasion, and vindicates them upon disputes with other Towns; He is a Servant
of the Senate and the Burgomasters, Delivers their Messages, makes their
Harangues upon all Public Occasions, and is not unlike the Recorder in one of
our Towns.

In this City of Amsterdam is the famous Bank, which is the greatest Treasure,
either real or imaginary, that is known any where in the World. The place of it
is a great Vault under the Stadthouse, made strong with all the circumstances
of Doors and Locks, and other appearing cautions of safety, that can be: And
it is certain, that whoever is carried to see the Bank, shall never fail to find
the appearance of a mighty real Treasure, in Bars of Gold and Silver, Plate
and infinite Bags of Metals, which are supposed to be all Gold and Silver, and
may be so for ought I know. But the Burgomasters only having the inspection of
this Bank, and no man ever taking any particular account of what issues in and
out, from Age to Age, it is impossible to make any calculation, or guess what
proportion the real Treasure may hold to the Credit of it. Therefore the
security of the Bank lies not only in the Effects that are in it, but in the
Credit of the whole Town or State of Amsterdam, whose Stock and Revenue is
equal to that of some Kingdoms; and who are bound to make good all Moneys that
are brought into their Bank; The Tickets or Bills hereof, make all the usual
great Payments that are made between man and man in the Town; and not only in
most other places of the United Provinces, but in many other Trading-parts of
the World. So as this Bank is properly a general Cash, where every man lodges
his money, because he esteems it safer, and easier paid in and out, than if it
were in his Coffers at home: And the Bank is so far from paying any Interest
for what is there brought in, that Money in the Bank is worth something more in
common Payments, than what runs current in Coin from hand to hand; No other
money passing in the Bank, but in the species of Coin the best known, the most
ascertained, and the most generally current in all parts of the Higher as well
as the Lower Germany.

The Revenues of Amsterdam arise out of the constant Excise upon all sorts of
Commodities bought and sold within the Precinct: Or out of the Rents of those
Houses or Lands that belong in common to the City: Or out of certain Duties and
Impositions upon every House, toward the uses of Charity, and the Repairs, or
Adornments, or Fortifications of the place: Or else out of extraordinary Levies
consented to by the Senate, for furnishing their part of the Public Charge
that is agreed to by their Deputies in the Provincial-States, for the use of
the Province: Or by the Deputies of the States of Holland in the
States General, for support of the Union. And all these Payments are made into
one Common Stock of the Town, not as many of ours are into that of the Parish;
So as attempts may be easier made at the calculations of their whole Revenue:
And I have heard it affirmed, That what is paid of all kinds to Public Uses
of the States General, the Province, and the City in Amsterdam, amounts to
above Sixteen hundred thousand pounds Sterling a year. But I enter into no
Computations, nor give these for any thing more than what I have heard from men
who pretended to make such Enquiries, which I confess I did not. It Is certain
that in no Town, Strength, Beauty, and Convenience, are better provided for,
nor with more unlimited Expense, than in this, by the Magnificence of their
Public Buildings, as Stadthouse and Arsenals; The Number and Spaciousness, as
well as Order and Revenues of their many Hospitals; The commodiousness of their
Canals running through the chief Streets of passage; The mighty strength of
their Bastions and Ramparts; And the neatness as well as convenience of their
Streets, so far as can be compassed in so great a confluence of industrious
people: All which could never be achieved without a Charge much exceeding what
seems proportioned to the Revenue of one single Town.

Government of the Province of Holland*
The Senate chooses the Deputies, which are sent from this City to the States of
Holland; The Sovereignty whereof is represented by Deputies of the Nobles and
Towns, composing Nineteen Voices; Of which the Nobles have only the first, and
the Cities eighteen, according to the number of those which are called Stemms;
The other Cities and Towns of the Province having no voice in the States. These
Cities were originally but Six, Dort, Haerlem, Delf, Leyden, Amsterdam, and
Tergo^. But were increased by Prince William of Nassaw, to the number of
Eighteen, by the addition of Rotterdam, Gorcum, Schedam, Schonoven, Briel,
Alcmaer, Horn, Enchusen, Edam, Moninckdam, Medenblick, and Permeren. This
makes as great an inequality in the Government of the Province, by such a small
City as Permeren having an equal voice in the the Provincial-States with
Amsterdam (which pays perhaps half of all charge of the Province), as seems to
be in the States General by so small a Province as Overyssel having an equal
voice in the States General with that of Holland, which contributes more than
half to the general charge of the Union. But this was by some Writers of that
Age interpreted to be done by the Prince's Authority, to lessen that of the
Nobles, and balance that of the greater Cities, by the voices of the smaller,
whose dependances were easier to be gained and secured.

The Nobles, though they are few in this Province, yet are not represented by
all their number, but by Eight or Nine, who as Deputies from their Body have
session in the States-Provincial; And who, when one among them dies, choose
another to succeed him. Though they have all together but one voice equal to
the smallest Town; yet are they very considerable in the Government, by
possessing many of the best Charges both Civil and Military, by having the
direction of all the Ecclesiastical Revenue that was seized by the State upon
the change of Religion; and by sending their Deputies to all the Councils both
of the Generalty and the Province, and by the nomination of one Councellor in
the two great Courts of Justice. They give their Voice first in the Assembly of
the States, and thereby a great weight to the business in consultation. The
Pensioner of Holland is seated with them, delivers their Voice for them, and
assists at all their Deliberations before they come to the Assembly. He is
properly, but Minister or Servant of the Province, and so his Place or Rank is
behind all their Deputies; but has always great Credit, because he is
perpetual, or seldom discharged; though of right he ought to be chosen or
renewed every third year. He has place in all the several Assemblies of the
Province, and in the States proposes all Affairs, gathers the Opinions, and
forms or digests the Resolutions; Pretending likewise a power not to conclude
any very important Affair by plurality of Voices, when he judges in his
Conscience he ought not to do it, and that it will be of ill consequence or
prejudice to the Province.

The Deputies of the Cities are drawn out of the Magistrates and Senate of each
Town: Their Number is uncertain and arbitrary, according to the Customs or
Pleasure of the Cities that send them, because they have all together but one
Voice, and are all maintained at their Cities charge: But commonly one of the
Burgomasters and the Pensioner are of the number.

The States of Holland have their Session in the Court at the Hague, and
assemble ordinarily four times a year, in February, June, September, and
November. In the former Sessions they provide for the filling up of all vacant
Charges, and for renewing the Farms of all the several Taxes, and for
consulting about any matters that concern either the general good of the
Province, or any particular differences arising between the Towns. But in
November they meet purposely to resolve upon the continuance of the Charge
which falls to the share of their Province the following year, according to
what may have been agreed upon by the Deputies of the States General, as
necessary for the support of the State or Union.

For extraordinary occasions, they are convoked by a Council called the Gecommi
Heerde Raeden, or the Commissioned Counselors, who are properly a Council of
State of the Province, composed of several Deputies; One from the Nobles; One
from each of the chief Towns; And but One from three of the smaller Towns, each
of the three choosing him by turns. And this Council sits constantly at the
Hague, and both proposes to the Provincial-States at their extraordinary
Assemblies, the matters of deliberation; and executes their Resolutions.

In these Assemblies, though all are equal in Voices, and any one hinders a
result; yet it seldom happens, but that united by one common bond of Interest,
and having all one common End of Public Good, They come after full Debates to
easy Resolutions; yiedling to the power of Reason where it is clear and
strong; And suppressing all private Passions or Interests, so as the smaller
part seldom contests hard or long, what the greater agrees of. When the
Deputies of the States agree in opinion, they send some of their number to
their respective Towns, proposing the Affair and the Reasons alleged, and
desiring Orders from them to conclude; Which seldom fails, if the necessity or
utility be evident: If it be more intricate, or suffers delay, The States
adjourn for such a time, as admits the return of all the Deputies to their
Towns; where their influence and interest, and the impressions of the Debates
in their Provincial Assemblies, make the consent of the Cities easier gained.

Besides the States and Council mentioned, the Province has likewise a Chamber
of Accounts, who manage the general Revenues of the Province: And besides this
Trust, they have the absolute disposition of the ancient Demesne of Holland,
without giving any account to the States of the Province. Only at times, either
upon usual intervals, or upon a necessity of money, The States call upon them
for a Subsidy of Two or three hundred thousand Crowns, or more, as they are
pressed, or conceive the Chamber to be grown rich, beyond what is proportioned to
the general design of increasing the ease and fortunes of those persons who
compose it. The States of Holland dispose of these charges to men grown aged in
their service, and who have passed through most of the Employments of State
with the esteem of Prudence and Integrity; and such persons find here an
honorable and profitable retreat.

The Provinces of Holland and Zealand, as they used formerly to have one
Governor in the time of the House of Burgundy and Austria; so they have long
had one common Judicature, which is exercised by two Courts of Justice, each of
them common to both the Provinces. The first is composed of Twelve Counselors,
Nine of Holland, and Three of Zealand, of whom the Governor of the Provinces
is the Head; by the old Constitution used to preside whenever he pleased, and
to name all the Counselors except one, who was chosen by the Nobles. This
Court judges without appeal in all Criminal Causes; but in Civil there lies
appeal to the other Court, which is called the High Council, from which there
is no appeal but only by Petition to the States of the Province for a revision:
When these judge there is reason for it, they grant Letters Patent to that
purpose, naming some Syndiques out of the Towns, who being added to the
Counselors of the two former Courts, revise and judge the Cause in the last
resort. And this course seems to have been instituted by way of supply or
imitation of the Chamber of Mechlyn, to which, before the Revolt of the
Provinces, there lay an appeal by way of revision, from all or most of the
Provincial Courts of Justice, as there still does in the Spanish Provinces of
the Netherlands.

Government of the United Provinces.
The Union is made up of the Seven Sovereign Provinces before named, who choose
their respective Deputies, and send them to the Hague, for the composing of
three several Colleges, called, The States General, The Council of State, and
the Chamber of Accounts. The Sovereign Power of this United-State, lies
effectively in the Assembly of the States General, which used at first to be
convoked upon extraordinary occasions, by the Council of State; but that
seldom, in regard they usually consisted of above Eight hundred persons, whose
meeting together in one place from so many several parts, gave too great a
shake to the whole Body of the Union; Made the Debates long, and sometimes
confused; the Resolutions slow, and upon sudden occasions out of time. In the
absence of the States General, the Council of State represented their
Authority, and executed their Resolutions, and judged of the necessity of a new
Convocation: Till after the Earl of Leicester's departure from the Government,
the Provincial-States desired of the General, That they might by their constant
respective Deputies, continue their Assemblies under the name of
States General, which were never after assembled but at Bergen ap Zoom, for
ratifying with more solemn form and authority, the Truce concluded with Duke
Albert and Spain.

This Desire of the Provinces was grounded upon the pretenses, That the Council
of State convoked them but seldom, and at will; and that being to execute all
in their absence, they thereby arrogated to themselves too great an Authority
in the State. But a more secret reason had greater weight in this Affair, which
was, That the English Ambassador had by agreement with Queen Elizabeth, a
constant place in their Council of State; And upon the distasts arising between
the Provinces and the Earl of Leicester, with some jealousies of the Queen's
disposition to make a Peace with Spain, They had no mind that Her Ambassador
should be present any longer in the first digestion of their Affairs, which was
then usually made in the Council of State. And hereupon they first framed the
ordinary Council, called the States General, which has ever since passed by
that Name, and sits constantly in the Court at the Hague, Represents the
Sovereignty of the Union, Gives Audience and Dispatches to all Foreign
Ministers; But yet is indeed only a representative of the States General, the
Assemblies whereof are wholly disused.

The Council of State, the Admiralty, and the Treasury are all subordinate to
this Council; All which are continued in as near a resemblance as could be, to
the several Councils used in the time when the Provinces were subject to their
several Principalities; or united under One in the Houses of Burgundy and
Austria: Only the several Deputies (composing one voice) now succeeding the
single Persons employed under the former Governments: And the Hague, which was
the ancient Seat of the Counts of Holland, still continues to be so of all
these Councils; where the Palace of the former Sovereigns, lodges the Prince of
Orange as Governor, and receives these several Councils as attending still
upon the Sovereignty, represented by the States General.

The Members of all these Councils are placed and changed by the several
Provinces, according to their different or agreeing Customs. To the
States General every one sends their Deputies in what number they please; some
Two, some Ten or Twelve; Which makes no difference, because all matters are
carried not by the Votes of Persons, but of Provinces; and all the Deputies
from one Province, how few or many soever, have one single Vote. The Provinces
differ likewise in the time fixed for their Deputation; some sending for a
year, some for more, and others for life. The Province of Holland send to the
States General one of their Nobles, who is perpetual; Two Deputies chosen out
of their Eight chief Towns; and One out of North-Holland; and with these, Two
of their Provincial Council of State, and their Pensioner.

Neither Stadtholder, or Governor, or any person in Military-charge, has
Session in the States General. Every Province presides their week in turns, and
by the most qualified person of the Deputies of that Province: He sits in a
Chair with arms, at the middle of a long Table, capable of holding about thirty
persons; For about that number this Council is usually composed of. The
Greffier, who is in nature of a Secretary, sits at the lower end of the Table:
When a Foreign Minister has audience, he is seated at the middle of this
Table, over against the President: Who proposes all matters in this Assembly;
Makes the Greffier read all Papers; Puts the Question; Calls the Voices of the
Provinces; And forms the Conclusion. Or if he refuses to conclude according to
the plurality, he is obliged to resign his Place to the President of the
ensuing Week, who concludes for him.

This is the course in all Affairs before them, except in cases of Peace and
War, of Foreign Alliances, of Raising or Coining of Moneys, or the Privileges
of each Province or Member of the Union. In all which, All the Provinces must
concur, Plurality being not at all weighed or observed. This Counsel is not
Sovereign, but only represents the Sovereignty; and therefore though
Ambassadors are both received and sent in their Name; yet neither are their own
chosen, nor Foreign Ministers answered, nor any of those mentioned Affairs
resolved, without consulting first the States of each Province by their
respective Deputies, and receiving Orders from them; And in other important
matters, though decided by Plurality, They frequently consult with the Council
of State.

Nor has this Method or Constitution ever been broken since their State began,
excepting only in one Affair, which was in January 1668, when His Majesty sent
me over to propose a League of Mutual Defense with this State, and another for
the preservation of Flanders from the invasion of France, which had already
conquered a great part of the Spanish Provinces, and left the rest at the mercy
of the next Campania. Upon this occasion I had the fortune to prevail with the
States General to conclude three Treaties, and upon them draw up and sign the
several Instruments, in the space of Five days; Without passing the essential
forms of their Government by any recourse to the Provinces, which must likewise
have had it to the several Cities; There, I knew, those Foreign Ministers
whose Duty and Interest it was to oppose this Affair, expected to meet and to
elude it, which could not have failed in case it had run that circle, since
engaging the Voice of one City, must have broken it. It Is true, that in
concluding these Alliances without Commission from their Principals, The
Deputies of the States General ventured their Heads if they had been disowned
by their Provinces; but being all unanimous, and led by the clear evidence of
so direct and so important an Interest (which must have been lost by the usual
delays), They all agreed to run the hazard; and were so far from being
disowned, that they were applauded by all the Members of every Province; Having
thereby changed the whole face of Affairs in Christendom, and laid the
Foundation of the Triple-Alliance, and the Peace of Aix (which were concluded
about Four Months after). So great has the force of Reason and Interest ever
proved in this State, not only to the uniting of all Voices in their
Assemblies, but to the absolving of the greatest breach of their Original
Constitutions; Even in a State whose Safety and Greatness has been chiefly
founded upon the severe and exact observance of Order and Method in all their
Counsels and Executions. Nor have they ever used at any other time any greater
means to agree and unite the several Members of their Union in the Resolutions
necessary, upon the most pressing occasions, Than for the agreeing-Provinces to
name some of their ablest persons to go and confer with the dissenting, and
represent those Reasons and Interests, by which they have been induced to their
opinions.

The Council of State is composed of Deputies from the several Provinces, but
after another manner than the States General, the number being fixed.
Gelderland sends Two, Holland Three, Zealand and Utrecht Two a piece,
Friezland, Overyssel and Groninghen, each of them One, making in all Twelve.
They vote not by Provinces, but by Personal Voices; and every Deputy presides
by turns. In this Council the Governor of the Provinces has Session, and a
decisive voice; And the Treasurer-General, Session, but a voice only
deliberative; yet he has much credit here, being for life; and so is the person
deputed to this Council from the Nobles of Holland, and the Deputies of the
Province of Zealand. The rest are but for two, three, or four years.

The Council of State executes the Resolutions of the States General; consults
and proposes to them the most expedient ways of raising Troops, and levying
Moneys, as well as the proportions of both, which they conceive necessary in
all Conjunctures and Revolutions of the State: Superintends the Milice, the
Fortifications, the Contributions out of Enemies Country, the forms and
disposal of all Passports, and the Affairs, Revenues, and Government of all
places conquered since the Union; which being gained by the common Arms of the
State, depend upon the States General, and not upon any particular Province.

Toward the end of every year, this Council forms a state of the Expense they
conceive will be necessary for the year ensuing; Presents it to the
States General, desiring them to demand so much of the States-Provincial, to be
raised according to the usual Proportions, which are of 100000 Grs.

Gelderland 3612 grs 05 st 00 d Holland 58309 grs 01 st 10 d Zealand 9183 grs
14 st 02 d Utrecht 5830 grs 17 st 11 d Friezland 11661 grs 15 st 10 d Overyssel
3571 grs 08 st 04 d Groningue 5830 grs 17 st 11 d

This Petition, as it is called, is made to the States General in the Name of
the Governor and Council of State, which is but a continuance of the forms
used in the time of their Sovereigns, and still by the Governors and Council
of State in the Spanish Netherlands: Petition signifying barely asking or
demanding, though implying the thing demanded to be wholly in the right and
power of them that give. It was used by the first Counts only upon
extraordinary occasions and necessities; but in the time of the Houses of
Burgundy and Austria, grew to be a thing of course, and Annual, as it is still
in the Spanish Provinces.

The Council of State disposes of all sums of Money destined for all
extraordinary Affairs, and expedites the Orders for the whole expense of the
State, upon the Resolutions first taken in the main, by the States General. The
Orders must be signed by three Deputies of several Provinces, as well as by the
Treasurer-General, and then registered in the Chamber of Accounts, before the
Receiver-General pays them, which is then done without any difficulty, charge,
or delay.

Every Province raises what Moneys it pleases, and by what ways or means; sends
its Quota, or share of the general charge, to the Receiver-General, and
converts the rest to the present use, or reserves it for the future occasions
of the Province.

The Chamber of Accounts was erected about sixty years ago, for the ease of the
Council of State, to examine and state all Accounts of all the several
Receivers, to control and register the Orders of the Council of State, which
disposes of the Finances: and this Chamber is composed of two Deputies from
each Province, who are changed every Three years.

Besides these Colleges, is the Council of the Admiralty; who, when the
States General by advice of the Council of State, have destined a Fleet of such
a number and force to be set out, Have the absolute disposition of the Marine
Affairs, as well in the choice and equipage of all the several Ships, as in
issuing the Moneys allotted for that service.

This College is subdivided into Five, of which three are in Holland, viz. one
in Amsterdam, another at Rotterdam, and the third at Horn: The fourth is at
Middlebourgh in Zealand, and the fifth at Harlinguen in Friezland. Each of
these is composed of Seven Deputies; Four of that Province where the College
resides; and Three named by the other Provinces. The Admiral, or in his absence
the Vice Admiral, has Session in all these Colleges, and presides when he is
present. They take cognizance of all Crimes committed at Sea; judge all Pirates
that are taken, and all Frauds or Negligences in the payment or collections of
the Customs; which are particularly affected to the Admiralty, and appliable to
no other use. This Fond being not sufficient in times of Wars, is supplied by
the States with whatever more is necessary from other Fonds; but in time of
Peace, being little exhausted by other constant charge, besides that of Convoys
to their several Fleets of Merchants in all parts, The remainder of this
Revenue is applied to the building of great Ships of War, and furnishing the
several Arsenals and Stores with all sorts of Provision necessary for the
building and rigging of more Ships than can be needed by the course of a long
War.

So soon as the number and force of the Fleets designed for any Expedition, is
agreed by the States General, and given out by the Council of State to the
Admiralty; Each particular College furnishes their own proportion, which is
known as well as that of the several Provinces, in all Moneys that are to be
raised. In all which, the Admiral has no other share or advantages, besides his
bare Salary, and his proportion in Prizes that are taken. The Captains and
Superior Officers of each Squadron are chosen by the several Colleges; the
number of men appointed for every ship: After which, each Captain uses his best
diligence and credit to fill his number with the best men he can get, and takes
the whole care and charge of Victualling his own Ship for the time intended for
that Expedition, and signified to him by the Admiralty; and this at a certain
rate of so much a man. And by the good or ill discharge of his Trust, as well
as that of providing Surgeons Medicines, and all things necessary for the
health of the men, each Captain grows into good or ill credit with the Seamen,
and by their report with the Admiralties; Upon whose opinion and esteem, the
fortune of all Sea-Officers depends: So as in all their Expeditions there
appears rather an emulation among the particular Captains who shall treat his
Seamen best in these points, and employ the Moneys allotted for their
Victualling, to the best advantage, Than any little Knavish Practices, of
filling their own Purses by keeping their men's Bellys empty, or forcing them
to corrupted unwholesome Diet: Upon which, and upon cleanliness in their Ships,
the health of many people crowded up into so little Rooms, seems chiefly to
depend.

The Salaries of all the great Officers of this State, are very small: I have
already mentioned that of a Burgomaster's of Amsterdam to be about fifty pounds
sterling a year: That of their Vice Admiral (for since the last Prince of
Orange's death, to the year 1670, there had been no Admiral) is Five hundred,
and that of the Pensioner of Holland Two hundred.

The Greatness of this State seems much to consist in these Orders, how
confused soever, and of different pieces they may seem: But more in two main
effects of them, which are the good choice of the Officers of chief Trust in
the Cities, Provinces, and State: And the great simplicity and modesty in the
common port or living of their chiefest Ministers; without which, the
Absoluteness of the Senates in each Town, and the Immensity of Taxes throughout
the whole State, would never be endured by the people with any patience; being
both of them greater than in many of those Governments which are esteemed most
Arbitrary among their Neighbors. But in the Assemblies and Debates of their
Senates, every man's Abilities are discovered, as their Dispositions are, in
the conduct of their Lives and Domestic, among their fellow-Citizens. The
observation of these, either raises or suppresses the credit of particular men,
both among the people and the Senates of their Towns; who to maintain their
Authority with less popular envy or discontent, give much to the general
opinion of the people in the choice of their Magistrates: By this means it
comes to pass, that though perhaps the Nation generally be not wise, yet the
Government is, Because it is composed of the wisest of the Nation, which may
give it an advantage over many others, where Ability is of more common growth,
but of less use to the Public, If it happens that neither Wisdom nor Honesty
are the Qualities which bring men to the management of State Affairs, as they
usually do in this Commonwealth.

Besides, though these people, who are naturally Cold and Heavy, may not be
ingenious enough to furnish a pleasant or agreeable Conversation, yet they want
not plain downright sense to understand and do their business both public
and private, which is a Talent very different from the other; and I know not
whether they often meet: For the first proceeds from heat of the brain, which
makes the spirits more aerie and volatile, and thereby the motions of Thought
lighter and quicker, and the range of Imagination much greater than in cold
heads, where the spirits are more earthy and dull; Thought moves slower and
heavier, but thereby the impressions of it are deeper, and last longer: One
imagination being not so frequently nor so easily effaced by another, as where
new ones are continually arising. This makes duller men more constant and
steady, and quicker men more inconstant and uncertain; whereas the greatest
ability in business, seems to be the steady pursuit of some one thing till
there is an end of it, with perpetual application and endeavor not to be
diverted by every representation of new hopes or fears, of difficulty or
danger, or of some better design. The first of these Talents cuts like a Razor,
the other like a Hatchet: One has thinness of edg, and fineness of metal and
temper, but is easily turned by any substance that is hard, and resists.
The Other has toughness and weight, which makes it cut thorough, or go deep,
wherever it falls; and therefore one is for Adornment, and the other for Use.

It may be said further, that the heat of the Heart commonly goes along with
that of the Brain; so that Passions are warmer where Imaginations are quicker:
And there are few men (unless in case of some evident natural defect) but have
sense enough to distinguish in gross between Right and Wrong, between Good and
Bad, when represented to them; and consequently have judgment enough to do
their business, if it be left to it self, and not swayed nor corrupted by some
Humor or Passion, by Anger or Pride, by Love or by Scorn, Ambition or Avarice,
Delight or Revenge; so as the coldness of Passions seems to be the natural
ground of Ability and Honesty among men, as the government or moderation of
them the great End of Philosophical and Moral Instructions. These Speculations
may perhaps a little lessen the common wonder, How we should meet with in one
Nation so little show of Parts and of Wit, and so great evidence of Wisdom and
Prudence, as has appeared in the Conduct and Successes of this State for near a
Hundred years; Which needs no other testimony than the mighty Growth and Power
it arrived to from so weak and contemptible Seeds and Beginnings.

The other Circumstance I mentioned as an occasion of their Greatness, was the
simplicity and modesty of their Magistrates in their way of living; which is so
general, that I never knew One among them exceed the common frugal popular air;
And so great, That of the two chief Officers in my time, Vice Admiral De
Ruiter, and the Pensioner De Wit (One, generally esteemed by Foreign Nations,
as great a Seaman, and the other as great a Statesman, as any of their Age),
I never saw the first in Clothes better than the commonest Sea-Captain, nor
with above one man following him, nor in a Coach: And in his own House, neither
was the Size, Building, Furniture, or Entertainment, at all exceeding the use
of every common Merchant and Tradesman in his Town. For the Pensioner De Wit,
who had the great influence in the Government, The whole train and expense of
his Domestique went very equal with other common Deputies or Ministers of the
State; His Habit grave, and plain, and popular; His Table what only served turn
for his Family, or a Friend; His Train (besides Commissaries and Clerks kept
for him in an Office adjoining to his House, at the public charge) was only
one man, who performed all the Menial service of his House at home; and upon
his Visits of Ceremony, putting on a plain Livery-Cloak, attended his Coach
abroad: For upon other occasions, He was seen usually in the streets on foot
and alone, like the commonest Burger of the Town. Nor was this manner of life
affected, or used by these particular men, but was the general fashion or mode
among all the Magistrates of the State: For I speak not of the Military
Officers, who are reckoned their Servants, and live in a different garb, though
generally modester than in other Countries.

Thus this stomachful People, who could not endure the least exercise of
Arbitrary Power or Impositions, or the sight of any Foreign Troops under the
Spanish Government; Have been since inured to all of them, in the highest
degree, under their own Popular Magistrates; Bridled with hard Laws; Terrified
with severe Executions; Environed with Foreign Forces; And oppressed with the
most cruel Hardship and variety of Taxes, that was ever known under any
Government. But all this, whilst the way to Office and Authority lies through
those qualities which acquire the general esteem of the people; Whilst no man
is exempted from the danger and current of Laws; Whilst Soldiers are confined
to Frontier-Garrisons (the guard of Inland or Trading-Towns being left to the
Burghers themselves); And whilst no great Riches are seen to enter by Public
Payments into private Purses, either to raise Families, or to feed the prodigal
Expenses of vain, extravagant, and luxurious men; But all Public Moneys are
applied to the Safety, Greatness, or Honor of the State, and the Magistrates
themselves bear an equal share in all the Burdens they impose.

The Authority of the Princes of Orange, The Authority of the Princes of Orange.
though intermitted upon the untimely death of the last, and infancy of this
present Prince; Yet as it must be ever acknowledged to have had a most
essential part in the first frame of this Government, and in all the Fortunes
thereof, during the whole growth and progress of the State: So has it ever
preserved a very strong root, not only in Six of the Provinces, but even in the
general and popular affections of the Province of Holland it self, Whose States
have for these last Twenty years so much endeavored to suppress or exclude it.

This began in the person of Prince William of Nassaw, at the very birth of the
State; And not so much by the quality of being Governor of Holland and Zealand
in Charles the Fifth's, and Philip the Second's time; As by the esteem of so
great Wisdom, Goodness and Courage, as excelled in that Prince, and seems to
have been from him derived to his whole Race, Being indeed the qualities that
naturally acquire esteem and authority among the people in all Governments. Nor
has this Nation in particular, since the time perhaps of Civilis, ever been
without some Head, under some Title or other; but always a Head subordinate to
their Laws and Customs, and to the Sovereign Power of the State.

In the first Constitution of this Government, after the Revolt from Spain, All
the Power and Rights of Prince William of Orange, as Governor of the
Provinces, seem to have been carefully reserved. But those which remained
inherent in the Sovereign, were devolved upon the Assembly of the
States General, so as in them remained the power of making Peace and War, and
all Foreign Alliances, and of raising and coining of Moneys. In the Prince,
the command of all Land and Sea-Forces, as Captain General and Admiral, and
thereby the disposition of all Military Commands; The power of pardoning the
Penalty of Crimes; The choosing of Magistrates upon the nomination of the Towns;
For they presented three to the Prince, who elected one out of that number.
Originally the States General were convoked by the Council of State, where the
Prince had the greatest influence: Nor since that change, have the States used
to resolve any important matter without his advice. Besides all this, As the
States General represented the Sovereignty, so did the Prince of Orange the
Dignity of this State, by public Guards, and the attendance of all Military
Officers; By the application of all Foreign Ministers, and all pretenders at
home; By the splendor of his Court, and magnificence of his Expense, supported
not only by the Pensions and Rights of his several Charges and Commands, but by
a mighty Patrimonial Revenue in Lands, and Sovereign Principalities and
Lordships, as well in France, Germany, and Burgundy, as in the several parts of
the Seventeen Provinces; so as Prince Henry was used to answer some that would
have flattered him into the designs of a more Arbitrary Power, That he had as
much as any wise Prince would desire in that State; since he had all indeed,
besides that of Punishing men, and raising Money; whereas he had rather the
envy of the first should lie upon the Forms of the Government; and he knew the
other could never be supported without the consent of the people, to that
degree which was necessary for the defense of so small a State against so
mighty Princes as their Neighbors.

Upon these Foundations was this State first established, and by these Orders
maintained, till the death of the last Prince of Orange; When by the great
influence of the Province of Holland amongst the rest, the Authority of the
Princes came to be shared among the several Magistracies of the State; Those of
the Cities assumed the last nomination of their several Magistrates; The
States-Provincial, the disposal of all Military Commands in those Troops which
their share was to pay; And the States General, the Command of the Armies, by
Officers of their own appointment, substituted and changed at their will. No
power remained to pardon what was once condemned by rigor of Law; Nor any
person to represent the Port and Dignity of a Sovereign State; Both which could
not fail of being sensibly missed by the people, since no man in particular can
be secure of offending, or would therefore absolutely despair of impunity
himself, though he would have others do so; And men are generally pleased with
the Pomp and Splendour of a Government, not only as it is an amusement for idle
people, but as it is a mark of the Greatness, Honor and Riches of their
Country.

However these Defects were for near Twenty years supplied in some measure, and
this Frame supported by the great Authority and Riches of the Province of
Holland, which drew a sort of dependence from the other Six; and by the great
Sufficiency, Integrity and Constancy of their chief Minister, and by the effect
of both in the prosperous Successes of their Affairs: Yet having a Constitution
strained against the current vein and humor of the people, It was always
evident, that upon the growth of this young Prince, The great Virtues and
Qualities he derived from the mixture of such Royal and such Princely Blood,
could not fail in time of raising His Authority to equal at least, if not to
surpass that of his glorious Ancestors.

CHAP. III. Of their Situation.
HOLLAND, Zealand, Friezland, and Groninguen, are seated upon the Sea, and make
the Strength and Greatness of this State: The other three, with the Conquered
Towns in Brabant, Flanders, and Cleve, make only the Outworks or Frontiers,
serving chiefly for safety and defense of these. No man can tell the strange
and mighty Changes that may have been made in the face and bounds of Maritime
Countries, at one time or other, by furious Inundations, upon the unusual
concurrence of Land-Floods, Winds and Tides; And therefore no man knows whether
the Province of Holland may not have been in some past Ages, all Wood and rough
unequal ground, as some old Traditions go; And levelled to what we see, by the
Sea's breaking in and continuing long upon the Land; since recovered by its
recess, and with the help of Industry. For it is evident, that the Sea for some
space of years, advances continually upon one Coast, retiring from the
opposite; and in another Age, quite changes this course, yiedling up what it
had seized, and seizing what it had yielded up, without any reason to be given
of such contrary motions. But I suppose this great change was made in Holland,
when the Sea first parted England from the Continent, breaking through a neck
of Land between Dover and Calais; Which may be a Tale, but I am sure is no
Record. It is certain, on the contrary, that Sixteen hundred years ago, there
was no usual mention or memory of any such Changes; and that the face of all
these Coasts, and nature of the Soil, especially that of Holland, was much as
it is now, allowing only the Improvements of Riches, Time, and Industry; Which
appears by the description made in Tacitus both of the limits of the Isle of
Batavia, Rhenus apud principium agri Batavi velut in duos amnes dividitur, ad
Gallicam ripam latior and placidior verso cognomento Vahalem accola dicuut, mox
id quoque vocabulum mutat Mosa flumine, ejusque immenso ore eundem in Oceanum
effunditur.

Cum interim flexu Autumni and Crebris imbribus superfusus amnis palust^^m
humil^mque Insulam in faciem Stag^i opplevit.


and the nature of the Soil as well as the Climate, and the very names of
Rivers still remaining.

It Is likely the Changes arrived since that Age in these Countries, may have
been made by stoppages grown in time, with the rolling of Sands upon the mouths
of three great Rivers, which disimbogued into the Sea through the Coasts of
these Provinces; That is, the Rhine, the Mose, and the Scheld. The ancient
Rhyne divided where Skencksconce now stands, into two Rivers; of which, one
kept the name, till running near Leyden, it fell into the Sea at Catwick; Where
are still seen at low Tides, the foundations of an ancient Roman Castle that
commanded the mouth of this River: But this is wholly stopped up, though a great
Canal still preserves the Name of the old Rhine. The Mose running by Dort and
Rotterdam, fell as it now does, into the Sea at the Briel, with mighty issues
of water; But the Sands gathered for three or four Leagues upon this Coast,
makes the Haven extreme dangerous, without great skill of Pilots, and use of
Pilot-boats, that come out with every Tide to welcome and secure the Ships
bound for that River; And it is probable that these Sands having obstructed the
free course of the River, has at times caused or increased those Inundations,
out of which so many Islands have been recovered, and of which that part of the
Country is much composed.

The Scheld seems to have had its issue by Walcheren in Zealand, which was an
Island in the mouth of that River, till the Inundations of that and the Mose
seem to have been joined together by some great Helps or Irruptions of the Sea,
by which the whole Country was overwhelmed, which now makes that Inland-Sea
that serves for a common passage between Holland, Zealand, Flanders and
Brabant. The Sea for some Leagues from Zealand, lies generally upon such Banks
of Sand as it does upon the mouth of the Maze, though separated by something
better Channels than are found in the other.

That which seems likeliest to have been the occasion of stopping up wholly one
of these Rivers, and obstructing the others, Is the course of Westerly-winds,
which drive upon this Shore so much more constant and violent than the East:
For taking the Seasons and Years one with another, I suppose there will be
observed three parts of Westerly for one of Easterly Winds; Besides that these
last generally attend the calm Frosts and fair weather, and the other the
stormy and foul. And I have had occasion to make experiment of the Sands rising
and sinking before a Haven, by two fits of these contrary Winds, above four
foot. This I presume is likewise the natural reason of so many deep and
commodious Havens found upon all the English side of the Channel, and so few
(or indeed none) upon the French and Dutch: An advantage seeming to be given us
by Nature, and never to be equaled by any Art or Expense of our Neighbors.

I remember no mention in ancient Authors of that which is now called the
Zudder-Sea; Which makes me imagine, that may have been formed likewise by some
great Inundation breaking in between the Tessel-Islands and others that lie
still in a line contiguous, and like the broken remainders of a continued
Coast. This seems more probable from the great shallowness of that Sea, and
flatness of the Sands upon the whole extent of it; From the violent Rage of the
Waters breaking in that way, which threaten the parts of North-Holland about
Medenblick and Enchusen, and brave it over the highest and strongest Digues of
the Province upon every High-tide, and storm at North-west. As likewise from
the Names of East and West-Friezland, which should have been one Continent till
divided by this Sea; And in the time of the first Counts of Holland, their
great and almost continual Wars were against the Frizons; which could not have
been, if separated by this Sea, or if the Frizons were only the Inhabitants of
North-Holland.

Whatever it was, whether Nature or Accident, and upon what occasion soever it
arrived, The Soil of the whole Province of Holland is generally flat like the
Sea in a calm, and looks as if after a long contention between Land and Water,
which It should belong to, It had at length been divided between them: For to
consider the great Rivers, and the strange number of Canals that are found in
this Province, and do not only lead to every great Town, but almost to every
Village, and every Farm-House in the Country; And the infinity of Sails that
are seen every where coursing up and down upon them; One would imagine the
Water to have shared with the Land; and the people that live in Boats, to hold
some proportion with those that live in Houses. And this is one great advantage
toward Trade, which is natural to the Situation, and not to be attained in
any Country where there is not the same level and softness of Soil, which
makes the cutting of Canals so easy work as to be attempted almost by every
private man; And one Horse shall draw in a Boat more than fifty can do by Cart,
whereas Carriage makes a great part of the price in all heavy Commodities: And
by this easy way of traveling, an industrious man loses no time from his
business, for he writes, or eats, or sleeps while he goes; whereas the Time of
laboring or industrious men, is the greatest Native Commodity of any Country.

There is besides, one very great Lake of fresh water still remaining in the
midst of this Province, by the name of Harlem Maer, which might as they say be
easily drained, and would thereby make a mighty addition of Land to a Country,
where nothing is more wanted; and receive a great quantity of people, in which
they abound, and who make their Greatness and Riches. Much discourse there has
been about such an Attempt, but the City of Leyden having no other way of
refreshing their Town, or renewing their Canals with fresh water, but from this
Maer, will never consent to it. On the other side, Amsterdam will ever oppose
the opening and cleansing of the old Channel of the Rhine, which they say might
easily be compassed, and by which the Town of Leyden would grow Maritime, and
share a great part of the Trade now engrossed by Amsterdam. There is in
North-Holland a great Essay made at the possibility of draining these great
Lakes, by one of about two Leagues broad having been made firm Land, within
these forty years; This makes that part of the Country called the Bemster,
being now the richest Soil of the Province, lying upon a dead flat, divided
with Canals, and the ways through it distinguished with ranges of Trees, which
make the pleasantest Summer-Landschip of any Country I have seen of that sort.

Another advantage of their Situation for Trade, is made by those two great
Rivers of the Rhyne and Mose, reaching up, and Navigable so mighty a length
into so rich and populous Countries of the Higher and Lower Germany; which as
it brings down all the Commodities from those parts to the Magazines in
Holland, that vent them by their Shipping into all parts of the World where the
Market calls for them; so with something more Labor and Time, it returns all
the Merchandises of other parts into those Countries that are seated upon these
streams. For their commodious seat as to the Trade of the Streights, or
Baltique, or any parts of the Ocean, I see no advantage they have of most parts
of England; and they must certainly yield to many we possess, if we had other
equal circumstances to value them.

The lowness and flatness of their Lands, makes in a great measure the richness
of their Soil, that is easily overflowed every Winter, so as the whole Country
at that season seems to lie under water, which in Spring is driven out again by
Mills. But that which mends the Earth, spoils the Air, which would be all Fog
and Mist, if it were not cleared by the sharpness of their Frosts, which never
fail with every East Wind for about four Months of the year, and are much
fiercer than in the same Latitude with us, because that Wind comes to them over
a mighty length of dry Continent; but is moistened by the Vapors, or softened by
the warmth of the Seas motion, before it reaches us.

And this is the greatest disadvantage of Trade they receive from their
Situation, though necessary to their health; Because many times their Havens
are all shut up for two or three Months with Ice, when ours are open and free.

The fierce sharpness of these Winds, makes the changes of their Weather and
Seasons more violent and surprising than in any place I know; so as a warm
faint Air turns in a night to a sharp Frost, with the Wind coming into the
North-east; And the contrary with another change of Wind. The Spring is much
shorter, and less agreeable than with us; the Winter much colder, and some
parts of the Summer much hotter; and I have known more than once, the violence
of one give way to that of the other, like the cold fit of an Ague to the hot,
without any good temper between.

The flatness of their Land exposes it to the danger of the Sea, and forces
them to infinite charge in the continual fences and repairs of their Banks to
oppose it; Which employ yearly more men than all the Corn of the Province of
Holland could maintain (as one of their chief Ministers has told me). They have
lately found the common Sea-weed to be the best Material for these Digues,
which fastens with a thin mixture of Earth, yields a little to the force of the
Sea, and returns when the Waves give back: Whether they are thereby the safer
against Water, as they say Houses that shake are against Wind; or whether, as
pious Naturalists observe, all things carry about them that which serves for a
Remedy against the Mischiefs they do in the world.

The extreme moisture of the Air, I take to be the occasion of the great
neatness in their Houses, and cleanliness in their Towns. For without the help
of those Customs, their Country would not be habitable by such Crowds of
people, but the Air would corrupt upon every hot season, and expose the
Inhabitants to general and infectious Diseases; Which they hardly escape three
Summers together, especially about Leyden, where the Waters are not so easily
renewed; and for this reason I suppose it is that Leyden is found to be the
neatest and cleanest kept of all their Towns.

The same moisture of Air makes all Metals apt to rust, and Wood to mould;
which forces them by continual pains of rubbing and scouring, to seek a
prevention or cure: This makes the brightness and cleanness that seems affected
in their Houses, and is called natural to them, by people who think no further.
So the deepness of their Soil, and wetness of Seasons, which would render it
unpassable, forces them not only to exactness of paving in their Streets, but
to the expense of so long Cawsies between many of their Towns, and in their
Highways. As indeed most National Customs are the Effect of some unseen or
unobserved natural Causes or Necessities.

CHAP. IV. Of their People and Dispositions.
THE People of Holland may be divided into these several Classes: The Clowns or
Boors (as they call them), who cultivate the Land. The Mariners or Schippers,
who supply their Ships and Inland-Boats. The Merchants or Traders, who fill
their Towns. The Renteeners, or men that live in all their chief Cities upon
the Rents or Interest of Estates formerly acquired in their Families: And the
Gentlemen and Officers of their Armies.

The first are a Race of people diligent rather than laborious; dull and slow
of understanding, and so not dealt with by hasty words, but managed easily by
soft and fair; and yiedling to plain Reason, if you give them time to
understand it. In the Country and Villages not too near the great Towns, they
seem plain and honest, and content with their own; so that if in bounty you
give them a shilling for what is worth but a groat, they will take the current
price, and give you the rest again; if you bid them take it, they know not what
you mean, and sometimes ask if you are a Fool. They know no other Good, but the
supply of what Nature requires, and the common increase of Wealth. They feed
most upon Herbs, Roots, and Milks; and by that means I suppose neither their
Strength nor Vigor seems answerable to the Size or Bulk of their Bodies.

The Mariners are a plain, but much rougher people; whether from the Element
they live in, or from their Food, which is generally Fish and Corn, and
heartier than that of the Boors. They are surly and ill-manner'd, which is
mistaken for Pride; but I believe is learnt, as all Manners are, by the
conversation we use. Now theirs lying only among one another, or with Winds*
and Waves, which are not moved or wrought upon by any language, or observance;
or to be dealt with, but by Pains and by Patience; These are all the Qualities
their Mariners have learnt; their Valor is passive rather than active; and
their Language is little more than what is of necessary use to their Business.

The Merchants and Tradesmen, both the greater and Mechanic, living in Towns
that are of great resort, both by strangers and passengers of their own; Are
more Mercurial (Wit being sharpened by commerce and conversation of Cities),
though they are not very inventive, which is the gift of warmer heads; yet are
they great in imitation, and so far, many times, as goes beyond the Originals:
Of mighty Industry, and constant application to the Ends they propose and
pursue. They make use of their Skill and their Wit, to take advantage of other
men's Ignorance and Folly they deal with: Are great Exacters where the Law is
in their own hands. In other points, where they deal with men that understand
like themselves, and are under the reach of Justice and (...), they are the
plainest and best dealers in the world; Which seems not to grow so much from a
Principle of Conscience or Morality, as from a Custom or Habit introduced by
the necessity of Trade among them, which depends as much upon Common-Honesty,
as War does upon Discipline; and without which, all would break up, Merchants
would turn Pedlars, and Soldiers Thieves.

Those Families which live upon their Patrimonial Estates in all the great
Cities, are a people differently bred and manner'd from the Traders, though
like them in the modesty of Garb and Habit, and the Parsimony of living. Their
Youth are generally bred up at Schools, and at the Universities of Leyden or
Utrecht, in the common studies of Human Learning, but chiefly of the Civil Law,
which is that of their Country, at least as far as it is so in France and
Spain. (For, as much as I understand of those Countries, No Decisions or
Decrees of the Civil Law, nor Constitutions of the Roman Emperors, have the
force or current of Law among them, as is commonly believed, but only the force
of Reasons when alleged before their Courts of Judicature, as far as the
Authority of men esteemed wise, passes for Reason: But the ancient Customs of
those several Countries, and the Ordonnances of their Kings and Princes,
consented to by the Estates, or in France verified by Parliaments, have only
the strength and authority of Law among them.)

Where these Families are rich, their Youths after the course of their studies
at home, travel for some years, as the Sons of our Gentry use to do; but their
journeys are chiefly into England and France, not much into Italy, seldomer
into Spain, nor often into the more Northern Countries, unless in company or
train of their Public Ministers. The chief End of their Breeding, is to make
them fit for the service of their Country in the Magistracy of their Towns,
their Provinces, and their State. And of these kind of men are the Civil
Officers of this Government generally composed, being descended of Families who
have many times been constantly in the Magistracy of their Native Towns for
many Years, and some for several Ages.

Such were most or all of the chief Ministers, and the persons that composed
their chief Councils, in the time of my residence among them, and not men of
mean or Mechanic Trades, as it is commonly received among Foreigners, and
makes the subject of Comical Jests upon their Government. This does not exclude
many Merchants, or Traders in gross, from being often seen in the Offices of
their Cities, and sometimes deputed to their States; Nor several of their
States, from turning their Stocks in the management of some very beneficial
Trade by Servants, and Houses maintained to that purpose. But the generality of
the States and Magistrates are of the other sort; Their Estates consisting in
the Pensions of their Public Charges, in the Rents of Lands, or Interest of
Money upon the Cantores, or in Actions of the East-Indy Company, or in Shares
upon the Adventures of great Trading-Merchants.

Nor do these Families, habituated as it were to the Magistracy of their Towns
and Provinces, usually arrive at great or excessive Riches; The Salaries of
Public Employments and Interest being low, but the Revenue of Lands being yet
very much lower, and seldom exceeding the profit of Two in the Hundred. They
content themselves with the hohour of being useful to the Public, with the
esteem of their Cities or their Country, and with the ease of their Fortunes;
which seldom fails, by the frugality of their living, grown universal by being
(I suppose) at first necessary, but since honorable among them.

The mighty growth and excess of Riches is seen among the Merchants and
Traders, whose application lies wholly that way, and who are the better content
to have so little share in the Government, desiring only security in what they
possess; Troubled with no cares but those of their Fortunes, and the management
of their Trades, and turning the rest of their time and thought to the
divertisement of their lives. Yet these, when they attain great wealth, choose
to breed up their Sons in the way, and marry their Daughters into the Families
of those others most generally credited in their Towns, and versed in their
Magistracies; And thereby introduce their Families into the way of Government
and Honor, which consists not here in Titles, but in Public Employments.

The next Rank among them, is that of their Gentlemen or Nobles, who in the
Province of Holland (to which I chiefly confine these Observations) are very
few, most of the Families having been extinguished in the long Wars with Spain.
But those that remain, are in a manner all employed in the Military or Civil
Charges of the Province or State. These are in their Customs, and Manners, and
way of living, a good deal different from the rest of the people; and having
been bred much abroad, rather affect the Garb of their Neighbour-Courts, than
the Popular Air of their own Country. They value themselves more upon their
Nobility, than men do in other Countries, where it is more common; and would
think themselves utterly dishonored by the marriage of one that were not of
their Rank, though it were to make up the broken Fortune of a Noble Family, by
the Wealth of a Plebean. They strive to imitate the French in their Mien, their
Clothes, their way of Talk, of Eating, of Gallantry, or Debauchery; And are, in
my mind, something worse than they would be, by affecting to be better than
they need; making sometimes but ill Copies, whereas they might be good
Originals, by refining or improving the Customs and Virtues proper to their own
Country and Climate. They are otherwise an Honest, Well-natur'd, Friendly, and
Gentlemanly sort of men, and acquit themselves generally with Honor and Merit,
where their Country employs them.

The Officers of their Armies live after the Customs and Fashions of the
Gentlemen; And so do many Sons of the rich Merchants, who returning from travel
abroad, have more designs upon their own pleasure, and the vanity of appearing,
than upon the Service of their Country; Or if they pretend to enter into that,
it is rather by the Army than the State. And all these are generally desirous
to see a Court in their Country, that they may value themselves at home, by
the Qualities they have learnt abroad; and make a Figure which agrees better
with their own Humor, and the manner of Courts, than with the Customs and
Orders that prevail in more Popular Governments.

There are some Customs or Dispositions that seem to run generally through all
these Degrees of men among them; As great Frugality, and order in their
Expenses. Their common Riches lie in every man's having more than he spends; or
to say it more properly, In every man's spending less than he has coming in, be
that what it will: Nor does it enter into men's heads among them, That the
common port or course of Expense, should equal the Revenue; and when this
happens, they think at least they have lived that year to no purpose; And the
train of it discredits a man among them, as much as any vicious or prodigal
Extravagance does in other Countries. This enables every man to bear their
extreme Taxes, and makes them less sensible than they would be in other places:
For he that lives upon Two parts in Five of what he has coming in, if he pays
Two more to the State, he does but part with what he should have laid up, and
had no present use for; Whereas he that spends yearly what he receives, if he
pays but the Fiftieth part to the Public, it goes from him like that which
was necessary to buy Bread or Clothes for himself or his Family.

This makes the beauty and strength of their Towns, the commodiousness of
traveling in their Country by their Canals, Bridges, and Cawseys; the
pleasantness of their Walks, and their Grafts in and near all their Cities; And
in short, the Beauty, Convenience, and sometimes Magnificence of all Public
Works, to which every man pays as willingly, and takes as much pleasure and
vanity in them, as those of other Countries do in the same circumstances, among
the Possessions of their Families, or private Inheritance. What they can spare,
besides the necessary expense of their Domestique, the Public Payments, and
the common course of still increasing their Stock, Is laid out in the Fabric,
Adornment, or Furniture of their Houses: Things not so transitory, or so
prejudicial to Health, and to Business, as the constant Excesses and Luxury of
Tables; Nor perhaps altogether so vain as the extravagant Expenses of Clothes
and Attendance; At least these end wholly in a man's self, and the satisfaction
of his personal Humor; whereas the other make not only the Riches of a Family,
but contribute much toward the public Beauty and Honor of a Country.

The order in casting up their Expenses, is so great and general, that no man
offers at any Undertaking, which he is not prepared for, and Master of his
Design before he begins; so as I have neither observed nor heard of any
Building public or private, that has not been finished in the time designed
for it. So are their Canals, Cawseys, and Bridges; so was their Way from the
Hague to Skeveling, a Work that might have become the old Romans, considering
how soon it was dispatched. The House at the Hague, built purposely for casting
of Cannon, was finished in one Summer, during the heat of the first English War,
and looked rather like a design of Vanity in their Government, than Necessity or
Use. The Stadthouse of Amsterdam has been left purposely to time, without any
limitation in the first Design, either of that, or of Expense; both that the
Diligence and the Genius of so many succeeding Magistrates, should be employed
in the collection of all things that could be esteemed proper to increase the
Beauty or Magnificence of that Structure; And perhaps a little to reprieve the
experiment of a current Prediction, That the Trade of that City should begin to
fall the same year the Stadthouse should be finished, as it did at Antwerp.

Charity seems to be very National among them, though it be regulated by Orders
of the Country, and not usually moved by the common Objects of Compassion. But
it is seen in the admirable Provisions that are made out of it for all sorts of
persons that can want, or ought to be kept in a Government. Among the many and
various Hospitals that are in every man's curiosity and talk that travels their
Country, I was affected with none more than that of the aged Seamen at
Enchusyen, which is contrived, finished, and ordered, as if it were done with a
kind intention of some well-natur'd man, That those who had past their whole
lives in the Hardships and Incommodities of the Sea, should find a Retreat
stored with all the Eases and Conveniences that Old Age is capable of feeling
and enjoying. And here I met with the only rich man that I ever saw in my life:
For one of these old Seamen entertaining me a good while with the plain
Stories of his Fifty years Voyages and Adventures, while I was viewing their
Hospital, and the Church adjoining; I gave him at parting a piece of their Coin
about the value of a Crown; He took it smiling, and offered it me again; but
when I refused it, he asked me what he should do with Money? for all that ever
they wanted, was provided for them at their House. I left him to overcome his
Modesty as he could; but a Servant coming after me, saw him give it to a little
Girl that opened the Church-door, as she past by him; Which made me reflect
upon the fantastic calculation of Riches and Poverty that is current in the
world, by which a man that wants a Million, is a Prince; He that wants but a
Groat is a Beggar; and this was a poor man that wanted nothing at all.

In general, All Appetites and Passions seem to run lower and cooler here, than
in other Countries where I have converst. Avarice may be excepted. And yet that
should not be so violent, where it feeds only upon Industry and Parsimony, as
where it breaks out into Fraud, Rapine, and Oppression. But Quarrels are seldom
seen among them, unless in their drink, Revenge rarely heard of, or Jealousy
known. Their Tempers are not aerie enough for Joy, or any unusual strains of
pleasant Humor; nor warm enough for Love. This is talked of sometimes among the
younger men, but as a thing they have heard of, rather than felt; and as a
discourse that becomes them, rather than affects them. I have known some among
them that personated Lovers well enough but none that I ever thought were at
heart in love; Nor any of the Women that seemed at all to care whether they
were so or no. Whether it be that they are such lovers of their Liberty, as not
to bear the servitude of a Mistress, any more than that of a Master; Or that the
dullness of their Air renders them less susceptible of more refined Passions; Or
that they are diverted from it by the general intention every man has upon his
business whatever it is; (nothing being so mortal an Enemy of Love, that
suffers no Rival, as any bent of thought another way).

The same Causes may have had the same Effects among their married Women, who
have the whole care and absolute management of all their Domestique; And live
with very general good Fame; A certain sort of Chastity being hereditary and
habitual among them, as Probity among the Men.

The same dullness of Air may dispose them to that strange assiduity and
constant application of their minds, with that perpetual Study and Labor upon
any thing they design and take in hand. This gives them patience to pursue the
quest of Riches by so long Voyages and Adventures to the Indies, and by so long
Parsimony as that of their whole lives. Nay I have (for a more particular
example of this Disposition among them) known one man that employed Four and
twenty years about the making and perfecting of a Globe, and another above
Thirty about the inlaying of a Table. Nor does any man know how much may have
been contributed toward the great things in all kinds, both public and
private, that have been achieved among them by this one Humor of never giving
over what they imagine may be brought to pass, nor leaving one sent to follow
another they meet with; Which is the property of the lighter and more ingenious
Nations; And the Humor of a Government being usually the same with that of the
persons that compose it, Not only in this, but in all other points; so as where
men that govern, are Wise, Good, Steady and Just, the Government will appear so
too; and the contrary where they are otherwise.

The same Qualities in their Air, may incline them to the Entertainments and
Customs of Drinking, which are so much laid to their charge, and for ought I
know may not only be necessary to their Health (as they generally believe it),
but to the vigor and improvement of their Understandings, in the midst of a
thick foggy Air, and so much coldness of Temper and Complexion. For though the
use or excess of drinking, may destroy men's Abilities who live in better
Climates, and are of warmer Constitutions; Wine to hot Brains, being like Oil
to Fire, and making the Spirits by too much lightness, evaporate into smoke,
and perfect aerie imaginations; Or by too much heat, rage into Frenzy, or at
least into Humors and Thoughts that have a great mixture of it; Yet on the
other side, it may improve men's Parts and Abilities of cold Complexions, and
in dull Air; and may be necessary to thaw and move the frozen or unactive
Spirits of the Brain; To rowse sleepy Thought, and refine grosser Imaginations,
and perhaps to animate the Spirits of the Heart, as well as enliven those of
the Brain: Therefore the old Germans seemed to have some reason in their
Custom, Not to execute any great Resolutions which had not been twice debated,
and agreed at two several Assemblies, one in an Afternoon, and the other in a
Morning; Because they thought their Counsels might want Vigor when they were
sober, as well as Caution when they had drunk.

Yet in Holland I have observed very few of their chief Officers or Ministers
of State vicious in this kind; Or if they drunk much, 'twas only at set-Feasts,
and rather to acquit themselves, than of choice or inclination; And for the
Merchants and Traders, with whom it is customary, They never do it in a
morning, nor till they come from the Exchange, where the business of the day is
commonly dispatched; Nay, it hardly enters into their heads, that it is lawful to
drink at all before that time; but they will excuse it if you come to their
House, and tell you how sorry they are you come in a morning when they cannot
offer you to drink; as if at that time of day it were not only unlawful for
them to drink themselves, but so much as a stranger to do it within their Walls.

The Afternoon, or at least the Evening is given to whatever they find will
divert them; And is no more than needs, considering how they spend the rest of
the day, in Thought, or in Cares; in Toils, or in Business. For Nature cannot
hold out with constant labor of Body, and as little with constant bent or
application of mind: Much motion of the same parts of the Brain either weary
and waste them too fast for repair, or else (as it were) fire the wheels, and
so end either in ge^eral decays of the Body, or distractions of the Mind (For
these are usually occasioned by perpetual motions of Thought about some one
Object; whether it be about ones self in excesses of Pride, or about another in
those of Love, or of Grief). Therefore none are so excusable as men of much
care and thought, or of great business, for giving up their times of leisure to
any pleasures or diversions that offend no Laws, nor hurt others or themselves:
And this seems the reason that in all Civil Constitutions, not only Honors,
but Riches are annexed to the Charges of those who govern, and upon whom the
Public cares are meant to be devolved; Not only that they may not be
distracted from these by the cares of their own Domestique or private
Interests; but that by the help of Esteem, and of Riches, they may have those
Pleasures and Diversions in their reach, which idle men neither need nor
deserve, but which are necessary for the refreshment or repair of Spirits
exhausted with Cares and with Toil, and which serve to sweeten and preserve
those Lives that would otherwise wear out too fast, or grow too uneasy in the
Service of the Public.

The two Characters that are left by the old Roman Writers, of the ancient
Batavi or Hollanders, are, That they were both the bravest among the German
Nations, Queruntur (Fabii Valentis) Legiones orbari se fortissimorum virorum
auxilio veteres illos and tot bellorum auctores non abrumpendos ut corpori
validissimos artus.

Tacit.
and the most obstinate lovers and defenders of their Liberty; Which made them
exempted from all Tribute by the Romans, who desired only Soldiers of their
Nation to make up some of their Auxiliary-Bands, as they did in former Ages of
those Nations in Italy that were their Friends and Allies. The last Disposition
seems to have continued constant and National among them ever since that time,
and never to have more appeared than in the Rise and Constitutions of their
present State. It does not seem to be so of the First, or that the people in
general can be said now to be Valiant, a quality of old so National among them,
and which by the several Wars of the Counts of Holland (especially with the
Frizons), and by the desperate Defenses made against the Spaniards by this
people in the beginnings of their State, should seem to have lasted long, and
to have but lately decayed; That is, since the whole application of their
Natives has been turned to Commerce and Trade, and the vein of their Domestique
lives so much to Parsimony (by Circumstances which will be the Subject of
another Chapter); and since the main of all their Forces, and body of their
Army has been composed and continually supplied out of their Neighbour-Nations.

For Soldiers and Merchants are not found by experience to be more incompatible
in their abode, than the Dispositions and Customs seem to be different that
render a people sit for Trade and for War. The Soldier thinks of a short life
and a merry. The Trader reckons upon a long and a painful. One intends to make
his Fortunes suddenly by his Courage, by Victory, and Spoil: The the other
slower, but surer, by Craft, by Treaty, and by Industry. This makes the first
franc and generous, and throw away upon his Pleasures what has been gotten in
one Danger, and may either be lost or repaired in the next. The other wary and
frugal, and loath to part with in a day, what he has been laboring for a year,
and has no hopes to recover, but by the same paces of Diligence and Time. One
aims only to preserve what he has, as the fruit of his Father's pains; or what
he shall get, as the fruit of his own: The Other thinks the price of a little
Blood is more than of a great deal of Sweat; and means to live upon other men's
Labors, and possess in an hour what they have been years in acquiring: This
makes one love to live under stanch Orders and Laws; While the other would have
all depend upon Arbitrary Power and Will. The Trader reckons upon growing
Richer, and by his account Better, the longer he lives; which makes him careful
of his Health and his Life, and so apt to be orderly and temperate in his Diet;
While the Soldier is thoughtless or prodigal of both; and having not his Meat
ready at hours, or when he has a mind to it, Eats full and greedily whenever he
gets to it; And perhaps difference of Diet may make greater difference in men's
natural Courage, than is commonly thought of.

For Courage may proceed in some measure from the temper of Air, may be formed
by Discipline, and acquired by Use, or infused by Opinion; But that which is
more natural, and so more National in some Countries than in others, seems to
arise from the heat or strength of Spirits about the Heart, Which may a great
deal depend upon the measure and the substance of the food men are used to.
This made a great Physician among us say, He would make any man a Coward with
six weeks dietting; and Prince Maurice of Orange call for the English that were
newly come over, and had (as he said) their own Beef in their Bellies, for any
bold and desperate Action. This may be one reason why the Gentry in all places
of the world are braver than the Peasantry, whose hearts are depressed not only
by Slavery, but by short and heartless Food, the effect of their Poverty. This
is a cause why the Yeomanry and Commonalty of England are generally braver than
in other Countries, Because by the Plenty and Constitutions of the Kingdom,
they are so much easier in their Rents and their Taxes, and fare so much better
and fuller than those of their rank in any other Nation. Their chief, and
indeed constant food, being of flesh; And among all Creatures, both the Birds
and the Beasts, we shall still find those that feed upon flesh, to be the
fierce and the bold; and on the contrary, the fearful and fainthearted to feed
upon Grass, and upon Plants. I think there can be pretended but two Exceptions
to this Rule, which are the Cock, and the Horse; whereas the Courage of the
first is noted no where but in England, and there, only in certain Races: And
for the other, all the Courage we commend in them, is the want of fear; and
they are observed to grow much fiercer, whenever by custom or necessity they
have been used to flesh.

From all this may be inferred, That not only the long disuse of Arms among the
Native Hollanders (especially at Land), and making use of other Nations chiefly
in their Milice; But the Arts of Trade, as well as Peace, and their great
Parsimony in diet, and eating so very little flesh (which the common people
seldom do above once a week), may have helped to debase much the ancient Valor
of the Nation, at least in the occasions of Service at Land. Their Seamen are
much better; but not so good as those of Zealand, who are generally brave;
Which I suppose comes by these having upon all occasions turned so much more to
Privateering, and Men of War; and those of Holland being generally employed in
Trading and Merchant-Ships; While their Men of War are manned by Mariners of all
Nations, who are very numerous among them, but especially those of the
East-land Coasts of Germany, Suedes, Danes, and Norwegians.

It Is odd, that Veins of Courage should seem to run like Veins of good Earth in
a Country, and yet not only those of the Province of Hainault among the
Spanish, and of Gelderland among the United Provinces, are esteemed better
Soldiers than the rest; But the Burghers of Valenciennes among the Towns of
Flanders, and of Nimmeguen among those of the lower Gelder, are observed to be
particularly brave. But there may be firmness and constancy of Courage from
Tradition, as well as of Belief: Nor methinks should any man know how to be a
Coward, that is brought up with the opinion, That all of his Nation or City
have ever been Valiant.

I can say nothing of what is usually laid to their charge about their being
Cruel, besides what we have so often heard, of their barbarous usage to some of
our men in the East Indies, and what we have so lately seen of their Savage
Murder of their Pensioner De Wit; A Person that deserved another Fate, and a
better return from his Country after Eighteen years spent in their Ministry,
without any care of his Entertainments or Ease, and little of his Fortune. A
man of unwearied Industry, inflexible Constancy, sound, clear, and deep
Understanding, and untainted Integrity; so that whenever he was blinded, it was
by the passion he had for that which he esteemed the good and interest of his
State. This testimony is justly due to him from all that practiced him; and is
the more willingly paid, since there can be as little interest to flatter, as
honor to reproach the dead. But this Action of that people may be attributed
to the misfortune of their Country; and is so unlike the appearance of their
Customs and Dispositions, living as I saw them under the Orders and Laws of a
quiet and settled State, that one must confess Mankind to be a very various
Creature, and none to be known that has not been seen in his Rage, as well as
his Drink.

They are generally not so long-lived as in better Airs; and begin to decay
early, both men and women, especially at Amsterdam; For at the Hague (which is
their best Air) I have known two considerable men a good deal above Seventy,
and one of them in very good sense and health: But this is not so usual as it
is in England and in Spain. The Diseases of the Climate seem to be chiefly the
Gout and the Scurvy; but all hot and dry Summers bring some that are infectious
among them, especially into Amsterdam and Leyden: These are usually Fevers that
lie most in the head, and either kill suddenly, or languish long before they
recover. Plagues are not so frequent, at least not in a degree to be taken
notice of, for All suppress the talk of them as much as they can, and no
distinction is made in the Registry of the dead, nor much in the care and
attendance of the sick: Whether from a belief of Predestination, or else a
preference of Trade, which is the life of the Country, before that of
particular men.

Strangers among them are apt to complain of the Spleen, but those of the
Country seldom or never: Which I take to proceed from their being ever busy,
or easily satisfied. For this seems to be the Disease of people that are idle,
or think themselves but ill entertained; and attribute every sit of dull
Humor, or Imagination, to a formal Disease, which they have found this Name
for; Whereas such Fits are incident to all men, at one time or other, from the
fumes of Indigestion, from the common alterations of some insensible degrees in
Health and Vigor Vbi tempestas and coeli mobilis humor Mu^avere vias, and
Jupiter humidus Austris, D^nsat, erant quae rara modo, and quae densa relaxat
^^^tuntur species animorum, and pectora motus (...) alios, alios dum nubila
ventus agebat ^^^cipiunt, hinc ille avium concentus in agris Et (...) pecudes,
and ovantes gutture corvi.

Virg. Geor.
; or from some changes or approaches of change in Winds and Weather, which
affect the finer Spirits of the Brain, before they grow sensible to other
parts; And are apt to alter the shapes or colors of whatever is represented to
us by our Imaginations whilst we are so affected. Yet this Effect is not so
strong, but that business, or intention of thought, commonly either resists or
diverts it; And those who understand the motions of it, let it pass, and return
to themselves. But such as are idle, or know not from whence these changes
arise, and trouble their heads with Notions and Schemes of general Happiness or
Unhappiness in life; Upon every such fit begin reflections on the condition of
their Bodies, their Souls, or their Fortunes; And (as all things are then
represented in the worst colors) they fall into melancholy apprehensions of
one or other, and sometimes of them all: These make deep impression in their
minds, and are not easily worn out by the natural returns of good Humor,
especially if they are often interrupted by the contrary; As happens in some
particular Constitutions, and more generally in uncertain Climates, especially
if improved by accidents of ill health, or ill fortune. But this is a Disease
too refined for this Country and People, Who are well, when they are not ill;
and pleased, when they are not troubled; are content, because they think little
of it; and seek their happiness in the common Eases and Commodities of Life, or
the increase of Riches; Not amusing themselves with the more speculative
contrivances of Passion, or refinements of Pleasure.

To conclude this Chapter: Holland is a Country where the Earth is better than
the Air, and Profit more in request than Honor; Where there is more Sense than
Wit; More good Nature than good Humor; And more Wealth than Pleasure; Where a
man would choose rather to travel, than to live; Shall find more things to
observe than desire, And more persons to esteem than to love. But the same
Qualities and Dispositions do not value a private man and a State, nor make a
Conversation agreeable, and a Government great: Nor is it unlikely that some
very great King might make but a very ordinary private Gentleman, and some very
extraordinary Gentleman might be capable of making but a very mean Prince.

CHAP. V. Of their RELIGION.
I Intend not here to speak of Religion at all as a Divine, but as a mere
Secular man, when I observe the occasions that seem to have established it in
the Forms, or with the Liberties wherewith it is now attended in the United
Provinces. I believe the Reformed Religion was introduced there, as well as in
England, and the many other Countries where it is professed, by the operation
of Divine Will and Providence; And by the same, I believe the Roman-Catholique
was continued in France: Where it seemed by the conspiring of so many Accidents
in the beginnings of Charles the Ninth's Reign, to be so near a change. And
whoever doubts this, seems to question not only the Will, but the Power of God.
Nor will it at all derogate from the Honor of a Religion, to have been planted
in a Country by Secular means, or Civil Revolutions, which have, long since,
succeeded to those Miraculous Operations that made way for Christianity in the
world. It Is enough that God Almighty infuses belief into the hearts of men, or
else ordains it to grow out of Religious Enquiries and Instructions; And that
wherever the generality of a Nation come by these means to be of a belief, It
is by the force of this concurrence introduced into the Government, and becomes
the Established Religion of That Country. So was the Reformed Profession
introduced into England, Scotland, Sueden, Denmark, Holland, and many parts of
Germany. So was the Roman-Catholique restored in France and in Flanders; where
notwithstanding the great Concussions that were made in the Government by the
Hugonots and the Gueuses, yet they were never esteemed in either of those
Countries to amount further than the Seventh or Eighth part of the people. And
whosoever designs the change of Religion in a Country, or Government, by any
other means than that of a general conversion of the people, or the greatest
part of them, Designs all the Mischiefs to a Nation that use to usher in or
attend the two greatest Distempers of a State, Civil War, or Tyranny; Which
are, Violence, Oppression, Cruelty, Rapine, Intemperance, Injustice, and in
short, the miserable Effusion of Human Blood, and the Confusion of all Laws,
Orders, and Virtues among men.

Such Consequences as these, I doubt are something more than the disputed
Opinions of any man, or any particular Assembly of men can be worth; Since the
great and general End of all Religion, next to men's happiness hereafter, is
their happiness here; As appears by the Commandments of God, being the best and
greatest Moral and Civil, as well as Divine Precepts, that have been given to a
Nation; And by the Rewards proposed to the Piety of the Jews throughout the Old
Testament, which were the Blessings of this life, as Health, length of Age,
number of Children, Plenty, Peace, or Victory.

Now the way to our future happiness, has been perpetually disputed throughout
the World, and must be left at last to the Impressions made upon every man's
Belief and Conscience, either by natural or supernatural Arguments and Means;
Which Impressions men may disguise or dissemble, but no man can resist. For
Belief is no more in a man's power, than his Stature or his Feature; And he
that tells me, I must change my Opinion for his, because it is the truer and the
better, without other Arguments, that have to me the force of conviction, May
as well tell me, I must change my gray eyes for others like his that are black,
because these are lovelier, or more in esteem. He that tells me, I must inform
my self; Has reason, if I do it not: But if I endeavor it all that I can, and
perhaps more than he ever did, and yet still differ from him; And he, that it
may be is idle, will have me study on, and inform my self better, and so to the
end of my life; Then I easily understand what he means by informing, Which is
in short, that I must do it till I come to be of his opinion.

If he that perhaps pursues his Pleasures or Interests as much or more than I
do; And allows me to have as good sense as he has, in all other matters; Tells
me I should be of his opinion, but that Passion or Interest blinds me; Unless
he can convince me how, or where this lies, He is but where he was, Only
pretends to know me better than I do my self, who cannot imagine why I should
not have as much care of my soul, as he has of his.

A man that tells me my opinions are absurd or ridiculous, impertinent or
unreasonable, because they differ from his, seems to intend a Quarrel instead
of a Dispute; and calls me Fool or Madman with a little more circumstance;
Though perhaps I pass for one as well in my senses as he, as pertinent in talk,
and as prudent in life: Yet these are the common Civilities, in Religious
Argument, of sufficient and conceited men, Who talk much of Right Reason, and
mean always their own; And make their private imagination the measure of
general Truth. But such language determines all between us, and the Dispute
comes to end in three words at last, which it might as well have ended in at
first, That he is in the right, and I am in the wrong.

The other great End of Religion, which is our happiness here, Has been
generally agreed on by all Mankind, as appears in the Records of all their
Laws, Fiunt diversae respublicae ex civium moribus qui quocunque fluxerint,
caetera secum rapiunt.

Plat. de Rep.
as well as all their Religions, which come to be established by the concurrence
of men's Customs and and Opinions; though in the latter, that concurrence may
have been produced by Divine Impressions or Inspirations. For all agree in
teaching and commanding, in planting and improving, not only those Moral
Virtues which conduce to the felicity and tranquillity of every private man's
life; But also those Manners and Dispositions that tend to the Peace, Order,
and Safety of all Civil Societies and Governments among men. Nor could I ever
understand, how those who call themselves, and the world usually calls
Religious Men, come to put so great weight upon those points of Belief which
men never have agreed in, and so little upon those of Virtue and Morality, in
which they have hardly ever disagreed. Nor why a State should venture the
subversion of their Peace, and their Order, which are certain Goods, for the
propagation of uncertain or contested Opinions.

One of the great Causes of the first Revolt in the Low Countries, appeared to
be, The Oppression of men's Consciences, or Persecution in their Liberties,
their Estates, and their Lives, upon pretense of Religion. And this at a time,
when there seemed to be a conspiring-disposition in most Countries of
Christendom, to seek the reformation of some abuses, grown in the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church, either by the Rust of Time, by Negligence, or by
Human Inventions, Passions and Interests. The rigid opposition given at Rome to
this general Humor, was followed by a defection of mighty numbers in all those
several Countries, Who professed to reform themselves according to such Rules
as they thought were necessary for the reformation of the Church. These
persons, though they agreed in the main of disowning the Papal Power, and
reducing Belief from the authority of Tradition to that of the Scripture; Yet
they differed much among themselves in other circumstances, especially of
Discipline, according to the Persuasions and Impressions of the Leading-Doctors
in their several Countries. So the Reformed of France became universally
Calvinists: But for those of Germany, though they were generally Lutherans, yet
there was a great mixture both of Calvinists and Anabaptists among them.

The first Persecutions of these Reformed, arose in Germany in the time of
Charles the Fifth, and drove great numbers of them down into the Seventeen
Provinces, especially Holland and Brabant, where the Privileges of the Cities
were greater, and the Emperor's Government was less severe, as among the
Subjects of his own Native Countries. This was the occasion that in the year
1566, when upon the first Insurrection in Flanders, those of the Reformed
Profession began to form Consistories, and levy Contributions among themselves,
for support of their Common Cause; It was resolved upon consultation among the
Heads of them, that for declining all differences among themselves, at a time
of common exigence, The public Profession of their Party should be that of
the Lutherans, though with liberty and indulgence to those of different
Opinions. By the Union of Utrecht concluded in 579, Each of the Provinces was
left to order the matter of Religion as they thought fit and most conducing to
the welfare of their Province; With this provision, that every man should
remain free in his Religion, and none be examined or entrapped for that cause,
according to the Pacification at Gant. But in the year 583, it was enacted by
general agreement, That the Evangelical Religion should be only professed in
all the Seven Provinces: Which came thereby to be the established Religion of
this State.

The Reasons which seem to induce them to this settlement, were many, and of
weight; As first, Because by the Persecutions arrived in France, (where all the
Reformed were Calvinists) multitudes of people had retired out of that Kingdom
into the Low Countries; And by the great commerce and continual intercourse
with England, where the Reformation agreed much with the Calvinists in point of
Doctrine, though more with the Lutherans in point of Discipline, Those Opinions
came to be credited and propagated more than any other among the people of
these Provinces, So as the numbers were grown to be greater far in the Cities,
of this, than of any other Profession. Secondly, The Succors and Supplies both
of Men and Money, by which the weak Beginnings of this Commonwealth were
Perserved and Fortified, came chiefly, from England, from the Protestants of
France, (when their affairs were successful), and from the Calvinist Princes of
Germany, who lay nearest, and were readiest to relieve them. In the next place,
Because those of this Profession seemed the most contrary and violent against
the Spaniards, who made themselves Heads of the Roman-Catholiques throughout
Christendom, And the hatred of Spain and their Dominion, was so rooted in the
Hearts of this People, that it had influence upon them in the very choice of
their Religion. And lastly, Because by this Profession, all Rights and
Jurisdiction of the Clergy or Hierarchy being suppressed, There was no
Ecclesiastical Authority left to rise up and trouble or fetter the Civil Power;
And all the Goods and Possessions of Churches and Abbeys, were seized wholly
into the hands of the State, which made a great increase of the public
Revenue, A thing the most necessary for the support of their Government.

There might perhaps be added one Reason more, which was particular to one of
the Provinces: For whereas in most, if not all other parts of Christendom, the
Clergy composed one of the Three Estates of the Country, And thereby shared
with the Nobles and Commons in their Influences upon the Government; That Order
never made any part of the Estates in Holland, nor had any Vote in their
Assembly, which consisted only of the Nobles and the Cities, and this Province
bearing always the greatest sway in the Councils of the Union, was most
inclined to the settlement of that Profession, which gave least pretense of
Power or Jurisdiction to the Clergy, and so agreed most with their own ancient
Constitutions.

Since this Establishment, as well as before, the great Care of this State has
ever been, To favor no particular or curious Inquisition into the Faith or
Religious Principles of any peaceable man, who came to live under the
protection of their Laws, And to suffer no Violence or Oppression upon any Man's
Conscience, whose Opinions broke not out into Expressions or Actions of ill
consequence to the State. A free Form of Government either making way for more
freedom in Religion, Or else having newly contended so far themselves for
Liberty in this point, they thought it the more unreasonable for them to
oppress others. Perhaps while they were so threatened and endangered by
Foreign Armies, they thought it the more necessary to provide against
Discontents within, which can never be dangerous where they are not grounded or
fathered upon Oppression in point either of Religion or Liberty, But in those
two Cases the Flame often proves most violent in a State, the more it is shut
up, or the longer concealed.

The Roman-Catholique Religion was alone excepted from the common protection of
their Laws, Making Men (as the States believed) worse Subjects than the rest,
By the acknowledgment of a Foreign and Superior Jurisdiction; For so must all
Spiritual Power needs be, as grounded upon greater Hopes and Fears than any
Civil, At least wherever the persuasions from Faith are as strong as those from
Sense, Of which there are so many Testimonies recorded by the Martyrdoms,
Penances or Conscientious Restraints and Severities, suffered by infinite
Persons in all sorts of Religion.

Besides, this Profession seemed still a retainer of the Spanish Government,
which was then the great Patron of it in the world: Yet such was the care of
this State to give all men ease in this point, who asked no more than to serve
God, and save their own souls, in their own Way and Forms; That what was not
provided for by the Constitutions of their Government, was so, in a very great
degree, by the connivence of their Officers, Who upon certain constant Payments
from every Family, suffer the exercise of the Roman-Catholique Religion in
their several Jurisdictions, as free and easy, though not so cheap and so
avowed as the rest. This I suppose has been the reason, that though those of
this Profession are very numerous in the Country, among the Peasants, and
considerable in the Cities; Yet they seem to be a found piece of the State, and
fast jointed in with the rest; And have neither given any disturbance to the
Government, nor expressed any inclinations to a change, or to any Foreign Power,
Either upon the former Wars with Spain, or the latter Invasions of the Bishop
of Munster.

Of all other Religions, every man enjoys the free exercise in his own Chamber,
or his own House, unquestioned and unespied: And if the followers of any Sect
grow so numerous in any place, that they affect a public Congregation, and
are content to purchase a place of Assembly, to bear the charge of a Pastor or
Teacher, and to pay for this Liberty to the Public; They go and propose their
desire to the Magistrates of the place where they reside, Who inform themselves
of their Opinions, and manners of Worship; and if they find nothing in either,
destructive to Civil Society, or prejudicial to the Constitutions of their
State, And content themselves with the price that is offered for the purchase
of this Liberty, They easily allow it; But with the condition, That one or more
Commissioners shall be appointed, who shall have free admission at all their
meetings, shall be both the Observers and Witnesses of all that is acted or
preached among them, and whose testimony shall be received concerning any thing
that passes there to the prejudice of the State; In which case the Laws and
Executions are as severe as against any Civil Crimes.

Thus the Jews have their allowed Synagogues in Amsterdam and Rotterdam; And in
the first, almost all Sects that are known among Christians, have their
public Meeting-places; and some, whose Names are almost worn out in all other
parts, as the Brownists, Familists, and others. The Arminians, though they make
a great Name among them, by being rather the distinction of a Party in the
State, than a Sect in the Church; Yet are, in comparison of others, but few in
number, Though considerable by the persons, who are of the better quality, the
more learned and intelligent men, and many of them in the Government. The
Anabaptists are just the contrary, very numerous, but in the lower ranks of
people, Mechanics and Seamen, and abound chiefly in North-Holland.

The Calvinists make the body of the people, and are possessed of all the
public Churches in the Dominions of the State, as well as of the only
Ministers or Pastors who are maintained by the Public; But these have neither
Lands, nor Tithes, nor any authorized Contributions from the people, but
certain Salaries from the State, upon whom they wholly depend: And though they
are often very bold in taxing and preaching publicly against the Vices, and
sometimes the innocent Entertainments of persons most considerable in the
Government, as well as of the Vulgar; yet they are never heard to censure or
control the public Actions or Resolutions of the State: They are in general,
throughout the Country, passionate Friends to the Interests of the House of
Orange; And during the intermission of that Authority, found ways of expressing
their affections to the Person and Fortunes of this Prince, without offending
the State, as it was then constituted. They are fierce Enemies of the Arminian
Party, whose Principles were thought to lead them in Barnevelt's time toward a
conjunction, or at least compliance with the Spanish Religion and Government;
Both which, the House of Orange in the whole course of the War, endeavored to
make irreconcilable with those of the State.

It is hardly to be imagined how all the violence and sharpness, which
accompanies the differences of Religion in other Countries, seems to be
appeased or softened here, by the general freedom which all men enjoy, either by
allowance or connivence; Nor how Faction and Ambition are thereby disabled to
color their Interessed and Seditious Designs, with the pretenses of Religion,
Which has cost the Christian World so much blood for these last Hundred and
fifty years. No man can here complain of pressure in his Conscience, Of being
forced to any public profession of his private Faith; Of being restrained
from his own manner of worship in his House, Or obliged to any other abroad:
And whoever asks more in point of Religion, without the undisputed evidence of
a particular Mission from Heaven, may be justly suspected, not to ask for God's
sake, but for his own; since pretending to Sovereignty instead of Liberty in
Opinion, is indeed pretending the same in Authority too, Which consists chiefly
in Opinion; And what Man or Party soever, can gain the common and firm belief,
of being most immediately inspired, instructed, or favored of God, Will easily
obtain the prerogative of being most honored and obeyed by men.

But in this Commonwealth, no man having any reason to complain of oppression
in Conscience; and no man having hopes by advancing his Religion, to form a
Party, or break in upon the State, The differences in Opinion make none in
Affections, and little in Conversation, where it serves but for entertainment
and variety. They argue without interest or anger; They differ without enmity
or scorn, And they agree without confederacy. Men live together like Citizens
of the World, associated by the common ties of Humanity, and by the bonds of
Peace, Under the impartial protection of indifferent Laws, With equal
encouragement of all Art and Industry, and equal freedom of Speculation and
Enquiry; All men enjoying their imaginary excellencies and acquisitions of
knowledge, with as much safety, as their more real possessions and improvements
of Fortune. The power of Religion among them, where it is, lies in every man's
heart; The appearance of it, is but like a piece of Humanity, by which every
one falls most into the company or conversation of those whose Customs and
Humors, whose Talk and Disposition they like best: And as in other places,
it is in every man's choice, With whom he will eat or lodge, with whom go to
Market, or to Court; So it seems to be here, with whom he will pray or go to
Church, or associate in the Service and Worship of God; Nor is any more notice
taken, or more censure past, of what every one chooses in these cases, than in
the other.

I believe the force of Commerce, Alliances, and Acquaintance, spreading so far
as they do in small circuits (such as the Province of Holland) may contribute
much to make conversation, and all the offices of common life, so easy, among
so different Opinions, Of which so many several persons are often in every
man's eye; And no man cheeks or takes offense at Faces, or Customs, or
Ceremonies he sees every day, As at those he hears of in places far distant,
and perhaps by partial relations, and comes to see late in his life, and after
he has long been possessed by passion or prejudice against them. However it is,
Religion may possibly do more good in other places, But it does less hurt here;
And wherever the invisible effects of it are the greatest and most
advantageous, I am sure the visible are so in this Country, by the continual
and undisturbed Civil Peace of their Government for so long a course of years;
And by so mighty an increase of their people, Wherein will appear to consist
chiefly the vast growth of their Trade and Riches, and consequently the
strength and greatness of their State.

CHAP. VI. Of their TRADE.
It Is evident to those who have read the most, and traveled farthest, That no
Country can be found either in this present Age, or upon Record of any Story,
Where so vast a Trade has been managed, as in the narrow compass of the Four
Maritime Provinces of this Commonwealth: Nay it is generally esteemed, that
they have more Shipping belongs to them, than there does to all the rest of
Europe. Yet they have no Native Commodities toward the building or rigging of
the smallest Vessel; Their Flax, Hemp, Pitch, Wood, and Iron, coming all from
abroad, as Wool does for clothing their men, and Corn for feeding them. Nor do
I know any thing properly of their own growth, that is considerable either for
their own necessary use, or for Traffic with their Neighbors, besides
Butter, Cheese, and Earthen Wares. For Havens, they have not any good upon
their whole Coast: The best are Helversluys, which has no Trade at all; and
Flussingue, which has little in comparison of other Towns in Holland: But
Amsterdam, that triumphs in the spoils of Lisbon and Antwerp (which before
engrost the greatest Trade of Europe and the Indies) seems to be the most
incommodious Haven they have, Being seated upon so shallow waters, that
ordinary Ships cannot come up to it without the advantage of Tides; Nor great
ones without unlading. The entrance of the Tessel, and passage over the
Zudder-Sea, is more dangerous than a Voyage from thence to Spain, lying all in
blind and narrow Channels; so that it easily appears, that it is not a Haven
that draws Trade, but Trade that fills a Haven, and brings it in vogue. Nor has
Holland grown rich by any Native Commodities, but by force of Industry; By
improvement and manufacture of all Foreign growths; By being the general
Magazine of Europe, and furnishing all parts with whatever the Market wants or
invites; And by their Seamen being, as they have properly been called, the
common Carriers of the World.

Since the ground of Trade cannot be deduced from Havens, or Native Commodities
(as may well be concluded from the survey of Holland, which has the least and
the worst; and of Ireland, which has the most and the best, of both); it were
not amiss to consider, from what other source it may be more naturally and
certainly derived: For if we talk of Industry, we are still as much to seek
what it is that makes people industrious in one Country, and idle in another.
I conceive the true original and ground of Trade, to be great multitude of
people crowded into small compass of Land, whereby all things necessary to life
become deer, and all men who have possessions, are induced to Parsimony; but
those who have none, are forced to industry and labor, or else to want. Bodies
that are vigorous, fall to labor; Such as are not, Magister artis ingeniique
largitor Venture. Pers.
supply that defect by some sort of Inventions or Ingenuity. These Customs
arise first from Necessity, but increase by Imitation, and grow in time to be
habitual in a Country; And wherever they are so, If it lies upon the Sea, they
naturally break out into Trade, both because whatever they want of their own
that is necessary to so many men's lives, must be supplied from abroad; and
because by the multitude of people, and smallness of Country, Land grows so
deer, that the improvement of money that way is inconsiderable, and so turns to
Sea, where the greatness of the Profit makes amends for the Venture.

This cannot be better illustrated, than by its contrary, which appears no
where more than in Ireland; Where by the largeness and plenty of the Soil, and
scarcity of People, all things necessary to life are so cheap, that an
industrious man, by two days labor, may gain enough to feed him the rest of
the week; Which I take to be a very plain ground of the laziness attributed to
the people: For men naturally prefer Ease before Labor, and will not take
pains if they can live idle; Though, when by necessity they have been inured to
it, they cannot leave it, being grown a custom necessary to their health, and
to their very entertainment: Nor perhaps is the change harder, from constant
Ease, to Labor, than from constant Labor to Ease.

This account of the Original of Trade, agrees with the experience of all Ages,
and with the Constitutions of all places where it has most flourished in the
World, as Tire, Carthage, Athens, Syracuse, Agrigentum, Rhodes, Venice,
Holland; and will be so obvious to every man, that knows and considers the
situation, the extent and the nature of all those Countries, that it will need
no enlargement upon the comparisons.

By these Examples, which are all of Commonwealths, and by the decay or
dissolution of Trade in the Six first, when they came to be conquered or
subjected to Arbitrary Dominions, It might be concluded, That there is
something in that form of Government proper and natural to Trade in a more
peculiar manner. But the height it arrived to at Bruges and Antwerp, under
their Princes, for four or five descents of the House of Burgundy, and two of
Austria, shows it may thrive under good Princes and legal Monarchies, as well
as under Free States. Under Arbitrary and Tyrannical Power, it must of
necessity decay and dissolve, Because this empties a Country of people,
whereas the others fill it; This extinguishes Industry, whilst men are in doubt
of enjoying themselves what they get, or leaving it to their Children; The
others encourage it, by securing men of both: One fills a Country with
Soldiers, and the other with Merchants; Who were never yet known to live well
together, Because they cannot trust one another: And as Trade cannot live
without mutual trust among private men; so it cannot grow or thrive to any
great degree, without a confidence both of public and private safety, and
consequently a trust in the Government, from an opinion of its Strength,
Wisdom, and Justice; Which must be grounded either upon the Personal Virtues
and Qualities of a Prince, or else upon the Constitutions and Orders of a State.

It appears to every man's eye who has traveled Holland, and observed the
number and vicinity of their great and populous Towns and Villages, with the
prodigious improvement of almost every spot of ground in the Country, And the
great multitudes constantly employed in their Shipping abroad, and their Boats
at home, That no other known Country in the World, of the same extent, holds
any proportion with this in numbers of people; And if that be the great
foundation of Trade, the best account that can be given of theirs, will be, by
considering the Causes and Accidents that have served to force or invite so
vast a confluence of people into their Country. In the first rank may be
placed, the Civil-Wars, Calamities, Persecutions, Oppressions, or Discontents,
that have been so fatal to most of their Neighbors, for some time before as
well as since their State began.

The Persecutions for matter of Religion, in Germany under Charles the Fifth,
in France under Henry the Second, and in England under Queen Mary, forced great
numbers of people out of all those Countries, to shelter themselves in the
several Towns of the Seventeen Provinces, where the ancient Liberties of the
Country, and Privileges of the Cities, had been inviolate under so long a
succession of Princes, and gave protection to these oppressed strangers, who
filled their Cities both with People and Trade, and raised Antwerp to such a
height and renown, as continued till the Duke of Alva's arrival in the
Low Countries. The fright of this man, and the Orders he brought, and Armies to
execute them, began to scatter the Flock of people that for some time had been
nested there; So as in very few Months, above a Hundred thousand Families
removed out of the Country. But when the Seven Provinces united, and began to
defend themselves with success, under the conduct of the Prince of Orange, and
the countenance of England and France, And the Persecutions for Religion began
to grow sharp in the Spanish Provinces, All the Professors of the Reformed
Religion, and haters of the Spanish Dominion, retired into the strong Cities of
this Commonwealth, and gave the same date to the growth of Trade there, and the
decay of it at Antwerp.

The long Civil-Wars, at first of France, then of Germany, and lastly of
England, served to increase the swarm in this Country, not only by such as
were persecuted at home, but great numbers of peaceable men, who came here to
seek for quiet in their Lives, and safety in their Possessions or Trades; Like
those Birds that upon the approach of a rough Winter-season, leave the
Countries where they were born and bred, fly away to some kinder and softer
Climate, and never return till the Frosts are past, and the Winds are laid at
home.

The invitation these people had, to fix rather in Holland than in many better
Countries, seems to have been at first, the great strength of their Towns,
which by their Maritime situation, and the low flatness of their Country, can
with their Sluices overflow all the ground about them at such distances, as to
become inaccessible to any Landforces. And this natural strength has been
improved, especially at Amsterdam, by all the Art and Expense that could any
ways contribute toward the defense of the place.

Next was the Constitution of their Government, by which, neither the
States General nor the Prince have any power to invade any man's Person or
Property within the precincts of their Cities. Nor could it be feared that the
Senate of any Town should conspire to any such violence; nor if they did, could
they possibly execute it, having no Soldiers in their pay, and the Burgers only
being employed in the defense of their Towns, and execution of all Civil
Justice among them.

These Circumstances gave so great a credit to the Bank of Amsterdam; And that
was another invitation for people to come, and lodge here what part of their
Money they could transport, and knew no way of securing at home. Nor did those
people only lodge Moneys here, who came over into the Country; but many more
who never left their own; Though they provided for a retreat, or against a
storm, and thought no place so secure as this, nor from whence they might so
easily draw their money into any parts of the World.

Another Circumstance, was the general Liberty and Ease, not only in point of
Conscience, but all others that serve to the commodiousness and quiet of life;
Every man following his own way, minding his own business, and little enquiring
into other men's; Which I suppose happened by so great a concourse of people of
several Nations, different Religions and Customs, as left nothing strange or
new; And by the general humor, bent all upon Industry, whereas Curiosity is
only proper to idle men.

Besides, it has ever been the great Principle of their State, running through
all their Provinces and Cities, even with emulation, To make their Country the
common refuge of all miserable men; From whose protection, hardly any Alliance,
Treaties, or Interests, have ever been able to divert or remove them. So as
during the great dependence this State had upon France, in the time of Henry
the Fourth, All the persons disgraced at that Court, or banished that Country,
made this their common retreat; Nor could the State ever be prevailed with, by
any instances of the French Ambassadors, to refuse them the use and liberty of
common life and air, under the protection of their Government.

This firmness in the State, has been one of the circumstances that has invited
so many unhappy men out of all their Neighborhood, and indeed from most parts
of Europe, to shelter themselves from the blows of Justice, or of Fortune. Nor
indeed does any Country seem so proper to be made use of upon such occasions,
not only in respect of safety, but as a place that holds so constant and easy
correspondencies with all parts of the World; And whither any man may draw
whatever money he has at his disposal in any other place; Where neither Riches
expose men to danger, nor Poverty to contempt; But on the contrary, where
Parsimony is honorable, whether it be necessary or no; and he that is forced
by his Fortune to live low, may here alone live in fashion, and upon equal
terms (in appearance abroad) with the chiefest of their Ministers, and richest
of their Merchants: Nor is it easily imagined how great an effect this
Constitution among them, may in course of time have had upon the increase both
of their People and their Trade.

As the two first invitations of people into this Country, were the strength
of their Towns, and nature of their Government; So two others have grown with
the course of time, and progress of their Riches and Power. One is the
Reputation of their Government, arising from the observation of the Success of
their Arms, the Prudence of their Negotiations, the Steddiness of their
Counsels, the Constancy of their Peace and Quiet at home, and the Consideration
they hereby arrived at among the Princes and States of Christendom. From all
these, men grew to a general opinion of the Wisdom and Conduct of their State;
and of its being established upon Foundations that could not be shaken by any
common Accidents, nor consequently in danger of any great or sudden
Revolutions; And this is a mighty inducement to industrious people to come and
inhabit a Country, who seek not only safety under Laws from Injustice and
Oppression, but likewise under the strength and good conduct of a State, from
the violence of Foreign Invasions, or of Civil Commotions.

The other, is the great Beauty of their Country (forced in time, and by the
improvements of Industry, in spite of Nature), Which draws every day such
numbers of curious and idle persons to see their Provinces, though not to
inhabit them. And indeed their Country is a much better Mistress than a Wife;
and where few persons who are well at home, would be content to live; but where
none that have time and money to spare, would not for once be willing to
travel; And as England shows in the beauty of the Country, what Nature can
arrive at; so does Holland in the number, greatness, and beauty of their Towns,
whatever Art can bring to pass. But these and many other matters of Speculation
among them, filling the Observations of all common Travelers, shall make no
part of mine, whose design is rather to discover the Causes of their Trade and
Riches, than to relate the Effects.

Yet it may be noted hereupon, as a piece of wisdom in any Kingdom or State, By
the Magnificence of Courts, or of Public Structures; By encouraging beauty in
private Buildings, and the adornment of Towns with pleasant and regular
plantations of Trees; By the celebration of some Noble Festivals or
Solemnities; By the institution of some great Marts or Fairs; and by the
contrivance of any extraordinary and renowned Spectacles, To invite and
occasion, as much and as often as can be, the concourse of busy or idle people
from the neighboring or remoter Nations, whose very passage and intercourse is
a great increase of Wealth and of Trade, and a secret incentive of people to
inhabit a Country where men may meet with equal advantages, and more
entertainments of life, than in other places. Such were the Olimpick and other
Games among the Grecians; Such the Triumphs, Trophies, and Secular Plays of old
Rome, as well as the Spectacles exhibited afterward by the Emperors, with such
stupendous effects of Art and Expense, for courting or entertertaining the
people; Such the Jubilees of new Rome; The Justs and Tournaments formerly used
in most of the Courts of Christendom; The Festivals of the more celebrated
Orders of Knighthood; And in particular Towns, the Carnavals and Faires; The
Kirmeshes which run through all the Cities of the Netherlands, and in some of
them, with a great deal of Pageantry, as well as Traffic, being equal baits
of Pleasure and of Gain.

Having thus discovered what has laid the great Foundations of their Trade, by
the multitude of their People, which has planted and habituated Industry among
them, and by that, all sorts of Manufacture; As well as Parsimony, and thereby
general Wealth: I shall enumerate very briefly, some other Circumstances, that
seem, next to these, the chief Advancers and Encouragers of Trade in their
Country.

Low Interest, and deerness of Land, are effects of the multitude of People,
and cause so much Money to lie ready for all Projects, by which gain may be
expected, as the cutting of Canals, making Bridges and Cawsies, leveling Downs,
and draining Marshes, besides all new essays at Foreign Trade, which are
proposed with any probability of advantage.

The use of their Banks, which secures Money, and makes all Payments easy, and
Trade quick.

The Sale by Registry, which was introduced here and in Flanders in the time of
Charles the Fifth, and makes all Purchases safe.

The Severity of Justice, not only against all Thefts, but all Cheats, and
Counterfeits of any Public Bills (which is capital among them), and even
against all common Beggars, who are disposed of either into Workhouses, or
Hospitals, as they are able or unable to labor.

The Convoys of Merchant-Fleets into all parts, even in time of Peace, but
especially into the Streights; which give their Trade security against many
unexpected accidents, and their Nation credit abroad, and breeds up Seamen for
their Ships of War.

The lowness of their Customs, and easiness of paying them, which, with the
freedom of their Ports, invite both Strangers and Natives to bring Commodities
hither, not only as to a Market, but as to a Magazine, where they lodge till
they are invited abroad to other and better Markets.

Order and Exactness in managing their Trade, which brings their Commodities in
credit abroad. This was first introduced by severe Laws and Penalties, but is
since grown into custom. Thus there have been above Thirty several Placarts
about the manner of curing, pickling, and barreling Herrings. Thus all Arms
made at Utrecht, are forfeited if sold without mark, or marked without trial.
And I observed in their Indian-House, that all the pieces of Scarlet, which are
sent in great quantities to those parts, are marked with the English Arms, and
Inscriptions in English; by which they maintain the credit gained to that
Commodity, by our former trade to parts where it is now lost or decayed.

The Government managed either by men that trade, or whose Families have risen
by it, or who have themselves some Interest going in other men's Traffic, or
who are born and bred in Towns, The soul and being whereof consists wholly in
Trade, Which makes sure of all favor that from time to time grows necessary,
and can be given it by the Government.

The custom of every Towns affecting some particular Commerce or Staple,
valuing it self thereupon, and so improving it to the greatest height, as
Flussingue by that of the West Indies, Middleburgh of French-Wines, Terveer by
the Scotch Staple, Dort by the English Staple and Rhenish-Wines, Rotterdam by
the Rnglish and Scotch Trade at large, and by French-Wines; Leyden by the
Manufacture of all sorts of Stuffs, Silk, Hair, Gold and Silver; Haerlem by
Linen, Mixt-Stuffs, and Flowers; Delf by Beer and Dutch-Purcelane; Surdam by
the built of Ships; Enchusyen and Mazlandsluys, by Herring-fishing; Friezland
by the Greenland-Trade, and Amsterdam by that of the East Indies, Spain, and
the Streights.

The great application of the whole Province to the Fishing-Trade, upon the
Coasts of England and Scotland, which employs an incredible number of Ships and
Seamen, and supplies most of the Southern parts of Europe with a rich and
necessary Commodity.

The last I shall mention, is the mighty advance they have made toward
engrossing the whole Commerce of the East Indies, by their successes against
the Porteguesses, and by their many Wars and Victories against the Natives,
whereby they have forced them to Treaties of Commerce, exclusive to all other
Nations, and to the admission of Forts to be built upon Streights and Passes
that command the entrances into the Traffic of such places. This has been
achieved by the multitude of their people and Mariners, that has been able to
furnish every year so many great Ships for such Voyages, and to supply the loss
of so many lives as the changes of Climate have cost, before they learnt the
method of living in them: By the vastness of the Stock that has been turned
wholly to that Trade; And by the conduct and application of the East-Indy
Company, who have managed it like a Commonwealth rather than a Trade; And
thereby raised a State in the Indies, governed indeed by the Orders of the
Company, but otherwise appearing to those Nations like a Sovereign State,
making War and Peace with their greatest Kings, and able to bring to Sea Forty
or Fifty Men of War, and Thirty thousand men at Land, by the modestest
computations. The Stock of this Trade, besides what it turns to in France,
Spain, Italy, the Streights, and Germany, makes them so great Masters in the
Trade of the Northern parts of Europe, as Muscovy, Poland, Pomerania, and all
the Baltique; where the Spices, that are an Indian-Drug, and Europaean-Luxury,
command all the Commodities of those Countries, which are so necessary to life,
as their ^ora; and to Navigation, as Hemp, Pitch, Masts, Planks, and Iron.

Thus the Trade of this Country is discovered to be no effect of common
contrivances, of natural dispositions or scituations, or of trivial accidents;
But of a great concurrence of Circumstances, a long course of Time, force of
Orders and Method, which never before met in the World to such a degree, or
with so prodigious a Success, and perhaps never will again. Having grown (to
sum up all) from the situation of their Country, extended upon the Sea,
divided by two such Rivers as the Rhyne and the Mose, with the vicinity of the
Ems, Weser, and Elve; From the confluence of people out of Flanders, England,
France, and Germany, invited by the Strength of their Towns, and by the
Constitutions and Credit of their Government; by the Liberty of Conscience, and
Security of Life and Goods (subjected only to constant Laws); From general
Industry and Parsimony, occasioned by the multitude of People, and smalness of
Country; From cheapness and easiness of Carriage by convenience of Canals;
From low Use, and deerness of Land, which turn Money to Trade; The institution
of Banks; Sale by Registry; Care of Convoys; Smalness of Customs; Freedom of
Ports; Order in Trade; Interest of persons in the Government; Particular
Traffic affected to particular places; Application to the Fishery; And
Acquisitions in the East Indies.

It is no constant Rule, That Trade makes Riches; For there may be a Trade that
impoverishes a Nation: As it is not going often to Market that enriches the
Countryman; But on the contrary, if every time he comes there, he buys to a
greater value than he sells, He grows the poorer the oftener he goes: But the
only and certain Scale of Riches arising from Trade in a Nation, is the
proportion of what is exported for the consumption of others, to what is
imported for their own.

The true ground of this proportion lies in the general Industry and Parsimony
of a people, or in the contrary of both. Industry increases the Native
Commodity, either in the product of the Soil, or the Manufactures of the
Country, which raises the Stock for exportation. Parsimony lessens the
consumption of their own, as well as of Foreign Commodities; and not only
abates the importation by the last, but increases the exportation by the first;
For of all Native Commodities, the less is consumed in a Country, the more is
exported abroad; there being no Commodity, but at one price or other will find
a Market, which They will be Masters of, who can afford it cheapest: Such are
always the most industrious and parsimonious people, who can thrive by Prices
upon which the Lazy and Expensive cannot live.

The vulgar mistake, That importation of Foreign Wares, if purchased abroad
with Native Commodities, and not with Money, does not make a Nation poorer; Is
but what every man that gives himself leisure to think, must immediately
rectify, By finding out, that upon the end of an Account between a Nation and
all they deal with abroad Whatever the Exportation wants in value to balance
that of the Importation, must of necessity be made up with ready money.

By this we find out the foundation of the Riches of Holland, As of their Trade
by the circumstances already rehearsed. For never any Country traded so much,
and consumed so little: They buy infinitely, but it is to sell again, either
upon improvement of the Commodity, or at a better Market. They are the great
Masters of the Indian Spices, and of the Persian Silks; but wear plain Woollen,
and feed upon their own Fish and Roots. Nay, they sell the finest of their own
Cloth to France, and buy coarse out of England for their own wear. They send
abroad the best of their own Butter into all parts, and buy the cheapest out of
Ireland, or the North of England, for their own use. In short, they furnish
infinite Luxury, which they never practice; and traffic in Pleasures which
they never taste.

The Gentlemen and Officers of the Army change their Clothes and their Modes
like their Neighbors. But among the whole Body of the Civil Magistrates, the
Merchants, the rich Traders, and Citizens in general, the Fashions continue
still the same; And others as constant among the Seamen and Boors: So that men
leave off their Clothes only because they are worn out, and not because they
are out of fashion.

Their great Foreign Consumption, is French-Wine and Brandy; But that may be
allowed them, as the only Reward they enjoy of all their pains, and as that
alone which makes them rich and happy in their voluntary Poverty, who would
otherwise seem poor and wretched in their real Wealth. Besides, what they spend
in Wine, they save in Corn to make other Drinks, which is bought from Foreign
parts. And upon a pressure of their Affairs, we see now for two years together,
They have denied themselves even this Comfort, among all their Sorrows, and
made up in passive Fortitude whatever they have wanted in the active.

Thus it happens, that much going constantly out either in Commodity, or in the
Labor of Seafaring-men; And little coming in to be consumed at home; The rest
returns in Coin, and fills the Country to that degree, That more Silver is
seen in Holland among the common Hands and Purses, than Brass either in Spain
or in France; Though one be so rich in the best Native Commodities, and the
other drain all the Treasures of the West Indies.

By all this account of their Trade and Riches, it will appear, That some of
our Maxims are not so certain as they are current in our common Politics. As
first, That Example and Encouragement of Excess and Luxury, if employed in the
consumption of Native Commodities, is of advantage to Trade: It may be so to
that which impoverishes, but is not to that which enriches a Country; And is
indeed less prejudicial if it lie in Native than in Foreign Wares. But the
custom or humor of Luxury and Expense, cannot stop at certain bounds: What
begins in Native, will proceed in Foreign Commodities; and though the Example
arise among idle persons, yet the Imitation will run into all Degrees, even of
those men by whose Industry the Nation subsists. And besides, the more of our
own we spend, the less we shall have to send abroad; and so it will come to
pass, that while we drive a vast Trade, yet by buying much more than we sell,
we shall come to be poor: Whereas when we drove a very small Traffic abroad,
yet by selling so much more than we bought, we were very rich in proportion to
our Neighbors. This appeared in Edward the Third's time, when we maintained so
mighty Wars in France, and carried our Victorious Arms into the heart of Spain;
Whereas in the 28 year of that King's Reign, the Value and Custom of all our
Exported Commodities amounted to 294184 l. -- 17 s. -- 2 d. And that of our
Imported, but to 38970 l. -- 03 s. -- 06 d. So as there must have entered that
year into the Kingdom in Coin or Bullion (or else have grown a Debt to the
Nation) 255214 l. -- 13 s. -- 08 d. And yet we then carried out our Wools
unwrought, and brought in a great part of our Clothes from Flanders.

Another common Maxim is, That if by any Foreign Invasion or Servitude, the
State, and consequently the Trade of Holland should be ruined, the last would
of course fall to our share in England. Which is no consequence: For it would
certainly break into several pieces, and shift either to us, to Flanders, to
the Hans-Towns, or any other parts, according as the most of those
circumstances should any where concur to invite it (and the likest to such), as
appear to have formerly drawn it into Holland, By so mighty a confluence of
People, and so general a vein of Industry and Parsimony among them. And whoever
pretends to equal their growth in Trade and Riches, by other ways than such as
are already enumerated, will prove, I doubt, either to deceive, or to be
deceived.

A third is, That if that State were reduced to great extremities, so as to
become a Province to some greater Power, They would choose our Subjection rather
than any other, or those at least that are the Maritime and the Richest of the
Provinces. But it will be more reasonably concluded from all the former
Discourses, That though they may be divided by absolute Conquests, they will
never divide themselves by consent, But all fall one way, and by common
agreement make the best terms they can for their Country as a Province, if not
as a State: And before they come to such an extremity, they will first seek to
be admitted as a Belgick-Circle in the Empire (which they were of old); and
thereby receive the protection of that Mighty Body, which (as far as great and
smaller things may be compared) seems the likest their own State in its main
Constitutions, but especially in the Freedom or Sovereignty of the Imperial
Cities. And this I have often heard their Ministers speak of, as their last
refuge, in case of being threatened by too strong and fatal a Conjuncture.

And if this should happen, the Trade of the Provinces would rather be
preserved or increased, than any way broken or destroyed by such an alteration
of their State, Because the Liberties of the Country would continue what they
are, and the Security would be greater than now it is.

The last I will mention, is of another vein; That if the Prince of Orange were
made Sovereign of their Country, though by Foreign Arms, he would be a great
Prince, because this now appears to be so great a State. Whereas, on the
contrary, those Provinces would soon become a very mean Country. For such a
Power must be maintained by force, as it would be acquired, and as indeed all
Absolute Dominion must be in those Provinces. This would raise general
Discontents; and those, perpetual Seditions among the Towns, which would change
the Orders of the Country, endanger the Property of private men, And shake the
Credit and Safety of the Government: Whenever this should happen, The People
would scatter, Industry would faint, Banks would dissolve, And Trade would
decay to such a degree, as probably in course of time, their very Digues would
be no longer maintained by the Defenses of a weak People against so furious an
Invader; But the Sea would break in upon their Land, and leave their chiefest
Cities to be Fisher-Towns, as they were of old.

Without any such great Revolutions, I am of opinion, That Trade has for some
years ago past its Meridian, and begun sensibly to decay among them: Whereof
there seem to be several Causes; As first, The general application that so many
other Nations have made to it, within these two or three and twenty years. For
since the Peace of Munster, which restored the quiet of Christendom in 1648,
not only Sueden and Denmark, but France and England, have more particularly
than ever before, busied the thoughts and counsels of their several
Governments, as well as the humors of their People, about the matters of Trade.

Nor has this happened without good degrees of Success; though Kingdoms of such
extent, that have other and Nobler Foundations of Greatness, cannot raise Trade
to such a pitch as this little State, which had no other to build upon; No more
than a man, who has a fair and plentiful Estate, can fall to Labor and
Industry, like one that has nothing else to trust to for the support of his
life. But however, all these Nations have come of late to share largely with
them; And there seem to be grown too many Traders for Trade in the World, So as
they can hardly live one by another. As in a great populous Village, the first
Grocer or Mercer that sets up among them, grows presently rich, having all the
Custom; till another, encouraged by his success, comes to set up by him, and
share in his gains; At length so many fall to the Trade, that nothing is got by
it; and some must give over, or all must break.

Not many Ages past, Venice and Florence possessed all the Trade of Europe; The
last by their Manufactures; But the first by their Shipping: and the whole
Trade of Persia and the Indies, whose Commodities were brought (Those by Land,
and These by the Arabian-Sea) to Egypt, from whence they were fetched by the
Venetian Fleets, and dispersed into most of the parts of Europe: And in those
times we find the whole Trade of England was driven by Venetians, Florentines,
and Lombards. The Easterlings, who were the Inhabitants of the Hans-Towns, as
Dantzic, Lubeick, Hamburgh, and others upon that Coast, fell next into Trade,
and managed all that of these Northern parts for many years, and brought it
first down to Bruges, and from thence to Antwerp. The first Navigations of the
Portuguesses to the East Indies, broke the greatness of the Venetian Trade, and
drew it to Lisbon; And the Revolt of the Netherlands, that of Antwerp to
Holland. But in all this time, The other and greater Nations of Europe
concerned themselves little in it; Their Trade was War; Their Counsels and
Enterprises were busied in the quarrels of the Holy Land, or in those between
the Popes and the Emperors (both of the same Forge, engaging all Christian
Princes, and ending in the greatness of the Ecclesiastical State throughout
Christendom): Sometimes in the mighty Wars between England and France, Between
France and Spain: The more general, between Christian and Turks; Or more
particular quarrels between lesser and Neighbouring-Princes. In short, The
Kingdoms and Principalities were in the World like the Noblemen and Gentlemen
in a Country; The Free-States and Cities, like the Merchants and Traders:
These at first despised by the others; The others served and revered by them;
till by the various course of Events in the World, Some of these came to grow
Rich and Powerful by Industry and Parsimony; And some of the others Poor, by
War and by Luxury: Which made the Traders begin to take upon them, and carry it
like Gentlemen; and the Gentlemen begin to take a fancy of falling to Trade. By
this short account it will appear no wonder, either that particular places grew
so Rich and so Mighty, while they alone enjoyed almost the general Trade of the
World; nor why not only the Trade in Holland, but the advantage of it in
general, should seem to be lessened by so many that share it.

Another Cause of its decay in that State, may be, That by the mighty progress
of their East-Indy Company, The Commodities of that Country are grown more
than these parts of the World can take off; and consequently the Rates of them
must needs be lessened, while the Charge is encreast by the great Wars, the
Armies, and Forts, necessary to maintain or extend the Acquisitions of that
Company in the Indies. For instead of Five or Six East-Indy Ships, which used
to make the Fleet of the year, they are now risen to Eighteen or Twenty (I
think Two and twenty came in one year to the United Provinces). This is the
reason why the particular persons of that Company in Holland, make not so great
advantage of the same Stock, as those of ours do in England; Though their
Company be very much richer, and drives a far greater Trade than ours, Which is
exhausted by no charge of Armies, or Forts, or Ships of War: And this is the
reason that the Dutch are forced to keep so long and so much of those
Commodities in their Magazines here, and to bring them out, only as the Markets
call for them, or are able to take off; And why they bring so much less from
the Indies, than they were able to do, if there were vent enough here: As I
remember one of their Seamen, newly landed out of their East-Indy Fleet in the
year 69, upon discourse in a Boat between Delf and Leyden, said he had seen,
before he came away, three heaps of Nutmegs burnt at a time, each of which was
more than a small Church could hold, which he pointed at in a Village that was
in sight.

Another Cause may be the great cheapness of Corn, which has been for these
dozen years or more, general in all these parts of Europe, and which has a very
great influence upon the Trade of Holland. For a great vent of Indian
Commodities (at least the Spices, which are the gross of them) used to be made
into the Northern parts of Europe, in exchange for Corn, while it was taken off
at good rates by the Markets of Flanders, England, France, Spain, or Italy; In
all which Countries it has of late years gone so low, as to discourage the
Import of so great quantities as used to come from Poland and Prussia, and
other parts of the North. Now the less value those Nations receive for Corn,
the less they are able to give for Spice, Which is a great loss to the Dutch on
both sides, lessening the vent of their Indian Ware in the Northern, and the
Traffic of Corn in the Southern parts. The cause of this great cheapness of
Corn, seems to be, not so much a course of plentiful and seasonable years, As
the general Peace that has been in Europe since the year 59 or 60; by which so
many Men and so much Land have been turned to Husbandry, that were before
employed in the Wars, or lay wasted by them in all the Frontier-Provinces of
France and Spain, as well as throughout Germany, before the Peace of Munster;
and in England, during the Actions or Consequences of a Civil War; And Plenty
grows not to a height, but by the Succession of several peaceful as well as
seasonable Years.

The last Cause I will mention, is the mighty enlargement of the City of
Amsterdam, by that which is called the New Town; The Extent whereof is so
spacious, and the Buildings of so much greater Beauty and Cost than the Old,
that it must have employed a vast proportion of that Stock which in this City
was before wholly turned to Trade. Besides, there seems to have been growing on
for these later years, a greater Vie of Luxury and Expense among many of the
Merchants of that Town, than was ever formerly known; Which was observed and
complained of, as well as the enlargement of their City, by some of the wisest
of their Ministers, while I resided among them, who designed some Regulations
by Sumptuary Laws; As knowing the very Foundations of their Trade would soon be
undermined, if the habitual Industry, Parsimony, and Simplicity of their
People, came to be overrun by Luxury, Idleness, and Excess. However it
happened, I found it agreed by all the most diligent and circumspect Enquiries
I could make, That in the years 69 and 70, there was hardly any Foreign Trade
among them, besides that of the Indies, by which the Traders made the returns
of their money without loss; and none, by which the gain was above Two in the
hundred. So as it seems to be with Trade, as with the Sea (its Element), that
has a certain pitch, above which it never rises in the highest Tides; And
begins to ebb as soon as ever it ceases to flow; And ever loses ground in one
place, proportionably to what it gains in another.

CHAP. VII. Of their FORCES and REVENUES.
THE Strength and Forces of a Kingdom or State, were measured in former Ages by
the Numbers of Native and Warlike Subjects, which they could draw into the
Field upon any War with their Neighbors. National quarrels were decided by
National Armies, not by Stipendiary Forces (raised with Money, or maintained by
constant Pay). In the several Kingdoms and Principalities of Europe, the Bodies
of their Armies were composed, as they are still in Poland, Of the Nobility and
Gentry, who were bound to attend their Princes to the Wars, with certain
numbers of armed men, according to the tenure and extent of the several
Lordships and Lands they held of the Crown: Where these were not proportionable
to the occasion, The rest were made up of Subjects drawn together by love of
their Prince or their Country; By desire of Conquest and Spoils, or necessity
of defense; Held together by Allegiance or Religion; And Spirited by Honor,
Revenge, or Avarice (not of what they could get from their Leaders, but from
their Enemies). A Battle or two, fairly fought, decided a War; and a War ended
the quarrel of an Age, and either lost or gained the Cause or Country
contended for: Till the change of Times and Accidents brought it to a new
decision; Till the Virtues and Vices of Princes made them stronger or weaker,
either in the love and obedience of their people, or in such Orders and Customs
as rendered their Subjects more or less Warlike or Esseminate. Standing-Forces
or Guards in constant pay, were no where used by lawful Princes in their Native
or Hereditary Countries, But only by Conquerors in subdued Provinces, or
Usurpers at home; And were a defense only against Subjects, not against Enemies.

These Orders seem first to have been changed in Europe by the two States of
Venice and Holland; Both of them small in Territories at Land, and those
extended in Frontier upon powerful Neighbors: Both of them weak in number of
Native Subjects; and those less warlike at Land, by turning so much to
Traffic, and to Sea: But both of them mighty in Riches and Trade; Which made
them endeavor to balance their Neighbors strength in Native Subjects, by
Foreign Stipendiary Bands; And to defend their Frontiers by the Arts of
Fortification, and strength of places, which might draw out a War into length
by Sieges, when they durst not venture it upon a Battle; And so make it many
times determine by force of Money, rather than of Arms. This forced those
Princes, who frontier'd upon these States, to the same provisions; Which have
been encreast by the perpetual course of Wars, upon the Continent of Europe,
ever since the rise of This State, until the Peace of the Pirenees, between
Princes bordering one upon the other; and so, ready for sudden Inroads or
Invasions.

The Force therefore of these Provinces is to be measured, not by the number or
dispositions of their Subjects, But by the strength of their Shipping, and
standing-Troops, which they constantly maintain, even in time of peace; And by
the numbers of both which, they have been able to draw into the Field, and to
Sea, for support of a War: By their constant Revenue to maintain the first; And
by the temporary charge they have been able to furnish for supply of the other.

I will not enumerate their Frontier-Towns (which is a common Theme), or the
Forces necessary for the Garrisons of them. Nor the nature and variety of their
Taxes and Impositions; Though I have an exact List of them by me, expressing
the several kinds, rates, and proportions, upon every Province and Town; But
this would swell a Discourse with a great deal of tedious matter, and to little
purpose. I shall therefore be content only to observe, what I have informed my
self of their Forces and Revenues in general, from persons among them the best
able to give that account.

The ordinary Revenue of this State, consists either in what is levied in the
conquered Towns, and Country of Brabant, Flanders, or the Rhine; Which is
wholly administered by the Council of State: Or else the ordinary Fonds which
the Seven Provinces provide every year, according to their several proportions,
upon the Petition of the Council of State, and Computation of the Charge of the
ensuing year, given in by them to the States General. And this Revenue commonly
amounts to about One and twenty Millions of Gilders a year; Every Million
making about Ninety thousand pounds Sterling, intrinsic value.

The chief Fonds out of which this rises, Is the Excise, and the Customs: The
first is great, and so general, that I have heard it observed at Amsterdam,
That when in a Tavern, a certain Dish of Fish is eaten with the usual Sauce,
above thirty several Excises are paid, for what is necessary to that small
Service. The last are low, and applied particularly to the Admiralty.

Out of this Revenue, is supplied the charge of the whole Milice, Of all
public Officers of the State, and Ambassadors or Ministers abroad, And the
Interest of about Thirteen Millions owing by the States General.

The standing-Forces in the year 70, upon so general a Peace, and after all
Reformations, Were Twenty six thousand two hundred men, in Ten Regiments of
Horse, consisting of Fifty Troops; And Nineteen of Foot, consisting of Three
hundred and Eighty Companies. The constant charge of these Forces stood them in
Six Millions one hundred and nineteen thousand Gilders a year.

Their Admiralties, in time of Peace, maintain between Thirty and Forty Men of
War, employed in the several Convoys of their Merchants Fleets, In a Squadron
of Eight or Ten Ships to attend the Algerines and other Corsairs in the
Mediterranean; And some always lying ready in their Havens for any sudden
accidents, or occasions of the State. The common Expense of the Admiralties in
this Equipage, and the built of Ships, Is about Six Millions a year.

Besides the Debt of the Generalty, The Province of Holland owes about Sixty
five Millions, for which they pay Interest at Four in the Hundred; But with so
great ease and exactness both in Principal and Interest, That no man ever
demands it twice; They might take up whatever money they desired. Whoever is
admitted to bring in his money, takes it for a great deal of favor; And when
they pay off any part of the Principal, Those it belongs to, receive it with
tears, Not knowing how to dispose of it to Interest with such safety and ease.
And the common Revenue of particular men, lies much in the Cantores either of
the Generalty, or the several Provinces, which are the Registries of these
public Debts.

Of the several Imposts and Excises, Those that are upon certain and immovable
possessions (as Houses and Lands) are collected by the Magistrates of the
several places, and by them paid in to the Receivers, because both the number
and value of them are constant, and easily known. Those which arise out of
uncertain Consumptions, are all set out to farm, And to him that bids most,
some every three Months, some every six, and some yearly.

The Collection, Receipt, and Distribution of all Public Moneys, are made
without any Fee to Officers, who receive certain constant Salaries from the
State, which they dare not increase by any private practices or Extortions; So
as whoever has a Bill of any public Debt, has so much ready money in his
Coffers, being paid certainly at call, without charge or trouble; and assigned
over in any payment, like the best Bill of Exchange.

The extraordinary Revenue is, when upon some great occasions or Wars, the
Generalty agrees to any extraordinary Contributions; As sometimes the Hundredth
penny of the Estates of all the Inhabitants; Pole, or Chimney-money; Or any
other Subsidies and Payments, according as they can agree, and the occasions
require; Which have sometimes reached so far, as even to an Imposition upon
every man that travels in the common ways of their Country, by Boat, or in
Coach; in Wagon, or on Horseback.

By all these means, in the first year of the English War in 1665, There were
raised in the Provinces Forty Millions, of which Twenty two in the Province of
Holland. And upon the Bishop of Munster's invading them at the same time by
Land, they had in the year 66, above Threescore thousand Land-men in pay; And a
Fleet of above a Hundred great Men of War at Sea.

The greatness of this Nation at that time, seems justly to have raised the
glory of Ours; Which during the years 65 and 66, maintained a War, not only
against this Powerful State, but against the Crowns of France and Denmark in
conjunction with them: And All at a time, when This Kingdom was forced to
struggle at home with the Calamitous Effects of a raging Plague, that in Three
Months of the first year, swept away incredible numbers of people; And of a
prodigious Fire, that in Three days of the Second, laid in ashes that Ancient
and Famous City of LONDON (the Heart and Center of our Commerce and Riches),
consuming the greatest part of its Buildings, and an immense proportion of its
Wealth. Yet in the midst of these fatal Accidents, Those two Summers were
renowned with Three Battles of the mightiest Fleets that ever met upon the
Ocean; Whereof Two were determined by entire and unquestioned Victories, and
pursuit of our Enemies into their very Havens. The Third having begun by the
unfortunate division of our Fleet, with the odds of Ninety of their Ships
against Fifty of ours; And in spite of such disadvantages, having continued,
or been renewed for three days together (wherein We were every morning the
Aggressors), ended at last by the equal and mutual Weakness or Weariness of
both Sides, The maims of Ships and Tackling, with want of Powder and
Ammunition; Having left undecided the greatest Action that will perhaps appear
upon Record of any Story. And in this Battle, Monsieur De Wit confessed to me,
That we gained more Honor to our Nation, and to the invincible Courage of our
Seamen, than by the other Two Victories. That he was sure, their men could
never have been brought on the two following days, after the disadvantages of
the first; And he believed no other Nation was capable of it, but Ours.

I will not judge, how we came to fail of a glorious Peace in the Six Months
next succeeding, after the fortune of our last Victory, and with the Honor of
the War: But as any rough hand can break a bone, whereas much art and care are
required to set it again, and restore it to its first strength and proportion;
So it is an easy part in a Minister of State, to engage a War; but it is given
to few to know the times, and find the ways of making Peace. Yet when after the
sensible events of an unfortunate Negligence, An indifferent Treaty was
concluded at Breda in 67; Within Six Months following, By an Alliance with this
State in January 68 (which was received with incredible Joy and Applause among
them), His Majesty became the unquestioned Arbiter of all the Affairs of
Christendom; Made a Peace between the two great Crowns, at Aix la Chapelle,
Which was avowed by all the World to be perfectly His Own; And was received
with equal Applause of Christian Princes abroad, and of his Subjects at home;
And for three years succeeding, by the unshaken Alliance and Dependence of the
United States, His Majesty remained Absolute Master of the Peace of
Christendom, and in a posture of giving Bounds to the greatest, as well as
Protection to the weakest of his Neighbors.

CHAP. VIII. The Causes of their FALL in 1672.
IT must be avowed, That as This State in the course and progress of its
Greatness for so many years past, Has shined like a Comet; So in the
Revolutions of this last Summer, It seemed to fall like a Meteor, and has
equally amazed the World by the one and the other: When we consider such a
Power and Wealth as was related in the last Chapter, To have fallen in a manner
prostrate within the space of one Month: So many Frontier Towns, renowned in
the Sieges and Actions of the Spanish Wars, Entered like open Villages by the
French Troops, without defense, or almost denial: Most of them without any
blows at all; and all of them with so few: Their great Rivers, that were
esteemed an invincible security to the Provinces of Holland and Utrecht, passed
with as much ease, and as small resistances, as little Fords: And in short, the
very Hearts of a Nation so valiant of old against Rome, so obstinate against
Spain; Now subdued, and in a manner abandoning all before their Danger
appeared: We may justly have our recourse to the secret and fixed periods of
all Human Greatness, for the account of such a Revolution: Or rather to the
unsearchable Decrees, and unresistable force of Divine Providence; Though it
seems not more impious to question it, than to measure it by our Scale; Or
reduce the Issues and Motions of that Eternal Will and Power, to a conformity
with what is esteemed Just, or Wise, or Good, by the usual Consent, or the
narrow Comprehension of poor Mortal men.

But as in the search and consideration even of things natural and common, our
Talent, I fear, is to Talk rather than to Know; So we may be allowed to Enquire
and Reason upon all things, while we do not pretend to Certainty, or call that
Undeniable Truth, which is every day denied by Ten thousand; Nor those Opinions
Unreasonable, which we know to be held by such as we allow to be Reasonable
men. I shall therefore set down such Circumstances as to me seem most evidently
to have conspired in this Revolution; leaving the Causes less discernable, to
the search of more discerning persons.

And first, I take their vast Trade, which was an occasion of their Greatness,
to have been One likewise of their Fall, by having wholly diverted the Genius
of their Native Subjects and Inhabitants, from Arms to Traffic, and the Arts
of Peace; Leaving the whole fortune of their later Wars, to be managed by
Foreign and Mercenary Troops; Which much abased the Courage of their Nation
(as was observed in another Chapter), and made the Burghers of so little moment
toward the defense of their Towns; Whereas in the famous Sieges of Harlem,
Alemar, and Leyden, They had made such brave and fierce defenses, as broke the
heart of the Spanish Armies, and the fortune of their Affairs.

Next was the Peace of Munster, which had left them now, for above Twenty
years, too secure of all Invasions or Enemies at Land; And so turned their
whole application to the strength of their Forces at Sea; Which have been since
exercised with two English Wars in that time, and enlivened with the small
yearly Expeditions into the Streights against the Algerines, and other Corsairs
of the Mediterranean.

Another was their too great Parsimony in reforming so many of their best
Foreign Officers and Troops, upon the Peace of Munster; whose Valor and
Conduct had been so great occasions of inducing Spain to the Counsels and
Conclusions of that Treaty.

But the greatest of all others that concurred to weaken, and indeed break the
strength of their Land-Milice, Was the alteration of their State, which
happened by the Perpetual Edict of Holland and West-Friezland, upon the death
of the last Prince of Orange, for exclusion of the Power of Stadtholder in
their Province, or at least the separation of it from the Charge of
Captain General. Since that time, the main design and application of those
Provinces, has been to work out by degrees all the old Officers both Native and
Foreign, who had been formerly sworn to the Prince of Orange, and were still
thought affectionate to the Interest of that Family; And to fill the Commands
of their Army with the Sons or Kinsmen of Burgomasters, and other Officers or
Deputies in the State, Whom they esteemed sure to the Constitutions of their
Popular Government, and good enough for an Age where they saw no appearance of
Enemy at Land to attaque them.

But the Humor of Kindness to the young Prince, both in the People and Army,
was not to be dissolved or dispersed by any Medicines or Operations either of
Rigor or Artifice; But grew up insensibly with the Age of the Prince, Crevit
occulto velut arbor ^aevo, Fama Marcelli.
ever presaging some Revolution in the State, when he should come to the years
of aspiring, and managing the general Affections of the people: Being a Prince,
who joined to the great Qualities of his Royal Blood, the popular Virtues of
his Country; Silent and thoughtful; Given to hear, and to enquire; Of a sound
and steady Understanding; Much firmness in what he once resolves, or once
denies; Great Industry and application to his business; Little to his
Pleasures: Piety in the Religion of his Country, but with Charity to others;
Temperance unusual to his youth, and to the Climate; Frugal in the common
management of his Fortune, and yet magnificent upon occasion: Of great Spirit
and Heart, aspiring to the glory of Military Actions: With strong ambition to
grow Great, but rather by the Service than the Servitude of his Country. In
short, A Prince of many Virtues, without any appearing mixture of Vice.

In the English War begun the year 65, the States disbanded all the English
Troops that were then left in their Service, dispersing the Officers and
Soldiers of our Nation who staid with them, into other Companies or Regiments
of their own. After the French Invasion of Flanders, and the strict Alliance
between England and Holland in 68: They did the same by all the French that
were remaining in their Service. So as the several Bodies of these two Nations,
which had ever the greatest part in the Honor and Fortune of their Wars, were
now wholly dissolved, and their standing-Milice composed in a manner all of
their own Natives, enervated by the long uses and arts of Traffic and of
Peace.

But they were too great a Match for any of the smaller Princes their
Neighbors in Germany; And too secure of any danger from Spain, by the knowledge
of their Forces, as well as Dispositions; And being strictly allied both with
England and Sweden, in two several Defensive Leagues, and in one common Tripple
Alliance; They could not foresee any danger from France, who they thought would
never have the Courage or Force to enter the Lists with so mighty Confederates;
and who were sure of a Conjunction, whenever they pleased, both with the
Emperor and Spain.

Besides, They knew that France could not attaque them without passing through
Flanders, or Germany: They were sure Spain would not suffer it through the
first, if they were backed in opposing it, As foreseeing the inevitable loss of
Flanders upon that of Holland: And they could hardly believe the passage should
be yielded by a German Prince, contrary to the express Will and Intentions of
the Emperor, as well as the common Interests of the Empire: So that they hoped
the War would at least open in their Neighbors Provinces, For whose defense
they resolved to employ the whole Force of their State. And would have made a
mighty resistance, if the Quarrel had begun at any other doors but their own.

They could not imagine a Conjunction between England and France for the ruin
of their State; For, being unacquainted with our Constitutions, they did not
foresee how we should find our Interest in it, and measured all States by that
which They esteemed to be their Interest. Nor could they believe that other
Princes and States of Europe would suffer such an addition to be made to the
Power of France, as a Conquest of Holland.

Besides these public Considerations, there were others particular to the
Factions among them; And some of their Ministers were neither forward nor
supple enough to endeavor the early breaking or diverting such Conjunctures as
threatened them; Because they were not without hopes, they might end in renewing
their broken Measures with France; Which those of the Commonwealth-Party were
more inclined to, by foreseeing the influence that their Alliances with England
must needs have in time toward the restoring of the Prince of Orange's
Authority: And they thought at the worst, that whenever a pinch came, they
could not fail of a safe bargain in one Market or other, having so vast a
Treasure ready to employ upon any good occasion.

These Considerations made them commit three fatal Oversights in their Foreign
Negotiations: For they made an Alliance with England, without engaging a
Confidence and Friendship: They broke their Measures with France, without
closing new ones with Spain: And they reckoned upon the Assistances of Sweden,
and their Neighbour-Princes of Germany, without making them sure by Subsidiary
Advances, before a War began.

Lastly, The Prince of Orange was approaching the Two and twentieth year of his
age, which the States of Holland had, since their Alliance with His Majesty in
68, ever pretended, should be the time of advancing him to the Charge of
Captain General, and Admiral of their Forces, Though without that of
Stadtholder. But the nearer they drew to this period, which was like to make a
new Figure in their Government; the more desirous some of their Ministers
seemed either to decline, or to restrain it. On the other side, the Prince grew
confident upon the former Promises, or at least Intimations of Holland, and the
concurring dispositions of the other Six Provinces to his advancement: And his
Party, spirited by their hopes, and the great Qualities of this young Prince
(now grown ripe for Action, and for Enterprise), resolved to bring this point
to a sudden decision; Against which, the other Party prepared and united all
their Defenses; So as this strong Disease that had been so long working in the
very Bowels of the State, seemed just upon its Crisis, When a Conjunction of
two Mighty Kings brought upon them a sudden and furious Invasion by Land and
Sea, at the same time, By a Royal Fleet of above Fourscore Ships, and an Army
of as many thousand men.

When the States saw this Cloud ready to break upon them (after a long belief
that it would blow over), They began not only to provide shelter at home, with
their usual vigor; but to look out for it abroad, though both too late. Of the
Princes that were their Allies, or concerned in their danger, Such as were far
off, could not be in time; The nearer, were unwilling to share in a danger they
were not enough prepared for; Most were content to see the Pride of this State
humbled; Some, the Injuries they had received from them, revenged; Many would
have them mortified, that would not have them destroyed; And so all resolved to
leave them to weather the storm as they could for one Campania; Which they did
not believe could go far toward their ruin, considering the greatness of their
Riches, number of their Forces, and strength of their Places.

The State, in the mean time, had increased their Troops to Seventy thousand
men, and had begun to repair the Fortifications of their Frontier-Towns: But so
great a length of their Country lay open to the French Invasion by the
Territories of Colen and Liege; And to the Bishop of Munster (their inveterate
Enemy) by Westphalia, that they knew not where to expect or provide against the
first danger: And while they divided their Forces and Endeavors toward the
securing of so many Garrisons, They provided for none to any purpose but
Maestricht; Which the French left behind them, and fell in upon the Towns of
the Rhine, and the heart of their Provinces.

Besides, Those Ministers who had still the direction of Affairs, bent their
chief application to the strength and order of their Fleet, rather than of
their Army: Whether more peckt at England than France, upon the War, and manner
of entering into it; Or believing that a Victory at Sea would be the way to a
Peace with this Crown; Or hoping their Towns would not fall so fast, but that
before three or four were lost, the business at Sea would be decided; Or
perhaps content that some ill Successes should attend the Prince of Orange at
his first entrance upon the Command of their Armies, and thereby contribute to
their Designs of restraining the Authority, while they were forced to leave him
the Name of Captain General. This indeed was not likely to fail, considering
the ill constitution of their old Army, the hasty Levies of their new, and the
height of the Factions now broken out in the State; Which left both the Towns
and the Troops in suspense, under whose Banners they fought, and by whose
Orders they were to be governed, the Prince's, or the States.

There happened at the same time, an accident unusual to their Climate, Which
was a mighty Drowth in the beginning of the Summer, that left their waters
fordable in places where they used to be navigable for Boats of greatest
burden. And this gave them more trouble and distraction in the defense, as
their Enemies more facility in the passage of those great Rivers, which were
esteemed no small security of their Country.

And in this posture were the Affairs of this Commonwealth when the War broke
out, with those fatal Events, that must needs attend any Kingdom or State,
where the violence of a Foreign Invasion happens to meet with the distraction
of a Domestique Sedition or Discontent, Which, like ill Humors in a Body, make
any small wound dangerous, and a great one mortal. They were still a great
Body, but without their usual Soul; They were a State, but it was of the
Disunited Provinces. Their Towns were without Order; Their Burgers without
Obedience; Their Soldiers without Discipline; And all without heart: Whereas in
all Sieges, The Hearts of Men defend the Walls, and not Walls the Men: And
indeed, it was the Name of England joining in the War against them, that broke
their hearts, and contributed more to the loss of so many Towns, and so much
Country, than the Armies of Munster, or of France. So that upon all
circumstances considered, it seems easier to give an account, what it was that
lost them so much, than what saved them the rest.

No man at play sees a very great Game either in his own, or another's hand,
unexpectedly lost, but He is apt to consider, whether it could have been saved,
and how it ought to have been played. The same Enquiry will be natural upon the
fall of this State, and very difficult to resolve.

After the mighty growth of the French, and decay of the Spanish Power, which
drew on the Invasion of Flanders in 1667, This State had a very hard Game to
play; Either they must see Flanders wholly lost, and France grown to confine
upon them (whom they liked as an Ally, but dreaded as a Neighbor); Or else
they must join with France to divide Flanders between them; But they knew what
it was to share with the Lion: Or they must join with Spain to defend Flanders
against France; That is, with their old Enemy, against their old Friend: Or
lastly, They must join with England for the defense of Flanders, Neither
breaking with France, nor closing with Spain; and frame an Arbitrage, but of
something a rough nature; Rather prescribing than mediating a Peace, And
threatening a War upon that Crown that refused it.

They chose the last, and wisely, as all men thought; But though this Alliance
was happily planted, yet it was unhappily cultivated, and so the Fruit came to
fall, and the Root to wither upon the first change of seasons, in such a
manner, and to such a degree, as we have lately seen. Whether they could have
prevented a Conjunction of England with France, shall be no part of my Subject;
For I pretend not to know, or to tell Secrets of State; and intend these, not
for the Observations of an Ambassador, but of a private man as I am, and such
as any Gentleman might easily have made, who had resided above two years as I
did in Holland; and had been, as I was, a little inclined to observe. I shall
only say, That the Conjunction of England with France, was to this State like
one of those Diseases which the Physicians say, are hard to discern, while they
are easy to cure; but when once they come to be plainly discovered, they are
past remedy.

But as Holland had ever defended it self against Spain, by England and France;
So it ought to have done against France, by England and Spain, and provided
early against their own danger, as well as* that of Flanders, by improving and
advancing their Confederate-League with England and Sweden, into a strict
Defensive-Alliance with Spain, as a Principal in the League; And by agreeing
with that Crown, to furnish between them some constant Subsidiary Payments to
Sweden, for the support of their standing-Forces, even in time of Peace. This
was the desire of Spain, The Interest of all that meant to secure the Peace of
Christendom; And the opinion of some of the Dutch Ministers, Though not of the
Chiefest, till it was too late; And the omission of This, was the greatest
fault ever committed in their Politics; And proceeded in a great measure from
their ancient animosity to Spain; Which as it was the beginning, so, by this
effect, it almost proved the end of their State.

When the War began in the midst of the Conjunctures related, It Is hard to say
what could have defended them; But as men in a Town, threatened with a mighty
Siege, abandon their Suburbs, and slight those Outworks which are either weak
of themselves, or not well defensible for want of men; And resolve only to make
good those Posts which they are able fully to man, and easily to relieve;
Because the loss of every small Outwork does not only weaken the Number, but
sink the Courage of the Garrison within.

So this State, which came to be in a manner besieged by the mighty and
numerous Armies of France and of Munster; Ought, in my opinion, to have left
themselves but three Outworks to maintain (I mean, three Posts standing
without the Lines, that enclosed the main Body of their Provinces); These
should have been, Mastricht, Wesel, and Coeverden. They should have slighted
all the rest of their places that lay without these upon the Rhyne, or in
Overyssel; And drawn the men into these Towns, so as to have left them rather
like Camps, than Garrisons; That is, Eight thousand Foot, and Two thousand
Horse in Maestricht, as many in Wesel, and half the number in Coeverden, if the
place would contain them; If not, they might have formed and fortified a Camp
with something a greater number, upon the next Pass into Friezland and
Groninguen.

Of the rest of their Horse (which were I suppose about Five thousand), with at
least Fifteen thousand Foot, they should have formed a great standing Camp,
within their Rivers, somewhere near Arnhem; Fortified it with Canon, and all
the Art that could be; Furnished it with the greatest care, and plenty of
Provisions. The remainder of their Infantry would have been enough for the rest
of their Garrisons; Of which the Towns upon the Yssel, Doesburgh, Zutphen,
Doventer, and Swoll, would have been in a manner flankt (though at some
distance) by the strong Garrisons of Wesel and Coeverden; And breasted by the
main Camp.

If with this disposition of their Forces, They had provided well for the
strength and defense of Skinksconce, Nimmeguen, and Grave (which would likewise
have lien all within the cover of these out-posts); They might, for ought I
know, have expected the War, without losing the heart and steddiness of their
Counsels, and not without probability of making a defense worthy the former
Greatness and Achievements of their State.

For a Siege of Maestricht or Wesel (so garrisoned and resolutely defended)
might not only have amused, but endangered the French Armies; As Coeverden
might have done that of Munster. The resistance of one of these Towns, would
have increased the strength of all the rest: For the Fortune of Battles and
Sieges, turns upon the hearts of men, as they are more or less capable of
general Confidences or Fears, which are very much raised by Accidents and
Opinions. It would not have been within any common Rules, to march so far into
the Country, as to attaque the Burse or Breda, Nimmeguen or Grave, leaving
such Camps behind as those at Wesel and Maestricht, and having so much a
greater before them, as that about Arnhem. If any of these three Posts had been
lost, Yet it could not have happened without good Conditions, and so retiring
the men to strengthen either the more inward Garrisons, or the main Camp, Which
would have lien ready to defend the Passes of their Rivers. And if at the worst
they had failed in this, yet the French Army must afterward, either have
attaqued a fortified Camp of Twenty thousand men, or left such an Army behind
them when they marched toward Utrecht, and into the heart of the Provinces;
Both of which would have been Attempts, that I think have hardly been
enterprised with success upon any Invasion.

There seems at least some appearance of Order and Conduct in this Scheam of
Defense; Whereas there was none in theirs: But perhaps the greatness of the
Tempest from abroad, and of the Factions at home, either broke the heart, or
distracted the course of their Counsels. And besides, such old Seamen in so
strong a Ship that had weathered so many storms without loss, could not but
think it hard to throw overboard so much of their Lading before This began.
After all, I know very well, That nothing is so hard, as to give wise Counsel
before Events; And nothing so easy, as after them, to make Wise Reflections.
Many things seem true in Reason, and prove false in Experience: Many that are
weakly consulted, are executed with Success. Therefore, to conclude, We must
all acknowledge, That Wisdom and Happiness dwell with God alone; And among
mortal men (both of their Persons and their States), Those are the wisest that
commit the fewest Follies; and those the happiest that meet with the fewest
Misfortunes.

FINIS.

