Dublin July 22d 1673
An Essay upon the Advancement of Trade in IRELAND.
My LORD,
I Know not what it was that fell into discourse the other day, and gave your
Excellency the occasion of desiring me to digest into some Method and upon
Paper, the means and ways I esteemed most proper for the advancing of Trade in
Ireland: This I know very well, that you did it in a manner, and with
Expressions too obliging to be refused, and out of a design so public and
generous as ought not to be discouraged. I had therefore much rather obey your
Lordship in this point, how ill soever I do it, than excuse my self, though
never so well, which were much easier than the other. For I might alledg that
neither my Birth nor my Breeding has been at all in this Country: That I have
passed only one short period of my life here, and the greatest part thereof
wholly out of business, and public thoughts; That I have since been Ten years
absent from it; and am now here upon no other occasion than of a short Visit to
some of my Friends: Which are all Circumstances that make me a very improper
subject for such a command. But I suppose the vein I have had of running into
speculations of this kind upon a greater scene of Trade, and in a Country where
I was more a stranger; and the too partial favor your Lordship has expressed to
another Discourse of this nature, have cost me this present service; and you
have thought fit to punish me for one folly, by engaging me to commit another;
like the Confessor, that prescribed a Drunkard the penance of being drunk
again. However it is, your Lordship shall be obeyed, and therein I hope to be
enough excused; which is all I pretend to upon this occasion.

Before I enter upon the considerations of Trade which are more general, and
may be more lasting in this Kingdom; I will observe to your Lordship some
particular Circumstances in the Constitution and Government, which have been
hitherto, and may be long, the great discouragers of Trade and Riches here; And
some others in the present Conjuncture, which are absolutely mortal to it; that
so you may not expect to find remedies where indeed there is none; nor suffer
men, like busy ignorant Physicians, to apply such as are contrary to the
disease, because they cannot find such as are proper for it.

The true and natural ground of Trade and Riches, is Number of People, in
proportion to the compass of Ground they inhabit. This makes all things
necessary to life dear, and that forces men to industry and parsimony. These
Customs which grow first from necessity, come with time to be habitual in a
Country. And wherever they are so, that place must grow great in Traffic and
Riches, if not disturbed by some accidents or revolutions, as of Wars, of
Plagues, or Famines, by which the People come to be either scattered or
destroyed.

People are multiplied in a Country by the temper of the Climate favorable to
Generation, to Health, and long life. Or else by the Circumstances of safety
and ease under the Government, the credit whereof invites men over to it, when
they cannot be either safe or easy at home. When things are once in motion,
Trade begets Trade, as fire does fire, and People go much where much People are
already gone. So men run still to a crowd where they see it in the streets, or
the fields, though it be only to do as others do, to see or to be entertained.

The want of Trade in Ireland proceeds from the want of People, and this is not
grown from any ill qualities of the Climate or Air, but chiefly from the
frequent Revolutions of so many Wars and Rebellions, so great Slaughters and
Calamities of Mankind as have at several Intervals of time succeeded the first
Conquest of this Kingdom in Henry the Seconds time, until the year 1653; Two
very great Plagues followed the two great Wars, those of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, and the last; which helped to drain the current stream of Generation in
the Country.

The discredit which is grown upon the Constitutions or Settlements of this
Kingdom, by so frequent and unhappy Revolutions that for many ages have
infested it, has been the great discouragement to other Nations to transplant
themselves hither, and prevailed further than all the invitations which the
cheapness and plenty of the Country has made them. So that had it not been for
the numbers of the British, which the necessity of the late Wars at first drew
over, and of such who either as Adventurers or Soldiers seated themselves here
upon account of the satisfaction made to them in Land, the Country had by the
last War and Plague been left in a manner desolate.

Besides, the subordinacy of the Government changing hands so often, makes an
unsteddiness in the pursuit of the public Interests of the Kingdom, gives way
to the emulations of the different Factions, and draws the favor or
countenance of the Government sometimes to one party or interest, sometimes to
another; this makes different motions in men's minds, raising hopes and fears,
and opinions of uncertainty in their possessions; and thereby in the peace of
the Country.

This subordinacy in the Government, and emulation of parties, with the want
sometimes of Authority in the Governor (by the weakness of his credit and
support at Court) occasions the perpetual agencies or journeys into England of
all persons that have any considerable pretenses in Ireland, and money to
pursue them; which end many times in long abodes, and frequent habituating of
Families there, though they have no money to support them but what is drawn out
of Ireland. Besides, the young Gentlemen go of course for their breeding there,
some seek their health, and others their entertainment in a better Climate or
Scene; By these means the Country loses the expense of many of the richest
persons or families at home, and mighty sums of money must needs go over from
hence into England, which the great stock of rich native Commodities here can
make the only amends for.

These Circumstances so prejudicial to the increase of Trade and Riches in a
Country, seem natural or at least have ever been incident to the Government
here, and without them the native fertility of the Soil and Seas in so many
rich Commodities improved by multitude of People and industry, with the
advantage of so many excellent Havens, and a Situation so commodious for all
sorts of foreign Trade, must needs have rendered this Kingdom one of the richest
in Europe, and made a mighty increase both of strength and revenue to the Crown
of England; whereas it has hitherto been rather esteemed and found to be our
weak side, and to have cost us more blood and treasure than it is worth.

Since my late arrival in Ireland, I have found a very unusual, but I doubt
very just complaint concerning the scarcity of Money, which occasioned many
airy Propositions for the remedy of it, and among the rest that of raising
some, or all of the Coyns here. This was chiefly grounded upon the experience
made as they say about the Duke of Ormonds coming first over hither in 1663,
when the Plate-pieces of Eight were raised three pence in the piece, and a
mighty plenty of money was observed to grow in Ireland for a year or two after.
But this seems to me a very mistaken account, and to have depended wholly upon
other circumstances little taken notice of, and not at all upon the raising of
the Money to which it is by some great men attributed. For first, there was
about that time a general peace and serenity which had newly succeeded a
general trouble and cloud throughout all his Majesty's Kingdoms; then after two
years attendance in England upon the settlement of Ireland (there on the forge)
by all persons and parties here that were considerably interested in it, the
Parliament being called here, and the main settlement of Ireland wound up in
England, and put into the Duke of Ormonds hands to pass here into an Act; all
persons came over in a shoal either to attend their own concernments in the
main, or more particularly to make their Court to the Lord Lieutenant upon
whom his Majesty had at that time in a manner wholly devolved the care and
disposition of all affairs in this Kingdom: This made a sudden and mighty stop
of that issue of Money which had for two years run perpetually out of Ireland
into England, and kept it all at home. Nor is the very expense of the Duke of
Ormonds own great Patrimonial estate with that of several other Families that
came over at that time, of small consideration in the stock of this Kingdom.
Besides, there was a great sum of Money in ready Coin brought over out of
England at the same time toward the arrears of the Army: Which are all
circumstances that must needs have made a mighty change in the course of ready
money here. All the effect that I conceive was made by crying up the pieces of
Eight, was to bring in much more of that Species instead of others current here
(as indeed all the Money brought from England was of that sort, and complained
of in Parliament to be of a worse allay), and to carry away much English Money
in exchange for Plate-pieces, by which a Trade was driven very beneficial to
the Traders, but of mighty loss to the Kingdom in the intrinsic value of their
Money.

The Circumstances at this time seem to be just the reverse of what they were
then; The Nations engaged in a War the most fatal to trade of any that could
arise; The settlement of Ireland shaken at the Court, and falling into new
disquisitions (whether in truth or in common opinion, is all a case): This
draws continual Agencies and Journeys of People concerned into England, to
watch the motions of the main wheel there. Besides, the Lieutenants of Ireland
since the Duke of Ormond's time, have had little in their disposition here, and
only executed the resolutions daily taken at Court in particular as well as
general affairs, which has drawn thither the attendance of all private
pretenders. The great Estates of this Kingdom have been four or five years
constantly spent in England. Money, instead of coming over hither for pay of
the Army, has since the War began, been transmitted thither for pay of those
Forces that were called from hence. And lastly, This War has had a more
particular and mortal influence upon the Trade of this Country, than upon any
other of his Majesty's Kingdoms.

For by the Act against Transportation of Cattle into England, the Trade of
this Country which run wholly thither before, was turned very much into foreign
parts; but by this War the last is stopped, and the other not being opened,
there is in a manner no vent for any Commodity but of Wool. This necessity has
forced the Kingdom to go on still with their foreign Trade, but that has been
with such mighty losses, by the great number of Dutch Privateers plying about
the Coasts, and the want of English Fregats to secure them, that the stock of
the Kingdom must be extremely diminished. Yet by the continuance of the same
expense and luxury in point of living, Money goes over into England to fetch
what must supply it, though little Commodities goes either there or abroad to
make any considerable balance; By all which it must happen, that with another
years continuance of the War, there will not be Money left in this Kingdom to
turn the common Markets, or pay any rents, or leave any circulation further
than the receipts of the Customs and Quit-rents, and the pays of the Army,
which in both kinds must be the last that fail.

In such a conjuncture, the crying up of any species of money will but increase
the want of it in general; for while there goes not out commodity to balance
that which is brought in, and no degree of gains by exportation will make
amends for the venture; what should money come in for, unless it be to carry
out other money as it did before, and leave the stock that remains equal indeed
in denomination, but lower in the intrinsique value than it was before? In
short, while this War lasts, and our Seas are ill guarded, all that can be done
toward preserving the small remainder of Money in this Kingdom, is, First, to
introduce as far as can be, a vein of Parsimony throughout the Country in all
things that are not perfectly the native growths and manufactures: Then by
severity and steediness of the Government (as far as will be permitted) to keep
up in some credit the present peace and settlement. And lastly, To force men to
a degree of industry, by suffering none to hope that they shall be able to live
by rapine or fraud. For in some diseases of a Civil as well as Natural body,
all that can be done is to fast and to rest, to watch and to prevent accidents,
to trust to methods rather than Medicines or remedies; and with patience to
expect till the humors being spent, and the Crisis past, way may be made for
the natural returns of health and of strength.

This being premised as peculiar either to the Government in general, or to the
present conjuncture; I shall proceed to such Observations as occur concerning
the ways of advancing the common and standing Trade of this Kingdom.

The Trade of a Country arises from the native growths of the Soil, or Seas,
the Manufactures, the commodiousness of Ports, and the store of Shipping which
belong to it. The improvement therefore of Trade in Ireland, must be considered
in the survey of all these Particulars, the defects to which at present they
are subject, and the increases they are capable of receiving either from the
course of time, the change of customs, or the conduct and application of the
Government.

The native Commodities or common easy Manufactures which make up the
Exportation of this Kingdom, and consequently furnish both the stock of foreign
Commodities consumed in the Country, and that likewise of current Money, by
which all Trade is turned; are Wool, Butter, Beef, Cattle, Fish, Iron; and by
the improvement of these, either in the quantity, the credit, or the further
Manufacture, the Trade of Ireland seems chiefly to be advanced.

In this Survey one thing must be taken notice of as peculiar to this Country,
which is, That as in the nature of its Government, so in the very improvement
of its Trade and Riches, it ought to be considered not only in its own proper
interest, but likewise in its relation to England, to which it is subordinate,
and upon whose weal in the main, that of this Kingdom depends; and therefore a
regard must be had of those points wherein the Trade of Ireland comes to
interfere with any main branches of the Trade of England, in which cases the
encouragement of such Trade ought to be either declined or moderated, and so
give way to the interest of Trade in England, upon the health and vigor
whereof, the strength, riches, and glory of his Majesty's Crowns seem chiefly
to depend. But on the other side, some such branches of Trade ought not wholly
to be suppressed, but rather so far admitted as may serve the general consumption
of this Kingdom, left by too great an importation of Commodities, though out of
England it self, the Money of this Kingdom happen to be drawn away in such a
degree as not to leave a stock sufficient for turning the Trade at home; the
effect hereof would be general discontents among the People, complaints, or at
least ill impressions of the Government, which in a Country composed of three
several Nations different to a great degree in Language, Customs, and Religion,
as well as Interest (both of property and dependances) may prove not only
dangerous to this Kingdom, but to England it self. Since a sore in the leg may
affect the whole body, and in time grow as difficult a cure as if it were in
the head; especially where humors abound.

The Wool of Ireland seems not to be capable of any increase, nor to suffer
under any defect, the Country being generally full stockt with sheep, cleared
of Wolves, the Soil little subject to other rotts than of hunger; and all the
considerable flocks being of English breed, and the staple of Wool generally
equal with that of Northampton or Leicestershire, the improvement of this
Commodity by Manufactures in this Kingdom would give so great a damp to the
Trade of England (of which Cloths, Stuffs, and Stockins, make so mighty a part)
that it seems not fit to be encouraged here, at least no further than to such a
quantity of one or two Summer-stuffs, Irish-freeze, and Cloth from Six
shillings to Fourteen, as may supply in some measure the ordinary consumption
of the Kingdom. That which seems most necessary in this branch is the careful
and severe execution of the Statutes provided to forbid the Exportation of Wool
to any other parts but to England, which is the more to be watched and feared,
since thereby the present Riches of this Kingdom would be mightily increased,
and great advantages might be made by the connivance of Governors; whereas on
the other side this would prove a most sensible decay, if not destruction of
Manufactures both here and in England it self.

Yarn is a Commodity very proper to this Country, but made in no great
quantities in any parts besides the North, nor any where into Linen to any
great degree, or of sorts fit for the better uses at home, or exportation
abroad; though of all others this ought most to be encouraged, and was
therefore chiefly designed by the Earl of Strafford. The Soil produces Flax
kindly and well, and fine too, answerable to the care used in choice of seed
and exercise of Husbandry; and much Land is fit for it here, which is not so
for Corn. The Manufacture of it in gathering or beating is of little toil or
application, and so the fitter for the Natives of the Country. Besides, no
Women are apter to spin it well than the Irish, who laboring little in any
kind with their hands, have their fingers more supple and soft than other Women
of the poorer condition among us. And this may certainly be advanced and
improved into a great Manufacture of Linen, so as to beat down the Trade both
of France and Holland, and draw much of the Money which goes from England to
those parts upon this occasion into the hands of his Majesty's Subjects of
Ireland without crossing any interest of Trade in England. For besides what has
been said of Flax and Spinning, the Soil and Climate are proper for whitening
both by the frequency of Brooks, and also of Winds in the Country.

Much care was spent upon this design in an Act of Parliament past the last
Session, and something may have been advanced by it; but the too great rigor
imposed upon the sowing of certain quantities of Flax, has caused (and perhaps
justly) a general neglect in the execution; and common guilt has made the
penalties impracticable; so as the main effect has been spoiled by too much
diligence, and the Child killed with kindness. For the Money applied by that
Act to the encouragement of making fine Linen, and broad (which I think is
twenty pounds every year in each County), though the institution was good, yet
it has not reached the end, by encouraging any considerable application that
way; so that sometimes one share of that Money is paid to a single pretender at
the Sizes, or Sessions, and sometimes a share is saved for want of any
pretender at all.

This Trade may be advanced by some amendments to the last Act in another
Session, whereby the necessity of sowing Flax may be so limited as to be made
easily practicable, and so may be forced by the severity of levying the
penalties Enacted. And for the Money allotted in the Counties, no person ought
to carry the first, second or third prize, without producing two pieces of
Linen of each sort (whereas one only now is necessary.) And severe defenses
may be made against weaving any Linen under a certain breadth, such as may be
of better use to the poorest People, and in the coarsest Linen than the narrow
Irish Cloth; and may bear some price abroad when ever more comes to be made
than is consumed at home. But after all these or such like provisions, there
are but two things which can make any extraordinary advance in this branch of
Trade, and those are: First, An increase of People in the Country to such a
degree as may make things necessary to life dear, and thereby force general
industry from each member of a Family (Women as well as Men), and in as many
sorts as they can well turn to, which among others may in time come to run the
vein this way. The second is a particular application in the Government. And
this must be made either by some Governor upon his own private account, who
has a great stock that he is content to turn that way, and is invited by the
gains, or else by the honor of bringing to pass a work of so much public
utility both to England and Ireland (which circumstances I suppose concurred
both in the Earl of Strafford's design; and when ever they meet again, can have
no better copy to follow in all particulars) than that begun at the Naas in his
time. Or else by a considerable sum of Money being laid aside either out of his
Majesty's present Revenue, or some future Subsidy to be granted for this
occasion: And this either to be employed in setting up of some great Linen
Manufacture in some certain place, and to be managed by some certain hands both
for making all sorts of fine Clothes, and of those for Sails too. The benefit
or loss of such a Trade accuring to the Government until it comes to take root
in the Nation. Or else if this seem too great an undertaking for the humor of
our age, then such a sum of Money to lie ready in hands appointed by the
Government, for taking off at common moderate prices all such pieces of Cloth
as shall be brought in by any persons at certain times to the chief Town of
each County; and all such pieces of Cloth as are fit for Sails, to be carried
into the stores of the Navy. All that are fit for the use of the Army, to be
given the Soldiers (as Clothes are) in part of their pay: And all finer pieces
to be sold, and the Money still applied to the increase or constant supply of
the main stock. The effect hereof would be, That People finding a certain
Market for this Commodity, and that of others so uncertain as it is in this
Kingdom, would turn so much of their industry this way, as would serve to
furnish a great part of that Money which is most absolutely necessary for
payment of Taxes, Rents, or subsistence of Families.

Hide, Tallow, Butter, Beef, arise all from one sort of Cattle, and are subject
to the same general defects, and capable of the same common improvements.

The three first are certain Commodities, and yield the readiest Money of any
that are turned in this Kingdom, because they never fail of a price abroad.
Beef is a drug, finding no constant vent abroad, and therefore yielding no rate
at home: for the consumption of the Kingdom holds no proportion with the
product that is usually made of Cattle in it; so that in many parts at this
time an Ox may be bought in the Country-markets, and the Hide and Tallow sold
at the next Trading-Town for as much as it cost. The defects of these
Commodities lie either in the age and feeding of the Cattle that are killed, or
in the Manufacture and making them up for exportation abroad.

Until the Transportation of Cattle into England was forbidden by the late Act
of Parliament, the quickest Trade of ready Money here was driven by the sale of
young Bullocks, which for four or five Summer-months of the year were carried
over in very great numbers, and this made all the breeders in the Kingdom turn
their lands and stocks chiefly to that sort of Cattle. Few Cows were bred up
for the Dairy, more than served the consumption within; and few Oxen for
draught, which was all performed by rascally small Horses; so as the Cattle
generally sold either for slaughter within, or Exportation abroad were of two,
three, or at best four years old, and those such as had never been either
handled or wintered at hand-meat, but bred wholly upon the Mountains in Summer,
and upon the withered long grass of the lower lands in the Winter. The effect
hereof was very pernicious to this Kingdom in what concerned all these
Commodities: The Hides were small, thin, and lank: The Tallow much less in
quantity, and of quicker consumption. Little Butter was exported abroad, and
that discredited by the huswifery of the Irish in making it up; most of what
was sent coming from their hands, who alone kept up the Trade of Dairies,
because the breed of their Cattle was not fit for the English-Markets. But
above all, the Trade of Beef for foreign Exportation was prejudiced and almost
sunk, for the flesh being young, and only grass-fed (and that on a sudden by
the sweetness of the Summers pasture, after the Cattle being almost starved in
the Winter) was thin, light, and moist, and not of a substance to endure the
salt, or be preserved by it, for long Voyages, or a slow consumption. Besides,
either the unskilfulness or carlesness, or Knavery of the Traders, added much
to the undervalue and discredit of these Commodities abroad; for the Hides were
often made up very dirty, which increased the weight by which that Commodity is
sold when it comes in quantities abroad. The Butter would be better on the top
and bottom of the Barrels, than in the middle, which would be sometimes filled
up, or mingled with Tallow; nay, sometimes with stones. The Beef would be so
ill chosen, or so ill cured, as to stink many times before it came so far as
Holland, or at least not prove a Commodity that would defray the first charge
of the Merchant before it was shipped. Nay, I have known Merchants there, fain to
throw away great quantities after having layn long in their hands without any
Market at all.

After the Act in England had wholly stopped the Transportation of Cattle, the
Trade of this Kingdom was forced to find out a new Channel, a great deal of
Land was turned to Sheep, because Wool gave ready Money for the English
Markets, and by stealth for those abroad. The breeders of English Cattle turned
much to Dairy, or else by keeping their Cattle to six and seven year old, and
wintering them dry, made them fit for the Beef-trade abroad; and some of the
Merchants fell into care and exactness in Barrelling them up; and hereby the
improvements of this Trade were grown so sensible in the course of a few years,
that in the year 1669, some Merchants in Holland assured me, that they had
received parcels of Beef out of Ireland which sold current, and very near the
English; and of Butter which sold beyond it; and that they had observed it
spent as if it came from the richer soil of the two. It Is most evident that if
the Dutch War had not broken out so soon after the improvements of all these
Trades (forced at first by necessity, and growing afterward habitual by use)
would in a few years have very much advanced the Trade and Riches of this
Kingdom, and made it a great gainer instead of losing by the Act against
Transportation of their Cattle: But the War gave a sudden damp to this and all
other Trade, which is sunk to nothing by the continuance of it.

However having marked the defects that were even in time of peace, it may not
be useless to set down the Remedies, though little practicable while the War
lasts. For that great one of killing Cattle young, and only grass-fed, I know
none so effectual as introducing a general custom of using Oxen for all sorts
of draught, which would be perhaps the greatest improvement that could be made
in many kinds throughout the Kingdom. By this means the great slaughter would
be made of full-grown, large, and well-wintered Cattle, which would double the
income made by Hide, Tallow and Beef, and raise their credit in all foreign
Markets, every man would be forced to provide Winter-fodder for his Teem
(whereas common Garrans shift upon grass the year round); and this would force
men to the enclosing of Grounds, and improving bog into Meadows; the race of
Garrans would decrease, and so make room for the Countries maintaining the
greater number of Cattle, which makes a foreign Commodity, though they die by
accident or age, whereas the other makes none at all.

No great or useful thing is to be achieved without difficulties, and
therefore what may be raised against this Proposal ought not to discourage the
attempting it. First, the Statutes against that barbarous custom of Plowing by
the tail, ought to be renewed, and upon absolute forfeitures instead of
penalties; the constant and easy compositions whereof have proved rather an
allowing than forbidding it. Now if this were wholly disused, the Harness for
Horses being dearer than for Oxen, the Irish would turn their draught to the
last, wherever they have hitherto used the Plowing by the Tail. Next a
Standard might be made, under which no Horse should be used for draught; this
would not only enlarge the breed of Horses, but make way for the use of Oxen,
because they would be cheaper kept than large good Horses, which could not be
wintered like Garrans without housing or fodder. And lastly, a Tax might be
laid upon every Horse of draught throughout the Kingdom, which besides the main
use here intended, would increase the Kings Revenue by one of the easiest ways
that is any where in use.

For the miscarriages mentioned in the making up of those several Commodities
for foreign Markets, they must likewise be remedied by severe Laws, or else the
improvements of the Commodities themselves will not serve to bring them in
credit, upon which all Trade turns. First, the Ports out of which such
Commodities shall be shipped, may be restrained to a certain number, such as lie
most convenient for the vent of the Inland Provinces, and such as either are
already or are capable of being made regular Corporations. Whatever of them
shall be carried out of any other Port, shall be penal both to the Merchant
that delivers, and to the Master that receives them. In the Ports allowed shall
be published rules agreed on by the skilfullest Merchants in those Wares, to be
observed in the making up of all such as are intended for foreign
Transportation, and declaring that what is not found agreeable to those rules
shall not be suffered to go out. Two Officers may be appointed to be chosen
every three years by the body of the Corporation, whose business shall be to
inspect all Barrels of Beef, Tallow, Butter, and all Packs of Hides, and put to
them the seal or mark of the Corporation, without which none shall be suffered
to go abroad; Nor shall this mark be affixed to any parcels by those Officers,
but such as they have viewed and found agreeable to the rules set forth for
that purpose. Whereof one ought to be certain, That every Barrel be of the same
constant weight, or something over. If this were observed for a small course of
time, under any certain marks, the credit of them both as to quality and weight
would rise to that degree, that the Barrels or Packs would go off in the
Markets they used abroad, upon sight of the mark, like silver-plate upon sight
of the Cities mark where it is made.

The great difficulty will lie in the good execution of the Offices; But the
interest of such Corporations lying so deep in the credit of their mark, will
make emulation among them, every one vying to raise their own as high as they
can; and this will make them careful in the choice of men fit for that turn.
Besides, the Offices ought to be made beneficial to a good degree by a certain
fee upon every seal; and yet the Office to be forfeited upon every miscarriage
of the Officer, which shall be judged so by the chief Magistrates of the Town,
and thereupon a new Election be made by the body of the Corporation.

Cattle for Exportation, are Sheep, Bullocks, Horses, and of one or other of
these kinds the Country seems to be full stockt, no ground that I hear of being
untenanted; the two first seem sufficiently improved in the kinds as well as
the number, most of both being of the English breed. And though it were better
for the Country if the number of Horses being lessened made room for that of
increasing Sheep, and great Cattle; yet it seems indifferent which of these two
were most turned to, and that will be regulated by the liberty or restraint of
carrying live Cattle into England. When the passage is open, Land will be
turned most to great Cattle; when shut, to Sheep, as it is at present, though I
am not of opinion it can last, because that Act seems to have been carried on
rather by the interest of particular Counties in England than by that of the
whole, which in my opinion must be evidently a loser by it. For first, the
freight of all Cattle that were brought over being in English Vessels, was so
much clear gain to England, and this was one with another near a third, or at
least a fourth part of the price. Then their coming over young and very cheap
to the first Market, made them double their price by one years feeding, which
was the greatest improvement to be made of our dry Pasture-land in England. The
Trade of Hides, and Tallow, or else of Leather, was mightily advanced in
England, which will be beaten down in foreign Markets by Ireland, if they come
to kill all their Cattle at home. The young Irish Cattle served for the common
consumption in England, while their own large old fat Cattle went into the
Barrel for the foreign Trade, in which Irish Beef had in a manner no part,
though by the continuance of this restraint it will be forced upon improvement,
and come to share with England in the Beef-Trade abroad. Grounds were turned
much in England from breeding, either to feeding or Dairy, and this advanced
the Trade of English Butter, which will be extremely beaten down when Ireland
turns to it too (and in the way of English Huswifry, as it has done a great
deal since the restraint upon Cattle.) And lastly, whereas Ireland had before
very little Trade but with England, and with the Money for their Cattle bought
all the Commodities there which they wanted: By this restraint they are forced
to seek a foreign Market, and where they sell, they will be sure to buy too;
and all the foreign Merchandise which they had before from Bristow, Chester,
and London, they will have in time from Roan, Amsterdam, Lisbon, and the
Streights. As for the true causes of the decay of Rents in England, which made
the occasion of that Act, they were to be found in the want of People, in the
mighty consumption of foreign Commodities among the better sort, and in a
higher way of living among all, and not in this Transportation of Irish Cattle,
which would have been complained of in former times if it had been found a
prejudice to England. Besides, the Rents have been far from increasing since;
and though that may be by other accidents, yet as to what concerns Ireland, it
comes all to one, unless Wool be forbidden as well as Cattle; for the less
Cattle comes over from thence, there comes the more Wool, which goes as far as
the other toward beating down the price of Pasture-lands in England, and yet the
Transportation of Wool cannot be forbidden, since that would force the Irish
Wool either by stealth into foreign Markets, or else in Cloth by the advance of
that Manufacture; either of which would bring a sudden decay upon the principal
branch of the English Trade.

Horses in Ireland are a drug, but might be improved to a Commodity, not only
of greater use at home, but also fit for Exportation into other Countries. The
Soil is of a sweet and plentiful grass, which will raise a large breed; and the
Hills, especially near the Seacoasts, are hard and rough, and so fit to give
them shape and breath, and sound feet. The present defects in them are breeding
without choice of Stallions either in shape or size, and trusting so far to the
gentleness of the Climate as to winter them abroad, without ever handling Colts
till they are four year old: This both checks the growth of the common breeds,
and gives them an incurable shyness, which is the general vice of Irish Horses,
and is hardly ever seen in Flanders, because the hardness of the Winters in
those parts forces the breeders there to house and handle their Colts for at
least six months every year. In the Studds of persons of quality in Ireland
where care is taken, and cost is not spared, we see Horses bred of excellent
shape and vigor, and size, so as to reach great prices at home, and encourage
strangers to find the Market here; among whom I met with one this Summer that
came over on that errand, and bought about twenty Horses to carry over into the
French Army from twenty to threescore pounds price at the first hand.

The improvement of Horses here may be made by a standard prescribed to all
Stallions, and all Horses that shall be used for draught, the main point being
to make the common breed large, for then whether they have shape or no, they
have ever some reasonable price both at home and abroad. And besides, being not
to be raised without wintering, they will help to force men into improvement of
Land by a necessity of fodder. But for encouragement of finer breed, and in the
better hands, some other institutions may be invented by which emulation may be
raised among the Breeders by a prospect both of particular honor and profit to
those who succeed best, and of good ordinary gains and ready vent to such as by
aiming at the best though they fail, yet go beyond the common sorts. To this
purpose there may be set up both a Horse-Fair, and Races to be held at a
certain time every year for the space of a week; the first in the fairest Green
near the City of Dublin, the latter in that place designed by your Lordship in
the Park for some such purpose. During this Week, the Monday, Wednesday, and
Friday, may be the Races; the Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday, the Fairs may be
held. At each Race may be two Plates given by the King, one of thirty pounds,
and the other of twenty (besides the fashion,) as the Prizes for the first and
second Horse; the first Engraven with a Horse Crowned with a Crown; the second
with a Coronet, and under it the day of the Month, and the Year. Besides these
Plates, the Wagers may be as the persons please among themselves, but the
Horses must be evidenced by good Testimonies to have been bred in Ireland. For
honor, the Lord Lieutenant may ever be present himself, or at least name a
Deputy in his room, and two Judges of the field, who shall decide all
Controversies, and with sound of Trumpet declare the two Victors. The Masters
of these two Horses may be admitted to ride from the Field to the Castle with
the Lord Lieutenant, or his Deputy, and to dine with him that day, and there
receive all the honor of the Table. This to be done, what quality soever the
persons are of; for the lower that is, the more will be the honor; and perhaps
the more the sport: and the encouragement of breeding will by that means extend
to all sorts of men.

For the Fairs, the Lord Lieutenant may likewise be present every day in the
height of them, by himself or Deputy, and may with the advice of the two chief
Officers of the Army then present, choose out one of the best Horses, and two of
the best Geldings that appear in the Fair, not under four, nor above seven
years old. For which shall be paid to the owners of them, after sufficient
Testimony of their being bred in Ireland, One hundred pounds for the Horse, and
Fifty pounds a piece for the Geldings. These Sums, as that for the Plates, to
issue out of the Revenue of Ireland, and without trouble or fee; and the three
Horses to be sent over every year to the Kings Stables. Both those that won the
Plate, and those which are thus fold ought immediately to be marked so as they
may never return a second time, either to the Race or to the Sale.

The benefit by such an institution as this, will be very great and various:
For besides the encouragement to breed the best Horses, from the honor and
gain already mentioned; there will be a sort of public entertainment for one
whole week, during which the Lord Lieutenant, the Lord Mayor of the City, and
the great Officers both Civil and Military, ought to keep open Tables for all
strangers. This will draw a confluence of People from all parts of the Country.
Many perhaps from the nearer parts of England may come, not only as to a
public kind of solemnity, but as to a great Mart of the best Horses. This will
enrich the City by the expense of such a Concourse, and the Country by the Sale
of many Horses into England, and in time (or from thence) into foreign parts.
This will make general acquaintances among the Gentry of the Kingdom, and bring
the Lord Lieutenant to be more personally known, and more honored by his
appearing in more greatness, and with more solemnity than usual upon these
occasions. And all this with expense only of Three hundred and fifty pounds a
year to the Crown, for which the King shall have three the best Horses bred
that year in Ireland.

The Fishing of Ireland might prove a Mine under water, as rich as any under
ground, if it were improved to those vast advantages it is capable of, and that
we see it raised to in other Countries. But this is impossible under so great a
want of People, and cheapness of all things necessary to life throughout the
Country, which are in all places invincible enemies of industry and
improvements. While these continue, I know no way of advancing this Trade to
any considerable degree, unless it be the erecting four Companies of Fishery,
one in each Province of Ireland, into which every man that enters shall bring a
certain Capital, and receive a proportionable share of the gain or loss, and
have a proportional voice in the Election of a President and Council, by whom
the whole business in each Province shall be managed. If into each of these
Companies the King or Lord Lieutenant would enter for a considerable share at
the first, toward building such a number of Boats and Busses as each Company
could easily manage, it would be an encouragement both of honor and advantage.
Certain Privileges likewise, or Immunities, might be granted from charges of
trouble or expense, nay from Taxes, and all unusual payments to the public, in
favor of such as brought in a proportion to a certain height into the stock
of the Fishery. Nay, it seems a matter of so great importance to his Majesty's
Crowns, both as to the improving the Riches of this Kingdom, and impairing the
mighty gains of his Neighbors by this Trade; that perhaps there were no hurt
if an Act were made, by which none should be capable of being either chosen
into a Parliament, or the Commission of the Peace, who had not manifested his
desires of advancing the public good by entering in some certain proportion
into the stock and Companies of the Fishery, since the greatness of one, and
application of the other, seem the only present means of improving so rich and
so important a Trade. It will afterward be the business of the Companies
themselves, or their directors, to fall into the best methods and rules for the
curing and barreling up all their Fish, and to see them so exactly observed, as
may bring all those quantities of them that shall be sent abroad, or spent at
home, into the highest and most general credit; which with advancing the
Seasons, all that can be so as to find the first foreign Markets, will be a way
to the greatest and surest gains. In Holland there have been above thirty
Placaerts or Acts of State concerning the curing, salting, and barrelling of
Herrings alone, with such severity in the Imposition and execution of
Penalties, that the business is now grown to an habitual skill, and care, and
honesty, so as hardly any example is seen of failing in that matter, or thereby
impairing the general credit of that Commodity among them, or in the foreign
Markets they use.

Iron seems to me the Manufacture that of all others ought the least to be
encouraged in Ireland; or if it be, which requires the most restriction to
certain places and rules. For I do not remember to have heard that there is any
Oar in Ireland, at least I am sure the greatest part is fetched from England;
so that all this Country affords of its own growth toward this Manufacture, is
but the Wood, which has met but with too great consumptions already, in most
parts of this Kingdom, and needs not this to destroy what is left. So that
Iron-works ought to be confined to certain places, where either the Woods
continue vast, and make the Country savage, or where they are not at all fit
for Timber, or likely to grow to it, or where there is no conveyance for Timber
to places of vent so as to quit the cost of the carriage.

Having run through the Commodities of Ireland, with their defects and
improvements, I will only touch the other two Points mentioned at first, as the
grounds likewise of Trade in a Country; those are the Commodiousness of Ports,
and the store of Shipping; in one of which this Kingdom as much abounds, as it
fails in the other. The Haven of Dublin is barred to that degree, as very much
to obstruct the Trade of the City; the clearing or opening of it were a great
work, and proper either for the City, or the whole Province of Lemster to
undertake. But whether it be feasible, or at such charges as will quit cost, I
will not judge, especially considering the many good Havens that are scattered
upon that whole Eastern Coast of Ireland. Besides this, I know not what to
propose upon this head, unless it be the making of two free Ports, one in
Kerry, and the other upon the Northwest Coast, which may thereby grow to be
Magazines for the West-Indy Trade, and from thence those Commodities may be
dispersed into all other parts of Europe, after having paid the Customs which
they ought to pay in England, where this must be concerted.

For the last Point, I doubt there is hardly any other Country lying upon the
Seacoast, and not wholly out of the way of Trade, which has so little Shipping
of its own as Ireland, and which might be capable of employing more. The reason
of this must be in part the scarcity of Timber proper for this built; but more,
the want of Merchants, and uncertainty of Trade in the Country. For preventing
the further destruction of Timber, a Law may be made, forbidding any man to cut
down any Oak that is of a certain height, unless it be of a certain scantling,
as twelve inches diameter, or some such measure as usually makes a Tree useful
Timber. And further, the severest Penalties ought to be put upon Barking any
Tree that is not felled; a custom barbarous and peculiar to this Country, and
by which infinite quantities of Timber have been destroyed.

All Traders in these parts, at least of Ireland, are but Factors; nor do I
hear of any number of Merchants in the Kingdom. The cause of this must be
rather an ill opinion of security, than of gain; for those are the two baits
which draw Merchants to a place: the last intices the poorer Traders, or the
young beginners, or those of passage; but without the first, the substantial
and the rich will never settle in a Country. This opinion can be attained only
by a course of time, of good conduct, and good government, and thereby of
justice, and of peace, which lie out of the compass of this Discourse. But to
make some amends for this want at present, encouragement may be given to any
Merchants that shall come over and turn a certain stock of their own here, as
Naturallization upon any terms; Freedom from Customs the two first years, and
from any Offices of trouble or expense the first seven years. I see no hurt if
the King should give leave to the Merchants in eight or ten of the chief
Trading Ports of Ireland, to name for each Town one of their number, out of
which the Lord Lieutenant should choose two to be of the Privy Council of
Ireland, with a certain Salary from the King to defray their attendance: This
would be an honor and encouragement to so worthy a Calling, and would
introduce an interest of Trade into the Council, which being now composed
wholly of the Nobility or Gentry, the Civil or Military Officers; the Traders
seem to be lest without Patrons in the Government, and thereby without favor
to the particular concernments of a chief member in the Politic body; and upon
whose prospering, the wealth of the whole Kingdom seems chiefly to depend.

But this is enough for your Excellencies trouble, and for the discharge of my
promise, and too much I doubt for the humor of our age to bring into practice,
or so much as to admit into consideration. Your Lordship I know has generous
thoughts, and turned to such disinteressed Speculations as these, and a mind
framed for the exercise of those Virtues which can most advance the public
Weal of the Country where your Station is. But that is not enough toward the
raising such buildings as I have drawn you here the lines of, unless the
direction of all affairs here were wholly in your hands, or at least the
opinion lost of other men's being able to contest with you those points of
public utility which you ought best to know and most to be believed in, while
you deserve or discharge so great a trust as the Government of this Kingdom.
For I think a Prince cannot too much consider whom to choose for such
employments; but when he has chosen, cannot trust them too far, or thereby give
them too much Authority; no more than end it too soon, when ever he finds it
abused. In short, it is left only to Princes to mend the World, whose Commands
find general obedience; and Examples, imitation. For all other men, they must
take it as they find it; and good men enter into commerce with it, rather upon
cautions of not being spoiled themselves, than upon hopes of mending the World.
At least, this opinion becomes men of my level, amongst whom I have observed
all set quarrels with the age, and pretenses of reforming it by their own
models, to end commonly like the pains of a man in a little Boat, who tugs at a
rope that is fast to a Ship, it looks as if he resolved to draw the Ship to him,
but the truth and his meaning is, to draw himself to the Ship, where he gets in
when he can, and does like the rest of the Crew when he is there. When I have
such designs, I will begin such contentions; in the mean time the bent of my
thoughts shall be rather to mend my self than the World, which I reckon upon
leaving much what I found it. Nor should I have reason in complaining too far
of an age, which does your Lordship so much justice by the honor of so great
an Employment, and so universal an esteem; In both which, as I know no man
deserves greater successes and increases than you do, so I am sure no man
wishes you greater than I do.

FINIS.

