Concerning doing good to Posterity. A SERMON PREACHED before their MAJESTY'S
AT WHITE HALL, On February the 16 th, 1689-90.

Psalm Lxxviii. 5, 6. He established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law
in Israel, which he commanded our Forefathers, that they should make them known
to their Children.

That the Generations to come might know them, even the Children which should
be born, who should arise and declare them to their Children.

By Thomas Tenison, now Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Published by their Majesty's Special Command.

London: Printed by H. Hills, in Black-fryars, near the Waterside. For the
Benefit of the Poor.

PSALM Lxxviii. 5, 6. V. 5.... He established a Testimony in Jacob, and
appointed a Law in Israel, which he commanded our Forefathers, That they should
make them known to their Children.

V. 6. That the Generations to come might know Them, even the Children which
should be born, who should arise and declare them to their Children.


THE Title of Benefactor does principally belong to those who are at present
useful, and likewise oblige Posterity. Such a one was King David, who Served
his own Generation very Faithfully; and having finished his Course, delivered
his Lamp to the succeeding Age. Of this, as many are convinced, as either read
the History of his Life, or peruse his Psalms with Application of Mind.

And it was his care, amongst his other pious Designs, to continue the Memory
of God's Wonderful Works from Age to Age; to the end that the Consideration of
his Power and Goodness might effectually move them to obey his Laws. Of such
Remembrances they stood in great need, being apt no longer to think upon the
Miracles of Divine Mercy, than whilst they saw them.

Wherefore God himself prescribed this way of teaching his Statutes, and
rehearsing the History of his Mighty Acts, (and especially those at Horeb) to
their Sons, and their Sons Sons. Deuteronomy. 4. 9.

And that the Isrealites might not err in the repetition, he caused those
Statutes and wonders to be written down; not leaving them to the uncertainty of
Oral Tradtion, which sometimes either passes by things of moment, or delivers
them down very imperfectly, and too often brings it to pass, that the Legends
of one Age, become History in those that follow.

God established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which he
commanded our Forefathers; that they should make them known to their Children.

That the Generations to come might know them, even the children which should
be born, who should arise and declare them to their children.

The Argument of Doing Good to Posterity, being set forth in these words, not
by any General Precept, but only by the especial Instance of propagating the
Knowledge of his Law; I shall use them rather as the Occasion, than the Ground
of this Proposition.

That a Good Man, according to his Talent and Circumstance, does endeavor in
such manner to Do good in his time, that the next Age also may probably reap
the benefit of it.

Concerning this kind of Charity, I purpose to consider.

1. How fit and just a thing it is to put it in Practice. 2. That,
notwithstanding its fitness, there is too general a disuse of it. 3. Whence it
comes to pass that there is of Common a failure in so necessary a Duty. 4. By
what means the Exercise of it may be made more regular, and more frequent among
us; that so the ages to come may have just cause to Bless Almighty God for the
advantages derived to them from this Generation.
1. Now, First of all, the doing of Good to Posterity, may appear a fit and
reasonable Practice;

1. From a common Rule of Good and Evil. 2. From the Obligation which man is
under, to imitate God. 3. From the Gratitude we owe to former Ages.
1. This is a Common rule concerning Good, not only that it is to be done, but
that we are to do what, upon the whole matter, is the greatest good which we
are capable of doing in our Sphere and Condition. Now Good is increased as well
by the Duration of Benefits, as by their Magnitude and Number; so that if the
Good be equal in other respects, he that does the Charity that lasts but a day,
does well; but he that does the Good that lasts some years, does still better.
He who out of good will, gives a cup of cold water to a thirsty man, performs a
Charitable Office; but that Person is, by much, the greater Benefactor, who
opens a Fountain which from time to time may give refreshment to Man and Beast.
Wherefore by the Reasons and Proportions of Good, a man is required, according
to his ability, to look beyond the term of his own few and uncertain days,
known only to God how few they are.

He is,

2. Required to benefit Posterity, that he may be a Follower of God in true
Religion, which is the imitation of Him who we worship: And by doing Charities
which may last, we are made, in some measure like to Him; for all Generations
partake of the Goodness of God.

He so framed the Material World at the beginning, that by the same Order of
Nature (the same for the main) it might in its several Ages conveniently
subsist; and the same Sun that shone on Adam, enlightens us.

God permitted men in the first Age of the World, to live very many Years, that
by their Experience (especially in the Course of the Stars, which required
length of time for observation) the following Ages might receive useful
Instruction; useful, not only in secular Affairs, but in Religion; the Heavens,
the more they understood, declaring the more the Glory of God.

He ordained the Sabbath, the Passover, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, not
merely for the men of any one Age, but as Memorials of the Creation, of the
Deliverance out of Egypt, of the meritorious Passion of our Redeemer, for many
Generations.

He sent his Blessed Son once to offer a Sacrifice, whose Virtue might be
communicated to all true Christians, as long as there should be a Church on
Earth.

He caused Holy Scriptures to be written for the good of all following times;
and the things which were written of old, were written for our Admonition, upon
whom the ends of the world are come. For instance; we are commanded to Remember
the wife of Lot, who, so many Years ago, (looking back toward Sodom) was
turned into a Pillar of Salt and Sulphur, Genesis 19. 25. 26. S. Luke 17. 32.
Deuteronomy. 29. 23. being punished in the same extraordinary way with those unclean
Sinners who remained in it.

3. There is not a fitter expression of our gratitude to former Ages, than a
hearty endeavor to procure advantage to those who come after us, as we have
received benefit by those who went before us; borrowing Light from their Light,
and living upon the Effects of their Benevolence. If nothing had been done for
us, in how misirable an Estate should we have come into the World and lived in
it? Much more miserably than Adam, who in the state of Innocence, enjoyed the
Earth, without the Curse which Disobedience brought upon it. If all Arts, and
Sciences, and Buildings, and other such Helps and Conveniences of Humane Life,
were to be invented and begun with every Age, how rude, how mean would the
condition of it be? How heavily would it be pressed with the burden of
Necessity? How much more painful and laborious would this render the Pilgrimage
of man, which as it is, with all its advantages, has still its sufficient share
of trouble? In what darkness had we fate in reference to the means of our
Redemption, if it had not pleased the God of Wisdom, through the hands of the
Christians of former Centuries, to deliver down to us the Holy Bible?

It does therefore well become us to have a sense of the Favors of those who
died before our times, but still live in their benefits; and gratefully to
celebrate their just Praise, and to have a perpetual inclination, when we have
not further power, to go, and to do likewise.

But as fit and just as this Practice is, there seems to be

2. Too general a disuse of it, Some are careful even to Anxiety, but they show
that the solicitude is for their selves, by their backwardness in disposing of
anything so much as by a WILL. Some let Receipts and Inventions dye with them,
by which great numbers in succeeding Ages might have been profited. Some are
not provident for their selves, and therefore not likely to take due care for
Posterity. They will not put a stone into a decaying Building, or drop an acorn
into the Ground for the sake of those that shall follow them; much less have
they a zeal for the supporting of Gods Church in difficult times, or the
planting of true Religion in places that want the blessing of it: Insomuch that
when they give up their wretched lives (as give them up they must, what
aversion soever they have to it) they appear as a Place surrendered after a long
and tedious Siege, where little remains, besides dead Corpses Rubbish, and
Ruins.

And this puts me in mind of still a worser sort of men, who by their
inhumanity, make such desolations in their times, as late Posterity can scarce
repair. Their Talent lies not in promoting Truth, and Holy Worship, but in
forcing Error and Idolatry; not in Building and Planting, but in plucking up
and destroying. They are imitators of Apollyon the God of this World, whose
Delight is Mischief, whose Triumphs are Barbarities, Fire and Sword are the
Instruments of their Glory: They spare neither the Bodies of the Living, nor
the Monuments of the Dead. They lay wast in a few hours, strong and beautiful
Cities, which were the fruit of the Arts and Labors of former Times. One would
think they would anticip^^e Doomsday it self, if their Force were equal to
their Pride and Malice: Though that sort of men, of all others in the World,
have the least reason to hasten the Day of Judgment. When their Acts shall be
rehearsed before the Children that are yet unborn, they will rise up with just
indignation, and call their Memories accursed.

If (as we have proposed in the third place)

3. We inquire into the Causes of this Uncharitableness, we shall without much
difficulty, find them amongst the ill Principles and disorderly Lusts and
Passions and Humors of unreasonable men. As for example;

The Atheistical, if they follow the consequence of their Opinion, terminate
their Designs, as they imagine they do their humane Beings, in this Life.

Those who live by Sense, whose Objects are present, have no regard for such as
they shall never live to see; for such as are not capable of returning them
immediate thanks, of making them Presents, of pleasing them with flatteries, of
rendering them such services as are most grateful to flesh and blood.

The slothful will not be at the pains to build or to uphold, to manure or
cultivate, to catechize a Child, or instruct a Servant, or discreetly to
reprove an irregular Neighbor: They will let their own Vineyards be overrun,
in their own times with Briars and Thorns.

The Careless and Voluptuous are contented to think (if thinking be at any time
the exercise of such Affectors of of Ease) that Peace and Plenty will last for
their Days; and that is all the Eternity they care for; though by such neglect,
Ruin often comes down upon their Heads before the term of their Life is
expired. So it commonly happens to the Prodigal who inspect not their Affairs,
and believe their Fortune to be sufficient for their Time; And in that
Imagination, say to their Souls, Take your ^ase: and dream on till they are
surpised by Poverty: And, if their loose and swift way of living permits them
to number many Years; there remain to them the fewest Supplies in that Age
which has the most and greatest needs, the Age of Labor and Sorrow.

Furthermore,

The Ill-natured hate the rest of the World, and are not pleased that the state
of it should be bettered by them. Out of the abundance of such an ill Heart
came that worst of Sayings pronounced by one of the Brutal Heathens, When I
leave the World, let Earth and Fire mingle; or, let the Frame of Nature be
immediately dissolved. He would have forborne those wicked Words, if he had but
just thought of that more dreadful Fire which Divine Justice has prepared for
the Uncharitable.

Moreover, the Proud and the Designing, who are themselves ignorant, will on
purpose deny a leberal Education to those Children who are under their Conduct,
lest they grow too wise and sensible for them.

From the same Passion it is, that Wicked Men endeavor to hinder both present
and future Good, by depressing generous and worthy Persons, giving them
occasion to complain, with that great Warrior Belisarius; It was not a Crime
that hurt us but Envy.

Likewise, the Covetuous either stifle the Wills of the Charitable, or forbear
to fulfill them; converting that to their own use, which was piously intended
for others.

Also, the Malicious study on purpose to leave That which must go to others, in
a ruinous Condition. It may be, without a House for shelter, or a Tree for
shade, or a Field worn out with perpetual bearing, or a Paper for Direction,
and for the determination of Strife; much more withour a Prayer for the
Prosperity of those who shall come after them.

Again, of some Men of revengeful Dispositions, it has been said, That on their
very Deathbeds, [a solemn Time in which nothing should supplant the Love of
God and Man; when their abundant Charity should, through Christ, prepare their
way to the Mercy of God before whom they are suddenly to appear] that, being
engaged in vexatious Suits and Quarrels with others, they have given it in
charge to the Heirs of their Families, to keep up the Grudg, and to continue
the Controversy from Generation to Generation.

Finally, Where this Evil Tempter abounds, it entails Trouble and Confusion:
For it requires little skill to unfix and embroil, but a great deal to
establish. May That (as we hope, and as we pray) be, for the future, the Wisdom
of this Age, to the end that it may flourish in True Religion, in Unity, in
Plenty, Peace and Health, and by that means become a Blessing to these Lands
for ever.

These Evil Principles, Lusts, Passions, and Humors which I have mentioned,
are the Causes of the Decay of that generous Charity so beneficial to the Ages
to come.

But, Fourthly,

Let us not follow the inordinate Affections and unreable Customs of the Men of
this World, but be prevailed with to imitate David? or rather, the God of
David, who has a Blessing for every Age; and who, when he rested from the Work
of Creation, did not forbear the Works of Providence.

To this purpose,

First, That we may be capable of practicing this sort of Charity, the
forementioned Passions are to be subdued by pious Consideration, by Prayer for
the especial Grace of God, by firm and steadfast Resolution, by Conversation
with Christians whose Hearts are enlarged, by reading the holy Scriptures, and
in them, the History of God's Power and Goodness.

Secondly, being thus made capable of doing present and future Good; that we
may do it as we ought, the Good Will, the right Scope, the Decence, the Justice
of It, are well to be weighed.

And, First, Good Will ought to be the Spring which moves Men that benefit
those who succeed them; for it is no Virtue to leave that behind us, which
Death will not permit us to carry away. Dives laid up Goods for many years, and
he left them to Others, without being to them a Benefactor; for, he laid them
up for himself, upon a vain and presumptuous supposition of long Life; in which
he was miserably disappointed, by the surprising Justice of that Righteous God,
who said to Him, Thou Fool! this Night thy Soul shall be taken from thee.

Again, This Good Will is to be directed to a right and profitable Scope; that
Charity may not be blinded by Superstition, which has founded many Societies,
and left great Revenues, and enriched many Shrines, to the hurt of Posterity,
by promoting the Honor of false Deities and Saints; and by encouraging a
Worship from Age to Age, in which the True God can take no pleasure.

There is also to be observed, in this Practice, a Decency, which forbids a Man
to be severely Penurions all his days, for the doing a greater Good at the
last. It is true, He is not to be condemned for cutting off unnecessary Pomps
and Expenses in order to so good an End: And he may be bold with himself. But,
though there may be a laudable Frugality, there must not be a sordidness in his
Selfdenial.

Add to this, That Justice, as well as Decency becomes all Men who piously
design to be Benefactors to Posterity. They are not to do Evil that Good may
come of it; or, to be unjust, Oppressors, Extortioners in one Age, that they
may be bountiful to another. Yet, such is the manner of the Covetuous, who love
not Mankind, nor their very Offspring as Men, but in the Quality of their
second-selves: They run the hazard even of Damnation, for the greatning of
those, who generally spend with vicious profuseness all that Wealth which, with
such guilt of Conscience they had gathered together.

Thirdly, Having found out such Rules as these for the governing of our
Practice, we may render our selves more fit for the discharge of so Excellent a
Duty.

First, By removing certain Discouragements.

Secondly, By attending to some further Motives.

The Discouragements are of Two Kinds.

1. Suspicions of Ability to do such good.

2. Hindrances of Willingness in Those who are able to do it; and in some of
them who are not ill inclined.

1. Men of inferior Condition suspect their Ability; imagining, that he who
would become a Benefactor, must be armed with great Power and Authority endued
with high degrees of Wisdom, and furnished with such heaps of growing Wealth,
as may supply Charity, without sensible Diminution.

Whereas there are diverse ways by which Persons, in meaner Circumstances, may,
in their Age, be useful both to that and the next. A poor Man, as we read in
Ecclesiastes, did by his prudent Counsel deliver a City. And that Place had,
probably, the Benefit of his good Advice a long time after; though whilst his
wisdom made him considerable, his Poverty exposed him to the Scorn and Neglect
of the Proud and u^grateful. There are true Benefactors in the World besides
such who have Ability to make Public Ways, to repair Breaches of the Sea, to
calm that which is tumultuous, the Rage of the People; to build Houses for
God's Worship, to found Colleges and Hospitals, to subdue public Enemies, and
to enact wholesome Laws, which are the Nerves of Society, and by the strength of
which we a while (by God's Blessing) subsisted, though Popish Superstition did
so furiously assault us. Many may communicate to their Neighbors a wholesome
Medicine, though they cannot erect a House for the Sick, and Wounded, and
Impotent. Every Master of a Family in Israel. was obliged to show his Children
the Reason of the Paschal Feast, and to teach them the Law of God. Those,
therefore, were not Performances out of their Power, for then they could not
have been their Duty. And to Christians their great Master says, What
excellent things do ye? What do ye more than others? Much Good they may do by
rehearsing the Holy History of God's Law and his wonderful Works before others,
that they may learn it and transmit it to the next Generation. Much Good they
may do by teaching of necessary Doctrines to Youth, and by forming the manners
of those who are likely to outlive them. They may instill into them betimes such
Christian Principles as may grow up with them, and bring forth Fruit in their
Age. He who has a small proportion of Silver or Gold, may yet be sometimes
capable of leaving behind him a more valuable Legacy: By giving the World a
Book of Piety, such as that of the Whole Duty of Man, by which the judicious
and modest Author has done a greater Good to those who lived in and after his
Time, than if he had poured forth other Riches ^^on them in overflowing measure.

Most are capable of doing a durable Charity by good Example, which may operate
when they are dead and gone. To how many Generations has the Instance of
afflicted Job administered Courage and Support, whilst they have called it to
Remembrance in the Time of their Trouble? And there is great need of virtuous
Example for the ballancing of that which is Bad; the Contagion of which sticks
like Leprosy in Families, Churches and Kingdoms. Jeroboam the Son of Nebat
made Israel to sin 1. King. 14. 16. [to commit that great Sin of Idolatry, by
worshipping the true God by an Image] both in his Time, and after he was gone
to answer both for his own and for other Men's Sins. But what Answer could he
make for either? Either was a Burden too heavy for him to bear.

Then, for the Charity of Prayer, who is there that cannor call on God for a
Blessing on Persons and Families, on Churches and States, after they shall have
left this unquiet Stage, and that Sche^^ of the World which passes away. Exodus
20. 5, 6. ^ 34. 7. Deuteronomy. 7. 9.

In sum, all Wicked M^^ ^s wi^ked, are hurtful, and all Good Men, a^ good, ^re
beneficial both at present and for the future. Blessing and Cursing pursue
Families very often, according to the Righteousness or Impiety of the first
Heads of them.

Secondly, There are Discouragements which hinder Men, who are able to do Good
to other Generations, from being Willing. That is to say, The Instance of
Backwardness in Public Mannagers to reward those who have undone themselves by
some useful Invention, which generally ruins the first Projestors, whilst
Posterity reaps the fruit of their Wit, Labor, and Expense. Also the Instances
of Failures and Frauds of smothered or abused Legacies, in Trust, of the
converting of that to the use of the Rich, which is bequeathed to the Poor;
together with the Consideration of the uncertainty of Times, in which, by Wars
and tumultuous Violences, the Effects of public Charity do often perish.

There is much Truth in this Objection, but yet not so much as makes it
unanswerable. Useful Inventions are often greater Charities than could have
been done by the Pains and Wealth which they cost. Frauds and Abuses do not
always happen: They do not always come; and woe to them, no^ who are injured
by them, but by whom they come. And the Observation of such accidental
Miscarriages should, indeed, increase the Caution, but not prevent the Charity
of wealthy Men. It is, also, profitable for us to remember, That whatsoever
Hazards Good Works run, the Soul that has done them in Christian Manner, shall
be safe in the Hands of their Mediator. Christians know in whom they have
believed, and how able he is to keep that which is committed to his Trust to
that Day.

For the uncertainty of Times and Seasons, that is an Objection against doing
Good in all Ages; for Heaven only is a Kingdom which cannot be shaken.

Wherefore, laying aside these Impediments, cast in our Way by too great a
Degree of Jealousy, let us,

Secondly, Provoke our selves to Piety and to Good Works, by laying before our
Thoughts such further Motives as these.

The First may be taken from the true pleasure which is found in all good Acts,
and particularly of those of that kind of which we have been speaking. Pleasure
naturally springs up in the Mind, when we think of any thing we much value, as
continuing and prospering. A great degree of happiness consists in hope, and in
hope cherished by proceeding. The Mind is damped when it is stinted, and when
it sees an end of any thing in which it took content. And if pleasure is
derived to us from the growth and progress even of our humblest Plants, much
more shall we be pleased by the extent of our goodness to Christian Men, and in
the duration of it. It is a blessed and comfortable Thought, that God will
vouchsafe to use such frail earthen Vessels, as Instruments of good; by
Instruction, by Example, by Prayers, by Alms, not only for the Span of our
Life, but for many years to come. It was a strong Consolation to Abraham, that
in his Offspring all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed.

The Second Motive may be taken from Honor, which is Fame acquired by doing of
worthy things. After this Men so naturally thirst, that some have affected the
Name of Benefactors, Luke 22. 25. who have turned their Power into Oppression;
for of that number (as Philo shows us) was Caius Caligula. They understood what
was venerable, but they did not pursue if.

Even the Charity which is transient, is honorable* and the Woman who with her
Spikenard anointed our Savior to his burial, is to this day honorably
remembered wheresoever the History of the Gospel is read. And if to transient
good our Praise is due, certainly to that which is lasting it ought not to be
denied. Wherefore the Holy Virgin, considering the Salvation of the World by
Christ, whose Mother she was become through God's special favor, believed not
her Magnificat to be a vainglorious Hymn, but said with humble Joy, God has
regarded the lowliness of his Hand-maiden; for behold from henceforth all
Generations shall call me blessed.

But the greatest Motives of all are, Conscience, which requires us to do
good, as our Christian Duty.

Religious Fear, which sets before the Unprofitable (the unprofitable to Men,
for God we cannot profit) the Terrors of the great Day. And, last of all,

Religious Hope, which moves us to be useful, in all our Capacities, whilst
time lasts, upon the most comfortable prospect of an Eternal Recompense.

O the blessed Day, when those who abound in the work of the Lord Jesus, shall
find their labor not to be in vain in the same Lord. When the penitent, pious,
and righteous, shall behold the general Assembly of those great Souls who
neither lived nor died to themselves. May God prepare us for this Felicity, by
Faith, and Repentance, and Good Works, through him who was both the desire and
the blessing of all Nations, Jesus Christ the Righteous, to whom with the
Father and the Holy Ghost be all Honor and Glory, World without end, Amen.

FINIS.

