MEMOIRS Of what past in CHRISTENDOM, From the WAR Begun 1672. TO THE PEACE
Concluded 1679.

The Second Edition.

LONDON: Printed by R. R. for. Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCII.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
READER,
THESE following Papers I obtained from a Person, to whom I must never restore
them again; and the Author has not, that I know of, enquired after them since I
had them. I must needs confess, It Is but too plain by the Epistle, that he
intended they should not be public during his Life; but tho I have as great
Respect for him, as any Man, yet I could not be of his mind in this: I think I
should do the World wrong, to conceal any longer a Treatise of so much Profit
and Pleasure to all that read it; and I hope I shall not be thought to do the
Author any, in Publishing it, since the charge of not doing it, was not given
to me. I think likewise, That if any of his Friends can obtain of him the First
and Third Parts of these Memoirs that are mentioned in them, they will do the
Public a great Piece of Service; and if they should come from the Author's
last hand, they may chance to be more Correct than these, which look as tho
they had never been reviewed by the Author, but just as they fell from his Pen:
However, I do not remember to have met with a Treatise in any Language that I
understand, which in my poor Judgment is written with more Candor and Truth,
and thorough insight into the Matters it relates, stuffed with great Variety of
Subject, digested into better Order and Method, and expressed with more Clearness
and Spirit, than this is. I have not therefore, as I think there is no need,
changed a word in them; but only where things are said in French or Latin, I
have thought fit to Translate them in another Colume, or the Margin; and if I
have not done it so well as I should do, I crave the Reader's Pardon, and in
all else, do not doubt of his Thanks. I shall say nothing of the Author, who
will be known by the first Pages of the Book; nor of the Time or Motive of its
Writing, which are seen by the Epistle; but only heartily Pray to God to give
him Good Health, and a Long Life, that he may continue, as he has ever been, an
Ornament to Learning, and to his Country.

To My SON. April, 1683.
I Do not remember ever to have refused any thing you have desired of me, which
I take to be a greater Compliment to you, than to my self; since for a Young
man to make none but Reasonable Desires, is yet more extraordinary, than for an
Old man to think them so. That which you made me some time since, and have so
often renewed, I have at last resolved to comply with, as well as the rest; and
if I live, will leave you some Memoirs of what has passed in my Public
Employments, especially those abroad, which reached from the Year 1665, to
1678. and run through the most Important Foreign Negotiations of the Crown,
with great connection of Affairs at Home, during this Period, and the
Revolutions it produced. The Confidence of the King, my Master, and of His
Chief Ministers, as well as that of others abroad, gave me the advantage to
discern and observe the true Springs and Motions of Both, which were often
mistaken in Court, and in Parliament, and thereby fastened many Suspicions,
Confidences, Applauses, Reproaches, upon Persons, and at times where they were
very undeserved. Twenty years of my Life I passed in Public Thoughts and
Business, from the Thirty second, to the Fifty second year of my Age, which I
take to be the part of a Man's Life fittest to be dedicated to the Service of
His Prince, or State; the rest being usually too much taken up with his
Pleasures, or his Ease. The native love of my Country, and its ancient Legal
Constitutions, would not suffer me to enter into any Public Affairs, till the
way was opened for the King's Happy Restoration in 1660. and in 1680. you know
I sent you to acquaint the King with my Resolutions to pass the remainders of
my Life like as good a private Subject, as any he had; but never more to meddle
with any Public Employment. All the rest of my Age before, and since that
period, I have taken no more notice of what passed upon the Public Scene, than
an Old man uses to do of what is acted on a Theater, where he gets as easy a
Seat as he can, entertains himself with what passes upon the Stage, not caring
who the Actors are, or what the Plot, nor whether he goes out before the Play
be done. Therefore you must expect nothing from me out of the compass of that
time, nor any thing of that it self, with much application or care, further
than of Truth. You know how lazy I am in my Temper, how uneasy in my Health,
how weak my Eyes, and how much of my time passes in Walking or Riding, and
thereby fencing all I can against two cruel Diseases that have for some time
pursued me^ So that I doubt the satisfaction you expect, will be chiefly owing
to ill Health, or ill Weather, which yet are not like to fail at my Age, and in
our Climate. For the rest, if you find any thing either Instructing or
Diverting in what I shall write upon this Subject, you may attribute it wholly
to the Kindness and Esteem I have for you, without which I should not have
given my self the trouble of such Recollections: And as I intend them for Your
Use, so I desire no Other may be made of them during my Life; when that is
ended, neither They nor You will be any more in my care; and whatever I leave
of this or any other kind, will be in your disposal. I am the gladder, and it
is but just, that my Public Employments should contribute something to your
Entertaiment, since they have done so little to your Fortune; upon which I can
make you no excuses: 'Twas a thing so often in my Power, that it was never in
my Thoughts, which were turned always upon how much Less I needed, rather than
how much More. If yours have the same turn, you will be but too Rich; if the
contrary, you will be ever Poor.

MEMOIRS Of what past in CHRISTENDOM From 1672. to 1679.
CHAP. I.
HAving ended the first part of these Memoirs with my retirement from all
public business in the year 1671. which was soon followed by the Second Dutch
War, I shall begin this with the approaches of the Peace in the Year 1673.

About this time, after Two Summers spent in a War between England and Holland,
with several encounters at Sea, but no decisive Action; both Parties began to
enter upon thoughts, and indeed necessities of a Peace. The Nations had been at
War without being angry; and the Quarrel had been thought on both sides, rather
of the Ministers than the Peoples. The Dutch believed it at first intended only
against De Witt's Faction, in favor of the Prince of Orange; and in England,
some laid it to the Corruption of Ministers, by the Money of France; and some,
that pretended to think deeper, laid it to deeper Designs. The Lord Clifford's
violence in beginning it, gave it an ill air in general; and the disuse of
Parliaments, a cruel maim in the chief sinews of War.

The Subsidies from France bore no proportion to the charge of our Fleets; and
our Strength at Sea seemed rather lessened than increased by the conjunction of
theirs: Our Seamen fought without heart, and were0 more afraid of their Friends
than their Enemies; and our Discontents were so great at Land, that the
Assembling of our Militia to defend our Coasts, was thought as dangerous as an
Invasion. But that which most pressed His Majesty to the thoughts of a Peace,
was the resolution of Spain to declare the War with England, as they had done
already with France, in favor of Holland, unless the Peace were suddenly made;
which would have been such a blow to our Trade, as could not easily have been
fenced; and lost us that of the Mediterranean, as the Dutch War had done that
of the Northern Seas: So as the necessity of this conjuncture was only kept off
by the Honor of our Alliance with France. However that Crown being not able to
furnish Supplies enough to carry on the War without a Parliament, could not
oppose the calling one upon this occasion. When the Parliament met, though they
seemed willing to give the King Money, yet it was to make the Peace with
Holland, and not to carry on the War: And upon His Majesty's demanding their
Advice, they gave it unanimously, That the Peace should be made.

There were too many Parties engaged in this Quarrel to think of a General
Peace, though a Treaty to that purpose had been set on foot an Cologn, under the
Mediation of the Swedes, between the Ministers of the Emperor, Spain, Holland,
and some Princes of the Empire on the one part, and His Majesty and France on
the other; but without any the least appearance of success. For though all the
Confederates had a mind to the Peace between England and Holland, yet none of
them desired it with France: This made both the Dutch and the Spaniards set on
foot all the engines they could, to engage His Majesty in some Treaty of a
separate Peace; to which the necessity of His Affairs, the humor of his
People, and the instances of his Parliament at last determined him toward the
end of the year 1673.

Upon the first Meeting of the Parliament, the Duke of Buckingham, to
ingratiate himself with the House of Commons (whose ill humor began to appear
against those they esteemed the chief Authors of the War) had desired leave of
that House, that he might be heard there in his own defense upon that subject.
In his Speech, among many endeavors to throw the odium of the War from himself
upon the Lord Arlington, he desired that Lord might be asked who was the Author
of the Triple-Alliance? As if he understood himself to be so. The Lord
Arlington coming afterward, upon the like desire, into the same House of
Commons, and answering some parts of the Duke's Speech, when he came to that
Particular, He told them, he could easily answer that Question of the Duke's,
by telling them, That the Author of that Alliance was Sir William Temple. This,
I suppose gave the occasion for Reflections upon what had passed in the course
of my former Ambassies in Holland, and at Aix; and His Majesty, and his
Ministers, the resolution to send for me out of my private retreat, where I had
passed two years (as I intended to do the rest of my Life) and to engage me in
going over into Holland to make the separate Peace with that State.

Upon the 2d of February 1671/4. His Majesty received the certain Advice, of
the States having passed a resolution, That the Charges and Dignities possessed
by the Prince of Orange and his Ancestors, should become Hereditary to his
Children. And at the same time he also received a Letter from the States, with
the desire of Pasports, for the Ambassadors whom they were resolved to send to
His Majesty with Instructions and Powers to treat and conclude a Peace, and in
the mean time they offered a suspension of Arms. This offer coming upon the
neck of the Parliaments advice to His Majesty to enter into Treaty with the
Spanish Ambassador upon the Propositions he had advanced, and which the King
had ordered to be sent to the Parliament. It was not believed by the Ministers,
that a Treaty could be refused without drawing too much odium upon themselves,
and reflection upon the Government. On the other side, it was suspected what
Practices might be set on foot by Dutch Ambassadors, upon the general
discontent reigning against the present War. Therefore that very afternoon a
resolution was taken at the private Juncto, to send, rather than to receive an
Ambassy upon this subject; and that I should be the Person employed. Two
Gentlemen were sent to my House within half an hour of one another, from the
Earl of Danby then Lord Treasurer, and the Earl of Arlington, first Secretary
of State, to order my attendance upon His Majesty. My Lord Arlington told me,
he would not pretend the merit of having named me upon this occasion, nor could
he well tell, whether the King or Lord Treasurer did it first; but that the
whole Committee had joined in it, and concluded, That since the Peace was to be
made, there was no other Person to be thought of for it: And accordingly the
King gave me his Commands, with many expressions of kindness and confidence, to
prepare for my Journey, and the Secretary to draw up my Instructions. I told
the King I would obey him, and with a great deal of pleasure to see His Majesty
returning to the Measures upon which I had formerly served him; but that I
might do it the better, I begged of him that I might go over without the
Character of Ambassador, which would delay, or embarras me with preparations of
Equipage, and with Ceremonies there, that were uncessary to so sudden a
dispatch. His Majesty thought what I said very pertinent, and so ordered, that
I should go only as Plenipotentiary; but that I should have in all kinds the
appointment of Ambassador, and that I should take upon me the Character too
when the Peace was concluded.

Within three days I was ready; and the morning my Dispatches were so too; the
Marquess of Frezno, Spanish Ambassador, sent my Lord Arlington word (while I
was with him) that he had received full power from the States to Treat and
Conclude a Peace, and was ready to enter upon it whenever His Majesty pleased.
My Lord Arlington surpised, was at first of opinion the King should go on his
own way, and I my Journey, and give the Spaniards no part in the Affair: I was
of another mind, and that besides the point and Honor, which was clear, in
having the Peace made rather at London than the Hague, I thought That of
Interest might be the better pursued, when we were sought to by the States,
than when we sought to them: Besides, I believed the Spaniard would play as
fair in a Game that he thought so much his own, and not suffer the Dutch to
stop at any small Points, especially those of Honor, whereas that of the Flag
(though such) was one His Majesty ought to lay most to heart. My Lord Arlington,
after some debate agreed with me, and desired me to go immediately and acquaint
the King with this new and unexpected incident, who was then at the House of
Lords. The King seemed pleased with the change; and told me, That since I did
not Treat it at the Hague, I should however at London; and bid me go and
acquaint the Marquess of Frezno with his resolution, That if he and I could
agree upon the terms, the thing should soon be done.

The terms to be insisted on, were soon agreed by His Majesty at the Foreign
Committee, which was composed of the Lord Chancellor Finch, the Lord Treasurer,
the Lord Arlington, and Mr. Henry Coventry, Secretaries of State, with whom His
Majesty ordered my attendance upon this Affair. When I was instructed of His
Majesty's pleasure, I went to the Marquess of Frezno, and at three Meetings I
concluded the whole Treaty with satisfaction to His Majesty, and transport to
the Marquess, upon so great an Honor as he thought it to himself, and the
Fortunes he expected upon it from his Master. The Articles being public, need
no place here. The two Points of greatest difficulty were, that of the Flag,
and the re-calling all English Troops out of the French Service. This last was
composed by private Engagements to suffer those that were there to wear out
without any Recruits, and to permit no new ones to go over; but at the same
time to give leave for such Levies as the States should think fit to make in
His Majesty's Dominions, both of English and Scotch Regiments, The other of the
Flag was carried to all the height His Majesty could wish, and thereby a Claim
of the Crown to the acknowledgment of its Dominion in the Narrow-Seas, allowed
by Treaty from the most Powerful of our Neighbors at Sea, which had never yet
been yielded to by the Weakest of them, that I remember, in the whole course of
our pretense, and had served hitherto but for an occasion of quarrel, whenever
We or They had a mind to it, upon other Reasons or Conjectures. Nothing, I
confess, had ever given me a greater pleasure in the greatest Public Affairs I
had run through, than this Success, as having been a Point I ever had at heart,
and in my endeavors, to gain upon my first Negotiations in Holland, but found
Monsieur De Wit ever inflexible, though he agreed with me, that it would be a
Rock upon which our firmest Alliances would be in danger to strike, and to
split whenever other Circumstances fell in to make either of the Parties
content to alter the Measures we had entered into upon the Triple Alliance. The
Sum of Money given His Majesty by the States, though it was not considerable in
it self, and less to the King, by the greatest part of it being applied to the
Prince of Orange's satisfaction for his Mothers Portion, that had never been
paid; yet it gave the King the whole Honor of the Peace, as the Sum given by
the Parliament upon it, and the general satisfaction of his People made the
ease of it. And thus happily ended our part of a War so fatal to the rest of
Christendom in the Consequences of it, which no Man perhaps now alive will see
the end of, and had been begun and carried on as far as it would go, under the
Ministry of five Men, who were usually called, The Cabal; a Word unluckily
falling out of the five first Letters of their Names, that is, Clifford,
Arlington, Buckingham, Ashley, and Lauderdale. But though the Counsels and
Conduct of these Men had begun the War with two unusual strains to the Honor
of the Crown, in the attaque of the Smyrna-Fleet, and stopping up the Bank; yet
it must be allowed them to have succeeded well in the Honors they proposed to
themselves: Clifford having gained by it the place of High Treasurer, and Title
of a Baron; Ashley the Chancellor's place, and an Earldom; Arlington an
Earldom, with the Garter; and Lauderdale a Dukedom, with the Garter. The Duke
of Buckingham being already possessed of all the Honors the Crown could give of
that kind, contented himself to make no better a bargain in this matter, than
he used to do in all others that concerned him, and so pretended no further
than Commands in the Army. And thus, instead of making so great a King as they
pretended by this Dutch War and French Alliance, they had the Honor of making
only four great Subjects.

After the Peace was made, His Majesty's first care was to soften the stroke as
much as he could toward France; which was done by representing the necessities
of it (that needed no false colors) and at the same time to offer his
Mediation between the Parties remaining still in the War, in case France either
desired or accepted of it; which took up some time to determine. In the mean
while I continued in the Posture and Thoughts of the Private Man I was in
before this Revolution, till about a week after the whole conclusion of it,
when my Lord Arlington told me how kindly the King took of me both the
readiness I had expressed in going over into Holland, and the easiness I showed
upon the failing of that Commission, as well as the pains and success in the
Treaty with the Spanish Ambassador; and not knowing any thing better he had to
give me, he was resolved to send me Ambassador Extraordinary into Spain; and to
that purpose immediately to recall Sir William Godolphin, the Ordinary
Ambassador there, for many reasons that, he said, made it necessary in this
Conjuncture.

I acknowledged the Honor His Majesty intended me, but desired time to give my
Answer till I had consulted my Father upon it, who was then in Ireland, but in
the intention of coming suddenly over; however, in a month I undertook to
resolve. My Lord Arlington told me, He did not expect any demur upon such an
Offer, which he took to be of the best Employment the King had to give; and
therefore he had already acquainted the Spanish Ambassador with it, who
received it with great joy, and resolved immediately to give part of it to the
Court at Madrid, which he was sure was already done, and therefore he would
reckon upon it as a thing concluded, though for the good Grace of it to my
Father, he undertook the King would give me the time I asked to resolve. When I
writ to my Father upon this Subject, he was so violent against my charging my
self with this Ambassy, that I could not find any temper to satisfy him, and
upon it was forced to make my excuses to the King. When I did so, His Majesty
was pleased to assure me he did not at all take it ill of me; and that, on the
contrary, he intended me a better Employment; That he was at present engaged
for the Secretary's Place, upon my Lord Arlington's removal to Chamberlain; but
that he resolved the next removal should be to make room for me. This I told my
Lord Arlington; who presently said, That he believed I could not refuse the
Spanish Ambassay, but upon design of the Secretary's Place; and since I desired
it, and the King fell into it of himself, he would play the easiest Part in it
that he could. He was indeed agreed with Sir Joseph Williamson for 6000 l. and
the King had consented that he should enter upon it at his return from Cologn,
which was every day expected; but yet he made such a difference between the
Persons, that he would find some way to avoid it, in case I would lay down the
6000 l. I assured his Lordship, I had no such design, nor such a Sum of Money
to lay down while my Father enjoyed the Estate of the Family; That if I had, I
should be very unwilling to pursue it so far as to give his Lordship any strain
in a matter already promised and concluded, and therefore desired him to think
no further of it. But he was not of opinion I could stick at any thing but the
Money, and acquainted Mr. Montague and Mr. Sidney, who were Friends to us both,
with this transaction, and set them upon me to bring it to an issue before the
other came over: they both endeavored it with great instances, and Mr.
Montague was so kind as to offer to lend me the Money, but I was positive in
refusing it; yet at the same time I told my Lord Arlington, That, not to seem
humorous in declining the offers he had made me from the King or from himself,
I was content they should both know, That if his Majesty had occasion to send
an Ambassy into Holland upon the Peace, I would very willingly seave him there,
where I knew the Scene so well. So that matter slept for the present.

In the mean while France had thought fit to accept and approve the King's
offer of Mediation, That of Sweden being enden by the Assembly at Cologns
breaking up, in expostulations and quarrels upon the Emperor's seizing the
person of Prince William of Furstenburgh, a subject of the Empire, but an
instrument of France, as his Brother the Bishop of Strasburgh had been in all
the late designs and invasions of that Crown upon their Neighbors. The King
told me, That being resolved to offer his Mediation to all the Confederates, as
he had done already to France; and finding I had no mind to engage in either of
those employments which had of late been offered me, He was resolved to send me
Ambassador Extraordinary into Holland, to offer His Mediation there, as the
Scene of the Confederates Common Councils, and by their means to endeavor the
acceptance of it by the rest of the Princes concerned in the War. That I knew
the Place and Persons better than any Man, and could do him more Service both
in this, and continuing all good correspondency between Him and the States,
which He was resolved to preserve. That I should have the Character of
Ambassador Extraoadinary, and the same allowance I should have had in Spain.
Upon this offer, I made no demur, but immediately accepted it, and so my
Ambassy was declared in May 1674.

But to make way for my entering upon this great Scene, it will be necessaay to
deduce in short, the course of Affairs abroad from the first Period of the
present War, to this second of His Majesty's separate Peace with Holland, and
the several Dispositions among the Parties that were likely to facilitate or to
cross the design of the King's intended Mediation.

No Clap of Thunder in a fair frosty Day, could more astonish the World, than
our Declaration of War against Holland in 1672. first by matter of Fact, in
falling upon their Smyrna Fleet, and in consequence of that (however it failed)
by a formal Declaration, in which we gave Reasons for our Quarrel, while France
contented themselves to give no other for their part of it, than only the Glory
of that King. The Dutch could never be possessed with a belief that we were in
earnest, till the blow was given; but thought our unkindness and expostulations
of late, would end at last either in demands of Money, or the Prince of
Orange's Restitution to the Authority of his Ancestors. The Princes concerned
in their Safety, could not believe, that after having saved Flanders out of the
hands of France, we would suffer Holland to fall into the same Danger; and my
Lord Arlington told me at that time, that the Court of France did not believe
it themselves, till the Blow was struck in the Attack of the Smyrna Fleet. But
then they immediately set out their Declaration, and began their Invasion. This
surprise made way for their prodigious successes. The Dutch had made no
provision for their Defense, either at Home or Abroad; and the Empire, Spain
and Sweden, stood at a gaze, upon the opening of the War, not knowing upon what
Concerts between us and France, it was begun, nor how far we would suffer it to
go on upon the French Conquests. Besides, the Animosities of the Parties in
Holland, long expressed under their new Constitution, and de Witt's Ministry,
began to flame again upon this misfortune of their State. The Prince's Friends
talked loud and boldly, that there was no way to satisfy England, but restoring
the Prince; and that the Baseness and Cowardice of their Troops, were the
effects of turning out all Officers of Worth and Bravery for their inclinations
to the Prince, and mean Fellows brought in, for no other desert, than their
Enmity declared to the House of Orange. Upon this, all Men expected a sudden
Change; the States were in disorder, and irresolute what to do; the Troops were
without a General, and, which is worse, without heart; and tho De Ruyter by
admirable Conduct kept the Infection of these Evils out of his Fleet, which was
our part to deal with; yet Faction, Distrust, Sedition, and Distraction, made
such entrances upon the State and the Army, when the French Troops first
invaded them, that of all the Towns and Fortresses on the German-side (held
impregnable in all their former Wars), not one besides Mastricht made any show
of Resistance, and the French became immediately Masters of all the Inland
Parts of the Provinces, in as little time as Travelers usually employ to see
and consider them. Mastricht was taken, after a short Siege, as Skinsconce, by
the help of an extreme dry Season, that made Rivers fordable where they had
never been esteemed so before. The King of France marched as far as Vtrecht,
where he fixed his Camp and his Court, and from thence began to consider of the
ways how to possess himself of the rest. which was defended only by their
Situation upon some flat Lands; that, as they had by infinite labor in Canals
and Digues, been either gained or preserved from Inundations, so they were
subject to them upon opening the Sluices, whenever the Dutch found no other way
of saving their Country, but by losing it. This, at least, was generally
believed in the French Camp and Court; and, as I have heard, was the
Preservation of the State: For that King unwilling to venture the Honor and
Advantage of such Conquests as he had made that Summer, upon the Hazards of a
new sort of War with a merciless Element, where neither Conduct nor Courage was
of use, resolved to leave the rest to practices of Peace with the States, upon
the advantage of the terms he stood in, and the small distance of place between
them; or, if these should not succeed, then he trusted to the Frosts of the
following Winter, which seldom fail in that Country, to make all passable and
safe for Troops and Carriages themselves, that in Summer would be impassable,
either from the Waters, or the depth of Soil.

In the mean time the State and the Government of Holland took a new Form, and
with it a new Heart. Monsieur De Wit and his Brother had been Massacreed by
the sudden fury of the People at the Hague, and by the Fate of Ministers that
Govern by a Party or Faction* who are usually Sacrificed to the first great
Misfortunes abroad that fall in to aggravate or inflame the general Discontents
at home. The Fact and the manner having been very unusual, may be the Subject
of others enquiry, as it was of Mine, which gave me this account. The Ruart of
Putten, Eldest Brother to Monsieur De Wit, had been accused of a design upon
the Prince's Life, and of endeavoring by Money to engage one of his Highness's
Domestiques in that Attempt. But no other Witness appearing, he was sentenced
only to be Banished, at which the People showed great dissatisfaction, being
possessed with an Opinion of his Guilt. The Morning he was to come out of Prison,
Monsieur De Wit (against the Opinion of his Friends) would needs go himself to
bring him out with more Honor, and carry him out of Town, and to that purpose
went with his Coach and four Horses to the Court. This being not usual to this
Minister, made the People take more notice of it, and gather together
Tumultuously first in the streets where he passed, and then about the Court
where the Prisoner was kept. Some of the Trained Bands of the Hague that were
upon the Guard, mingled among them, and began to rail aloud against the
Judgment of the Court, the Crime of one Brother, and the Insolence of the
Other, who pretended (as they said) to carry him away in Triumph. In the midst
of this Heat and Passion raised by these kind of Discourses among the Populace,
the two Brothers came out, some of the Trained Bands stopped them, began to
treat them at first with ill Language, and from Words fell to Blows; upon
which, Monsieur De Wit foreseeing how the Trajedy would end, took his Brother
by the hand, and was at the same time knocked down with the butt end of a
Musket. They were both presently laid dead upon the place, then dragged about
the Town by the Fury of the People, and Torn in pieces. Thus ended one of the
greatest Life's of any Subject in our Age, and about the 47 th year of his own,
after having Served, or rather Administered that State as Pensioner of Holland
for about eighteen years, with great Honor to his Country and himself. After
the Death of these Brothers, the Provinces and Towns run with Unanimous Voices
into Public Demands of the Prince's being restored to the Authority of his
Ancestors. The States had in the beginning of the Year declared him Captain
General and Admiral of their Forces, which was no more than De Wit had always
professed was designed for Him, when he should be of Age; but this was found
neither to have satisfied England, nor the Prince's Party at home, and
therefore all the Members of the State agreed in those Acts that were thought
necessary to a full Restitution of His Highness, now at the Age of Twenty one
Years, to the Office and Power of Stadtholder, with all advantages, and even
some more than those which had been exercised by his Ancestors. At the same
time Monsieur Fagel was introduced into Monsieur De Witt's Place of Pentsioner
of Holland; whose Love to his Country made him a Lover of the Prince, as
believing it could not be Saved by any other Hand; and whose Zeal to his own
Religion, made him an Enemy irreconcilable to France, whose Professions as well
as Designs were to destroy it.

This Revolution, as it calmed all at Home, so it made the first Appearance of
defending what was left of the Country. The State grew United, the Army in
Heart, and Foreign Princes began to take Confidence in the Honor and Constancy
of the Young Prince, which they had in a manner wholly lost upon the Divisions
and Misfortunes of the State. The French themselves turned all their
Application and Practices the same way, and made the Prince all the offers that
could be of Honor and Advantages to his Person and Family, Provided he would
be contented to depend upon them. The Bait they thought could not fail of being
swallowed, and about which most Artifice was employed, was the Proposal of
making the Prince Sovereign of the Provinces under the Protection of England
and France. And to say truth, at a time when so little of the Provinces was
left, and what remained was under Water, and in so eminent danger upon the
first Frosts of the Winter; this seemed a lure to which a meaner Soul than that
of this Prince might very well stoop. But his was above it, and his Answers
always firm, That he never would betray a Trust that was given him, nor ever
fell the Liberties of his Country, that his Ancestors had so long defended.
Yet the Game he played, was then thought so desperate, that one of his nearest
Servants told me, he had long expostulated it with his Master, and asked him at
last, how he pretended to live, after Holland was lost? and whether he had
thought so far? The Prince told him he had, and that he was resolved to live
upon the Lands he had left in Germany; and that he he had rather pass his life
in Hunting there, than sell his Country or his Liberty to France at any Price.
I will say nothing of the Ambassy sent at this time by his Majesty to the
French King at Vtretcht, where the Three Ambassadors, Duke of Buckingham, Lord
Arlington, and Lord Halifax found him in his highest Exaltation; for I cannot
pretend to know what the true ends or subject of it was. The common belief in
England and Holland made it to be our jealousy of the French Conquests going
too fast, whilst ours were so lame; and great hopes were raised in Holland,
that it was to stop their Course or Extent; but these were soon dashed by the
return of the Ambassadors after having renewed and fastened the measures
formerly taken between the two Crowns. And the Ambassadors were indeed content
as they past through Holland, that the first should be thought; which gave
occasion for a very good Repartee of the Princess Dowager to the Duke of
Buckingham, who visited her as they passed through the Hague, and talking much
of their being good Hollanders, she told him, That was more than they asked,
which was only, That they should be good Englishmen; he assured her, they were
not only so, but good Dutchmen too; that indeed* they dit not use Holland like
a Mistresz, but they loved her like a Wife; to which she replied, Vrayement je
croy que vous nous aymez comme vous aymez la votre. In troth, I think you love
us as you do yours.


When France lost all hopes of shaking the Prince of Orange's Constancy, they
bent all their thoughts upon subduing and ruining the remainder of the
Country. They had avanc'd as far as Woorden, and from thence they made their
ravages within two or three Leagues of Leyden, with more violences and
cruelties than would have been prudent, if they had hoped to reclaim the Prince
or States from the obstinacy of their defense. The Prince encamped his Army
near Bodegrave, between Leyden and Woorden, and there made such a stand with a
handful of Men, as the French could never force. The Winter proved not
favorable to their hopes and designs, and some promises of Frosts inveigled
them into marches that proved almost fatal to them by a sudden thaw. This
frighted them into Cautions, perhaps more than were necessary, and gave the
Prince and States leisure to take their measures for a following Campaign, with
the Emperor, Spain, and the Duke of Brandenburgh and Lunenburgh, which proved a
diversion to the Arms of France, and turned part of them upon Germany and
Flanders, so as to give over the progress any further in Holland. Upon the
approach of the Winter, the Prince, after having taken Narden, three leagues
from Amsterdam, in spite of all resistance and opposition from either the
French, or the Season, resolved like another young Scipio, to save his Country
by abandoning it, and to avoid so many Sieges, as all the Towns they had lost
would cost to recover; He contented himself to leave the chief Post guarded
with a part of the Army, and with the rest marched into Germany, joined part of
the Confederate Troops, besig'd Bonne, which had been put into the hands of
France at the beginning of the War, wherein the Elector of Cologn, and the
Bishop of Munster had entered jointly with France. The boldness of this Action
amazed all men, but the success extolled the prudence as well as the bravery of
it; for the Prince took Bonne, and by it opened a passage for the German Forces
over the Rhine, and so into Flanders, and gave such a damp to the Designs and
Enterprises of France, that they immediately abandoned all their Conquests upon
Holland in less time than they made them, retaining only Mastricht and the
Grave, of all they had possessed belonging to this State.

In this posture stood affairs abroad when the Peace of England was made in
February 1673/4, upon the strength and heart whereof the Prince of Orange
concerted with the German and Spanish Troops to begin an offensive War, and in
the head of an Army of above Forty Thousand Men, to march into France.

The French began now to wish the War well ended, and were very glad to accept
his Majesty's Mediation. The King was desirous to make France some amends for
abandoning the Party, and making a separate Peace. Some of his Ministers
foresaw he would be Arbiter of the Peace by being Mediator, and that He might
hinder any separate Treaties, by mediating a general one, and might restore
Peace to Christendom whenever he thought fit, and upon what Conditions he
thought safe and just.

The only difficulties that appeared in this Affair, were what the Confederates
were like to make in accepting the King's Mediation, whose late engagements
with France had made him thought very partial on that side. And the House of
Austria finding that Crown now abandoned by England, had too greedily swallowed
the hopes of a revenge upon them, to desire any sudden Treaty, till the
Successes they expected in the War might at least make way for reducing France
to the Terms of that at the Pyrenees. This, I suppose, gave some occasion for
my being again designed for this Ambassy, who was thought to have some credit
with Spain as well as Holland from the Negotiations I had formerly run through
at the Hague, Brussels and Aix la Chapelle, by which the remaining parts of
Flanders had been saved out of the hands of France in the Year 1668.

But having often reflected upon the unhappy Issue of my last Public
Employments, and the fatal turn of Councels in our Court that had occasioned
it, against so many wiser men's Opinions, as well as my own; I resolved before I
went this Journey, to know the ground upon which I stood, as well as I could,
and to found it, by finding out what I was able of the King's true Sentiments
and Dispositions, as to the measures he had now taken, or rather renewed, and
trust no more to those of his Ministers, who had deceived either Me or
Themselves. Therefore at a long Audience in his Closet, I took occasion to
reflect upon the late Councels and Ministry of the late Cabal, how ill His
Majesty had been advised to break Measures and Treaties so solemnly taken and
agreed; how ill he had been served, and how ill succeeded by the violent humor
of the Nation's breaking out against such Proceedings, and by the Jealousies
they had raised against the Crown. The King said, 'Twas true, he had succeeded
ill; but if he had been well served, he might have made a good business enough
of it; and so went on a good deal to justify what was past. I was sorry to
find such a presage of what might again return from such a course of thought in
the King, and so went to the bottom of that matter. I showed how difficult, if
not impossible, it was to set up here the same Religion or Government that was
in France; That the universal bent of the Nation was against Both; That many
who were, perhaps, indifferent enough in the matter of Religion, considered it
could not be changed here but by force of an Army; and that the same force
which made the King Master of their Religion, made him Master of their
Liberties and Fortunes too. That in France there was none to be considered but
the Nobles and the Clergy, That if a King could engage them in his designs, he
had no more to do; for the Peasants having no Land, were as insignificant in
the Government, as the Women and Children are here. That on the contrary, the
great bulk of Land in England lies in the hands of the Yeomanry or lower
Gentry, and their hearts are high by ease and plenty, as those of the French
Peasantry are wholly dispirited by labor and want. That the Kings of France
are very great in possessions of Lands, and in dependances by such vast numbers
of Offices both Military and Civil, as well as Ecclesiastical; whereas those of
England having few Offices to bestow, having parted with their Lands, their
Court of Wards and Knights Service, have no means to raise or keep Armies on
foot, but by supplies from their Parliaments, nor Revenues to maintain any
foreign War by other ways. That if they had an Army on Foot, yet if composed of
English, they would never serve ends that the People hated and feared. That the
Roman Catholics in England were not the hundredth part of the Nation; and in
Scotland, not the two hundredth; and it seemed against all common sense, to
think by one part to govern Ninety nine that were of contrary minds and
humors. That for foreign Troops, if they were few, they would signify nothing
but to raise hatred and discontent; and how to raise to bring over at once, and
to maintain many, was very hard to imagine. That the Force seeming necessary to
subdue the Liberties and Spirits of this Nation, could not be esteemed less
than an Army of Threescore thousand men, since the Romans were forced to keep
Twelve Legions to that purpose, the Norman to institute Sixty two thousand
Knights Fees, and Cromwell left an Army of near Eighty thousand men. That I
never knew but one Foreigner that understood England well, which was Gourville,
(whom I knew the King esteemed the soundest Head of any Frenchman he had ever
seen); That when I was at Brussels in the first Dutch War, and he heard the
Parliament grew weary of it, he said, The King had nothing to do but to make
the Peace, That he had been long enough in England, seen enough of our Court,
and People, and Parliaments, to conclude, Qu'un Roy d' Angleterre qui veut
estree l'homme de son peuple, That a King of England who will be the MAN of
People, is the greatest King in the world; but if he will be something more --
he is nothing at all.
est le plus grand Roy du monde; mais s'il veut estre quelque chose
d'advantage, par Dieu il n'est plus rien.

The King heard me all very attentively, but seemed a little impatient at
first: Yet, at last, he said, I had reason in all, and so had Gourville; and
laying his hand upon mine, And I will be the MAN of my people.
he added, Et je veux estre l'homme de mon peuple.

My Ambassy extraordinary to Holland was declared in May, and my Dispatches
finished at the Treasury as well as the Secretary's Office; so as I went away
in July. My instructions were in general, To assure the States of His Majesty's
Friendship, and firm Resolution to observe his Treaties with them; then to
offer his Mediation in the present War, which both They, and almost all
Christendom, were engaged in; and after their acceptance of it, to endeavor it
likewise with all their Allies; and, to that end, to engage the Offices and
Intervention of the States. But immediately after my arrival at the Hague, to
repair to the Prince of Orange, give him part of His Majesty's Intentions in
all this Affair, and assurance of his kindness, and engage His Highness, as far
as could be, to second His Majesty's desires, in promoting a General Peace,
wherein the United Provinces seemed to have the greatest Interest.

After my arrival at the Hague in July 1674. and a delive^y of my Credentials
to the President of the Week, and a Visit to the Pensioner, wherein I
discovered a strong inclination in the States to a Peace, as far as their
Honor and Engag^ments to their Allies would allow- them, and was assured of
the States accepting His Majesty's Mediation; I went away to Antwerp, in hopes
to have found the Prince at his Camp there, between Antwerp and Lovain, where
he had lain some time attending the Advance of the Confederate Troops, with
whom he had concerted to join his Army upon their arrival in Flanders. But two
days before I came to Antwerp, the Army was marched beyond Lovain, so as I was
forced to go to Brussels, and there desire a Guard to convey me to the Camp.
The Punctilio's of my Character would not suffer me to see the Count Montery,
tho I had for some Years lived at Brussels in particular Friendship and
Conversation with him. Few Strangers had perhaps ever been better used than I,
during three years Residence at Brussels, by all Persons of Quality, and indeed
of all Ranks there; so that it was very surprising to me, to meet such a dry
and cold Treatment from the Governor, and such an Affectation of the Persons of
Quality, not so much as to visit me; for I do not remember one that did it,
besides Count d' Egmont, who was then not very well at Court, either in Spain
or Flanders. Others true I met in the Streets, or the Park, though they came
with open arms to embrace me, yet never came at me, but contented themselves
with saying, They intended it. When I sent my Secretary to the Count Montery,
with my Compliments, and Desires of a Guard to the Prince of Orange, who was
then not above six Leagues off; he returned the first very coldly; and the
other with Excuses that amounted to a Refusal; he said, The Way was so
dangerous, by straggling Parties of the Army, that he could not advise me to
venture with a small Guard; and he had drawn out so many of the Spanish Troops
into the Field, that he could not give me a great one. I sent again, to desire
what he could spare me, let the number be what it would; for though I would not
expose the King's Character nor his Business, by any Accident I might prevent;
yet when I had endeavored it by my Application to his Excellence, I would take
my fortune, tho he sent me but six of his Guards. He replied, That he could not
possibly spare any of them; but that next morning he expected a Troop of Horse
to come into Town, and that as soon as it arrived, the Captain should have
order to attend me. Next morning was put off till night, and night to the
morning following; when the Count finding I was resolved to go, though without
Convoy, rather than to expect longer, sent me a Spanish Captain with about
Forty Horse, to convey me to Lovain. The truth was, that the Spaniards were
grown so jealous of His Majesty's Mediation offered at the Hague, of the States
and Peoples violent humor to a Peace in Holland, and of the Offices they
thought I might use, to slacken the Prince of Orange in the vigorous
Prosecution of their present Hopes and Designs, that I found it was resolved to
delay first, and then to hinder absolutely any interview between the Prince and
me, till the Campagn was ended, but to do it with as little ill grace as they
could. To this purpose Du Moulin (then one of the Prince's Secretaries, and
inveterate Enemy against the Court in England) was dispatched between the Camp
and Brussels, whilst I lay there, and with Guards, whereof half would have
served my turn, or at least contented me.

When I came to Lovain, I found the Prince was marched toward Tirlemont, but
could not learn where his next halt was designed. The Spanish Captain told me,
he had order to go no further than Lovain. So that I neither knew whither to
go, nor could go any way without a Guard, as they assured me at Lovain.
Whereupon I sent immediately Mr. Bulstrode, who had come with me from Brussels,
to endeavor to find out the Prince, and desire him to appoint what Time and
Place I should attend His Highness, which I resolved to do with those few
Servants I had brought with me, and such others as I could hire at Lovain,
where I lay that night.

The next morning Mr. Bulstrode returned with the Prince's Answer, That He was
upon His March; That He should be very glad to see me, but could not possibly
appoint either time or place for it, because His Motions were uncertain, and
would depend upon the Advices He received. By which I found plainly what I had
suspected at Brussels, That it was resolved, I should not see the Prince before
this Campagn was begun by the Actions then concerted among the Confederates. I
would not however seem to understand it so, nor any thing more in it, than what
His Highness was pleased to say; but I knew very well, that as they say, none
is more deaf than he that will not hear; so a man that will not be seen, may
easily find ways of avoiding it, especially upon such Circumstances as the
Prince and I were then in, who must have followed the motions he would have
given me. And therefore I resolved not to expose either His Majesty's Character
or Credit, with His Nephew, by making that Public which had passed between the
Prince and me upon this Subject; but pretending my Health would not suffer me
to follow the Prince upon His March, I returned to Antwerp, and gave His
Majesty an Account of all that had passed* who extremely approved my Conduct in
it; and that I pressed no further, a Point that I saw would not go; and that
was taken by the Prince as well as Count Montery, so differently from what His
Majesty expected.

I stayed only a Night at Antwerp, which passed with so great Thunders and
Lightning, that I promised my self a very fair Day after it, to go back to
Rotterdam in the States Yatch, that still attended me. The Morning proved so,
but toward Evening the Sky grew foul, and the Seamen presaged ill weather, and
so resolved to lie at Anchor before Bergen op soom, the Wind being cross and
little. When the night was fallen as black as ever I saw, it soon began to
clear up with the most violent flashes of Lightning, as well as cracks of
Thunder, that I believe have ever been heard in our Age and Climate. This
continued all night, and we felt such a fierce heat from every great flash of
Lightning, that the Captain apprehended it would fire his Ship. But about eight
the next Morning, the Wind changed, and came up with so strong a Gale, that we
came to Rotterdam in about Four hours, and there found all mouths full of the
Mischiefs and Accidents that the last night's Tempest had occasioned both among
the Boats and the Houses, by the Thunder, Lightning, Hail, or Whirlwinds. But
the day after, came Stories to the Hague from all parts, of such violent
effects, as were almost ineredible: At Amsterdam they were deplorable, many
Trees torn up by the roots, Ships sunk in the Harbor, and Boats in the
Channels; Houses beaten down, and several People were snatched from the Ground
as they walked the Streets, and thrown into the Canals. But all was silenced by
the Relations from Vtrecht, where the Great and Ancient Cathedral was torn in
Pieces by the Violences of this Storm; and the vast Pillars of Stone, that
supported it, were wreathed like a twisted Club, having been so strongly
composed and cemented, as rather to suffer such a change of figure, than break
in pieces as other parts of the Fabric did; hardly any Church of the Town
escaped the Violence of this Storm, and very few Houses without the marks of
it; nor were the eff^ct^ of it less astonishing by the Relations from France
and Brusels, where the Damages were Infinite, as well from Whirlwinds, Thunder,
Lightning, as from Hailstones of Prodigious Bigness.

At my return to the Hague, I had long conversations with the Pensioner, by
which I gained the lights necessary to discover the whole present Scene of
Affairs, and pulses of the several Confederates in what related to the General
Peace. I told him how much His Majesty was satisfied, with that He had lately
made with the States, how much He was resolved to continue and to cultivate it.
How much reason he had to be content with the Posture That had left him in at
Peace with all his Neighbors, while they were all at War. That Advantages of
Commerce from it, were enough to make him trouble himself no further about the
Peace of Christendom, if his Goodness and Piety did not prevail more with Him
than His Interests. But that these and the desire of a General Good, had
persuaded Him to offer his Mediation in the Present Quarrel. That it had been
already accepted by France; and that the Emperor and Spain had answered, they
would consider of it in concert with their Allies. That the States Ambassadors
at London, had assured His Majesty, Their Masters would be pleased with it, and
doubted not their consent that the Treaty should be at London; and that
thereupon His Majesty had charged me with a Letter to the States to offer them
His Mediation. That I could not doubt Their Accepting it with the best Grace
that could be, for I knew their Interest was to have a Peace, and not to
disoblige the King. That if His Majesty were Partial to any side, they ought to
believe it would be to that wherein His own Nephew was so deeply concerned; and
the more, because he offered His Offices toward a Peace, at a time when the
Advantages and Preparations for the War run so high on the French side, as He
doubted the events might show if it continued. That they knew His interest
would not suffer Him to see Flanders lost; and that considering what had
passed, His Honor would not now suffer him to think of preserving it any other
way than by that of a Peace. That he would be glad to see that Country left by
the next Peace, in a better Posture of Defense than it was by the last; and the
Spanish Territories lie closer and rounder than they were then left. That when
this should be concluded, His Majesty would be ready to enter into the
strongest Guaranties they could desire, and might with Honor enter into a War
to preserve it, though He could not to obtain it. The Pensioner first gave me
thanks for my good Offices in the late Peace, and in all the measures of
Friendship that had interceded between His Majesty and them since the first
breach; he Applauded the King's resolution in so pious and generous an offer,
and acknowledged his Interest might lead him to other dispositions. That he
doubted not the States willingness to accept it; all the difference would be
about the time and the manner of doing it. As to this, he said, they could not
do it without the communication at least of their Allies; but would immediately
give them part of His Majesty's offer, and the States dispositions to receive
it. That for the terms of a Peace, as to their own parts, they would be content
to make His Majesty the Arbiter of it; That they had already recovered all the
Towns they had lost, except Grave and Mastricht, the last of which was in some
manner engaged to Spain when it should be recovered; and for the other, they
doubted not to have a good account of it very soon, orders being already gone
to invest it. But he doubted whether their Allies would be so easy in their
expectations or demands; and that 't was impossible for the States to leave
them who have saved their Country from ruin, when two so great Kings had
invaded them; nor to break the Treaties which they had made Offensive with the
Emperor, Spain and Brandenburgh. That the term stipulated with Spain obliged
them to reduce France to the Treaty of the Pyrenees; but only a reserve was
made by one Article, which was, Unless it should otherwise be agreed by consent
between them. That whatever Spain would be content with, should satisfy them,
though they were both equally sensible of the Designs and Ambition of France,
as well as of their ill talent to the States. That they could never hope for
such another conjuncture, to reduce them to such bounds and measures as might
be safe to their Neighbors, and give quiet to Christendom. That it was now an
ill time to enter into the terms of a Peace between France and Spain, because
he knew they should have ill Grace to demand the restitution of any Towns the
Spanjards had lost in Flanders by the last War, and given up by the Peace that
succeeded it; and yet His Majesty knew as well as they, that without it, a
Peace could neither be safe for Flanders, nor for Holland; nor consequently for
England. But he believed there would not pass many days before some decisive
Action would happen between the Armies now not far distant in the Field, which
would make room for the Negotiation of Peace that might succeed next Winter, in
which His Majesty would find the Interests and Humors of a Trading Country,
as theirs was, very strong; and disposed to press their Allies, as far as was
possible, to facilitate so great and so good a work. And for the rest of the
Allies besides Spain, He had no reason to suspect any great difficulties would
arise, so little having yet passed in the War between France and them.

The Pensioner was right in expecting some sudden Action between the Armies;
for about the middle of August came the news of the Battle of Seneffe, between
the Confederates under the Command of the Prince of Orange, and the French
under the Prince of Conde: But it proved not an Action so decisive as was
expected between two Armies of so great Force, and so animated by the hatred
and revenge of the Parties, as well as by the Bravery and Ambition of the
Commanders. The success of this Fight was so differently reported by those
engaged in it, that it was hard to judge of the Victory, which each side
challenged, and perhaps neither with any great reason. The Confederates had for
some days sought a Battle with great desire and endeavor; and the French
avoided it, with resolution not to Fight, unless upon evident advantage, whilst
both Armies lay near Nivelle, and not far distant from one another. The Reason
of this was thought to be of one side, the ardour of the young Prince of
Orange, to make way by a Victory, into France it self, and there revenge the
Invasion of his Country, and at the same time to make his first essay of a
Pitched Battle, against so great and renowned a General as the Prince of Conde.
On the other side, this old Captain had too much Honor to lose, and thought he
had not enough to gain, by entering the lists with a Prince of three and twenty
years old, bred up in the shade of a contrary Faction, till he was forced into.
the Field by the French Invasion of his Country. Nor was the Advantage less on
the French side, in the Reputation of their Troops, than of their General,
composed of excellent Officers, chosen Soldiers, exactly disciplined, long
trained for action before they began it, and now fleshed by the uninterrupted
Successes of two Wars. But the Dutch Troops when the Prince of Orange entered
upon the Command, were old or lazy Soldiers, disused with long Peace, and
disabled with young unskilful Officers (chosen by no other merit, than that of
a Faction against the House of Orange) then filled up, when the War broke out,
with hasty and undistinguished Levies, and disheartn'd with perpetual Losses of
Towns, and defeats of Parties, during the two first Campagns. The Prince of
Conde had another restraint upon the usual boldness of his nature in such
occasions, which was the ill posture he had been in at Court since this King's
Reign, and in regard how much more he would have to answer for, than another
man, upon any great misfortune to his Army, which must have left the way open
for the Confederates to enter France, unguarded on that side by any strong
Frontier, so as no man knew what shake it might give to the greatness of that
Crown, with the help of great and general Discontents, whereof this Prince was
thought to have his share.

Upon these Dispositions in the Generals, the Battle was for some time
industriously sought and avoided. Till the Prince of Orange, believing there
was no way of coming to a Battle, but by the siege of some place that might be
thought worth the venture to relieve, broke up, marched away toward Seneffe;
his Army divided into three Parts, whereof the German Troops, under the Count
de Souches, had the Van; the Spanish, under Prince Vaudemont, the Rear; and the
Dutch, under the Count Waldeck, the main Battle; with whom the Prince marched,
and Commanded the whole Confederate Army.

The Prince of Conde observing their march, which was not far from one side of
his Retrenchments; and that by the straitness of some Passages they were forced
to file off in small Lines, stayed till the Vanguard, and main Body, was over
one of these Passes, and the Rear beginning to enter upon it, when he drew out
his Men, and fell with great fierceness upon the Rear of the Spaniards, broke
them with great Slaughter, and not much resistance, took their Baggage, several
Standards, and many Prisoners of note. The Prince of Orange, upon notice of the
French march toward the Spanish Troops, had sent three Squadrons back to their
assistance, with all the diligence that could be; but the Spanish already
broken, brought the Dutch into disorder by falling in among them; and the
French pursuing with great bravery, broke the Dutch Squadrons to pieces,
killing or taking all their Commanders, and several Standards.

If the Prince of Conde had contented himself with this Success and Execution,
he had left no dispute of a Victory; but lured on by the hopes of one more
entire, and belief, the Dutch, whom he esteemed the worst Troops, would not
stand, after the Spaniards and a great part of their own were wholly routed, he
followed the Chase, and drawing out his whole Army upon them, brought it to a
set Battle, which was more than he intended. In the mean time the Prince of
Orange marching to the relief of the Spaniards, and the Squadrons he had sent,
was at first envelop'd by his own flying men, whom he could neither stop by
Words nor Blows, by Promises nor Reproaches, till joining the rest of his own
Forces that stood firm, and the Imperialists coming up to enforce them, the
Battle began with as great fury as any has been fought in the whole course of
the Wars, continued so for about Eight hours till Sunset, and about two hours
after by Moonlight, till that failing too, the Fight ended rather by the
Obscurity of the Night, than the weariness or weakness of either side. The
Prince of Orange in the whole course of this Action, gave all Orders with such
Prudence, and Observance of all Advantages. Led up his several Squadrons with
that Bravery, made such bold stands against his own broken Troops, as well as
against the fierceness of their pursuers, for six hours together in the hottest
of the fight; sometimes Charging into the midst of the Enemies, sometimes
overborn by his own that fled, till he Rallied them, and led them back to the
Charge, exposed to more danger than most private Soldiers in the Field; so that
the old Count de Souches, in his Letter to the States upon this occasion, told
them, That in the whole Course of the Action, the Prince had showed the Conduct
of an Old experienced Commander, and the Valor of a Caesar. And indeed his
Allies, his Friends, and his Enemies, agreed in giving him equal Glory from
this adventure: But He had more from none than from the Prince of Conde's
Testimony, That He had done like an old Captain in all, but only in venturing
himself too much like a young Man. Yet this old General had done the same in
this days Action, as much as the youngest Cavalier in his Army could do, when
he found the Battle fought so desperately, and all at stake; whereas it is
certain, that nothing could have given vigor to the Dutch Troops, after the
first Rout, but the repeated Examples and Dangers of the Prince, and shame of
not following such a Leader in all the desperate Charges he made that day,
which both the Generals seemed resolved to dye rather than to lose.

As the Numbers were not much different when the Fight began, so were those
esteemed that fell in this Battle, and to reach about Six or Seven thousand on
either side; but of the French, many more Officers and Gentlemen than was usual
in proportion to the Common Soldiers. When the Night parted the Armies, the
French retired back to their former Quarters, and next morning the Confederates
marched to that which they designed when they broke up the day before. The
Allies claimed the Victory because they were last upon the Field; and the
French upon the greatest number of Prisoners and Standards they carried away;
but whoever had the Honor, they both felt the Loss.

After the repair necessary in each Camp upon this sharp Encounter, each Army
took the Field again, and gave a general Expectation of another Battle before
the Campania ended; The Prince of Orange sought it all he could; but the Prince
of Conde chose and fortified his Encampments so, as not to be forced to one
without apparent disadvantages, and contented himself to observe the motions of
the Allies, to preserve the Towns of the French Conquests in Flanders, and
prevent any Invasion of France, which was designed this Summer with great
Confidence by the Confederate Armies both on this side, and that in Alsace, but
with equal disappointment, unless it were to Monsieur Starenburgh, who in the
beginning of the Campaign, complaining of the Wine at the Prince's Table, the
Prince told them, He would make them drink good Wine in Champagne before the
Summer ended. He who loved it well, desired the Prince to be as good as his
word, was afterward taken at the Battle of Seneffe, carried to Rheims with
several Dutch Officers, where sitting down to Dinner, and finding the Wine
excellent, he drunk the Prince's Health, and said, He would trust him as long
as he lived, for he had kept his word, and made them drink good Wine in
Champagne.

The Prince of Orange finding no other way of Action, sat down before Oudenarde
in September, and had his end of drawing the Prince of Conde out of his
cautious Marches, who came immediately to relieve it, and Fight the Allies
before they were ready to give any Assault to the Town. Upon fight of the
French Army, the Prince of Orange called a Council of War, and proposed to draw
out and Attack them immediately before they were rested after their hard days
March. The Spaniards were content, but Count Souches would not agree to it, and
so this occasion was lost, and with such discontent amongst the Chief Officers,
that next day the Germans left their Trenches, and marched away about a League,
and left room to the French to put what Relief they pleased into the Town. Upon
this the Prince of Orange was forced to rise too, with the rest of his Army;
and upon Conferences with the Count Montery, as well as Souches, resolved to
leave the greatest part of the Dutch Forces with the Count, and with the rest,
to go himself, and press the Siege of Grave. And here began those Dissentions
among the Chief Captains of the Confederates, that continued to ruin their
designs, and proved so fatal to them in the whole course of the War; and
against all appearances, made good the Spanish Proverb, that, Birdlime never
catches great Birds.
Liga nunc a coje grandes paxaros; the same word signifying a League, and
Birdlime; and meaning, That as this never catches great Birds, so the the other
never makes great Conquests, tho it often does great Defenses: Yet these first
Divisions were endeavored to be cured by the Emperor's recalling Count
Souches, and Spain the Count of Montery, who were both thought to have maimed
the Actions of this Campania, or at least not to have secondee, as they might
have done, the Prince of Orange's Vigor in pursuing them to other sort of
Successes than it ended with. This Prince having failed of what he proposed in
favor of the Spaniards, was resolved to free his own Country from the last
Mark of their intended Servitude, before this Season ended. Grave was the last
Town the French held in any of the Seven Provinces, and had been kept as a
Magazine both of what had been taken in the other Places, and was not easily
carried away when they quitted them; so as there was above Three hundred Pieces
of Canon in the Town, a very full and brave Garrison. composed of the best
Troops, and all that could be added to the Fortifications of the Place, after
the French took it, tho it was before counted one of the best the Dutch had. It
had been invested a Month before; yet the Prince found the Siege but little
advanced at his Arrival; and the Dutch Soldiers so rebuted with the brave
Defense from within, that nothing could have carried the Place at this Season,
being about the middle of October, when the Prince arrived, but the same humor
of leading on his Men himself, whenever they shrunk, which can never be too
much praised, nor too much blamed in this Prince, because, as his Country and
Allies would have had no General if they had lost him; so they would have had
no Army if they had not ventured him. In short, by this and his usual
Application and Vigor, as well as the common methods of such Sieges, he took
Grave by the end of October, with equal Glory to himself, and satisfaction to
all the Provinces, and returned to the Hague about the middle of November,
after having disposed his Forces in their Winter Quarters.

With the Prince of Orange, returned most of the General Officers to the Hague;
and among the rest, old Prince Maurice of Nassau, who, as the Prince told me,
had with the greatest industry that could be, sought all occasions of dying
fairly at the Battle of Seneffe without succeeding, which had given him great
regrets; and I did not wonder at it, considering his Age, of about Seventy six,
and his long habits both of Gout and Stone. When he came to visit me upon his
return, and before he went to his Government of Clevo, it came in my head to
ask him an idle question, because I thought it not very likely for me to see
him again, and I had a mind to know from his own mouth, the account of a
common, but much credited Story, that I had heard so often from many others, of
an old Parrot he had in Brasil, during his Government there, that spoke, and
asked, and answered common questions like a reasonable creature; so that those
of his Train there, generally concluded it to be Witchery or Possession; and
one of his Chaplains, who lived long afterward in Holland, would never from
that time endure a Parrot, but said, They all had a Devil in them. I had heard
many particulars of this story, and assever'd by people hard to be discredited,
which made me ask Prince Maurice, What there was of it? He said, with his usual
plainness, and dryness in talk, There was something true, but a great deal
false, of what had been reported. I desired to know of him, What there was of
the first? He told me short and coldly, That he had heard of such an old Parrot
when he came to Brasil; and tho he believed nothing of it, and 'twas a good way
off, yet he had so much curiosity as to send for it; That 'twas a very Great,
and a very Old One; and when it came first into the Room where the Prince was,
with a great many Dutchmen about him, it said presently, What a Company of
White Men are here? They asked it, What he thought that Man was? pointing at
the Prince. It answered, Some General or other. When they brought it close to
him, he asked it, Whence come you? It answered, From Marinn^n. The Prince, to
whom do you belong? The Parrot, To a Portugez. Prince, What do you there? I
look after the Chickens. The Prince laughed, and said, You look after the
Chickens? The Parrot answered, Yes, I, and I know well enough how to do it.
D'ou venes, vous? It answered, De Marinnan. The Prince, A qui est es vous, The
Parrot, A un Portugez. Prince, Que fais tula? Parrot, Je guard les Poulles. The
Prince laughed, and said, Vous gardes les Poulles? The Parrot answered, Ouy,
moy and je scay bien fair, and made the Chuck four or five times that people
use to m^ke to Chickens when they call them. I set down the words of this
worthy Dialogue in French, just as Prince Maurice said them to me. I asked him,
In what Language the Parrot spoke? And he said, In Brasilian. I asked, Whether
he understood Brasilian? He said, No; but he had taken care to have two
Interpreters by him, one a Dutchman, that spoke Brasilian, and the other a
Brasilian that spoke Dutch; That he as'k them separately and privately, and
both of them agreed in telling him just the same thing that the Parrot said. I
could not but tell this odd story, because it is so much out of the way, and
from the first hand, and what may pass for a good one; for I dare say this
Prince, at least, believed himself in all he told me, having ever passed for a
very honest and pious Man. I leave it to Naturalists to reason, and to other
men to believe as they please upon it; however, it is not, perhaps, amiss to
relieve or enliven a busy Scene sometimes with such digressions, whether to
the purpose or no.

Before I enter upon the Negotiations of the following Winter, it will be
necessary to give a short view of the Actions of the several Armies, and
dispositions of the Parties in other places, as well as in the Low Countries,
since all contributed to the different humor that appeared at the Hague about
the Peace, which was indeed the present Scene of that Affair, as well from his
Majesty's Mediation, as the great Weight of the States in the Confederacy; but
chiefly from the Person of the Prince of Orange, who seemed to be the Spirit or
Genius of the whole Alliance, and for whom the rest, as well as the States
themselves, had so great Trust and Deference: For several of their Ministers
made no difficulty to tell me upon many occasions, That their Masters would not
have entered into the present Engagements they were in, had it not been more
upon the confidence they had of the Prince's Personal Honor and Justice, than
either the Forces or the usual Conduct of the States General, especially in
what concerned the Foreign Treaties and Negotiations.

In Rousillon little passed of importance between the Forces there: The
thoughts of both Crowns were bent on that side, more upon Reducing or Relieving
Messina, that had made an absolute Revolt from Spain, and endeavored to gain
Protection from France, which was not difficult in this Conjuncture; as that
which might not only give a great diversion to the Spanish Forces, but open a
Way for the French into the Conquest of Sicily, and new Designs upon Naples,
which had been the Stage of so many great Wars between the Houses of France and
Arragon.

In Germany the Prince Electors Palatine, Mentz and Triers, had entered into
League with the Emperor, for the Defense of the German Liberty against all
Strangers. France was so enraged against the Elector Palatine, upon these
Measures he had taken, that Monsieur Turenne, at the Head of a French Army,
marched into his Country, and made such cruel Ravages in it, and so unusual to
that Generals common procedures, that the Elector sent him a Challenge; which
Monsieur Turenne answered, He could not accept without his Master's leave, but
was ready to meet him in the Field at the Head of his Army, against any that He
and his New Allies would bring together.

This Prince, spighted at the helpless Ruin of his Country, proved the greatest
incentive among the German Princes this Summer to join their Forces, in order
to some vigorous Action against France on that side. The Duke of Lunenburgh
engaged first, and afterward the Elector of Brandenburgh, in the common Cause
of the Empire's being Invaded; Strasburgh was prevailed with to throw off the
Neutrality they had enjoyed since the War began, and declare for the Empire in
this Quarrel. The new Bishop of Munster entered into the same Measures, and all
together made a considerable Force, that they brought into the Field on the other
side the Rhine, about the end of August, or beginning of September. The Old
Duke of Lorrain joined them with his Troops; The Duke of Lunenburgh was there
in Person, and the Elector Palatine had the Command of the Army. They were
Divided as well as the Imperial Officers, whether they should enter upon any
considerable Action or no, till the Duke of Brandenburgh came up, who was upon
his March at the Head of a very considerable Army, that joined the Confederates
in October. This gave great hopes and designs of entering either Lorain or
Burgundy, or taking Brisac, or at least Sabern and Haguena; and thereby
securing their Winter Quarters in Alsace. Monsieur Turenne played a defensive
Game with a small Army; and ill handled by the Sickness of the season. France
was at such a pinch for men, or fear of an Irruption into their Country from
Flanders or Alsace, that they called their Ban and Arriere-Ban, the Assembling
whereof had been long disused, and in a manner antiquated. However, with some
of these new Troops, and a reinforcement from Flanders after the Battle of
Seneffe, Monsieur Turenne by plain force of Skill, and that Admirable Science
in the Conduct of a War, which no Captain of his Age could dispute with him,
prevented and disappointed every one of the Confederates designs, without ever
coming to a set Battle, though several sharp Fights of Part of the Forces upon
necessity or advantage; so that the Winter ended with the Allies quitting the
last point they pretended, and would have been indeed decisive in the issue of
this Campania, which was the German Army's Quartering in Alsace and other parts
on that side the Rhine.

The most considerable loss or event of this Campania upon the Rhine, was the
Death of the Young Prince of Brandenburgh, who died about the end of it at
Strasburgh, of a Fever so Violent and Precipitate, as gave occasion for the
usual suspicions and discourses that attend the Death of such Young Princes, as
give great Hopes and Fears to Their Enemies and Friends. This was the more
considered for a particular and intimate Friendship between him and the Prince
of Orange, who though Cousin Germans, and engaged in one common Cause, were yet
nearer joined by likeness of Humors than of Interest; and by the ties of
personal Kindness than of Blood; and I never knew the Prince of Orange more
sensible of any misfortune that happened to him, than of this.

In all the Encounters mentioned on this side, no forces were oftener seen, or
more felt, or gained more Honor of their firmness and bravery, than the
English Regiments still remaining in the French Service, to whom the Germans
attributed wholly Monsieur Turenne's Successes, as he did a great deal Himself;
but the Divisions among the Princes that made up the Confederate Armies, may
justly be said to have had all the Merit that was not Personal in Monsieur
Turenne, who was certainly allowed by all that compared them, to be the
greatest Captain by much of His Age, in the course of a War, or Conduct of a
Campania, though the Prince of Conde was thought greater in the Day of a
Battle, both as to the disposal and order of an Army, Vigorous Enterprise, and
Sharp as well as Pertinent Resolutions upon all sudden Emergencies, to which
the course and chance of a Battle is every way subject.

For Sweden and Denmark, they were not yet entered into the Lists, but seemed
now upon the point of taking Party; Sweden had acted the Part of a Mediator
ever since the breaking up of the Treaty at Colen, both by their Ambassador at
Vienna, and the Hague; who plied both those Courts with very long and frequent
Memorials to that purpose during this whole Summer; but they had been as hard
plied themselves all that time by the Practices and Advantages offered by
France, both to that Crown, and the chief Ministers, to engage them in the War.
Nothing seemed so likely to determine them, as the Treaty and Expedition of the
Duke of Brandenburgh on the Confederate Side, which laid open his Country to
the Invasion of Sweden, and gave them a pretense of a Breach, in that Prince,
of the Treaties between them, in making War against France without the consent
of the Swedes. Therefore as soon as he was gone toward the Rhine with all the
Strength of His Forces, the Swedes drew the best and greatest part of theirs
into Pomerania; and as the Duke of Brandenburgh advanced in the common Designs
against France; so Sweden, without Declaring War, pursued their Measures, with
That Crown; and before the end of the Year, had drawn Their Forces into the
Brandenburgh Country, though without attempt upon any Places, and even with
pretense at first of Paying for Their Quarters, which was reckoned upon as
short-lived among Soldiers in another Prince's Country, whether Friend or
Enemy. The present effect of this inroad, was the ending of another pretense of
that Crown, which was that of Mediation, and so devolving that Figure wholly
upon His Majesty; and on the other side giving hopes to the Confederates of
engaging Denmark on their Side, if for no other reason, yet upon that old one
among them, of being always opposite to Sweden and Their Interests or Allies.

As soon as the Prince came to the Hague, I attended Him; and after Compliments
past, I acquainted Him with what His Majesty had Commanded me of His Personal
Kindness and Esteem for His Highness, of His Resolutions to Observe and
Cultivate His Present Friendship with the States, and desire to see a General
Peace restored to Christendom, in which He intended to Act wholly in concert
with His Highness, whose Opinion as to the thing, and the conditions most
necessary for His Highness to insist on, He very much desired to understand as
soon and as fully as He could. The Prince answered me with expressions of Duty
and kindness to His Majesty, and desires of a near Conjunction between the Two
Nations, which he thought alone could make His Majesty safe at Home and Abroad.
For the Peace, He said, though He could make many complaints of both Spanjards
and Imperialists Conduct since Their Treaties; yet the States could not with
any Faith or Honor make any Separate Peace, upon any terms that France could
offer them. That a General Peace could not be made without leaving Flanders in
a Posture of Defending it self, upon any new or sudden Invasion, against which
no Guarantees could secure it. That Spain could not upon any exchange quit the
County of Burgundy or Cambray, nor any thing in Flanders beyond the Treaty of
the Pyrenees, unless it were Air and Saint Omer. This He said was His Opinion;
but if He might know the King's, and find it at all consistent with the Safety
of His Country, and His own Honor toward His Allies, He would do all he
could to bring it about, as He had already done the Point of His Majesty's
Mediation, which was accepted both at Madrid and Vienna. I told him that the
King having been the Author and Guarend of the Peace at Aix, and not having yet
seen the French beaten out of any Town that was given them by that Treaty,
could with ill Grace propose any thing to France beyond those Terms, unless it
were upon some equivalent. He replied resolutely, 'Twere better going on with
the War, let it last as long, and cost as much as it would. That His Majesty
might, if he pleased, induce France to whatever he thought just and could never
show him so much Kindness, as to bring him out of this War with Honor. If he
would not, it must go on till some change happened in the condition of the
Parties, to make the Peace more necessary of one side or other. How it would
fall out, he could not tell, and must leave to God; but he thought they had as
fair a game as the French. That he was sure they might have been absolutely
beaten at Seneffe, if the Count Souches had so pleased; and have had a fair
blow for it again at Oudenarde: That he was sure Germany could furnish more,
and better men than France; and they were now in a manner united in the common
defense; and he hoped the Emperor's Councils and Conduct would not be so
betrayed as they had been. That however, he must perform what his own Honor,
as well as that of the States was engaged in to their Allies, let it cost what
in would.

I imagined in what he said of the Emperor's Councels, he reflected upon the
business of Prince Lakevitz, whose disgrace made so great noise about this
time, and with particulars so extraordinary, of the French Practices in that
Court, that they were very hard to believe, and very uncertain to know at that
distance, and even at Vienna it self, and therefore I would not enter into them
with the Prince, nor shall I here, as being foreign to this present Scene.

There was one Point more I entered into with the Prince, which was upon
occasion of the many discontented Persons in England, at the course of the last
Ministry and War, who were suspected to have trinkled at least with Holland
about the raising Seditions, and perhaps Insurrections in England, if the War
continued, and the Dutch Fleets should appear upon our Coasts, that were like
to be unguarded the next Summer by the streights His Majesty was in, for Money
to set out a Fleet. It was believed among many others, my Lord Shaftsbury was
one that had of late played this game, who having been as deep as any man in
the Councils of the Cabal, and gone so far in the public applause of them, as
in a Speech in Parliament to have applied the Delenda Carthago to our Interest
in the destruction of Holland; yet when he saw the Parliament and Nation sullen
upon it, and that the King could not pursue it with so much ill humor in both,
he turned short upon the Court and the rest of the Cabal, fell in with the
popular Humor in the City as well as Parliament, decried the present Designs
and Conduct, tho with the loss of his Chancellor's Place, and was believed to
manage a Practice in Holland for some Insurrection here. I told the Prince what
the King suspected of some of His Subjects, without naming any; how much
service it would be to His Majesty to know them more certainly, and how kind it
would be in his Highness to discover them. The Prince was stanch, and said, He
was sure the King would not press him upon a thing so much against all Honor,
as to betray men that professed to be his Friends. I gave His Majesty an
Account of all that passed between the Prince and me, which was thought at
Court both cold to His Majesty, and stiff as to the Peace; and I had no Returns
or Orders upon it; but within a week, or ten days, I had notice that my Lord
Arlington, and my Lord Ossory, intended to make a turn into Holland, with
Monsieur Odyke and his two Sisters, to make a visit to their Friends at the
Hague; and about the beginning of December they arrived in the King's Yatchts,
but without any sort of Character, or show of Business.

My Lord Arlington brought me a Letter from the King, written all with His own
hand; and telling me, he had sent him to set some important Points right
between His Majesty and the Prince, which ought not to lie longer in doubt;
recommending to me all the Assistance I could give him there, and assuring me
of His Majesty's Confidence and Kindness. His Lordship brought the most ample
Credential likewise, that could be, from His Majesty to the Prince, who still
gave me part of all that passed between them, with as much openness and
freedom, as the other did with coldness and reserve; and thereby lent me many
lights that I could not otherwise have had, to discover the Mystery of this
Journey and Affair, which was in great part, a Secret to my Lord Treasurer
himself, whom yet His Majesty was thought to trust at that time, as much as He
had ever done any of His Ministers.

My Lord Arlington, who had been at the head of those Measures that the King
entered into, during the Ministry of the Cabal, and the War with Holland, in
conjunction with France, found himself something discredited with his Master,
upon the ill issue of that Affair, and the necessities which forced Him to a
separate Peace, both from the Wants of His Treasury, and Discontents of His
Parliament and People in general. By the degrees this Lord's Favor declined,
the Earl of Danby's increased, who succeeded my Lord Clifford in the Treasury,
which had ever been my Arlington's Ambition. This gave him an implacable Envy
and Hatred against my Lord Danby, and which no Offices of Friends could ever
allay. He was not well in the Nation for having had such a part in breaking the
course of the Triple Alliance, and making that with France for the Ruin of
Holland, and as was commonly thought for some ends more displeasing at home.
Yet when the ill humor of the Parliament had broken the Designs of the Cabal,
and made my Lord Schaftsbury shift his Sails, and fall into the popular stream,
My Lord Arlington had gone so far upon the same scene, as to join with the Duke
of Ormond and Secretary Coventry, to persuade the King to remove the Duke
wholly from Court and public business, as a means to appease the Discontents
of the Parliament upon some jealousies the late Conduct of Affairs had raised
among them. By this Council my Lord Arlington had very much offended the Duke;
and finding himself ill with his Royal Highness, with the Parliament, and every
day declining in credit with the King, He thought there was no way of
retrieving his Game, but by making himself the Instrument of some secret and
close measures that might be taken between the King and the Prince of Orange.
He first infused into His Majesty the Necessity and Advantage of such a
Negotiation, and then that of his being employed in it, from the Interest his
Lady's Friends and Kindred in Holland would be able to give him, as well as
from the Credit of having been so long in the secret of the King's Affair, and
so best able to give them such colors as might render the late conduct of them
less disagreeable to the Prince. Tho he professed great friendship to me, yet he
represented me as unlikely to be treated with such a confidence from the Prince
as was requisite in this Affair, for having been so intimate with Monsieur De
Wit in my former Ambassy; and gave the Prince's unwillingness to see me during
the Campagnia, as a testimony of his dislike, or at least indifferency to me;
He proposed going over with all the Auxiliaries that were like to be of any
succor in this expedition, carrying not only my Lady Arlington, but Madam
Beverwoert her Sister, who had something in her Humor and Conversation very
agreeable to the Prince; Sir Gabriel Sylvius, who took himself to be in great
credit in that Court, where he had served long, and particularly with Monsieur
Benting; nor was it forgot to carry over Dr. Duril as a Man fit to practice
Monsieur Marest a French Minister, who was thought to have credit with the
Prince; and my Lord Ossory was known to have a great part in his kindness and
esteem, as well from his Marriage into the Beverwoert Family, as from his
Bravery, so much applauded in all Actions where he had been, which was a
quality loved by this Prince, though employed against him.

My Lord Danby had been made believe, that a Letter from the Prince to Monsieur
Odyke, then one of the Dutch Ambassadors in England, had given occasion for
this Journey, as if the Prince had desired some person there from the King,
with whom he might enter in the last Confidence; but the Prince assured me,
there was no such thing; and that Monsieur Ruvigny, the French Minister at
London, had more part in this Journey than he, or perhaps any body else; and
that all the endeavors used toward a Peace, came from that side.

However instructed, at least thus accompanied; my Lord Arlington came to the
Hague, where he told me at our first meeting that he came over to set right
some things between the King and the Prince, that he doubted were amiss, and
settle a perfect kindness and confidence between them for the time to come.
That to do this, he must go to the bottom of the Sore, and rake into things
past, which was an unpleasant work, and which I could not do, as having no part
in the King's business during that time wherein the Prince took his offense at
our Concils. That the King had chosen him for this Office, because he could
best justify His Majesty's intentions toward His Highness in the whole course
of that Affai^^ That for the Peace, tho His Majesty desired it, yet he would
not meddle with it, unless the Prince of himself made any overtures about it;
but would only endeavor to give the Prince what lights he could as to the
state of things in general, and what he might hope from his Allies, as well as
from France; That if the Prince made no advances to him upon it, he would let
it fall, and leave it in my hands to be pursued by the Orders I should receive.
That he knew very well such a Commission as his, might look unkind, if not
injurious, to another Ambassador; and that he would not have come, if any other
had been here; but the King, as well as he, reckoned so far upon the Friendship
between us, that they were both confident of my being easy in it, and giving
him any assistance he should want from me, which he would acquaint me with as
the matter proceeded. He said, besides, That after having fought the King's
Battle with the Prince, he must fight another of his own, who did not deserve
the coldness his Highness had of late expressed to him; and when this was done,
all his business was ended here, and the rest would be only seeing his Friends,
and finding some diversion from a new Scene; That he desired I would, according
to the Forms, bring him and my Lord Ossory the first time to the Prince; and
after that, they would see him no more in Ceremony, nor give me that trouble.

I told his Lordship, I was very glad to see him, let his business be what it
would; That I should be gladder yet that the King's business should be done,
let it be by whom it would; but much more that it might be by Him: That for
setting matters right between the King and Prince, I thought it the best Office
could be done them both; That for the way he mentioned of raking into the Sore,
and fighting Battles in defense or justification of what was past, I knew not
what to say to it, but would leave it to his own Prudence; but, from what I
knew in particular of the Prince's humor and thoughts, whatever he did of that
sort, I believed, should be very gentle, and not go too deep; and, for my own
part, I was always of opinion, That Expostulations were very apt to end well
between Lovers, but ill between Friends. That I would send to the Prince for an
Hour; and when I had brought him to his Highness, I would leave him there after
the first Entrances were past; and desired no other part in his Affair, than
what he thought necessary to give me: whenever he did, I should serve him the
best I could in so good an Endeavor; and for the rest, I should leave the
Field free to my Lord Ossory and Him while they stayed at the Hague, as to all
that was secret; as to the rest, I desired they would make what use they
pleased of Me and my House.

My Lord Arlington took all I said very well; and said; 'Twas not necessary I
should leave them after I had introduced them to the Prince, but in such a
manner as I saw he would not dislike it, nor have any body thought to have any
part in the Successes he expected: So next morning I brought them to the
Prince, and, after a quarter of an hour's stay, left them together. The Prince
would have had me stayed, but my Lord Arlington said not a word; and I
pretended some Letters pressed me, and so went away, and never saw them
together any more while they stayed at the Hague, unless at Dinner, or in mixed
and public Company.

The truth is, I was not the worse entertained during the course of this
Adventure; for my Lord Arlington told me every day what he thought fit of all
that passed between them; and the Prince told me not only the thing, but the
manner of it, which was more important than the matter it self; for This had no
effect, but the Other a great deal; and that lasted long. My Lord Arlington
told me much of his Expostulations, and with what good turns of Wit he had
justified both the King's Part in the late War, and His Own; but that, upon
all, he found the Prince dry and sullen, or at the best uneasy, and as if he
wished it ended. That upon Discourse of the State of Christendom, and what
related to the War he was engaged in, he made him no Overtures at all, nor
entered further, than That the King might bring him out of it with Honor, if he
pleased, and with Safety to Christendom; if not, it must go on till the
Fortunes of the Parties changing, made way for other thoughts than he believed
either of them had at this time. That this might happen after another Campania,
which none but His Majesty could prevent, by inducing France to such terms as
He thought just and safe for the rest of Christendom.

This was the Sum of what my Lord Arlington pretended to have passed in three
long Conferences; after which it grew so uneasy between them, that he told me,
he had absolutely given it over, and would not say a word more of business
while he was there, and attended His Majesty's Orders after the return of his
Dispatches: but would divert himself in the mean time as well as he could; see
the Prince as often as he pleased at Dinner, or in Company, but ask it no more
in private, unless the Prince of himself desired it; and, upon the whole, gave
all the signs of being equally disappointed and discontented with the Success
of this Undertaking.

The Prince, on the other side, told me with what Arrogance and Insolence my
Lord Arlington had entered upon all his Expostulations with him, both upon the
King's Chapter and His Own; That it was not only in the Discourses of it, as if
he pretended to deal with a Child, that he could by his Wit make believe what
he pleased; but in the manner he said all upon that Subject, it was as if he
had taken Himself for the Prince of Orange, and him for my Lord Arlington; That
all he said was so artificial, and giving such false Colors to things every
body knew, that he, that was a plain Man, could not bear it, and was never so
weary of any Conversation in his Life. In short, all the Prince told me upon
it, looked spighted at my Lord Arlington, and not very much satisfied with the
King's Intentions upon this Errand; tho he said, he was sure His Majesty never
intended he should treat it in the manner he had, if he remembered that he was
his Nephew, tho nothing else.

After the first Conversations, my Lord Arlington staid near six Weeks in
Holland, either upon contrary Winds to return his Dispatches, or to carry him
away, often at Dinner with the Prince at Court, or at Count Waldeck's, or
Monsieur Odyke's, or with Me, putting on the best Humor and Countenance,
affecting the Figure of one that had nothing of business in his Head, or in the
design of this Journey, but at heart weary of his stay in Holland, and
unwilling to return with no better Account of his Errand; and, as it proved, he
had reason for both.

I found the Pensioner and Count Waldeck thought, That the bent of my Lord
Arlington was, To draw the Prince into such Measures of a Peace as France then
so much desired: Into a discovery of those Persons who had made Advances to the
Prince or the States of raising Commotions in England during the late War; into
secret Measures with the King of assisting him against any Rebels at home, as
well as Enemies abroad; and into the Hopes or Designs of a Match with the
Duke's Eldest Daughter. Tho, they said, he found the Prince would not enter at
all into the First, was obstinate against the Second, treated the Third as a
disrespect to the King, to think he could be so ill beloved, or so imprudent to
need it; and upon mention made of the last by my Lord Ossory, he took no
further hold of it, then saying, His Fortunes were not in a condition for him
to think of a Wife.

Thus ended this Mystical Journey; which I have the rather unveiled, because,
perhaps, no other could do it; nor I, without so many several Lights from so
many several Hands; and because, tho it brought forth no present Fruits, yet
Seeds were then scattered, out of which sprung afterward some very great
Events.

My Lord Arlington returned, was received but coldly by the King, and ill by
the Duke, who was angry that any mention had been made of the Lady Mary, tho it
was done only by my Lord Ossory, and whether with Order from the King or no,
was not known: So as never any strain of Court-skill and Contrivance succeeded
so unfortunately as this had done, and so contrary to all the Ends the Author
of it proposed to himself. Instead of advancing the Peace, he left it
desperate; instead of establishing a Confidence between the King and the
Prince, he left all colder than he found it; instead of entering into great
personal Confidence and Friendship with the Prince, he left an Unkindness that
lasted ever after; instead of retrieving his own Credit at Court, which he
found waining upon the increase of my Lord Danby's, he made an end of all he
had left with the King, who never after used him with any Confidence further
than the Forms of his Place; and found my Lord Treasurer's Credit with the King
more advanced in six weeks he had been away, than it had done in many months
before.

Whatever was the occasion, France had this Winter an extreme desire of a
Peace, and left no ways unattempted to obtain it, that might not too much
discover the need they had of it. I suppose they might apprehend what the
Confederates reckoned upon, with perhaps, too much assurance, That if they
could gain one Battle, they should certainly enter France; and if ever they
did, the ill Humors grown under this late Government would certainly break
out, and make way for all the Successes and Ravages they proposed to
themselves; or, at least, for such terms of a Peace, as would leave all the
Neighbors of that Crown in safety, and at quiet. A talk was set on foot of a
Marriage between Monsieur's eldest Daughter and the King of Spain, in the heat
of the War; a Suspension of Arms was proposed at Vienna by Count Oxenstiern the
Swedish Ambassador, and the sending Plenipotentiaries immediately after to
treat the Peace, with Offers, in case these were agreed to, that the Affair of
Prince William of Furstenbergh should be respited till the end of the Treaty,
and Pasports should be granted for the Duke of Lorrain's Ministers, upon which
difficulties had been made; Practices were used with the Princes of
Brandenburgh and Lunenburgh to dis-joint them from the Common Alliance; and
particular Intelligence was held between the Mareschall d' Estrades, and one
who had been Pensioner of Mastricht, who communicated all his Letters to the
Pensioner Fagel. But the Sum of all, was Instances for a separate Peace between
France and Holland, a Breach of their Measures with the House of Austria, and
return of the old Ones with France, toward which they offered all the
Advantages that could be to the States in point of Commerce, and all the
Personal Ones that could be desired by a Prince of Orange.

But the Prince was unmovable in the Point of not leaving his Allies, tho he
began to foresee he was like to play a hard Game with them next Summer in the
Field, and perhaps a harder with the People at home, who grew impatient for a
Peace, both upon the cruel Taxes the War had raised, and upon the present decay
of Trade, as well as apprehension that with longer continuance of the War, it
would run so far into a new Channel by England, as never to be retrieved. Upon
these considerations the Prince resolved to make one effort toward a Peace
with Honor, before this Season ended, and made all further thoughts of it give
way to the Actions of the approaching Campania. His Scheme was this: That a
Match should be made between the King of Spain, and Madamoselle: That France
should give with her in Dowry, the late conquered Places in Flanders. That the
King should make this Match, and upon these terms; That he should have Two
hundred thousand pounds for His good Offices in it. By this means a Peace would
be made with safety to Spain, and to Holland, by securing against the Frontiers
of Flanders, with Honor to France, who parted with the conquered Towns only as
Dowry to a Daughter of France, without any blemish to the Prince's Honor, or
Faith in his Alliances, and with Honor and Profit both to His Majesty, which
last was thought no unwelcome Circumstance at that time in our Court.

This the Prince and Pensioner having digested the best way they could, and
deduced to Me, desired me to propose to the King, as the only way of making the
Peace he so much desired, as a thing they were sure he could do, and that
France could not deny him, if he would press it; and as the last degree of
favor His Majesty could express to the Prince, who could no other way come out
of this War with Honor. They desired me to write it to the King himself, and
that nothing might be said of it to any other Person, till His Majesty should
return me His Opinion upon it.

I did so by two Letters to the King, but had no hopes given me that it would
be effected; whether France took the desires of the Prince for an Argument of
his being weary of the War, or that he found the People were so; or whether
they would not end the War, without breaking the force and confidence of the
present Alliance, or (as the Prince thought) without leaving Flanders open for
another Invasion, when some better Conjuncture should make way for it; or
whether the Revolt of Messina had given them hopes of disabling Spain, by
drawing their Forces on that side, and disposing them to a Peace by this Wound
in a part so tender, and that might spread so far into Italy; or whether they
had now absolutely engaged the Crown of Sweden to enter into the War, and
believed that by the Impression that Crown would make in Pomerania, they might
not only recall the Duke of Brandenburgh and his Forces from the Rhine, but, if
they succeeded, might so allarm the Empire on that side, as to break, or very
much weaken any conjunction of their Forces next Summer on this side of the
Rhine. However it was, this Attempt of the Prince failed, and so all further
thoughts of a present Peace ended, and left me only to pursue the cold scent of
a Mediation in the common Forms, while the Preparations for a warm Summer on
all sides were making in the Field.

The Prince this February went into Gelderland, to establish the new Magistracy
there, according to his Office of Stadtholder. Whilst he was there, the
Deputies of that Province by unanimous consent made him an offer of the
Sovereignty of that Country, with the ancient Title of Duke of Gelderland,
which they pretended had been formerly in some of his Ancestors. The Prince
said, He would give them no answer upon an Affair of such moment, without first
advising with the other Provinces: He immediately writ to those of Holland,
Zeeland, and Vtrecht, to communicate this Offer to them, and demand their
Advice upon it. Zeeland returned theirs against his accepting of it, grounding
it upon the Jealousies it might raise in the other Provinces, and inconsistence
of it with the Constitutions of their Union, which left none of the Provinces
at liberty to dipose of their Sovereignty without consent of the rest. Vtrecht
returned their answer with advice to accept it. Holland was longer, depending
upon the delays necessary in running the circle of so many Towns; so that
before it was concluded, the Prince upon receiving the advice of Vtrecht
returned them immediately his Answer, with the notice, that he had excused
himself to the States of Gelderland, from accepting the offer they had made him.

Nothing could more employ the busy heads of this time than the course of this
Affair; some attributing it to the ambition of the Prince, and presaging the
same design upon the rest of the Provinces; others laying it to the charge of
some of his young Counselors; others to a design of sounding the humor of the
Provinces, and of having the honor to refuse it, after they should all have
advised him to accept it, as 'twas believed they would do. For my own part, I
can say nothing of it with certainty, having never seen the Prince while it was
upon the Anvil, no discoursed with him upon this Subject either before or
after; but if it were an ambition bent upon the Sovereignty of the rest of the
Provinces as well as Gelderland, it was a design very different from all his
proceedings in the course of the War, when France had proposed it to him with
all the advantages and support that could be; and as different from what he had
ever seemed to understand, and to be as much persuaded of as any Man, That a
Sovereign Prince in Holland would certainly and soon ruin the Trade, and
consequently the Riches and Greatness of that State, and leave a Prince of it
without power, or consideration in the world; whereas the Princes of Orange in
the Post they have held for four Generations, have entered into Wars and
Treaties, with a regard and weight equal to most of the Kings of Christendom.
For young Counselors that were thought to have engaged the Prince in this
adventure, I cannot speak with more certainty than of the intention; but I am
sure if they were in it, they were not alone; for none doubts of Monsieur
Fagel's having been for it; and Monsieur Beverning, who was ever thought as
stanch a Patriot as any Man among them, told me himself, that he had advised
the Prince to accept it, which I believe he would not have done, if he had
foreseen any danger from it to his Country. But whether the Prince or his
Friends had the part that was commonly thought in the first overture, it is
certain an Interest of the Deputies and Magistrates, as well as Nobles of
Gelderland had a share in it too. For whereas this is the first Province in the
Union, and abounds with Nobles more than all the rest, yet by reason of their
Poverty from a barran Soil and want of Trade, they are less considered than
several other Provinces, and their Voice has been in a manner swallowed up by
that of Holland, who, by their Trade and Riches, have a great influence upon
those of Gelderland. The Deputies of this Province finding themselves yet less
considerable in the Union than they were before the War, which had extremely
impoverished their Country during the French Conquests, thought there was no
way of recovering such a consideration in the State, as suited with the rank
and dignity they held, but devolving the Sovereignty of their Province upon the
Prince of Orange. Besides, many of the Nobles there having pretenses for
themselves or their Friends in the Military employments, thought to make their
Court to the Prince upon whom those Charges depended, by advancing such a
proposition; and this was certainly a great ingredient into the first
conception of it; but whether connived at, or seconded by the Prince, or his
Friends, or with what Aims or Instructions I cannot say, and so leave it as a
Mushroom that grew up suddenly, and as suddenly withered, and left no sign
where it had grown.

At the Prince's return to the Hague in March 1675. I received a Letter from
His Majesty's own hand, telling me of some advices given him, That the Prince
intended to come over into England against the approaching Session of
Parliament, and Commanding me to hinder it, as if His Majesty believed the
thing. I adventured to assure the King there could be nothing of it, before I
saw the Prince; but when I did, I pretended not to have had it from His
Majesty, but that I heard such a thing had been whispered to him. He said, yes,
and he believed by the Lord Arlington, who had some times talked of that
Journey after the Peace should be made. However it came, he was sorry the King
should believe it. That he was His Majesty's Servant, and if he could do him no
service, he would at least do him no harm: But if the King would be otherwise
possessed, he could not help it; yet desired me to assure him, there had never
been any ground for such a report. In the Afternoon the Prince came to me, and
told me in great heat, he had, since he saw me, received the most impertinent
Letter from Lord Arlington that ever was upon that Subject, treating it as a
resolution certain and intended for raising heats in the Parliament, and
commotions in the Kingdom; telling him, 'Twas like to prove but an ill
friendship between the King and him, if it was to be made A coup de bastons;
With Blows.
and putting him in mind, Qu'il y a de ployes chez vous, That there are some
wounds among you, that will bleed still, if there be not care taken of them.
qui saigneront encore, si l'on y met la main. The Prince said, he knew well
enough what Lord Arlington meant by that expression; for he had told Monsieur
Read in England, when he went over upon the first motions of the last Peace,
That the King could make the Prince be served as De Wit was, if he would set
himself about it. Upon this he fell into the greatest rage that ever I saw him,
against my Lord Arlington, calling this proceeding malicious, and insolent,
saying, He would write to him what he deserved; but never have any thing more
to do with him beyond common forms. That since he knew not how to trust the
King's Ministers, He would write to the King himself, and desired me to convey
his Letters so, as they might come to no other hand.

Soon after Count Waldeek went to Vienna to concert the Actions of the next
Campagnia, where Count Montecuculi was appointed to command the Imperial Forces
instead of Duke Bornonville; and the Count Souches was sent away into a
Government in Hungary. In March the Elector of Brandenburgh came to Cleve, upon
the same concert, where he was met by the Prince of Orange, and the Marquess De
Grana the Emperor's Minister; but the main point debated here was thought to be
the Defense necessary to be made in Pomerania against the Swede, who began now
to throw off the mask, to Ravage the Country, and to attack some places
necessary for their Quarters. The Moneys likewise paid that Court from France
at Hamburgh had been so public and so avowed, that none further doubted of a
sudden and open Rupture from that Crown. Whereupon the States sent to Monsieur
Ehernstein (then Swedish Ambassador at the Hague, and who would have kept still
the Figure of a Mediator) to put in no more Memorials to the States upon that
occasion, since they could not receive them from a Minister of a Prince, who
had openly and without cause Attacqu'd one of their Allies.

At this time arrived an Ambassador from Denmark at the Hague, to try what
advantages his Master could make of this Present Conjuncture, by Terms of
entering into the Alliance with France and Sweden. And all things being thus in
the highest Fermentation, a sudden damp fell upon the whole mass of these great
affairs by the Sickness of the Prince of Orange; which showed him to be the
Spring that gave motion to all the other Wheels; for while His Illness lasted,
and the event was doubtful, all was in suspense, and none of the Parties
engaged seem to have other Motions or Sentiments than what were raised by the
Hopes or Fears of so important a Life. After some days Fever, it proved the
Smallpox, which had been very Fatal in His Family, and gave the greater
Apprehensions to His Friends and His Country, who expressed indeed a strange
concernment upon this occasion, by perpetual concourse of People to enquire
after every minute's progress of His Illness. Whilst it lasted, he had taken a
fancy hardly to Eat or Drink anything but what came from my House, which the
People after took notice of as it passed; and though perhaps few Foreigners have
had the luck to be better thought of or used in a strange Country than we had
ever been in Holland; yet several of our Dutch Friends told us, That in case
any thing fatal happened to the Prince from this Disease, they believed the
People would pull down our Houses, and tear us all in pieces, upon knowing what
he took in his Sickness came from our hands. God be thanked all past without
any bad accident, tho ill symptoms at first; and his recovery, next to the
Blessing of God, was owing to the great evenness of his temper, and constancy
of mind, which gave way to no impressions or imaginations that use to be of ill
cons^quence in that disease; so that it passed in the common forms, and within
twenty days he was abroad, and fell into the present business of the Scene,
among which the preparation for the Campania was the chief.

I cannot here forbear to give Monsieur Benting the Character due to him, of
the best Servant I have ever known in Prince's, or private Family. He tended
his Master, during the whole course of his Disease, both night and day; nothing
he took was given him, nor he ever removed in his Bed, by any other hand; and
the Prince told me, that whether he slept or no, he could not tell; but in
Sixteen days and nights, he never called once that he was not answered by
Monsieur Benting, as if he had been awake. The first time the Prince was well
enough to have his Head opened and combed, Monsieur Benting, as soon as it was
done, begged of his Master to give him leave to go home, for he was able to
hold up no longer; He did so, and fell immediately sick of the same Disease,
and in great extremity; but recovered just soon enough to attend his Master
into the Field, where he was ever next his person.

The Campania happened to begin later than it u'sd to do on the French side,
both from the expectation what the Prince's sickness would end in, and from
some Commotions succeeding one another about this time in Guienne and Brittany,
upon occasion of the Imposts or Gabels, which drew some of the French Forces
into those parts. But when those troubles were ended, as they were by an
unusual strain of Lenity and Clemency in composing them, all imaginary
endeavors were used to prepare in France for the Campania: The King intended
to Attack Flanders in the Head of all the choice of his Forces, and with the
greatest Vigor and Impression he could make this year upon the Spanish
Netherlands; yet the King pretended to be but a Volunteer in the Army, of which
he declared the Prince of Conde General; whether to put the greatest Compliment
he could on so great Merit, or to hinder his Brother from making difficulty of
Acting under that Prince's Orders. And Monsieur Turenne was to be employed in
Alsace, to attend, and amuse as much as he could the German Army, for fear of
giving the King too much diversion in Flanders; and this with Orders to Act by
concert with Count Wrangel, General of the Swedish Forces in Pomerania, who
gave hopes of Marching so far into Germany as to concert his Actions, or at
least Motions with those of Monsieur Turenne. On the other side, the
Confederates were as busy in their provisions against these designs. The
Elector of Mentz was drawn to throw off the remainders of his Neutrality, and
to receive the Imperial Troops into his Towns, as Strasburgh had done; and
practices were set on foot to change the temper of the Court of Bavaria, with
hopes of success. Montecuculi prepared to come down into Alsace with the Army
of the Emperor and the adjoining Circles; and the Elector of Brandenburgh came
to the Hague after the Prince of Orange's illness, where Treaties were
concluded with the King of Denmark's Ministers, and reviewed with the Duke of
Lunenburgh's. After which the Elector went immediately away to the relief of
his own Subjects and Country, then invaded and spoiled by the open hostility
of the Swedish Forces. Whilst he was at the Hague, the Compliments passed in
form between us, but without visit or interview, tho the Elector desired and
pursued it with more instance than I well understood: For he sent his Minister
at the Hague first to me, and afterward engaged the Prince himself to
endeavor it, by finding some expedient in the difficulties of Ceremony; or
else by proposing a third place. But the French Ambassadors having taken up a
form of refusing to visit any Elector, unless they might have the hand given
them in those Princes Houses, and the Electors having never consented to it; I
told the Prince, I could not go lower than the French Ambassadors did, in that
nor any other point; and that meeting in a third place would look like a sort
of approving the refusal made by the Electors: And so I never saw this Prince
during his stay at the Hague, much to my regret, because I had been possessed
of many qualities very esteemable in him.

In the mean time, how useless soever for the present, yet the forms of His
Majesty's Mediation went on. After it had been accepted by all parties, the
first Point that came to be considered on, was the place of Treaty, about
which, the Swedes could not surmount the difficulties during the course of the
Mediation. The House of Austria proposed to have the Congress in some of the
free Towns of the Empire, as Francfort, Hamburgh, Strasburgh, and some others:
France refused ever to come into any Town of the Empire, upon the insults they
received and complained of so much at Cologn, in the seizure of Prince William
of Furstenburg, and a great sum of the French Money there; but offered at the
same time to come and Treat at Breda, though belonging to one of the Parties
engaged in the War, which they would make pass for a great condescension, and
testimony of that King's inclination to a Peace.

The Confederates on the other side would not hear of Breda; they took that
proposition as an artifice, first, to ingratiate with the States beyond the
rest of their Allies; but next, which was the point of importance, they looked
upon it as designed to carry on either a separate Treaty with the States, or at
least Private Measures and Correspondencies with several Towns and Persons of
those Provinces, so as to induce, or force the States at last into a separa^e
Treaty with France, upon the difficulties or delays that might arise in a
General one. And upon this point the Allies were so jealous, that the States
Deputies of the Foreign Committee, who managed all these Affairs in the first
resort, thought it necessary to seem as averse against Treating in any of their
Dominions, as any of the Allies. Thus all places in Germany, France, and the
Low Countries, seemed absolutely excluded by one part or other; and London was
disliked by all as too remote, and of difficult and uncertain Commerce for
Letters, by reason of the Sea. After much perplexity upon this Subject in many
Conferences I had with the Deputies, and Discourses with the Pensioner, I
proposed two places as the only I could think of left for any attempt, upon all
circumstances. The first was Cleve, which could not be said to belong to the
Empire, but to the Elector of Brandenburgh, as Duke of Cleve, and not as a
Prince of the Empire. The other was Nimeguen, as being the last Town belonging
to the States, and upon the Borders of Germany. Both Towns capable of such a
reception as was necessary; both in good Airs, and easy of access from all
parts; centered between Spain and Sweden, between the Empire and France, and
near England, where the Spiring of this Treaty was conceived to be. I thought
France might not dislike Cleve, even upon those regards the Allies suspected of
the vicinity to the States; and the Confederates could not except against it as
belonging to one of them. On the other side, if the Allies approved Cleve, and
France should refuse it, yet they could not afterward disapprove of Nimeguen,
which was but three Leagues nearer the Hague or Amsterdam, where they suspected
the French practices; and disjoined from both by necessary passage of great
Rivers, which made the Commerce more difficult and slow than it would be from
other Towns of the States Dominions. Another Reason was, That I knew no other
to name that did not seem previously excluded; and upon this the Deputies
consented that I should propose both to the King, that he might do the same to
all the Parties; but that I should begin with Cleve, which I did.

This France refused, upon pretense of some dependence upon the Empire; but, as
was thought, upon picque to the Duke of Brandenburgh, with whom they were more
offended at this time, than with any of the Allies. After this refusal, and
Nimeguen being advanced, France first a^cepted it, and afterward the Allies,
who could not well refuse it, after having expressed they would have been
satisfied with Cleve; and so this Place came to be fixed for the Scene of this
Negotiation.

But at the same time that France accepted the Place of Treaty, they declared,
That they would not however send any Ambass^dors thither till the Emperor had
given them satisfaction upon the two Points so long insisted, of Prince William
of Furstenburgh's Liberty, and Restitution of the Money seized at Colen, which
were Points had been hitherto as obstinately refused at Vienna, as demanded by
France: So as these paces toward a Peace, gained at present very little
ground, but left way for the Actions and Successes of the ensuing Campania to
determine the Times, the Methods, and Conditions of their pretended Treaty.

The French began their Action by the Siege of Limburgh, with one part of their
Army, whilst the King with the rest lay encamped in a Post most convenient to
oppose any attempt of relieving it, to which purpose the Prince was upon his
march; but after a short and weak resistance, it was taken before he could
approach it: For, besides some delays forced by his sickness, he began here to
feel the weight that hung about him all the course of this War, from the
uncertain and slow marches of the German Horse, and the weakness and disorders
of the Spanish Troops, which were necessary to make up his Army of strength to
oppose that of France, composed of such Numbers, such brave and experienced
Troops, and under so great a Commander as the Prince of Conde, and so gallant
Officers.

After the taking of Limburgh, the French and Confederate Armies in Flanders
fell into no considerable Action or Attempt; Neither daring to sit down before
any Place of Strength, while the other Army attended them, and was ready to
relieve it; and neither seeming very earnest to come to a Battle (unless with
evident Advantages) upon the loss of which so great Consequences seemed to
depend, as the French entire Conquest of Flanders on the one side, or the
Confederates marching directly into France on the other, after any great
Victory. Besides, they seemed to be amused by the expectation of what was
likely to pass in Germany, both upon the Rhine between the Imperialists and
French, and in Pomerania between the Swede and Brandenburgh, which, without new
Successes in the Low Countries, were like to decide in a great measure the Fate
of this War, whilst the Confederates equally presumed of their Successes in
Alsatia, and the French of those of the Swedes in the North.

About the end of July, the King of France, weary of a dull Campania, left the
Army to the Prince of Conde, and returned with his Court to Versailles; And the
same month, His Majesty, seeing the Negotions of the Peace laid at present
asleep, sent for me to make a short turn into England, and give an Account of
all the Observations I had been able to make abroad upon the present
Dispositions and Conjunctures, as well as receive his Instructions for the
future progress of his Mediation.

The Parliament in England, tho much pleased with the last Peace in Holland,
yet were not so with His Majesty's desires of a General One. They thought the
Power of France too great since their last Conquest in Flanders, and their
Ambition too declared, of atchieving it by one means, and at one time or other:
They were suspicious of the Court's favoring too much the French Designs, by
pursuing a Peace that would break so mighty a Confederacy as was now united
against France: They were jealous of the Councels which had made the late
Alliance and Kindness between Us and France in the time of the late Cabal; and
besides these regards, and the common Notions of balancing the Power of our
Neighbors, which were very popular, the ambitious Designs of private, but
unquiet or aspring men, fell in to augment and blow up the general ill humors
upon the more Public Accounts.

The Lord Shaftsbury, impatient at his fall from so great a share of the
Ministry, and hoping to retrieve a Game he was forced to give over, had run
desperately into the popular humor, both in Parliament and City, of censuring
the Court, exclaiming against our partiality to France, but most of all against
the Conduct of the present Ministry. And Lord Arlington was so enraged at the
Growth of my Lord Treasurer's Credit upon the Fall of His Own, that he fell in
with the common humor of the Parliament, in fomenting those Jealousies and
Practices in the House of Commons, which centered in a Measure agreed among the
most considerable of them, Not to consent to give the King any Money whilst
the present Lord Treasurer continued. Upon these occasions or dispositions they
grew very high in pursuing the Lord Lauderdale, the only remainder of the
Cabal, that had now any credit left at Court; and they pressed the King very
earnestly to recall all the English Troops in the French Service, tho there was
a greater number in the Dutch: But besides, they fell into so great dissentions
between the Two Houses, raised upon punctilious disputes, and deductions of
their several Privileges in opposition to one another, that about the end of
June the King Prorogued them.

Upon my arrival soon after, His Majesty telling me the several reasons that
had moved him to it, said, That he doubted much, while the War lasted abroad,
it would give occasion or pretense for these heats, that had of late appeared
in the Parliament, and make him very uneasy in his Revenue, which so much
needed their assistance; That some of the warm Leaders in both Houses had a
mind to engage him in a War with France, which they should not do for many
reasons; and, among the rest, because he was sure if they did, they would leave
him in it, and make use of it to ruin his Ministers, and make him depend upon
Them more than he intended, or any King would desire: But besides all this, he
doubted an impertinent quarrel between my Lord Treasurer and Lord Chamberlain,
did him more disservice in the Parliament than I could imagine; for the last did
not care what harm he did His business there, so he could hope to ruin my Lord
Treasurer; and had persuaded a great many in the House of Commons, that this
would certainly be compassed, if they were stanch, and declared in giving no
Money during his Ministry. That he knew they were both my Friends, and
therefore desired I would try to reconcile them while I stayed in England. I
endeavored it, but failed: my Lord Danby was very inclinable, being so posted
as to desire only to continue where he was; and that the King's business might
go well in his hands; but my Lord Arlington was so uneasy in the posture he
stood, which he attributed chiefly to my Lord Treasurer's present Greatness,
that he was untreatable upon this Subject: So when I found the Wound was too
much wrankled to be cured, I gave it over; telling each of them, That since I
could not make them Friends, I would at least live with them both as if they
were so; and desired them not to expect I should sacrifice one Friend to
another. My Lord Treasurer was content with this frankness; but Lord Arlington
could not bear this neither, grew dry from this time, and stiff in all that
passed between us, still mingling little reproaches or touches of my greatness
with the other; and grew so weary of the Scene at Court, where he found himself
left out, that he went into the Country for the rest of the Summer.

Thus the seeds of discontents that had been sown in the Parliament under the
Councels of the Cabal, began to spring fast, and root deep, after their Power
and Influence was wholly at an end; and those Heats were under other covers
fomented by two of the chief that composs'd that Ministry, and with help of
time and accident grew to such flames as have since appeared. But whatever
began or increased them, it is certain these agitations in England had great
effect upon those of the War and Peace abroad. For the Confederates were
confident, That the humor of the Parliament and People would at last engage
the King in their quarrel, which they knew would force France to such a Peace
as they desired; and Spain was so presuming, That England would not suffer the
loss of Flanders, that they grew careless of its Defense, or of those Orders
and Supplies that were necessary to it; trusting for the present to the Dutch
to preserve it, and to the King hereafter, whenever he should find it more in
danger. And these Considerations made the Allies less inclinable to a Peace,
which they might have had cheaper the following Winter, than ever it fell
afterward to their share, by Revolutions that were not foreseen, but yet such
as were suspected at this time, by those that knew the weakness of the
Spaniards, and divisions of the Imperial Court.

While I stayed in England, which was about six weeks, the News came of a great
Insurrection in Bretanny, which, with the Numbers and Rage it began, might have
proved of ill consequence to the French Affairs, if it had met with a Head
answerable to the Body; but being composed of a scum of the mean People, that
hated and spoiled the Nobles of the Province, it was by fair means partly, and
by foul, in a little time appeased. The Blow which was much more considerable
to France, than the loss of Provinces would have been, was the death of
Monsieur Turenne, the News whereof came to Court about the same time. This
great Captain had for three months together kept the Imperial Army at a bay on
the other side the Rhine; resolved not to fight unless with the greatest
advantage; his Point being to hinder the German Forces from besieging
Philipsburgh, from posting themselves in the Towns of Alsace, but chiefly from
entering into Lorain, or the County of Burgundy. All these he performed; but
being pressed by the Imperialists, and straightened in his Quarters, he suffered
much by want of Provisions, and found his Army diminished by Sickness and
Desertion, which use to follow that condition. At last, being necessitated for
want of Forage to force a Post of the Enemies that straightened him most, a warm
Skirmish began, and with loss to the French, that were galled with two Pieces
of Cannon raised upon an Eminence, and playing upon them with advantage.
Monsieur Turenne resolved to raise a Battery to dismount them; and going with
Saint Hilaire, a Lieutenant General, to choose a place the most convenient for
it, the two small Pieces from the Imperial side fired at them almost together;
one of the Bullets wounded Saint Hilaire in the Shoulder, and the other, after
two or three bounds upon the ground, struck Monsieur Turenne upon the Breast,
and without any apparent Wound, more than the Contusion, laid him Dead upon the
place, and by such a Death as Caesar used to wish for, unexpected, sudden, and
without pain. The astonishment was unspeakable in the French Camp, upon the
loss of such a General; the presumption as great in That of the Imperialists,
who reckoned upon themselves as Masters of the whole French Army, that was
straightened between Them and the Rhine, in want, diseased, and, above all,
discouraged by the loss of their Captain. All others had the same expectation
upon this News, but all were disappointed; and Monsieur de Lorge's taking the
Command of the Army, had the Honor of making a Retreat that was worth a
Victory; and by the force of Order and Conduct, with the Bravery of the English
Troops, who made such bold stands in several places that they could not be
broken till most of the Army were marched off, he passed the Rhine in sight of
part of the imperial Army, and encamped himself on the other side in safety,
and so preserved it till the Prince of Conde was sent in have out of Flanders,
with a great Enforcement to oppose the Progress of the Imperialists in Alsace.

In the mean time, the Elector of Brandenburgh drawing his Forces with some
Imperialists out of Silesia together, fell upon the Swedes in Pomerania with
that Bravery and Success, that he soon beat them out of his part of the Country
and pursued them into their own. He had an Interview with the King of Denmark,
who was now entered into the Interests of the Confederates, resolved to declare
War against Sweden, and to that end took his measures with the Duke of
Brandenburgh how to pursue it, with the best advantage, the rest of the Season.

When the Prince of Conde left Flanders to succeed Monsieur Turenne in Alsace,
the Duke of Lutzenburgh commanded the Army in Flanders, but with Orders not to
hazard a Battle, but only to observe the Prince of Orange's Motions, and to
cover any Town that was like to be endangered; which he performed so well, that
no further Action passed this Summer, besides the Prince's taking and razing of
Binch. But to make amends for the unactiveness of this Campania in Flanders,
the Confederates, by concert on all sides, fell upon an Enterprise of great
eclai, and of greater consequence, which was the Siege of Treves. The
Imperialists were bent upon it, to open a Passage that way into France, finding
so much opposition in their Designs of it by Alsatia: The Spaniards desired it,
to make way for their succouring Lutzenburgh whenever it should be pressed, which
was of the last importance to them: The Duke of Lorain was violent for it, in
hopes of finding a way opened for his entrance into Lorain. The Prince Palatine
thought it the best preparation for Besieging and carrying Philipsburg, which
was the Thorn in his side. So as all these joined part of their Troops
together, with some of the Elector of Trier's, and a Body of the Lunenburgh
Forces under the Dukes of Zell and Osnabrugh, and sat down before Treves.

The Marshall de Crequi gathered all the Forces he could out of the
neighboring Provinces, and made up a strong Army to relieve it. The
Confederates left part of Theirs to maintain their Retrenchments about the
Town, and marched with the rest against Monsieur de Crequi, passed a River in
his sight, attacqu'd him, beat him out of the Field with great slaughter, many
Prisoners, and such a dispersion of the rest, that the whole Army seemed to
have vanished in one day; and Monsieur de Crequi got into Treves with four or
five only in Company: There he made a desperate resistance for near a month
against the victorious Army, with great Honor and loss among the English
Troops that were in the Town, and without any hopes of Relief; nor would he
ever capitulate, after all the extremities he was reduced to by the forms of a
Siege, till the Garrison mutin'd against his obstinacy, capitulated for
themselves, and delivered up Monsieur de Crequi and most of the Officers
Prisoners to the Germans The Dukes of Lunenburgh had great honor in this
Action, and the Old Duke of Lorain; and indeed it was one of the most vigorous
that succeeded in the whole course of the War, and carried the compleatest
Victory, as well as a very considerable Town: And the Honor of it was very
much due to the Marquess de Grana, who commanded the Emperor's Forces there,
and was esteemed to have laid the first Design to have concerted the several
parts of it, engaged the several Parties to resolve upon the same Adventure,
and kept them firm in it till it was archieved. The loss of men was very great
on the French side, both in the Fight and the Siege; and added to Monsieur
Turenne's Death, and the impression expected upon it on that side, by Count
Montecuculi, with the loss of the Swedes, made so great a change in the
appearance of Affairs, that his Majesty in a Letter to me, in September, after
my return to the Hague, bid me use it as an Argument to induce the Prince of
Orange to be easy in the business of a Peace, That it was now time for him to
begin to apprehend again the greatness of the House of Austria, instead of that
of France. It was indeed expected that the Imperialists in Alsace would either
enter into Lorain, or at least would take the chief Towns of Alsace, and post
themselves so the following Winter, as to be ready for such an Enterprise in
the beginning of the next Spring; and Count Montecuculi besieged first
Haguenau, and afterward Saberne, which were the most considerable Places, to
that end. But after Haguenau had offered to Surrender upon Conditions, he rose
with his Army to fight the Prince of Conde, who made a motion of his Army as if
he intended to relieve it; but so ordered it as the Germans failed both of the
Battle and the Town. It was never comprehended how Montecuculi afterward came
to rise of a sudden from the Siege of Saberne: Some said, it was upon an
express Order from Vienna the night before; others, with design of fighting the
French Army, or besieging Philipsburgh; but neither happened; and which was
worse than all, he ended the Campania with passing back his whole Army over the
Rhine, and leaving Alsace wholly in possession, and at mercy of the French
Troops: Nor have I ever known any Action of such public Concern so
unaccountable as this Retreat, since it is hard to suspect either Corruption or
Court-Faction should go so far, though both were accused of having part in this
great and almost decisive Event.

The resentment of it was thought to have broke the old Duke of Lorain's heart,
who died about this time, and left Prince Charles, his Nephew, the succession
to that Duchy. No Prince had met with more misfortunes than this Duke, nor had
felt them less or given greater Testimony of what Philosophy teaches, That the
good or ill of men's lives comes more from their Humors than their Fortunes. He
was expelled that Noble and Lovely Duchy by the Arms of France in Cardinal
Richlieu's time; forced to go into the Spanish Service in Flanders with a Body
of Lorainers, that would follow his Fortune whatever it was; strugl'd with want
of Pay to his Troops, with jealousy and ill usage of the Spanish Governors;
was seized and imprisoned by that Crown; restored to a shattered possession of
Lorain by the Peace of the Pyrenees, and in the year 1670. forced to escape by
night, and almost alone, by a sudden surprise of the French Troops, in the
height and security of Peace; after this he never had a home any more for the
rest of his life, which was spent in suing for Protection and Relief from the
several Princes of Christendom, who resented the injustice of his Case, which
none pretended to defend, but yet none to concern themselves in it, till upon
the last War he fell into his share of the Confederacy, with the weight of two
or three thousand Lorainers, that still followed his Fortune, and entered into
Leagues with the Emperor and most of the Allies for his restitution. He seemed
not to deserve the Fortune of a Prince, only because he seemed not to care for
it; to hate the Constraints and Ceremonies that belong to it; and to value no
Pleasures in Life, but the most natural and most easy; and while he had them,
was never out of humor for wanting the rest; Generous to his Servants and
Soldiers when he had it; and when he wanted, endeavoring to make it up by the
Liberties he gave them; very much beloved and familiar among both: And to give
his Picture by a small trait, one of his Ministers told me, That not long
before he died, all his Family was, a Gentleman of the Horse (as he was called)
another of his Chamber, and a Boy that looked to a little Nag he used to ride;
one day he called for his Horse; the two first told him, the Boy was not to be
found. He bid them however get him his Horse. They could not agree which of
them should go and Saddle him, till the Duke bid them go, and one or the other of
them do it, or else he swore he would go down and Saddle his Horse himself;
they were as ham'd, and 'twas done.

About the same time died at the Hague the old Princess Dowager of Orange; a
Woman of the most Wit, and good Sense in general, that I have known; and who
had thereby a great part in forming the race of the Prince, and the mighty
improvement it received from three very extraordinary Women, as well as three
so great Men in the last descents. None has showed more the force of Order and
Economy than this Princess, who with small Revenues, never above Twelve
thousand pounds a year since her Husband's deash, lived always in as great
plenty, and more curiousness and elegance than is seen in many greater Courts.
Among other pieces of Greatness, She was constantly served all in Gold Plate,
which went so far as to great Bottles for Water, and a great Cistern for
Bottles, to the Key of her Closet, and every thing of that kind She usually
touched, which I mention, because I think it is what the greatest Kings of
Christendom have not pretended to do, nor any I have heard of on this side
Persia.

In November, this year, happened a Storm at Northwest, with a Springtide, so
violent, as gave apprehensions of some loss irrecoverable to the Province of
Holland, and by several Breaches in the great Digues near Enckhuysen, and
others between Amsterdam and Harlem, made way for such Inundations as had not
been seen before by any man then alive, and filled the Country with many
relations of most deplorable Events. But the incredible diligence and unanimous
endeavors of the People upon such occasions, gave a stop to the Fury of that
Element, and made way for recovering next year all the Lands, though not the
People, Cattle, and Houses, that had been lost.

Before the end of the year, the Danes took Wismar from the Suedes; and by an
open War those two Crowns came to be engaged in the common quarrel; and after a
great expectation of some extraordinary Successes in the Spanish Affairs from
Don John's intended expedition into Italy, to command all the Forces and
Provinces of that Crown, both there and in Sicily, when he was ready to go and
meet de Ruyter at Barcelona, who attended him there with the Dutch Fleet,
designed for Messina, he was by a Court-Intrigue recalled to Madrid; the King
was then arrived in his Fourteenth year, and took upon him the Government, as
now in Majority; and by the advice of some near him in favor, writ a Letter to
Don John to invite him to Court, to assist him in the Government; he obeyed,
but stayed not there above a Fortnight or three Weeks, till by the Credit and
Authority of the Queen Mother, he was forced to quit his ground there, and
return to Saragoza; and so vanished a mighty expectation that had been raised
in Spain, and other places, of great effects that were to follow this Prince's
coming to the Administration of Affairs, and very great Sums of Money were
wholly lost that had been employed in the Preparations of his Journey and
Equipage for Italy. And Sicily was left almost hopeless of recovery, from the
Successes of the French, who had taken many Posts about Messina, and threatened
many more; and other Towns were feared to follow the Example of that great
Revolt.

After the Prince's return from the Campania to the Hague in October, I had
several Conferences with him upon the subject of the Peace, and the Terms that
both his Majesty and the States might think reasonable, between France and
Spain, and both those Crowns be in any probability of consenting to. That which
France pretended, was the terms of the Peace of Aix, and retaining the County
of Burgundy which had been since conquered; or if either this Province, or some
of the most important Frontier Towns of Flanders should be restored; then an
equivalent to be made them for such restitution. The Spaniards talked of
nothing less than the Peace of the Pyrenees; and that they would rather lose
the rest of Flanders by the War, than part with Burgundy by the Peace; and
said, both the King and the States were as much concerned in Flanders, as the
Crown of Spain; and had the same Interest to see it safe by a War or a Peace,
which could not by such a Frontier as was left by that of Aix.

That which my Lord Arlington had proposed to the Prince and Pensioner, and
which passed for his Majesty's Sentiment, tho he pretended no Orders, was the
terms of Aix la Capelle; but in regard of the necessity for the Spaniards to
have a better Frontier in Flanders than was left by that Peace, That the French
should give up Aeth, and Charleroy, and Oudenarde for Air, and St. Omer: And
that if they parted with the County of Burgundy, it should be for something in
exchange. His Majesty commanded me to assure the Prince, That if a Peace could
be made upon these terms, or any so near them, that he might hope to obtain the
consent of France; His Majesty for the security of Flanders would give his own
Gaurranty to the Peace, and enter into the strictest Alliance the States could
desire for preserving it, or defending Flanders in case of a new rupture. He
bid me further assure the Prince, That for his Patrimonial Lands in Burgundy
(which were about eight thousand Pounds a year, and Lordships of the greatest
Royalty in that County) he would undertake for his secure possessing them, tho
that County should remain in the French hands, or for selling them to that
King, and at what price the Prince himself could think fit to value them.

The Prince's Answer was, That for his own part, he could be very well content
to leave the terms of a Peace to his Majesty himself, and believed the States
would do so too; but they were both engaged by Treaty and Honor to their
Allies, and there was no thought of making Peace without them. That he believed
the Spaniards might be persuaded to it upon the terms of Aix, with restitution
only of Aeth, Charleroy, and Oudenarde, toward composing some kind of
necessary Frontier on that side; but to part with Air and St Omer without any
further and greater exchange, he believed they would not in the present posture
of things. That for France retaining the County of Burgundy, as Conquered in
this last War, he was sure neither Spain nor the Emperor would ever consent to
it, unless they were beaten into it by disasters they had no reason to expect;
though for his own part, he should be content with it, provided the French would
restore Tournay, Courtray, Lisle, and Doway, with their dependencies, to the
Spaniards in lieu of it, because by that means Flanders would have a secure
Frontier on that side, and a reasonable good one by Aeth and Charleroy on the
other; and the security of Flanders was the chief interest of the States upon
the Peace. That for himself, he thanked his Majesty for his offer, as to his
Lands in Burgundy; but they never came into his thought upon the terms of a
Peace, nor should ever hinder it; but on the other side, he would be content to
lose them all, to gain one good Town more for the Spanjards in Flanders.

When I put him in mind, as the King ordered me, of the apprehensions He and
the States might have of the Greatness of the House of Austria, if their
Successes continued; he told me, There was no need of that, till they should go
beyond the Peace of the Pyrenees: whenever that should happen, he should be as
much a French man as he was now a Spaniard, but not before. He ended, in
desiring, That whatever Plan his Majesty thought fit to propose for a Peace, he
would do it at the Congress at Nimeguen; for the number and variety of
Pretensions and Interests were grown so great, by all the Parties now engaged
in a war, that it could not be done in any other place; and for his part, he
could never consent to any Treaty separate from his Allies. That he believed
they would be reasonable; and if France would be so too, the Peace might be
made; if not, perhaps another Campania might bring them to reason; and that
this might have done it, if some differences between him and the Spanjards, in
the Actions proposed, had not hindered the successes they hoped for in
Flanders, and if Montecuculi's impatience to be at Vienna, and pass the Winter
there upon the Factions stirring at Court, had not made him repass the Rhine,
and take his Winter Quarters in the Circles of the Empire there; because if he
had done it in Alsace, he doubted his presence with the Army might be thought
necessary.

After this Conference, and no return from His Majesty to the account I gave
him of it, the Discourse ceased of Private Measures to be agreed to between His
Majesty and the Prince and States, for promoting a Peace; and all thoughts
began now to turn upon forming the Congress at Nimeguen.

I had another testimony given me of the firmness I had always found in the
Prince upon the subject of the Peace, by what one of the Spanish Ministers told
me had lately passed between him and the Duke of Villa Hermosa. His Highness
had a long pretense depending at Madrid, for about Two hundred thousand Pounds,
owing to his Family from that Crown since the Peace of Munster. It had ever
been delayed though never refused; an Agent from the Prince had of late very much
pressed the Queen Regent of Spain upon this Subject, and with much ado had
obtained an Order for Fifty thousand Pounds, and Bills were put into his hands
by the Ministers there, which when they arrived in Flanders, instead of being
paid, they were Protested. The Duke Villa Hermosa was so ashamed of this
treatment, that he sent a person purposely to excuse it to the Prince, and
assure him the fault was not in the Queen nor Ministers, but only in the choice
of hands by which it was transmitted, and desired his Highness would not take
it ill of the Queen. The Prince answered, No, not at all; on the other side, I
have reason to take it well of the Queen, for if she did not think me the
honestest Man in the World, she would not use me so; however, nothing of this
kind shall hinder me from doing what I owe to my Allies, or to my Honor.

Notwithstanding all I had written from the Prince to His Majesty upon this
Subject, yet my Lord Arlington, upon pretended intelligence from his Relations
in Holland, endeavored to persuade him that he knew not the Prince's mind for
want of some body that had more credit with him than I had; and at the same
time he pursued the Prince by Letters, to desire the King to send over some
such person as he might treat with in the last confidence upon all matters
between them. The Prince showed me his Letters, and bid me assure the King and
my Lord Treasurer, that he could say no more than he had done to me, and would
not say so much to any other Man. However my Lord Arlington upon the former
suggestions, prevailed with the King to send over Sir Gabriel Sylvius
instructed, to know the bottom of the Prince's Mind upon the Subject of the
Peace, before the Campania began. He acquainted the Prince with this
resolution, and that he was a person they knew His Highness would trust; The
Prince showed me this Letter too, and said, He knew not what he meant; that
Lord Arlington knew as well as any Man how far he trusted both Sir Gabriel
Sylvius and me; This good usage ended all Correspondence between Lord Arlington
and me, which had lasted by Letters to this time, though coldly since my being
last in England: But upon Sir Gabriel Sylvius's coming to the Hague in January,
and my preparation to go for Nimeguen, I ended that scene, having not learned
enough of the Age, nor the Court I lived in, to act an unsincere part either in
Friendship or in Love.

When Sir Gabriel came to the Hague, he passed for a Man of some great
Intrigue, was perpetually at Court, or in Conversation and Visits with the
persons near the Prince, or most employed in the State; but he and Lord
Arlington were soon satisfied to how good purpose he came over; for the Prince,
who is the sincerest Man in the World, hating all tricks, and those that use
them, gave him no mark of the least confidence while he stayed, and sent him
away with a very plain one of the contrary, by trusting another hand with all
he writ of consequence into England, before he went into the Field. The truth
is, the Prince took this Journey of his to have been designed by my Lord
Arlington, both out of spite to me, and to give jealousies to the
Confederates, by the suspicion of something in agitation between the King and
the Prince, that I was not thought fit to be trusted with; and indeed several
of their Ministers at the Hague were apt to fall into such surmises: But
Monsieur de Lyra a Spanish Minister, a person much credited in his own Court,
and much in the Prince's Confidence, was ever firm in the belief of His
Highnesses Honor and Constancy (which he used to say his Master trusted to,
more than to any Treaties) and so helped to prevent all such impressions.

In the mean time, all motions necessary toward forming the Congress at
Nimeguen began to be made by the several Parties, and gave appearances of the
Ambassadors meeting suddenly there. The great obstruction hitherto had been the
point of Prince William of Furstenberg's Liberty, which France had absolutely
insisted on before they sent their Ambassadors, and the Emperor had been
induced to promise only upon conclusion of the Treaty. But an Expedient was
found out to salve the Honor of France upon this point, rather than the Treaty
should be hindered, which was at that time thought necessary for their Affairs.
The Bishop of Strasburg made a formal request to the King of France, That no
Private Interests, or Respects of his Brother, might delay the Treaty of a
Peace which was of so much consequence to all Christendom; and this Request
being at this time easily received and granted, no further difficulty was made
upon this point.

His Majesty thereupon invited all the Princes concerned in the War, to hasten
away their Ministers to the place of Congress, and acquainted them with his
having ordered his own to repair immediately thither; and having some Months
before appointed the Lord Berkly (then Ambassador at Paris) Sir William Temple,
and Sir Lionel Jenkins His Ambassadors, Mediators, and Plenipotentiaries for
the Treaty of Nimeguen; Sir Lionel was accordingly dispatched away, and arrived
at the Hague toward the end of January 1676. and brought with him our
instructions for that Ambassy; and after some few days stay at the Hague, went
away for Nimeguen. But the Expedition of the Pasports, from and to all the
Ministers of the several Parties, having been for some time under my care, and
many of them come to my hands, though others were entangled still in some
difficulty or other, we both concluded it necessary for me to continue at the
Hague till this was dispatched, whilst Sir Lionel should go upon the place of
Congress, and by the presence of a Mediator, invite the rest to make more haste
than many of them seemed disposed to at this time.

The French Ambassadors were already come to Charleville, where they stayed for
their Pasports only to go on with their Journey; and upon Sir Lionel's arrival
at the Hague, the Dutch Ambassadors came to us to acquaint us with the States
Orders for their immediate repair to Nimeguen, and for the Magistrates of that
City (which they now considered as a Neutral Town) to receive all Orders from
us the Mediators, and particularly any we pleased to give about our reception
upon our arrival there.

We told them, His Majesty's thoughts were upon the successes of the Treaty,
and that nothing could more obstruct it than the Ceremonies which used to
attend those Meetings; and therefore he ordered us to introduce as much as we
could the method of all the Ambassadors, living there as much like private men,
as could consist with the Honor of their Characters; and to this end, that we
should make no public Entries, and give thereby an example to those that came
after us.

To avoid all punctilio's about the time of the several Parties dispatching the
Passports; it was agreed that all should be sent to the Hague from the several
Courts, and there should be put into my hands, to the end, that when I found my
self possessed, I should make the distribution reciprocally to both Parties at
the same time. Those of France were early with me, but short in some points of
those from the Confederates; the chief whereof was the omission of Liberty
granted to the Ambassadors to dispatch Couriers to their Masters Courts upon
Passports of the respective Ambassadors, which was thought necessary for the
progress of the Treaty. Another was the omission of Passports for the Duke of
Lorain's Ministers in the form usual and expected; for whereas the Crown of
France had always treated the former Dukes of Lorain with the Titles of Duke,
and Appellations of Brother; their Passports now treated the new Duke only with
Cousin, and Prince Charles of Lorain; the rest were minute differences, or
mistakes of words, which are not worth the mention, and were easily surmounted.
Of all these his Majesty had early notice, and employed his Offices toward
France for some months, without answer upon that of Lorain, and with positive
refusal of inserting the Clause for liberty of Pasports, tho Monsieur Van
Beuningham several times during this pause writ to the States, That the King
often assured him (their Ambassador at London,) That there should be no
difficulty in the business of Loroin.

About the beginning of February this year 1676. I received a Letter from
Monsieur Pompone, then Secretary for the Foreign Affairs in France, to tell me,
That his Master having been acquainted from His Majesty with the difficulties
occurred in forming the Congress, had ordered him to let me know his Reasons
upon them. As to that of Couriers, That he thought it not fit to have his
Countries and Towns lie open to his Enemies Observations and Discoveries, upon
pretext of such Couriers frequent passage; That the inconvenience would be the
same to the Confederates; and that he asked no more than he gave. As to the
Point of Lorain, That his Master could not give Passports with the style of
Duke, which carried that of Brother, pretending that Duchy belonged to His
Most Christian Majesty by the Treaty in 1662. between Him and the last Duke.

Not many days after, I received notice from Secretary Williamson, of the same
Account having been given His Majesty by Monsieur Ruvigny, with order to
acquaint the States with it; which I had not done upon Monsieur Pompone's
Letter, as not thinking fit to make any paces in these matters without Orders
from His Majesty. The States and all their Allies were very much surprised with
this pretense of Lorain, which France had never before advanced, or so much as
mentioned, either upon the seizure of that Duchy, or since that time, in the
Accounts of it by their Ministers in the several Courts of Christendom; they
had only professed to have found such a seizure necessary for preserving the
Peace wherein Christendom then was, from the dangerous or uncertain
dispositions of that present Duke, with whom His Most Christian Majesty could
take no certain Measures, and his Enemies would be practicing; but that it was
without any intention of retaining any part of that Duchy otherwise than for
this end of preserving the Peace of Christendom. All this, with many more
Circumstances, Monsieur Serinchamps, the Lorain Envoy, alleged at the
Conferences with the States and Allies upon this occasion; and for the Treaty
of 1662. he seemed to wonder it should ever be mentioned, as a thing wholly
invalid, and, as every body thought, thereupon long since forgotten; That the
last Duke had no power to dispose of that Duchy from his Nephew; because if
the Salique Law had place in Lorain, it was unalienable from the next
Heir-male: if the Feminine Succession, then that Duke himself had no Title at
all to it, but it belonged to the present Duke, even in the life of his Uncle.
Secondly, That it was invalid, by the French nonperformance of the only
condition on their side, upon which the Old Duke pretended to have made it;
which was, That the Princes of that Family should be assumed into the Rank of
Princes of the Blood in France; and that upon registring that Treaty of 1662.
in the parliament of Paris, without that Clause, the Old Duke had declared it
void within three weeks after it was made. Thirdly, That a Treaty was concluded
the year after, being 1663. at Marsal, between the Most Christian King and the
said Duke, by which he was to continue the possession of all his Territories,
besides Marsal, in the same manner as he enjoyed them by the Treaty of 1661. as
he did till the seizure of them by France in 1670. during a profound Peace, and
with the Professions abovementioned made by France to His Majesty at that time
(as Monsieur Serinchamps averred) as well as to the other Courts of Christendom.

These Arguments were of such force with all the Confederates, that they were
unanimous and firm in positively insisting upon the Pasports of that Duke, with
the usual forms; and the more, since France had advanced a pretense to that
Duchy, which was never thought of before among the Allies. The Austrian
Ministers told me frankly, That the Treaty should never be without this
allowance of the Duke of Lorain's Title, nor the Peace without his Restitution.
The States said, They for their parts would willingly refer his, and any other
matters concerning the Treaty, to His Majesty's arbitration; but that they were
bound already by other Treaties to their Allies; and particularly, to the Duke
of Lorain, and could not break from them upon a Point of such apparent Right as
this. The Prince spoke the same Language, and said further, That he was bound
by his Oath of Stadtholder, among other things, to endeavor to the utmost of
his power to keep the States to the due observance of their Treaties; and so,
by the Grace of God, he would do in This as well as Others.

All this being signified to His Majesty, and by Him to France that Court
continued peremptory in the matter; and the Allies persisting in the same
disposition, the Congress began to be looked upon from all sides as a thing
ended before it began. The Allies took this pretense for a Declaration from
France of their Resolution there should be no Treaty at present; and grounded
it upon some great expectation or design they had upon further progresses in
Sicily, or new ones in Naples, or else from hopes of bringing in the Poles to
the assistance of Sweden.

But the truth was, That France had been forced to discover upon this Incident
what they had always at heart; and I ever observed in the course of all these
Negotiations, that there were three Points for which France thought the War
worth continuing to the last extremity, which were, rather than restore Lorain
or Burgundy, or leave a good Frontier on both sides of the Spanish Territories
in Flanders. The last would hinder the progress of their great Design, whether
of extending their Empire only to the Rhine, or beyond it: The two first would
hinder their Conquest of Flanders, whenever they pursued the finishing of that
Adventure, by leaving a passage for the Germans to relieve it, and by so great
and dangerous a diversion as entering France through Lorain or Burgundy.

His Majesty most certainly disapproved, and was surpised with this pretense
of France to the Duchy of Lorain; but yet was prevailed with by Monsieur
Ruvigny to offer the expedient of His Majesty as Mediator, giving all Pasports
necessary to the Congress at Nimeguen. Monsieur Van Beuningham in this matter
acted the part rather of a Bourgomaster of Amsterdam, than an Ambassador of the
States; and to make court to that Town, who began to express great impatience
for the Peace, he assured His Majesty, That his Masters could not fail of
consenting to this expedient. I foresaw it would be refused, and gave his
Majesty notice of it before I proposed it to the States, as thinking His Honor
and that of the Mediation concerned in such a refusal; but receiving direct
Orders to propose it, I did so. The States told me, They would of themselves
consent to this, or whatever else His Majesty should propose; but having
communicated it to their Allies, they would not hear of it; some refusing it
with heat, and reflection upon His Majesty's partiality to France; others with
sullenness and silence, referring themselves to new Orders from their Masters.

Hereupon the Congress grew wholly desperate, and all Parties prepared for the
Field, without any other View, for the three months following the first rise of
this Pretention. In the mean time, there passed a Fight between the French, and
Dutch, and Spanish Ships near Messina, wherein de Ruyter was shot in the Heel
by a Cannon-bullet, of which he died within few days after, and determined the
greatest loss to have certainly happened on that side, by that of the ablest
Sea-Captain of his Age, and the best Servant that any Prince or State could
have: For the rest, the Advantage was not considerable of either part in this
Fight, nor the consequence material in the progress of the French Arms in
Sicily, or in any prospect of great Enterprises upon Naples. On the other side,
the Swedish Affairs went very ill in Pomerania, and were threatened with great
Invasions the following Campaign; both from Denmark and Brandenburgh. This
decry'd the Councels of those Persons that engaged them in this Quarrel. Two
Ambassadors, Count Oxenstorn and Olivacrown, were appointed for the Treaty at
Nimeguen, who had been ever of contrary Sentiments or Faction, which now began
to prevail in the Swedish Court: They grew impatient for a Peace, and for the
Treaty in order to it: They declared their disapproval of the French Pretension
raised to Lorain, which seemed only to obstruct it; and that they would send
their Ministers to the Congress, whether the French came or no: and their
Commissary at the Hague so well seconded these new dispositions of his Court,
that whilst the Congress looked desperate by the declared obstinacy of both
sides upon the Point of Lorain, Ships and Passports were dispatched by the
States, with consent of their Allies, to fetch the Swedish Ambassador from
Gottenburgh into Holland.

The Confederates were besides, much animated in their hopes, from the
dispositions and humors expressed in a late Session of Parliament in England,
which grew so high against the French, or at least upon that pretense, against
the present Conduct of his Majesty or his Ministers, that the King Prorogued
them about Christmas, before any of the matters projected by the warm Men
amongst the House of Commons, were brought into form.

The French were upon their march into Flanders, and that King at the Head of a
great and brave Army, threatening some great Enterprise. The Prince was
preparing to go away into the Field, with resolution and hopes of having the
honor of a Battle at the opening of the Campania; all thoughts of the Congress
meeting before the end of it, were laid aside, when about the middle of May I
was extremely surpised to receive a Packet from Secretary Williamson, with the
French Passports for the Duke of Lorain's Ministers, in the Form, and with the
Styles demanded by the Allies. And hereupon all difficulties being removed the
Passports were exchanged by the end of May.

Some days were lost by a new demand of the Allies for Passports likewise, for
the Duke of Nieuburgh's Ministers, who was newly entered into the common
Alliance; and the same paces were expected likewise from the Duke of Bavaria;
(at least, so the Germans flattered themselves or their Friends.) Upon this,
some of the Ministers of the Allies at the Hague, whose Masters were very
unwilling the Congress should begin before the campania ended, prevailed with
the States to send Deputies to me, to demand Passports for the Duke of
Nieuburgh, and any other Princes that should enter into their Alliance; and to
declare, That if these were refused by France, they would look upon what had
been already granted, as void.

I was something surprised at so unexpected a Message from the States; and told
their Deputies, That such a Resolution was unpracticable; That His Majesty had
undertaken to procure Passports for the Parties engaged in the War, and all the
Allies they had named on both sides, which was done, and thereupon the Congress
ready to begin, and such a delay as this would occasion, was both a disrespect
to His Majesty, and that could not be consented by France, nor the Reciprocal
of it by any of the Allies that foresaw the Consequences which might happen
upon it; That some Allie of France might fall off to the Confederates, or some
of the Confederates to France, and with such Circumstances, as it could not be
expected either of them should think fit to give Passports, or treat with them
at the Congress: nor was it a thing in any form, to demand Passports, without
naming for whom they should be. After several other exceptions, the Deputies
desired me to let them represent my reasons against it, to the States, and to
expect their Answer till the next afternoon; and one of them told me as he went
out, That I had all the reason in the world, and that they had been too easy
in it upon the instances of some Allies. Next day the Deputies came to let me
know, the States had altered their resolution, and desired only, That His
Majesty would procure Passports for the Duke of Nieuburgh's Ministers, which I
easily undertook. This Change had not passed without violent heats between the
States Deputies and the Ministers of some Allies, who pressed them so far, as
one of the Deputies answered him, Que pretendez vous donc, What do you intend
then, Sirs, to make us be torn in pieces by the Rabble?
Messieurs, de nous fair, deschirer par la Canaille? Which shows the
disposition that run so generally at this time throughout the Trading Provinces
toward a Peace.

There remained now but one Preliminary undetermined, which was, To fix some
extent of Neutral Country about the Place of Congress: France would have
extended it two leagues, round; the Allies would have it bounded of one side by
the River of the Waal, upon which Nimeguen stood, and was divided by it from
the Betow, a part of the Province of Holland, and through which lay the strait
Road into the rest of that Country. Both these Proposals were grounded upon
the same reason: That of France to facilitate the Commerce of their Ambassadors
with the Towns of Holland, incite the desires, and enter into Practices of
Peace distinct from the motions of the Congress; That of the Allies, to prevent
or encumber the too easy and undiscovered passage of the French Emissaries
upon this occasion. However, both were positive in their Opinions; so as this
matter came not to be determined till some time after the Congress began, and
but lamely then.

CHAP. II.
THE Prince was now ready to go into the Field, and told me, That before he
went, he must have some talk with me in private and at leisure; and, to that
purpose, desired it might be in the Garden of Hounslerdyke. We appointed the
hour, and met accordingly. He told me, I would easily believe, that being the
only Son that was left of his Family, he was often pressed by his Friends to
think of Marrying, and had many persons proposed to him, as their several
humors led them. That, for his own part, he knew it was a thing to be done at
one time or other; but that he had hitherto excused the thoughts of it,
otherwise than in general, till the War was ended. That, besides his own
Friends, the Deputies of the States begun to press him more earnestly every
day, and the more, as they saw the War like to continue; and perhaps they had
more reason to do it than any others. That he had at last promised them he
would think of it more seriously and particularly; and so he had, and resolved
he would marry; but the choice of a person he thought more difficult. That he
found himself inclined to no Proposals had been made him out of France or
Germany, nor indeed to any that had been mentioned upon this occasion by any of
his Friends, but that of England. That before he concluded to make any paces
that way, he was resolved to have my Opinion upon two Points; but yet would not
ask it, unless I promised to answer him as a Friend, or at least an indifferent
Person, and not as the King's Ambassador. When I told him he should be obeyed,
he went on, and said, That he would confess to me, during the late War, neither
the States, nor He in particular, were without applications made them from
several Persons, and considerable, in England, who would fain have engaged them
to Head the Discontents that were raised by the Conduct of the Court in that
whole War, which he knew was begun and carried on quite contrary to the humor
of the Nation, and might, perhaps, have proved very dangerous to the Crown, if
it had not ended as it did. That all these persons who pretended to be much his
Friends, were extremely against any thoughts of his marrying in England. Their
Reasons were, That he would by it lose all the Esteem and Interest he had
there, and be believed to have run wholly into the dispositions and designs of
the Court, which were generally thought so different from those of the Nation,
especially upon the Point of Religion, that his Friends there did not believe
the Government could be long without some great Disturbance, unless they
changed their Measures, which was not esteemed very likely to be done; and upon
this he desired my thoughts as a Friend. The next was upon the Person and
Dispositions of the Young Lady; for though it would not pass in the World, for a
Prince to seem concerned in those particulars; yet for himself, he would tell
me, without any sort of affectation, that he was so, and in such a degree, that
no Circumstances of Fortune or Interest would engage him, without those of the
Person, especially those of Humor and Dispositions. That he might, perhaps, be
not very easy for a Wife to live with; he was sure he should not to such Wives
as were generally in the Courts of this Age. That if he should meet with one to
give him trouble at home, 'twas what he should not be able to bear, who was
like to have enough abroad in the course of his Life; and that after the manner
he was resolved to live with a Wife, which should be the best he could. He
would have one that he thought likely to live well with him, which he thought
chiefly depended upon their Disposition and Education; and if I knew any thing
particular of the Lady Mary in these points, he desired me to tell him freely.

I answered his Highness, That I was very glad to find he was resolved to
Marry, being what he owed his Family and Friends; That I was much more pleased
that his inclination led him to endeavor it in England. That I thought it as
much for his interest, as others of his English Friends thought it was against
it. That the King and his Highness would ever be able to do one another more
good, and more harm, than any other Princes could do either of them, by being
Friends or Enemies. That it was a great step to be one degree nearer the Crown,
and in all appearance the next. That for his Friends (as they pretended) in
England, they must see much further than I did, to believe the King in any such
dangers or difficulties as they imagined. That the Crown of England stood upon
surer foundations than ever it had done in former times, and the more for what
had passed in the last Reign; and that I believed the people would be found
better Subjects than perhaps the King himself believed them. That it was
however in his power to be as well with them as he pleased, and to make as
short turns to such an end; if not, yet with the help of a little good
husbandry, he might pass his Reign in Peace, though not perhaps with so much ease
at home, or glory abroad, as if he fell into the vein of his pople. That if the
Court were of sentiments different from those of His Highness, yet his Adv^^ers
would make him a greater Compliment in believing him as likely to induce the
Court to his, as in concluding they would bring him to theirs; and if that
should happen, the most seditious men in England would be hard put to it to
find an ill side in such a Match. That for the other point, I could say nothing
to it, but that I had always heard my Wife and my Sister speak with all the
advantage that could be of what they could discern in a Princess so young, and
more from what they had been told by the Governess, with whom they had a
particular friendship, and who they were sure took all the care that could be
in so much of Education as fell to her share.

After two hours discourse upon this subject, the Prince concluded he would
enter upon this pursuit; and in order to it, would write both to the King and
the Duke to beg their favor to him in it, and their leave, that he might go
over into England at the end of the Campania; That my Wife, who was then going
over upon my private Affairs, should carry and deliver both his Letters; and
during her stay there, should endeavor to inform her self the most
particularly she could, of all that concerned the Person, Humor, and
Dispositions of the young Princess, in which he seemed so much concerned.

Within two or three days after these Discourses, the Prince brought his
Letters to my Wife, and went immediately to the Army, and she went suddenly
after into England with those Dispatches, and left me preparing for my Journey
to Nimeguen, where the Dutch first, and after them the French Ambassadors were
arrived, and consequently those of the two principal Parties in the War.

Before I went, Du Moulin met my Chaplain in the Forhaut, and told him, He was
so ill, that he knew he had not long to live, and that he could not die in
quiet, without asking my Pardon for so many false and injurious things as he
confessed to have said of me since my last Ambassy there, though he had before
had all the esteem that could be for me. He desired my Chaplain, since I had
always refused to see him, that he would do this Office for him, and ask my
Pardon as from a dying Man. This Moulin, after having been much employed and
favored by my Lord Arlington, during the Councels and Vogue of of the Triple
Alliance, and disgraced by him after the change of those Measures in England,
went over into Holland, was entertained by the Prince as one of his
Secretaries, grew into great favor and confidence during the War, was made use
of by the Discontents of England in their Applications at the Hague, was
thought worth all my Lord Arlington's instances and endeavors when he was at
the Hague, to remove him from the Prince's Service. I received afterward
Commands to the same purpose, and compassed it not without time and difficulty;
he had not been long laid aside when this happened; and whether that, or the
knowledge of the Prince's late resolution to pursue the Match in England,
helped to break his heart, or whether it were a Consumption, as his Friends
gave out, I know not, but he died soon after, and with him the Intrigues of
that Party in England, that had for some time employed him, and busied his
Friends in Holland.

After many delays in the Dispatch, and exchange of the Passports, I got loose
from the Hague about the beginning of July 1676. upon my journey to Nimeguen,
where the French and Dutch Ambassadors being already arrived, pressed very much
for my coming, in regard Sir Lionel Jenkins excused himself from performing any
acts or Offices of the Mediation, till my arrival, and contented himself to
pass only the usual Visits. The dispositions I observed in the several Parties
toward the success of this Congress, when I went in order to the opening of
it, were very different, and very unlikely to draw it to any sudden issue; but
only to attend and be Governed by the Successes of the several Armies in the
Field, and the events expected from the Actions of the Campania. The French had
given all the facility they could for some Months past to the forming of the
Congress, and made all the haste they could for their Ambassadors to be upon
the place, desiring no better Peace than upon the present Plan of Affairs; and
hoping by their forwardness, and the great backwardness of some of the Allies,
to make way for some separate Treaties with those among them who began to be
impatient for the Peace. The House of Austria was sullen, as losers use to be,
and so were very slow and testy in all their paces toward this Treaty; The
Germans hoping for great successes of their Arms in this Campania, and the
Spaniards flattering themselves with the Interests His Majesty had in the
preservation of Flanders, and with the part which the Parliament in England
seemed of late to have taken in their Affairs, and both were in hopes that
something might arise from one of these sides, to make room for pretensions
that could not be in countenance as things stood at present. The Swede was very
earnest for a Peace, as having more hopes of recovering himself that way, than
by the course of a War. Denmark and Brandenburgh were violent for continuing
the War, finding the Swedes weak, divided, and unrelievable by France any
otherwise than with their Moneys, and hoping to drive them this Summer out of
Germany. The States were very desirous of the Peace, having no pretenses of
their own, but to get well out of a War that ruined their Trade, and drained
their Money, but they durst not break from their Confederates, not trusting
England enough, nor France at all, so as to leave themselves in a condition of
depending upon either of them after the Peace should be made. One general
Thread run through the Councils on both sides; on the French, to break the
confidence and union of the Confederacy by different paces and advances to the
several Parties in the course of the Treaty; on the Confederates, to preserve
the same confidence and union with which they had carried on the War, even
after the Peace should be made. His Majesty, though he was offered by some of the
Parties to be Arbiter as well as Mediator in the present differences, and was
known by them all to have it in his power to make that figure as he pleased,
yet chose the other, and gave us orders accordingly, only to perform the
Offices of a bare Mediation, and to avoid the Parties submitting their
differences to his determination; so that upon the whole, it was easy to
foresee the Congress would only prove a business of form, and proceed no
otherwise than as it should be moved, or rather governed by the events of the
Field.

However, the opening of it might well be called the dawn of a Peace; which put
me in mind of the only Prophecy of this sort that I had ever thought worth
taking notice of; nor should I have done so, but that Monsieur Colbert showed
it me at my coming to Nimeguen, and made me remember to have seen it in my Lord
Arlington's hands in the year 1668. who told me it was very old, and had been
found in some Abbey of Germany. It was in these terms: The Lilly shall Invade
the Land of the Lion, bearing wild Beasts in its Arms; the Eagle shall move its
Wings, and the Son of Man shall come to his assistance from the South; then
there shall be great War throughout the World; but after four Years, Peace
shall shine forth, and the Son of Man be delivered by those from whom his ruin
was expected.
Lilium intrabit in terram Leonis feras in brachiis gerens, Aquila movebit
alas, and in auxilium veniet filius hominis ab Austro, tunc erit ingens bellum
per totum terrarum orbem, sed post quatuor annos pax elucescet, and salus erit
filio hominis unde exitium putabatur. Those that have a mind to give credit to
such Prophesies from the course of events, must allow the Leopards (the Ancient
Arms of England) to be meant by Feras; the King of Spain by filius hominis; the
Congress at Nimeguen (four years after the War began) by the Dawn of Peace; and
Spain's having been saved by the States, or the Prince of Orange, by those from
whom their ruin was expected. But I easily believe, that as most Prophecies
that run the World, arise from the Contrivances of Crafty, or the Dreams of
Enthusiastical Heads; and the Sense of them (where there is any) lies wrapped up
in mystical or incoherent expressions, fit to receive many sorts of
Interpretations; and some perhaps from the leisure of great Wits that are ill
entertained, and seek diversion to themselves, by writing things at random,
with the scornful thought of amuzing the World about nothing; so others of them
are broached for old, either after events happen, or when they are so probable
as to be easily conjectured by foreseeing men And it seems strange, that of
the first kind (being so many) no more happen to be fulfilled with the help of
so much inclination to credit, as well as so much invention to wrest the
meaning of words to the sense pretended. But whether this I mention may not
have been one of the last kind, is uncertain; for in that very year it was
produced, and given my Lord Arlington by a French Man, as he told me, the
design of this War was not only laying, but well advanced by the Practices of
Monsieur Colbert, upon the Ministers of our Court, (where he was then
Ambassador) and by the violent humor of my Lord Clifford to enter the Leagues
then projected by France; so that the very day the Parliament gave his Majesty
a mighty sum of Money to Compliment him upon so applauded a Council and Success
as that of the Triple Alliance in the Year 1668. That Lord, coming out of the
House of Commons, where he was then a Member, could not hold saying to a Friend
of mine, who came out with him, That for all this great joy, it must not be
long before we have another War with Holland. And which of these two Prophesies
were the more to be considered, or the better ininspir'd, I leave it to every
one to guess as they please.

Nimeguen is seated upon the side of a Hill, which is the last of Germany, and
stoops upon the River Woal, that washes the lower part of the Town, and divides
it from the Betow, an Island lying all upon flat low Ground, between the Woal
and the old Rhine, which was the ancient Seat of those the Romans called
Batavians, and for their Bravery and love of Liberty, took into their
Confederacy, when they subjected all the Neighboring parts of Gaul and
Germany. Betow and Woal were the ancient German, Names, and turned into Batavia
and Voholis by the Roman terminations, as Colen and Cleve are Roman names
changed into German. Betow signifies in the old German, fat Earth, as Velow, (a
great Heathey Country on the other side the Rhine) does course, or barren Earth
Whether Nimeguen came from Neomagum, or Neomagum from Nimegue, I cannot
determine; but the old Castle, as well as many antiquities about it, show it to
have been a Colony of the Romans, and it is seated in very good Air, encompas'd
on three sides by great and dry Heaths, is well built, and inhabited by a good
sort of People.

I excused my self from letting the Magistrates of Nimeguen know what time I
designed my arrival there, though they sent to inform themselves while I was upon
the way; and I refused any Ceremonies at Entry, to prevent that pretense in
other Ambassadors, and and the troubles and disturbances such Public
Receptions might occasion. However I could not escape some part of it, for
which I had like to have paid a great deal more than 'twas worth. The River of
Nimeguen is very rapid in the midst of the Stream, which lies near the Town,
and spreads very broad upon the other side to the Betow, being upon flat
grounds. The first part of it is passed by a very large Ferry-Boat, which held
at once my two Coaches and six Horses, one Wagon with my Trunks, eight Saddle
Horses, and would have received many more. This Boat is of a contrivance so
singular, as well as so commodious, that I have much wondered never to have seen
it practiced in any other place; for the force of the Stream drives the Boat
cross the River without the least pains of the men, being kept to its course by
a strong Cable extended from one side to the other, and fastened to a Pully set
up for that purpose in the Boat; so that no stress of Weather hinders this
passage, and the harder the Stream runs, the sooner it is made. Where the River
grows shallow, and the Current slack on the Betow side, it is supplied by a
Bridge of Planks for about two hundred Paces, which are ill kept, many loose or
shaking, and no defense on the sides. When my Coaches were upon this Bridge,
the Cannon of the Town began to Fire, and so continued all the while I was upon
the River, which was a piece of Civility well understood, and my Horses were so
unruly with that noise and the clatter of the Planks, that they were much
likelier to have carried me into the River than the Boat. But when with the
help of my Servants on Foot that led them, we got in there, we were safe, as in
a House, and got well away to the Town, where I landed at Sir Lionel Jenkin's
House, and stayed there till late in the Evening, to avoid any Visits or
Ceremonies that Night.

The next Day I was visited by the French Ambassadors, with Monsieur D' Avaux;
there passed little but what was common upon such occasions: but the Marshall
D'Estrades, and Monsieur Colbert being of my particular acquaintance in my
former Ambassies at the Hague and Aix la Chapelle, they pretended in their
first separate Visits, to enter with me upon Points and terms of great
Confidence, and upon matters that gave me light into the whole design of
France, intended by the steps of this Treaty to which they had of late showed
so great forwardness, at least in the forming of this Congress and dispatch of
their Ambassadors, before those of the Allies were in any motion, or perhaps
disposition toward it. They both told me, That they had Express and Private
Orders from the King their Master, to make me particular Compliments upon the
esteem his most Christian Majesty had for my Person, and to make their
Application wholly to me in the course of this Negotiation, tho one of the
Mediators came from residing in their own Court; but they knew very well I had
the King my Master's Confidence, as well as that of his Ministers; and that
having had the framing of this Congress from the first Overtures, and through
all the Preliminaries, there was no other hand but mine capable of finishing
it; and therefore they presaged me all the glory of it. That I might reckon
upon all the facility their Master could give toward it; but after such
successes in the War, and at the Head of so great Forces, both at Land and Sea,
it could not be expected he should yield to restore what his Arms had
Conquered. On the other side, they knew very well, though the States were bent upon
the Peace, yet the frowardness or extravagant demands of their Allies, would
engage them as long as they would in the War, unless the Prince of Orange would
interpose his Authority, which was so great with all the Allies, that they were
sure of their consenting to whatever Terms the Prince should be resolute in
proposing for the Peace: That to draw it therefore to a happy issue, there was
no way but for his Highness first to agree privately with France upon the
Conditions, and what every Party should content themselves with; and
afterward, in the course of the Treaty, to draw all things, by concert
together, to the scope agreed between them; in which the Prince might make use
of the known temper of the States to bring it to a sudden issue, and to make a
separate Peace, in case the unreasonable pretenses of their Allies should
hinder or delay a general one. That this part was acted by the Elector of
Bavaria at Munster, who was in private concert with France through the whole
proceedings of that Treaty though he went on with the Allies in the Public
Transactions; That he owed the greatness of his House to this Council, and to
the consideration and support it had ever since received from the Crown of
France. That by pursuing the same at Nimeguen, it would be in the Prince of
Orange's power to do the same for himself and his Family; and that for what
concerned his own personal Interests and Advantages, their Master had given
them power to assure him, He should have the Carte Blanch, and draw his own
Conditions upon it. That though they had other ways of making up this overture to
the Prince, yet they had order to do it by none but me, if I would charge my
self with it; That they knew the Credit and Confidence I was in with the
Prince, and how far he would defer to my opinions in what concerned the Public
Interests of his Allies as well as his own; And that if I would espouse this
Affair, besides the Glory of having alone given a Peace to Christendom, I might
reckon upon what I pleased my self from the bounty and generosity of the King
their Master.

This was the sum of what was said by them both, tho in several and private
Visits; but I observed Monsieur Colbert to have been instructed with more
particular Confidence, and to design it with me, even apart from both his
Colleagues and mine in the pursuit of this intelligence; but Monsieur D'Estrades
valued himself chiefly upon his entering into it with me preferrable to all
others, though he had several other ways of doing it with the Prince, as well as
into what Practices he should think fit with the States, by the help of so many
Friendships and Habitudes as I knew he had contracted in Holland during so long
a course of employments there.

I answered, That I was obliged to his Most Christian Majesty for his good
opinion, and to them for having given it him, not having my self at all the
Honor of being known to him; That I should make no ill use of this great
Honor and Confidence, whether I should be able to make a good one or no: That
for his Majesty's dispositions to promote the Peace, they knew them as well as
I, but that many considerations had engaged him to instruct us the Mediators
only to promote a general Peace, and not to enter into any paces toward any
particular one, or separate, between the Parties, which such a private and
previous concert between France and the Prince of Orange would look very like;
and therefore I did not see how I could enter upon it without particular Orders
from the King: That besides, I would confess to them, that I did not think it
would be of any great effect if I should receive them; and that the best
Service I could do them (the Ambassadors) was to let them know very freely all
that I knew, or at least thought of the Prince of Orange, and his dispositions
in this great Affair, that they might the better guess what paces to expect
from him; that I was sure, he desired the Peace as much as the States could do;
that the weak Conduct of Spain, and distracted Councels of the Empire, was
enough to force him upon it, without many other circumstances that were too
well known to trouble them with. That the Prince knew very well there would be
no difficulty at all in the Terms of a Peace between France and Holland, and
that all would arise from their Allies, who had entered into the War only in
their defense; That their Faith and Honor were since engaged by many Treaties
concluded with them, and which hindered them from making any separate Peace.
That in all those Treaties the Prince's Honor was more particularly engaged,
upon which personally the several Princes Confederate were known to rely more,
than upon any public Resolution, or Instruments of the States. That if any
ways could be found, or offers made toward bringing his Highness out of this
War, with the safety of his Honor by the satisfaction of his Allies upon any
sort of Terms, I was sure he would fall into them with all the Joy that could
be; but to break from them against all Faith and Agreements by separate
measures, I believed he would never be induced, but by the last extremities of
the War, or necessities at home. And that for his own Personal Interests, I was
confident no advantages to be offered him, would ever be considered by his
Highness, how great soever, but that two or three Towns more or less to the
Spaniards, for the strength of their Frontier in Flanders, would prevail more
with him than all could be done for his Interest in Orange or Burgundy; and
that all other Propositions of advantages more than were avowed in the course
of the Treaty, were, I believed, what he would take ill from any that should
make them; and yet whenever I saw him next, I would tell him of all that had
past in this Conversation. But for the deference they believed his Highness
might have for my Sen^^ments, I would assure them, my Opinion was, he had none
for mine, or any man's else, further than as their Arguments prevailed upon his
Judgment: That he had sense enough to govern himself, and I believed he would
always trust to it, tho he might advise with other men.

After these Conversations, during the time I stayed at Nimeguen, Monsieur
Colbert made many small Attacks of this kind upon me, and sometimes contented
himself only to let fall some things in Conversation, to try if I was disposed
to enter further upon that subject: But the Marshall D'Efirades immediately
after began to turn his Battery another way, which was upon the Pensioner
Fagel, by the intervention of a Person of Mastricht, many of whose Letters the
Pensioner showed me upon the same occasion; and with all the offers that could
be made of Consideration and Advantage to the interests of the Prince of
Orange, which met with no other Reception from his Highness than what I
foretold.

After the first Visits between us and the French and Dutch Ambassadors, whom
we only found at Nimeguen, we received a Visit from the Magistrates of the
Town, who told us, They had order from the States, to remit the Government of
the City to our disposition, during the present Treaty, and to proceed no
otherwise in it, than according to such Orders as they should receive from us
the Mediators. We told them, It was his Majesty's Pleasure, that we should not
at all intermeddle with it; but that on the contrary, we should consign into
the hands of the ordinary Justice of the Town, any of our Domestics that
should be guilty of any Crime against the Peace or Government of the place; and
that Justice should be done upon them, according to their Faults; and that we
should not take upon us to withdraw or protect them form the ordinary course of
Justice, by the Rights and Privileges of that Character his Majesty had given
us.

After this we applied our selves to propose some Regulations for the order and
quiet of so numerous an Assembly as this was like to prove, (in a Town but too
strait, and composed of narrow Streets) and to the establishment of some
compass of Neutral Country about it, for the convenience and divertisement of
the Company that should compose it. For the first we gave in a Paper to the
French and Dutch Ambassadors, with certain Articles, to which we desired their
consent, not doubting, but all others that should come after, would easily fall
into what they should previously agree to upon our desire. They were these, as
we gave them in French, the Language used in all Conferences, and most Papers
that passed in this Treaty.

1. Que pour eviter les inconvenients qui pourront arriver par le grand nombre
de traits dans les rues si etroits and enter des coinssi incommodes, Les
Ambassadeurs Mediateurs proposent, De ne fair les visits, mesme de Ceremony
qu' avec chacun Ambassadeur deux Pages, and quatre Lacquais; and un Carosse, a
deux Chevaux and de n'aller a aucune place de Conference, ou autres lieux
publiques avec plus 1. That for avoiding the Inconvenient that may happen by
the great number of Coaches in the streets, that are so narrow, and the Corners
so incommodious, the Ambassadors Mediators propose, Not to make any Visits,
though they be Visits of Ceremony, with more than Two Pages, and Four Lackeys to
each Ambassador; and to have but one Coach, with two Horses; and not to go to
the Place of Conference, or other public places, with more than one Page and
two Lackeys to every Ambassador.
d'un Page and deux Lacquais a chaque Ambassadeur.

2. Qu'en cas de rencontre de Carosses dans de lieux trop estroits pour le
passage de l'un and de l'autre, chaucun au lieude s'embarasser pour le pasy
apportera toute sort de faeilite, and s'arrestera le premier quant il sera le
premier quant il sera le premier quant il sera le premier averti que le passage
est trop estroit, and fera place en cas que de son cost cela se trouve de plus
facile.

3. Que les Lacquais ne porteront espee, baton ny baguette par les rues, ni les
Pages plus que de baguette seul.

2. That when Coaches meet in these narrow places, where there is not room to
pass by one another, every one, instead of contending for Place or precedence,
shall mind rather to make the passage easy to one another, and stop the first,
if he have the first notice that the Pass is too strait, and also give place to
the other, if it be more easily done on his side, than on the other side.
3. That no Lackey shall carry either sword, staff, or stick in the streets;
nor Pages any more than a little stick.
4. Que les Ambassadeurs sur aucune crime commis par aucun de leur domestiques
contre la paix public, renonceront a la protection des dits domestiques, and
les remettront aussi tossed enter les mains de la Justice de la ville, la priants
and autorisans de proceder contre eux selon les regles ordinaires.

5. Qu' end cas de quelque insulte ou querelle faite par aucun de leurs
Domestiques contre ceux d'aucun auire Ambassadeur ou Ministre Public, Les
Ambassadeurs remettront tells domestiques enter les mains du Maistre de la
Party offensee pour estre puni selon sa discretion.

4. That the Ambassador upon any Crime committed against the public Peace, by
any of their Domestics, shall renounce all Protection of the said Domestics,
and deliver them up into the hands of the Justice of the City; desiring, and
authorizing them to proceed against them according to their ordinary rules.
5. That in case any insult or quarrel should be made by the Domestics of one
Ambassador, with those of another Ambassador, or any other public Minister,
the Ambassadors will deliver up such of their Domestics into the hands of the
Master of the Party offended, to be punished at his discretion.
The French Ambassadors received this Paper with much Approbation and
Compliment to us, upon the design and conception of it; and said, they were
ready to give their full consent to every part of it, excepting only the second
Article; but upon this they could not, without first acquainting their Master,
from whom they had orders to maintain upon all occasions, the Rank that Spain
had yielded to them by Treaty; so that they could not stop or make way for the
Ministers of that Crown, though they would do it for those of Brandenburgh. We
told them, we doubted not but the Emperor's Ambassadors would be content to
fall into the General Rule for so good an end; and that for our selves, the
Mediators, who were out of all Competition by that Quality, yet we resolved to
practice it with the rest, and give the Example.

The French Ambassadors seemed satisfied in their own Opinions; but however
desired they might first communicate it to their Court. The Dutch Ambassadors
wholly approved it, and resolved to conform their practice accordingly, unless
they found other Ambassadors should decline it. However, about a Fortnight
after, the French Ambassadors, upon Dispatches from their Court, began to
change their Language; and told us, That for the first Article, Monsieur
Pompone thought it not necessary to restrain the Numbers of Ambassadors Trains,
since they were well provided against Disorders by the following Articles.
Besides that, this would in a manner level the Ambassadors of greatest Kings
with the Ministers of smaller Princes, at least in the eyes of the mean people,
who measure the Dignity of Persons by the Train that attend them. For the
second Article they consented to it, with an Apostyle of their own upon it,
providing that it should not prejudice the Rights of any Princes, nor ever be
drawn into consequence in any other place or time: We found by these Answers,
That the French Ambassadors had less Vanity than their Court, and wondered to
find it so avowed, and to descend to circumstances so low and so minute; for
though Vanity be a weakness, or a fault that the fewest men are without, yet it
is that of all others that the fewest will own; and few private men, though
perhaps affected with the Gazes and Opinion of the Rabble, that fill the
Streets as they pass, will yet pretend or confess to consider them. However, we
thought best to let it pass; and the rather, because we knew it was no more the
sense of the French Ambassadors, than Ours; for which they had one more
particular Reason, which was The noise that run of the magnificent Preparations
and Equipage designed by the Marquess de Balbaces and Count Antoine, toward
their appearance in this Congress: the first whereof was one of the richest
Subjects of Spain, Heir and Descendent of the famous Spinola; and the other had
great Revenues from the Duke of Oldenburgh (being his Natural Son) and was
chosen by Denmark, on purpose to appear with Luster in this Embassage: and the
French Ambassadors apprehended either being out-shined by these at their
arrival, or being engaged in greater Expenses upon the Vye than they expected
from their Court, which usually leaves those kind of services to future
Rewards, by succeeding Employments and Advances, rather than present Supplies.
When we received this answer from them, we only said, Monsieur Pompone's
reasoning from the mean people, seemed a little below the Greatness of his
Master, or the style of a Great Minister; but that we should acquaint the Dutch
Ambassadors with it, that they might be at liberty to retract the consent they
had already given, since they the French, seemed to have done so: but that, for
our selves, we would observe at least the Rules we had proposed to others, and
let them follow either the rules or Examples as they pleased. The French would
by no means allow to have refused them, and said, They had only told us
Monsieur Pompone's Reflections upon them; but that they could not absolutely
consent, till they had concerted with their Allies, the Swedish Ambassadors,
whose arrival they daily expected. However, though they were by these wholly
approved, yet the French Ambassadors during the Assembly, made all their first
Visits with the three several Ambassadors Coaches and Six Horses, and the whole
number of their Train, which sometimes reached further than the space between
their Houses, and of the Minister's where the Visit was paid. But we continued
to make ours, only with two Horses, and the number of Servants we had proposed,
and the rest of the Rules were observed by all with so good effect, that for
one whole year I resided there together, there never happened any disorder or
complaint from so numerous Trains.

For the Neutral Country, we at first proposed, by concert with the French
Ambassadors, to extend it about three Leagues, so as to take in the Town of
Cleve, which has been always celebrated for one of the pleasantest Seats of
Germany; but upon transmitting this Proposal to the French, a Resolution came
back to their Ambassadors, to admit only two leagues from Nimeguen, and That to
continue subject to Contribution, and to Execution, upon failure of that being
paid, as was usual to the Garrison of Mastricht. This we thought unpracticable,
with the safety of the Ambassadors, or their Retinues, that should make use of
a Neutrality subject to Inroads of armed Troops upon pretense of Contribution,
and admitted of many disputes. The French Ambassadors had Orders from their
Court to go out of Town upon any occasion of Airing and Entertainment: The
Dutch desired us to let the French know, The States could not be answerable for
their doing it safely, till a Neutral Country were established without being
liable to Contribution. After some time, rather than continue Prisoners to the
Town, or venture the inconvenience and danger of Parties ranging within the
bounds of a Neutral Country, a Compass was agreed, about two English miles
from the Town, and marked out with several great Posts erected to that purpose,
within which all persons should have liberty, and no Soldier should be
suffered to come in, upon any pretext whatsoever.

Several Pretensions were raised at the opening of this Congress (which was
reckoned upon the time of two Mediators arrival upon the place), about the
Rights of several Princes to send Ambassadors, and many disputes arose upon
them. It had been agreed at the Treaty of Munster, That every Elector should be
allowed to send a Minister thither, with the Character of Ambassador; but if
they sent more than One in Commission, that the First only should be treated
with Excellence, and other Ceremonies of Ambassadors. This Rule we agreed to
follow at Nimeguen: and the Elector of Brandenburgh sent two Ambassadors
thither; but we treated the First only with the usual Ceremonies, and left the
other to his Pretenses and Complaints. The French followed our example; and the
other Ambassadors did some one, some the other, according as their Interests
engaged them to comply with that Elector in this pretense.

Upon admission of the Electors to send Ambassadors to the Congress, the same
pretense was soon after raised by the Dukes of Lorain, Nieuburgh, and
Lunenburgh: much alteration used upon this Subject; but the Presidents
alleged, not being found without dispute, the thing lay quiet, and their
Envoys arrived after some time at Nimeguen.

We agreed neither to give the first Visit, nor the Hand, in our Houses, to any
Character under that of Ambassador; nor to other Persons of Quality, that were
not either Counts of the Empire, or General Officers of Armies.

There was no dispute about the Rank with the Mediators; the French having
first yielded it by Order of their Court, till the Imperialists came, who
neither yielded nor refused it, but seemed desirous to have that mark of
distinction allowed between the Emperor's Ambassadors and those of all other
Crowned Heads: We held on our pretense of it from These, as well as the rest,
but kept it from coming to any decision till the very signing of the Treaty,
finding the Emperor not inclined to yield it; and knowing that if it were
refused there, the admission granted by the rest, might come to be retracted
upon that Example.

The other Ambassadors were left to their usual Pretenses: The French, That all
should yield to Them; and the rest, of None yielding to one another; in which
the Swedes carried the Point even with their Allies, the French, as nicely and
positively as any others.

The Swedes arrived about the middle of August; sent first to us, and then to
the French, to notify their arrival; this happened late in the Evening, so we
deferred our Compliments and desires of an hour, till next Morning; the French
made theirs the same Night to Monsieur Oxenstern, first in Commission, who gave
them an Hour the next Morning, and to our Secretaries who came to them about
that time, they gave an Hour in the Afternoon: The Visits were made
accordingly, but upon our insisting that the first Visit ought to be returned
to the Mediators, from whomsoever the first should be received, the Swedish
Ambassadors, after some time to consider it, determined the point, and made us
the first Visit, though the French had first made it to them; and this was
observed by the Ambassadors that afterward arrived during my residence there.

I remember no other points of the Ceremonial, that seem to have been
established by the course of this Assembly, unless it was one particular to our
selves, who declared, that we would dine with no Ambassador till the Peace was
concluded, being desirous to avoid the trouble and engagements of perpetual
Invitations, as well as the unkindness of Excuses, at one time, or to some
person more than another; but our own Tables were open, each of us three days
in the Week, two Post-days being reserved to our selves for business, and one
for diversion or Exercise abroad; and several of the Ambassadors, especially
the French, came to our Tables notwithstanding this resolution, which they
seemed to take a little to heart: But to make amends, we divided the Nights by
turns, where there were any Ladies in the Ambassadors Houses, and where the
Evenings were spent in Dancing or Play, or careless and easy Suppers or
Collations. In these Entertainments, as I seldom failed of making a part, and
my Colleague never had any, so it gave occasion for a good word that passed
upon it, Que la Mediation est oit tous jours en pied pour fair sa function;
That the Mediation was always on foot for to go on with its business.
for I used to go to Bed, and rise late, while my Colleague was a Bed by Eight,
and up by Four; and to say Truth, two more different Men were never joined in
one Commission, nor agreed better in it.

For business, there was very little for many Months after the Congress began,
till the arrival of the Imperial Ministers, only the French Ambassadors soon
after my coming, demanding an audience, came to make us the offer of exhibiting
their Plein pouvoirs into our hands, Full Powers.
not doubting, as they said, of the Dutch being ready to do the same. But upon
our acquainting the Dutch Ambassadors with this overture, They told us, That it
was in the choice of the French Ambassadors to do it when they pleased; but
they did not conceive the hastening of it would gain any time, since they had
no Orders to make that Peace without a previous concert with their Allies; and
consequently though the French should do it, yet they would, at present, neither
exhibit their own, nor, make any reflections (as might be necessary) upon those
of the French. From this Answer, the French took occasion to press the Dutch
extremely upon making instances to all their Allies to hasten to the Treaty, or
else to declare, that they would enter into Affairs without them; and not
without some intimation of their Master's, being resolved to recall them in case
this was refused, or much longer delayed. The Dutch excused the retardments
given to the Treaty so long, by the many difficulties raised by the French
Court upon occasion of the Pasports, which were not yet dispatched to some of
their new Allies; but however, promised to acquaint the States with these
instances, and endeavor to dispose them to fix some time, by which they would
order their Ambassadors to enter into matter, unless the Ministers of the
Allies were arrived at Nimeguen.

In these, and several other points, interceeding between the French and Dutch
Ambassadors, we carried the Proposals and Answers from one to the other, at
their Houses, by word of mouth, which continued till the Assembly was
completed, and a place of Conference with much difficulty agreed at the
Stadthouse of Nimeguen; where after many difficulties between the two
Confederacies, and many more between the Parties that composed each of them,
two Chambers were at length agreed for the Parties, and one for the Mediators,
by which our pains was lessened, but without other advantage. Nor was there any
point that gave us more trouble than the adjusting this among the Parties; for
the French were from the very first, most declaredly averse from treating
either by Writings, or from agreeing to a place of Public conference;
conceiving this would tend to keep the body of the Confederacy united in the
Treaty, as well as the War; whereas their design was to break that union here,
which they could not in the Field; and find some way or other of entering into
separate measures for a Peace with some of the Parties engaged. In the mean
time the Allies found, or took as many occasions as they could of delaying the
dispatch of their Ministers to the Congress, while they had hopes of hindering
the Dutch from proceeding without them; and that they believed might be done
till this Campania should end, from the events, whereof the several Princes
might the better take their measures for the conditions of a Peace, that should
be proposed or insisted on in this Treaty; and this disposition of theirs was
so well pursued, that no other Ambassadors arrived at Nimeguen till November,
though we and the French, and the Dutch, had been so long upon the place, and the
Swedes soon after.

In the mean time the successes of the Campania, that were expected absolutely
to govern the motions of the Treaty, were various as to the gross of the War;
but run as high to the advantage of the French, as to the disadvantage of the
Swedish Affairs. By force of great Treasures, and great order in disposing
them. The French Magazines were always filled in the Winter, so as to enable
them to take the Field as they pleased in the Spring, without fearing the
weather for their Foot, or expecting Grass for their Horse; on the other side,
the Spaniards want of Money and Order, left their Troops in Flanders, neither
capable to act by themselves upon any sudden attempt, nor to supply with
Provisions in their March, either Dutch or Germans that should come to their
relief. Their Towns were ill fortified, and worse defended; so that the King of
France Marching in the Head of a brave and numerous Army, took Conde in four
days in the month of April this year 1676. before any of the Confederates were
in the Field; and in May, sent the Duke of Orleans to besiege Bouchain with
some part of his Troops, being a small, though strong place, and very
considerable for its situation to the defense of the Spanish Netherlands. The
King, with the strength of his Army, Posted himself so advantageously, as to
hinder the Prince of Orange from being able to relieve it, or to Fight without
disadvantage.

The Prince strugled through all the difficulties from the Season, or want of
Provisions and Magazines in Flanders, and Marched with his Army in sight of the
French King by the middle of May, the Armies continued some days facing one
another, and several times drawing out in order to a Battle, which neither of
them thought fit to begin; whether not willing to hazard, without necessity or
advantage, so decisive an action as this was like to prove; or whether the
French contented themselves to carry their point by hindering the Relief of
Bouchain, which must fall without it, while the Prince of Orange, withheld by
the Spaniards from pursuing his, which was to give a Battle that the Spaniards
knew could not be lost without the loss of Flanders. The Armies continued
facing one another till Bouchain was surrendered the Eighth day of the Siege.
The Prince returned to refresh his Army, harassed with so hasty a March upon so
sudden preparations; and the King of France returned home, leaving his Army
under the Marshall Schomberg, to attend the motions of the Enemies. The Prince
fell into concert with the Spanjard and German Princes near the lower Rhine,
for the Siege of Mastricht, which, tho the strongest of the Dutch Frontiers
when it was taken, had been yet fortified by the French since they possessed
it, with all the advantages of Art and Expense, and with a Garrison of eight
Thousand chosen Men, under Calvo, a resolute Catalonian, who commanded there
under the Marshall d'Estrades Governor of the place, but then at Nimeguen.

About the end of July, the Trenches were opened by the Prince, and the Siege
carried on with such Bravery, so many and desperate Assaults for about Three
Weeks, that as Wagers were continually offered, with odds, at Nimeguen, that it
would be taken within such or such a time; so we did not observe the Marshall
d'Estrades was willing to take them, or seemed at all confident it would be so
well defended. The Prince, or the Rhingrave, (who was d^sign'd for Governor of
the Town, as his Father had been) were ever in the head of the Attacks, and
made great use, as well as proof of the desperate Courage of the English Troops
upon all those occasions; many of the outworks were taken with great slaughter
on both sides, but were supplied by new Retrenchments, and by all the Art and
Industry of a resolute Captain, and brave Soldiers within. About the middle of
August, the Prince exposing himself upon all occasions, received a Musket Shot
in his Arm; at which, perceiving those about him were daunted, he immediately
pulled off his Hat with the Arm that was hurt, and waved it about his Head, to
show the wound was but in the Flesh, and the Bone safe; at which they all
revived, and the Prince went on without interruption in all the Paces of the
Siege. But a cruel sickness falling into his Army, weakened it more than all
the Assaults they had given the Town. The Germans came not up with the Supplies
they had promised, and upon which assurance the Siege was undertaken; and the
Rhindgrav^, who, next the Prince, was the spring of this Action, happening to
be wounded soon after, was forced to leave the Camp for a Castle in the
Neighborhood, where he died; by all which the Army grew disheartened, and the
Siege faint. In the mean time Monsieur Schomberg, who trusted to a vigorous
defense at Mastricht, had besig'd and taken Air, and after the Prince's Army
was weakened, by the accidents of the Siege, Marched with all the French Forces
through the heart of the Spanish Low Countries, to the relief of Mastricht;
upon whose approach, and their solutions of the Council of War in the Prince's
Camp, the Siege was raised, and with it the Campania ended in the Dutch or
Spanish Provinces. And from this time the Prince of Orange began to despair of
any success in a War, after such trials and experience of such weakness in the
Spanish Forces and Conduct, and uncertainty in the German Councels or
Resolutions.

However, the Imperial Army took Philipsburgh in the end of September this year
1676. which was yielded for want of Provisions, and as much against common
opinion and expectation, as the contrary event in the Siege of Mastricht.

The Affairs of Denmark and Brandenburgh prosper'd all this while against
Sweden, with advantage in most of the Sieges and Encounters that passed this
Summer, and the first part of the Winter following, so that the Swedes seemed
to be losing apace all they had so long possessed in Germany; but the Imperial
Forces, though joined with those of the several Princes upon the upper Rhine, had
made no progress in their designed Conquests there, and were forced to seek
their old Quarters on the German side of the Rhine, upon the approach of the
French; which was a true and undisputed decision of the small success of this
Campania.

After it was ended, the Parties engaged in the War began to turn their
thoughts, or at least their eyes, more toward the motions of the Treaty than
they had hitherto done. The Prince of Orange writ to me, desired to see me for
a day or two at Soesdycke near Amesfort, about a days Journey from Nimeguen. He
complained much, and with too much reason, of the Conduct of his Allies, the
weakness, or rather uselesness of the Spanish Troops in Flanders, for want of
Pay, or Order; the Imperial Armies acting without design upon the Rhine, or
with dependence upon Orders from Vienna, where the emulation of the Ministers
made such destraction, and counter-paces of their Generals, that the Campania
had passed with small effect after the promises of vigorously invading either
Lorain or France. How the Dukes of Lunenburgh had failed of sending their
Troops to Mastricht, which, with the Sickness of the Camp, had rendered that
Siege ineffectual: So that he began to despair of any good issue of the War,
and would be glad to hear, I hoped, for a better of the Peace upon our Scene at
Nimeguen, after the Paces and Progress whereof he made particular enquiries. I
told him how little advances had been hitherto made, by the slowness of his
Allies dispatching their Ministers thither; how little success could be
expected from the pretentions of the Parties when they should meet, especially
France pretending to keep all they had got by the War, and Spain to recover all
they had lost; how His Majesty seemed of the mind to concern himself no further
than the Paces of a Mediator, our Orders being only to convey the Mind or
Proposals of the Parties from one to another, and even to avoid the offers of
any references upon them to his Majesty's determination; so that my opinion
was, That it must be the War alone that must make the Peace, and that I
supposed it would do at one time or other by the weakness or weariness of one
of the Parties.

The Prince seemed of my mind, and said, the events of the War would depend
upon the Conduct at Madrid and Vienna before next Campania; for without some
great successes, he did not believe the States would be induced to continue it
longer; I told the Prince the Discourses Monsieur Colbert had entertained me
with upon my arrival at Nimeguen, in which his Highness was chiefly concerned;
upon which he replied coldly, he had heard enough of the same kind another way,
which Monsieur D' Estrades had found out to Pensioner Fagel; but that they knew
him little that made him such Overtures; and for his own Interests or
Advantages, let them find a way of saving his Honor, by satisfying Spain, and
nothing of his Concerns should retard the Peace an hour.

After my return to Nimeguen, I found the French making all the advances they
could toward the progress of the Treaty, and they were (no doubt) in earnest,
being in a posture to insist upon their present possessions, and having made a
great hand of this last Campania, were willing, like Gamesters that have won
much, to give over, unless obliged to Play on by those that had lost. The
Swedes were more in haste and in earnest for the Peace than any, hoping no
Resource for their losses in Germany by the War. The Dutch were grown impatient
after the Peace, finding France would make no difficulty of any thing between
them, offering privately by their Emissaries, especially at Amsterdam, such a
Reglement of Commerce as they could desire, the restitution of Mastricht, and
of all satisfaction the Prince of Orange could pretend upon his losses, or
their seizures in the War. But Denmark and Brandenburgh were as violent against
the Peace, having swallowed up in their hopes all that Sweden had possessed in
Germany; and though the Emperor seemed to pretend little after the taking of
Philipsburgh, besides the restitution of Lorain and the Towns of Alsatia, to
the posture they were left in by the Munster Treaty; yet they were so fast
linked both with their German Allies as well as Spain, that they resolved to
make no Paces in the Treaty but by common concert; and Spain, though sensible of
the condition their affairs in Flanders were in, as well as Sicily, yet upon a
design then hatching at Madrid, for removal of the Queen Regent and her
Ministry, to introduce Don John to head the affairs of their Government, had
conceived great hopes to recover those desperate infirmities that their
inveterate disorders both in Councils and conduct, especially in their
Finances, had for so long time occasioned. Besides, they had confidences still
given them from their Ministers in England, that His Majesty would not, after
all, be contented to see Flanders lost, or would be forced into the War by the
humor of his Parliament. For these Reasons, the Allies seemed to make no have
at all to the Congress, and some of them hardly to look that way; and none of
the Parties were yet arrived, besides the French, the Swedes and the Dutch: But
about the end of September, the French Ambassadors gave notice, That their
Master having made so many advances to the Peace, and being so ill seconded by
the proceedings of the Confederates, and their slowness in coming to the
Treaty, was resolved to recall his Ambassadors, unless those of the chief
Confederates should repair to Nimeguen within the space of one Month.

This we communicated to the Dutch Ambassadors, and they to the States, who
after some Conferences with the Ministers of their Allies, came to a
resolution, That they would enter upon the Treaty themselves, if the Ministers
of their Confederates should not repair to Nimeguen by the first of November,
which was afterward, upon some disputes, declared to be meant Old Style, being
that of the place where the Congress was held.

The noise of this resolution of the States, was more among their Allies, than
the danger, since there were ways enough to raise difficulties, and spin out
time after the Ambassadors should arrive, as well as before; but yet it had so
much effect, that the several Confederates did upon it begin to hasten away one
or other of their intended Ambassadors toward Nimeguen (as Count Kinkski from
Vienna, Don Pedro Ronquillo from England, where he then resided as Spanish
Envoy) but not the persons principally entrusted, or at the head of their
Embassies, nor with powers to proceed further than Preliminaries; And from
Denmark, Monsieur Heug, without any news of Count Antoine's preparation, who
was appointed chief of that Ambassay; any more than of the Bishop of Gurke, or
Marquess de Balbaces, the chiefest of those designed from the Emperor and Spain.

In the mean time the Dutch began to lay load upon their Allies, for their back
wardness, so declared, in making any paces toward the Treaty; to cavil upon
the obligations they were under of so many great Subsidies to so many Princes
their Allies, for carrying on a war which the Allies pursued for their own
separate Interests or Ambition, though entr'd into it, perhaps at first, for
defense of Holland, with whose safety theirs were complicated, Hereupon their
Ministers both at the Hugue and az Nimeguen, took the liberty to say publicly,
upon several occasions, and in several Companies, That their Masters would pay
no Subsidies to their Allies the next Campania, unless in the mean time they
would by their fair and sincere proceedings in the Treaty, put the French in
the wrong, as their expression was.

The Swedes had, as well as the French, offered to deliver us their Powers; but
this was deferred by the Dutch to the arrival of their Allies, till after the
first of November was elapsed; The French began to press them upon it, in
consequence of the States resolution; and after some little demurs, the Dutch
Ambassadors agreed to deliver theirs; so by a concert, not without difficulty,
we agreed, That on the 21st of November, the several Powers should be brought
to us the Mediators, by the several Ambassadors, at such Hours as they should
severally take from us, should be deposited in our hands, and that we should
afterward communicate the Originals mutually to the several Ambassadors at
their Houses, and leave Copies with them, attested by us the Mediators.

This was done accordingly; and the morning after, the Dutch Ambassadors
brought us an account of several exceptions they were forced to make against
several expressions in the French and Swedish Prefaces to their Powers, which
they said were fitter for Manifestoes than for Powers of a Treaty, especially
those of justifying the War, and maintaining the Treaty of Westphalia: But the
greatest stress they laid, was upon a clause in the French Powers, mentioning
the Pope's Mediation, which they said their Masters could never consent to now,
no more than they had at Munster. To say truth, though the gaining of time for
the Allies coming might have some part in these exceptions of the Dutch, yet
they were framed with great art, and showed the great quickness and sharpness
of Monsieur Beverning's apprehension, as well as his skill and experience in
these kind of affairs; being, I think without dispute, the most practiced, and
the ablest Ambassador, of any I have ever met in the course of my Employments.

The Dutch exceptions were returned, by others from the French and Swedes
against their Powers; but with offer from both of entering into the Treaty,
while these Ministers should be adjusting. The Dutch accepted it, provided the
French would oblige themselves to procure new Powers, free from the exceptions
raised against them, as the Dutch offered to do. After much debate, they all
agreed in desiring us the Mediators to draw up a form of Powers to be used by
all the Parties; We did it, and it was approved by them all, with some reserve
only from the French, whether it would be fit to mention any Mediation, since
that of the Pope's was left out, and some little Tentatives upon us, whether we
would be content to leave out all mention of his Majesty's Mediation, as well
as that of the Pope's? This we excused our selves from doing, the whole frame
of the Congress having proceeded from His Majesty's Mediation, without any
intervention of the Pope's; and the King's having been accepted by all the
Parties, which the Pope's had not been; but on the contrary, the very mention
of it in the Powers, declared against by several of them. And by Orders we
received from Court upon occasion of this dispute, we declared to all of the
Parties, That though His Majesty pretended not to exclude any other Mediation
that the Parties should think fit to use, yet he could not in any wise act
jointly with that of the Pope, nor suffer his Ministers to enter into any
Commerce either of Visits or Conferences, with any of His that might be
employed at Nimeguen.

In November arrived Monsieur Heug, one of the Danish Ambassadors; Monsieur
Somnitz and Blaspyl, the two Brandenburgh Ambassadors; Lord Barclay from Paris;
and soon after, Don Pedro Ronquillo, one of the Spanish Ambassadors; but the
last continued incognito till the arrival of Count Kintski, who whether he had
taken the Gout, or the Gout had taken him, continued upon that pretense, at
Colen till the new year was begun.

The Spanish Ambassador coming upon Visits to my Wife, and meeting me there,
found that way of entering into the present business of the Scene, as much as if
he had been declared upon it. He agreed with the French in this one point, of
desiring either the Pope's Mediation might be mentioned in their Powers; or
that His Majesty in consideration of the Peace, would suffer the mention of his
to be left out; but the Dane on the other side agreed with the Dutch, in refusing
to admit any Power with mention of the Pope's Mediation. There arose likewise
another difficulty from a seeming Expedient proposed by the Dutch, of having
from each Party several Powers granted for treating with the several Parties
they were in War with, which the French refused, or to grant other Powers than
for the Dutch and their Allies; and in these disputes or difficulties the year
1676 ended.

I enter not at all into the Detail, or so much as mention of the many
Incidents that fell into the course of this Treaty upon Punctilioes of Visits
or Ceremonials, because they seem to me but so many Impertinencies that are
grown this last Age into the Character of Ambassadors, having been raised and
cultivated by men, who wanting other Talents to value themselves in those
Employments, endeavored to do it by exactness or niceties in the Forms; and
besides, they have been taken notice of by discourses concerning this Treaty,
and at one time or other may be exactly known by the Original Papers of our
Ambassy, which are in two or three several Hands: Whereas I intend chiefly to
declare the course of this great Affair, by the more material circumstances,
and from the true springs of those events that succeeded, rather than trouble
my self with the Forms that served to amuse so long this Assembly at Nimeguen.

I shall only make two Observations upon the Ceremonial; the first is upon the
Emperor's Conduct toward the Brandenburgh Ambassadors; allowing his Ministers
to Treat them both like Ambassadors of Crowned Heads, though we gave it only to
the first of the Ambassy upon the President of the Munster Treaty, and were
followed in it by the French and Swedes in the whole course of this Treaty at
Nimeguen. This Pace of the Emperor seemed not so much grounded, as some
thought, upon his compliance with so considerable an Ally, as upon a design to
assist another Pretention of his own, which is not only a difference of Place,
but also of Rank from all other Crowned Heads of Christendom; Whereas the other
Kings, though they yield him the Place, yet they do not allow him a difference
of Rank. But if the Emperor could by his Example prevail with other Kings to
Treat the Electors like Crowned Heads, it would fortify the Pretensions of the
Emperor to a difference of Rank, since there is a great one, and out of all
contest between him and the Electors.

My second Remark is, That among all the Punctilioes between the Ambassadors at
Nimeguen, none seemed to me to carry them to such heights as the Swedes and the
Danes; The first standing as stiff upon all Points of not seeming to yield in
the least to the French Ambassadors, though their Allies and from a Crown not
only of so mighty Power, but from whom alone they expected the restoring of
their broken State in Germany; and the Danish Ambassador, upon the French
Powers being exhibited in French, said he would give his in Danish, unless they
would do it in Latin as a common Language; alleging, he knew no difference
between Crowned Heads; that the Danish King had been as great as the French are
now, and in their present Dominions are as Absolute. Upon all which Monsieur
Beverning could not forbear to reflect, and say to us, That in his Remembrance
there was no sort of Competition made by those two Northern Kings with the
other three great Kings of Christendom; That the treatment of the States to
them was very different, and their Ministers made no difficulty of signing any
Instruments after the Ministers of the three Great Crowns. It Is, I think, out
of question, that the pretention of Parity among the Crowned Heads, was first
made in the North by Gustavus, when he told Monsieur Grammont the French
Ambassador in Sweden upon this occasion; That for his part he knew no
distinction among Crowned Heads, but what was made by their Virtue; and this
Pretense was not much disputed with him in respect to the greatness of his
Qualities, as well as of his Attempts and Successes; and his example was
followed by the Kings of Denmark, and has since left Place, a thing contested
among them all. It Is true, the French have claimed the Precedence next to the
Emperor, with more noise and haughtiness than the rest, but have been yielded
to by none except the Spaniard, upon the fear of a War they were not able to
deal with; nor have they since been willing to own the weakness of that
confession, but have chosen to fall into what measures they could of
encouraging and establishing the Pretense of Parity among Crowned Heads. The
most remarkable Instance of this happened at Nimeguen, where upon a public
meeting of the Allies, the Dispute arising between Spain and Denmark for the
place at Table, Don Pedro consented to have it taken by turns, and at the first
to be divided by lot. The French Ambassadors made their pretense of preference
next the Mediators at Nimeguen, in the first return of their Visits from
Ambassadors arriving; but was neither yielded to by Swede or Dane, nor
Practiced by the Emperors Ambassadors, who made their first Visit to the
Mediators, and the next without Distinction to the first that had visited them.
The Emperor took Advantage of the French, as well as the rest, having yielded
to the Mediators, and during this Treaty made a Scruple, though not a Refusal of
doing it, by which he distinguished himself from the other Crowned Heads. We
were content to keep it, as much as we could, from Decision with them; but it
once happened, that upon a Meeting with the Allies at the Dane's House, Count
Kinkski was there before I and Sir Lionel came into the Room, where Chairs were
set for all the Ambassadors. After the common Salutations, I went strait up to
the Chair that was first in Rank, and stood before it, to sit down when the
rest were ready; but my Colleague either losing his time by being engaged in
longer Civilities, or by Desire not to be engaged in Contests, gave room to
Count Kinkski (a very brisk Man) to come and stand before the Chair that was
next me, and consequently between me and my Colleague: When I saw this, and
considered, that though the Place was given me by the Imperialists, yet it was
not given to the King's Ambassy; I chose not to sit down; but falling into the
Conference that was intended, I stood all the while, as if I did it carelessly,
and so left the Matter undecided.

The Prince of Orange, about the latter End of December, writ very earnestly to
me, to make a Step for some few Days to the Hague, knowing I had leave from His
Majesty to do it when I thought fit. And finding all things without present
Motion at Nimeguen, I went thither, and arrived the last day of the Year. The
first of the next being 1677. I attended His Highness: We fell into large
Discourses of the Progress of the Treaty, the Coldness of the Parties, the
affected Delays of the Imperials and Spaniards, the declared Aversion of the
Danes and Brandenburgh; and concluded how little was to be expected from the
formal Paces of this Congress. Upon all which the Prince asked, if I had heard
any more of His Majesty's Mind upon the Peace, since I had been last with him?
I told him what I remembered of his last Letter to me upon that Subject; which
was, That he concluded from the Prince's Discourses to me, that he had then no
mind to a Peace; that he was sorry for it, because he thought it was his
Interest to have it. That he had tried to know the Mind of France upon it; but
if they would not open themselves farther of one side, nor His Highness on the
other, than they had yet done, he would content himself with performing only
His Part of a Mediator, and in the Common Forms. The Prince said, This looked
very cold, since His Majesty was alone able to make the Peace, and knew well
enough what it would come to by the Forms of the Congress. That for his own
part, he desired it, and had a great deal of reason, both because His Majesty
seemed to do so, and to think it his own Interest as well as the Prince's; and
because the States not only thought it their Interest, but absolutely necessary
for them. That he would not say this to any but to the King by me; because if
France should know it, they would, he doubted, be harder upon the Terms: That
both Spain and the Emperor had less Mind to it now, than they had at the End of
the last Campania; the new Ministers being less inclined to it than the old had
been; so that there was not one of the Allies; that had any Mind to it besides
the States. That for his own Part, he should be always in the same Mind with
them, and therefore very much desired it; but did not know which way to go
about it, at least, so as to compass it before the next Campania. And if that
once began, they should be all at Sea again, and should be forced to go just as
the Wind should drive them. That if His Majesty had a Mind to make it, and
would let him know freely the Conditions upon which either he desired or
believed it might be made, he would endeavor to concert it the best he could
with His Majesty, and that with all the Freedom and Sincereness in the World,
so it might be done with any Safety to his own Honor, and the Interests of his
Country.

All this he desired me to write directly to his Majesty from him, as he knew I
had not only Leave, but Command to do upon any Occasion that I thought deserved
it.

Two Days after, I saw the Pensioner Fagel, upon some common Affairs incident
to my Ambassy at the Hague, which had been left in the Hands of the Secretary
of that Ambassay. When these Discourses were past, he asked me, if I had
brought them the Peace from Nimeguen I replied, That since he was so ignorant
of what had passed there, I would tell him; That they had carried their Matters
there, Like able Men.
En habiles gens. That to bring their Allies to the Congress, they had
pretended to treat by the first of November, whether they came or no. That
after that Day past, they had found fault with the Powers exhibited, had
offered at new, made the Mediators course from one to the other, spun out two
Months time in these Paces, and thereby were gotten in sight both of Spanish
and Imperial Ministers, which I supposed was the Point they always intended,
and afterward to keep Pace with them. The Pensioner answered me with something
in his Face both serious and sad, That either I did not know them, and the
Course of their Affairs since I left the Hague, or else I would not seem to
know them: That they not only desired the Peace from their Hearts, but thought
it absolutely necessary for them; That they would certainly have entered into
Treaty at the time, if the French had either exhibited Powers in a Form to be
at all admitted, or would have obliged themselves to procure new ones; Nay,
That they would not insist upon a Peace according to their Allies Pretensions,
nor could he answer that they would not make a separate one. I said, That was a
matter of such Moment, as I was sure they would think of it another Year before
they did it. With this he drew up his Chair closer to me, and began a Discourse
with more Heat and Earnestness than agreed well with the Posture of Health he
was in; saying, first, That they had thought enough of it already, and with
thinking much, had begun to find it was without Remedy. That they had great
Obligations to Spain for entering the War to save their Country, and thereby to
save Flanders too; but they had made them no ill Return, by continuing it now
three Years only for the Interests of Spain, since there remained nothing of
Consequence between France and them. That they had further engaged themselves
to carry it on this following Year, and so would have done with the Forces they
did the last, if their Allies had performed the Parts they had likewise
engaged. But for Spain, they took no Care, but to let them see they were
resolved to perish; That they had sent their Fleet home from Sicily without the
Payments agreed on, and left them to be paid by the States at their Return.
That not a Penny could be got of a great Sum they owed them for Carriages and
Provisions the last Summer, and which was designed for Magazines against next
Year in Flanders, without which their Armies could not march in that Country,
where they were sure to find none of the Spaniards providing. That they had
represented to Spain the necessity but of keeping so many Forces well regulated
and paid, as might defend their Towns while the Prince should take the Field
with the Army of the State, and hinder or divert any great Sieges there; but
not a Word of Answer. That they had then desired them to receive so many of the
Troops of the German Princes, their Allies, as might defend their most
important Places; but instead of this, they drove them out of their Country.
That for the Emperor, they had always told him, That unless his Army would
march into France, or at least force them to a Battle by such Forces as might
draw great Detachments of the French out of Flanders, that Country would not
be saved the last Summer, or at least not the next, unless his Army took up
their Quartiers this Winter in Alsatia, or on that side of the Rhine. But at
Vienna they considered Flanders as much as the Dutch do Hungary; and because
the Imperial Officers could better find their private Account by
Winter Quarters in Germany, than in a Country harassed like Alsatia, their
Armies must repass the Rhine this Winter, and thereby lose all the Advantages
of the last Campania, and Hopes of the next. That for want of Magazines in
Flanders, two or three strong Frontiers would be lost there next Spring, before
the Imperialists could take the Field; and if Cambray, Valencines and Mons were
taken, all the rest would revolt, considering the Miseries they had already
suffered, and must by a longer War. That the Prince would not be able to
prevent it, or be soon enough in the Field to march, for want of Provisions in
Flanders, the Country growing desolate by the unsettled Contributions; or at
least, not with such an Army as to venture a Battle, or raise a Siege, while
the Spanish Troops were so weak, and the French would be so strong, at a time
when they had no Enemy to divert them upon the Rhine. That the Prince's Friends
could not suffer him to go into the Field only to see Towns lost under his
Nose, and perhaps all Flanders, while He was expected to defend it, and at the
same time was rendered incapable of doing it by the Faults of the Spaniards, who
yet would not fail to reproach Him, as well as his Enemies abroad, and
Ill-willers at home, that would be glad of the Occasion. In the mean time, from
France they could have whatever Conditions they pretended, either by restoring
Mastricht, a Reglement of Commerce, or any Advantages to the House of Orange;
and as to this last, whatever the Prince himself would demand: That to this
Purpose they had every Week pressing Letters from Monsieur d'Estrades to make
the Separate Peace; and though he should fall into it with the greatest Regret
that could be, yet he did not see what else was to be done, and did not know
one Man in Holland that was not of the same Mind. That he did not talk with me
as an Ambassador, but a Friend, whose Opinion he esteemed and desired; That he
told me freely, Their Strength and their Weakness.
Leur fort and leur soible; and would be glad to know what else I thought they
could do upon all these Circumstances, And in this distress of their State by
so long a War.
Et dans accablement de leur Estat par une si longue guerre. I returned his
Compliment, but excused my self from giving my Opinion to a Person so well able
to take Measures that were the fittest for the States Conduct, or his own; but
desired to know what He reckoned would become of Flanders after the Dutch had
made their Separate Peace; because the Fate of that Country was that wherein
the rest of their Neighbors were concerned as well as they. He answered, It
would be lost in one Summer, or in two, but more probably in one; That he
believed Cambray, Valenciennes, Namur and Mons, might be lost in one Summer;
That after their Loss, the great Towns within would not offer at defending
themselves, excepting Antwerp and Ostend, for which they might perhaps take
some Measures with France, as I knew the French had offered Monsieur de Wit
upon their first Invasion in 1667. I asked him, how he reckoned this State was
to live with France after the Loss of Flanders? And if he thought it could be
otherwise than at Discretion? He desired me to believe, that if they would hope
to save Flanders by the War, they would not think of a Separate Peace; but if
it must be lost, they had rather it should be by the last, which would less
exhaust their Country, and dishonor the Prince; That after Flanders was lost,
they must live so with France, as would make them find it their Interest rather
to preserve their State, than to destroy it; That it was not to be chosen, but
to be swallowed, like a desperate Remedy; That he had hoped for some Resource
from better Conduct in the Spanish Affairs, or that some great Impression of
the German Armies upon that side of France might have brought the Peace to some
reasonable Terms; That for his own part, he had ever believed that England it
self would cry Halt, at one step or other that France was making; and that if
we would be content to see half Flanders lost, yet we would not all, nor Sicily
neither, for the Interest of our Trade in the Mediterranean. That the King had
the Peace in his Hands for these two Years past, might have made it when he
pleased, and upon such Conditions as he should think fit, of Justice and Safety
to the rest of his Neighbors as well as himself. That all Men knew France was
not in a condition to refuse whatever Terms His Majesty resolved on, or to
venture a War with England in Conjunction with the rest of the Allies. That the
least show of it, if at all credited in France, was enough to make the Peace.
That they had long represented all this in England by Monsieur Van Beuninghen,
and offered His Majesty to be the Arbiter of it, and to fall into the Terms he
should prescribe; but not a Word in Answer, and all received with such a
Coldness as never was, though other People thought we had reason to be a little
more concerned. That this put him more upon thinking a separate Peace necessary
than all the rest; That he confes'd, All means were first to be tried.

An incurable Wound.


Cuncta prius tentanda, till he found at last 'twas immedicabile vulnus. That
for their living with France after Flanders was lost, he knew well enough what
I meant by asking; but after that, the Aims of France would be more upon Italy
or Germany, or perhaps upon us than them; That it could not be the Interest of
Franco to Destroy or Conquer this State, but to preserve it in a Dependence
upon that Crown; That they could make better Use of the Dutch Fleets, than of a
few poor Fisher Towns, that they should be reduced to, if any Violation were
made, either upon their Liberties or Religion. That the King of France had seen
their Country, and knew it, and understood it so; and said upon all Occasions,
That he had rather have them for his Friends, than his Subjects. But if, after
all, I concluded their State must fall in four and twenty Hours, yet it were
better for them to defer it to the last Hour; and that it should happen at
Night, rather than at Noon.

This was discoursed with such Vehemence and Warmth, that he was not able to go
on; and having said, It was not a Matter to be resolved between us Two, I left
him, after wishing him Health enough to go through the Thoughts and Businesses
of so great a Conjuncture.

Next Morning I went to the Prince, and after some common Talk, told him what
had past in my Visit to the Pensioner, and asked His Highness, If he had seen
him since, or knew any thing of it? He said, No; and so I told him the Detail
of it: and, upon Conclusion, That he said, he saw nothing else to be done, but
to make a separate Peace; and that he knew not a Man in Holland who was not of
his Mind. The Prince interrupted me, saying, Yes, I am sure I know one, and
that is My Self, and I will hinder it as long as I can: but if any thing should
happen to me, I know it would be done in two days time. I asked him, Whether he
was of the Pensioner's Mind, as to what he thought likely to happen the next
Campania? He said, The Appearance were ill; but Campania's did not always end
as they began: That Accidents might happen which no Man could foresee; and
that if they came to one fair Battle, none could answer for the Event. That the
King might make the Peace, if he pleased, before it began; but if we were so
indifferent as to let this Season pass, for his part, he must go on, and take
his Fortune. That he had seen that Morning a poor old Man, tugging alone in a
little Boat with his Oars, against the Eddy of a Sluice upon a Canal; that when
with the last Endeavors he was just got up to the Place intended, Force of the
Eddy carried him quite back again; but he turned his Boat as soon as he could,
and fell to his Oars again; and thus three or four times, while the Prince saw
him; and concluded, this old Man's Business and His were too like one another;
and that he ought however to do just as the old Man did, without knowing what
would succeed, any more than what did in the poor Man's Case.

All that passed upon these Discourses, I represented very particularly to the
Court; the first Part immediately to the King, the rest to the Secretaries of
State; and added my own Opinion, That if His Majesty continued to interpose no
further than by the bare and common Offices of this Mediation in the Place and
Forms of a Treaty, and the Austrians held off from the Progress of it as well
as the Northern Allies, and as they had all hitherto done; it would certainly
follow, that the French and Dutch would fall into private Negotiations, and by
what I could observe on both sides, were like to adjust them in a very little
time, and leave them ready to clap up a Peace in two Days, when the Dutch
should grow more impatient of the Slowness or Unsincereness of their Allies
Proceedings in the General Treaty, or whenever the violent Humor of the People
should force the Prince to fall into the same Opinion with the States upon this
Matter. This I esteemed my self obliged to say, that His Majesty might want no
Lights that were necessary upon so nice, and yet so dangerous a Conjuncture. I
had His Majesty's Answer in a long Letter of his own Hand, complaining much of
the Confederate Ministers in England caballing with Parliament Men, and raising
all Men's Spirits as high against the Peace as they could; and that they had
done it to such a Degree, as made it very difficult for him to make any Steps
with France toward a General Peace, unless the Dutch Ambassador would first
put in a Memorial, pressing His Majesty from the States to do it, and
declaring; That without it they saw Flanders would be lost,

From Secretary Williamson I had no other Answer material upon all the
Pensioner's Discourses, nor my own Opinion upon the present Conjuncture, but
that His Majesty, and the Lords of the Foreign Committee, wondered I should
think the French were so ready for a Separate Peace, if the Dutch should fall
into those Thoughts; and that they did not remember they had ever received any
thing from either Me, or my Colleague at Nimeguen, that looked that way. Upon
which, I told him the frequent Conversations I had had with Monsieur Colbert
upon that Subject, and the several Letters the Pensioner had shown me from the
Marshall d'Estrades, or his Instrument at Mastricht. But to all this I
received no Answer, nor so much as Reflection, though I thought this part was my
duty as Ambassador at the Hague, whether it were so as Mediator at Nimeguen or
not.

The Prince and Pensioner were both willing the King should be complied with in
the Government of Monsieur Van Beuningham's Paces and Language at London; but
pressed me to write once more, to know His Majesty's Opinion upon the Terms of
a Peace; or else, he said, it would be too late, while the Season advanced
toward the Campania. Upon which, I desired him to consider, there might be
three Weeks difference between his first telling his own thoughts to His
Majesty, and receiving His Majesty's Opinion upon it; or sending first to know
His Majesty's, then returning his own, and afterward expecting the King's
again, in case they differed: besides, I believed His Majesty would take it
kinder, and as a piece of more confidence, if His Highness made no difficulty
of explaining himself first. The Prince paused a while, and then said, To show
the Confidence he desired to live in with His Majesty, he would make no further
difficulty of it, though he might have many reasons to do it. That if the King
had a mind to make a sudden Peace, he thought he must do it upon the foot of
Aix la Chapelle, which he would have the more ground for, because it was a
Peace he both made and warranted. That for Exchanges, he thought there should
be no other proposed upon it, but only of Aeth and Charleroy for Air and St.
Omer; which two last he thought imported a great deal more to France than the
others, unless they would declare, that they intended to end this War with the
prospect of beginning another, by which they might get the rest of Flanders.
That this was all needed pass between France and Spain; and for the Emperor and
this State, that the first having taken Philipsburgh from the French, should
raze it; and the French having taken Mastricht from the Dutch, should raze it
too; and so this whole War should pass, As a Storm that has ceased* after it
had threatened much, and made but little alterations in the World.
Comme un tourbillon qui avoit cesse apres avoir menace beaucoup and fait fort
peu de remvements au monde.

I was surpised to hear a Proposition so on the sudden, so short, and so
decisive, and that seemed so easy toward a short close, if His Majesty should
fall into it; and I esteemed it a strain in the Prince of the most consummate
knowledge in the whole present Scheme of Affairs, and most decisive Judgment
upon them, that he could have given after the longest deliberation and maturest
advice. I observed however to His Highness upon it, That he had not explained
what was to become of Lorain and Burgundy; and next, Whether he believed it at
all likely, that France, after such acquisitions made in this War, and so many
more expected, should come to such Restitutions of what they possessed, without
any equivalent. The Prince replied, Both were explained by the Terms he
proposed of Aix la Chapelle; That for Lorain, France never pretended to keep
it, but from the last Duke only. That Burgundy could not be parted with by
Spain, without the French restoring so many Towns for it in Flanders as would
raise endless debates, draw the Business into lengths, and so leave it to the
decision of another Campania. For the second, he said, He had reason to doubt
it, and did not believe it would be done, but by His Majesty's vigorous
interposition, by that he was sure it would be easily effected; but if His
Majesty would not endeavor it, the War must go on, and God Almighty must
decide it. That all the Allies would be glad of it; and believed, that upon Don
John's coming to the Head of the Spanish Affairs, there would be a new World
there. That however one Town well defended, or one Battle well fought, might
change the Scene. That for himself, he would confess, the King could never do
so kind a part, as to bring him with some Honor out of this War, and upon some
moderate Terms: but if he was content that France should make them
insupportable, they would venture All, rather than receive them. And for
Holland's making it a separate Peace, let the Pensioner or any others tell me
what they would, they should never do it while he was alive, and was able to
hinder it; and he would say one thing more to me, That he believed he was able
to hinder it) That if he died, he knew it would be done next day: but when that
should happen, this matter must be some others care, and perhaps, We in
England, were the most concerned to look after it.

I promised to represent all he had said directly to His Majesty, and so I did
immediately; and the Prince went next day to Dieren, within six Leagues of
Nimeguen, where I promised to come to him as soon as I should be possessed of
his Majesty's Answer. And I am the more particular in all these Discourses with
the Prince and the Pensioner upon this great Conjuncture, because they do not
only discover the true Springs from which the Peace was afterward derived, but
represent most of the Interests of Christendom, as they were observed by the
two Persons, that next to Monsieur De Wit, understood them the best of any I
ever met with in the course of my Negotiations.

After the Prince was gone, I had one Conference more with the Pensioner, who
told me, he was still of Opinion it must come to a Separate Peace; That he had
told the Emperor's Ministers the same thing; and that if they did not at
Vienna fall into the Measures proposs'd and insisted on by the States, before
the middle of February next, they should be forced to make it. That if Don
Emanuel de Lyra had not now assured them of the Remises being actually come
from Spain, for payment of the last Years Charge of the Fleets, both in the
Mediterranian and Baltic, according to Agreement, the Peace could not have
been kept off this Winter it self. I told him, The Prince was of another mind,
and had said to me, a Separate Peace should never be made while he lived, and
was able to hinder it; and that he believed he should have that in his power.
The Pensioner replied, He should come to it with as much regret as the Prince
himself; but that his Highness himself might be forced to it by the ill Conduct
of his Allies, the ill Successes of the next Campania, and the Mutinies of the
People, to which they were already but too much disposed at Amsterdam by the
delays of the Treaty at Nimeguen. That the late Revolution in Spain against the
Queen Regent and her Ministry, had showed enough what might be brought about by
a violent and general humor of the People; and the Prince knew the Country too
well, to go too far against it. That it was in His Majesty's hands to make a
General Peace if he pleased, before the Campania begun; and perhaps it was in
the Conduct of Spain and the Emperor to engage Holland in one Campania more, by
the Measures they had proposed: If both these failed, a Separate Peace must be
made.

While I staid at the Hague, which was about a month, my Colleague at Nimeguen
had, it seems, found out a Negotiation grown between the French Ambassadors and
Mons. Beverning, separate from the Ministers of his Allies, and without any
Communication of the Mediators, which they suspected would end in a Separate
Peace. Of this they thought fit to give part to the Court, and of their
suspicions upon it, as they had done in my absence; and received an immediate
Order upon it, That in case they found a Separate Peace concluding or concluded
between France and Holland at Nimeguen, they should protest publicly against
it in His Majesty's Name. This my Colleague Sir Lionel Jenkins writ to me at
the Hague about the 10 th of January, and was in great pain about it. He
apprehended the thing, but exspected not to know it till it was done, and then
doubted any good Consequences from our Protestation: He desired I would both
send him my thoughts upon it, and the same to Court as soon as I could.

I did so both to my Lord Treasurer and Mr. Secretary Coventry, and told them
very freely, That I could not understand the reason or the drift of such an
Order as my Colleagues had received to make such a Protestation. That if a
Separate Peace between France and Holland were thought as dangerous in the
Court, as I knew it was in the Country, the King might endeavor to prevent it,
and had it still in his power, as he had had a great while: But if it were once
concluded, I did not see any other effect of our Protestation, unless it were
to irritate both the Parties, and bind them the faster, by our being angry at
their Conjunction. Nor did I know what ground could be given for such a
Protestation; for though the Parties had accepted his Majesty's Mediation of a
General Peace, yet none of them had obliged themselves to His Majesty not to
treat a Separate One, or without his Offices of Mediation: And if they had, I
did not see why the same Interests that could make them break through so many
Oligations to their Allies, should not make them as bold with a Mediator. That
as to prevent the thing may be a very wise and necessary Counsel, so His
Majesty's Resolution in it ought to be signified as early as can be, where it
is likely to be of moment to that end, which was to France: But if the thing
should be first done, as I could not tell how well to ground our Offense, so I
could as little how to seek our Revenge; and it would be to stay till we were
stuck, and then trust to crying out. That, to the best of my sense, it were
better to anger any one of the Parties before a Separate Peace, than both of
them after; and if we must strain any points of Courtesy with them, to do it
rather by making a Fair and General Peace, than by complaining or protesting
against a Separate One.

I thought, I confess, that this Representation from my Colleagues, without any
knowledge of mine, or suspicion that the matter was working up at Nimeguen when
I left it, and yet agreeing so much with what I had Foreseen and Represented
from the Hague, and meeting such a Resentment at our Court as appeared by the
Order transmitted to my Colleagues upon it; There was little question but his
Majesty would declare himself upon the Terms of a General Peace to both
Parties, which I knew very well would be refused by neither, if he were
positive in it, and supported, as he would certainly have been by the Prince.
But our Councils at Court were so in Balance, between the desires of living at
least fair with France, and the Fears of too much displeasing the Parliaments
upon their frequent Sessions, that our Paces upon this whole Affair looked all
like cross Purposes, which no man at Home or Abroad could well understand, and
were often mistaken by both parties engaged in the War, as well as by both
Parties in the House of Commons, till the thing was wrested out of our hands.

About the Twenty Fifth of January 1677. I received his Majesty's Answer to my
last dispatches by the Prince's directions, and carried them immediately away
to Dieren, which was a little out of my way to Nimeguen, and there Communicated
them to the Prince. They consisted of two Parts; The First, An Offer of his
Majesty's entering into the strongest defensive Alliance with the States,
thereby to secure them from all Apprehensions from France, after the Peace
should be made. The second was his Majesty's Remarks, rather than Conclusion of
Judgment upon the Terms proposed by the Prince for a Peace. That he believed it
might be composed with France, upon the exchange of Cambray, Air, and St.
Omer, for Aeth, Charleroy, Ondenarde, Conde, and Bouchain: That this Scheme was
what his Majesty thought possible to be obtained of France, though not what was
to be wished.

I observed the Prince's Countenance to change when I named Cambray and the
rest of the Towns, yet he heard me through, and the many nice Reasons of Sir J.
-- W. -- upon the matter, as of a double Frontier this would give to Flanders,
the safety whereof was the thing both His Majesty and the States were most
concerned in, and many other ways of cutting the Feather: After which the
Prince said, He believed Dinner was ready, and we would talk of it after we had
dined, and so went out; but as he was near the Door, he turned to me, and said,
Though we should talk more of it after Dinner, yet he would tell me now, and in
few words, That he must rather die than make such a Peace.

After Dinner, we went again into his Chamber, where he began with telling me,
I had spoiled his Dinner; That he had not expected such a return of the
Confidence he had begun toward His Majesty. He observed the offer of Alliance
came to me in a Letter of His Majesty's own hand; but That about the Terms of a
Peace, from the Secretary only; That it was in a Style, as if he thought him a
Child, or to be fed with Whips Cream; That since all this had been before the
Foreign Commitee, he knew very well it had been with the French Ambassador too,
and that the Terms were his, and a great deal worse than they could have
directly from France. He cast them up distinctly, and what in plain Language
they amounted to; That Spain must part with all Burgundy, Cambray, Air, and
St. Omer, which were of the value of two other Provinces in the consequences of
any War between France and Spain, and all for the five Towns mentioned; That in
short, all must be ventured, since he was in, and found no other way out. I
told the Prince, that I hoped he would send His Majesty his own thoughts upon
it; but that he would think a little more before he did it. He said, he would
write to the King that Night, but would not enter into the detail of the
business, which was not worth the pains, but would leave it to me. He desired
me further to let His Majesty know, that he had been very plain in what he had
told me of his own thoughts upon this whole matter, and had gone as low as he
could with any regard to the safety of his Country, and his Allies, or his
Honor; That he doubted whether Spain would ever have consented to those very
Terms; but for these he knew they could not, though they were sure to lose all
Flanders by the War: And for himself, he could never propose it to them: but if
Flanders were left in that posture, it could never be defended upon another
Invasion, neither by Holland nor England it self; and he was so far of the
Spaniard's mind, That if Flanders must be lost, it had better be so by a War
than by a Peace; That whenever that was, Holland must fall into an absolute
dependence upon France; so that what His Majesty offered of an Alliance with
them, would be to no purpose, for they would not be made the Stage of a War,
after the loss of Flanders, and wherein they were sure no Alliance of His
Majesty, nor Forces neither, could defend them. He concluded, That if His
Majesty would help him out of this War with any Honor and Safety, either upon
kindness to him, or consideration of what concernment his own Crowns were like
to have in the issue of this Affair, he would acknowledge, and endeavor to
deserve it as long as he lived; if not, the War must go on, be the event what
it would; and for his own part, He would rather Charge a Thousand Men with a
Hundred, nay, though he were sure to die in the Charge, than enter into any
concert of a Peace upon these conditions.

I gave His Majesty an account of all that passed in this interview, and
returned to my Post at Nimeguen.

The Allies had taken great Umbrage at my journey to the Hague, as designed for
Negotiating some separate Peace between France and Holland; but the Prince and
Pensioner seemed careless to satisfy them, and made that use only of it, to
let them know that no such thing was yet intended, but that Holland would be
forced to it at last, if the Emperor and Spain fell not into those measures
that they had proposed to them, both at Vienna and Madrid, for the vigorous
prosecution of the next Campania, which had some effect at Vienna, but little
in Spain or Flanders, as was felt in the beginning of the Spring.

At my return to Nimeguen, I found that in my absence Count Kinkski was
arrived, who was a person of great parts, of a sharp and quick apprehension,
but exact and scrupulous in his Conduct, rigid in his Opinions, never before
versed in these sort of Employments, and thereby very punctilious; This had
engaged him in difficulties upon the Ceremony of Visits, both with my
Colleagues and the French upon his first arrival, which lasted with these till
the end of the Congress, so as to hinder all Visits between them; but I had the
good Fortune to retrieve all ill correspondence that had happened between the
Mediators and him; I found likewise that a secret intelligence was grown
between the French and Dutch Ambassadors, which was managed by Monsieur
Olivecrantz, the second Swedish Ambassador, and wholly apart from my
Colleagues, whose intervention had been only used when the matter was first
agreed between those Parties. That Monsieur Beverning drove on very violently
toward a Peace, and with little regard of his Allies; and said, he had order
from the States, De pousser l'affaire tant qu'il lui seroit possible. To push
the business on as far as it is possible.
That those Ambassadors had come to a sort of Agreement about the from and
number of Powers, which was, That the Mediators should be desired to draw up a
form of Preamble, which should be common to all the Parties, and contain
nothing more, but that such and such Princes, out of a sincere desire of Peace,
had sent such and such Persons to Nimeguen, which had been chose for the Place
of Treaty, by the intercession of the King of Great Britain. That the
Mediators should likewise draw up an Obligatory Act, to be signed by the
several Ambassadors, and put into their hands on the same day, for the
procuring new Powers within Sixty days after the date. That the Titles in the
new Powers should be inserted, bona fide, according to the usual Style of the
Chancellary of each Court; and that an Act of Salvo should be signed by the
several Ambassadors, for no consequence to be drawn hereafter, for the use or
omission of any Titles in these Powers.

I found likewise, that these Points had been agreed among all the Allies, by
the formal intervention of my Colleagues, after they had first been concerted
between the French and Dutch. That these Ambassadors had entered into a course
of mutual Visits, owning publicly, That they did it, as necessary to
facilitate the Progress of the Treaty, and that the Dutch began to talk of
finishing an eventual Treaty (as they called it) for themselves, as soon as the
Acts about Powers were wholly dispatched, which should not take Place till the
General Peace was concluded; but after which They, the Dutch, intended to
employ their Offices between their Allies and the French.

I found likewise, that Mr. Hide had increased the Number of the Mediators in
my Absence, who having been sent into Poland the Summer past, to Christen that
Kings Child, and to condole with the Emperor upon the late Emperor's Death,
had performed the first Compliment from his Majesty; but upon his coming from
thence to Vienna, found the Emperor married, and so passed on privately home,
and arrived at Nimeguen, soon after I left it upon my Journey to the Hague;
where he came to me, after having staid a Fortnight at Nimeguen. He told me at
the Hague, That upon his Return by Rotterdam, he had there met Letters from
Court with a Commission to stop for some short time at Nimeguen, and take the
Character of one of the Ambassadors Mediators there, by which he might be
enabled at his Return to give His Majesty an Account of the State and Progress
of Affairs there. He said, this Commission was intended to find him at
Nimeguen, upon the stop he made there; but having not arrived till he had left
that Place, he was in doubt whether he should make any use of it or no, and
desired my Advice, whether to return to Nimeguen, or to go forward for England.
I easily perceived what this Dispatch was intended for, to introduce him into
those kinds of Characters and Employments; and so advised him to go back to
Nimeguen, which he did, and made a part of the Ambassy during a short stay
there, but excused himself from entering into the management of any Conferences
or Dispatches; so that by his Modesty, and my Lord Berkly's great Age and
Infirmities, the Fatigue of that Employment lay still upon me and Sir Lionel
Jenkins, who writ alternatively the Dispatches from the Ambassy to Court, and
the others to other Princes and Ministers, by concert, all the while I was upon
the Place.

I found likewise at my return to Nimeguen, some few Difficulties yet
remaining, which obstructed the Dispatch intended about the Powers. For though
the French had consented to furnish new Powers, and several for the Emperor,
Spain, Denmark, and Holland; yet they refused a distinct one for Brandenburgh,
which these Ministers insisted on; and the Dutch were in such Oligations to
that Prince, that they were forced to do so too, though unwillingly, as doubting
the Success with France, and foreseeing the Consequence of the same Pretense to
be raised upon it by other Princes of Germany, not only Electors, but the
Houses of Lunenburgh, and Nieuburgh, who yielded to the Electors in no Point
but that one of Precedence. But the Dutch, to distinguish that of Brandenburgh,
alleged to us, that he was Principal in the War of Sweden, and so could not be
included as an Ally only, either by the Emperor, or by the States.

The Danish Ambassador stood positively upon the common Use of the Latin Tongue
between France and them in their Powers, or else to give his in Danish, if they
gave theirs in French. These said, That it was a Novelty and an Impertinence;
and that if in all the Intercourse that had ever been between those Two Crowns,
the Language had not been French on their side, and Latin on the Danes, even in
any one Instrument, they were content they should give their Powers not only in
Danish, but in Hebrew, if they pleased. The Dane said, He could not give
account of all Presidents; that if ill ones had been hitherto used, 'twas time
to establish new ones that were good. That his Master had more Right to do it,
than any former King, being now Successive in that Crown, which was before
Elective; and being more Absolute in his Dominions than any other King of
Christendom; for there was now nothing in Denmark, but La volonte du Roy; The
Will of the King.
upon all which he said, his Orders were positive, and he could not proceed
without the Style he pretended.

These two Points chiefly had obstructed the final Agreement about the Powers,
for near a Month; after which we prevailed with the French to yield to new
Powers for Brandenburgh, upon Assurance from the Dutch Ambassadors, that they
expected no such Pretension for any other of their German Allies; but that if
any should be raised and refused by France, yet that should not hinder or delay
the Dutch from proceeding in the Treaty. The Danish Pretense about the
Languages, being neither countenanced nor approved by any of his Allies, was at
last yielded by him, which had been better never started, as having lost him
ground in that which was intended by it, which was to establish the Principle
of a Parity among Crowned Heads.

There was an Accident happened likewise in my Absence, which had raised great
Heats among the Parties. Upon Count Kinkski's Arrival, the Allies began their
Meetings at his House; by which they hoped to govern the general Resolutions,
and keep the Alliance from breaking into any separate Pieces. The Dutch
Ambassadors, who pretended to influence the Peace more than any of their
Allies, stomach'd the Count's Design and Carriage at these Conferences, where
they said he pretended to be sole Dictator, and they were unwilling to enter
into plain Contradictions, or the same Heats at his own House; upon which they
went to the Stadthouse, and chose there a Room for their Conferences among all
the Allies, which upon the first Practice gave great Offense to the French
Ambassadors. They said, it was a Breach upon the Neutrality of the Place
established by the Assembly's being there, and that the Dutch had now arrogated
to themselves the Disposal of the Townhouse, without common Agreement. The
Dutch alleged, the Rooms they had taken, were not belonging to the Town, but
to the Nobles of Gelderland, and were below Stairs, and that all above,
remained to be disposed of still by the Mediators for the common Use of the
Parties, when they should desire it. The French were not satisfied with these
Reasons, and threatened to break the Assembly. We at last prevailed with the
Allies to forbear the Use of the Stadthouse, till we drew up a formal Proposal
to be made by us the Mediators, to all Parties, desiring them, That for their
Ease and Convenience, all Parties would meet in one Room at the Stadthouse, or
at least the two Alliances in two several Rooms, whilst we should meet in
another, and be there ready to perform all Offices between them. This last was
accepted, and we designed the several Rooms for our selves and the Parties, but
were forced to find two Rooms for the French and Swedes to meet apart, whose
Competition, tho Allies, would not suffer them to meet in one, or decide it by
lot, as the Spaniard and Dane had done.

There remained one Difficulty more, which particularly concerned His Majesty.
Both French and Spaniards, as well as Imperialists, had insisted even with
Emulation, That the Pope's Mediation should be mentioned in the new Powers, as
well as his Majesty's. The Dutch and Danes both had absolutely refused to treat
upon any Powers where the Pope's Mediation should be mentioned. We had likewise
represented to them, how great a Difference there was between his Majesty's
Mediation, that had been accepted by all Parties, and the Pope's, that had been
so only by a part of them; and the very mention of it absolutely refused by
several others, to be admitted into the Powers. That his Majesty's Mediation
had proposed the Place of Treaty, exchanged the Pasports, formed the Assembly,
managed all the Negotiations in it so long, without the appearance of any
Minister from the Pope, or knowledge whether he would be received if he came,
or by whom his Mediation would be accepted or employed. At length it was
resolved, That the mention of his Majesty's Mediation alone, should be made in
the several Powers: and so all being agreed, about the middle of February all
the several Acts were signed, and put into our Hands, and by us exchanged among
the several Parties.

After this dispatch of all Preliminaries to the Treaty, the several Parties by
Agreement brought into our hands their several propositions or Pretensions. The
French seemed in Theirs to demand nothing of the Emperor and of Brandenburgh,
but the entire restoring of the Treaty of Munster: Of Spain, the retaining of
all they had conquered in this War, upon the Spaniards having first broken the
Peace. From the their States General they made no Demand, but offered them the
restoring of their Friendship, and that they will hearken to a Treaty of
Commerce. On the other side, The Emperor's Demands were, That France should
restore to him, to the Empire, and all his Allies, whatever they had taken from
them in the Course of this War, and make Reparation for all Damages they had
suffered in it. The Spaniards demanded all the Places they had lost, and all
the Damages they had suffered from France since the Year 1665. The Dutch
demanded from France, the Restitution of Mastricht, Satisfaction to the Prince
of Orange in what did concern the Principali^y of Orange, and a Reglement of
Commerce, with a Renunci^tion of all Pretensions each Party might have upon the
other. As for the great Damages they had sustained, they said, they sacrificed
them all to the Public Peace, provided Satisfaction might be given their
Allies.

For the Northern Kings, and German Prinees, their Demands were so extended,
that I shall forbear relating them, and sum them up in this only; That those
who had gained by the War, pretended to retain all they had got; and those that
had lost, pretended to recover all they had lost, and to be repaid the Damages
they had suffered by the War. Count Kinkski delivered into our Hands likewise
the Duke of Lorrain's Pretensions, sealed as the rest were; but we opened them
not, upon the French telling us, they had not received from Court any
Counter-Pretensions upon the Duke of Lorrain, whereof they believed the Reason
to be, That no Minister of his had yet appeared at the Congress. Indeed their
Pretensions against Lorrain, had never yet been made since the Death of the
late Duke, and would have been very hard to draw up by their ablest Ministers
or Advocates themselves; and therefore they thought fit to decline them, and
reserve them for the Terms of a Peace, when they should be able to prescribe,
rather than to treat them.

By these Propositions of the several Parties, it easily appeared to the World,
what wise Men knew before, how little Hopes there were of a Peace, from the
Motions of this Treaty in the present Circumstances of Affairs, and how it was
wholly to be expected from the course and influence of future Events in the
Progress of the War.

About the 24 th of February, I went to the Prince at his House at Soesdyke, a
Day's Journey from Nimeguen, upon a Letter from his Highness, desiring it of
me. I had about a Week before written to him by the King's Command, upon which
his Highness desired to speak with me. I went, and told him the Contents of my
last Dispatch. He asked me, whether it were from the King himself, or from any
of the Ministers? I told him, it was from Secretary Williamson, by the King's
Command. The Prince said, Then he knew from whence it came; but however desired
me to read the Particulars to him, which were, the King's apprehension of a
Mistake in the Prince, because the Terms mentioned by his Majesty were not any
Propositions (which He did not think his part to make) nor had He any Authority
for it, but only a piece of Confidence he had entered into with the Prince.
Next, That the Exchange of Cambray, was only proposed as a thing to be wished,
that so six Towns might be restored to Spain, instead of five the Prince had
proposed, which in His Majesty's Opinion would make a kind of a double Frontier
to Brussels, and so leave Flanders safer than by the Prince's Scheme; Therefore
His Majesty desired the Prince would think further of it, and not let it fall
so flat as he did by his last Answer, without trying what it could be beaten
out to. But however offered, That if his Highness had any other Proposition to
make to France, the King would very readily hand it over to them in the best
manner he could.

Whilst I was reading this to the Prince, He could hardly hear it out with any
Patience, Sir J -- W -- 's Style was always so disagreeable to him; and he
thought the whole cast of this so artificial, that he received it at first with
Indignation and Scorn, rather than with those further Thoughts that were
desired of him. He said, the Style of Letting it fall so flat, was my Lord
Arlington's; and, The Double Frontier, as it were, for Brussels, was some of
the Secretary's Cresme Foitte, Whipped Cream.
and fit for Children. The rest he took to be all the French Ambassador's, who
would fain continue a private Treaty with him by the King's Hand, while His
Master went into the Field. His Answer was very plain: That he had thought
enough of it, and had no more to say at this time; That when he spoke to me so
lately at the Hague, He believed the Peace might have been made, and upon
better terms than he proposed, if the King had desired them from France, either
upon Kindness to Him, or upon the Interests of His own Crowns. That he was
sorry to find the King's Thoughts so different from his, and that whenever they
grew nearer, he should be glad to know it. But he looked now upon the Campania
as begun; and believed at the time we talked, the Guns were playing before
Valencienne. That he saw now no hopes of a Peace, but expected a long War,
unless Flanders should be lost, and in that case the States must make the best
terms they could. That he expected a very ill Beginning of the Campania, and to
make an ill Figure in it himself, and to bear the Shame of Faults that others
would make; but if the Emperor performed what he had promised, the Campania
might not end as it began. That however, he was in, and must go on, Et quant on
est a la grandemesse on y est (meaning, And when one is at High Mass* one is at
it.
I suppose, that one must stay till it is done, because the Crowd is so great
one cannot get out) That he gave His Majesty Thanks for his offer of handing
over to France any Proposition he should make; but that never was His Meaning:
For if it had, He could easily have found a directer way. That his Intention
was only to enter into a Confidence with His Majesty upon the Subject of the
Peace, and to owe it wholly to him; but if any thing was proposed by the King
to France, otherwise than as His own Thoughts, it must be from the Body of the
Alliance, and not from Him.

After these Discourses, the Prince went immediately away for the Hague, and I
returned to Nimeguen, where all Negotiations seemed wholly at a stand, and so
continued till toward the End of April. In this time arrived Monsieur
Stratman, one of the Imperial Ambassadors; Monsieur Christin, one of the
Spanish; but He and Don Pedro having only the Character of Plenipotentiaries,
and pretending thereupon the Treatment of Ambassadors, and the French and
Swedes refusing it to that Character, they continued incognito till the Arrival
of the Marquess de Balbaces.

For Monsieur Stratman upon his Notification to the several Ambassadors (as he
said at the same time) the Dane and the Swede made him first their Visits, and
after them the French; whereupon having first made his to the Mediators, he
returned them to the Swedes, the Dane being out of Town, after which he sent to
demand an Hour of the French; but Monsieur d' Estrades returned him answer,
That having failed of the Respect due to the King his Master, they would not
admit of any visit from him; hereupon Monsieur Kinkski and Stratman desired us
to know upon what Point the French refused their Visit, saying, It could be
upon no other but a Pretense of Preference to all other Crowns, and expecting
the first Visit to be made the French, though other Ambassadors had first visited
the Imperialists. This they desired much the French would avow, believing it
would embroil them with the Swedes as well as with us, who they knew would
declare against any such Pretense. But the French, upon our application from
the Imperialists, kept stanch to their first Answer, That Monsieur Stratman,
avoit manque du respect au Roy leur Maistre. Had been wanting in respect to the
King their Master.
That he had done it in several Points, and knew very well in what: And further
than this, they would not enter into the Matter, but continued positive in
refusing the Visit.

Whilst such Matters as these helped to amuse the Congress, and keep them in
Countenance, the essential Parts of the Treaty were managed in the Field:
France had in the beginning of the Year blocked up Cambray and Valenciennes,
about the end of February; having provided sufficient Magazines in the Winter
for the Subsistence of their Forces, they began to break into Flanders, and
into the Parts of Germany on the other side the Rhine, and with all the most
cruel Ravages of Burning and Spoiling those Parts of Germany that could be
exercised, and such as had not yet been used on either Side since the War
began. The Allies made Complaints of this new manner of War to His Majesty, who
employed his Offices toward France, to hinder such prosecution of a Quarrel,
while a Peace was treating under his Mediation; but the thing was done, and
their Point was gained, which was, by an entire Ruin of the Country, to hinder
the Imperialists from finding any Subsistence for their Troops if they should
march into Alsatia, and thereby divert those Forces that the French resolved to
employ this Spring in Flanders, before the Dutch could take the Field, and
march to the relief of those Places they intended to attack.

About the seventeenth of March, the King of France took Valenciennes, having
furmounted the very Force of the Seasons, and set down before it about the
beginning of that Month. From thence he marched with a mighty Army, and laid
Siege to Cambray with one part of it, and to St. Omer with the other, under the
Duke of Orleans. After five days Siege from the opening of the Trenches, he
took Cambray, like all the other Spanish Towns, by surrender upon Articles; but
the Citadel held out for some Days longer.

In the mean time, the Dutch having received their Payments due from Spain, and
finding the French go on with their design upon Flanders, whilst the Treaty
served but for an Amusement, resolved to go on with the War for another
Campania; being kept up to this Resolution by the vigor of the Prince of
Orange, in pressing them upon the Observance of their Treaties, and pursuit of
their Interest, in the defense of Flanders. Upon the first motion of the
French, the Prince had begun to prepare for that of his Troops likewise, and
pressed the Spaniards to have Theirs in readiness to join him, and with all
imaginable endeavors provided for the subsistence of his Army in their march
through Flanders, which the Spaniards had taken no care of. But with all the
Diligence and Application that could be used, he could not come to the Relief
either of Valenciennes or Cambray; but with part of the Forces of the States
alone, and without either Troops, or so much as Guides furnished him by the
Spaniards, he marched directly toward S. Omer, resolute to raise that Siege
with the hazard of a Battle, at what Disadvantage soever. The Duke of Orleans
leaving a small part of his Troops to defend his Trenches before St. Omer,
marched to meet the Prince of Orange, and upon the way was reinforced by
Monsieur de Lutzenburgh with all the Troops the French King could send out of
his Army, leaving only enough to continue the Siege before the Citadel of
Cambray. These Armies met, and fought with great Bravery at Mont-Cassel, where,
after a sharp Dispute, the first Regiment of the Dutch Infantry began to break,
and fall into disorder: The Prince went immediately to that Part where the
Shake began, ralli'd them several times, and renewed the Charge; but at last
was born down by the plain Flight of his Men, whom he was forced to resist like
Enemies, and fall in among them with his Sword in his Hand; and cutting the
first cross over the Face, cried out aloud, Cocquin je te marqueray au moins a
fin de te fair pendre. Rascal, I Will set a mark on thee at least, that I may
hang thee afterward.
Voice nor Action, Treats nor Example, could give Courage to Men that had
already lost it; and so the Prince was forced to yield to the Stream that
carried him back to the rest of his Troops, which yet stood firm; with whom,
and what he could gather of those that had been routed, he made a Retreat that
wanted little of the Honor of a Victory; and will, by the confession of his
Enemies, make a part of that great Character they so justly allow him. The
safety of the Dutch Army, upon this Misfortune, was by them wholly owned to His
Highness's Conduct as well as Bravery in the course of this Action; after which
both St. Omer and the Citadel of Cambray were surrendered to the French about
the 20 th of April, by which the Spaniards lost the main Strength of their
Frontier of Flanders on that side, (as they had done that on the other side by
Aeth and Charleroy in the former War) and all the Hopes of raising any
Contributions in France, which was a great part of the Subsistence of the
Spanish Troops; so as there now remained nothing of Frontier considerable,
besides Namur and Mons to the Land, Ostend and Nieuport to the Sea; and the
rest of the Spanish Netherlands consisted only of great Towns, by which no
resistance could be hoped for, whenever the French should think fit to attacque
them, and could spare Men enough to garrison them when they should be taken. For
the Greatness of those Towns, and Multitude of Inhabitants, and their
inveterates Hatred to the French Government, was such, as without very great
Garrisons they could not be held, unless upon one sudden Conquest and great
Revolution, the whole Spanish Netherlands should become French, and thereby be
made a new Frontier toward the Dutch and Germans, and, like a new Conquest,
the Seat of their Armies.

This the Spaniards thought would never be suffered, neither by England nor
Holland, and so they seemed to have abandoned the Fate of Flanders to their
Care, with a Resignation that became good Christians, rather than good
Reasoners: For I have long observed, from all I have seen, or heard, or read in
story, that nothing is so fallacious, as to reason upon the Counsels or Conduct
of Princes or States, from what one conceives to be the true Interest of their
Countries; for there is in all places an Interest of those that Govern, and
another of those that are Governed: nay, among these, there is an Interest of
quiet Men, that desire only to keep what they have; and another of unquiet Men,
who desire to acquire what they have not, and by violent, if they cannot by
lawful means; therefore I never could find a better way of judging the
Resolutions of a State, than by the personal Temper and Understanding, or
Passions and Humors of the Princes, or Chief Ministers, that were for the time
at the Head of Affairs. But the Spaniards reasoned only from what they thought
the Interest of each Country. They knew Holland would save Flanders if they
could, and England they were sure could if they would, and believed would be
brought to it at last by the Increase of the Danger and Force of their own
Interest, and the Humor of the People. In this Hope or Presumption they were a
great deal flattered by their Ministers then in England, Don Bernard de Salinas
Envoy from Spain, and Fonseca, Consul there; who did indeed very industriously
foment the Heats that began about this time to appear in the Parliament, upon
the Apprehensions of the French Conquests both in Flanders and Sicily; which
moved them, about the End of March, to make an Address to the King,
representing the Progresses of France, and desiring His Majesty to put a stop
to them, before they grew dangerous to England, as well as to their Neighbors.
Don Bernard de Salinas told some of the Commons, That the King was very angry
at this Address, and had said upon it, That the Authors of it were a Company of
Rogues; which made a great Noise in the House of Commons. The King resented it
as a piece of Malice in Salinas, or at least as a Design to inflame the House;
and thereupon ordered him to depart the Kingdom within certain Days. Yet, about
a Month after, the Parliament made another Address upon the same Occasion,
desiring his Majesty to make a League Offensive and Defensive with the States
General, for opposing the Progress of the French Conquests. This His Majesty
received as an Invasion of his Prerogative, made them an angry Answer, and
Prorogued the Parliament till the Winter following.

However, France had so much Regard to the Jealousies raised both in England
and Holland, of their designing an entire Conquest of Flanders, that, after
having gained those three important Frontier Towns so early in the Spring, and
dispersed his Army after that Expedition, that King returned home, writ to his
Majesty, That to show he had no Intention to conquer Flanders, but only to make
a General Peace, he was contented, notwithstanding the great Advantages and
Forces he had at present, to make a General Truce, in case his Allies the
Swedes would agree to it; which he desired His Majesty to inform himself of,
since he had not Convenience of doing it, for want of Liberty of Couriers into
Sweden.

The Contents of this Letter was proved by the French Ambassadors at Nimeguen
among the several Ministers there, till they found it had an effect contrary to
what was intended, and was taken by all for too gross an Artifice. It passed
very ill with Monsieur Beverning himself, who of all others there, was the most
passionately bent upon the Peace. But he said openly upon this, That the French
were to be commended, who never neglected any thing of Importance, nor so much
as of amusement; that France had given their Blow, and would now hinder the
Allies from giving Theirs: That the reserve of Sweden's Consent was an easy way
of avoiding the Truce, if the Allies should accept it: That this it self could
not be done, because Flanders would be left so open, as to be easily swallowed
up by the next Invasion, having no Frontier on either side. That the Towns now
possessed by France, would in the time of a Truce grow absolutely French, and
so the harder to be restored by a Peace or a War. That for his part, he desired
the Peace, contrary to the Politics of Monsieur Van Beuninghen, and the other
Ministers of the Allies in England; affirming always. That notwithstanding all
their Intrigues and Intelligences there, He, Monsieur Beverning, was assured,
That his Majesty would not enter into the War, to save the last Town in
Flanders. This Confidence made him pursue all the Ways toward a Peace, and by
Paces which some thought forwarder than his Commission, and very ill concerted
with those of his Allies. About the middle of April, he brought us the Project
of a Treaty of Commerce both for France and Sweden, and desired we would make
the Communication of them; which we did for form, though we knew that those
Ministers had been before possessed of them from the Dutch Ambassadors
themselves. And some few Days after, they entered into Conferences upon this
Project at the French Ambassadors Houses, whom they found very easy in the
Terms the Dutch insisted on for their Commerce, which was all that could make
any Difficulty between them.

1677. About the end of April, the Ministers of the Allies came, and presented
us their several Answers in Writing to the French Propositions, which they
offered to leave with us, whenever we should assure them that the French and
Swedes were ready with theirs. Upon this Communication given to the French,
they were positive to give no Answer in writing, nor to receive any, alleging
both Reason and Example for their Opinion; this from the Practice of the
Munster Treaty, that from the Danger of the invective Style or Language that is
apt to enter into the Writings of each Party upon such Occasions. The Allies
were for some time as peremptory in their Resolution of delivering their Answer
in writing; but both at last agreed upon the Expedient we proposed, of
dictating to us what they intended should be said to the other Party, of our
setting the Substance down in Writing, and reading it over to them first, who
dictated to us, so as they might be Judges whether we had rightly apprehended
and expressed their meaning; and yet the thing might go in our Style, and not
in theirs; by which all Sharpness and Provocation would be avoided.

About the middle of May, arrived President Canon, Envoy from the Duke of
Lorrain, and put his Master's Pretensions into our Hands; upon which the Allies
expected a return of those from France upon that Duke, no room being now left
for delaying them from the want of a Minister upon the Place; but the French
said very plainly, It was a Matter they were not instructed in; which the
Allies received with great Stomach, and perpetual Complaints to us the
Mediators; all professing, they were resolved not to proceed in the Treaty,
without carrying on the Interests of that Duke, an equal Pace with their own.

About the End of May arrived the Pope's Nuncio; whereupon the Swedish and
Danish Ambassadors resorted immediately to us, desiring to know how we intended
to carry our selves in what regarded that Minister; professing themselves to be
much in pain, being of one side very much pressed, the Swedes by the French,
and the Danes by the Imperialists and Spaniards, to the enterchange at least of
common Ceremonies and Civilities, with a Minister for whom they all with
emulation professed so great Respect and Deference: On the other side, the Swedes
and Danes pretended neither to have Instruction or Example from their
respective Courts, to determine them in this Matter, but said, they were
resolved to observe and consider the steps that should be made by us. We cut
the Business very short, and declared to them our Resolution to have no sort of
Commerce with the Pope's Nuncio, either in the Affairs of our Function, or in
matters of Ceremony; and told them, our Orders from Court were so precise in
this Point, that they would admit of no Debate. The next Day Monsieur Colbert
and d'Avaux came formally to give us part of the Nuncio's Arrival, and of his
Desire to make us his first Comments, if he might know they would be received:
Our Answer to them was the same we had made to the Swedes and Danes; and soon
after, all the Ministers of Protestant Princes at Nimeguen, resolved to follow
our Example, and to have no Commerce at all with the Nuncio.

About the same time, after many Messages carried by us between the Parties,
they were persuaded at last into the Agreement of delivering and exchanging by
our Hands, their Answers to each others Propositions in writing, tho without
pretending to pursue that Method in the succeeding Paces of the Negotiation.
Nor was there need of that Caution, for this I take to have been the last Pace
of any free and general Negotiation between the Parties engaged in the War and
in the Treaty: nor were the Answers any thing nearer agreeing, than the first
Propositions.

The last Day of May arrived the Marquess de Balbaces, first Ambassador from
Spain; and about the same time, my Lord Berkly returned into England, where he
languished out the rest of the Summer, and died.

About the seventh of June, the Dutch Ambassadors brought us the Project of a
Treaty between them and France, digested and extended in all its Forms and
Articles; and told us soon after, They had in a Conference upon it with the
French Ambassadors, agreed, in a manner, all the Points of it, at least that
there remained but two, which concerned Commerce only, undetermined between
them, which they doubted not would be agreed likewise upon return of the French
Dispatches to Court. That after their Business was ended, they would perform
the best Offices they could between their Allies and the French; and indeed by
the Beginning of July, all Points were accordingly agreed between the French
and Dutch, and Monsieur Beverning began to play the part of something more than
a Mediator, pressing on his Allies toward a Peace, with Paces very earnest and
something rough, and as some believed more than he had Order for, from his
Masters, who yet pretended to hold Hands with their Allies. But Monsieur
Beverning professed to believe that their Friends at the Hague were imposed
upon by Van Beuninghen, and the Spanish Ministers at London, who still animated
them with Hopes of the King's entering into the War, or at least prescribing a
Plan of the Peace to be received by all parties, which Beverning believed
neither one nor the other of, and pretended to be morally assured of his Opinion,
and thereupon grounded the absolute Necessity of a Peace.

In this Month the Duke of Zell began to make a Difficulty of sending the five
thousand Men he had promised to the Allies, without some new Stipulations. And
the French offered a Guaranty to the House of Lunenburgh, of all their
Conquests on the Swede in Bremen, upon a Neutrality to be declared by those
Dukes, which began to give great Umbrages to the Allies, as well as the Swedes,
of some separate Measures like to be concluded between France and the whole
House of Brunswick. The Dutch Ambassadors were likewise in Pain upon new
Intelligence both from Vienna and Madrid about a separate Peace, being Treated
between Don John and the French, with an Exchange of the Spanish Netherlands,
for what should be restored them in Roussillon and Sicily. The Ministers of the
Confederates made great Instances in England, That His Majesty would recall his
Troops, that were in the French Service; attributing most of their Successes in
Germany, to the Bravery of those English Regiments. But His Majesty excused it
upon the Equality of a Mediator; since there were English Troops of greater
number in the Service of the Allies: Who took this Answer, however, for an ill
Sign of that Prosecution which they hoped from His Majesty for the Relief of
their Languishing Affairs. The Hopes of those great Actions promised by the
Imperialists this Summer on the Rhine, began to Flat; Their Troops finding no
Subsistence in those Countries which had been wholly desolated by the French in
the Beginning of the Year, to prevent their March. The Prince of Orange
observing all these Circumstances, and foreseeing no resource for the Interests
of the Allies; unless from his Majesty; and that it was likely to prove an
unactive Summer in Flanders, the French resolving not to come to a Battle, and
he not able to form a Siege, and oppose a French Army that should come to
relieve it; he sent Monsieur Bentinck over into England about the beginning of
June, to desire his Majesty's leave that he might make a Journey thither so
soon as the Campania ended. He received a civil Answer, but with Wishes from
the King, That he would first think of making the Peace, and rather defer his
Journey till that were concluded.

About the middle of June, my Son came over to me at Nimeguen, and brought me
Letters from my Lord Treasurer, to signify his Majesty's Pleasure, that I
should come over, and enter upon the Secretary of State's Office, which Mr.
Conventry had offered his Majesty to lay down upon the payment often thousand
Pounds; That the King would pay half the Money, and I must lay down the rest at
present; tho his Lordship did not doubt but the King would find the way of
easing me in time of that too. I writ immediately to my Lord Treasurer to make
my Acknowledgment to his Majesty; but at the same time my Excuses, That I was
not in a condition to lay down such a Sum, my Father being still alive, and
keeping the Estate of the Family; and desiring that the King's Intention might
at least be respited till he saw how the present Treaty was like to determine.
In return of my Letters on the second of July, Mr. Smith, one of the King's
Messengers, being sent Express, and making great diligence, arrived at
Nimeguen, and brought me his Majesty's Commands to repair immediately over, in
a Yatcht which he had sent on purpose for me: In obedience to this Command I
left Nimeguen, but without any Ceremony, pretending only a sudden Journey into
England, but saying nothing of the Occasion further than to my nearest Friends.

At my Arrival, the King asked me many Questions about my Journey, about the
Congress, draping us for spending Him so much Money, and doing nothing; and
about Sir Lionel, asking me how I had bred him; and how he passed among the
Ambassadors there? and other Pleasantries upon that Subject. After a good deal
of this kind of Conversation, He told me, I knew for what he had sent for me
over, and that 'twas what he had long intended; and I was not to thank him,
because he did not know any Body else to bring into that Place. I told his
Majesty, that was too great a Compliment for me, but was a very ill one to my
Country, and which I thought it did not deserve; that I believed there were a
great many in it fit for that, or any other Place he had to give; and I could
name two in a breath that I would undertake should make better Secretaries of
State than I. The King said, Go, get you gone to Sheen, we shall have no good
of you till you have been there, and when you have rested your self, come up
again. I never saw him in better humor, nor ever knew a more agreeable
Conversation when he was so, and where he was pleased to be familiar, great
Quickness of Conception, great Pleasantness of Wit, with great Variety of
Knowledge, more Observation and truer Judgment of Men, than one would have
imagined by so careless and easy a manner as was natural to him in all he said
or did: From his own Temper, he desired nothing but to be easy himself, and
that every Body else should be so; and would have been glad to see the least of
his Subjects pleased, and to refuse no Man what he asked. But this softness of
temper made him apt to fall into the Persuasions of whoever had his kindness
and confidence for the time, how different soever from the Opinions he was of
before; and he was very easy to change hands, when those he employed seemed to
have engaged him in any Difficulties; so as nothing looked steady in the
Conduct of his Affairs, nor aimed at any certain end. Yet sure no Prince had
more Qualities to make him loved, with a great many to make him esteemed, and
all without a grain of Pride or Vanity in his whole Constitution; nor can he
suffer Flattery in any kind, growing uneasy upon the first Approaches of it,
and turning it off to something else. But this humor has made him lose many
great Occasions of Glory to himself, and Greatness to his Crown, which the
Conjunctures of his Reign conspired to put into his Head, and have made way for
the aspiring Thoughts and Designs of a Neighbor Prince, which would not have
appeared, or could not have succeeded in the World, without the Applications
and Arts employed to manage this easy and inglorious Humor of the King's.

I staid two days at Sheen, in which time some of Secretary Coventry's Friends
had prevailed with him not to part with his Place if he could help it, unless
the King would let him recommend the Person to succeed him, who should pay all
the Money he expected, and which the King had charged himself with. When I came
to Town, the King, told me in his Closet all that had passed between Him and
Mr. Coventry the day before upon this occasion; That He did not understand what
he meant, nor what was at the bottom; for he had first spoke to His Majesty
about parting with his Place, said his Health would not go through with it,
made the Price he Expected for it, and concluded all before He had sent for me
over. That now he pretended he did not mean to quit it, unless he might present
one to succeed him, and hoped he had not deserved His Majesty should turn him
out. But the King said upon it, That, under favor, He was resolved to take him
at his Word, and so He had told him, and left him to digest it as he could.
Upon this, I represented to the King how old and true a Servant Mr. Coventry
had been of his Father's and His, how well he had served him in this Place; how
well he was able to do it still by the great credit he had in the House of
Commons, where the King's great Business lay in the ill state of his Revenue;
how ill such a Treatment would agree with his Majesty's Nature and Customs, and
for my own part, that it would be a great favor to me to respite this change
till he saw what was like to become of the Treaty, or the War, and therefore I
begged of him that he would not force a good Secretary out, and perhaps an ill
one in against both their Wills, but let Mr. Coventry keep it, at least, till
he seemed more willing to part with it. The King said, well then, He would let
it alone for the present, but did not doubt in a little time one or other of us
would change our mind.

In the mean time, the Design of my Journey was known; my Lord Arlington and
others still asking me when they should give me joy of it, and many making
Applications to me for Places in the Office; which made the Court uneasier to
me, and increased my known Humor of loving the Country, and being as much in
it as I could. However, when I came to Court, the King fell often into
Conversation with me, and often in his Closet alone, or with none other present
besides the Duke or my Lord Treasurer, and often both. The Subject of these
Conversations were usually the Peace, and the Prince of Orange's Journey into
England. The King always expressed a great desire for the First, but not at all
for the other till that was concluded. He said, his Parliament would never be
quiet nor easy to Him while the War lasted abroad: They had got it into their
Heads to draw Him into it, whether He would or no. That they pretended Public
Ends, and Dangers from France, and there might be Both meant by a great many
honest Men among them; but the Heats and Distempers of late had been raised by
some factious Leaders, who thought more of themselves than of any thing else,
had a mind to engage Him in a War, and then leave Him in it, unless they might
have their Terms in removing and filling of Places; and he was very loath to be
so much at their Mercy, as he should be, if he were once engaged in the War.
That besides, he saw the longer it continued, the worse it would be for the
Confederates; more of Flanders would be lost every day; the Conduct of Spain
must certainly ruin all in time; and therefore he would fain have the Prince
make the Peace for them, if they would not do it for themselves. That if He and
the Prince could fall into the Terms of it, he was sure it might be done: And,
after several Discourses upon this Subject for near a Month, his Majesty at
last told me, He had a great mind I should make a short turn to the Prince, and
try if I could persuade him to it; and assure him, That after it was agreed, he
should be the gladdest in the World to see him in England. The Duke and my Lord
Treasurer both pressed me upon the same Point; but I told them at a long
Conference upon it, how often I had been employed upon this Errand to the
Prince, how unmovable I had found him, and how sure I was to find him so still,
unless the King would consider of another Scheme for the Peace than had been
yet proposed to him, and wherein he might reckon upon more Safety to Flanders,
as well as to his own Honor. That I had spent all my Shot, and was capable of
saying no more to him than I had done, in obedience to all the Instructions I
had received. That his Answers had been positive; so that some of my good
Friends at Court pretended they had been my own Thoughts rather than the
Prince's. That His Majesty would do well to try another Hand, and he would the
better know the Prince's Mind, if his Answers were the same to both; if not, he
would at least know how ill I had served him. The King said, It was a thing of
Confidence between Him and the Prince, and must be so treated, and he knew no
Body he had besides to send. I told him, if he pleased, I would name one? He
bid me; and I said, Mr. Hyde was idle ever since his return from Nimeguen, had
been entered into the Commission of the Mediators there, staid with us a
Fortnight or three Weeks, might pretend to return thither to exercise the same
Function in my absence, since the Commission run to any two of the Number, and
might take the Prince of Orange's Camp in his way to Nimeguen, perform the
King's Commands to His Highness, inform himself of his last Resolution upon the
Subject of the Peace; go on to Nimeguen without giving any jealousy to the
Allies, or without the noise that my going would make; since Sir Lionel had
wrote to Court and to Me, That Monsieur Beverning had desired all Paces should
stop there till my return, which he heard would be sudden, and that the King
would send by me his own Plan of the Peace. The Duke fell in first to the
Proposal of Mr. Hyde's going, and, after some debate, the King and my Lord
Treasurer, and that it should be as soon as was possible. He was sent for
accordingly, and dispatched away in all Points as I had proposed. He found the
Prince at the Camp, but unmovable in the Business of the Peace upon the Terms
His Majesty had Thoughts of proceeding; gave Account of all that passed in that
Conference to the King, and went straight away to Nimeguen, and writ me word of
his Conversation with the Prince, and that he never saw such a Firmness in any
Man.

I knew Mr. Hyde's going to reside at Nimeguen, would be of great comfort and
support to Sir Lionel, who was in perpetual Agonies (as his word was) after he
was left alone in that station; having ever so much distrust of his own
Judgment, that tho he had the most great desire that could be to do well, yet
he many times could not resolve how to go about it; and was often as much
perplexed about the little Punctilio's of Visit and Ceremony that were left to
busy that Ambassy, as if greater Affairs had still attended it. Besides, he lay
under the lash of Secretary Williamson, who upon old Grudges between them at
Colen, never failed to lay hold of any occasion he could to censure his
Conduct, and expose it at the Foreign Committee, where his Letters were read to
His Majesty. It happened about this time, that the Spanish Ambassadors first
appearing in Public upon a new Commission to all Three, gave immediate notice
of it to the Imperialists, who made their Visit upon it, and were within two
hours revisited by the Spaniards. After which, they sent their formal
Notifications to all the other Ambassadors, and to the Mediators in the first
place. Sir Lionel was in pain, having Orders to pretend the first Rank of
Respect before the Imperialists, as well as other Ambassadors there; and not to
yield it, if it came in competition. He had likewise another Order, which was,
that upon Matters in Ceremony, doubtful, and not admitting the delay of new
Orders, he should consult with the other Ambassadors, especially French and
Swedish, who used to carry those Points the highest, and govern himself as well
as he could by Presidents and Examples. He consulted both these Ambassadors,
whether he should visit the Spaniards, after having given the first notice to
the Imperialists? And they concluded, That he should first know of them,
whether it was done in form, as to Ambassadors in general; or whether it was
upon the account of the near Alliance in Blood between those two Houses of
Austria? That if it were the First, he ought not visit them, as having put a
disrespect upon the Mediation, and distinguished the Emperor from all the other
crowned Heads, who had yielded the precedence wholly to them; which they should
not have done, if the Emperor had refused it. But if the Spaniards affirmed it
was only upon the nearness of Blood between them, none of the other Ambassadors
need take any notice of it, since the same had been done between those two
Crowns at Munster upon the same score; which being there declared, it gave no
offense to the Mediators, tho they were the Pope's Nuncio's, with whom there
was otherwise no competition. Sir Lionel was satisfied by the Spaniards (who
gave it him in writing) that the Visits were made only upon the score of
Kindred; as at Munster; and thereupon made them his Visit, and received theirs;
for which he was sharply reproved by Secretary Williamson's Letter upon it, who
had represented it to the King as a Disobedience to a positive Order, and
giving up the Point to the Imperialists. But being at Court soon after these
Dispatches, I endeavored to justify my Colleague's Intentions and his
Proceedings, by showing that he had conformed to his other Orders of consulting
the other Ambassadors, and proceeding according to the best President, which
was that at Munster; and that if he had broken with the Spaniards upon this
Point, he would have provoked the Imperialists to declare their resolution of
not yielding to the Mediators, upon which the other Ambassadors would recall the
Concession which they had already made in this Point, and so hazard, if not
lose, the Possession his Majesty was in, of the first Respect given to his
Mediation. I had the good fortune to satisfy his Majesty and his Ministers, and
to obtain Orders for His gracious Pardon to be sent Sir Lionel (for they would
suffer it to run in no other Terms); for which however the poor Gentleman made
as great Acknowledgments, as if his Fault had been much greater, and worse
meant.

The rest of this Summer passed without any further Paces made in the Congress
at Nimeguen, where the Messages carried and returned about the Business of
Lorain, served to keep the Mediators in countenance, and no more. The whole
Body of Allies pressed for an Answer from the French to that Duke's
Pretensions, delivered in by President Canon. The French, after their former
Exception, of his wanting a Minister there, raised another to stave off these
Instances of the Allies, and declared, they could give no answer about Lorain,
till the Bishop of Strasburgh's Agents were received by the Allies, upon which
the Emperor made an invincible Difficulty, declaring he would never treat with
a Vassal of his own* And in these Conferences about Lorain, the French
Ambassadors began to insinuate to the Mediators, That their Master never
intended That to be treated as a Principal, but only as an Accessory to the
Treaty.

In August arrived at Nimeguen, the Bishop of Gurck, chief of the Imperial
Ambassay, and Count Antoine of that from Denmark: The first was immediately
visited by the Spainsh Ambassadors, and returned them; after which he sent his
Notifications to the Mediators, and from them to the other Ambassadors; upon
which no Difficulty was made by them, since the Bishop made the same
Declaration the Spaniards had done before upon the like occasion. That the
first Visits passing between the Ministers of the two Houses of Austria, were
Visits of Kindness and Consanguinity, and not of Ceremony. But Count Antoine
fell into endless Difficulties upon his first arrival. He intended to have sent
his first Notification to the Mediators, as others had done; but the
Imperialists having notice of this Intention, sent him direct word, they
expected the first Respect should be given the Emperor; and this was the first
time they owned that Pretension, in prejudice of the Honor hitherto done to
the King's Mediation. Count Antoine sent Monsieur Hoeg, his Colleague, to
acquaint the Mediators with this Incident, and desire them to find out some
Expedient: They excused themselves, alleging their positive Orders to expect
the first Notification. The Danes were as unwilling to disoblige His Majesty,
as the Emperor, and found no temper in this matter, after many offered both by
French and Dutch Ambassadors; so that Count Antoine resolved to leave it
undecided, and to give no Notifications, nor receive or make any Visits; but
however assisted at the Conferences among the Allies, and made a part of all
the Evening Entertainments at Play, and in Conversation in the Apartments of
the several Ambassadrices. And this course he observed, during his stay at
Nimeguen, which was seven or eight Months; for the rest, a Person very much
esteemed for his generous Qualities, and Gentlemanly Humor and Conversation,
and yielding to none upon the Place in the Greatness and Splendour of his
Equipage, wherein the Marquess de Balbaces, and Count Antoine seemed to
distinguish themselves from all the rest.

About the end of July, the Prince of Orange made an Attempt upon Charleroy,
rather than a Siege. This had been before concerted with the Duke of Lorain,
who made a mien of entering into Champagne, on purpose to draw off the French
Forces from attending the Prince's motions and design upon Charleroy; the
Prince had hopes to take it by Surprise; but found them of the Garrison upon
their Guard, and very strong, as well as the Place, which had been fortified
with all the force of Art and Expense, which could be employed upon a Place of
that Compass. He sat down before it, and would have besieged it in form, if the
Duke of Lorain could have diverted the French Army from relieving it; but
Monsieur Louvoys, with great diligence, leaving the Mareshal Crequi with Force
enough to face that Duke, assembled a very great Army for the Relief of
Charleroy, upon approach whereof, the Prince called a Council of War, to
resolve whether to march, and fight the French Army, or raise the Siege. The
last was resolved upon debate at the Council, and accordingly executed, and
therewith ended this Compania in Flanders. But this March and Retreat of the
Prince, passed not without many Reflections, not only among the Allies, but in
Holland too, as if he had given over the Design upon some Intelligences and
Expresses between Him and the King about this time. Monsieur Bentink had gone
over and returned, without any Bodies knowing his Business. My Lord Ossory
happened to arrive in the Camp, the day before the Council of War, upon which
the Siege was raised, which made many think, something his Lordship brought
from England, was the occasion of it: But I could never find there was any
thing more in his Journey than the hopes of seeing a Battle (which was ever a
particular Inclination of my Lord Ossory) and a cast of my Lord Arlington to
preserve himself in the Prince's Favor and Confidence as much as he could, by
my Lord Ossory's keeping close to him, at a time when he saw the Business of
Christendom roll so much upon the Person of this Prince.

About this time, the Assembly at Nimeguen seemed in danger of being broken by
a passionate Motion the Swedes made in it. There had been a long Contest since
it first began, between the Swedes and Danes, about Freedom of Passage for the
Swedish Couriers through tbe Danish Territories, for managing the
Correspondences necessary with their Court. The Danes pretended the example of
France, who refused the same Liberty to the Spaniards. This Dispute had been
managed by many Messages, wherewith the Mediators had been charged between the
Parties, wherein the Allies of both sides took equal part: Sometimes the matter
had been Treated with very Pressing Instances, and sometimes with Fainter;
sometimes almost let fall, and then again resumed; and thus for above a Year
past; but about this time the Swedes came to the Mediators, desire their
Offices once more to the Danes upon this Subject, and declare, That without
this Liberty insisted upon so long for their Couriers, they find themselves
incapable of giving Advices necessary to their Court, or receiving Orders
necessary from it; and that without it, they must be forced to leave the
Assembly. This Resolution of the Swedes continued for some time so Peremptory,
that it was expected to come to that issue; but after some Foogue spent for
about a fortnight or three weeks upon this occasion, and some Temperament found
out by the Dutch for the secure and speedy passage of all the Swedish
Dispatches from Amsterdam, those Ambassadors began to grow soft and calm again,
and to go on their usual Pace. Soon after, the French Ambassadors, who had
Treated the Swedish Affairs and Ministers with great indifferency and neglect
in this Treaty, (declaring to Monsieur Beverning, their Master would not part
with one Town in Flanders, to Restore the Swedes to all they had lost) began
wholly to change their Language, and say upon all occasions, That France could
not make Peace without the full Satisfaction and Restitution of the Swedes; and
it was discoursed, that the French and Swedes had entered into a new Alliance
at Paris to this purpose; and some believed, it was by concert between them,
that this Attenite was given by the Swedes to the Congress. That the French had
at that time a mind to break it, and to enter into a Treaty with Spain under
the Pope's direction, and at Rome, not knowing to what measures His Majesty
might be induced upon the Progress of the French Conquests, and the Distempers
Raised in His Parliament upon that occasion. But this Gust blown over, all was
becalmed at Nimeguen; so that Monsieur Olivecrantz left that Place about the
end of August, upon a Journey to Sweden.

Till this time the Motions of Business had been Respited in the Assembly, upon
a general expectation that the King was sending me over suddenly with the Plan
of Peace, that he resolved should be made, and to which it was not doubted but
all Parties would yield, whatever it was; so great a Regard was held on all
sides, of His Majesty's Will and Power. But a greater stop was yet given to all
further Paces there, by the Prince of Orange's Journey into England, about the
end of September 1677. which wholly changed the Scene of this Treaty, and for
the present carried it over to London, and left all other places at a gaze
only, and in expectation of what should be there Agitated and Concluded.

CHAP. III.
THE Prince, like a hasty Lover, came Post from Harwich to Newmarket, where the
Court then was, as a Season and Place of County Sports. My Lord Arlington
attended his Highness at his alighting, making his Pretense of the chief
Confidence with him; and the Court expected it upon his Alliance and Journeys
into Holland. My Lord Treasurer and I went together to wait on him, but met him
upon the middle of the Stairs, in a great Crowd, coming down to the King. He
whispered to us both together, and said to me, That he must desire me to answer
for him and my Lord Treasurer one to another, so as they might from that time
enter both into Business and Conversation, as if they had been of a longer
Acquaintance; which was a wise Strain, considering his Lordship's Credit in
Court at that time, and was of great use to the Prince in the Course of his
Affairs then in England; and though it much shockt my Lord Arlington and his
Friends, yet it could not be wondered at by such as knew what had passed of
late, between the Prince and him, with whom he only lived in common forms,
during his stay there. He was very kindly received by the King and the Duke,
who both invited him often into Discourses of Business, which they wondered to
see him avoid or divert industriously, so as the King bid me find out the
reason of it. The Prince told me he was resolved to see the Young Princess
before he entered into that Affair; and yet to proceed in that, before the other
of the Peace. The King laughed at this piece of Nicety when I told it Him. But
however, to humor him in it, said, he would go some days sooner than he had
intended from Newmarket, which was accordingly done.

The Prince upon his arrival in Town, and sight of the Princess, was so pleased
with her Person, and all those signs of such a humor as had been described to
him upon former enquiries, that he immediately made his Suit to the King and
the Duke, which was very well received and assented to, but with this
condition, That the Terms of a Peace abroad might be first agreed on between
them. The Prince excused himself, and said, he must end his first business
before he began the other. The King and Duke were both positive in their
opinion; and the Prince resolute in his; and said at last, That his Allies, who
were like to have hard terms of the Peace as things then stood, would be apt to
believe, that he had made this Match at their cost; and for his part, he would
never sell his Honor for a Wife. This prevailed not, but the King continued so
positive for three or four days, that my Lord Treasurer and I began to doubt
the whole business would break upon this punctilio. About that time I chanced
to go to the Prince after Supper, and found him in the worst humor that I ever
saw him; he told me he repented he had ever come into England, and resolved he
would stay but two days longer, and then be gone, if the King continued in his
mind of treating upon the Peace before he was married; but that before he went,
the King must choose how they should live hereafter; for he was sure it must be
either like the greatest Friends, or the greatest Enemies, and desired me to
let His Majesty know so next morning, and give him an account of what he should
say upon it. I did so early in the morning, told the King all the Prince had
said to me the night before, and the ill consequences of a breach between them,
considering the ill humor of so many of his Subjects upon our late measures
with France, and the invitations made the Princes by several of them, durig the
late War. The King heard me with great attention; and when I had done, said,
Well, I never yet was deceived in judging of a man's Honesty by his Looks, (of
which he gave me some examples) and if I am not deceived in the Prince's face,
he is the honestest man in the world, and I will trust him, and he shall have
his Wife, and you shall go immediately and tell my Brother so, and that it is a
thing I am resolved on. I did so, and the Duke at first seemed a little
surprised; but when I had done, He said, The King shall be obeyed, and I would
be glad all His Subjects would learn of me to obey Him. I do tell Him my
Opinion very freely upon any thing; but when that is done, and I know his
pleasure upon it. I obey Him. From the Duke I went to the Prince, and told him
my Story, which he could at first hardly believe, but embraced me, and said, I
had made him a very happy Man, and very unexpectedly, and so I left him to give
the King an account of what had passed, and in the Prince's Antichamber met my
Lord Treasurer, and told him the Story, who undertook to adjust all the rest
between the King and the Prince; which he did so well, that the Match was
declared that Evening at the Committee, before any other in Court knew any
thing of it; and next day it was declared in Council, and received there and
every where else in the Kingdom with the most universal joy that I ever saw any
thing in the King's Reign. The French Ambassador and my Lord Arlington appeared
the only two Persons unsatisfied upon it at Court; the first not knowing how he
should answer it to his Master that an Affare of that importance should pass
without his Communication, much less Advice, in a Court where nothing before
had been done so for many years; and my Lord Arlington, That it should pass
without his knowledge, who still endeavored to keep up the Court opinion of
his Confidence with the Prince; who told me the Complaint his Lordship had made
him upon it, That some things good in themselves were spoiled by the manner of
doing them as some things bad were mended by it: But he would confess this was
a thing so good in it self, that the manner of doing it, could not spoil it.

Within two or three days the Marrriage was consummated, and immediately after
they fell into the debates upon the Terms of the Peace; to which, as to that of
the Match, none but my Lord Treasurer and I were admitted. The Prince insisted
hard upon the Strength and Enlargement of a Frontier on both sides of Flanders,
without which France, he said, would end his War with the View of beginning
another, and carrying Flanders in one Compania. The King was content to leave
that business a little looser, upon the confidence that France was so weary of
this War, that if they could get out of it with Honor, they would never begin
another in this Reign: That the King grew past his Youth, and lazy, and would
turn to the pleasures of the Court, and Building, and leave his Neighbors in
quiet. The Prince thought France would not make a Peace now, but to break the
present Confederacy, and to begin another War with more advantage and surprise;
That their ambition would never end till they had all Flanders and Germany to
the Rhine, and thereby Holland in an absolute dependence upon them, which would
leave Them in an ill condition, and Us in no good one; And that Christendom
could not be left safe by the Peace, without such a Frontier as he Proposed for
Flanders, and the restitution of Lorain, as well as what the Emperor had lost
in Alsatia. Upon this I told the King, That in the course of my Life, I had
never observed Men's Natures to alter by Age or Fortunes; but that a good Boy
made a good Man; and a young Coxcomb, an old Fool; and a young Fripon, an old
Knave; and that quiet Spirits were so, young as well as old, and unquiet ones
would be so old as well as young: That I believed the King of France would
always have some bent or other, sometimes War, sometimes Love, sometimes
Building; but that I was of the Prince's Opinion, That He would ever make Peace
with a design of a new War, after He had fixed His Conquest by the last; and
the King approved what I said. The Points of Lorain and Alsatia were easily
agreed to by the King and Duke, but they would not hear of the County of
Burgundy, as what France could never be brought to, though the Prince insisted
much upon it; so as the King imagined. He was touched by the interest of his
own Lands in that County (which are greater and more Seigneurial than those of
the Crown of Spain there) and thereupon told him, That for his Lands he would
charge himself with either his enjoying them as safely under France as Spain;
or if he should rather choose to part with them than have that dependence, he
would undertake to get him what price he should himself value them at. But the
Prince answered briskly and generously, That he should not trouble himself nor
the Peace about that matter, and that he would be content to lose all his Lands
there, to get one good Town more for the Spaniards upon the Frontier of
Flanders; so all difficulties began to terminate upon what was esteemed
necessary there. This admitted great debates between the King and Prince; one
pretending France would never be brought to one Scheme; and the other, that Spain
would never consent to the other. But at the last it was agreed, That the Peace
should be made upon these terms, All to be restored by France to the Empire and
Emperor that had been taken in the War; the Duchy of Lorain to that Duke, and
all on both sides between France and Holland; and to Spain the Towns of Aeth,
Charleroy, Oudenard, Courtray, Tournay, Conde, Valenciennes, St. Gillain, and
Binch. That the Prince should endeavor to procure the Consent of Spain, and
His Majesty that of France; for which purpose he should send some person
immediately over with the Proposition, who should be instructed to enter into
no Reasonings upon it, but demand a positive Answer in two days, and after that
term immediately return. The Question was, Who should go? and my Lord Treasurer
said, it must be He or I; for none else had been acquainted with the debate of
this business. The Prince said, it must be I, for my Lord Treasurer could not
be spared, and it must be some person upon whose Judgment and Truth he could
rely* as to the Intentions of that Court. The King ordered me to be ready in
two days, which I was; and the Evening before I was to go, meeting His Majesty
in the Park, he called me to him, and, a little out of Countenance told me, He
had been thinking of my Journey and my Errand, and how unwelcome I should be in
France, as well as my Message; and having a mind to gain the Peace, he was
unwilling to anger them more than needs. Besides, the thing being not to be
reasoned or debated, any body else would serve the turn as well as I, whom he
had other use of; and therefore he had been thinking to send some other Person.
I saw he doubted I would take it ill; but told him, and very truly, he would do
me the greatest Pleasure in the World; for I never had less mind to any Journey
in my life, and should not have accepted it, but in perfect Obedience. The
King, that was the gentlest Prince in the World of his own Nature, fell into
good humor upon seeing I took it not ill, pretended to think whom he should
send, and at last asked me, what I thought of my Lord Duras? I said, Very well;
upon which he seemed to resolve it. But the thing had been agreed in the
morning, as I was told, upon the Duke's desire, who thought France would accept
the Terms, and that the Peace would be made, and had a mind to have the Honor
of it by sending a Servant of his own. Whether there were any other Motive, I
know not; but my Lord Duras went immediately with the Orders before mentioned;
and some few days after, the Prince and Princess embarked for Holland, where
Affairs pressed his return beyond the hopes of my Lord Duras from France; the
King assuring him, he would never part from the least point of the Scheme sent
over, and would enter into the War against France, if they refused it. However,
he went not away without a great mortification, to see the Parliament Prorogued
the next Spring; which the French Ambassador had gained of the King, to make up
some good Mien with France after the Prince's Marriage, and before the dispatch
of the Terms of a Peace to that Court.

Upon my Lord Duras's arrival at Paris, the Court there were surpised, both at
the thing, and more at the manner; but made good Mien upon it, took it gently;
Said, The King knew very well he might always be Master of the Peace; but some
of the Towns in Flanders seemed very hard, especially Tournay, upon whose
Fortifications such vast Treasures had been expended; and that they would take
some short time to consider of the Answer. My Lord Duras told them, he was tied
to two days stay; but when that was out, he was prevailed with to stay some few
days longer, and to come away without a positive Answer: What he brought, was
what they had said to him before, That the Most Christian King hoped his
Brother would not break with him upon one or two Towns: but even upon them too
he would send Orders to his Ambassador at London to treat with His Majesty
himself. By this gain of time, and artifical drawing it into Treaty without any
positive refusal, this blow came to be eluded, which could not easily have been
so any other way. The King was softened by the softness of France. The
Ambassador said at last, He had leave to yield all but Tournay, and to treat
even for some equivalent for that too, if the King insisted absolutely upon it.
The Prince was gone, who had spirited the vigor of the whole resolution, and
the Treaty of it began to draw out into Messages and Returns from France.

However, the ill humor of People growing higher upon the noise of a Peace,
and negotiated in France, and the late Prorogation of the Parliament, this was
by Proclamation anticipated soon after my Lord Duras's return, though a thing
something unusual, and a countenance made as if the King resolved to enter into
the War; for which the Parliament seemed impatient, whenever the King seemed
averse to it; but grew jealous of some tricks, whenever the Court seemed
inclined to it. About the end of December 1677. the King sent for me to the
Foreign Committee, and told me, he could get no positive Answer from France,
and therefore resolved to send me into Holland, to make a League there with the
States, for forcing both France and Spain, if either refused, to make the Peace
upon the Terms he had proposed. I told the King, What he had agreed, was to
enter into the War with all the Confederates, in case of no direct and
immediate Answer from France. That this, perhaps, would satisfy both the
Prince and Confederates abroad, and the People at home: but to make such a
League with Holland only, would satisfy none of them, and disoblige both
France and Spain. Besides, it would not have an effect or force as the
Tripple-Allliance had, being a great Original, of which this seemed but an ill
Copy; and therefore excused my self from going. The King was set upon it, though
I pretended domestic Affairs of great importance upon the Death of my Father,
and pleaded so hard, that the Duke at last desired the King not to press me
upon a thing I was so averse from, and would be so inconvenient to me; and
desired I might propose who should be sent with the Treaty. I made my
acknowledgments to the Duke for his favor, and proposed, that Mr. Thyn should
be sent from the Office with a Draught of the Treaty to Mr. Hyde, who was then
come from Nimeguen to the Hague upon a Visit to the Princess. This was done,
and the Treaty signed there on the sixteenth of January, though not without
great difficulties and dissatisfaction of the Prince, who was yet covered in it
by the private Consent of the Spanish Minister there, in behalf of his Master;
so as the War could not break but upon France, in case of their refusal.

In the mean time, France, draws out the Treaty upon the Terms at London into
length, never raising more than one Difficulty at a time, and expostulating the
unkindness of breaking for the single Town of Tournay, though that was indeed
more important than any Three of the others, being the only strong one to guard
that side of the Frontier, and giving way for any sudden Invasion upon Gant and
Antwerp, and the very heart of the Country. But while this Game was playing in
England, they had another on foot in Holland, especially at Amsterdam, by
raising Jealousies of the measures taken between the King and Prince upon the
Marriage, as dangerous to the Liberties of Holland, and making it there
believed, That by the Match, the King and Duke had drawn over the Prince wholly
into their Interests or Sentiments: whereas the Prince went away possessed to
have by it drawn them indeed into his. They proposed to the Dutch other Terms
of the Peace, far short of the King's, and less safe for Flanders; restoring
only six Towns to the Spaniards, and mentioning Lorain but ambiguously; which
would not have gone down in Holland, but for the suspicions raised by the
Prince's Marriage, among the people there, who had an incurable Jealousy of
our Court, and thereupon not that Confidence of the Prince that he deserved.

There were two ruling Burgomasters at Amsterdam at this time, who had the
whole sway of that Town (as this has a great one in Holland) Hoeft and
Valkeneer; the first a Generous, Honest man, of great Patrimonial Riches,
Learning, Wit, Humor, without Ambition, having always refused all Employments
the State had offered him, and serving only in that of Burgomaster of his Town
in his turn, and as little busy in it as he could; a true Genius, and that
said two things to me in Conversation, I had not heard before; one, That a man
that were to dye to morrow in Torment, would yet enjoy to day, if he were Sain;
Of a sound mind.
and that it was some disease or decay of Spirits that hindered it. The other,
That a man was a Coyon, A sorry wight.
that desired to live after Threescore; and that for his part, after that Age,
which he was then approaching, he should be glad of the first good occasion to
dye; and this he made good, dying with neglect upon a fit of the Gout, talking
with his Friends till he was just spent, then sending them away, that he might
not dye in their sight; and when he found himself come a little again, sending
for them up, and telling them, Qu^il y avoit encore pour une demi heure de
conversation. That he had still life for one half hour of Conversation.
This was the Character of Monsieur Hoeft, who was a great inclination of mine,
tho he passed for a humorous man; and told me, I was the only Ambassador he had
ever visited in his life: He had all the Credit that could be in his Town,
without seeking, or minding, or using it; whereas Valkeneer sought and courted
it all that could be, without having half the other's; being a Morose and
Formal Man, but of great Industry, much Thought, and as was believed, Avarice,
and making the turns easily, that were necessary in the Government, to carry
his ends. These two had long been Enemies, and thought irreconcilable, till
the French Instruments at this time with great Art and Industry made up the
Quarrel, and joined them both in the design of making the Peace upon the Terms
offered by France.

The Parliament meets in January by Anticipation of that Session, which seemed
to import something of great Consequence: The King acquaints them with the
League he had made in Holland, and asks them money upon it for putting himself
in a Posture to carry on the War if the Peace failed: which the Parliament gave
him, upon the hopes of the War, and not of the Peace. The Constitution of this
Parliament, that had sat seventeen Years, was grown into two known Factions,
which were called, That of Court and Country; the Court Party were grown
numerous by a Practice introduced by my Lord Clifford, of downright buying off
one man after another, as they could make the bargain. The Country Party was
something greater yet in number, and kept in more Credit upon the Corruption of
others, and their own pretense of steadiness to the true Interest of the
Nation, especially in the Points of France and Popery; where these came in
question, many of the Court Party Voted with those of the Countty, who then
carried all before them; but whenever the Court seemed to fall in with the true
Interests of the Nation, especially in those two Points, then many of the
Country party meaning fairly, fell in with the Court, and carried the Votes, as
they now did upon the Kings pretense to grow bold with France, and to resolve
upon the War, if the Peace were refused.

In October, Friburgh had been taken by a feinte of the Duke of Crequi's,
before the Duke of Lorain could come to relieve it; and in the same month
Stettin had been taken by the Elector of Brandenburgh, after a vigorous
Resistance, which left the Scales as even as they were before, between the two
Leagues.

In January, upon the delays of France to agree the King's Conditions of a
Peace, His Majesty entered into a Negotiation with the Ministers of the
Confederates at London, in case France went on to refuse them; but the hopes of
a Peace was on a sudden dashed by the French Attempts upon Ypre, and Threats of
Ostend, where the King immediately sends Forces over, at the desire of the
Spanish Ambassador, for security of that important place; nor did the French
Ambassador seem to resent at all this Pace of His Majesty, but continued his
Court and Treaty with all the fairness that could be.

Toward the end of February, the King of France marching in the Head of his
Army, and carrying the Queen and Ladies to Mentz, seemed to threaten
Lutzenburgh, or Namur, or Mons; but having drawn the Spanish Forces that way,
on a sudden crosses the Country, sits down before Gant, and by the end of the
month takes both that Town and Ypre, and thereby gives a mighty Alarm to
Holland, and strengthens the Credit and Endeavors of those he had already
disposed to his Terms of a Peace, as grown now absolutely necessary; while
England seemed resolved to go into the War, or at least furnished the
Confederates with many such hopes. About the first of April, France made a
public Declaration of the Terms upon which they were resolved to make the
Peace; which though very different from those agreed between his Majesty and
Holland, and more from the pretensions of the Allies; yet having, as to what
concerned Spain and Holland, been first privately agreed with some Leaders of
the principal Towns, proved indeed the Plan of the Peace both for Holland and
all the other Confederates engaged in the War. And here the French began that
imperious way of Treating, which they afterward pursued in the Whole
Negotiation of the ensuing Peace, declaring such and such was the Conditions
they would admit, and no other; and upon which their Enemies might choose either
Peace or War as they pleased; and to which France pretended not to be tied
longer than to the Tenth of May, after which, they would be at liberty to
change, or restrain them as they should think fit.

About this time, I happened to be with Lord Treasurer one Evening in his
Closet, when a Packet came to him from Mr. Montague Ambassador at Paris, giving
him an account of a large Conference Monsieur Louvoy had lately had with him,
by the King His Master's Order; wherein he represented the measures they had
already taken for a Peace in Holland upon the French Terms; That since they
were agreed there, they hoped His Majesty would not be against it; That
however, France had ordered him to make his Majesty the offer of a great Sum of
Money for his Consent, though to a thing already accepted by Holland, and wherein
his Majesty was consequently not concerned. That Monsieur Louvoy desired the
Ambassador to write this immediately to Lord Treasurer, and to offer him a very
considerable Sum for himself, that should be sent over in Money, Jewels, or by
Bills, as he should choose; and Mr. Montague added, That it was desired this
Affair should be treated only between them two, and not communicated to either
of the Secretaries of State. My Lord Treasurer read the Letter to me, and I
said, Well, my Lord, What do you say to the Offer? He Answered, That he thought
'twas the same thing as if it should be made to the King to have Windsor put
into the French hands, and so he should treat it; and that we had nothing to do
but to go on with our Treaty with the Confederates. This his Lordship and I
were incharged with, and had brought near a conclusion, when Letters came from
Mr. Hyde, with Representations made him from the Pensioner at the Hague, of the
dispositions in Holland running violently into a Peace, and the absolute
necessity he thought there was of concluding it, upon the taking of Gant, and
danger of Antwerp, which was then threatened, and the loss whereof would be so
fatal to the Trade of Holland, especially Amsterdam. Hereupon Mr. Godolphin was
dispatched immediately into Holland, to bring the last and surest Account he
could get of the resolutions there upon this Affair, and return with the
greatest speed he could; he did so, and brought the same account of all
dispositions which Mr. Hyde had given, and in the process of our Treaty with
the Confederates, Monsieur Van Beuningham, when he came to the point, was
forced to confess, That he had no Powers to conclude, without first
communicating to the States, which must draw into length and uncertainty.

About this time the French Ambassador began to change his Language, who had
ever before pretended, That His Majesty should be always Arbiter of the Peace;
but now assuring, that his Master had agreed with Holland, he seemed to wonder
and expostulate why the King should pretend to obtain better Terms for the
Spaniards, than their Allies the Dutch were content with.

I was then pressed by the King and Lord Treasurer to go into Holland to know
their final Resolutions, whether they would yet go on with the War, in case his
Majesty should go into it; But I excused my self, knowing the Dutch were too
much pressed by so near approaches of France, to declare themselves upon a
reserve of the King's; and said, If his Majesty resolved to go that way, he
must first take his measures with the Parliament for the War, and then send
them word in Holland, he was ready to declare it in case they would pursue it;
and upon this Message, I knew the Dutch so well as to believe they would do it,
and keep close to their late Alliance with his Majesty. This the King was
unwilling to do; but posted Mr. Godolphin again into Holland about the middle
of April, to know their final resolutions; and Prorogued the Parliament for
Fourteen Days.

During these Negotiations, and since the Money given by the Parliament, and in
Six Weeks time the King had raised an Army of about Twenty thousand men, the
compleatest, and in all appearance the bravest Troops that could be any where
seen, and might have raised many more upon so great a concurrence of the
peoples humor with His Majesty's seeming design of entering into a War against
France; and it was confessed by all the Foreign Ministers, That no King in
Christendom could have made and completed such a Levy as this appeared, in
such a time.

My Lord Treasurer upon the Twentieth came to me, and assured me of the King's
Resolution being at length fixed to go into the War, and desired me to prepare
what the King was to say to the Parliament upon this occasion, which I did;
When I carried it to my Lord Treasurer, I met there Letters from Mr. Hyde and
Godolphin, That Holland absolutely desired the Peace, even upon the Terms
proposed by France, and had resolved to send Monsieur Van Lewen over hither, to
dispose the King to be contented with them. He arrived, and the King sent me
immediately to him, to know his Errand. He was the Chief of the Town of Leyden,
and had joined with Amsterdam, Harlem. Delf, and some others, in promoting the
Peace, even upon the French Conditions: But being a man of great Honor and
Worth, and having done it upon the suspicion that England was still at bottom
in with France, and that all the rest was but Grimace; the Prince had procured
him to be sent over on purpose to satisfy himself (and thereby his Accomplices
for the Peace) that the King's intentions were determined to enter into the
War, which His Highness thought the only means to prevent the Peace.

When I came to Monsieur Van Lewen, he told me freely, That it was the most
against their hearts in Holland that could be, to make a Peace upon Terms so
low and unsafe for Flanders; and that if the King had gone into the War, as was
promised, upon France delaying or refusing to accept his Scheme, they would
certainly have continued it: but His Majesty's Proceedings looked ever since so
uncertain or unresolved, that it had raised Jealousies in Holland of our
Measures being at bottom fixed and close with France; which made most of the
Towns in Holland think they had nothing else left to do, but to go in with them
too as fast as they could: and the approach of the French Army to Antwerp left
them now no time to deliberate: Yet he professed to me in private, That if the
King would immediately declare the War, he believed the States would still go
on with it, in pursuit of their Alliance, and the Terms therein contained.

I made this Report to the King, who seemed positive to declare the War, in
case the Parliament advised him, and promised to support it; when an unlucky
peevish Vote, moved by Sir T -- C -- in spite to my Lord Treasurer, passed the
House of Commons, That no Msney should be given, till satisfaction was received
in matters of Religion. This left all so loose and so lame, that the King was
in a rage, reproached me with my Popular Notions, as he termed them, and asked
me when, or how I thought he could trust the House of Commons to carry him
through the War, if he should engage in it? And I had not much indeed to say,
considering the Temper and Factions of the House; nor could I well clear it to
my self, by my Observation, whether the King was firmly resolved to enter into
the War, or if he did, whether the House of Commons would have supported him in
it, or turned it only to ruin the Ministers by the King's Necessities. It Is
certain, no Vote could ever have passed more unhappily, nor in such a
Counter-Season, nor more cross to the humor of the House, which seemed
generally bent upon engaging His Majesty in the War; and the Person that moved
it was, I believe, himself as much of that mind as any of the rest; but having
since the loss of his Employment at Court, ever acted a part of great animosity
in opposition to the present Ministry, in whose hands soever it was: This
private ill humor carried him contrary to his public intentions, as it did
many more in the House, who pretended to be very willing to supply the King
upon occasion of the War, or even of his Debts, but that they would not do it
during my Lord Treasures Ministry. In short, there was such fatal and mutual
distrust both in the Court and Parliament, as it was very hard to fall into any
sound measures between them. The King at least now saw he had lost his time of
entering into the War, if he had a mind to it; and that he ought to have done it
(upon my Lord Duras's return, and) with the whole Confederacy. And my Lord
Essex told me, I had been a Prophet, in refusing to go into Holland to make
that Alliance, which had, as I said, pleased none at home or abroad, and had
now lost all our measures in Holland, and turned theirs upon France.

But the turn that the King gave all this, was, That since the Dutch would have
a Peace upon the French Terms, and France offered money for his Consent, to
what he could not help, he did not know why he should not get the money; and
thereupon ordered me to Treat upon it with the French Ambassador, who had
Orders to that purpose. I would have excused my self; but he said, I could not
help seeing him, for he would be with me at my House by Seven next Morning; He
accordingly came, and I told him very truly, I had been ill in the night, and
could not enter into Business. The Ambassador was much disappointed, and
pressed me all he could; but I defended my self upon my illness, till at length
he left me without entering upon any thing. When I got up, I went immediately to
Sheen, writ to my Lord Treasurer by my Wife, May the Tenth, 1678. how much I
was unsatisfied with being put upon such a Treaty with the French Ambassador,
that belonged not at all to my Post, and which they knew I thought dishonorable
to the King; and thereupon I offered to resign to His Majesty, both my Ambassy
at Nimeguen, and my Promise of Secretary of State's Place, to be disposed by
his Majesty as he pleased. My Lord Treasurer sent me word, The King forced no
man upon what he had no mind to; but if I resolved this should be said to him,
I must do it my self, or by some other, for he would not make my Court so ill,
as to say it for me; and so it rested, and I continued at Sheen, without
stirring till the King sent for me.

In the mean time from the beginning of May, the ill humor of the House of
Commons, began to break out by several Discourses and Votes against the
Ministers and their Conduct, which increased the ill opinion His Majesty had
conceived of their intentions in pressing him to enter upon a War; yet
notwithstanding all this, he had (as I was told by a good hand) conceived such
an Indignation at one Article of the private Treaty proposed by Monsieur
Barillon, that he said, he would never forget it while he lived; and tho he
said nothing to me of his Resentment, yet he seemed at this time more resolved
to enter into the War, than I had ever before seen or thought him.

Monsieur Ruvigny the Son, was dispatched into France, to know the last
intentions of that Court, upon the terms of the Peace proposed by His Majesty,
but brought no Answer clear or positive; so as His Majesty went on to complete
his Levies, and to prepare for the War; but May the eleventh, the House of
Commons passed another Negative upon the Debate of money; which so offended the
King, that he Prorogued them for ten days, believing in that time his
Intentions to enter into the War, would appear so clear, as to satisfy the
House, and put them in better humor. Monsieur Van Lewen distasted with these
delays, and the Counterpaces between King and Parliament, begins to discourse
boldly of the necessity his Masters found, to make the Peace as they could,
since there was no relying upon any measures with England for carrying on the
War, and the Season was too far advanced to admit any longer delays. Upon these
Discourses from him, His Majesty began to cool his Talk of a War, and to say,
The Peace must be left to the Course which Holland had given it; and though upon
May the twenty third, the Parliament met, and seemed in much better temper than
they parted, yet news coming about the same time that Monsieur Beverning was
sent by the States to the French Court at Gant, to propose a Cessation of Arms
for six Weeks, in order to negotiate and agree the Terms of the Peace in that
time, the Affairs began now to be looked upon both in Court and Parliament, as
a thing concluded, or at least as like to receive no other motion than what
should be given it by Holland and France. And indeed, the dispositions were so
inclined to it on both sides, that the Terms were soon adjusted between them.
These Articles having been so public, I shall not trouble my self to insert
them, but only say, they seemed so hard both to Spain, and to the Northern
Princes, who had made great Conquests upon the Swedes, that they all declared,
they would never accept them; and when the French Ambassadors at Nimeguen
desired Sir Lionel Jenkins to carry them to the Confederates, he refused to do
it, or to have part in a Treaty, or Conditions of Peace, so different from what
the King his Master had proposed, and what both his Majesty and Holland had
obliged themselves to pursue by their late Treaty at the Hague.

About this time, France by a Conduct very surprising, having sent Monsieur la
Feuillade to Messina, with a common expectation of reinforcing the War in
Sicily, showed the Intention was very different, and of a sudden, ordered all
their Forces to abandon that Island, with whom many Messineses returned,
fearing the Vengeance of the Spaniards, to whom they were now exposed; and this
was the only important Service done that Crown, by all his Majesty's Intentions
or preparations to assist them; for no man doubted that the abandoning of
Sicily was wholly owing to the apprehensions in France of a War with England,
which they thought would give them but too much occasion for employing of their
Forces; and indeed the eyes and hopes of all the Confederates were now turned
so wholly upon England for any resource in their Affairs, after Holland had
deserted them (as they thought) by such precipitate terms of a Peace, that many
of the chief Ministers at Nimeguen left that place, as of no more use to the
Treaty it was designed for, and went into England, where they thought the whole
scene of that Affair then lay, among whom was Count Antoine the Danish
Ambassador, and soon after, Monsieur Olivecrantz, the Swedish, with the Elector
of Brandenburgh's Envoy, and several others.

However, the Negotiation continued there between the French Ambassadors, and
Monsieur Beverning, till he was sent to the French Camp, where he concluded the
Terms of the Peace toward the end of June, and a Cessation from all
Hostilities in Flanders, for six weeks, which was given to the Dutch, to
endeavor the Spaniards entering into the Peace upon the Terms they had proposed
for them. And in the whole Course of this Negotiation, France seemed to have no
regards, but for Holland, and for them so much, that the most Christian King
assured the States, That though Spain should not agree, yet he had such care of
their satisfaction, that he would always provide such a Barriere in Flanders
should be left, as they thought necessary for their safety; and that after the
Peace should be made, and the ancient Amity restored, he would be ready to
enter into such Engagements and Measures with them, as should for ever secure
their Repose and their Liberty.

This was by all interpreted an invidious word, put in on purpose to cajole the
Enemies of the Prince, who ever pretended the suspicions of his affecting more
Authority than they desired, and thereby kept up a Popular Party in the State,
the chief of whom had been the chief promoters of the present Peace; and indeed
the Prince was not at all reserved in the Endeavors of opposing it, but used
all that was possible and agreeable to the Forms of the State; yet all in vain,
the humor having spread so far at first in Holland, and from thence into the
other Provinces, that it was no longer to be opposed or diverted by the Prince.

In the mean time, England was grown pretty indifferent in the matter of the
Peace, and Spain seemed well inclined to accept their part of it: But the
Emperor, the King of Denmark, and Elector of Brandenburgh, fell into the
highest Declarations and Reproaches against the States, that could be well
invented, ripping up all they had ventured and suffered in a War they had begun
only for the preservation of Holland; how they were now abandoned by them in
pretending to conclude Imperious and Arbitrary terms of a Peace upon them
without their consent: That they were willing to treat with France, and make a
Peace upon any safe and reasonable Conditions, but would never endure to have
them imposed as from a Conqueror; and would venture all, rather than accept
them; especially those for the Duke of Lorain, whose case was the worst
treated, though the most favored in appearance by all the Confederates, and the
least contested by France.

Notwithstanding all these storms from their Allies, the Dutch were little
moved, and held on their course, having small regard to any of their
satisfaction, besides that of Spain, in what concerned the Safety of Flanders;
and the necessities of that Crown made them easy, though as little contented as
the rest: So as the Peace was upon the point of signing by the French and Dutch
Ambassadors, when an unexpected Incident fell in, which had like to have
overturned this whole Fabric, and to have renewed the War with greater Heats,
and more equal Forces, by engaging England to a share of it in favor of the
Confederates, which they had been long practicing without Success, and now
without Hopes.

In the Conditions which Holland had made for the French restoring the six
Towns in Flanders to Spain, there was no particular mention made of the time of
that Restitution; the Dutch understanding as well as the Spaniards, That it was
to be upon the Ratifications of the Peace with Spain and Holland, whether any
of the other Allies on each side were included, or no. But when the Dutch
Treaty was near signing, the Marquess de Balbaces either found or made some
occasion of enquiring more particularly of the French Intentions upon this
Point. The French Ambassadors made no difficulty of declaring, That the King,
their Master, being obliged to see an entire Restitution made to the Swedes of
all they had lost in the War, could not evacuate the Towns in Flanders, till
those to the Swedes were likewise restored* and that this detention of places,
was the only means to induce the Princes of the North to accept of the Peace.

Monsieur Beverning gave Account to his Masters of this new pretense; and the
States ordered him to let the French Ambassadors know, he could not sign the
Peace without the Restitution of the Places in Flanders upon the Ratification
of the Treaty. The French Ambassadors were firm on the other side, and said,
Their Orders were positive to insist upon the Restitution of Sweden. The States
hereupon sent to Monsieur Van Lewen to acquaint his Majesty with this
unexpected Incident, and to know his Opinion and Resolution upon a point of so
great moment to the Peace of Christendom on the one side, and to the Safety of
Flanders on the other. The King was difficult at first to believe it; but
sending to the French Ambassador at London to know the Truth of it, and finding
him own his Master's intention not to evacuate the Towns till the General Peace
was concluded, and Sweden satisfied; He was both surpised and angry at this
proceeding of France, and next morning sent for me to the Foreign Committee,
and there declared his resolution of sending me immediately into Holland with
Commission to sign a Treaty with the States, by which they should be obliged to
carry on the War, and His Majesty to enter into it, in case France should not
consent within a certain time limited, to evacuate the Towns. The Duke fell
into this Counsel with great warmth, and said at the Committee, That it was
plain by this pace, that France was not sincere in the business of the Peace;
That they aimed at the Universal Monarchy; and that none but His Majesty could
hinder them from it, in the Posture that Christendom stood. All the Lords of
the Committee agreed with so general a concurrence, that it was hard to imagine
this should not prove a steady Resolution, how little soever we had been given
to any such. His Majesty took the pains to press Van Lewen to go over with me,
to persuade the States of the sincereness and constancy of his resolution to
pursue this Measure with the utmost of his Power; and took upon himself to
excuse to the States his Masters, the making this Journey without Their consent.

Upon this Dispatch Mr. Godolphin, who had been so lately in Holland, told me,
That if I brought the States to the Treaty His Majesty proposed upon this
occasion, he would move the Parliament to have my Statue set up; the Success
whereof may deserve a further Remark in its due place.

Monsieur Van Lewen and I went over in July, 1678. in two several Yatchs, but
met soon at the Hague; where, upon my first Conference with the Commissioners
of Secret Affairs, one of them made me the handsomest Dutch Compliment I had
met with. That they esteemed my coming into Holland, like that of the
Swallow's, which brought fair Weather always with it.

The Prince received me with the greatest joy in the World, hoping by my
Errand, and the Success of it, either to continue the War, or recover such
Conditions of the Peace for his Allies, as had been wrested out of his hands by
force of a Faction begun at Amsterdam, and spread since into the rest of the
Provinces.

To make way for this Negotiation, I concerted with Monsieur Van Lewen to dine
at his Country House, with Monsieur Hoeft of Amsterdam, Van Tielt of Harlem,
Patz of Rotterdam, and two or three more of the Chief Burgomasters who had
promoted the Peace, or rather precipitated it, upon the French Conditions.
After Dinner we entered into long Conferences, in which Monsieur Van Lewen
assured them with great confidence of the King's sincereness in the resolutions
he had taken, and seconded very effectually all I had to say upon that Subject;
which had the more credit from one who had gone as far as any of them in
pursuit and acceptance of the Peace.

The Prince was impatient to know what had passed in this Meeting, which made
me go to him that evening; and I told him what I was very confident to have
found, That Monsieur Patz was incurable, and not otherwise to be dealt with;
but that all the rest were good and well meaning persons to their Country,
abused first by Jealousies of His Highness's Match in England, by apprehensions
of Our Court being wholly in the Measures of France, and by the plausible
Offers of France toward such a Peace as they could desire for themselves. That
they were something enlightened by the late refusal of delivering up the Spanish
Towns till the satisfaction of Sweden; and would, I doubted not, awaken their
several Towns, so as to make them receive favorably His Majesty's Proposition
upon this Conjuncture. It happened accordingly; for Monsieur Hoeft proposing at
Amsterdam to make a trial and judgment of the sincerity of France upon the
whole proceeding of the Peace, by their evacuating the Spanish Towns, and
without it to continue the War; he carried his Point there, in spite of
Valkeneer, and the same followed in all the rest of the Towns: So that when I
fell into this Negotiation, I concluded the Treaty in six days; by which France
was obliged to declare within fourteen after the date thereof, That they would
evacuate the Spanish Towns; or, in case of their refusal, Holland was engaged
to go on with the War, and England immediately to declare it against France, in
conjunction with Holland and the rest of the Confederates.

It is hardly to be imagined what a new life this gave to the Authority and
Fortunes of the Prince of Orange, who was now owned by the States to have made
a truer judgment than they had done, of the measures they were to expect both
from France and England; the last having proceeded so resolutely to the offers
of entering into the War; (which was never believed in Holland) and France,
after raising so important a difficulty in the Peace, having proceeded in the
War so far as to Block up Mons, one of the best Frontiers remaining to
Flanders, which was expected to fall into their hands, before the Term fixed
for the conclusion or rupture of the Peace should expire.

Preparations were made with the greatest vigor imaginable for his Highness's
Expedition to relieve Mons, and about Ten thousand English already arrived in
Flanders, were ordered to March that way and join the Prince. He went into the
Field, with a firm belief that the War would certainly go on, since France
seemed too far engaged in Honor to yield the Evacuation of the Towns, and though
they should, yet Spain could not be ready to Agree and Sign the Peace within
the Term limited: And he thought that he left the States resolved not to
conclude otherwise than in conjunction with that Crown. And besides, he hoped
to engage the French Army before the term for Signing the Peace should expire,
and resolved to relieve Mons, or dye in the attempt, whether the Peace
succeeded or no; so as the continuance of the War seemed inevitable. But no man
since Solomon ever enough considered how subject all things are to Time and
Chance, nor how poor Diviners the wisest men are of future Events, how plainly
soever all things may seem laid toward the producing them; nor upon how small
accidents the greatest Counsels and Revolutions turn, which was never more
proved than by the course and event of this Affair.

After the Treaty concluded and signified to France, all the Arts that could
be, were on that side employed to elude it, by drawing this matter into Treaty,
or into greater length, which had succeeded so well in England. They offered to
treat upon it at St. Quintin, then at Gant, where the King Himself would meet
such Ambassadors as the Dutch should send to either of those Towns. But the
States were firm, not to recede from their late Treaty concluded with His
Majesty, and so continued till about five days before the term was to expire.
Then arrived from England one De Cross, formerly a French Monk, who some time
since had left his Frock for a Petticoat, and insinuated himself so far in the
Swedish Court as to procure a Commission (or Credence at least) for a certain
petty Agency in England. At London he had devoted himself wholly to Monsieur
Barillon the French Ambassador, though pretending to pursue the Interests of
Sweden. About a Week after I had sent a Secretary into England with the Treaty
Signed, This man brought me a Packet from Court, Commanding me to go
immediately away to Nimeguen, and there to endeavor all I could (and from His
Majesty) to persuade the Swedish Ambassadors to let the French there know, That
they would, for the good of Christendom, consent, and even desire the King of
France no longer to defer the Evacuation of the Towns, and consequently the
Peace upon the sole regard and interest of the Crown of Swden. I was likewise
Commanded to assure the said Ambassadors that after this Peace His Majesty
would use all the most effectual Endeavors he could for restitution of the
Towns and Countries the Swedes had lost in the War.

It was not easy for any man to be more surprised than I was by this Dispatch;
but the Pensioner Fagel was stunned, who came and told me the whole Contents of
it, before I had mentioned it to any man; and that De Cross had gone about most
industriously to the Deputies of the several Towns, and acquainted them with
it; and that the Terms of the Peace were absolutely consented, and agreed,
between the two Kings; that he had brought me orders to go strait to Nimeguen,
and that I should at my arrival there, meet with Letters from my Lord
Sunderland, the King's Ambassador at Paris, with all the particulars concluded
between them.

How this Dispatch by De Cross was gained, or by whom, I will not pretend to
determine; but upon my next return for England, the Duke told me, That He knew
nothing of it, till it was gone, having been a hunting that morning; my Lord
Treasurer said all that could be to excuse himself of it; and I never talked of
it to Secretary Williamson; but the King indeed told me pleasantly, that the
Rogue De Cross had outwitted them all. The Account I met with at Court was,
That these Orders were agreed and dispatched one morning in an hours time, and
in the Duchess of Portsmouth's Chamber, by the intervention and pursuit of
Monsieur Borillon. However it was, and what endeavors soever were made
immediately after, at our Court, to retrieve this Game, it never could be done;
and this one Incident changed the whole Fate of Christendom; and with so little
seeming ground for any such Council, that before De Cros's arrival at the
Hague, the Swedish Ambassadors at Nimeguen had made the very same Declaration
and Instances to the French Ambassadors there, that I was posted away from the
Hague upon the pretense of persuading them to resolve on.

When I arrived at Nimeguen, there remained but three days of the term fixed by
the late Treaty between His Majesty, and the States, at the Hague, either for
the French assent to the evacuation of the Towns, or for the carrying on of the
War in conjunction of England with Holland, and consequently the rest of the
Confederates. I found all Men there persuaded, that the Peace would not
succeed; and indeed all appearances were against it. The French Ambassadors had
given many Reasons, in a formal sort of Manifesto, to the Dutch, why the King,
their Master, could not consent to it, without the previous satisfaction of
Sweden, whose Interests he esteemed the same with his own; but yet declaring,
he was willing to receive any expedients the States should offer in this
matter, either by their Ambassadors at Nimeguen, or such as they should send to
His most Christian Majesty at Saint Quentin, or Gant. The Dutch gave them an
Answer in Writing, declaring, It was a matter no longer entire, since upon the
difficulty raised about the Evacuation of the Towns, the States, their Masters,
had been induced to sign a Treaty with England, from which they could not
recede; nor from the day therein fixed for determining the Fate of either Peace
or War; and as there was no time, so there could be no use of any Deputation to
St. Quentin, or Gant; nor any other Expedient, besides the assent of France, to
evacuate the Towns. After this, the French Ambassador had declared to the
Dutch, That they had found the King, their Master, was resolved, at the desire
of the Swedes, to retard the Peace no longer upon their consideration; and
would consent to evacuate the Towns, upon condition the States would send their
Deputies to treat upon the ways of securing the future satisfaction to Sweden,
which was by both intended. But the Dutch Ambassadors continued peremptory,
that there could be no deputation made by their Masters; and that if the term
fixed by the late Treaty with England should elapse, there was no remedy, but
the War must go on. To this the French Ambassadors replying, that their hands
were bound up from proceeding further without such a Deputation, the Peace was
thereupon esteemed desperate; and the more so, because, at the same time, the
Duke of Lutzenburg pressed Mons, and the Marshall Scomberg seemed to threaten
Colen, demanding of them immediate satisfaction of the Money that had been
seized, during the Assembly there; and Brussels it self grew unquiet upon their
finding themselves almost surrounded by French Troops; so as the Confederate
Ministers thought themselves secure of what they had so much, and so long
desired, and aimed at, which was a long War in conjunction with England; for
they neither believed France would yield a point they had so long, and so
publicly contested; nor (if they did) that the Dutch would suffer their
Ambassadors to sign the Peace without Spain; and the time was now too near
expiring for agreeing the Terms and Draught of a Treaty between the two Crowns,
which had not yet been in any kind digested.

In the midst of these Appearances and Dispositions at Nimeguen, came the fatal
Day, agreed by the late Treaty at the Hague, for determining whether a sudden
Peace, or a long War, were to be reckoned upon in Christendom; when, in the
morning early, Monsieur Boreel, who had been sent from Amsterdam to the Dutch
Ambassadors at Nimeguen, went to the French Ambassadors; and after some
Conference with them, these three Ambassadors went immediately to those of
Holland, and declared to them, they had received Orders to consent to the
evacuation of the Towns, and thereupon to sign the Peace; but that it must be
done that very morning. Whether the Dutch were surprised, or no, they seemed to
be so; and entering into debate upon several of the Articles as well as upon the
Interests of Spain, this Conference lasted near five hours, but ended in
agreement upon all the Points, both of Peace and Commerce, between France and
Holland, and Orders for writing all fair with the greatest haste that was
possible, so as the Treaty might be signed that Night.

About Four in the Afternoon, the French Ambassadors, having demanded an hour
of me, and Sir Lionel, came to us at my House, gave us an account of their
agreement with the Dutch Ambassadors upon all Points in difference between
them; and of the Treaty's being so ordered, as that it should be signed that
Evening, and made us the offer that they would all come and sign it at my
House, that so we might have the part in it that was due to the Mediators.

We answered them, That having been sent by His Majesty with Instructions only
to Mediate a general Peace, we could not by our Orders assist at the signing of
a particular One; and therefore desired them to excuse us from having any part
in this Conclusion between them and the Dutch; either by the Signing it at our
Houses, or by using our Names as Mediators in the Treaty.

The Dutch Ambassadors came to us likewise with the same Communication and
Offer, and received the same Answer; and I observed their Conversation upon
this mighty and sudden turn to be a good deal embarassed, and something
irresolute, and not very well agreed between the two Ambassadors themselves.
Monsieur Beverning complained of the uncertainty of our Conduct in England, and
the incurable Jealousies that De Cros's Journey had raised in Holland. That
since the King still desired the Peace, his Masters had nothing to do but to
conclude it; and that They the Ambassadors, took themselves to be so
instructed, as that they must Sign the Peace upon the offers made by the French
to evacuate the Towns. Monsieur Ha^en did not seem to me so clear in point of
their Orders; and I never could learn whether upon de Cros's Arrival and
Discourses at the Hague, the States Deputies there had sent Orders to their
Ambassadors at Nimeguen to Sign the Peace (even without the Spaniards) in case
of the French assenting to the evacuation of the Towns before the day appointed
for that purpose should expire; or whether only the Town of Amsterdam had by
Boreel sent that advice to Monsieur Beverning, with assurances to bear him out
in what he did, where his Orders might receive a doubtful Sense or
Interpretation; However it were, Monsieur Beverning was bent upon giving this
sudden end to the War, and such a quick dispatch to the draught of the Treaty,
that it was agreed in all Articles, and written out fair, so as to be signed
between Eleven and Twelve at Night. And thus were eluded all the effects of the
late Treaty concluded at the Hague, and the hopes conceived by the Confederates
of the War's going on, which so provoked several of their Ministers, as to
engage them in sharp and violent Protestations against the Dutch Ambassadors,
by which they hoped to deter them from signing the Peace without new Orders
from their Masters. But all was to no purpose, Beverning was unmoved, and the
thing was done.

The day after the Peace was signed, came an Express to me from Court, with the
Ratifications of the late Treaty between His Majesty and the States, and Orders
to me immediately to proceed to the exchange of them; which was such a
counterpace to the Dispatch I had received by De Cross, and to the consequences
of it, which had ended in the conclusion of the Peace; and thereby rendered the
late Treaty of no farther use; that the ratification seemed now as unnecessary
as it had been at first unresolved at our Court, and unexpected from us by the
Dutch: However, I went away immediately upon this Express, and next day after
my arrival at the Hague, made an exchange of the Ratifications, according to
the Orders I had received.

I found the Pensioner, and several other of the Deputies very much unsatisfied
with the Peace, and more with the Precipitation of Monsieur Beverning to sign
it upon the sudden offer of the French Ambassadors to evacuate the Towns,
before he had acquainted the States with it, and received new Orders upon it.
They said, his Instructions could not warrant him; they talked of calling him
in question for it, and of disavowing what he had done, and thereupon of having
recourse to the Treaty with His Majesty (which they now saw ratified) and of
continuing the War in conjuction with England, and the rather because they saw
France had no mind to venture it, but had chosen to stoop from those high
flights they had so long made in all transactions with their Neighbors, either
of War or Peace. But others of the Deputies, especially those of Amsterdam,
declared their satisfaction in this conclusion at Nimeguen; argued, that the
weakness of their Confederates, especially Spain, and the unsteaddiness or
irresolution of England, had made the Peace of absolute necessity to Holland,
and excused any precipitation of their Ambassadors in signing that day, or
without clear and positive Orders, upon the emergency being so sudden and
surprising, and the time so critical, that the delay of sending to the Hague
must of necessity have engaged the States in their obligations of the late
Treaty with England, and thereby in a necessity of continuing the War.

The truth is, I never observed, either in what I had seen or read, any
Negotiation managed with greater Address and Skill, than this had been by the
French in the whole course of this Affair, especially since the Prince of
Orange's Match, which was thought to have given them so great a blow, and by
force of Conduct was turned so much to their advantage. It Is certain and plain,
they never intended to continue the War, if England should fall with such
weight into the scale of the Confederates, as the force of that Kingdom, and
humor of the People would have given to such a Conjunction; and consequently,
that His Majesty might have prescribed what Terms He pleased of the Peace,
during the whole course of His Mediation. For besides the respect which the
French have for our Troops both Horse and Foot, more than any others,
especially since the Services and Advantages they received from them in all
their Actions against the Germans; besides the terror of a Conjuction between
our Naval Forces and the Dutch, and of descents upon their Coasts, with the
dangerous influences that might make upon the Discontents of their People. They
wisely foresaw another Consequence of our falling into this Confederacy, which
must unavoidable have proved more mortal to them than all the rest, in two
years time; for whereas the Wealth of France, which makes their Greatness,
arises from the infinite Consumption made by so many neighboring Countries, of
so many and rich Commodities, as the Native Soil and Climate, or ingenuity of
the People produces in France; In case this War had gone on, with England
engaged in it, all these veins of such infinite Treasure had been seized at
once, or at least left open only to some parts of Italy, which neither takes
off their Wines, their Salts, nor their Modes in Habit or Equipage, that draw
so vast expenses upon all the Provinces almost of Europe, which lie Northward
of France, and drains such vast Sums of Money from all their Neighbors, into
that Fruitful and Noble Kingdom, more favored by Nature, in my opinion, than
any other in the World. But the loss of this Advantage, upon the Necessity,
Folly, or Luxury of others, must in two or three years time, reduce them to
such weakness in those Sinews of War, by so general a Poverty and Misery among
their People, that there would need no other effect of such a general
Confederacy, to consume the Strength and Force of that Nation. This they very
prudently foresaw, and never intended to venture; but having reason to
apprehend it from the Prince of Orange's Match in England, they took it without
Resentment; nay, improved it rather into new Kindness than Quarrel, making use
of the King's good Nature to engage him in a Prorogation of the Parliament
immediately after; which made it appear both at home and abroad, that they had
still the Ascendant upon our Court. They eluded the effect of the Message sent
them by Lord Duras, with His Majesty's Scheme of the Peace, by drawing it out
into Expostulations of Kindness, and so into Treaty. During this Amusement of
our Court, they plied their business in Holland; yet with greater Art and
Industry, poisoned the People there with Jealousies of the Prince's Match in
England, and of Designs from both upon their Liberties, by a long and
unnecessary Continuance of the War. They united the Factions in Amsterdam upon
the sent of a Peace, and upon their own Conditions, to avoid those that had
been Proposed by His Majesty. When they had gained their Point with the several
Deputies in Holland, they acquainted the King with their being sure of the
Peace on that side, and by his Ambassador at Paris, made Offers of mighty Sums
both to himself and his chief Minister, only for their Consent to such a Peace
as Holland it self was content with. When the States had absolutely resolved on
the Peace by the particular Faction of Amsterdam, and general Terror upon the
French taking of Gant, and threatening Antwerp, they esteemed the humor in
Holland so violent toward the Peace, and so unsatisfied with the fluctuation
of our Councils in England, that they thought they might be bold with them upon
the Interests of Spain, and so raised the pretense of not evacuating the Towns
before the satisfaction of Sweden; and though I know this was by the Politicians
esteemed a wrong pace of France, yet I did not think it so, but that all
Appearances were for their succeeding in it. Nor had they reason to believe,
either our Court or Holland would have resented it to that degree they did, or
that they could have fallen into such close and sudden measures, and with such
confidence as they happened to do upon this occasion, by the Treaty of July at
the Hague. When this was concluded, they made all the Offers that could be, at
breaking the force of it, by drawing it into Negotiation, and by condescentions
to the States, unusual with that Crown, even to the greatest Kings. They
poisoned it by the Dispatch of de Cross, and by his instructions, as well as
Artifices and Industry to make the Contents of it public at the Hague, which
were pretended at Court to be sent over to me with the greatest secret that
could be. At the same time they made all the Declarations of not receding from
the difficulties they had raised otherwise than by Treaty, and thereby laid
asleep all Jealousies of the Confederates, as well as endeavors to prevent a
blow they did not believe could arrive where the Honor of France seemed so far
engaged. And thus they continued, till the very day limited for their final
Declaration. The secret was so well kept, that none had the least umbrage of it
that very morning. When they declared it, they left not the Dutch Ambassadors
time enough to send to their Masters, fearing if they had, the States would
have refused to sign without Spain, which could not be ready before the time
must have elapsed for incurring the effects of the late Treaty.

Thus the Peace was gained with Holland. His Majesty was excluded from any fair
pretense of entering into the War, after the vast Expense of raising a great
Army, and transporting them into Flanders, and after a great expectation of his
People raised, and, as they thought, deluded. Spain was necessitated to accept
the terms that the Dutch had negotiated for them; and this left the Peace of
the Empire wholly at the mercy and discretion of France, and the restitution of
Lorain (which all had consented in) wholly abandoned, and unprovided. So that I
must again conclude the Conduct of France to have been admirable in the whole
course of this Affair, and the Italian Proverb to continue true, The French
Fools are dead.
Che gle Francesi pazzi sono morti. On the contrary, our Councils and Conduct
were like those of a floating Island, driven one way or the other, according to
the Winds or Tides. The Kings dispositions inclined him to preserve his
measures with France, and consequently to promote a Peace which might break the
present Confederacy. The humor of his People and Parliament was violent
toward engaging him in a War; the Ministers were wavering between the fears of
making their Court ill, or of drawing upon them the heats of a House of
Commons, whom the King's Expenses made him always in need of. From these
humors arose those uncertainties in our Councils, that no Man, who was not
behind the Curtain, could tell what to make of, and which appeared to others
much more mysterious than indeed they were; till a new and formidable Engine
beginning to appear upon the Stage, made the Court fall into an absolute
resolution of entering into the War just when it was too late; and to post away
the Ratifications of the Treaty of July, so as to arrive the day after the
French and Dutch had signed the Peace, and after the King had given the States
occasion to believe he did not intend to ratify it, but that he had taken his
Measures with France; for so all Men in Holland concluded from De Cros's
Journey, and the Commands he brought me for mine to Nimeguen, at a time when my
presence at the Hague was thought the most necessary, both to ratify the
Treaty, if it had been intended, and to keep the States firm to their
resolutions upon it.

Thus ended in smoke this whole Negotiation, which was near raising so great a
fire. France having made the Peace with Holland, treated all the rest of it
with ease and leisure, as playing a sure Game. England, to avoid a cruel
Convulsion that threatened them at home, would fain have gone into the War, if
Holland would have been prevailed with; but they could not trust us enough, to
lose the present Interest of Trade, for the uncertain Events of a War, wherein
they thought their Neighbors more concerned than Themselves.

About two or three days after my return to the Hague, and exchanging the
Ratifications, came the News of the Battle of Mons, between the Prince of
Orange, and the French under the Command of the Duke of Lutzenburgh, who had
posted himself with the Strength and Flower of the French Forces, so as to
prevent the Prince's Design of Relieving Mons. And I remember, the day the
Dutch Peace was signed at Nimeguen, I was saying to the Marshall d' Estrades,
That for ought I knew, we might have a Peace signed and a Battle fought both in
one day. He replied, There was no fear of it; for the Duke of Lutzenburgh had
writ him word, He was so posted, that if he had but Ten Thousand Men, and the
Prince Forty, ye he was sure he would not be forced; whereas he took His Army
to be stronger than That of the Prince. I need not relate an Action so well
known in the World, and so shall only say, That in spite of many Disadvantages
from an Army drawn so suddenly together, so hasty a March as that of the Dutch,
and Posts taken with so much skill, and fortified with so much industry by the
French, as was believed, the Prince, upon the fourteenth of August, attacqued
them with a resolution and vigor that at first surprised them, and, after an
obstinate and bloody Fight, so disordered them, that though the Night prevented
the end of this Action, yet it was generally concluded, That if he had been at
liberty next day to pursue it with seven or eight thousand English that were
ready to join his Army, he must in all appearance not only have relieved Mons,
but made such an impression into France as had been often designed, but never
attempted since the War began, and upon which a French Officer present in it,
said, That he esteemed This the only Heroic Action that had been done in the
whole course or progress of it.

But the Morning after the Battle, the Prince received from the States an
Advice of the Peace having been signed at Nimeguen, and thereupon immediately
sent a Deputy with the News of it to Monsieur de Lutzenburgh. After Compliments
passed on both sides, That Duke desired to see the Prince, which was agreed to,
and they met in the Field at the Head of their Chief Officers, where all passed
with the Civilities that became the occasion, and with great curiosity of the
French to see and crowd about a Young Prince, who had made so much noise in the
World, and had the day before given life and vigor to such a desperate Action,
as all Men esteemed this Battle of St. Denis. Yet many Reflections were made
upon it by the Prince's Friends as well as his Enemies: Some said, That he knew
the Peace was signed before the Fight began; and that it was too great a
venture both to Himself and the States, and too great a Sacrifice to his own
Honor, since it could be to no other Advantage: Others laid it to the Marquess
of Grana, who they said had intercepted and concealed the States Packet to the
Prince, which came into the Camp the day before the Battle, (but after it was
resolved on) and that he had hopes by such a breach of the Peace, even after it
was signed, that the progress of it would have been defeated. Whethere this
were true or no, I could never certainly be informed; but so much is, That the
Prince could not have ended the War with greater Glory, nor with greater
Spite, to see such a mighty Occasion wrested out of his hand by the sudden and
unexpected signing of the Peace, which he had assured himself the States would
not have consented to without the Spaniards. Yet upon the certain News of it,
he drew back his Army, returned to the Hague, and left the States to pursue
their own paces in order to finishing the Treaty between France and Spain,
wherein the Dutch Ambassadors at Nimeguen employed themselves with great zeal
and diligence, and no longer as Parties or Confederates, but as Mediators,
whilst Sir Lionel, who continued still there in that Figure, declined the
Function, as in a matter wherein he found our Court would not take any part,
nor allow themselves to have had any in the Peace between France and Holland.

Soon after the Prince's return, he went to Dieren to hunt in the Velawe, like
a Person that had little else left to do. And I having occasion to go at the
same time to Amsterdam, he desired me to remember him kindly to Monsieur Hoeft
the Chief Burgomaster there, and tell him, That he desired him to be no longer
in his Interests, than he should find His Highness in the true Interests of the
State. I did so; and Monsieur Hoeft very frankly and generously bid me tell the
Prince, He would be just what His Highness desired, and be ever firm to his
Interests, while he was in Those of his Country; but if ever His Highness
departed from them, he would be the first Man to oppose him; till then he would
neither Censure nor Distrust his Conduct; for he knew very well, without matual
Trust between the Prince and the States, his Country must be ruined. From this
time to that of his Death, Monsieur Hoeft continued in the same Mind, and by
his Example that great and jealous Town began to fall into much more
Confidence, not only of the Prince, but of his whose Conduct in the
Administration of the Affairs of their State.

For the time I stayed at Amsterdam, I was every day in Conversation with
Monsieur Hoeft, who, besides much Learning, Worth, Sincereness, and Credit in
his Town, was a Man of a pleasant Natural Humor, which makes, in my Opinion,
the most agreeable Conversation of all other Ingredients, and much more than
any of those squeezed or forced Strains of Wit that are in some places so much
in request, though I think commonly Men that affect them are themselves much
fonder of them than any of the Company.

Dining one day at Monsieur Hoeft's, and having a great Cold, I observed every
time I spit, a tight handsome Wench (that stood in the Room with a clean Cloth
in her Hand) was presently down to wipe it up, and rub the Board clean:
Somebody at Table speaking of my Cold, I said, The most trouble it gave me was
to see the poor Wench take so much pains about it: Monsieur Hoeft told me,
'Twas well I escaped so; and that if his Wife had been at home, though I were an
Ambassador, she would have turned me out of door for fouling her House: And
laughing at that humor, said, There were two Rooms of his House that he never
durst come into, and believed they were never open but twice a year to make
them clean. I said, I found he was a good Patriat; and not only in the
Interests of his Country, but in the Customs of his Town, where that of the
Wives governing, was, I heard, a thing established. He replied, 'Twas true, and
that all a man could hope for there, was to have une douce Patron, An easy
Governess.
and that his Wife was so. Another of the Magistrates at Table, who was a
graver man, said, Monsieur Hoeft was pleasant; but the thing was no more so in
their Town, than in any other places that he knew of. Hoeft replied very
briskly, It was so, and could not be otherwise, for it had long been the
Custom; and whoever offered to break it, would have banded against him, not
only all the Women of the Town, but all those Men too that were governed by
their Wives, which would make too great a Party to be opposed. In the
afternoon, upon a visit, and occasion of what had been said at Monsieur
Hoeft's, many Stories were told of the strange and curious Cleanliness so
general in that City; and some so extravagant, that my Sister took them for
jest, when the Secretary of Amsterdam, that was of the Company, desiring her to
look out of the Window, said, Why, Madam, there is the House where one of our
Magistrates going to visit the Mistress of it, and knocking at the Door, a
strapping North Holland Lass came and opened it; he asked, Whether her Mistress
was at home; she said, Yes; and with that he offered to go in: But the Wench
marking his Shoes were not very clean, took him by both Arms, threw him upon
her back, carried him cross two Rooms, set him down at the bottom of the
Stairs, pulled off his Shoes, put him on a pair of Slippers that stood there,
and all this without saying a word; but when she had done, told him, He might
go up to her Mistress, who was in her Chamber.

I am very glad to have a little divertion with such pleasantries as these, the
thoughts of the busy Scene I was so deep engaged in, that I will confess the
very remembrance of it, and all the strange surprising turns of it, began to
renew those cruel Motions they had raised both in my head and heart, whilst I
had so great, and so sensible a part in them. But to return where I left the
thread of these Affairs.

After the Peace of Holland and France, the Ministers of the Confederates,
especially those of Denmark and Brandenbargh, employed their last Efforts to
prevent the Spaniards agreeing to their part of the Peace, as accepted for them
by the Dutch. They exclaimed at their breach of Honor and Interest. That what
was left the Spaniards in Flanders by those Terms, was indefensible, and could
serve but to exhaust their Men and Treasures to no purpose. That the Design of
France was only to break this present Confederacy by these separate Treaties,
and so leave the Spaniards abandoned by their Allies upon the next Invasion;
which they would have reason to expect, if Spain should use them with as little
regard of their Honor and Treaties, as the Dutch Ambassadors seemed to design.
These themselves also met with some difficulties in their Mediation, by a
Pretension raised in France upon the County of Beaumont, and Town of Bovigues,
which they did not find to have been mentioned in what had passed between the
French and Dutch upon the score of Spain, before the Peace was signed.

All these Circumstances began to make it look uncertain what would at length
be determined by the States, as to their Ratifications, which were like to be
delayed till Spain had concluded their Treaty, though those of France had been
dispatched, so as to arrive at Nimeguen the twenty second of this Month; and
Monsieur d' Avaux commanded from thence to the Hague, in quality of Ambassador
Extraordinary to the States; and the French Army had retired into France at the
same time the Dutch returned from before Mons. So that all seemed on the French
side resolved to pursue the Peace: on the side of the Empire, and Princes of
the North, to carry on the War: On the Spaniards, very irresolute, whether or
no to accept the Peace the Dutch had mediated for them: And in Holland, 'twas
doubtful; whether to ratify that their Ambassadors had signed, and whether at
least before the Treaty of Spain should be agreed.

Whilst the minds of men were busied with different reasonings and presages, as
well as wishes, upon this Conjuncture; About the end of August Mr. Hyde arrived
at the Hague from England, without the least intimation given me of his
Journey, or his Errand; so that I was surprised both to see him, and to hear
the design of such a sudden dispatch.

The substance of it was, to acquaint the States how much the King had been
surprised at the news of their Ambassadors having signed a particular Treaty
with France, even without the inclusion of Spain, and without any Guaranty
given for the evacution of the Towns within the time requisite: To complain of
this Precipitation of the States; and at the same time of the new Pretensions
that Franee had advanced upon the County of Beaumont and the Town of Bovigues,
which had retarded the Peace of Spain, and hindered it from being concluded at
the same time with that of Holland, which His Majesty understood always to have
been the Intention of the States, as well as His own. That for these Reasons he
understood, and believed, that the late Treaty of July, between His Majesty and
the States, ought to take effect, the case being fallen out against which that
was provided, and both Parties being thereby obliged to enter jointly into the
War against France. That if the States would hereupon refuse to ratify the
Treaty their Ministers had signed at Nimeguen, His Majesty offered to declare
War immediately against France, and carry it on in all points according to the
Articles and Obligations of the said Treaty with the States.

Though Mr. Hyde did not know, or did not tell me the true spring of this
resolute pace that was made by our Court, so different from all the rest in the
whole course of this Affair; yet he assured me, they were both in earnest, and
very warm upon the scent, and desired nothing so much as to enter immediately
and vigorously into the War, in case Holland would be persuaded to continue it;
and that no time nor endeavors were to be neglected in pursuing the Commission
he brought over, which was given jointly to us both, and recommended to me
particularly from Court, with all the instances and earnestness that could be.
When I carried him that very Evening to the Prince at Hounslerdike, and he
acquainted his Highness with the whole extent of his Errand and Instructions;
The Prince received it very coldly, and only advised him to give in a Memorial
to the States, and ask Commissioners to treat, by whom he would find what the
Mind of the States was like to be upon this Affair, and at which he would at
present make no conjecture.

After a short Audience, Mr. Hyde went to the Princess, and left me alone with
the Prince, who as soon as he was gone, lift up his Hands two or three times,
and said, Was ever any thing so hot and so cold as this Court of yours; Will
the King, that is so often at Sea, never learn a Word that I shall never forget
since my last passage? When in a great Storm the Captain was all Night crying
out to the Man at the Helm, Steady, Steady, Steady; if this Dispatch had come
twenty days ago, it had changed the Face of Affairs in Christendom, and the War
might have been carried on till France had yielded to the Treaty of the
Pyrenees, and left the World in quiet for the rest of our lives. As it comes
now, it will have no effect at all, at least, that is my opinion, tho I would
not say so to Mr. Hyde.

After this he asked me what I could imagine was at the bottom of this new heat
in our Court; and what could make it break out so mal a propos, Unseasonably.
after the dissatisfaction they had expressed upon the late Treaty, when it was
first sent over, and the Dispatch of De Cross, so contrary to the design of it.
I told him very truly, That I was perfectly ignorant of the whole matter, and
could give no guess at the motions of it: And so I continued till some Months
after, when I was advised, That the business of the Plot, which has since made
so much noise in the World, was just then breaking out; and that the Court, to
avoid the Consequences That might have upon the ill humor of the Parliament,
which seemed to rise chiefly from the Peace, His Majesty resolved to give them
the satisfaction they had so long desired, of entering into the War, which is
all the account I can give of this Council or Resolution.

The Event proved answerable to the Judgment the Prince at first made of it;
for though the States Deputies drew the matter into several Debates and
Conferences with us, which filled all Parties concerned in the War with
different apprehensions, and served to facilitate the Treaty between France and
Spain; yet the Pensioner told me from the first, this was all the use that
could be made of it, and that the States were so unsatisfied with our whole
Conduct in the business of the Peace, that though they would be glad to see us in
the War, yet they were resolved to have no further part in it, unless France
should refuse what they had already promised to Spain. However, while this
Affair continued in agitation, during Mr. Hyde's stay at the Hague, all
appearances looked very different from the opinion of the Prince and Pensioner,
who alone had so full a grasp of the business in Holland, as to make a true
judgment what the general sentiments there would determine in. Many of the
Deputies were so ill satisfied with their Ambassadors having signed the Peace,
that they inclined to his Majesty's Proposals, and framed several Articles
against Monsieur Beverning's Proceedings, whereof some laid mistakes to his
Charge; others, the commission of matters absolutely necessary in the Treaty;
and others more directly, his having gone beyond his Orders and Instructions;
particularly, in having stipulated, that the States should give their Guaranty
for the Neutrality of Spain. And in this point, I doubt he had nothing to show
from his Masters to cover him. The rest seemed rather to be raised invidiously
at his Conduct, in having suddenly concluded an Affair, which they now say
might have had another issue if he had given it more breath; though at that time
many of his Accusers expected as little from England as he did, and with reason
alike, since none of them could imagine any thing of that new Spring there, from
which this violent motion had begun. Whatever Monsieur Beverning's Orders or
his Proceedings had been, the heats were so high against him at the Hague, that
many talked, not only of disavowing what he had done, but of forming Process
against him upon it, And though in a short stay he made there upon this occasion,
he had the fortune or the justice to see his Enemies grow calm toward him; yet
he was not a little mortified with so ill payment of what he thought had been
so good Service to his Country; and after his return to Nimeguen, was observed
to proceed in the Negotiations there, with more phlegm and caution than was
natural to his Temper, and less show of partiality to the Peace, than he had
made in the whole course of the Treaty.

All the while these matters were in motion at the Hague, the King's Forces
were every day transporting into Flanders, as if the War were to be carried on
with the greatest certainty and vigor, which gave opinion and heart to those
in Holland that disliked the Peace; it raised also so great confidence in the
Spaniardt, that they fell into all the measures they could with the Confederate
Ministers at Nimeguen, to form difficulties and delays in the Treaty there,
between that Crown and France, upon the security that Holland would not ratify
theirs, till that of Spain were concluded; and that in the mean time they might
be drawn into the War by the violent dispositions which now appeared in
England, as well as in the Confederates to continue it. The Spanish Ambassadors
laid hold of all occasions to except against the matter or style of those
Articles which Holland had mediated between them and France; they found
difficulties upon the condition wherein the several Towns to be evacuated
should be restored to them, as to the Fortifications that had been made in them
by the French, and as to the Artillery and Munitions that were in them at the
time when the Dutch had agreed upon those Conditions. They found matter of
dispute upon the Territories that belonged to the several Towns, and especially
upon the Chattellenie of Aeth, which France had dismembered since it was in
their possession, and had joined above Threescore Villages to the Chattellenie
of Tournay, which had belonged to Aeth, and were with that Town transferred by
the Spaniards to the French upon the Peace of Aix la Chapelle: But the French
pretending now to restore it only in the Condition they had left it, and not
what they had found it, the Spaniards made a mighty clamor both at London and
the Hague upon this Subject, and complained of this, among other smaller
matters, as Innovations endeavored to be introduced by France, even beyond
what they had themselves proposed to the Dutch, and agreed in April last, which
had been laid and pursued as the very foundation of the Peace.

In this uncertain State all matters continued at the Hague for about Three
Weeks, the opinions of most Men running generally against the Peace, as well as
the Wagers at Amsterdam, by which People often imagine the Pulse of the State is
to be felt and judged; though it indeed be a sort of Trade driven by Men that
have little dealing or success in any other, and is managed with more tricks
than the rest seems to be in that Scene; not only coining false News upon the
place, but practicing Intelligence from remote parts to their purpose,
concerting the same Advices from different Countries, and making great Secret
and Mystery of Reports that are raised on purpose to be public, and yet by
such devices as these, not only the Wagers at Amsterdam are commonly turning,
but the rising and falling of the very Actions of the East India Company are
often, and in a great measure influenced.

But France thought the Conjuncture too important to let it hover long in such
uncertainties, and therefore first dispatched a Courier to their Ambassadors at
Nimeguen, with leave to satisfy the States in those Clauses of their Treaty
wherein they seemed to except justly against Monsieur Beverning's Conduct, and
thereby cover the credit of that Minister who had been so affectionate an
Instrument in the progress of the Treaty. Next they gave them liberty to soften
a little of the rigor they had hitherto exercised in the smallest points
contested with the Spaniards; and last of all, they dispatched an Express to
their Ambassadors with power to remit all the differenees which obstructed or
retarded the conclusion of the Treaty between that Crown and Spain, to the
Determination and Arbitrage of the States themselves.

This was a pace of so much confidence toward the States, and appeared such a
testimony of the most Christian King's sincerity in the late Advances he had
made toward a Peace, that it had all the effect designed by it. The several
Towns and Provinces proceeded with a general Concurrence to the Ratifications
of the Peace, that they might lie ready in their Ambassadors hands, to be
exchanged when that of Spain should be signed. Monsieur Beverning, now favored
with a fair Gale from home, the humor of his Country blowing the same way
with his own dispositions, and seconded with the great facilities that were
given by France, made such a quick dispatch of what remained in contest upon
the Treaty between France and Spain, that all was perfected and signed by the
Twentieth of September, and thereupon the Dutch Ratifications were exchanged
with the usual forms. In all this, Sir Lionel Jenkins had no part, as in an
Affair disapproved by the King his Master. The Dutch Ambassadors played the
part of formal Mediators, had the Treaty between the two Crowns signed at their
House, and took great care by the choice and disposition of the Room where it
was performed, to avoid all punctilio's about Place, that might arise between
the several Ambassadors. Mr. Hyde had the mortification to return into England,
with the entire disappointment of the Design upon which he came, and believed
the Court so passionately bent; I was left at the Hague without any thing more
to do, than to perform the part of a common Ambassador; France was left in
possession of the Peace with Holland and Spain, and by consequence, Master of
that of the Empire, and the North, upon their own Terms; and England was left
to busy it self about a Fire that was breaking out at home, with so much
smoke, and so much noise, that as it was hard to discover the beginning, so it
was much harder to foresee the end of it.

After the Peace of Spain signed, and of Holland ratified, though the Ambassadors
of the Emperor at Nimeguen were sullen, and those of Denmark and Brandenburgh
enraged, yet by the application of the Dutch Ambassadors, the Conferences were
set on foot between them and the French; and Sir Lionel received Orders from
Court to return to his Function, though the remaining part he had in the Affair,
was rather that of a Messenger, than a Mediator. The Northern Princes continued
their Preparations and Marches, as if they resolved to pursue the War, but at
the same time gave jealousies to the Emperor, of some private Intelligences or
Negotiations of separate Treaties set on foot between France and Denmark, and
others between that Crown and Brandenburgh, by Monsieur Despense, an old
servant of the Elector, but Subject of France. On the other side, France made
great Preparations to attack the Empire, upon the pretense of forcing them into
the terms they had prescribed for the Peace, and thereby gave so great terror
to the Princes of the Rhine, that lay first exposed to the fury of their Arms,
that the Electors of Ments and Triers and Duke of Nieuburgh, sent away in great
haste to the States, demanding and desiring to be included by them in the Peace
they had made, by virtue of an Article therein, which gave them liberty within
six Weeks to declare and include such as they should name for their Allies. But
this was opposed by France, and refused to any patticular Prince of the Empire,
and allowed only to the Emperor and Empire, if they should jointly desire to be
declared and included in the Peace, as an Ally of Holland. The Duke of Lorain
about the same time, seeing the whole Confederacy breaking into so many several
Pieces, and every one minding only how to shift the best they could for
themselves, accepted his part of the Peace, as France had carved it out for
him, and chose the Alternative offered from that Crown, by which Nancy was to
remain to France. But the Emperor, though he professed all the inclination that
could be, to see the General Peace restored, yet he pretended not to suffer the
terms of it should like Laws be imposed upon him; he consented to the
re-establishment of the Treaties of Westphalia, which seemed to be all that
France insisted on, but could not agree to the Passage demanded for their
Troops, whenever they found it necessary for the execution of the said
Treaties; and this was insisted on positively by the French. Nor could the
Imperialists yield to to the dependence pretended by France, of the ten Towns
of Alsatia upon that Crown, which the French demanded as so left, or at least
intended by the Treaty of Munster, while the Emperor's Ambassadors denied
either the Fact or the Intention of that Treaty.

While these Dispositions, and these Difficulties delayed the Treaty of the
Emperor, the Ratifications of Spain were likewise deferred by concert, as was
supposed, between the two Houses of Austria, so as the term agreed for exchange
of them, was quite elapsed, and twice renewed or prolonged by France at the
desire of the States. But during this time, the French Troops made incursions
into the Richest Parts of Flanders, and which had been best covered in the time
of the War, and there exacted so great Contributions, and made such Ravages
where they were disputed, that the Spanish Netherlands were more ruined between
the signing of the Peace, and the exchange of the Ratifications, than they had
been in so much time, during the whole course of the War.

The outcries and calamities of their Subjects in Flanders, at length moved
the Spaniards out of their slow pace, but more, the embroilments of England
upon the Subject of the Plot, which took up the Minds both of Court and
Parliament, and left them little or no regard for the course of Foreign
Affairs. This Prospect made Holland the more eager upon urging the Peace to a
general Issue; and France making a wise use of so favorable a Conjuncture,
pressed the Empire not only by the Threats and Preparations of a sudden
Invasion, but also by confining their Offers of the Peace to certain days, and
raising much higher Demands, if those should expire before the Emperor's
Acceptance.

All these Circumstances improved by the diligence and abilities of the Dutch
Ambassadors at Nimeguen, at length determined the House of Austria to run the
Ship ashore, whatever came on it rather than keep out at Sea in so cruel a Storm
as they saw falling upon them, and for which they found themselves so
unprovided. The Spanish Ratifications at length arrived, and after the Winter
far spent in fruitless Contests by the Imperial Ambassadors, and more fruitless
hopes from England, by the Spaniards, and other Confederates; Sir Lionel
Jenkins gave notice both to the Court and to me, that he looked upon the Treaty
between the Emperor and France, to be as good as concluded; and soon after I
received His Majesty's Commands to go immediately away from the Hague to
Nimeguen; and there assist as a Mediator at the signing of the Peace which then
appeared to be General.

I never obeyed the King so unwillingly in my life, both upon account of an
Errand so unnecessary, and at best, so merely formal (which I had never been
used to in so long a course of Employments) and likewise upon the unclemency of
the Season, which was never known so great in any Man's Memory, as when I set
out from the Hague. The Snow was in many places where I passed, near Ten Foot
deep, and ways for my Coach forced to be dug through it; several Post-Boys
dyed upon the Road, and it was ridiculous to see People walk about with long
Icicles from their Noses. I passed both the Rhine and the Waal with both
Coaches and Wagons upon the Ice, and never in my life suffered so much from
Weather, as in this Journey, in spite of all Provisions I could make against
it. The best of it was, that I knew all the way; it was neither at all material
that the Mediators should sign this Branch of the General Peace, having signed
none of the other; nor that two should sign it, when one alone had assisted in
the course of this Negotiation, since it was renewed between the Empire and
France; besides, I was very confident it would not at last be signed by either
of us; for I could not believe, when it came to the point, the Emperor's
Ambassadors should yield that of precedence to the Mediators at the conclusion
of the Treaty, which they never consented to do in the whole course of it. So
that I looked upon the favor of this Journey as afforded me from the
particular good will of some of my good Friends in the Foreign Committee,
taking a rise from some Instances of Sir Lionel Jenkins, who was in one of his
usual Agonies, for fear of being left in the way of signing alone a Treaty
which he neither was pleased with himself, nor believed many People in England
like to be so.

I arrived at Nimeguen the end of January 167 8/9, and found all concluded; and
ready to sign, as Sir Lionel believed; yet the Imperialists made a vigorous
effort in two Conferences, after my arrival, to gain some ease in the Points of
Lorain, and the dependence of the Ten Towns in Alsatia, wherein they thought
themselves the most hardly used of any others, and in the first, their Master's
Honor and Justice most concerned; so as Count Kinski made a mien of absolutely
breaking, without some relief upon them. But the French Ambassadors knew too
well the force of the Conjuncture, and the necessity laid upon the Emperor by
the Dutch and Spanish Peace, to pass the same way, or leap out of the Window.
And they were too skilful not to make use of it, or to give any ground to all
the Instances or Threats of the Imperialists. These on the other side durst not
venture the expiration of the last day given them by France, nor the reserve
made in that Case, of exacting new and harder Terms. So as the Peace was signed
about three days after my arrival. The poor Duke of Lorain thought himself
pressed with such hardships upon both the Alternatives, that he could not
resolve to accept of either; For in that he had chosen, not only his Duchy was
dismembered of several great parts wholly cut off, but the rest left at the
French discretion, who insisted upon great spaces of ground left them in
propriety, quite cross this Country, for the march of their Armies, whenever
they should pretend occasion; so this Noble, but unfortunate Prince, was left
wholly out of the Treaty, and of his Country, contrary to the direct and
repeated Engagements of the Confederates, and the Intentions of His Majesty, as
he often declared in the whole course of the Treaty.

When it was ready to sign, the French Ambassadors offered to yield the
precedence in signing it to us as Mediators, which they had done very frankly
in the whole course of this Assembly; but the Imperialists, when it came to the
point, downright refused it; and we, according to our primitive Orders, refused
to sign without it; and by our Offers, gained only the point of having that
determined against us, which till this time, had always remained in suspense.

Whilst I staid at Nimeguen, I had a Sheet of Paper sent me from an unknown
Hand, written in Latin, but in a Style and Character that discovered it to be
by some German; The subject of it was a long comment upon a Quartrain recited
out of Nostredamus.

Ne sous les ombres d'une journee nocturne
Sera en los and bonte Souverain,
Fera renaistre le sang de l'antique Vrne
Et changera en Or le siecle d' Airain.
Under the shades of the Nocturnal day being born,
In glory and goodness Sovereign, shall shine,
Shall cause to spring again the Blood of the Ancient Urn,
And into gold the brazen Age refine.
The scope of the whole Discourse was to prove the Prince of Orange's being by
it designed for the Crown of England, and how much glory and felicity should
attend that Age and Reign. I could not but mention it, because I thought the
Interpretation ingeniously found out, and applied, having otherwise very little
regard for any such kind of Predictions, that are so apt to amuse the World.
And though the present State of the Royal Family leave not this without
appearance of arriving at one time or other, yet it is at too great a distance
for my Eyes, which by the course of Nature must be closed long before such an
Event is likely to succeed. The Author of this Paper made, The shades of the
nocturnal day, to signify the deep mourning of the Princess Royal's Chamber,
with the Lamps hung about it, which by the Windows being kept shut, left no
other light in it that morning the Prince was born, (which was soon after his
Father's death.) Restoring the Blood of the Ancient Vrn, was that of Bourbon,
or of Charlemain, from whom the Prince was said to descend. The rest was only
Panegyric upon his Virtues, and the general praise should attend them, and the
Golden Age he should restore.

The day after the Treaty was signed, I left Nimeguen, and returned to the
Hague, after a cruel fatigue and expense, which was rendered the more agreeable,
when upon my going into England soon after, I found my self above Seven
thousand Pounds in Arrear at the Treasury; and though with much trouble and
delay, and some worse Circumstances (to engage Men that were more dextrous than
I in such pursuits) I recovered the rest of my Debt, yet Two and twenty hundred
Pounds, due to me for this last Ambassy, continues to this day a desperate
Debt, and mark upon me, how unfit I am for a Court; and Mr. Godolphin, after
having both said, and writ to me, that he would move to have my Statue set up,
if I compassed that Treaty, has sat several years since in the Treasury, and
seen me to want the very Money I laid out of my own Purse in that Service; and
which I am like to leave a Debt upon my Estate and Family.

I shall not trouble my self with observing the remaining Paces of the General
Peace, by that of the North, which was left to be made at the Mercy of France.
And though Denmark and Brandenburgh looked big, and spoke high for a time,
after the Peace between the Empire and France, pretending they would defend
what they had conquered from the Swedes in Germany; yet upon the march of the
French Troops into the Brandenburgh Country, both those Princes made what
haste they could to finish their separate Treaties with France; and upon
certain sums of Money agreed on, delivered up all they had gained in this War,
to the Crown of Sweden. Thus Christendom was left for the present in a General
Peace, and France to pursue what they could gain upon their Neighbors by their
Pretensions of Dependences, and by the droit de bienseance, Right of Decency.
which they pursued with such imperious Methods, both against the Empire and
the Spaniardt, as rendered their Acquisitions after the Peace, greater, at
least in consequence, than what they had gained by the War; since not only
great Tracts of Country upon the score of Dependences, but Strashurgh and
Lutzenburgh fell as Sacrifices to their Ambition, without any neighboring
Prince or States concerning themselves in their Relief. But these Enterprises I
leave to some others Observations.

Very soon after my Arrival at the Hague, the King sent me Orders to provide
for my return as soon as I could possibly be ready, and bid me acquaint the
Prince and the States, That he had sent for me over to come into the Place of
first Secretary of State in Mr. Coventry's room. My Lord Treasurer writ to me
to the same purpose, and with more Esteem than I could pretend to deserve;
telling me, among other things, They were fallen into a cruel Disease, and had
need of so Able a Physician. This put me in mind of a Story of Dr. Prujean (the
greatest of that Profession in our time), and which I told my Friends that were
with me when these Letters came. A certain Lady came to the Doctor in great
trouble about her Daughter. Why, what ails she? Alas, Doctor! I cannot tell;
but she has lost her Humor, her Looks, her Stomach; her Strength consumes
every day, so as we fear she cannot live. Why do not you Marry her? Alas,
Doctor! that we would fain do, and have offered her as good a Match as she
could ever expect, but she will not hear of marrying. Is there no other, do you
think, that she would be content to Marry? Ah, Doctor! that is it that troubles
us; for there is a young Gentleman we doubt she loves, that her Father and I
can never consent to. Why, look you, Madam, replies the Doctor gravely (being
among all his Books in his Closet) then the case is this: Your Daughter would
Marry one Man, and you would have her Marry another: in all my Books I find no
Remedy for such a Disease as this. I confess, I esteemed the Case as desperate
in a Politic as in a Natural Body, and as little to be attempted by a Man who
neither ever had his own Fortune at heart (which such Conjunctures are only
proper for) nor ever could resolve upon any pusuits of it to go against either
the true Interest, or the Laws of his Country; One of which is commonly
endangered upon the fatal misfortune of such Divisions in a Kingdom: I chose
therefore to make my excuses both to the King and to my Lord Treasurer, and
desired leave to go to Florence, and discharge my self of a promise I had made
some years past of a Visit to the Great Duke the first time I had leisure from
my Public Employments. Instead of granting this Suit, the King sent a Yatch
for me toward the end of February, 1678. with Orders to come immediately away
to enter upon the Secretary's Office about the same time with my Lord
Sunderland, who was brought into Sir Joseph Williamson's Place. I obeyed His
Majesty, and acquainted the Prince and States with my Journey, and the design
of it, according to his Command, who made me Compliments upon both, and would
have had me believe, that the Secretary of State was to make amends for the
loss of the Ambassador. But I told the Prince, that tho I must go, yet if I
found the Scene what it appeared to us at that distance, I would not charge my
self with that Employment upon any terms that could be offered me. We knew very
well in Holland, That both Houses of Parliament believed the Plot; That the
Clergy, the City, the Country in general did so too, or at least pursued it as
if they all believed it. We knew the King and some of the Court believed
nothing of it, and yet thought not fit to own that Opinion: And the Prince told
me, He had reason to be confident, that the King was in his heart a Roman
Catholic, tho he durst not profess it. For my own part, I knew not what to
believe of one side or the other, but thought it easy to presage, from such
contrary Winds and Tides, such a Storm must rise, as would tear the Ship in
pieces, whatever Hand were at the Helm.

At my arrival in England, about the latter end of February, I found the King
had Dissolved a Parliament that had sat eighteen years, and given great
testimonies of Loyalty, and compliance with His Majesty, till they broke first
into Heats upon the French Alliances, and at last into Flames upon the business
of the Plot: I found a new Parliament was called; and that to make way for a
calmer Session, the resolution had been taken at Court for the Duke's going
over into Holland, who enbarqu'd the day after my arrival at London. The
Elections of the ensuing Parliament were so eagerly pursued, that all were in a
manner engaged before I came over; and by the dispositions that appeared in
both Electors and Elected, it was easy to presage in what temper the Houses
were like to meet: My Lord Shaftsbury, my Lord Essex, and my Lord Hallifax, had
struck up with the Duke of Monmouth, resolving to make use of His Credit with
the King, and to support it by Theirs in the Parliament; and tho the first had
been as deep as any in the Councels of the Cabal while he was Chancellor, yet
all Three had now fallen in with the common Humor against the Court and the
Ministry, endeavoring to inflame the Discontents against both; and agreed
among themselves, That none of them would come into Court, unless they did it
all together; Which was observed like other common strains of
Court-Friendships. Sir William Coventry had the most Credit of any man in the
House of Commons, and I think the most deservedly: not only for his great
Abilities, but for having been turned out of the Council and the Treasury, to
make way for my Lord Cliffora's Greatness, and the Designs of the Cabal. He had
been ever since opposite to the French Alliances, and bent upon engaging
England in a War with that Crown, and assistance of the Confederates; and was
now extremely dissatisfied with the conclusion of the Peace, and with the
Ministry, that he thought either assisted, or at least might have prevented it;
and in these dispositions he was like to be followed by the best and soberest
part of the House of Commons. For my Lord Treasurer and Lord Chamberlain, I
found them two most admirable Emblems of the true, and so much admired Felicity
of Ministers of State: The last, notwithstanding the greatest skill of Court,
and the best turns of Wit in particular Conversation that I have known there,
and the great Figure he made in the First Part of these Memoirs, was now grown
out of all Credit and Confidence with the King, the Duke, and Prince of Orange,
and thereby forced to support himself by Intrigues with the persons most
discontented against my Lord Treasurer's Ministry, whose Greatness he so much
envied, and who was yet at this time in much worse condition than himself, tho
not so sensible of it; for he had been very ill with the late Parliament upon
account of Transactions with France, which tho He had not approved, yet He
durst not defend Himself from the imputation, for fear of exposing his Master.
He was hated by the French Ambassador, for endeavoring (as he thought) to
engage the King in a War with France. He was in danger of being pursued by his
Enemies next Parliament for having (as they pretended) made the Peace, and
endeavored to stifle the Plot; and yet I found within a Fortnight after I
arrived, that he sat very loose with the King his Master, who told me several
reasons of that change, whereof one was, his having brought the business of the
Plot into the Parliament against his absolute Command; and to complete the
happy and envied state of this Chief Minister, the Duchess of Portsmouth and
Earl of Sunderland were joined with the Duke of Monmouth and Earl of Shaftsbury
in the design of his ruin. What a Game so embroyled and played on all sides
with so much heat and passion, was like to end in, no man could tell; But I,
that never had any thing so much at heart as the Union of my Country, which I
thought the only way to its greatness and felicity, was very unwilling to have
any part in the Divisions of it, the deplorable effects whereof I had been too
much acquainted with in the Stories of Athens and Rome, as well as of England
and France; and for this reason, tho I was very much pressed to enter upon the
Secretary's Office immediately after my arrival, yet I delayed it, by
representing to His Majesty how necessary it was for him to have one of the
Secretaries in the House of Commons, (where it had been usual to have them
both) and that consequently it was very unfit for me to enter upon that Office
before I got into the House, which was attempted, and failed: But how long this
excuse lasted, and how it was succeeded by many new and various accidents, and
how I was prevailed with by the King to have the Part I had afterward in a new
Constitution of Council; and how after almost two years unsuccessful endeavors
at some Union, or at least some allay of the heats and distempers between the
King and His Parliaments, I took the resolution of having no more to do with
Affairs of State, will be the Subject of a Third Part of these Memoirs.

FINIS.

