Some Short REMARKS UPON Mr. Lock's Book, IN ANSWER To Mr. LOUNDS, And several
other Books and Pamphlets concerning COIN.

By Sir RICHARD TEMPLE, Knight of the Bath, and BARONET.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms Inn in Warwick Lane.
1696.

Some Short REMARKS UPON Mr. Lock's Book, etc.
ALthough Mr. Lock, by all his Writings has justly acquired the Character of a
very Ingenious Person; yet without detracting from his Merit in this late
Discourse of his, he has fallen into the Error which often attends those who
write upon Subjects of which they have no practical Knowledge or Experieoce, to
frame Notions, and lay down Suppositions, which are either False or Fallacious,
of which, my present design is only to give a short Specimen, having not the
leisure as yet, to pursue so large a Discourse.

First. That an Ounce of Silver is of equal value to an Ounce of Silver of the
same Weight and Finess, admits of no Dispute; But, that an Ounce of Silver will
buy an Ounce of Silver of the like Fineness, is an absurd Proposition, since
there is no occasion for any Barter or Exchange.

Secondly. That the intrinsic value of Silver is the true Instrument and
Measure of Commerce, is partly True, and partly False; for the Money of every
Country, and not the Ounce of Silver, or the intrinsic value, is the
Instrument and Measure of Commerce there, according to its Denomination, and
the Standard of the Coin of each Nation is very different, and does often vary
according to Time, Place, and Circumstances: Nor are the Commodities of any
Country bought by Foreign Coin or Bullion, of the Makers, or first Venders, but
by the Coin of the Country, and is therefore bought by Commodities; they are
first invested into the Money of the Country; or if by Foreign Coin or Bullion,
it must be also converted into the Coin of the Place, before it can be useful
for Barter; and the Merchant or Goldsmith will gain something to reduce it to
the Coin of the Country, unless the Matter be transacted by Bills of Exchange,
in which they endeavor as much as may be to make a Par between the Money of
each Country, according to the intrinsic Value; and hence comes the necessity
and use of Exchange. Nevertheless, that intrinsic value is governed by the
value of Bullion in each Country at that time, which varies, as other
Commodities do, and other Circumstances.

Thirdly. Bullion is a Commodity, and has no certain universal stated Price or
Value, agreed upon by Mankind, as he supposes, but varies in every Age and
Nation, according to the Scarcity, Plenty, or Use of it: Notwithstanding, it
must be allowed, that the Silver coming wholly from the West Indies, the Price
of it does govern the Value in all Europe; nor does it vary so much as other
Commodities do, unless there be some extraordinary accident of interrupting the
Trade to those Parts, by reason of War, etc. Or by the increase of the demand
of it in Europe, or in some particular Nations thereof, and therefore is the
fittest to be the material for the Instrument and Measure of Commerce, ( viz.)
Money.

Fourthly. Against his Assertion, That advancing the Denomination, or lessening
the Weight or Fineness of our Coin, would be a loss of so much to the Landed
Men in their Rents, and the Creditors in their Debts; at least as to all
Bargains already made. I offer to consideration, That nothing is more evident,
than that such a Change can have no such effect or consequence upon any thing
at Home, but only Exchange and Commerce Abroad; for proof whereof, I shall
appeal to the Historical part of Mr. Lounds his Book, as to the frequent
alteration of the Standard in Weight, Fineness, and Denomination here, which is
yet much more practiced in other Neighboring Nations, as I could easily
demonstrate, the Standard of whose Coin is much below ours, and who have also
grert quantities of Coin of base Alloy current among them, which they have
never thought fit to change, even in the times of the greatest Wealth or Plenty
among them, for the ease of Commerce at Home, and augmenting the species of
Money.

Fifthly. In the next place, it is as evident, that whatever the value of the
Coin be, more or less, it will have the same effect according to the Price
current of it, as to our home Commerce; for Instance, If our Shilling be above
the Standard of all other Nations, and worth thirteen Pence abroad, as it has
been for many years, yet without Melting or Exporting, or by way of Exchange,
it will purchase no more than a Clipped Shilling, or twelve Pence in Halfpence
or Farthings; and while our Clipped Money passed, and no discountenance put upon
it, we found no such rise of Commodities, or fall of our Rents, or damage to
the Subject in taking it: Nor has it the same influence now, as to any
Commodities that are not for Foreign Consumption, since Corn, Flesh, etc. have
risen or fallen according to the Scarcity, Plenty, or Vent, and not according
to the Value, but denomination of Money, for these three Years last past, before
the Project of Re-coining our Money was set on foot, which possibly has of late
made some alteration in these Commodities also. This indeed must be allowed,
that when the Standard of Coin was by public Authority for perpetuity, altered
from twenty Pence to sixty two in point of Denomination, but not in Weight or
Fineness. Between the time of Edward III, and Queen Elizabeth, by degrees the
price of Commodities and Rents, did advance; but the ounce of Silver being
generally raised through all the World accordingly, and rather more abroad, by
reason of the frequent Wars upon the Continent; as also, that of their being
then the principal Seats of Trade and Manufacture, which required greater
supplies of Silver; there was no loss as to the Old Rent.

Sixthly. To keep up an old Standard under an old Denomination, below the value
of Bullion is the greatest Folly imaginable, and what is not practiced in any
other Nation, for which we have paid dear and yet are not grown wiser; for it
first carried away all our Gold, which was very plentiful here, in the time of
King Charles the First, then all our Old and Broad Money, and lastly, all our
Milled Money, which was as plentiful in King Charles the Second's time;
notwithstanding the Balance of Trade was much on our side, and has put an
absolute stop to our Mint as to Silver for many Years past, and brought such a
want of the Species, that our Money was Clipped down to above half, and yet not
sufficient to keep out a vast quantity of false Money to supply the Defect; and
whereas it has been alleged, that the rise of Guineas to 30 s. has been by a
Trick of the Goldsmiths; their rise has been naturally necessary, and would
have produced no ill Effect, could Foreign Guineas been kept out, for at
highest they were advanced not to a full Third, and our other Coin by reason of
its Clipping, was not indeed worth a Moiety in its intrinsic Value, and the
Counterfeit part much less, taken together.

Lastly. Although it were desirable, were we in better Circumstances as to the
balance of our Trade, that our Silver Money should be kept up in weight and
finess, near the intrinsic value of Bullion, or at least the Standard of our
Neighbors Coin; yet it ought always to below rather then above it, to prevent
the Exportation of Money, instead of Commodities, and to bring Bullion into the
Mint, especially since the plenty of the Species of Money, is the only thing
that can advance Trade, and the value of Lands, But as our present
Circumstances are, there is an absolute Necessity that we raise the
Denomination of our Silver, both in respect of Gold, and the over balance of
our Dealings abroad; if you will have any Money at home to support Commerce; nor
can such an Advance hurt us in the least, since at worst a broad they will only
take their measures according to the intrinsic value, or rather the Standard
of their own Coin; and if they raise their Commodities proportionably, it will
bring us a double benefit to discourage the Consumption (whereof we are too
prodigal) and Encourage the Advance and Consumption of our own Commodities, and
keep our Money at home, which will be the least thing carried out, when it will
pass for more here than there.

As for Guineas, the fall of them was not only unnecessary, but highly
prejudicial to the Kingdom; first, because Guineas has bought up all the Silver
Money that was left in the Country, and consequently left us no other Coin to
carry on Trade and Subsistence; and after the raising of Seven Millions, will
be a Tax of Eight Shillings and Sixpence upon the Subjects, and the plenty of
Silver Money is the only thing that will reduce them Gradually.

To conclude, as to our Forigne Commerce, the price of our Commodities were
raised accordingly, and therefore could not hurt us; now if Guineas fall, all
Commodities must fall, and the want of fixing them at a certain price will
cause a mighty loss, and interruption in our Traffic, and this is certain that
nothing but care of our Trade at home, and lessening the Expense of our Army
abroad, by having a free Port, altering the Quota's of our Allies, or
Capitulating with the Dutch for the payment of the Subsistence of our Forces in
Flanders, can possibly enable us to carry on our War, Trade, and home Commerce.

FINIS.

