AN ACCOUNT OF POLAND.

An Account of POLAND.

CONTAINING, A Geographical Description OF THE COUNTRY, THE Manners of the
Inhabitants, and the Wars they have been Engaged in; the Constitution of that
Government; Particularly the Manner of Electing and Crowning their KING; his
Power and Prerogatives: With a Brief History of the Tartars.

By Monsieur Hauteville, who Resided about 25 Years in that Kingdom.

To which is Added, A Chronology of the Polish KINGS; the ABDICATION of KING
John Casimir; and the Rise and Progress of SOCINIANISME.

Likewise a Relation of the Chief Passages during the Last Interregnum; and the
Election and Coronation of the New KING Frederic Augustus.

The Whole Comprehending whatsoever is Curious and Worthy of Remark in the
Former and Present State of POLAND.

London, Printed for T. Goodwin at the Queens-head in Fleet Street, and H.
Newman at the Grasshopper in the Poultry, School.

To His EXCELLENCY The Earl of GALLWAY, Lieutenant General of the King's
Armies, one of the Lords Justices of Ireland, and General of His Majesty's
Forces in that Kingdom.
My Lord,
THis Treatise I make bold to Present to your Excellency; and I hope the
Consideration of the Subject it Treats of, will make Atonement for the Freedom
of it. The Republic of Poland is justly Ranked amongst the Greatest Dominions
in the World; and the Dispute between Two Great Princes, who both Pretend to
the CROWN, draws all the Eyes of Europe on that side: Therefore, I hope, that
though your Excellency is Perfectly Acquainted with the Laws and Constitutions of
all the States in Christendom, yet you will please Favorably to Receive this
Book, which, I think, gives an Exact Account of Poland, and of the Pretentions
of the Two Illustrious Rivals, who Dispute that Throne.

However, I design not to Prepossess the W^^^^^ in Favor of this Book, by the
Prefixing of (...) Illustrious Name to it; I know I could n^^ make choice of a
Better Protector; but I only (...) tend to give your Excellency a Public Mark
of my Profound Respect.

Neither did I propose to my self to make the Eulogy of the Great Virtues,
which are so conspicuous in your Excellency, such an Undertaking is above
Vulgar Pens, and too great to be Treated in the narrow bounds of an Epistle
Dedicatory. Whoever attempts that, must give a Relation of the Sieges of
Candia, Athlone, Galway, Limerick and Cazal; Describe the Bloody Batters of
Aghrim and Landen; Relate the Important Negotiations committed to your care,
speak of the Prudence, Intrepidity, and Bravery you have expressed in the
greatest Dangers, and commend, in Terms suitable to the Subject, that admired
Penetration and Sagacity of your Excellency, which discovered the Secret
Intreagues of a Court, notwithstanding the most refined Dissimulation that ever
Italy made use of. These great Qualities are so well known, that Envy and
Jealousy are forced to be silent, and dare not attack a Merit esteemed by all
the Princes of Europe, and admired by all the World.

I am afraid that I should displease your Excellency by proceeding any farther
on this Subject, yet I would beg leave to observe, that these great Virtues are
hereditary in your Excellency, and not the effect only of an happy Education.
My Lord Marquess of Ruvigny, your Father, was equally fit for Council and
Action. His great Courage and Prudence raised him to the Dignity of Lieutenant
General of the Armies of the French King, and would have certainly advanced him
to that of Marshall of France, had not his Religion, been an Invincible, though
Glorious Obstacle to it. Every body owned he deserved that Great Trust, and his
Prince thought he had no Subject in his Kingdom so fit to Represent His Person
in the Courts of the greatest Kings in Europe.

Your Excellency will pardon me if I cannot forbear to carry the Parallel
somewhat further, and therefore, my Lord, give me leave to say, That you are
like him, Pious and Charitable: You both Generously quitted a Great Estate; and
a private Life, with the Testimony of a good Conscience, had more Charms with
you, than all the Dignities and Dazzling Splendour of a Court. You are, as he
was, Sensible of the Miseries of the Poor: They had always Access to your
Person, and were never sent back without Relief: The Widows and Orphans find in
your Excellency what they have lost, and the Prayers of so many Relieved People
sent up to Heaven, fall down again upon your Excellency in Showers of Blessings.

But what shall I say of the Virtues of my Lady Marchioness your Mother? It is
impossible to draw her Character, without Exhausting all the Qualifications
ascribed by Solomon to his Virtuous Woman.

The Merit of your Excellency is so generally known, that England and Ireland
have Applauded the Choice His Majesty made of you to be one of the Lord
Justices of Ireland; and every body agrees, that the Titles and Employments
Conferred upon your Excellency, are not so much the effect of His Majesty's
Favor, as the just Reward of your Eminent Virtue and Services.

That your Excellency may long enjoy that unspotted Fame, will be the Constant
Prayers of

My Lord, Your Excellency's most Humble, and most obedient Servant

THE PREFACE.
THE Dispute about the Crown of Poland, makes now such a Noise in the World,
that it is Believed an Account of that Country cannot but be Acceptable to the
Ingenious Reader.

This Book, which is offered to your Consideration, is not Exstracted out of
several Authors, as most Accounts commonly are; but contains the Observations
of a Person of Quality, who Resided 25 Years in Poland, and had an Opportunity
of Informing himself of every thing worthy a Gentleman's Curiosity; being very
Intimate with the Ministers, and all the Great Men of that Kingdom See Journaux
des Seavans, An. 1687. Ep^em. 23. Mots d' Avril. Also the Pibliotheq. Vniver.
Tom. 7. p. 574. And the Republiq. des Lutres. Mots d' A^ust. An. 1687.
.

Though Poland is not very Remote from us, yet one may say, it is almost
unknown, few Persons going thither to Travel. However, it deserves our
Curiosity, it being one of the most Ancient States of the World, the only one
which has Preserved and Maintained the Right of Electing their Monarchs, and
indeed the only one that was never Conquered.

The Original of the Poles, as well as other Nations, is very uncertain and
Fabulous; but the Sarmatians are so Ancient, that there is still some Monuments
at this day, that Jupiter Belvs, one of the Assyrian Monarchs, made War upon
them, though Unfortunately. The Grecians and Persians were not more Successful
against that Warlike Nation, nor even the Romans themselves. They had nothing
to do with them till Augustus's time, who Beat them off of the Banks of the
Danube. Domitian was very Unhappy against them; and, in short, it does not
clearly appear, that any of the Roman Emperors penetrated into Sarmatia, no
not Trajan Himself, though Eutropius relates, he received under his Protection
a Sarmatian King. Adrian allowed them a Yearly Pension; Marcus Antoninus Pius
took a greater Care to Defend the Empire, than Enlarge its Bounds; and as to
Marcus Antoninus the Philosopher, he was not able to Compass the Design he had
of Reducing Sarmatia into a Province of the Roman Empire. Maximin had no better
Success against them; and since his time the Empire declined apace till Probus
revived their Spirits again. This Great Man Subdued the Germans, and gave the
Sarmatians so many Overthrows, that they were forced to quit the Territories
they had Usurped during the Reign of His Predecessors. They were again Defeated
by Dioclesian and Constantius; but it does not appear, that they became
Subjects to the Romans. Valentinian Defeated them some time after, in such a
Manner, that they were forced to quit Pannoma and Moesia, and Retire into their
own Country, and Began to Form a Commonwealth under Lochus, about the Year of
our Lord 550.

They have preserved their Liberty ever since, though they have been often
reduced to great Extremities; but they never paid Tribute to any of their
Neighbors. It Is true, that their King Michael, VVieznowisky, had the Weakness
to agree to Pay a Yearly Tribute to the Turks, but the States of Poland refused
to Ratify the Treaty, and boldly Asserted their Right and Liberty under the
Conduct of John Sobiesky, Grand Mareshal of the Crown, who was afterward
Elected King, and forced the Turks to Renounce the Pretended Tribute that
Michael had Promised them.

The Nobility of Poland is so Numerous and Brave, that it seems Morally
Impossible to Conquer their Country, so long as they are well United; and the
Surprising Progress of Charles Gustavus King of Sweden, who, in Three Months
Time, Conquered almost that Kingdom, signifies nothing in this Case, for that
Prince was called in by some of the Polanders themselves, and the others would
not Fight for their King. The Precipitated Retreat of the Swedes, when the
Poles Returned to their Duty, shows, how little they were able to Conquer
Poland. But I leave off this Subject to speak a word as to this Book.

The First Part giving an Account of the Constitution of the Polish Government,
of the State of Poland in respect to its Neighbors; of the Prerogative of
their Kings; of their Dyets, Customs, Manners, Ceremonies, Religion, Coyns,
etc. -- is Owing to a Person of Quality who has Resided many years in that
Kingdom, and who, by reason of his Merit, as well as Character, could better
inform himself of the Matters he Treats of, than Men of ordinary Birth and
Capacity.

The Appendix containing a Chronological Abridgment of the Kings of Poland,
some farther Remarks on the Government of that Kingdom, the Instrument of the
^bdication of King John Casimire, the Rise, Progress, and Destruction of the
Socinians, is partly abstracted from History, and Private Memoires of Persons
that may be depended upon.

The Account of the late Interregnum, and the Election of Frederick Augustus,
is grounded upon the best Intelligence, that it was possible to have from
Poland, considering the Confusion of the Affairs of that Country; and the
Pretentions of the Competitors, are stated and related as they have been
communicated by the Eyewitnesses of those Transactions.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. OF the Constitution of the Polish Government, and the Principal
Officers of State. p. 1 Chap. II. Of the Division of Poland into Provinces. p.
4 Chap. III. Of the State of Poland, with respect to its Neighbors; and of the
various Success of the Wars in which it has been Engaged with them. p. 12
Chap. IV. Of the Tartars, their manner of Fighting, their Original, Division of
their Country, Manners, and History of their Actions, and how they became
Subject to the Turk. p. 27 Chap. V. Of Ukrania, and the Cossacks; with an
Account of the Lithuanians, and Livonians. p. 37 Chap. VI. Of the State of
Poland. p. 76 Chap. VII. Of the King. p. 81 Chap. VIII. Of the Senate in
General. p. 97 Chap. IX. Of the Senate an particular, and first of the Bishops.
p. 98 Chap. X. Of the Palatins, Castellans, and Officers of State who are
Senators. p. 107 Chap. XI. Of the Order of the Nobility, and Gentry. p. 113
Chap. XII. Of the Officers who are not Senators. p. 118 Chap. XIII. Of the
Interregnum. p. 120 Chap. XIV. Of the Election of a KING. p. 124 Chap. XV. Of
the Diets in general. p. 128 Chap. XVI. Of the Diet of the Election. p. 137
Chap. XVII. Of the Election of a Successor. p. 144 Chap. XVIII. Of the Pacta
Conventa, or the Contract betwixt the King and the People. p. 147 Chap. XIX, Of
the Kings Coronation. p. 153 Chap. XX. Of the Queens of Poland. p. 161 Chap.
XXI. Of the Polish Army. p. 164 Chap. XXII. Of the Estates and Revenues of the
Polanders. p. 174, Chap. XXIII. Of the Customs, Humors and Inclinations of the
Polanders. p. 184 Chap. XXIV. Of their Religion. p. 191 Chap. XXV. Of the
Administration of Justice. p. 194 Chap. XXVI. Their Marriages and Funerals. p.
196 Chap. XXVII, Of the Diet, and Entertainment of the Polanders. p. 200 Chap.
XXVIII, Their way of Traveling. p. 205 Chap. XXIX. Of the Polish Money. p.
209.
A Chronological Abridgment of the History of Poland. p. 212. A Panegyrical
Character of the Last King John III. with an Account of his Principal Actions
and Death. p. 221
Further Remarks on the Government of Poland, and the Extraordinary care they
take of their Libertys and Privileges. p. 223. The Form of King Casimire's
Abdication. p. 225. The Instrument of the States Published on that Cecasion. p.
228.
The Rise of Socinianism in Poland, and of the Present State of that Sect. p.
230 Edict of King Sigismund against the Socinians. p. 233. Edict of King John
Casimire against them. p. 236. A Letter giving an Account of the Present State
of the Socinians. p. 238.
A Petition of the Socinians sent some years ago into England, representing
briefly their Miserable Condition. p. 248. Where now Settled. p. 250.
Account of the late Interregnum and Election of the Present King. With some
further Remarks on the late King, and a short Character of the several
Candidates for that Crown p. 251 The Proposals made by the Baron de Fleming in
behalf of his Master the Elector of Saxony. p. 274. The Pacta Conventa Sworn to
by the Baron de Fleming in the great Church of Warsaw. p. 278 A great Ambassy
appointed to go and offer the Crown to the Elector, with the Remarkable Speech
of the first Ambassador on that Occasion. p. 281. The Kings Speech to the
Nobility assembled to Congratulate him. p. 288. His Corronation. p. 293. The
Prince of Conty's arrival at Dantzick, etc. p. 295

THE Present State OF POLAND.
CHAP. I. Of the Constitution of the Polish Government, and the Principal
Officers of State.
POLAND is a Republic composed of two Estates; the Crown, and the great Duchy
of Lithuania.

The Crown is properly the Kingdom of Poland; and the great Duchy of Lithuania
was United to it in the Year 1386. by the Duke de Jagillon, who embraced the
Christian Religion that he might marry Hedwige, Daughter to Lewis King of
Poland and Hungary, and who with his Religion changed also his Name, and was
called Viadislaus. For the Polanders were Christians long before, having
received the Faith of Christ, ann. 964, in the Reign of Miecislans I. who after
he had divorced seven Pagan Wives, was converted, and married the Daughter of
Boleslaus King of Bohemiae, who was a Christian.

These two Estates are contiguous to one-another, and are now but one Body,
being united in the same Interest, under the Government of the same King, and
in the Profession of the same Religion; especially since the Diet held at
Grodeck on the River Bug, between the Polanders and the Lithuanians in the year
1413. where the Union was renewed, and where it was concluded, that for the
future they should have the same Laws and Privileges; and that the King should
be elected by the joint Consent of the Nobility of the two Estates, which was
ratified and signed by all the Senators of Poland and Lithuania.

Nevertheless they are governed by distinct Officers, each of them having a
Grand Marshal and a Petty or Sub-Marshal, whom they call the Marshal of the
Court, a Chancellor, Vice Chancellor, and Treasurer, who are all Senators,
those of the Crown for Poland, and those of the Duchy for Lithuania, and are
equal in Dignity and Power; only those of the Crown take place of those of the
Duchy.

The Office of the Grand Marshal is to keep the Peace, and prevent Tumults or
Disturbances both in the Diets and in the King's Household, to punish Offenders
even with death, and without Appeal from his Judgment, except in cases of
great Importance, which may be brought before the King. He has also Power to
command Silence, to give leave to speak, to introduce Ambassadors, to appoint
them their Lodgings, and to fix the prices of all Commodities and Merchandises.
This last Branch of his Authority is extremely advantageous to him: for the
Merchants give him very Considerable Presents, that they may have leave to sell
their Goods at exorbitant Rates.

The Chancellors and the Vice-Chancellors of the Crown are chosen by turns out
of the Clergy and Laity: But those of the Duchy are always Laymen. The
Chancellor and the Vice Chancellor make use of the same Seals, and either of
them may be used indifferently; for they have both an equal Authority, only the
latter gives place to the former, and never gives judgment but in his absence.
The Chancellor, by his Office is the Judge of all Civil Affairs, and matters
relating to the Kings Revenue. It Is also his Duty to take Care that nothing be
done contrary to the Laws, or Injurious to the Liberty of the People, and that
the Intrigues of Foreigners may not be prejudicial to the Republic.

The Authority of the Chancellors and Vice-Chancellors is so great, that in
several cases they may affix their Seals, without the Kings Order, and refuse
to seal such things for him as are contrary to the Constitutions of the State.
It Is the Office of the Chancellor, or in his Absence, of the Vice Chancellor,
to answer all the Harangues that are made to the King by Ambassadors; and he of
the two who is a Clergyman, has power over the Secretaries, Priests and
Preachers of the Court, and over the Ceremonies of the Church.

The Treasurer is properly the Keeper of the public Treasure, which is brought
to him by four other Officers, who keep an exact Account of it, and are obliged
to give one Copy to the King, and another to the Treasurer. His Office impowers
him to prevent the wasting or embezelling of the Revenues of the Republic, and
of those which are appointed for maintaining the King's Table; and therefore he
ought to sign all the Contracts the King makes, which otherwise would be void:
He ought also to take care that the Republic do not sustain any damage by the
Contracts that are made for the Coining of New Money.

When the Treasurer is called to an Account, the General Diet orders a
Committee of a certain Number of Persons to examine his Accounts, and to give
him an Acquittance, without which the Republic may still call him to an
Account for the Administration of his Employment. And therefore since this
Acquittance is of such vast importance to the Grand Treasurer, great Interest
is always made about the Nomination of the Commissioners that are appointed to
examine his Accounts; because he is obliged not only to entertain the
Commissioners, but also to give them considerable Presents, to obtain his
discharge.

The Petty or Sub-Marshal, or the Marshal of the Court, who is the last of the
five Officers that are Members of the Senate, executes the Office of the Grand
Marshal, in his absence; and in case of the Death or Demise of that Officer, he
succeeds in course, as the Vice Chancellor is in such cases promoted to the
dignity of the Chancellor: So that before a Man can be Grand Marshal or
Chancellor, he must first be Petty Marshal or Vice Chancellor.

CHAP. II. Of the Division of Poland into Provinces.
THE Kingdom of POLAND formerly contained Fifteen great Provinces, which the
King retains still in his Title, as King of Poland, Duke of Lithuania, Russia,
Prussia, Massovia, Samogitia, Livonia, Volhinia, Kiovia, Podolia. Podlassia,
Smolensko, Si^eria and Czerniechovia. But at present there are no more than
nine Provinces subject to the Crown of Poland, viz. Great and little Poland,
the great Duchy of Lithuania, Russia, Prussia, Massovia, Samogitia, upper
Volhinia and Podlassia, or Podlachia.

Great POLAND is so called, because Lechus, first King of the Polanders,
settled his Residence at Gnesna in this Province. It is also called Lower
Poland; and Posnania is the principal City. This Province contains eight
Palatinates, viz. Posn^^^, Kalisch, Lencici, Breast, Inowlocz, Siradiae, Kawa
and Ploosko. It is bounded on the North with Prussia, on the South with Little
Poland, on the East with Massovia, and on the West with Silesia, and the New
Marquisate of Brand^nburg. The River Warta runs through the middle of the
Province.

Little POLAND, which is also called Upper POLAND, contains three (...),
Cracow, Sa^domir and Lublin. It borders with Massovia and Great Poland on the
North, Mount Crapat on the South, Black Russia on the East, and Silesia on the
West; and the River Vistula runs through it. The City of Cracow is the
Metropolis of this Province, and of the whole Kingdom.

The Starosta of Cracow is not only Governor of the Castle, but also the
Defender of the Peace and of the public Tranquillity; which entitles him to a
large Jurisdiction both over the Inhabitants of Towns, and the Gentry.

As for the great Duchy of Lithuania; tho Jagillon began to unite it to the
Crown of Poland, Anno 1386, and tho that union was afterward renewed in the
Diet held at Grodeck, between the Polanders and the Lithuanians in 1413, yet it
still retained its own Dukes, and was not entirely united to the Kingdom, till
the year 1501, by Albert Duke of Lithuania who was chosen King of Poland. This
Duchy contains eight Palatinates, viz. Vilnae, Troki, Bressici, Nowogrodeck,
Minsk, Mseislaw, Vitepsk and Polosk. It is a hundred leagues long, and a
hundred and fifty broad; and is bordered by Muscovy on the North and East, by
Russia and Volhinia on the South, and by Samogitia, Prussia, and Podlachia on
the West. The chief Rivers of the great Duchy are the Niemen and the Dzwina.

The Province of Russia, which was united to Poland by King Casimir the Great,
anno 1341, is bordered by Lithuania on the North, and by the Mountains of
Hungary and Transylvania on the South; It has Upper Volhinia, and Upper Podolia
on the East, and Little Poland on the West. It contains three Palatinates,
Leopold, Chelm and Belch; the principal River that runs through it, is the Bugg.

Bokutia which is part of the Palatinate of Leopold, is a small Country
bordered on the North with the Niester, and on the South with the Carpathian
Mountains. It was sold to Poland, with the Towns of Sniatyn, and Kolomey upon
the River Prut, by Alexander Palatin of Valachia, for 500 Ounces of Silver. The
chief City of Pokutia is Halioz on the Niester, whither Lewis King of Poland
and Hungary transferred the Archbishopric of Leopold, anno 1375, with a design
to join Russia, Pod^lia and Pokutia to Hungary, because of their sertility. But
the whole Polish Nobility took up Arms to oppose that Enterprise, and made so
much noise about it in the Diet, that the Archbishopric was restored to
Leopold.

Prussia is bounded on the North with the Bal^^k Sea, on the South with Great
Poland and Mas^^^ (...) the East with Lithuania, and on the West (...). The
Kingdom of Poland was long (...) with a cruel and bloody War, about the
^^osession of this Province: For when the Knights of the Teutonick Order were
driven out of Syria by the Saracens, they were received by Conrade Duke of
Prussia and Brother to Lescus King of Poland, who finding himself unable to
defend his Country against the continual Incursions of the Idolatrous
Prussians, called in those Knights to his Assistance in the year 1228,
promising them half of what they could Conquer in Prussia, and in the mean time
putting 'em in possession of the Province of Culm, till they should be able to
make themselves Masters of some part of the Country. This was the fatal Spring
of all the Differences which engaged Poland in a War that was carried on with
so Obstinate a Fury: For the Knights of the Teutonic Order, grew at last so
Formidable to their Neighbors, and by successive Victories raised their Power
to such a height, that after they had subdued all Prussia, they gave many
Battles to the Polanders, who could never utterly expel 'em, tho they sometimes
obtained considerable Victories over them, as in the Battle which Jagillon
fought against Grunwald and Tanneberg, in the Year 1400.

In the mean time the Teutonick Knights were so proud of their new Conquests,
that forgetting their Original, and scorning the humble and samiliar Name of
Brother, with which their Religious Constitution obliged 'em to content
themselves, they began openly to claim the Title of Lords, notwithstanding the
pious Zeal of their great Master Vlric, who endeavored to oppose so scandalous
an Innovation. And tho they were frequently beaten by the Polanders, they
ceased not to continue the War, because they were assisted by the Emperors, and
by the Princes of the House of Austria.

It Is certain, that the Austrian Family could never endure that the Polanders
should recover Prussia; as it appears by the following Instance.

When Sigismund K. of Poland sent Ambassadors to the Diet at Augsburg, Anno
1530, to justify his Pretensions to that Province, the Difference was adjusted
in favor of Poland; but the Execution of it being left to the Emperor Charles
V, the Resolution of the Diet took no effect.

These Knights assumed such an absolute and independent Authority, that they
would not submit even to the Decrees of the Popes; for Locticus King of Poland
having sent to Avignon, to complain, that these Military Friars had usurped one
of his Provinces: the Pope ordered 'em to restore it, upon pain of
Excommunication, but they had so little Regard to his Menaces, that they
resus'd positively to quit their Possession.

Under the same Loct^us, the Chancellor of Pomerania, a factious man, and a
secret Enemy to his Sovereign, plotted to deliver up that Province to the
Marquess of Brandenburg; but he was taken, and put in Prison, before he could
execute his treacherous design. Nevertheless, the King pardoned him, at the
Request of his Brothers. However, it seems the Affront he thought he had
received made a stronger Impression upon him than the sparing of his Life; for
not long after, he put several Towns of Pomerania into the hands of the
Marquess of Brandenburg, and among the rest the City of Dan^^c. In the mean
time, one B^^^sia, who was Governor of the Citadel of Da^tz^c, for the King of
Poland, defended that place, and acquainted his Master with the present
Exigency of his Affairs; but before the Polan^^ could come up to his
assistance, he was obliged to call in the (...) Knights, allowing them half the
Government of the Ciradel of Dartzie, provided they would defend it entirely a
whole Year at their own charge; by which means the Citadel was not only
preserved, but the Town it self was retaken: But the Polanders had no reason to
boast of that Success; for their pretended Friends were so far from contenting
themselves with the promised Reward of their Service, that they resolved to
make themselves the sole Masters of the Citadel, notwithstanding the repeated
Remonstrances of Bogusta, and the rest of the faithful Polanders. And this open
violation of a solemn Treaty was the occasion of a bloody War, which created so
implacable an Animosity betwixt the Polanders and their encroaching Neighbors,
that the least Pretense was sufficient to rekindle the Flame.

And afterward, when Casimir, the Grandson of Locticus, renewed his Complaints
against them and prevailed with the Pope to excommunicate them, if they would
not restore that usurped Province, they slighted both him and his
Excommunication. But at last, by the Peace which was concluded betwixt Casimir
and the Order, it was agreed upon, That the Great Master should be acknowledged
as a Prince and Senator of the Republic under the Protection and Dominion of
Poland. Some time after, the Province was divided into two Parts, called the
Royal and Ducal Prussia. Albert of Brandenburg, Great Master of the Teutonic
Order, having turned Lutheran, and being married, fixed his Residence in this
Province; and Sigismund yielded up to him the Ducal Prussia, on condition that
he should remain a Vassal to Poland: And by the Peace of Oliva, made in the
Year 1660, the Sovereignty of Ducal Prussia was finally yielded up to the
Elector of Brend^^^ing.

Thus, at present, it is only the Royal Prussia that ought to be reckoned a
Province of Poland; and even though it belongs to the Republic, it is governed by
its own Laws, and enjoys particular Privileges: They have a peculiar Treasury,
and a Treasurer; and when the King summons the Arrierban, the Nobility are not
obliged to go beyond the Frontiers of the Kingdom. This Province is divided
into three Palatinates, Culm, Marienburg, and Pomerania. Its chief Cities are
Thorn upon the Vistula, Elbing, a league from Frischlaff, and Dantzic, which is
the most considerable of 'em all, and the capital City of the Palatinate of
Pomerania, which comprehends all the Country Westward of the Vistula, to the
Confines of Germany.

Upon the Coast of Prussia the Waves of the Sea cast Amber upon the Shore,
which the Fishermen take up in Nets. It is soft at first, but soon after grows
so hard, that it may be turned or engraved, and cut into all sorts of Figures.
It Is also found in certain great Lakes in the same Province, especially in the
Bishopric of Warmia. There are also many Lakes that abound with Fish, almost
in every part of the Country. In the Palatinate of Marienburg there is the Lake
of Drausen, which sends forth the River Elbing, that discharges it self in the
Frischaff, which is a Bay or Gulf of the Baltic Sea, about twenty leagues in
length, and two in breadth. In the Palatinate of Pomerania there is a Lake
betwixt Konicz and Schochaw, which is seven leagues long, and five broad, and
is the head of the River Bro, which falls into the V^stula about four leagues
above Culm. There are also three other almost as large as the former in the
same Palatinate, near the City of Dantzic; and both the Palatinate of Culm and
the Bishopric of Warmia, are so full of Lakes, that it would be almost an
endless Labor to mention every one of them particularly.

Massovia has Prussia on the North, little Poland on the South, Podlassia on
the East, and great Poland on the West: The Vistula and the Bugg are the
principal Rivers that water it. This Province began to be united to the Crown
of Poland by Ziemowit, who was Prince thereof, in the Reign of Casimir the
Great, but the Union was not fully perfected till the Death of the Dukes John
and Stanislaus, in the Reign of Sigismund I. anno 1526. It contains only one
Palatinate, which formerly took its Name from the Town of Czersk, but is now
called after the Name of the Province.

Samogitia, or Samojedia, which is a Dependancy of the Duchy of Lithuania, is
bordered by Courland on the North, the River Niemen on the South, Lithuania on
the East, and the Baltic Sea on the West. The Christian Religion was introduced
into this Country Anno 1413, by the pious Care of King Jagellon, who took the
pains to instruct those People himself, because they could not understand the
Polish Priests. The chief Towns in Samogitia are Rosienia on the River Dubissa,
and Miednich: There are no Palatinates here, but the Province is divided into
several Starosties, or Governments of Castles, and the first Starosta is a
Senator.

Since Courland depends upon Poland, and is the Frontier of Samogitia, it will
not be improper to give a short account of it here. It Is divided into two
parts, Courland and Semigallia; the River Dzwina separates it from Livonia on
the North; it is bounded with Samogitia on the South, Lithuania on the East, and
the Baltic Sea on the West. This Country has been subject to a Prince who is a
Vassal and Feudatory of Poland, since the Year 1561, that Godfrey Ketl^r, great
Master of the Teutonic Knights in Livonia, having voluntarily resigned his
Office, put all Livonia, with the Town of Riga, the capital City of the
Province, into the hands of Nicholas Radziwill, in the Name of Sigismund
Augustus, who gave him Courland and Semigallis, which were then reckoned part
of Liv^ia, on Condition that he should remain a Vassal to the Crown of Poland.
The City of Mittauw in S^^^^^ita, is at present the Metropolis of that little
State, and the Residence of the Duke.

Upper Volhinia reaches from Polesia on the North to upper P^d^ia on the South,
and from lower Volbinia on the East to black Russia on the West. Its chief
Cities are Lucko, or Lusuck, or Luceowia, on the River Ster; and Kremienice,
which is situated upon an Eminence, on the bank of the River Izwa, about eight
leagues from Luceowia, toward the South.

The Province of Podlachia, which was united to Poland in the Year 1569, is
bounded by Lithuania toward the East, and Massovia toward the West; it is ten
leagues broad and thirty leagues long. Its chief Cities are Augustow and
Biclsk, which gives Name to a Palatinate.

CHAP. III. Of the State of Poland, with respect to its Neighbors; and of the
various Success of the Wars in which it has been engaged with 'em.
POland reached heretofore from the Black Sea to the Baltic, and from (...) to
Hungary; but as all the States in the World are subject to great and frequent
Revolutions, Poland has had its share in the general Calamity, and is at
present confined within much narrower Bounds: For it may be observed in
general, that every Republic is looked upon by its Neighbors as a Country
which they have a kind of Right to invade. And the same Remark may in a
peculiar manner be applied to Poland, both with respect to the Manner and
Constitution of its Government, and the insatiable Ambition of all its
Neighbors, of which the Turks, Tartars, and Moscovites are most formidable.

It Is long since the Turks dismembered Valachia and Moldavia from this Kingdom,
and afterward the Cossacks, being oppressed by the Nobility, and restrained
from their wonted Pyracies on the Black Sea, resolved to shake off a Yoke which
they could no longer bear, and by that means gave the Turks an opportunity to
invade Vbrania, in the Reign of King Michael, and to make themselves Masters of
Caminiec, the capital City of Upper Podolia, and the only place of strength
which the Polanders had upon that Frontier. That fatal War continued after the
death of K. Michael, and disturbed the Reign of his Successor John III, till
the Polanders were at last constrained to make a Peace at Zurawno in Pokutia;
for the Army of the Turks and Tartars was so numerous and formidable that Year,
that it consisted of above 180000 effective Men; and on the other hand that of
the Polanders was so weak, that they could not bring above 12000 Men into the
Field, because they were deprived of the Assistance of a considerable part of
the Forces of Lithuania, who were drawing together near Leopold, under Prince
Michael of Radziwill, their General, but could not join the grand Army, because
the Infidels had blocked up all the Avenues to the Camp; so that the General
was obliged to continue at Leopold, with the Marquess de Bethune, and the L.
Hide, Ambassador from the K. of England, expecting the issue either of a Peace,
or of a Battle. Soon after a Peace was concluded with the Turks, of which the
King immediately sent an Account to Prince Michael of Radziwill, ordering him
to communicate the News with all speed to the Queen, who remained at Janowiecs,
upon the Vistula, over against Casimir.

By this Peace the Polanders yielded up Podolia and Vkrania, which is the best
Country within the bounds of their Dominions; for the Earth is so fat and
fertile, that they never dung it; and though they sow it but once in two Years,
it yields a plentiful Harvest of Corn every Year. Asparagus grows in the
untilled Fields, and the Forests are full of Trees, which bear excellent Fruit.
And besides, the loss of Vkrania is so much the more considerable, because it
produces abundance of Saltpeter to make Powder, which the Polanders stand more
in need of than any other Nation, because their Country lies open on all sides,
and by consequence is exposed to the Incursions of many Enemies. This is the
last and the greatest loss that Poland has sustained in its Wars with the Port;
so that the Kingdom is now bounded on the East with Black Russia.

As the Turks and Tartars have an irreconcilable Aversion to the Polanders,
because of the great difference of their Religions, which makes 'em look upon
one another as Beasts; the Moscovites are no less Enemies to the Republic, by
reason of the difference, or rather contrariety, both of their Inclinations and
Religion; for all the Moscovites are Schismatical Greeks, and the Polanders are
generally Roman Catholics. In the last War that was kind I Would betwixt these
Nations, the Muscovites took from the Polanders, the Dutchies or Palatinates of
Smolensko, Siberia, and Czernichowia, which belonged to Lithuania, besides that
of Kiowia, the poslession of which was only granted to 'em by a Truce, and not
by any Treaty of Peace; so that the Polanders may one day endeavor to recover
these Provinces, but they are so far from being at present in a condition to
make good their Pretensions, that they prolong the Truce with the Muscovites
from time to time.

In the mean time if we consider the management of the Wars and Differences
betwixt these two Nations, it may be said, that the Polanders, with respect to
the Muscovites, are the same with the French, in regard to the Spaniards; for
as the Spaniards are not able to resist the French in the Field, the Polanders
have the same advantage over the Muscovites, when they are not entrenched, even
though their Army be much more numerous. But on the other hand, as Nature has
given the latter less Courage, she has made 'em superior to the others in
Subtlety and Cunning. I might allege several Instances to confirm and
illustrate this truth, but I shall content my self with observing, that in the
year 1581, King Steven Battori had reduced the Muscovites to such a straight,
that they solicited him for a Peace, which not being able to obtain of that
Prince upon the Conditions they desired, they entreated the Pope to intercede
in their behalf: So true it is, that they are ready upon all occasions to have
recourse to Artifices, and leave no means unattempted to accomplish the Designs
which they cannot execute by Force: For though (as I intimated before) they are
all Schismatical Greeks, and do not acknowledge the Pope to be the Head of
their Church, yet in their Necessity they scrupled not to implore his
Assistance, and even gave him some Reason to hope that they might be prevailed
with to embrace the Catholic Faith. In the mean time the Pope gave so much
Credit to their Insinuations, that he immediately dispatched Anthony Possevin
to Muscovy, and the Great Duke received him with so many Marks of a sincere
Affection, as if he had been really resolved to become a Convert. But this was
only an Artifice to amuse the Pope, that by the interposition of the Nuncio, he
might obtain either a Peace or a Truce; as he really did: For, notwithstanding
all the Advantages the King of Poland had over the Muscovites, he granted them
a Truce for ten years, and restored all that he had taken from them; the Duke
of Muscovy yielding up to him, at the same time, all that he possessed in
Livonia.

But it will not appear so surprising, that the Muscovites should solicit the
Mediation of the Pope, if we reflect upon the scandalous Methods they took to
beg the Grand Signior's Assistance against Vladislaus IV. King of Poland,
during the War in which they were engaged with that Prince, in the beginning of
his Reign, Anno 1633.

During my long abode in Lithuania, which borders upon Muscovy, I was confirmed
in my former Opinion concerning the Artificial Conduct of the Muscovites, by
the many Instances which the People of that Country relate of the ungenerous
Subtlety of their troublesome Neighbors. I was assured, that the Muscovites
never invade Poland but when they see it engaged in other Wars, and the Forces
of the Kingdom employed elsewhere. The Muscovites had entertained an
uninterrupted Peace with the Polanders, after the Treaty concluded with King
Vladislaus IV. in the year 1634. by which they yielded up to him the Dutchies
of Siberia and Czernichovia, with all the Land that lay within the space of One
hundred miles beyond those Countries; yet, contrary to the express Articles of
a Treaty, which seemed to be so firmly established, as soon as they heard of
the Irruption of the Swedes into Poland, in 1655. they entered into Lithuania
with an Army of 60000 Men, and took the Town and Castle of Vilna.

But tho I have observed, that the Conduct of the Muscovites, with respect to
their Neighbors, resembles that of the Spaniards; it must be acknowledged, that
their Tempers and Characters are very different; for the Spaniards are civil
and humane, and the Muscovites on the other hand are generally rude and
unpolished, and extremely cruel; as it will appear by the following Examples.

King John Casimir having concluded a Peace with the King of Sweden, marched
into Lithuania with his whole Army, and retook the City of Vilna, the
Metropolis of the great Duchy; but the Castle made an obstinate defense,
because the Muscovite who commanded in it was so cruel, that no man durst talk
of Surrendering. Nevertheless, this is not the most remarkable Instance of his
Cruelty; for he ordered one of his Prisoners, who was a Priest, to be put into
a great Mortar, and shot into the Air as a Bomb. However, the Castle was at
last reduced, by means of some foreign Officers, who finding themselves pressed
by the Polanders, and fearing that they should have no Capitulation allowed
'em, seized the Governor, and put him into the hands of the King of Poland, who
caused his Head to be cut off, because of his Cruelty to the Priest. And when
they wanted a Hangman to perform the Execution, his own Cook offered to do it,
with his Chopping-knife, adding, That he was glad of such an Opportunity to be
revenged, for the ill usage he had received from him. Accordingly he cut off
his Master's Head upon a Logg of Wood; as if it had been a piece of Beef, and
was forced to give him several Slashes before he could entirely separate his
Head from his Body.

Stephen Battori King of Poland besieged the City of Polotta in Muscovy, Anno
1579. and after a most vigorous resistance, the Besieged finding themselves
unable to hold out longer, offered to surrender the place; the Capitulation was
at last agreed upon, by the unanimous Consent of the Garrison and Inhabitants,
except the Bishop and the Governor, who continually animated the Soldiers and
the Burghers to make an obstinate defense, representing to them, that it would
be more honorable to dye in the Service of their Prince, than to save their
Lives by an ignominious Treaty. And indeed neither the Bishop nor the Governor
would sign the Capitulation, but retired into the Church of St. Sophia, whence
Steven Battori caused them to be brought forth, and committed them to the
Custody of the Treasurer of Lithuania. When the Polish Garrison entered the
Town, to take possession of it, and to receive the Stores and Ammunitions
according to the Articles of the Capitulation, they were surpised to behold so
many Marks of a horrible and brutish Cruelty, which the Muscovites had
practiced on the Polish Prisoners: they found some of 'em most barbarously torn
in pieces, some half boiled in great Kettles, with their Hands tied behind
their Backs, and others who had been miserably butchered by ripping up their
Bellies: the Polanders were so transported with Rage and Indignation at the
sight of such a dismal Scene of Horror, that they would have revenged the death
of their Countrymen upon the whole Muscovitish Garrison: But King Stephen
generously considering that no provocation could excuse the Breach of a solemn
Treaty, restrained the Fury of his Soldiers, and sent the Muscovites back to
their own Country, under the Convoy of two Troops of Horse. I could easily
produce many other Examples of this nature, but what I have already said is
sufficient to prove, that the Muscovites are naturally cruel.

I return now to that memorable Irruption which the King of Sweden made into
Poland, with so much Violence and Success, that King John Casimir and his Queen
Louise Mary were forced to leave the Kingdom, and to retire into Silesia; for
almost all the Nobility, and even the Polish Army, had abandoned them, and
followed the Rapidity of the Conqueror's Fortune. But the Polanders afterward
being sensible of the Fault they had committed in forsaking their King, and
those who had still continued faithful to him resuming fresh Courage, under the
Conduct of the General Czarneski, they by degrees expelled the Swedes, who had
made themselves Masters of the whole Country, and of the City of Cracow, which
they had taken in three days. Thus the Kingdom was reconquer'd, and the Swedes
were obliged to enter into a Treaty of Peace, which was concluded in the Abbey
of Oliva.

Princes are so apt to be jealous of a neighboring Conqueror, that they are
even willing to assist a former Enemy against the unequal force of an ambitious
and successful Invader: For when the King of Sweden had made himself Master of
Poland, at a time when the Polanders were engaged in a War with the Cossacks,
who had besieged Leopold, the Muscovites, who had also invaded Lithuania,,
immediately quitted that Duchy, and fell upon the Swedes in Livonia, in order
to make a diversion; and the Tartars, who are naturally Enemies to all
Christians, and in a particular manner to the Polish Nation, not only sent a
potent Army to assist the K. of Poland, but forced the Cossacks to raise the
Siege of Leopold, and to join with them in the defense of the Polanders.

And the same reason which induced the Muscovites and the Tartars to succor
the Polanders, obliged the Emperor also to send them some Troops, but he made
'em pay dear for his Assistance; for the Salt-works being mortgaged to him for
some years, he caused so great a quantity of Salt to be made and exported, that
the Works were almost ruined.

Nor are the Muscovites and Tartars the only troublesome Neighbors to Poland,
for 'twill appear by the following Relation, that the Misfortunes of that
Nation were in some measure owing to the Germans.

Vladislaus Jagellon King of Poland being engaged in a War with the Teutonic
Knights, who were Masters of Prussia, and having raised a powerful Army of
Polanders, Lithuanians, and Prussians, was in a condition to overpower his
Enemies, and to expel them utterly out of his Dominions; when the Emperor
Sigismund of Luxemburg desired him to refer the Differences that occasioned the
War to his Arbitration, and in the mean time to grant the Teutonic Knights a
Truce for two Years: Jagellon accepted the Offer, and disbanded his Army. But
since the Emperor designed only to gain time, that the Knights might be able to
put themselves in a posture of desence, he was so far from taking care to
adjust these Differences, that he was glad the Polanders were divided, fearing
that after they had driven the Teutonic Knights out of the Kingdom, they would
make a vigorous Attempt to retake Silesia, which the Kings of Bohemia had
lately usurped.

King Jagellon perceiving that the Emperor had disappointed him, sent to put
him in mind of his Promise; but, it seems, Sigismund had either forgotten, or
was not willing to remember the Service which the Polanders had done him in the
year 1414, when they obliged the Turks to restore all the Prisoners they had
taken, and to grant him a Truce for six years; and that Jagellon not only
refused the Crown of Bohemia, which the revolted Hussites had offered him, but
exhorted them to return to their Obedience to the Church and to their Prince.
Thus without considering those important services, and without examining the
matter, he gave Judgment against the Polanders, in favor of the Teutonic
Knights; which so incensed King Jagellon, that he dispatched one immediately to
reproach him with his Ingratitude and Injustice, and to tell him, that he
renounced his Friendship: Whereupon Sigismund endeavored to excuse himself, by
pretending that he was imposed upon by the Knights.

Though the Emperor knew that the King of Poland had just cause to be angry with
him, he was so far from seeming to take notice of his Resentment, that he went
as far as Luceoria to see him and his Uncle Vitold, pretending an earnest
desire to be reconciled to 'em, tho his real design was to divide 'em. He knew
that the latter was a violent and ambitious Prince, and that his Nephew had
entrusted him with a very great Authority in Lithuania, and resolved to make
use of this Opportunity to corrupt his Fidelity, and inspire him with an
Inclination to revolt. He insinuated, that a Prince of so much Merit ought not
to depend upon his Nephew, but to think how to make himself at least his Equal;
adding, That since 'twas in his power to erect new Kingdoms, as being King of
the Romans, he would make him King of Lithuania, and send him the Crown, with
all the other Royal Ornaments. To which Vitold replied, That tho he would not
refuse the Offer, he could ^ot accept it without the Consent of the King his
Ne^hew. As soon as the Emperor had received this Answer, he went to Jagellon,
and represented to him, That for the Honor of his Nation he ought not to
oppose that Design, if the Senate would consent to it.

The Senators being assembled for that end, and Vitold present, the Archbishop
of Gnesna, whom Sigismund had brought over to his side, having made a long and
confused Discourse, without coming to any certain conclusion, the Bishop of
Cracow rose up in his place, and blaming Vitold's Design, with a great deal of
Zeal and Boldness put him in mind of all the Articles agreed upon betwixt the
King and him, and confirmed by mutual Oaths, by which they had united Lithuania
to Poland: That it was a Shame for a Prince of his age, and who had acquired so
much Glory, to discover so irregular an Ambition, that would infallibly expose
both the Polanders and Lithuanians to unavoidable Ruin; adding, That he ought
to consider that Sigismund's Kindness was treacherous and fatal; that he ought
to suspect a Present that was offered him by their common Enemy; that the
Design of the King of the Romans was only to create a Jealousy betwixt him and
his Nephew, that he might execute his Designs upon two disunited Princes, which
he durst not attempt while they were Friends; that he ought to set a greater
Value on the Favors and Kindnesses he had received from the King his Nephew,
and from the Polanders, than upon the vain and deceitful Promises of the King
of the Romans; that the Germans never had any real Kindness either for him or
the King; that they had often violated the Conditions of Peace agreed on
between the two Nations, and that under the pretext of doing them good Offices,
they had made frequent Attempts to ruin 'em; that he ought to consider that
the King had preferred him before his own Brothers, by intrusting him with so
great an Authority in Lithuania; that he ought not to be deluded by the
pernicious Insinuations of Sigismund; and that he hoped so wise and judicious a
Prince would neither suffer himself to be imposed upon, nor the Glory of so
many illustrious Actions which he had performed to be stained by the
treacherous Artifices of his Enemy.

This Harangue was applauded by the whole Senate, which so exasperated Vitold,
that he went out of the Assembly, after he had assured 'em, That since they did
not think fit to comply with him, he would find some other way to compass his
Designs. Thus the Senate broke up, and King Jagellon returned to Poland, but
Sigismund staid some time with Vitold at Luceoria, after which he went
immediately to Hungary, lest the Polanders, whom he had offended, should raise
some Disturbance in that Country; and some time after he sent a fine Present to
Vitold, as a Pledge of the League they had entered into upon certain
Conditions. The King left no means unattempted to secure himself against the
Attempts of his Uncle, and to prevent the ill effects of the Advice which
Sigismund had given him, to make himself Master of Lithuania; for he had
received information, that he had entered into an Alliance with the Tentonic
Knights, by the Emperor's Advice and Mediation. Vitold, on the other hand, in
pursuance of his Design, forced the Lithuanians to take a new Oath of Fidelity
to him, and placed Garrisons in the Towns of Lithuania that bordered upon
Poland.

Jagellon not being able to dissuade his Uncle Vitold from pursuing the
unnatural Resolution with which the King of the Romans had inspired him, and
understanding that he was suddenly to be Crowned, gave Orders to lie in wait
for those who should be sent to him, and to surprise them in their Journey from
Prussia to Lithuania. And accordingly the Chamberlain of Posnania who received
that Order seized two of those Envoys on the Frontiers of Poland, viz. Baptista
Cigale of Genoua, and Sigismund Roth of Silesia, who were going to Vitold in
Lithuania, and took from them the Letters which they were carrying to him.
Those Letters were written to satisfy him, that a King of the Romans, or an
Emperor, had power to erect new Kingdoms. These Envoys were also entrusted with
Letters Patents for the erection of the Duchy of Lithuania into a Kingdom. And
besides, they were empowered to treat of an Alliance with the Teutonic Knights
against the Polanders.

The King having perused all the Letters, commanded the Chamberlain of Posnania
to return to the Frontiers of Poland; for Sigismund was sending to Vitold an
Ambassy of Germans, Bohemians, and Hungarians, who were carrying the Crown and
all the Royal Ornaments to him, and were to pass by the next morning; but by
that time they had reached Frankfurt, upon the Oder, they understood that the
Polanders had blocked up all the Passages; so that after they had staid two
months in that City, without daring to proceed on their Journey, they returned
to Germany. In the mean time Vitold, who had invited all the principal Lords of
Lithuania and Russia, and the chief of the Teutonic Knights, to Vilna, to
assist at the Ceremony of his Coronation, perceiving that he was disappointed,
resolved himself to invite the King his Nephew to a Hunting-match in Lithuania,
hoping that he might easily persuade him to consent to his Advancement. But the
Senate of Poland, who were acquainted with the goodness and easiness of the
King's Temper, ordered the Bishop of Cracow to accompany him, that he might not
do any thing without his Advice. When the King arrived at Vi^na, Vitold prayed
him to consent to his Coronation, and not to envy him the Honor of wearing a
Crown. To which the King answered, That he could not do it without the Consent
of the Lords of Poland, who had sent the Bishop of Cracow with him, that he
might do nothing without his Approbation. Upon which Vitold sent some persons
to that Prelate to bribe his Fidelity, with Assurances of a magnificent Reward;
adding in a flattering and obliging manner, That his Fortune depended upon him,
and that he hoped he would not prove the only Enemy to his Advancement.

Those who were entrusted with this Message had Orders to tell the Bishop, That
he ought to consider what an Affront it would be to their Master if he sold
not be crowned King; That he desired no more than that he would suffer him to
wear the Crown for a moment, and that he would quit it immediately: At the same
time they assured him, that if he continued obstinately to oppose that Prince's
Design, he would be his irreconcilable Enemy, and do every thing that lay in
his power to dispossess him of his Bishopric. But that Prelate resolving to
maintain the Honor and Interest of his Country, and being equally Proof
against Promises and Threatenings, replied, That he was sensible their Master
deserved a Crown, but that he could not make himself Master of Lithuania
without violating the Oath he had taken touching the Union of that State with
Poland, and therefore he advised him to lay aside that pernicious design, which
would be so far from being either honorable or advantageous to him, that it
would be an eternal Reproach to him, and would hasten the Ruin of his Country:
That he should not flatter himself with thinking that the Germans and Teutonic
Knights would be his faithful Allies, since they were irreconcilable Enemies
both to the Lithuanians and Polanders: That their only design was to weaken
both the one and the other, and of most firmly united Friends, as they were, to
make them become mortal Enemies, that they might be able to execute their
Designs upon those two Nations, and make 'em the Instruments of their own Ruin:
That the King of the Romans could not forbear discovering his treacherous
Intentions, declaring with a kind of Ostentation, that He had cast a Bone
between two Dogs, that they might worry one-another. Vitold was so mortified
with this Answer, that his Grief threw him into a Fit of Sickness, and his
Death, which followed soon after, broke the Measures which Sigismund had taken
to disunite Lithuania from Poland.

I have insisted the longer upon this Story, to show, that after the Germans
had taken Silesia from the Polanders, they were still forming new Projects to
weaken 'em. And from hence we may also take notice of the terrible Consequences
of the mistaken Politics of some Princes who entrust their Subjects with too
large a Share in the Government; for it is plain, that by an excessive Kindness
to his Uncle, this excellent King was in danger of losing both Poland and
Lithuania.

By the Peace concluded in the Abbey of Oliva near Dantzick, the third of May,
1660, of which the French King was Guarantee, the Polanders yielded up Livonia
to the Swedes, and the Sovereignty of Ducal Prussia to the Elector of
Brandenburg; and as for Silesia, it is so long since they lost it, that they
think no more of recovering it, for it seems to be one of their peculiar
Qualities to lose the remembrance of their Losses.

Thus Poland is at present bordered on the North with Livonia and Muscovy, on
the South with Upper Hungary and Transylvania, on the East with Vkrania, which
belongs to the Turks, and the Dutchies or Palatinates of Smolensko, Siberia,
Czernichowia, and Kiowia, which are under the Dominion of the Muscovites; and
on the West with Sitesia, which belongs to the Emperor.

Since I observed that the Revolt of the Cossack^ was the occasion of the loss
of all Vkrania, and brought the Tartars into Poland, I must in the next place
take a short view, of those two Nations; and, first, of the Tartars.

CHAP. IV. Of the Tartars.
IT IS observed of this Warlike and Barbarous Nation, that they never Fight in
Ranks, and that in their flight they shoot Arrows behind them: that their
Poverty and their Swiftness makes 'em in a manner invincible; and that they
seem only to be born to pillage and impoverish their Neighbors. They are
descended from the great Tartars of Asia, and left Mount Imaus beyond the
Caspian Sea, in the Year 1188. extending themselves along the Volga, the
Tanais, and the neighboring places, and in that Peninsala which the Ancients
called Taurica Chersonesus, and which is now called the Crim. This is the
Reason why they are and have been known by diverse Names; for those who inhabit
the Peninsula are called Crim Tartars; those who extend themselves to the River
Don or Tanais, which comes from Muscovy, and discharges itself into the Palus
Maeotis, are called Nogais; and both of them are called Petty Tartars, to
distinguish them from the Great Tartars of Asia.

The Crim is divided into two parts, the Northern and the Southern: the latter
is cut through the middle by very high and almost inaccessible Mountains. The
capital City of this Peninsula is Caffa, which is a considerable Port on the
Black Sea, to the Eastward, which Mahomet the Emperor of the Turks took from
the Genoese, in the year 1475. The whole Peninsula is but 78 leagues in length,
and 40 in breadth. It Is bordered with the Palus Sukamorzi toward the North,
the Black Sea on the South and West, the Palus Maeotis and the Cimmerian
Bosphorus, which separates it from Circassia toward the East. It is joined to
the Continent by a very narrow Isthmus toward the North near the Town of
Precop. After the year 1188, when the Tartars came into that Peninsula, it
continued under the Dominion of one Sovereign Independent from the Grand
Signior. But as Divisions among Princes is frequently the occasion of their
ruin, so the Crim became subject to the Turk by the Animosities that happened
betwixt two Brothers.

For Machmetkirey, Chan of the Crim Tartars, the Ally and Friend of the Turks,
had two Brothers, who revolted against him; but not being strong enough to
resist him, they put themselves under the protection of Stephen Battori King of
Poland, and Machmetkirey, after he had several times in vain demanded them of
that King, prayed Amurath Emperor of the Turks to require 'em in his own name
The Grand Signior complied with his Request, and prevailed with the King of
Poland to send 'em to Constantinople, with an Ambassador to assist at the
Circumcision of his Son. But when Amurath had those two Princes in his power,
instead of restoring them to Machmetkirey their Brother, he resolved to retain
them as Hostages for his Fidelity, and by that means to keep him in a perpetual
dependence upon the Port.

The Grand Signior being at that time engaged in a War with the Persians, he
desired the Cham of Tartary to assist the Turks in Asia, and upon that
condition promised to deliver up his Brother. Upon this Assurance Machmetkirey
marched ed from Tartary with a powerful Army, in order to assist him; but
understanding, as he was passing through Mingrelia, that the Turks were totally
routed by the Persians, he marched back to his own Country, where he expected
to find his Brothers; but perceiving that Amurath had disappointed him, he was
so enraged, that the Grand Signior was forced to appease him with Presents, and
to send Ambassadors to make his excuse for not performing his Promise,
pretending, that he was afraid to send back the two Princes in his absence,
lest they should have raised some disturbances, and assuring him, that he would
put them very speedily into his hands. Not long after, these two Princes made
their escapes from Constantinople, and by the assistance of some other Tartars,
and of the Muscovites, raised a new War against their Brother, which obliged
Machmetkirey to demand Succors of Amurath, who promised to furnish him with
some Troops, but sent him none. In the mean time the Cham drove his Brothers
out of the Peninsula, without the Grand Signior's assistance, whom he suspected
to be the Contriver and Promoter of the Rebellion, concluding, that if he had
not had such a design, he would have delivered 'em up long before, or at least
would have kept 'em so secure, that they could not have made their escape.

At the some time Amurath, who was still engaged in the War with the Persians,
sent to require Muchmetkirey's Assistance, no longer as a Friend, but as a
Master, and in a haughty and imperious manner; which so enraged the Cham, that
he began to commit Hostilities against the Grand Signior, without declaring
War. He besieged the City of Caffa, and pressed it so hard in a few days, that
the Turks, who were not in a posture of defense, because they were not afraid
of being attacked by a Prince who was their Ally, had resolved to surrender it
in two days time, if they were not relieved. Then Amurath, who was extremely
alarmed at so unexpected an Expedition, sont for one Assan a Tartar, whom he
had kept a long time Prisoner, and who was said to be the Bastard-brother of
Machmetkirey. He spoke to him in a very obliging manner, and told him, that if
he would obey his Orders, he would advance him to great Honors; that the Cham
of Tartary had declared War against him without any reason; that he was a
Tyrant, and abused his Subjects so barbarously, that they were no longer able
to bear his Cruelties; and that if he would undertake to invade Crim Tartary,
he would furnish him with Money, and an Army to deliver his Countrymen from
their inhuman Oppressor. Assan, who had never dreamt of exchanging his Chains
for a Scepter, transported with Joy at the prospect of so happy a turn in his
Fortune, readily accepted Amurath's Offer: He was declared Viceroy of Tartary,
under the protection of the Grand Signior, to whom he took an Oath of Fidelity,
and to all his Successors in the Ottoman Empire; and afterward having received
the Golden Standard as a Mark of his Investiture, he departed from
Constantinople with 40 Galleys commanded by General Ochiali, and arrived in a
few days at Caffa, just as that City was going to be surrendered to
Machmetkirey.

After he had relieved Caffa, he endeavored by Presents and Promises to gain
the principal persons among the Tartars to his side, and to induce them either
to kill the Cham, or to deliver him up alive to him. He found it no difficult
Task to debauch their Fidelity; for the Grand Signior had furnished him with a
great quantity of Money; and it is the general weakness of the Oriental Nations,
that they are very easily bribed. Thus having secured a considerable number of
them, and even some of the Chain's most faithful Friends, he caused him to be
massacr'd, with his two Sons, after which he was acknowledged Cham of the
Tartars, and acquired the Esteem and Affection of his Subjects by his
extraordinary Liberality to them. 'Twas thus that the Crim Tartars, who till
then were a free People, became Vassals to their ancient Allies; and, by the
way, this may serve to show us what success may be expected from an Alliance
with the Turks.

The Tartars are naturally so barbarous and cruel, and of so haughty and
imperious a temper, that they despise all those who profess the Faith of
Christ, and look upon them as Beasts; so that when they obtain any Advantage
over them, they impose insupportable Conditions upon them. Thus the Tartars,
who inhabit along the Volga, imposed very shameful and dishonorable Conditions
upon the Muscovites, when they forced 'em to pay tribute to 'em, anno 1470.
After they had ravaged Muscovy, and subdued part of the Country, they made a
Peace with the Muscovites upon these Conditions: That the Czar or Great Duke
should pay a yearly tribute to the Tartars, which he should be obliged to send
to them on Horseback; that he should go himself on foot, with all the Lords of
his Court, to meet the person who should come to demand the said tribute, even
tho it were but a Postillion or Groom; that the Czar should, in a very
respectful manner, present him with a Pot of Mares-Milk, to drink; that if any
one drop of it should happen to be spilt upon his Horse's Mane, the Duke
himself should be obliged to lick it off with his Tongue; that he should spread
a fine Sable Furr under the Feet of him who should read the Prince of Tartary's
Letters; that he and all the Lords of Muscovy should hear them read upon their
Knees; and that they should blindly obey all his Orders, even tho he should
command them to make War against the Christians.

In the Year 1226, in the Reign of Boleslaus Pudicus, the Crim Tartars made a
terrible Irruption into Poland, overrun all the Palatinate of Lublin. and
having passed the Vistula at Zavichost, ravaged the Country, and carried away a
great Booty into Russia. After they had secured their Prey, they returned to
Poland, where they committed far greater Barbarities; and, as if the whole
Kingdom had not been sufficient to satisfy their insatiable Desire of Plunder,
they marched as far as Silesia, where the Dukes of Oppelen, Ratibor, and
Lignitz, having joined the Teutonic Knights, and the Troops of Great Poland,
resolved to attack them, but were themselves unfortunately defeated; and the
slaughter was so great, that the Barbarians carried away with 'em nine Sacks
full of Earrings, which they had cut from the Christians after the Battle.

Some time after, in the same Reign, the Tartars returned into Poland with a
great Army, accompanied by Leo and Romanus Dukes of Russia, who though they
professed the Christian Faith, scrupled not to join with its mortal Enemies.
After they had overrun the Palatinates of Lublin, Sandomir, and Cracow, they
retired into their own Country: but the Dukes of Russia being also desirous to
enrich themselves with Booty, made Incursions into Massovia and Lithuania,
where Boleslaus defeated them; and Romanus was afterward killed at Zavichost,
a small City on the Vistula, about two leagues below Sandomir. But, as if those
first Incursions which the Tartars made into Poland had only served for a Whet
to their ravenous Appetites, they returned again in the Reign of Leseus Niger,
in the year 1279, with a terrible Army, and carried away so many Slaves, that
having counted them at Vlodzimirs, a Town of Upper Volhinia, on the Frontiers
of Russia, they found that there were Twenty thousand young Women among the
Captives.

I might venture to affirm, that the Tartars have invaded Poland in the Reigns
of almost all its Kings. In that of John Albert they made an Irruption into
Volhinia, in the year 1493. And in the same Reign, being joined by the Turks,
they made such a dreadful Incursion into that miserable Country, that after
they had sacked Premislia, Jeroslaw, and several other Cities, they carried
away above One hundred thousand persons of all Ranks and Sexes into Slavery, so
that Thracia, Scythia, and almost all Asia, was filled with Polish Slaves.

The Tartars are naturally so hardy, that they swim over the Rivers in the
Winter when there is no Ice; which, without doubt, proceeds from the Mothers
washing their Infants with cold Water. They cross the great Rivers, such as the
Boristhenes, after this manner: each of them prepares several Faggots or
Bundles of Rushes or Reeds, which he ties to two Poles; upon these he lays his
Clothes, Arms, Saddle, and all that he intends to carry along with him; then he
ties this little Bridge of Fagots to his Horse's Tail, after which with one
hand he takes hold of the Horse's Main, and whips him with the other, and in
this equipage passes the River stark naked.

When the Tartars take the Field, to make Incursions, they agree beforehand,
that when they are pressed too hard by the Enemy, they shall divide into
several Parties, each of which shall retire by a different way, and that they
shall afterward rendezvous at a certain place. They take these Precautions,
that those who pursue them seeing many tracts of Horses feet, may not know
which to follow.

They are so afraid of being killed or taken Prisoners, that when they are
pressed by their enemies, they fly with such an amazing swiftness, that having
tired one of their Horses, they leap from him at a full gallop, upon the back
of another, without dismounting: and if they find that they are still hotly
pursued, they first throw away their Sabre then their Bow and their Arrows, and
at last, without alighting from their Horse, they cut the Girths, and drop the
Saddle, and by that means ease their Horses. If in their flight they meet with
a Defile or narrow passage, they gallop through it with so much precipitation and
disorder, that they ride over one-another, without minding those who command
them; no, not the Cham, who is their Prince: which is an evident sign that they
are all extremely apprehensive of being killed or taken Prisoners.

The Cham, who at present governs the Crim Tartars, is of the Family of
Gilerey, and both he and all those of his Race are clothed in Silk, the
Officers in Cloth, and the rest in Sheepskins, with the woolly sides next
their skin in the Winter, but they turn 'em outward in the Summer, or in rainy
weather. They wear no Turbans, as the Turks and Persians do, but Caps, like the
Polanders: their Arms are a Sabre, with a Bow and Arrows; every one of them
carries a Knife and an Awl, to make Whips and Straps, which serve to tie the
Slaves, whom they take in their Incursions: they are extremely afraid of
Firearms: their greatest strength consists in the swiftness of their Horses,
which are very ugly, but never tire; and each Tartar has many of them, which he
leads along with him; and they know their Masters so well, that they follow 'em
when they fly, without losing 'em, or running away from 'em.

Their usual Food is Horseflesh, which they like so well, that they prefer it
before Beef. I have seen some Tartars, who were Prisoners in Poland, eat Horses
that died of any Distemper, and even devour the Head, Feet, and Intrails. None
but the Rich eat Bread, and the rest live upon Milk, Millet, and Turkey Wheat.
They are very lazy when they are in their own Country, but are extremely
laborious and vigilant when they go abroad upon an Expedition. The Poor kill no
Horses to eat unless they be sick; and when they kill one, they give part of it
to their Neighbors: they make a sort of Pudding with the Blood of the Horse
they kill and the Meal of Turkey Wheat or Millet, which they reckon to be a
very delicious Ragou. They eat but little Salt, because they believe it to be
bad for the eyes; and since they are Mahometans, 'twould be needless to add,
that they eat no Bacon. These are some of the most remarkable Observations I
made during my abode in Crim Tartary.

The Tartars are divided into Hords or Cantons, almost like the Switzers. These
Hords are unequal in bigness, number, and strength; the greatest of them all is
that betwixt Kilia and Bialogrod, which are two Towns, one at the mouth of the
Niester, and the other at the mouth of the Danube. Next to this, the most
considerable is that of Oczacow, a City and Fort, which the Turks call
Dziarerimenda, at the mouth of the Boristhenes: the smallest of all the Hords
is that of Kipozako, which takes its Name from the River that runs by the Town.

The Cham of the Tartars never goes out of the Crim to take the Field, unless
all the Hords march with him. There are also some Mohammedan Tartars subject to
Poland, who live in Lithuania, near Vilna, where they possess Lands, and work
as the other Lithuanians do; they were established there by Vitold, Uncle to
King Vladislaus Jagellon, after he had expelled 'em out of the Lower Volhinia.
King Jagellon had also Tartars in his Army, when he routed the Teutonic Knights
in the Year 1386. After this short account of the Tartars, I proceed to take a
view of the Cossacks; and, first, of Vkrania.

CHAP. V. Of Ukrania, and the Cossacks; with an Account of the Lithuanians and
Livonians.
LOwer Volhinia and Lower Podolia are both comprehended under the name of
Vkrania, which in the Sclavonish tongue signifies a Frontier, because those
Provinces are the Frontiers of the Turks and Tartars, who are the most terrible
Enemies of Poland. This is a very large Country, containing above 300 miles
from East to West, and above 180 from North to South. Kiovia, situated on the
Boristhenes, is the capital City, and was once one of the largest Towns in
Europe; but it has been so often pillaged and harassed by the Tartars, that
there is nothing to be seen in it, at present, but ruined Houses and Cottages,
with a Fort in which the Muscovites keep Garrison. The Boristhenes, which is
one of the greatest Rivers in Europe, runs through the middle of the Country, and
receives all the other Rivers that water it.

The first Rendezvous of the Cossacks, who were originally Russian Peasants,
was in the Isles of the Boristhenes, especially that of Tamaho^ka, from whence
they spread themselves through all Vkrania, betwixt the Cities of Kiovia and
Czyrkassy. At that time they lived only by Hunting and Fishing: they are called
the Zaporovian Cossacks, because they inhabit along the Boristhenes, to
distinguish them from those who live on the Banks of the Tanais or Don, which
empties itself into the Palus Meotis.

Stephen Battori King of Poland was the first who brought the Cossacks under
Military Discipline, and appointed them the City of Trethymirow upon the
Boristhenes, about twelve leagues below Kiowia, for their place of rendezvous;
for heretofore they had no Leaders, and were so far from observing Discipline,
that they marched rather like Freebooters than Soldiers. But from that time
they began to make War against the Turks and Tartars, and gave them also
occasion to make frequent Inroads into Poland.

In the year 1614 the Cossacks made such great and successful Incursions as far
as Asia minor, that they took the City of Sinope upon the Black Sea, and struck
a Terror into Constantinople; for they are so brave a People, that in the War
betwixt Sigismund III, and Osman Emperor of the Turks, Anno 1620, four hundred
of them, who came to serve in the Polish Army, carelessly straggling at a
considerable distance from the rest of their Forces, were attacked by Osman's
whole Army, with which they fought three days, and defended themselves with
such incredible Valor, that the Turks lost a vast number of Men before they
could force 'em to submit: And after they were beaten, the Ottoman Army, which
was very formidable, designing to hinder the other Cossacks from joining the
Polanders, attacked them in their passage; but after a Fight that lasted eight
whole days, they joined the Polish Army in spite of all the Opposition of so
numerous an Army; and, in a word, they did Wonders that Campaign. But after the
Christians had gained the Battle, they threatened to leave the Army, because
they wanted Bread; whereupon Prince Vladislaus, who commanded the Army of the
King his Father, appeased them with a Promise of Fifty thousand Livres, which
so encouraged them, that they stole secretly from the Polish Army, and attacked
and took the Baggage of the Turks.

The chief reason why Osman declared War against Poland, was, because the
Polanders did not restrain the Cossacks from making Incursions into his
Dominions. It Is true, King Sigismund was so unwilling to engage in a War with
the Grand Signior, that he did all that lay in his power to oblige the Cossacks
to give over their Piracies upon the Black Sea. But as soon as they found
themselves restrained from pillaging, they turned their Arms against the
Christians, on the Frontiers of Russia, where they were totally routed by the
Duke of Ostrog; after which, under the Conduct of one Nalevaik, a man of mean
birth, but of an intrepid fierceness, they invaded the Frontiers of Russia a
second time, and marched against the Polanders, over whom they obtained some
advantage in the beginning, but at last they were routed, and their Leader
taken and carried Prisoner to Warsaw, where he was beheaded. Thus it was in the
Reign of Sigismund III, that the Cossacks began to revolt; but this Sedition
was so happily quieted, that afterward they did very considerable service in
the War against the Turks, Anno 1620, as I intimated before.

After the Peace was concluded between Poland and the Port, the Cossacks not
being able to give over their wonted Pyracies, embarked on the Black Sea, in
the year 1624, and went to the very Suburbs of Constantinople, from whence they
carried away a great booty.

The next year they entered the Crim without King Sigismund's Leave, of which
the Grand Signior complained to the Republic, as an Infraction of the Treaty
concluded with the Port: And from that time General Koniesspolski began to
restrain them from making Incursions into the Territories of the Turks.

The Cossacks not being able to endure such a Constraint, revolted a second
time in the Year 1630, at the solicitation of a Monk of Kiowia, and defeated
some of King Sigismund's troops; but General Koniecspolski surpised them near
Pereaslaw, a little City in Lower Volhiniv, upon the River Trubiecz, about
three leagues above the place where it falls into the Boristhenes, and after he
had defeated part of their Army, the rest promised to send the Authors of the
Revolt to the approaching Diet.

Vladislaus IV. being chosen King of Poland in the year 1633, resolved to
suppress the Insolence of the Cossacks; and for that purpose, in the year 1637,
built Fort Kudack upon the Boristhenes, about five leagues below the place
where the River Samara discharges it self into that River: but as a Dam that is
built cross a great River, to stop the current of its Waters, serves only to
spread 'em through the Neighborhood, so the erecting of Fort Kudack, instead of
restraining the Cossacks from making Incursions upon the Infidels, served only
to turn their Fury against the Polanders, and proved the Occasion of a new
Revolt.

King Vladislaus being informed of the disorders they committed, sent General
Potoski to reduce them, who having obliged 'em to deliver up Pauluc, who was
their Leader, with the other Officers, he sent them all to Warsaw, where Paulu^
was beheaded in the year 1638, which so enraged the Cossacks, that they took up
Arms immediately under the Command of one Demetrius Timoszevits; but they were
quickly obliged to submit, partly by Force, and partly by Promises.

In the Winter they cover their Bodies with rough Sheeps-skins, and are so
hardy, that they endure Hunger, Thirst, Wind, Rain, Heat, Cold, and all the
Injuries of the Weather with much less trouble than any other People. When they
made Incursions upon the Black Sea, they did not use Boats or Vessels, like
oath Pirates, but the large hollow trunks of a certain Tree about sixty foot
long: Into each of these trunks they put fifty Men armed, not with Bows and
Arrows like the Tartars, but with Muskets, with which they shoot so just, that
they seldom miss the Mark. When they embarked upon any Expedition, they
prohibited, under severe penalties, the taking in of any intoxicating Liquor,
lest Drunkenness should enervate them, and so render them incapable of putting
their Designs in execution.

When they encamp, they do not raise Trenches, but place their Carts round 'em;
and in the midst of this Enclosure, which they call Tabor, they defend
themselves with an incredible Obstinacy. Their Troops are divided into
Regiments of Seven or Eight thousand men each, so that they have very few
Officers, in which they differ very much from other Nations, who are generally
persuaded that the strength of an Army consists in the multitude of Officers.

One of the causes of their Revolt, was the change of Religion, which the Lords
of Poland would have introduced into Vkrania and Russia, where all the People
adhered to the Greek Church. For, the Polanders finding that they would not be
prevailed with to embrace the Romish Religion, had recourse to violent methods,
and so forced 'em to exchange their Customs, and the Grecian Ceremonies, for
those of the Church of Rome, and to receive the Reformation of the Calendar
which was made by Gregory XIII. But the Russiant not being able to endure such
an Innovation, and disdaining to bear the Yoke that was imposed on 'em, the
more they were pressed to submit to it, the more vehemently they complained
against and threatened those who would have compelled 'em to receive an
Alteration to which they had so strong and so natural an aversion. At last they
resolved to call in the Cossacks, who were all of their own Religion. This
Difference in Religion occasioned such an implacable Animosity betwixt the
Polanders and the Russians, that they could never afterward be reconciled. And
this was one of the principal causes of the Revolt of the Cossacks, and of all
the Disasters with which Poland was afterward harassed.

Such was the dismal effect of that Change of Religion, and of those Ceremonies
which the Polish Gentry would have introduced into their Territories in Russia:
they ought to have considered, that the best Innovations are frequently
attended with fatal Consequences, and their own Country might have furnished
'em with a very instructive Example of this nature. The Lutheran Doctrine was
introduced into Riga by a Sedition of the meaner sort of people, in the Year
1586, not long after the Reformation of the Calendar made by Pope Gregory XIII.
had been published there. Some persons resolving to celebrate the Feast of our
Savior's Nativity according to the ancient Calendar, the Governor of the City
imprisoned the Principal of the College, because he was the first who acted
contrary to the Decree of the Senate; which raised so great an Uproar in the
City, that the People in the nightime broke open the Prison, and pulled down
the Houses of the Curate and of the Governor: And even the disorder was so
great, that almost all the Inhabitants took up Arms against those who defended
the Roman Catholic Religion, and especially the Jesuits, whom King Stephen
Battori had settled there in the year 1582, after he had given 'em certain
Revenues and a Church which belonged to the Canons. During the heat of the
tumult, the incensed People imprisoned some of the Senators, and put some
others to death; so that being sensible of their Guilt, and despairing of
Pardon, they put themselves under the protection of other Lutherans, and never
afterward returned to their ancient Religion.

Thus it is plain, that the restraining of the Cossacks from making Incursions,
and the Change of Religion which the Lords of Poland would have introduced into
their Territories in Russia and Vkrania, were the two principal Causes of that
Peoples revolt. But there was also another reason that caused that fierce and
untractable Nation to rebel.

The Gentry of Upper Volhinia were so addicted to Tyranny and Oppression, that
they could not endure the Cossacks, because their neighborhood gave a bad
Example to all their Subjects, and disposed 'em to shake off the insupportable
Yoke of Servitude; for they thought it better to live, like the Cossacks, at
Liberty, and without Constraint, than to work and till the Ground for the use
of their Oppressors; so that the tyranny of the Gentlemen augmented the number
of the Cossacks, by forcing the Peasants to forsake their Habitations, and
retire to them.

The fourth reason that the Cossacks had to complain of the Gentry, proceeded
from the sordid Usury and insatiable Avarice of the Jews, who are very numerous
in Poland, except in the Province of Massovia. where they are only permitted to
remain when there is a Diet sitting at Warsaw. They live miserably through the
whole Kingdom, because they are oppressed and squeezed by the Gentry; they are
usually the persons who sell Aqua-Vitae and Beer, and farm the Customs of the
Lords, which they do for the most part at an excessive price; and this is the
reason why they make bad Brandy and Beer. They were first introduced into
Poland by a Duke of Kalisch, who brought them from Germany, and established
them in his and some other Cities of Lower Poland, from whence they spread
themselves throughout the whole Kingdom: they have the Privilege not to
acknowledge any Judge, but only the Palatins, whom they easily soften (not to
say corrupt) by the Presents they make them. Their Usury and Exactions upon the
People have sometimes risen to such an exorbitant height, that they have
obtained a Prohibition for any private person to brew Beer, not even for
themselves, by which means they obliged all the Inhabitants of the Kingdom to
buy it of them at what price they pleased to impose upon it.

The Son of King Vladislaus dying in the Year 1647, the Cossacks began again to
revolt, under the command of one Chemeinski, who was the first that made the
Cossacks join the Tartars, notwithstanding the mortal Enmity that was formerly
betwixt 'em by reason of the great difference of their Language, Manners, and
Religion. After they were thus united, in the Year 1648, they made a terrible
havoc in Poland. But before I proceed to relate their Barbarities, it will not
be improper to give a short Character of Chemelnski.

He understood War very well, and was once Secretary to the Army; he was also a
man of Learning, and had studied with the Jesuits at Leopold; he knew the weak
side of the Court of Poland, having been several times there in the quality of
an Envoy; he was so exasperated by the loss of an Estate which a Polish Lord
had taken from him, by a Lawsuit, that immediately he had recourse to force;
and having gathered out of the Isles of the Boristhenes a multitude of People
like himself, and corrupted the Cossacks in the Polish Army, he soon after
prevailed with the neighboring Tartars to join him, with whose assistance he
fell unexpectedly upon the Polanders who guarded the Frontiers of the Kingdom,
and afterward cut in pieces part of their Army, and sent the rest, with their
Commanders, into Slavery to Tartary. From that time he so managed the
Republic, that sometimes he suffered himself to be appeased by Promises, and
then raised a new Insurrection, according to the posture of his Affairs. It Is
true, he was sometimes beaten by the Polanders, but it is no less certain that
he always kept the Advantage over 'em, either by his own dexterity, or by the
Divisions or Neglect of the Polish Generals, who could not make a right use of
their Victories. He was often reconciled to the Republic, but never trusted in
them. He was naturally of a turbulent Spirit, keeping his Men always in Arms
against Poland, and fortifying his Interest by the Affiance of some potent
Neighbor; for 'twas his constant practice to change his Affies according to
the state of his Affairs. Thus, after the Tartars had concluded a Peace with
King John Casimir, he implored the Protection of the Duke of Muscovy; so that
Poland could hardly entertain any Hope of being able to reduce the Cossacks
during the life of so politic a General.

After the death of Vladislaus IV, May 30, 1648, John Casimir his Brother was
chosen King of Poland, Nov. 17, in the same Year. He immediately applied
himself to remedy the ill state of the Republic, and to repair the Losses it
had sustained by the Irruption which the Cossacks and Tartars had made even
into the very Heart of the Kingdom, after the Defeat at Pilaveze, Sept. 29,
1648. The greatest part of the Polish Army was composed of new-raised Soldiers
and of Militia; they were encamped near the Cossacks, end had even obtained
some Advantages over them; but those Revolters having made a great noise in the
Evening with their Drums and Trumpets, and by discharging several Volleys of
Canon round their Camp, the new-raised Polanders believed that they were
rejoicing for the arrival of the Tartars, whom they expected, which put 'em
into such a consternation, that they resolved upon a sudden flight, their
Officers not being able to stop them. The disorder was so great, and the flight
so precipitate, that the Cossacks were for a whole day of opinion, that it was
only a Feint to draw them from their Post; but at last having detached some
Troops to observe the Enemy, they understood that there was not one Soldier
left in the Polish Camp; whereupon they marched immediately, and pillaged all
the Baggage that the Polanders had left: And the Tartars arriving afterward in
their Army, they carried Terror and Desolation into the very Heart of the
Kingdom. Such was the fatal effect of a panick Fear that surpised those
new-raised and undisciplined Troops.

The Polish Army being thus totally dispersed at Pilaveze, a small City in
Upper Volhinia, about two leagues from Chmielnich, on the River Bugg, the
Tartars and Cossacks besieged Leopold with an Army of 300000 Men, and at the
first Assault took the Castle, but they met with a more than ordinary
resistance from the Town, tho it was neither strong by Nature nor Art, and
defended by a small Garrison. When these Barbarians perceived that they could
not make themselves Masters of the City, they demanded 200000 Crowns of Gold
for its ransom; and the Burghers not being able to pay so exorbitant a Sum, and
fearing the Event of a Siege, gave them 1200 Marks of uncoin'd Silver, among
which there was a great quantity of Church-plate; but they not being satisfied
with so small a sum, continued to press the City which obliged the Burghers to
give them 16000 Livres more, which they raised with extraordinary difficulty;
and besides, they gave them the holy Ornaments, Cloth, Silks, and abundance of
Furrs; for though the City wants the Convenience of a River, it is a place of
great Trade, because it is the Metropolis of all Russia. Thus the Cossacks and
Tartars raised the Siege of Leopold, October 24, 1648, after which they ravaged
the Country; and after the Tartars returned home, the Cossacks alone laid Siege
to Zamoiscia, a Town seated upon a Lake in the Palatinate of Belcz, fortified
with seven Bastions, and beautified with an Academy, which John Zamoski,
Chancellor and General of the Army of the Crown, founded there. It is famous
for the vigorous resistance it made against Chemelnski, General of the
Cossacks, who besieged it with an Army of above 60000 Men, toward the end of
the Year 1648.

The Year following King John Casimir sent Deputies to Chemelnski, to endeavor
to bring him to a sense of his Duty, and in the mean time to entreat him to
restrain the Violence of his Troops. and to hinder them from making Incursions.
But Chemelnski answered fiercely, That he would put himself under the
Protection of the Port, if the Polanders would not grant him all the Conditions
he required.

The King, who was resolved to leave no means unattempted to overcome the
Obstinacy of the Cossacks, sent other Deputies to treat with 'em concerning
Articles of Peace; they found Chemclnski at Pereaslaw, where they delivered to
him, in the King's Name, the Batoon of a General, on the 20th of February,
1649, and received his Proposals, which looked rather like absolute Commands
than Conditions of Peace; for he exclaimed with great vehemence against
Visnovieshi and Czaplinski, and declared with an infupportable Insolence, That
he would never be at quiet till he had chastised them for all the Injuries they
had done to the Cossacks. That Visnovieski must be punished, and Czaplinski put
into their hands, as the Authors of all these Disasters: That Potoski was not
free from the Crime of having persecuted the Cossacks, even into the Isles of
the Boristhenes, whither they had retired to save their Lives: That
nevertheless Potoski (who was then a Slave in the Crim) was punished
sufficiently for all his pernicious Designs: That to those three he might add
the great Standard bearer of the Crown, who had robbed him of his Inheritance,
and had quartered his Troops in the Territories of the Cossacks, where they
committed all manner of Barbarities; but that he did not impute all those
Disorders so much to him as to Visnovieski and Czaplinski: That therefore the
Punishment, as well as the Blame, ought to fall upon those two; and that if
they were not punished, he would perish, with all the Army of the Cossacks, or
Poland itself should perish, with its Senate, Generals, Lords, and all the
Nobility.

King Casimir perceiving the Design of the Cossacks, by this Answer, drew his
Forces together; and on the other hand Chemelnski called in the Tartars, who
came to his assistance with a formidable Army, and attacked a body of the
Polish Troops which was encamped at Zbaras, a small City of Lower Podolia, upon
the Frontiers of Lower Volhinia, about ten leagues from Braclaw, toward the
North, famous for the brave defense that a small number of Polanders made
against an infinite number of Cossacks and Tartars, who kept them invested for
two months, and thrice attacked their Retrenchments, without being able to
force them; for the Polanders defended themselves with so incredible a Valor,
that they gave their King time to come to their relief. The Cossacks and
Tartars hearing of their approach, marched secretly to Zborow, on the River
Bog, to meet him, where being defeated by King Casimir, and understanding that
another Party of Cossacks was routed by the Lithuanians, they concluded a Peace
with Poland, which was afterward ratified in the Diet held at Warsaw in the
same Year 1649.

After the Peace was concluded with the Cossacks at Zborow, Chemelnski their
General growing daily more powerful and insolent, assisted the Cham of Tartary
against the Circassians, without the King's Leave; and afterward having
received Succors from the Cham, he attacked the Hospodar of Moldavia, from
whom he exacted a great Ransom, with a Promise to give his Daughter in Marriage
to his Son Timothy. But not being satisfied with so considerable an Alliance,
he sent Deputies, Anno 1650, to the Port to desire some Auxiliary Forces, and
to put himself under the protection of the Turks. Thus he shook off the Yoke of
the Republic of Poland, and the Cossacks made themselves Masters of all
Vkrania; which was an extraordinary mortification to the Polish Nobility, who
had just re-enter'd upon the Estates they had lost during the Insurrection of
those Rebels.

King Casimir having lost all Hopes of reducing them by Promises or Favors,
resolved once more to have recourse to Force. In pursuance of this Resolution,
he summoned the Arrierban, in the Year 1651, and led them, with his whole Army,
into the Fields which depends upon the City of Lesinow, beyond Beretesko, a
City of the Palatinate of Luceoria, on the River Ster, about a league from the
Frontiers of Russia. In this place he found the Cossacks and Tartars joined
together, whom he attacked and fought for three days together, during which
time the Battle was very obstinate on both sides, but at last the Polish Army
obtained an entire Victory over the Cossacks and Tartars, and put Chemelnski
and the Cham, who commanded in person, to flight. This deseat obliged
Chemelnski to make a Peace with Poland, which was concluded Sept. 28. 1651, but
lasted not long; for, soon after, the Cossacks being enraged by the Insolency
of the Polish Nobility, and fearing to fall again into their ancient Bondage,
attacked the Army of the Republic, and totally routed it.

I observed, before that Chemelnski had always the Policy to enter into an
Alliance with such Princes who were best able to support him. In pursuance of
this Maxim, as soon as he understood that the Tartars had made a Peace with
Poland, not daring to rely upon his own single strength, he put himself under
the protection of the Muscovites, in the year 1654, and made a League with 'em;
which cost the Polanders the City of Smolensko, which the Muscovites took the
same year.

Chemelnski dying Anno 1658, the Cossacks chose one Vihowski for their General,
and threatened, that they would put themselves into the hands of the Turk or
the D. of Muscovy, if the Republic would not grant all that they demanded; upon
which King John Casimir considering that it would be equally disadvantageous to
his Kingdom, whether they submitted to the Duke of Muscovy or the Turks,
concluded a Peace with 'em, by which it was agreed, that all their Captains
should be Gentlemen of Poland; That Vihowski their General should be Palatin of
Kiowia; That the Bishops of the Greek Religion should be admitted to the chief
Offices; and, That the Metropolitan of Kiowia should have the rank of a
Senator. Besides, the Starostie of Lubomliana was given to Vihowski, and that
of Bobrois to Nieczaio, on condition that they should hold them as Fiefs of the
Republic. These Conditions was afterward ratified by the Diet: And by this
means the Cossack Captains, from miserable Peasants of Russia, as they were by
their Birth, were advanced to the Dignity of Polish Noblemen.

I have already observed, that the revolt of the Cossacks was partly occasioned
by the Tyranny of the Polish Gentlemen; for they were their Lords, and had
power of Life and Death over 'em, as they have still in Poland over all their
Peasants. Those of Vkrania not being able to support their Insolency, began to
revolt, and by degrees expelled all the Nobility. There were several great
Lords, who by this revolution lost above 100000 Crowns a Year, among whom was
the above mentioned Prince Visnovieski, whose Son I have seen in Poland so
poor, that he had only a yearly Pension of Six thousand Livres, which Queen
Mary Louise allowed him to subsist upon; but Fortune afterward raised him to
the Throne, upon the abdication of King Casimir; as I shall have occasion to
observe in its proper place.

That fatal Revolt of the Cossacks, which began in the Reign of Sigismund III,
augmenting by degrees under the following Kings, not only deprived many Polish
Gentlemen of their Estates, and gave the Tartars occasion to carry away above a
million of persons into Slavery, but was also the cause of the decay of the
Christian Religion throughout Vkrania: For it may be reasonably supposed that
the Turks endeavor to settle Mahometism in that Country, in imitation of all
Conquerors, who the Letter to secure the Fidelity of the people whom they
subdue, force them to receive their Religion, as the most effectual way to keep
'em in Obedience to their new Masters. And even though the Turks should not
endeavor to settle Mahometism in all their Conquests, it would at last become
the modish Religion, since it is usual for people to take the Language and
Religion of a Prince, whose Favor they are desirous to procure.

The Cossacks having under several Generals maintained a War against the
Polanders, who perpetually labored to reduce them, they were at last obliged
to call in the Turks, and to put themselves under their protection. Thus were
those Infidels admitted into Vkrania, and easily made themselves Masters of the
City of Caminiec, which they found destitute of all sorts of Provisions;
nevertheless they took it by Capitulation: But they were so far from observing
the Articles they had granted, by which the Inhabitants were to continue still
in the profession of their ancient Religion, that as soon as they were Masters
of the place, they carried away into Slavery all the people of that unhappy
City, and left no mark of its having been once inhabited by Christians, but
only the Cathedral Church, which they have also turned to a Mosque. These are
the fatal Consequences of the insupportable Tyranny of the Gentlemen of Poland,
and of their unjustifiable Cruelty to their Subjects.

But long before the Turks invaded Poland, they looked upon Vkrania as a
Country which they resolved to conquer at any rate, and which they might easily
subdue, if the Cossacks should be obliged to desire their protection. Besides,
they were willing to take hold of so favorable an Opportunity to deliver
themselves from such cruel and formidable Enemies, who had so often harassed
'em by their Pyracies on the Black Sea. They had made Peace with the Emperor,
and consequently were not obliged to keep an Army in Hungary; and after the
abdication of King John Casimir, who was a valiant Prince, the People had
chosen a peaceable King in his place: They considered also, that the Revolt of
the Cossacks gave them a free passage into a pleasant and fertile Country, such
as Vkrania certainly is, and invited 'em to make themselves Masters of
Caminiec, which is the Key of that Province.

For that City, which is the Metropolis of Upper Podolia, is fortified by
Nature, being situated on a Rock, environed by a very deep, broad, and sleep
Ditch, which is sill'd with Water by the River Smotrzy which almost quite
surrounds the City, so that it leaves only a narrow passage into it; and it is
that entry only which is fortified by Art, all the rest being sufficiently
defended by Nature. Nevertheless it must be acknowledged, that the Hills that
are beyond the Ditch being higher than the City, the Garrison in a Siege might
be very much incommoded with Artillery: But it is not such an Inconveniency as
this that can oblige a place of strength to surrender, nor will it ever be
reduced by so distant an attack; and, after all, the City of Caminiec will never
be retaken by the Polanders, unless the Port be one day reduced as low as
Poland was when the Turks took it.

In the Reign of King Michael the Polanders were so firmly persuaded of the
impossibility of reducing that place, and of the difficulty of putting an end
to the War with the Grand Signior, that they made a shameful Peace with him,
and obliged themselves to pay him a yearly Tribute. But the Diet, which was
afterward held at Warsaw, would not ratify that Peace; so that the War
between Poland and the Port was renewed with greater Vigor than before.

The two Armies of the Crown and of the Duchy advanced toward Podolia, the
one commanded by General Sobieski, and the other by General Patz, and marched
together to attack that of the Turks, which was encamped at Chotzin on the
Niester, about five leagues from Caminiec, where they fought and entirely
routed 'em. This Victory, which was very considerable, would have doubtless
restored the Affairs of Poland to a good condition, and contributed very much
to the retaking of Caminiec, if the Generals had made a right use of so
important an Advantage. But the Battle was no sooner over than they carried
home their Troops, the one into Poland, and the other into Lithuania; in which
they imitated their Predecessors Swir^zowski and Ostrogski, who after they had
obtained a memorable Victory over the Muscovites, returned home, instead of
marching to attack Smolensko, which they had lost a little before, and might
then have easily retaken.

The Error which those two Generals committed by neglecting so inviting an
opportunity to reduce Smolensko, was so unaccountable, and so directly opposite
to the Maxims of Policy, and even of common Prudence, that I cannot forbear
inserting the whole Story.

In the year 1512, Sigismund King of Poland married the Daughter of the Count
of Scepusz, which so incensed the Emperor Maximilian, that he left no means
unattempted to involve Poland either in a civil or foreign War. It was in
pursuance of this design that in a Diet of the Princes of Germany he complained
of King Sigismund's Proceedings, alleging, That he was contriving indirect
Methods to expel the Teutonic Knights out of Prussia, which they had purchased
with their Blood, and where they had extirpated Paganism, and established the
Faith of Jesus Christ. But seeing he could not prevail with the Princes to
declare War against the King of Poland, at a time when all the Christians were
ready to enter in a Confederacy against the Turks, he made a League with Basil
Duke of Muscovy, and persuaded him to declare War against the Polaenders, and
to invade Lithuania. The Muscovite, relying upon this new Alliance with the
Emperor, scrupled not to violate the Peace he had made with King Sigismund. He
raised an Army, entered Lithuania, and after he had destroyed the Country, sat
down before Smolensko, but could not take it; tho at the same time Sigismund
was in Poland, and had no Troops on foot to oppose him.

The King of Poland being informed of the Treachery of the Duke of Muscovy, who
had broke the Peace without any cause, called a Diet at Radom, in the Year
1513, to concert the Measures that were to be taken in so pressing an exigency.
The Czar on the other hand sent to demand Succors from the Emperor his Ally,
who only sent him some Engineers, who cast 300 pieces of Cannon for him. The
year following, the Duke of Muscovy having assembled an Army of 80000 Men,
marched with his 300 pieces of Cannon to besiege Smolenske, which he battered
in a very furious manner. The City was so closely blocked up, and the Avenues
so well guarded, that 500 Horse, whom the King of Poland sent to its relief,
could not get into the place. In the mean time the Garrison made so vigorous a
defense, that the Muscovites being discouraged by the obstinate resistance of
the Polanders, raised the Siege, and ravaged Lithuania a second time. After
they had sent their Booty to Muscovy, they returned to the Siege of Smolensko,
but the Garrison defended the place with so much Courage and Resolution, that
the Czar despairing of Success, resolved to raise the Siege; but Glinski a
Lithuanian Rebel persuaded him to continue it, insinuating, that he could not
without exposing himself to eternal Infamy suffer an impotent and disheartened
enemy to insult over such a formidable Army. At last the cunning Traitor, who
had engaged Basil in this enterprise, perceiving that he could not take the
City by force, resolved to try the Success of a Stratagem: To this end he
desired leave to speak with the Governor, to whom he represented, That his
Master was not in a condition to relieve him; that the Garrison could not hold
out much longer, and that unless he was resolved to bury himself in the Ruins
of the City, he ought to consult his own true Interest, and accept the vast
Recompenses which the Czar was willing to give him. Thus the Governor was
persuaded to surrender the City of Smolensko, which the Polanders had possessed
for the space of a hundred years.

As soon as King Sigismund had received at Radom the news of the loss of that
important place, he went immediately to Lithuania, in September, and assembled
all the great Lords of that Duchy at Vilna, to deliberate with them how they
might effectually oppose the Progress of their victorious enemy; 10000 Horse,
20000 Foot, and some light Horse, were raised in Lithuania, with which, and
with the Army of Poland, and the necessary Artillery, the King set out from
Vilna, with a design to attack the Muscevites. The Czar having received Advice
of the march of the Polish Army, reassembl'd his Troops, and encamped near
Smolensko, lest the King should sit down before it. After he had reinforced the
Garrison, he marched with his Army to Lithuania, and advanced to the River
Berezina, in the Palatinate of Minsk; where Sigismund arriving immediately
after, struck such a Terror into the Muscovites, that they retired to the City
of Orsza, not far from the Boristhenes.

The King of Poland having passed the River Berezina, without any opposition,
detached a body of 30000 chosen Men, whom he ordered to march toward the
enemy, while he remained at Boryssow on the River Berezina, with the rest of
the Army; where he cast up Trenches and fortified the Camp with great
diligence, that if the Muscovites should gain the Battle, the Polanders and
Lithuanians might have the advantage of retiring to a place of security; and
that he might afterward be in a condition to oppose the enemy, who even after
a Victory would have been weakened by the Battle, and harassed by the Fatigues
of so long a pursuit.

The Czar, who was at the head of an Army of 80000 Men, despised that of
Poland, which was not half so numerous, and insolently boasted, that his
Soldiers should not so much as take the pains to draw their Sabres against the
Polanders, but drive 'em all to Muscovy with Whips, like Herds of Oxen, or
Flocks of Sheep. Nor was this a mere Rhodomontade, for he actually gave Orders
to his Soldiers, that they should not draw their Sabres, but let the Polanders
pass the Baristhenes without opposition, and then whip 'em to Muscovy. But that
insolent and haughty Prince had the Mortification to be convinced by a very
fatal and unwelcome experiment, that a great Army should never despise a feeble
Enemy, and that a Conqueror may quickly ruin himself by neglecting the prudent
Maxims of a cautious Policy.

As soon as the Polish Army arrived near the City of Orsza, the Muscovites
retired about 4000 paces beyond the Boristhenes, concluding that their retreat
would embolden the Polanders to pass the River, and that afterward they might
easily defeat them, and intercept their flight. The Duke of Muscovy was then at
Smolensko, about thirteen leagues from his Army, where he employed his time in
dividing Lithuania, and sharing it among his Generals, allotting to each of
them a part of the Country on the Mapp, and considering how he should dispose
of an Army whom he looked upon already as his Prisoners. But the Polanders, who
have always the advantage over the Muscovites in the open Field, were so
incensed at the Pride and Insolency of the Duke of Muscovy, who threatened to
whip them, that they resolved to give him Battle. In pursuance of this
Resolution they divided their Army into two parts, one commanded by General
Suirczowski, and the other by General Ostrogski. The two Generals having held a
Council of War, commanded a Bridge to be laid over the River, and ordered all
the Artillery, with the Infantry, to pass the same; which being done, the
Cavalry followed 'em with an incredible bravery; the Muscovites, pursuant to
the Czar's Order, not stirring from their Posts. The two Armies being drawn up
in order of Battle, Suirczowski detached 800 Horse for a body of reserve, and
ordered them to post themselves in a Wood at the side of the Enemy's Army, and
in the heat of the Fight to sally out and attack the Muscovites with terrible
Cries, to put 'em into a consternation.

King Sigismund's Army was so disposed, that the Polish Cavalry had the right
Wing, and the Lithuanians the left, the Infantry being placed in the middle.
The Battle began about three a clock, the Polanders first attacking the
Muscovites with an undaunted Resolution: Sometimes they gained Ground of 'em,
and sometimes were repulsed by the unequal numbers of their Enemies; but
immediately they rallied, and broke through 'em afresh.

On the other hand Ostrogski, who commanded the Lithuanians, attacked the
Muscovites with an extraordinary fury, and made a great slaughter among them.
There was in the Polish Camp a little rising Ground, which contributed very
much to the gaining of the Battle, for their Artillery being planted there,
made such a dreadful havoc in the Enemy's Rear, and broke all their Ranks in
so terrible a manner, that they began to be disordered, and to take the flight;
and those who were in the middle perceiving that those who were in the rear
gave way, began also to fly, while they were still sighting in the van. During
this disorder, the 800 Horse who were posted in the Wood attacked the
Muscovites in the flank with so much Fury, that being no longer able to sustain
the shock of the Polanders, the whole Army gave ground and fled.

In this Battle 32000 Muscovites were killed, and many drowned in a Morass,
which they endeavored to pass in their flight. Some affirm, the Muscovites
lost 40000 Men; and it is certain the slaughter was so great, that the Waters of
the Boristhenes grew red with the Blood that was sned on its banks. The
Polanders took a great number of Prisoners, and among others ten Generals of
the greatest Lords of Muscovy, seventeen Palatins or Governors of Provinces,
and two thousand Gentlemen. Of the Polanders there were but 400 men killed, but
the number of the wounded was much greater. They obtained this memorable
Victory March 25. 1614.

After the gaining of such an important Battle, the loss of which would have
been infallibly attended with the total ruin not only of Lithuania, but also of
Poland, the Generals ought to have besieged the City of Smolensko, which they
might have easily retaken during the universal consternation that was spread
over Muscovy; but instead of making a right use of that advantage, they retired
without making any further attempt; and King Sigismund himself, who expected
the event at Boryssow, returned to Vilna with the Prisoners, whom he caused to
be led before him in a kind of Triumph. From thence he sent Ambassadors to all
Christian Princes, to notify the great Victory which he had obtained over the
Muscovites; and that their Eyes, as well as Ears, might convince 'em of the
Truth of that Advice, the Envoys were accompanied with fourteen Muscovites, who
were remarkable for their white Hair. But the Emperor being enraged at the loss
which his Allies had sustained, and at the unhappy event of a War, of which he
himself was the Author, surpised the Envoys of the King of Poland as they were
passing through his Territories, and took their Prisoners from 'em, whom he sent
back to the Czar, by the way of Lubec.

It is so natural to the Polanders to neglect the advantages which they obtain
over their Enemies, that after they had defeated Gustavus King of Sweden in a
memorable Battle, in which he himself was wounded, and could hardly secure his
own person, they were so far from pursuing him, that they suffered him to
retire to Stum, between Marienburg and Marienwerder, where having rallied his
scattered Forces, he renewed the War with greater Vigor than before. Nor were
they guilty of a less inexcusable blunder after the Victory they obtained in
Vkrania, June 30. 1651; for tho the Cossacks and Tartars were totally routed,
and the Cham, with Chemelnski, put to flight, the Polanders retired, as if they
had been beaten, and immediately concluded a Peace, by which they suffered the
Cossacks to keep an Army of 20000 Men in the Palatinate of Kiowia. This
Reflection is so just and important, that I cannot forbear adding another
remarkable instance of the same nature, which happened Anno 1489.

About that time Russia and Podolia were miserably harassed by the Tartars, who
infested these Provinces with continual Inroads, and always returned home with
a multitude of Slaves; at last King Casimir resolving to prevent the utter ruin
of the Country, upon advice that the Tartars were preparing to make a new
Incursion into Russia and Podolia, he sent John Albert his Son with a body of
light Horse to oppose 'em, and ordered all the Gentry of Russia and Podolia to
join him. The Tartars being divided into two bodies, the first of which
consisted of 15000 Horse, and the second of 10000, were returning home, without
fearing any danger, with a prodigious number of Slaves, according to their
usual Custom; but the young Prince with his Troops meeting the first, attacked
and totally routed them, and took from them all the Booty and Slaves they had
carried away. After this Success, he marched immediately to attack the other
body: The Officer who commanded 'em made some resistance, but was at last
killed, and the slaughter was so great, that the Polanders were weary with
cutting off so many Heads, for not one of the Tartars returned to the Crim.

This total defeat of the Tartars ought to have encouraged the Polanders to
pursue their Victory, and in their return to enter the Crim, and ravage all
they could, which they might have done the more easily, because Poland reached
at that time to the Black Sea, and because they might have surpised that
Peninsula, since there was not one Tartar that escaped to carry the News of the
defeat, or of the march of the Polanders. But instead of taking this favorable
Opportunity to invade, or at least alarm, these Barbarians, with whom they were
sensible they could never conclude a solid and durable Peace, Prince John
Albert returned to Poland in triumph, and the King his Father received him with
a great deal of Joy, instead of checking him for not pursuing his Victory; and
all the Polanders extolled his Courage and Prudence. This then is the usual
Conduct of the Polanders, after the gaining of a Battle.

I observed, that the Polanders know by experience, that they can never make a
solid peace with the Tartars, or rely upon their promises; and I could easily
prove this Remark by above a hundred examples, but I shall content my self with
mentioning two of these Instances. Sigismund King of Poland preparing to make
War with the Duke of Muscovy in the year 1516, and being desirous to secure
Podolia and Volhinia, gave a sum of Money to Mendlinges Cham of Tartary, that he
might not only oblige him to make no Irruptions into Poland, but also to make a
powerful diversion in Muscovy; which the Cham promised and swore to do: but he
had no sooner received the Money from the Polanders, than he violated his Oath;
for marching out of the Crim with 300000 Horse, instead of invading the
Muscovites, he entered into Podolia and Russia, and encamped at Luceoria, from
whence he sent four of his principal Officers, each with a great body of Horse,
keeping only the fourth part of his Army with himself, who made such a terrible
havoc through the whole Kingdom of Poland, and especially in the Palatinates of
Belcz, Leopold, and Lublin; and the Consternation of the People was so great,
that the Alarm reached to Hungary; for they pillaged, burnt, ravished Women and
Maids, and carried away all the Cattle, Men, Women, and Maids they could seize
upon, insomuch that the number of the Slaves they took amounted to above 50000
persons, without reckoning the old and the young, whom they killed, because
they could not carry them away.

In the mean time King Sigismund was in Lithuania, where having received an
account of the fatal News, and not being able to remedy the disorder at so
great a distance, he sent Deputies to Mendlinges, to complain of his Treachery
in violating his Oath; to which the Cham replied, That it was the Fault of his
Children and Nephews, and of the insolent Youth, whom he could not restrain. In
the mean time he desired to renew the Alliance he had made with King Sigismund,
and promised to turn his Arms against the Muscovites; accordingly he marched
the same Summer out of the Crim, and ravaged all Muscovy, from whence he
brought back an infinite number of Cattle and Slaves. It Is plain then that
neither the Polanders nor any other Christians ought to give credit to those
Barbarians. But the second Example which I shall relate will more plainly
demonstrate the Infidelity of those Mahometans.

Aslan being declared Cham of Tartary, and his Fidelity being suspected by the
Grand Signior, the Port on which the Tartars depend resolved to send them
Sedetker for their Prince; which Aslan being informed of by some of his
Friends, and dreading the Grand Signior's power, he sent to supplicate
Sigismund III, King of Poland, to give him leave, if the Port should declare
War against him, to retire into his Territories, about the Boristhenes, with
70000 men, praying him to be instead of a Father to him, and promising to serve
him against all his enemies: to which Sigismund replied, That he would receive
him as his Son; that he wished him all Happiness; that he was sorry that the
Port was displeased with his advancement; and that if the Turks should march
against him, he might retire with safety into the neighborhood of the
Boristhenes, where he would assist him with Provisions and Troops.

The Polanders, who guarded the Frontiers of the Kingdom, that they might
signalize themselves by some brave and important action, resolved to attack
Oczakow, which belonged to the Crim Tartars, that there might be no place left
that could incommode those who had retired along the Boristhenes; but
unfortunately, three days before the Polanders arrived at Oczakow, Aslan had
concluded a Peace with his Cousin Sedetker, and Oczakow was surrendered to him.
The Polanders having no design to offend Aslan, who they knew was their Ally,
nor knowing that the two Cousins were reconciled, met in their way 300 Tartars
belonging to the Cham Aslan, whom (believing 'em to be his enemies) they cut to
pieces, and afterward killed more of the same Nation in other places. Their
Courage being elevated with this success, they marched strait to Oczakow, and
at their first arrival before the place took 3000 Horses that were running
loose in the Fields. Aslan understanding what the Polanders had done, sent a
Messenger to Jaslowieski their Commander, to acquaint him, that since he was in
League with the King of Poland, his Brother and good Friend, and had faithfully
defended his Country from the Incursions of the other Tartars, he was extremely
surpised to hear that the Polanders had killed his Men and carried away the
Horses which he kept for the Service of their King; that he entreated him to
cause 'em to be restored to him, without obliging him to right himself by force
of Arms, to revenge the Injury he had received; nor, from a Defendor of the
Kingdom of Poland, to give him cause to become its most cruel enemy, that
however he thought fit to inform him, it was necessary he should have a private
Conference with him, to treat in a friendly manner of the wrongs and losses he
had sustained.

Jaslowieski being deeply concerned at this News, that did acquaint him with
his having offended a Prince, who was one of Poland's Allies, and also fearing
the Kings Resentments; sent word to Aslan, that he was extremely sorry, that
the Polanders had offended one of his King's Allies; that this happened thoro'
a Mistake; not knowing that the Tartars whom he met, did belong to him, and
thinking they were some of the Crim Tartars his Enemies, that he prayed him to
forgive him a Fault, of which his Ignorance was the only cause; that he was
ready to restore all the Horses that had been taken then, and gave free leave
to the Tartars to come for them when they pleased.

Aslan having received this News with a great deal of Joy, sent immediately to
fetch the Horses, and invited Jaslowieski to come to Oczakow with the men that
were to bring 'em thither, assuring him that he had nothing to fear, and that
at his Arrival they would consult together about the surest means of making a
more strong Friendship and Alliance.

Jaslowieski not being able to imagine but that Aslan was sincere and real,
went to him at Oczakow. But he was no sooner come thither, but the Tartars got
on Horseback, and surrounding the Polanders, shot their Arrows at them. The
Polanders stood a while without making any other motion, but covering
themselves with their sheilds to guard their Bodies from the Arrows. Then the
Cham perceiving the violence which was offered them, stepped between, seemingly
to hinder the Tartars from killing the Polanders: But having made a Show of not
being able to hinder it, he withdrew, and all the Polanders were slain.

It must not be imagined, that of all the Mahometans, the Tartars only are
perfidious; for the Turks are as faithless, nor ought the Christians to trust
any more to the promises of the one, than to those of the others. This is
observable from their breach of Faith to all the Towns which surrendered to them
upon Articles in Vkrania, during the years one thousand six hundred seventy
four, and one thousand six hundred seventy five: But of all the Towns which
they used ill, none received a more barbarous Treatment than the town of Human
in Lower Podolia, about five Leagues from the Fontiers of Lower Volhinia, to
the Westward. This Town was very populous, and after some Resistance
surrendered to the Turks that had beseiged it, upon Articles of Capitulation.
These Barbarians, who did not design to perform them, granted to all the people
free leave to remain and dwell in the town and enjoy their Rights and Goods:
But as soon as they were become Masters of the Place, they put into practice
all the Cruelties and Barbarities imaginable: For they ravished the Maids and
Women, murdered the old People, and young Children, and carried away into
Slavery all those that were able to walk.

Now let us go back to that which gave me Occasion to make the foregoing
Digression. I say, that the Retreat of which I spoke before, that was made by
Prince John Albert, and other polish Generals may serve to show, that the
Neighbors of Poland may make war with that state, without being in danger of
losing their Country. For the humor of the Polanders will be sure to make them
do no more, than barely defend themselves, without foreseeing that the same
Enemies who attackt 'em once, may attacht them again afterward, if the
Soldiers will give 'em leave to take breath, and recruit their Forces after
they have beaten them off. This Assertion might be made out by an infinite
number of Instances; and principally of so many Irruptions of the Tartars into
Poland, in which the Tartars have often been beaten: I Will relate one more that
happened in the year 1527.

About the beginning of the year, the Tartars marched out of their Country with
an Army of twenty six thousand Horse. They made an Irruption into Lithuania,
and came as far as Pinsk, plundering and destroying the Country, burning the
Villages, and carrying away the Inhabitants into Slavery. The Duke of Ostrog
having got a Body of men together, pursued them as they were going home with
all the Booty and Slaves which they had got in this Expedition: He came up with
them about break of day; at a time, when they did not so much as imagine they
were followed by the Polanders; and with the Polanders and Lithuanians which he
had got with him, he fell upon them of a sudden with great Fury, and made so
great a slaughter of them, that very few of them escaped. This he did with so
much the greater Ease, because he found them all dismounted; for they thought
themselves so secure that they had left their Horses Grazing in the Fields.
Thus almost all of them were cut off, except seven hundred who were taken
Prisoners. After this Exploit the Duke of Ostrog returned into Poland, and
brought back forty thousand Christians whom the Tartars had carried away into
Slavery. King Sigismund received him at Cracow with an incredible joy, and not
only commended his Courage extremely, but also his Judgment and Experience in
war. For he was indeed a great Officer; and it may be said, that the Fault
which he then committed in not entering into the Body of Crim Tartary, as well
as that of which he might be said to have been guilty before that, in not
besieging Smolensko, after he had entirely routed the Muscovites in the year
one thousand five hundred and fourteen, are not so much the particular Faults
of a General, as an Effect of the Humor of all the Polanders.

The Cossack Language is a Dialect of the Polish Tongue; it is full of
Diminutives, and pleasant Expressions. The Common people among the Cossacks are
of the Greek Church; the better sort are most of them Romans or Protestants.

The Boristhenes, which, as we have said, runs through the middle of Vkrania,
which the Cossacks inhabit, is certainly, next to the Danube, the greatest
River in Europe. It flows out of two Lakes in Russia, the one the Lake of
Wolock, thus called from the town of that Name near its Banks, and the
Monastery of the Blessed Trinity; the other is called the Nieper, and is in the
Forest of Wolock, and from the latter the Boristhenes is commonly called the
river Nieper. It is most wholesome and pleasant to drink, and in some places
waters many agreeable Meadows, and has large Fishes of a very good savor, and
without Bones. At a considerable distance below the Town of Cirkassi, it falls
between high Rocks and Precipices, which make Lithuania inaccessible on one
side, except in ten places, where some armed Cossacks always keep a Guard
either in small Islands or Rocks; whence without any difficulty they cut off
the Tartars, when they endeavor to get over with their Horses, which swim over
large rivers, like Water Spaniels; or if the Tartars, sometimes crossing the
Deserts beyond Circassi, get into Volhinia and plunder it, carrying away some
of the people of Lithuania into Slavery, then the Cossacks very often watch
them, as they go home with their Booty, and take both that and the Plunderers
away.

Some write that the Cossacks were called so, from their extraordinary
nimbleness, the word Kosa signifying a Goat in the Polish Tongue. But that Name
seems rather to have been given 'em from Cosac, a Russic Word that signifies a
Free-Booter, or plundering Soldier. The Island Cireches, called in the Polish
Tongue Zaporow, has got 'em the name of Zaporovians: Some say it was from the
Porohis (Rocks, in the Russic Tongue) of the Boristhenes that they got that
Name; there being great Rocks, about 50 leagues from the mouth of that River
that cross it over, which the Cossacks pass when they go to make Incursions
toward the Black Sea beyond the Porohis. They have in the Island their
Skarbnica Wogskowa, that is, the Magazines of their Army, and there they keep
all their Booty. Nor could the Cossacks ever be driven out of that Island,
because, as it is in a manner walled round with very large Reeds, no Galley nor
Vessel of any considerable Bulk can get thither. They want for nothing though
they never sow nor reap. Several Palatines supply 'em with money, and the
Provinces they inhabit, and which they guard, furnish 'em with Necessaries.
They are all Gentlemen, but either of very slender Fortunes, younger Brothers,
or such as have no share of the Inheritance, as the Law of the Nation orders
it. They are commonly divided into Troops of 120 when they guard the Frontiers;
besides their Servants that follow in the like number, and who alight, if their
Masters Horse is disabled. They fight covered with Sheepskins, stuffed so as to
be Lance and Javelin Proof. Their Arms are Pistols and Carbines, and
Seymitars, that hang at their Girdle fastened with a Gilt Chain. In the Fight
they always ride to and fro; as if they designed to attack the Enemy on diverse
sides, and thus rout them the more easily; the Foe not being able to know on
which side they are like to be most pressed. They use Kettle-Drums, but never
Trumpets, unless before their General, whom they choose among themselves; and
who used to take the Oath of Fidelity to the King of Poland Their Czaiki, or
hollow trunks of trees, which they use to make Incursions, are not altogether
unlike the Canoes which the Indians use. They are covered with Oxhides, with
Holes for as many men as each Canoe will carry, commonly 40 or 50; and they
fasten those Hides so to their Bodies with pieces of Leather that no water can
get in; yet they are not obstructed by them from Rowing or using their Arms.
Fifty of these often go out together, usually keeping pretty near the Shore;
and if a storm happens to arise, or they find they are not able to cope with
the Enemies Galleys, they make the best of their way to the Paludes Meoticae,
sink their Canoes, dive into the water; and draw their breath through a Reed,
which they keep so fixed to their mouth, as to let nothing but the end of it be
above the water.

There there lie hid till the danger is over; and, then having thrown the water
out of the Canoes, they fall unexpectedly upon the Galleys, and often make
themselves Masters of them. About the end of the season these Adventurers
separate, and go each to his own home, after they have appointed their
Rendezvous for the ensuing Spring near the Islands of the Boristhenes.

The Cossacks are of a good Stature, strong, dexterous, nimble, liberal, great
Lovers of their Liberty, uneasy under any Yoke, indefatigable, bold, and good
Soldiers; but great Drunkards, and very treacherous. They are much given to
Fishing and Hunting. They have this peculiar to them that none knows how to
prepare Saltpeter better than they do, and their Country used to supply
several parts of Europe with it. In Summer they are mightily pestered with
Flies, and Grasshoppers, which fly sometimes in such vast numbers that they make
a kind of Cloud, and darken the Air; for they fly in swarms that are sometimes
several miles long, and will destroy the Corn they light on, though it be green,
in less than two hours time. These insects live but six months: Rain kills 'em.
and the Northern Wind blows them into the black Sea.

The first Revolt of the Cossacks, was under their General John Fodhovia, who
was worsted, and then beheaded; this happened after King Stephen Battori's
death; for by that time they were become formidable, by reason of their native
Valor, and being brought under military Discipline. They had been allowed many
Privileges by that Great Prince, besides their Common Pay; and he had joined a
Body of Polish Horse to them, and appointed the fourth part of his Customs for
their subsistence; for which reason they are called Quartani. The vast Country
beyond the Towns of Blacklew, Bar, and Kiovia had begun to be inhabited, and
several Towns and Castles to be built by Colonies from neighboring Provinces;
and had not the change of religion, which the Polish Lords would have imposed
upon the Cossacks, occasioned the revolt, greater Improvements might have been
made; and the second which happened in the year 1596 might have been prevented.
Then the Cossacks had some Advantage over the Polish Army commanded by General
Zolskiewski, and looked upon themselves as invincible: yet that able Warrier
found means to press them so close, that he forced 'em to deliver him their
General Nolevaiko, who was served like his Predecessor. Then they revolted a
third time in 1637, as has been said, but with as ill success as before; and
the Loss of their General and chief Officers at that time was attended with the
forfeiture of their Privileges and of the town of Trethimirow, and also with
the suppression of their Souldery. After these disgraces when they were ready
to try their Fortune again, they were at last promised a re-establishment; but
this promise was not kept, for there was a new modeled Militia established,
and their General was often removed. Then the Polanders found the Inconveniency
of the change by the Incursions of the Tartars; and King Vladislaus the IV,
having a design to make war with the Turks, the Cossacks were resetled upon the
ancient Foot. But awhile after this upon some new occasions they shook off the
Yoke of Poland under Chonelensk; and since that, having sometimes partly
submitted, and at others disclaimed the Authority of the republic, their
Country is now much depopulated, and they are divided among themselves. Some
obey the Muscovites, and some the Poles, and many of them side sometimes with
the Turks, sometimes with the Poles and sometimes with the Muscovites,
according as they are successful, or offer them more advantageous Terms.

It may not be amiss to say something of the Lithuanians in particular, before
we give an Account in general of the State of Poland, of which their Country
now makes a Part.

Lithuania is for the most part very full of large Woods and Forests, as also
Ponds and Lakes: Some of them of such an extent that they seem a kind of Sea.
The Inhabitants are not less jealous of their Liberty than the Poles, taking
great care that their Rights may not be infringed by that Nation, their
Associates, on one side, and that the Muscovites their Neighbors may not
enslave them, as they have often endeavored; for though they agree with the
latter in some things, as in their drink, which is chiefly Mead and Metheglin,
as also Brandy which they drink alike to great excess; also in their way of
Ploughing and Sowing, and many other matters in point of living, yet they have
always looked upon them as an inveterate and treacherous Enemy.

The Peasants are not less miserable there, and yet more ignorant than those of
the Kingdom of Poland. They are in general used like Slaves by their Masters,
and often very barbarously by the Servants, and Attendants of the Nobility,
principally in time of War; for then they make nothing of entering their Huts,
and plundering what they can. The poor Rusticks have no admittance into their
Lord's Presence without Presents, and if it be their Fortune to have access to
them, they are commonly directed to make their complaint to the Judges, who are
sure to do them but little good, unless the Plaintifs bring them Presents to
recommend their Petitions; so that every word of the Judge in Lithuania is
money. Four days commonly, and sometimes five or six in a week, the Wretches
must work for their Lords: On Mundays they are allowed to drudge for
themselves, and as they have not time enough on other days, they frequently do
all manner of work on sundays, (for the Peasants keep no manner of Saints
Holy Days there) having that also particular to them with the Russians, that if
you ask them, why they presume to work on the Lord's day, they will answer you
with this question, whether they must not eat on the Lord's day? They are
obliged to pay a Tax three or four times a year toward defraying the charges
of guarding the Frontiers, besides several other heavy Impositions of their
Lord's devising. Their Bread is the brownest and coursest, the Wheat and Ears
of Corn being commonly ground together. They have very little Horses, which yet
are excellent for service, either in War or Husbandry: They do not plough the
Ground with Iron, but with Wood, which seems the stranger, because their soil
is generally hard and not sandy. When they go to plough, they take along with
them several pieces of Wood, which they use instead of Plough shares, and when
one is broken, they presently clap another into the Plough. A certain great
man, to ease those poor men in that hard labor, caused several Iron
Plough-shares to be fabricated; but as the following years by reason of the
badness of the weather there were no plentiful Harvests, they Peasants
positively ascribed the sterility of the Ground to those Iron Plough-shares;
insomuch that to avoid a sedition, they were permitted to use their old Way.
Their Dress is generally a course Ash-colored Habit, with a sort of Buskings
or Boots, made of the skins of Beasts after they have taken off the hair. They
have a sort of light Carts, about which they make use of no manner of
Iron-work; and as they never grease them, when many of them are driven
together, the Axel-trees make a strange uncouth sort of a Noise. In some places
in the Country, if any one of the Peasants has committed a Crime for which his
Lord thinks fit to condemn him to die, the Criminal is obliged to hang himself,
and be his own Executioner; and if he refuses, he is compelled to do it with
Threats and Blows. As it is not many hundred years since the Lithuanians became
Christians, there are some of the meaner sort still in the Country so stupidly
ignorant as to retain many things of their Ancestors Idolatrous Worship; these
keep a sort of swarthy serpents which they look upon as their tutelary
Divinities, feeding them with great Care and Respect, and attributing their ill
Fortune to their neglect of those Animals. Not long ago the Lithuanian Rusticks
used to offer sacrifices about the latter end of October to an imaginary Deity
whom they called Ziemiennick. Those of Samogitia and Russia used to do the
like. Neither were those of Livonia less idolatrous, having been taught
Christianity, not only by preaching and apostolical Admonitions, but also by
force of Arms. This gave Birth to the Order of Livonian Knights; who first
styled themselves Sword-bearing Friars, or Brothers; and these finding
themselves unable to fight the Livonians out of their ancient Belief and
Liberty, in time called in the Teutonick Knights of Prussia to their
assistance, by which means they at last prevailed. Being at last incorporated
with them by Pope Gregory IX, the Livonian Masters were obliged to pay homage
and certain Tributes to the Masters of Prussia, till the time of Albert
Marquess of Brandenburg, who about the year 1513 parted with that yearly
Tribute and Homage for a large sum of Money. Thus the Livonian Knights, by
degrees and also the several Bishops and Arch Bishops became so many
Sovereigns, till after many Wars, the whole Country of Livonia was subdued by
Sigismund Augustus King of Poland; though since it has been quitted to the
Swedes, who are now Masters of it.

CHAP. VI. Of the State of POLAND.
THe Polanders have at all times had an Inclination to War: Insomuch, that at
first they continually went armed, as if they had been just ready to engage
their Enemies; and indeed all their business was to rove about and change their
Station from time to time, more like Shepherds, than like settled Inhabitants of
any particular Place; neither were they ever in safety, for they were on one
side always ready to be attacked by the Germans, and by the Scythians on the
other: So that they had many Wars and bloody Conflicts with both those Nations.
Yet though there never was any solid Friendship between them and the Germans, at
last their way of Living, and the Care they took to keep their word to one
another, made them Accustom themselves more to them than to the Scythians.

In the beginning, the Polanders had neither Laws nor Princes to govern them,
and lived after an uncontrolled manner; but as no Nation can remain long
without Rulers, principally in time of War, they afterward used to choose among
themselves a Chief, who was commonly the most Famous person for Valor among
them, and they used to obey him as a Leader: but his Authority lasted no longer
than the War. All the People resolutely followed him, Armed with Bows, and
Arrows, Partisans and long Lances; the Women attended their Husbands,
pretending to witchcraft and the Knowledge of the future Events of Battles. The
Men never used to betake themselves to flight; and whosoever ran away was never
suffered to return to his Party: This being esteemed the greatest shame and
ignominy among them. They came in time to have Knights, which was the next
Dignity to their Chief Captain, and those were also never chosen but out of the
Bravest; after they had signalized their Valor against the Enemy. They
Worshipped the Sun, the Moon, Mars, and diverse other false Divinities, having
certain Places and Rites appropriated to pay them their Adoration. They buried
the dead in Forests, and Fields, laying high heaps of stones over their Tombs,
as may be still seen in many places in Russia; others, according to the Roman
way, used to burn the dead Bodies, and laid up the ashes in Urns: Few things
satisfied them for their Food. They had nothing which they properly called
their own, except their Bow, their Partisan, and Lance: They purchased what
ever they wanted of others by the way of Barter or Exchange. They wore course
Garments made of the skins of Wild Beasts, down to their heels; despising all
Rich Dresses, Treasures, Houses and possessions: They made an end of all
private Controversies, by the way of Arms in public.

This was their way of Living then, which is not yet altogether abolished in
some places. But in Process of Time, Princes and then Kings were brought in
among them: Yet with a more limited authority than in other Countries, and
after an Elective manner. As for Laws, King Casimir introduced the Teutonick
there, in the Year 1368. and Established a Sovereign Court of Justice, at the
Castle of Cracow, as in the middle of his Kingdom; for Poland was then of a far
greater Extent than it is now, so that the City of Cracow was, in a manner in
the middle of that Great State; whereas at this time, it may be almost called a
Frontier Town, since it is but twelve Leagues from thence to Silesia, which was
then a province of Poland, and now belongs to the Emperor of Germany, on the
account of the Kingdom of Bohemia.

The Kings used always to have a right to make the People take up arms, as
often as it was necessary; and every Man was excited to give some proofs of
Valor, because there was no other means to rise, and obtain the Right of
Nobility; neither was there any other Reward to be expected. As for those who
were not stirred up by the desire of honor and advancement, the fear of
punishment used to prevail with them; for those who did not obey the King's
Orders were either whipped with Cords, or cudgel'd into fighting, which convinced
the rest of the Necessity of taking arms with all speed.

In those days it was not the Custom to levy Military Men with Money in Poland,
for there was none at that time, in that Kingdom, where they then tilled the
Ground, barely to supply the Necessity of the Inhabitants, and had no thoughts
of exporting Corn out of the Country, nor of importing those things that serve
only for Superfluity and good Cheer.

The Soil, which is fruitful of it self, supplied every one with a sufficient
subsistence; so that the Peasants were not compelled to work hard; for if they
wrought never so little, they did enough for their Masters, and for themselves.
But as soon as the Polish Gentlemen began to exchange Corn for foreign
Merchandises, and Riches and Luxury were brought into that Kingdom, the
Military Vigor began to abate, and the Slavery of the Peasants became
intolerable.

Poland is now properly a Republic, and it is by that Name that the Polanders
call it, looking upon their King as being no more than the head of their Common
wealth. This makes them lessen the King's authority more and more, when a new
one is to be elected, still enlarging their own privileges, and taking care
that his prerogative may not grow too great: They are indeed so jealous of
their Liberty and so afraid of losing it, that they will not have any fortyfied
towns upon the Frontiers, for fear the King should put a Garrison in it, and so
should make himself absolute Master of all the Nobility by degrees. That
sentiment is so strongly rooted within their hearts that they prepossess their
Children with it betimes, making them believe that their native Freedom would
soon be lost, if ever they suffered any town to be fortyfied upon the
Frontiers. But they do not consider, that while they design to shun a great
Evil, they fall into another that is worse; since their Neighbors who are all
of them their Enemies, finding the Country open, easily invade it, and from
time to time make themselves Masters of some part of their state before the
Polanders can be in a Condition to oppose their Irruptions, as the Swedes did,
which I have already mentioned.

The Republic of Poland is composed of three Orders, the King, the Senate, and
the Nobility or Gentry. Thus all the Rites and Privileges are jointly holden by
those three Orders; insomuch that there can be no Laws made nor abrogated, no
War levied, no alliance concluded with Foreigners, no Impositions laid (...)
nor no money coined, but with the joint Consent of the whole Republic, or of
the Senators that are deputed for that end; therefore some of these are always
near the King's person, in order to preserve the Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom.

CHAP. VII. Of the KING.
THe King disposes of all the consistorial Benefices, and of many others; as
also of all the Offices and Places of profit in the Gift of the Crown; for he
cannot keep them to himself, and is obliged to bestow them upon the Gentlemen
of Poland, and not upon Foreigners, though they have never so much personal
Merit, or have done never so much service to the Republic; for the Polanders
are so jealous of Foreigners, that they cannot endure that the King should make
them any connderable Gratification: As for Instance.

In the Reign of King Stephen Batori, the Hungarians had been very serviceable
to the Republic in the War against the Muscovites. Now that brave Prince, who
had invited many of 'em into Poland, to repel that encroaching Enemy with
their Assistance, thought himself obliged to bestow some suitable Rewards upon
them; but he had no sooner done this, but that several of the Great Men of
Poland were strangely exasperated, particularly the Great General who resented
it so highly that he resigned his place upon that Account: Many others also
murmured openly against that Prince; which usage may seem the more ungenerous
and ungrateful, seeing they were so much obliged to that Warlike King, who had
atcheived braver and greater Actions for Poland, than any of his Predecessors.
Thus all that a Foreigner can pretend to in that Republic, can amount to no
more than the obtaining the Command of a Regiment of Foot, or the Grant of some
little Royal Gift. Besides, that he may be duly qualified for the possession
of it; he must first be made a Gentleman of Poland, for otherwise the King
cannot bestow any such thing upon him; however there are some little Royal
Gifts and Benefices, which a man may hold without being a Gentleman of Poland.

But in the main, it is so certain, that there is a necessity of being made a
Gentleman of Poland, to possess an Estate or Place of considerable Profit in
that Kingdom, that King Stephen Battori, whom we just now mentioned, thought
fit to procure the Indigenate, that is the right of Nobility, to two of his
Kins-men at the Sessions of the Diet which he had summoned to meet the 13 of
December 1386. For, as he had no Children, he was desirous of advancing those
of his Brother, and was persuaded that this Naturalization would enable him to
prefer them to something more considerable. But that Great Prince was prevented
by Death, in the fifty fourth year of his age, after he had reigned ten years.

One would be apt to think, that this mighty Power, which the King of Poland
has to dispose of so many places of Trust and Profit, of so many Lands by Royal
Tenure, and of so many Benefices, must need gain him the Love and Affection of
those on whom they are conserr'd, and engage them to follow the Dictates of his
Will, with a blind Obedience; for there are few Kings in Europe, that have more
favors to bestow than that Prince, neither can any other in less time make a
very rich Lord, of a poor Gentleman. But it happens quite otherwise: For, not
to speak of the Temper of the Polanders, who naturally are none of the most
grateful; they know too well that their King cannot dispose of any of those
Preferments to any others, but only to themselves, and they believe that, when
he grants them any such Places, Revenues or Benefices, he only gives 'em back
what belongs to them by their native Right; and that thus his grant is not so
much an act of Grace, as a piece of Justice. The rather, because, as I have
already said, the King neither ought nor can keep or convert any of those
Revenues to his own particular Use or Benefit; nor can he suppress any Place of
Trust or Profit in the Kingdom. Besides, the Nobility would not easily suffer
him to give the least thing to Foreigners; for that powerful Body is so jealous
of its Liberty, that it will not give the King the least Opportunity of
increasing his Prerogative and Authority, by gaining creatures that would
solely depend upon him.

The King does not succeed his Predecessor; no, not though he were his Father.
But he is freely elected by the Nobility, who meet by their Deputies in a
General Diet, which always ought to be kept near Warsaw. However, though a
King's Children have no manner of right in the Republic, yet is there always a
due regard had to them: Insomuch that it is commonly one of them upon whom the
Election falls, after the decease of his Father. But nevertheless, this is
always done with the same Ceremonies, and still observing the same rules as if
a Stranger were elected; the Polanders taking great care to preserve their
right of not choosing one of the deceased King's Family, believing that their
Happiness lies chiefly in the Power which they have to make choice of what
Prince they please.

They have not only a due regard to the Sons of their Kings, their
Consideration extends also to their Daughters, and even to their Widows, of
which I will here relate some Examples.

Lewis King of Poland and Hungary being dead the 13 of December 1382, and
having left no other Issue than two Daughters, the Republic met at Radom in
order to proceed to the Election of a New King. Part of the Senators inclined
to choose Sigismund Marquess of Brandenburg who had wedded the eldest of those
two Princesses. The other part were for Hedwige, who was the youngest and not
yet of age to be married. Thus after many Consultations it was resolved at last
in the Diet that was kept at Vielicza, that some Deputies should be sent by the
Republic to Queen Elizabeth, who was then in Hungary with the Princess Hedwige
her Daughter, to entreat her to send that Lady into Poland, and inform her that
the Senate had resolved to crown her Queen, and to elect a Prince that would be
in a condition to marry her. Queen Elizabeth who had no mind that this Princess
should marry so young, and besides that, had a Design to wed her to the Duke of
Austria, to whom she had been betrothed in King Lewis her Father's life time,
sent to acquaint the Diet which was then held at Seradia, that she would send
the Princess Hedwige into Poland at the following Easter; but that she desired
that she might return after that into Hungary to remain with her the space of
three years, till she were of age to be married.

The Senators of Poland, having received this answer, did not think fit to
proceed to the Election of a King, till the Arrival of the Princess, according
to the promise of the Queen her Mother: But finding that she had not sent her
into Poland at the time appointed, the Senate did a second time depute some of
the Nobility to let the Queen know, that though the Affairs of the Republic of
Poland were in such a condition as highly required the presence of a King, yet
they were contented to stay for the Princess till the Month of November 1383.
Now the Queen having neglected to send her Daughter Hedwige that second time,
the Polanders sent her some Deputies a third time, about the beginning of the
following year. But Queen Elizabeth having also broke her word to them that
time, the Senate being met at Radom, sent one single Deputy to acquaint her,
that it had been resolved in the Diet, not to send any more to her, and that,
if she had a mind that her daughter Hedwige should been Queen, they would still
wait for her till the 8 of May; but that, if after that time she did not
appear, the Republic would proceed according as might be thought most
advisable in the pressing necessity which they labored under for want of a
King.

The Queen having heard the Senate's final resolution, instead of sending her
Daughter Hedwige into Poland, advised her Son-in-Law Sigismund to go thither
with some Forces to govern the Republic till her Daughter Hedwige were grown
up. But as soon as the Polanders heard of Sigsmund's Approach, they raised some
men with all speed to oppose that Prince, whom they particularly hated. At the
same time they sent to let him know, that if he presumed to enter Poland, they
would declare themselves his open Enemies; this obliged him to go back, and
send to desire them to stay till the Whitsuntide following for the Princess
Hedwige's Coming. Accordingly they staid; and not only till then, but also till
the month of October after that, at which time she arrived at Cracow, where
immediately she was crowned Queen of Poland on St. Hedwige of Lignitz's Day.

I thought fit to relate this passage to de nonstrate that the Poles have no
common Regard to the royal progeny; nor do I think that any thing can
illustrate that Respect more than the patience with which they waited; and that
too at a time while they had so much need of Electing a King. For the Kingdom
was then disturbed, not only by the Duke of Masovia, who having a considerable
party in the Republic, endeavored to be made King of Poland, as being one of
the royal Family of Casimir the Great; but the Lithuanians and the Russians
also were not a little troublesome, and there were then many Roberies,
Plunderings, and strange disorders committed every where, with Impunity,
because the Kingdom was destitute of a Head.

When Hedwige had been crowned, and the Republic was studying how to get her a
proper Husband, Jagello Duke of Lithuania sent his two Brothers to her with
very considerable Presents, and at the same time offered to renounce his
idolatrous Worship, and turn Christian, as also to endeavor to make his
Subjects do the same, and to unite his Duchy to the Crown of Poland for the
future, and present the Republic with two hundred thousand Livres; all this
provided he might marry Hedwige, and be elected King of Poland. These
advantageous Proposals were hearkened to, and granted, and accordingly he was
elected King. By these means Lithuania was in time united to Poland, and from
an Hereditaty State, is become a part of an Elective Republic. Which change
some of the Kings of the race of Jagello did not altogether approve, nor can it
be said, that it was fully effected till the Extinction of that Family; for,
being unwilling to deprive their Heirs of an Hereditary Right, by submitting to
make Lithuania elective, they still delayed the Confirmation of the Convention,
alleging that the Nobility and people of Lithuania would never suffer it, lest
by such an Union they should lose their ancient degree and dignity. Things
remained in this condition while there were Princes of that Family to be
elected: At last the Lithuanians perceiving that it was extinct as to Males,
after the death of King Sigismund Augustus, and being afraid of Irruptions from
their incroaching Neighbors the Muscovites, they consented to an Union.

The Example of Stephen Batori, verifies also what we have already said of the
regard which the Poles have to the Royal Family in point of Election. For, that
Prince was chosen King of Poland only upon Condition that he should marry the
Princess Anne, Sister to Sigismund Augustus, who dyed without Issue, and was
the last of the Family of the Jagellones. I must own that there were several
Reasons which concurred to cause the Polanders to impose that Condition on
Stephen Batori; for thus they did not only express their respect to the
Jagellonian Family, but avoided the Expenses which they must otherwise have
been at, for the maintaining of two Princesses. But that which engaged them the
rather to act thus, was the Abdication of Henry of Valds King of Poland who had
refused to marry her; for that Prince having received the News of the death of
Charles IX his Brother, privately left Poland the 18 of June 1574, and returned
to France, after he had been crowned at Cracow the 24 of February, and had
remained five months with the Republic.

The Polanders therefore, believing that they would thus more strongly bind
Stephen Batori to their Interest, obliged him to marry the Princess Anne, though
she was somewhat elderly. But this proved of a very unhappy Consequence for all
the Church of Sweden: For Stephen Battori dying afterward at Iroane, on the 12
of December 1586, without leaving any Issue, the Republic still having a
regard to the Family of the Jagellones, chose Sigismund the third, the Son of
John King of Sweden and of Catharine, Sister to Sigismund Augustus, and thus
Nephew to Queen Anne, Stephen Battoris's Widow. By reason of which Election,
Sigismund being obliged to make Poland the place of his residence, left the
Government of Sweden to his Uncle the Duke of Sudermania, who afterward made
himself Master of the Kingdom where he abolished the Roman Religion, and
established the Lutheran which he publicly professed.

What I have said of the Polanders, as to their preferring the Offspring of
their Kings before others, is so true, that from the beginning of their
acknowledging a Regal State, even at a time when they were all strangers to the
Christian religion, they chose Venda to be their Queen, being the only person
that was left of the Line of Cracus their third King. Long after this, Lewis
King of Poland and Hungary having chosen for his Successor, Sigismund Marquess
of Brandenburg, who had wedded his eldest Daughter; the Republic met at Radom,
in the year 1312, and the Diet past a Constitution, whereby Sigismund was
excluded; however declaring at the same time, that there should be a due regard
had to the Princess his Wife. The Great Men of the Kingdom gave afterward
their Votes for Ziemowitz, Duke of Masovia, upon condition he would wed Hedwige
who was King Lewis's Daughter. But Queen Elizabeth her Mother would not consent
that her Daughter should marry so inconsiderable a Prince as was the Duke of
Masovia, though he was of the Royal House of Casimir the Great.

I have said, that the Polanders have not only some Consideration for all those
of the Royal Family; but that they have also a great regard to the Widows of
their Kings. It was for this reason that they obliged King John Casimir to
marry Queen Maria Aloisia the Widow of Vladislaus the fourth, his Brother, who
died without Issue. This will further appear, by the Proposal that was made to
Queen Eleonor of Austria, the Widow of King Michael, during the Diet of
Election in the year 1674. For the Poles insisted upon that Queen's marrying
the Prince of Newburg, for whom the French used their Interest; insomuch, that
on the 18 of May, four Bishops came to that Queen, and assured her, that
provided she would consent to wed that Prince, he would certainly be elected,
and that by this means the minds of all the different parties would be
reunited. But Queen Eleonor, who is the Emperors Sister, and who then did
nothing but by the Advice of Chancellor Patz and the motions of the Ministers
of the Court of Vienna, made them no other answer, but that she had some
Friends in the Diet who would take care of her Interest.

A drew Trezebsck^ Bishop of Cracow, was one of the four that were deputed on
that account to the Queen, and afterward to Chancellor Patz, who as I have
said, was her chief Councellor. But that Chancellor, who had a mind the
Election should fall on Prince Charles of Lorrain, whom the Emperor did very
earnestly recommend, made answer, That he would have no other but the Prince of
Lorraine, and not the Prince of Newburg. The event soon convinced him of his
error, and made him know, that he had taken wrong Measures, and not understood
his true Interest. For as he had governed King Michael, and still had an
absolute sway over the mind of the Queen, he might easily have governed also
the Prince of Newburgh who was young, and whom his Queen might have inclined as
she would have thought fit.

The Chancellor Batz was so positive in his Opinion, that it was a very
difficult matter to make him alter it: He was a Man of his word, and when ever
he had engaged it to any body, he was sure to keep it inviolably, his own
Intrest not being able to make him Recant. And indeed the Conference which he
had with the Prince of Newburgh's Ambassador at Belveder (whither I kept him
Company) made it plainly appear that his own Interest alone was not sufficient
to make him alter his Measures. For I understood afterward from him, that
considerable Offers had been made him, and that it had been Represented to him,
what Advantages the Election of the Prince of Newburgh would bring to all his
Family. But all this did not in the least affect him; and so that Conference
was to no purpose, neither for him nor for the Prince of Newburgh: Nay, even
his Lady, though a French-woman, of the House of Mailly, could never be brought
to side with the French Faction, though very Advantageous Offers were made to
her. She was Lady of Honor to Queen Eleonor, and had promised her to be
faithful to her, which she did Inviolably. This unshaken Fidelity in an
Austrian French-woman was such, that even the French themselves could not but
admire and esteem it, it being their Nature to Prefer that Virtue to all the
Advantages that can be proposed to them, to engage them to part with it.

France had then almost all the Princes of Europe its Enemies, but was still so
Fortunate, that Heaven would not so much as suffer her to compass those Things
which She most Earnestly desired, when in process of Time those Things might
have been Prejudicial to her Interest. Thus the Divine Providence would not
permit the Prince of Newburgh to be chosen King of Poland, though France used all
her Endeavors to make the Choice fall upon him; which if it had taken effect,
would undoubtedly have been disadvantageous to that Nation; for, that Prince
would not have failed to have proved her Enemy, as did his Father soon after,
having Married his Daughter to the Emperor.

I return now to what I have already said, that it is in the King of Poland's
Power to dispose of all the Places and Offices in the Kingdom and Duchy. Those
on whom he bestows them, ought not only to be Gentlemen of Poland, but ought
also to be possessed of some Estate in Land, in the State or Country, to which
the said Place or Office Properly belongs. So that a Gentleman whose Estate
lies all in the Kingdom of Poland, cannot have an Office in the Duchy of
Lithuania; neither can he whose Estate is altogether in the Duchy, have an
Office in the Kingdom; which Order is regularly observed, though the Polanders
and the Lithuanians are now properly but one Body, and are no more than one
People; differing but in few things as to their manner of Living. Nevertheless
in the time that I lived in Lithuania, I have observed that the Politer part of
the Lithuanians come nearer to to the French than the Polanders do in all their
ways, and particularly in their Briskness, and Gayty though Lithuania is remoter
from France than Poland.

When the King of Poland enters a City, the Magistrates ought always to bring
him the Keys; and he has power to make his own Regiment of Guards keep watch at
the Gates. The Citizens of Dantzick alone, have the privilege of Guarding
their own Gates when the King enters that City; nay, they have a Right to
hinder any Forces from entering with the King, and to go the Rounds all Night
in the Streets, as long as he stays within their Walls. But it must indeed be
Acknowledged, that Dantzic, which is one of the most Considerable Hans-Towns,
is properly a free Republic, under the Protection of Poland. Consequently it
has all the marks of an Entire Sovereignty: For it condemns to Death without
Appeal, even the Gentlemen of Poland themselves, if they happen to commit any
Crime there that deserves a Capital Punishment. It has a Mint of its own, and
Coyns its own Money, without any previous Leave or Permission obtained from the
Republic of Poland, though they Stamp the Kings Image upon it; and they are not
Obliged to take in payment the base Money of that State; however, though the
people of Dantzic may thus be reckoned a Republic and particular Sovereign
State, they are nevertheless Obliged to send to the Diet some Deputies, who
never fail to speak in the Name of the Senate of Dantzic, and who Consequently
never fail to be Interrupted by the Chancellor, who always desires them to be
Silent, forbidding them to take that Quality upon them, which yet they are sure
to take afterward in the following Diets.

Dantzic is Situated about a League from the Baltic Sea, and almost at the
mouth of the River Vistula. That City, till the Year 1170 consisted only of
some Fishermen's Cottages, but has raised it self since that time, to such a
height of Greatness, that it passes now for one of the Principal Cities of
Europe: It must indeed be owned, that it is a Fine and Stately Place, and its
Port, or Harbor very Famous; but of difficult Access, because the Vistula
divides it self into several Branches, before it discharges it self into the
Sea; and that Branch which goes to Dantzic is one of the least of them, which
is the reason that Great Ships have not Water enough to Anchor with their
Lading through that Branch into the Harbor of Dantzic: Between the Mouth of the
River and the Port, there lies a Fort which is called the Light-house, because
there is a Beacon in it where there is a Light every Night, that the Ships
which are coming into the Harbor may discover it a far off.

Dantzic is the Town of the Greatest Trade in all Prussia; most of which
Trafick consists in Corn, as does almost all the Trade of Poland: The
Dantzickers have such a privilege that none but themselves, can be allowed to
buy any Corn of the Polanders, when once it is entered in their Port, whether
vast Quantities are brought to them from all Parts by the Vistula; half the
Revenue of the Port belonged to the King of Poland since the time that King
Sigismund Augustus obliged the Dantzickers to grant him that Tribute, for their
presumption in proposing some Provoking Conditions to him, before they would
suffer his Deputies to come into their City.

Dantzic is the Capital City of all Prussia; it is about Seven Leagues from
Elbing, and Twenty Six from Thorn; it is well enough Fortified (considering the
Country) since the Irruption which the Sweedes made into Poland in the Year
1655. But there are some Grounds that overlook and command it on the West Side.

From this Town the Polanders draw what Goods they want of Foreign Growth and
Manufacture; as Cloth, Silks, Stuffs, Leather, Paper, Sugar, Oils, and all the
Spices which they use in very great quantities to Season their Fish and other
Meat: I do not speak of the Wines and Brandy, nor of the Salt which is brought
thither from France, and worth but a Crown the French Muid or Hogshead; because
as for Wine the Poles like no other but that of Hungary; as for Brandy they
make it at home with Corn; and as for Salt, their Country abounds with it.
Thus the Wines, Brandy and Salt that come from France to Dantzic serve only for
Prussia; however there are such considerable quantities of other Goods exported
from Dantzic to Poland, and so great a Return made from that Kingdom thither in
Corn, Money, and other Things, that, as it is the only Place from which they
draw all their Necessaries, and to which they Trade, it is not in the least to
be admired how that Town is come to be so Rich and Considerable.

All the Dantzickers were formerly Roman Catholics: But they Embraced the
Lutheran persuasion in the last Age, as did most of the Northern Nations. They
began to imbibe that Doctrine in the Year 1525. in the Reign of Sigismund the
first, who did not dare to oppose it, because he was afraid of engaging in a
War with the Teutonic Knights, the Truce which he had made with them being then
near expired. Sigismund Augustus having afterward received the Homage and Oath
of Fidelity to himself and the Republic from Albert Duke of Prussia, he
confirmed the people of Prussia in their Ancient Rights and Privileges, and
gave them leave to make open profession of the Lutheran Belief, according to
the Augsburg Confession.

The greatest part of the Inhabitants of Dantzic are Lutherans, and the other
part Calvinists, there being only some few Roman Catholics, and Anabaptists;
for there is an entire Liberty of Conscience, yet in such a manner, that the
whole Government is in the hands of the Lutherans; none of the other Sects
being admitted to a share. The Roman Catholics have a Church there which is a
Convent of Dominican Monks, which serves for a Parish to all those that reside
in the Town: The Jesuits have also a House in the Suburbs, where there is
likewise a Nunnery. As for the Lutherans they have that Stately Church which
was of Old enjoyed by the Roman Catholics, and which is one of the finest
Buildings that I have seen in Poland. It Is Worthy Observation, that at Dantzic,
even among the Lutherans, they acknowledge the Popes Nunicio that resides in
Poland in several Eclesiastical Cases, as for Licenses, and Dispensations to
Marry in a degree forbidden by the Canons.

I have no more to say of the City of Dantzic, but only that it disclaims the
Jurisdiction of Poland; its Inhabitants saying, that it did not submit to the
Polanders, but only to the King. To vindicate that right of Exemption the
Dantzickers took Arms in the Year 1576. and marched as far as Ditschow upon the
Vistula with some Forces which they had raised, under the Command of a certain
Officer called John of Cologn, who had before that defended Marienburg. But
they were defeated by the army of Poland; however, the King afterward forgave
them, at the Entreaty of the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg.

The King of Poland cannot send any Ambassadors to foreign Princes, nor receive
any from 'em without the Senates Consent, though it is he that is to give them
Audience. Neither can he leave the Kingdom upon any Account, let the Importance
be what it will. Sigismund III, having heard of the death of his Father John
King of Sweden, summoned a Diet at Warsaw in the month of May 1592, that the
Republic might consent to the Journey, which he intended to take into
Swedeland. And Lewis King of Hungary, who was chosen King of Poland in the year
1370, having a desire to return into Hungary, was obliged to ask consent, and
to enlarge the Privileges of the Nobility that he might obtain it.

The King of Poland has a right to judge and determine civil and criminal
Cases. The definitive Sentences in all Jurisdictions are past according to the
Majority of Votes. But in criminal Cases, the King's single Vote saves the
Offenders Life: And this, because he has a right to pardon all manner of
Criminals, by what Tribunal soever they be condemned. But it is otherwise in the
Decision of those affairs, that concern the Republic, which are handled in a
general Diet, where all the Nobility is assembled by its Deputies; for then it
is absolutely necessary to have the unanimous Consent of all those Deputies,
whose number is considerable, before any thing can be concluded and determined.
So that as often as any one Member of the Assembly will not consent, and enters
his protestation, the Diet breaks off, and all the Deputies depart; nor can the
King oblige 'em to stay, nor get another Diet to assemble till three months
after that which then broke off.

But though a King of Poland can hardly do any thing by himself, yet he may take
Cognizance of the payment of the Soldiers, regulate their number, and command
the Army. Not but that he that is great General of it still has a great
Authority over the Soldiers, as I will show hereafter.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Senate in General.
THE Senate of Poland is Composed of the Bishops, Palatines, Castellans, and
the Ten Officers of State, whose Dignity Entitles them to a place in that
Assembly: It was Instituted to Regulate, according to the Justice and Equity of
the Laws, all that is Transacted, for the Good and Security of the State. The
King Creates the Senators, and before he Advances them to that Honor, makes
them take an Oath of Fidelity to the Republic: But, after they are once
admitted into that Body, they cannot be afterward displaced. In the General
Diet they sit at the Right and Left hand of the King, according to their
Dignity, and not according to the Seniority of their Reception. It Is they, who,
with the King, Approve and Ratify all the Constitutions which the Nobility
propose to them by their Deputies. So that the Senators are, as it were,
Mediators betwixt the King and the Nobility, to preserve and defend the
Authority of the Republic. For, it is in this order that the Authority is
properly lodged, not by reason of the great Number of Persons of which it is
Composed, but by a Power they derive from the Laws, which determine their
respective Duties and Privileges.

The Senators value their Dignity so much, that they despise all the Titles of
Honor which the Emperors are wont to bestow. Thus when Sigismund King of
Poland, and his Brother Vladislaus King of Hungary went to Vienna, the Emperor
offered to confer upon the Senators, who accompanied them, the Title of Princes
of the Empire, which they refused to accept of, saying, That since they were
Gentlemen of Poland, and had Power to Treat with their King, both of Peace and
War, he did them an Injury to think, that the Title of Prince of the Empire
could either be more honorable or great than that of Senator of the Republic
of Poland.

The Senators Swear to maintain the Rights, Liberties and Privileges of the
Republic against all opposition: So that if the King should attempt to extend
his Power beyond the Laws and Liberties, which he is obliged by Oath to
preserve, the Senators may put him in mind of his Duty and Oath, without losing
that respect which is due to His Majesty. And therefore there ought always to
be Four Senators at Court, both to assist the King with their Counsel, and to
see that nothing be done contrary to their Privileges, which the Polanders
believe to be the only way to secure the Liberty of their Republic. It Is also
to be observed, that none of the Senators must go out of the Kingdom without
leave obtained of the Republic, not even for change of Air, or to drink the
Waters, etc. for the Recovery of their Health.

CHAP. IX. Of the Senate in particular, and first of the Bishops.
ALL the Bishops are Senators, and Precede the Secular Members. There are but
16 Bishoprics in the Kingdom, 3 of which are Usurped by its Enemies, viz.
those of Smolensko and Kiovia by the Muscovites, and that of Caminiec by the
Turks. Nevertheless the Dignities are still retained, and when they become
vacant, there are always a considerable number of Competitors, who solicit the
King for those Titles, that they may have a place in the Senate.

The Archbishop of Gnesna is Apostolical Legate by his Office, the first of all
the Bishops and Senators, and Primate of the Kingdom. These Privileges were
annexed to this See by the Council of Constance, whither he, who was then
Archbishop, was sent by King Vladislaus Jagellon, to assert his Right to
Prussia, against the Teutonick Knights. For that Prelate being informed, that,
during his Absence, the King had Married Elizabeth, Daughter to the Palatine of
Sandomir, Anno 1416. and caused her to be Crowned at Cracow by the Archbishop
of Leopold; and fearing lest he and his Successors should be deprived of the
Privilege of Crowning the King, prevailed with the Council to Declare and
Ordain, that the Archbishop of Gnesna should from thenceforth be Primate of the
Kingdom. And it is for this reason that an Appeal may be brought before him, not
only from the rest of the Bishops, but also from the Archbishop of Leopold.
Afterward, in the Year 1513. John Laski Archbishop of Gnesna, being sent to
Rome by King Sigismund, to assist at the Council of Lateran, obtained of Leo
the Xth, for himself, and all his Successors, the Quality of Legatus natus, of
the Holy Apostolic See.

The Authority of this Prelate is so great, that it is not lawful to draw a
Sword, or so much as to speak indecently in his presence. Besides, when the
King acts contrary to the Laws, the Archbis^^^ may Assemble the Senate and the
Nobility to oppose him; and, during an Interregnum, he has Power to Coin Money.

The Cross is carried before him when he goes to the King, or to the Diet, and
when he sits, on Almoner holds it behind his Chair. And as a farther Mark of
his Grandeur, he has a Senator and Castellan of the Kingdom for his Marshal,
who rides before his Coach, bearing his Staff upright, which he never bows but
before the King; and when the other Marshalls are absent, he has the Privilege
to carry the Staff upright before His Majesty, and to March before Him to
Church, or to the Diet.

When the Archbishop comes to the Foot of the Stairs of the King's Palace, he
stops there, till the King send the Chamberlain of the Crown, or some other of
the Principal Officers of his Court to Salute him. The Sub-Marshal attends him
at the top of the Stairs; and when he enters the Antichamber, the King comes
out of his Chamber to meet him. He never makes a Visit but to the Pope's
Nuncio, whom he only Visits once, not even to the Ambassadors of Crowned
Heads, who have visited him. It Is he, who, during the Interregnum, is the Head
and Regent of the Republic; and who regulates the Sentiments of all the
Noblemen, who are Assembled, by their Deputies, in the Diet of the Election.
It Is he who sends Circular Letters to all the Orders of the Republic, to give
them notice of the King's Death, that they may hold their Petty Diets, and to
acquaint them with the time of the General Diet. And when any extraordinary
Affair happens during the Interregnum, some Noblemen and Senators are chosen to
assist him with their Counsel in so difficult a Juncture.

The Polanders have lodged so great an Authority in the Person of this Prelate,
because they durst not entrust a Layman with it, least his Ambition should
prompt him to aspire to the Crown. For it is he who Proclaims the New King after
he is Chosen; which is so great and so considerable a Privilege, that the
Ambassadors of the Candidates look upon the Archbishop of Gnesna as the Person
on whom the success of their Negotiation depends, and leave no means
unattempted to gain his Favor, because the King cannot be duly Elected, unless
he be afterward Proclaimed. To confirm this, I shall relate what happened at
the Election of the late King John the Third, in the Year 1674. One
Czartoreski, of the Faction of Austria, an Intimate Friend of Chancellor Putz,
and consequently a great Enemy to the French Faction, and the Marshal Sobieski,
who was Chosen King, was then Archbishop of Gnesna, and in that Quality had the
Power of Proclaiming the King. He would never have been prevaild with to
Proclaim the Great Marshal; but dying Three days before the Election, the right
of Proclamation was devolved upon Trzebicki Bishop of Cracow, who being a
Friend to the Marshal Sobieski, Proclaimed him with Joy.

There are but 16 Bishoprics in Poland, as I have already observed; but they
are generally of a vast extent, and Endowed with great Revenues; which may be
easily believed, if we consider that that Kidgdom, after all its Losses, is
still as large as France.

The First is the Archbishopric of Gnesna, in Lower Poland, in the Palatinate
of Kalisch, about 9 Leagues from that City, toward the North. This place which
was once the Capital City of the Kingdom, is now only a great Unwall'd Village,
without the convenience of a River.

The Second is the Archbishopric of Leopold, which is the Metropolis of Black
Russia, and took its Name from Leo, Duke of that Province, who, as he was
Ravaging Poland with an Army of Tartars and Russians, was entirely defeated by
the Castellan of Cracow, Ann. 1279, in the Reign of Lesko the Black. This City
is seated at the foot of the Mountains, very meanly Fortified, without a River,
and defended only by an inconsiderable Castle upon an Eminence. It Is famous for
the many Sieges it has sustained, having been once Besieged by the Cossacks and
Tartars with a formidable Army; at another time by the Muscovites and the
Cossacks, with an Army of 120000 Men for the space of Two Months and a half;
after which, they were constrained to raise the Siege; and, in the last place,
by the Turks and Tartars, in the Reign of King Mi^^^el.

This City is the Seat of 3 Bishops, viz. a Latin Catholic Archbishop, an
Armenian Catholic Archbishop, and a Russian Scismatical Greek, Bishop. The
first Latin Archbishop was a Polish Gentleman, called Christinus, who was
Consecrated by the Archbishop of Gnes^a, in the presence of King Casimir, who
erected this See, Anno 1361.

I shall say nothing of the Archbishops, since they differ not from other
Catholics; only the Armenians have their particular Ornaments and Ceremonies,
and the Men are separated from the Women in the Church. But I shall take this
occasion to give a brief account of the peculiar Rites and Customs of the
Russians.

Their Bishop is always an Unmarry'd Person, because he is chosen among the
Monks of St. Basil, who are under the Vow of Chastity. As for the Curats of
their Parishes, those who are admitted to Orders after their Marriage, are not
obliged to separate from their Wives. But they cannot Marry after their
Ordination, and when their Wives die, they must for ever afterward live in
Celibacy. Their Liturgy is in the Russian Language, which, as well as the
Polish, is properly a Dialect of the Sla^ouie. They believe that the Holy Ghost
proceeds from the Father by the Son; and that the Pope is not the Head of the
whole Church, but only the first of the Two Patriarchs; and that he of
Constantinople, whose Authority they acknowledge, is the Second, and yet
Independent on the first. In all other Articles of Faith they agree with the
Catholics: But their Ceremonies and Ornaments are different from those of the
Latins and Armenians; They Pray standing, and make a great number of
Genuflexions, which they reckon with Beads. They Administer the Sacrament in
both kinds after this manner. The Priest Consecrates several little Loaves of
Leavened Bread, and after he has taken the Sacrament himself, he breaks these
Loaves into little pieces, and puts them into the Chalice with the Consecrated
Wine. Then with a little Silver Spoon, which serves only for that Use, he takes
one of those pieces, with a little Wine, out of the Chalice, and gives the
Sacrament to those who approach him, by pouring that little piece of Bread,
with the Consecrated Wine, into the Mouth of each Communicant. They Communicate
standing, holding their Arms across their Breasts, and also make their little
Children receive the Communion. After all the People have Communicated, the
Priest consumes all that is left in the Chalice.

The Third Bishopric is that of Cracow, which is the Capital City of the
Kingdom, situated upon the Vistula, in the Upper, or Little Poland. This
Bishopric was heretofore an Archbishopric, founded by Mieceslaus in the Year
964. immediately after he had embraced the Christian Faith. But that Dignity
was lost by one Lampert, who being of a Potent Family, neglected to send to
Rome for the Pallium. It Is observable, that several Prelates have held both
this Bishopric and the Archbishopric of Gnesna at the same time. The Bishop
of Cracow styles himself Duke of Siberia. All the Nobility of that Duchy are
under his Authority, and are exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Royal Coarts.

This Metropolis is composed of 3 Cities joy^^d together, viz. The Ancient
City which was built by King Cracus, Casimirie, which was built by Casimir the
Great, with a design to establish an Academy in it, and that which is between
them both, the two latter being joined by a Bridge. The Jews, who before the
Year 1494. were dispersed promiscuously throughout the whole City, since that
time are obliged to reside in Casimirie; for, upon the occasion of a Fire,
which burnt down part of the City, the Soldiers drove the Jews out of all the
Houses they possessed, and ever since they are only permitted to live in
Casimirie, from whence they come every Market Day to the Old City.

Queen Hedwige, the Wife of Vladislaus Jagellon, who was a Princess of great
Virtue and Piety, designed to have finished the Academy which King Casimir the
Great began to Erect at Cracow; and after the Death of that Queen, who left
considerable Legacies to the Poor, the King, her Husband, took care to continue
her Pious Design; in order to which he established 2 Colleges in that City, and
brought Masters thither from Prague to Instruct the Youth. These Colleges are
almost like those of Paris. There are some endowed Scholarships, and the
Students are obliged to very little Exercise. In one of these Colleges, which
is called the Academy, there is a certain number of poor Scholars, who receive
Weekly Charity to keep them from starving; which, with what they get by begging
Alms in the Streets at Night, enables them to (...) their Studies.

The (...) is the Bishopric of Cujavia and Pome^^^^. (...) is composed of the
Palatinate of (...) and (...), in the Lower or Great Poland. The Bishop's Seat
is at Wiadislow, a City on the Vistula, about Four Leagues above Thorn.

The Fifth is the Bishopric of Vilna, which is the Metropolis of the Duchy of
Lithuania, situated on the River Vilia, which falls into the Niemen below
Kowno; This City is Large and very Populous.

The Sixth is the Bishopric of Posnania, which is a City of Lower Poland, in
the Palatinate of the same Name, situated on the River Varta. There is an old
Castle upon a Rising Ground, and the Cathedral Church is without the City,
which is indifferently Large and Populous.

The Seventh is the Bishopric of Plocsko, a small City in Lower Poland,
situated on the Vistula, about Five Leagues above Wladislaw. The Bishops Seat
is at Pultausk in Massovia, situated on the River Narev, which meets with the
Bug about Two Leagues lower. The Bishop of Plocsko is Sovereign of the
Territory of Pultausk, and there is no Appeal from his Sentence, not even to
the King.

The Eighth is the Bishopric of Warmia, in Royal Prussia. The Episcopal Seat
is at Frawenherg, a small City near Frischhaff. The Bishop of Warmia is
President of Royal Prussia, and all the Nobility of his Diocese depend upon
him, and are exempted from all the Royal Jurisdictions.

The Ninth is the Bishopric of Luceoria, or Lucko, which is the Capital City
of Volhinia.

The Tenth is the Bishopric of Premislia, which is a City of Black Russia upon
the River Sana, about 6 Leagues above Jeroslaw, and 12 from Leopold, toward
the West. There are two Bishops in this City, one a Latin Catholic, and the
other a Greek Schismatic. One Orichowski, Canon of this Cathedral, was the
first, who, at the beginning of the Reformation, maintained, that 'twas lawful
for Priests to Marry, and afterward Married himself, Anno 1549. in the Reign
of Sigismund Augustus.

The Eleventh is the Bishopric of Samogitia. This Prelate has no particular
Seat, except at Midnich, which is one of the Chief Buroughs of that Province.

The Twelfth is the Bishopric of Culm, a City of Royal Prussia, situated on
the Vistula, about 6 Leagues above Thorn. This Prelate formerly preceded the
Bishop of Warmia.

The Thirteenth is the Bishopric of Chelm in Black Russia. There are Two
Bishops in this City, one a Latin Catholic, and the other a Greek Schismatic.
But the Latin Bishop removed his Seat to Kranostaw, another City in the same
Palatinat, Seated on a Great Lake, through which runs the River Vieptz, by
reason of the frequent Irruptions of the Tartars and Cossacks, who have ruined
the City of Chelm.

The Fourteenth is the Bishopric of Kiowia, the Metropolis of Volhinia, and of
all Vkrania. This City is the Seat of a Greek Schismatical Archbishop, who was
formerly Primate of all the Russians. The Inhabitants of Kiowia are
Schismatics, and now Subject to the Great Duke of Muscovy.

The Fifteenth is the Bishopric of Caminiec, which is the Capital City of
Upper Podolia: It Is now in the hands of the Insidels.

The Sixteenth is the Bishopric of Smolensko, which is situated on the
Boristhenes; the Metropolis of a Duchy, and of a Palatmate, heretofore
depending upon Lithuania, but now in possession of the Muscovites.

It Is to be observed, that most of the Bishops have, in their Diocesses, a
Suffragan, or Subordinate Bishop in Partibus Infidelium, because those who bear
the Title imagine, that they were only made Bishops that they might have a
Place in the Senate, and enjoy a sufficient Revenue to support that Dignity.
They allow a small Pension to their Substilties for the pains they take in
giving Orders, and performing all other Episcopal Functions.

CHAP. X. Of the Palatins, Castellans, and Officers of State who are Senators.
THE First Secular Senatos are 36 in Number, viz. 32 Palatins, who are properly
Governors of Provinces, 3 Castellans, and one Starosta.

The First of all the Secular Senators is the Castellan of Cracow, who was
advanced to that Dignity by King Boleslaus Crivoustus about the year 1103. This
Prince being provoked by the Insolence of Scarbimirus Palatin of Cracow, who
was perpetually endeavoring to stir up the People to Rebellion, expelled him
out of the Senate, and threw him into Prison, where he died; And that he might
leave an Eternal Mark of his Resentment to Posterity, he made an Edict, or
Constitution, by which it was Ordained, that for the future, the Castellan of
Cracow should always precede the Palatin.

The Second and Third Places belong, by Turns, to the Palatin of Cracow, and
Posnania. The Palatinat of Cracow is in Upper Poland, and that of Posnanania,
in the Lower, or Greater Poland. In this Palatinate there is a Town called
Srim, situated on the River Varta, about Four Leagues above Posnania, near
which there is a Mountain, where they dig up Pots, Pitchers, and other Earthen
Vessels, all formed by Nature, which are soft, and afterward harden in the Air.

The Fourth is the Palatin of Vilna in Lithuania.

The Fifth the Palatine of Pandomir, a City of Upper Poland, situated on the
Vistula.

The Sixth, The Castellan of Vilna.

The Seventh, The Palatin of Kalisch, a City of Great Poland.

The Eighth, The Palatin of Troki, a City of Lithuania, situated upon a Lake.

The Ninth, The Palatin of Siradia, a City of Lower Poland, situated on the
River Varta, about Six Leagues from Kalisch, and Eleven from Lencicia.

The Tenth, The Castellan of Troki.

The Eleventh, The Palatin of Lencici, a City of Lower Poland, situated upon
an Eminence, about Four Leagues Eastwards from the River Varta.

The Twelfth, The Starosta of Samogitia.

The Thirteenth, The Palatin of Breast, or Bressici, a City of Lithuania, the
Metropolis of the Province of Polesia, situated on the River Bug.

The Fourteenth, The Palatin of Kiovia, in Lower Volhinia; But this Palatinat
is only Titular, because the Muscovites have kept the possession of the Town
ever since the Cossacks put it into their hands.

The Fifteenth is the Palatin of Inowlocz, a City of Lower Poland, situated on
the River Germ, about Two Leagues below the Lake Guplo, and Five from the
Viscula.

The Sixteenth, The Palatin of Russia, so called from the Name of the whole
Province, though there are several Palatinats in it, and though he is only
Palatin of Leopold.

The Seventeenth, The Palatin of Upper Volh nia, or of Luc^oria.

The Eighteenth, The Palatin of Upper Podolia, which was farmerly a Province of
Poland. There are many Wild Oxen and Asses in this Country. It extends from
Upper Volhinia to the Niester, and from Lower Podolta to Russia. The Chief
Cities of Upper Podolta are Caminiec, situated on the River Smotrzy, and Bar,
seated on the Row, which empties it self into the Bug, about Seven Leagues
below Braclaw. But this Palatinat is at present a mere Titular Dignity, because
the Turks have been Masters of it ever since the loss of Caminiec.

The Nineteenth. The Palatine of Smolensko. This Palatinat is also Titular,
because the Muscovites have possessed it since the Year 1654.

The Twentieth. The Palatin of Lublin, a City in Upper Poland, seated on a
Brook, which falls into the River Vieprz, about Two Leagues below the Town.

The 21th. The Palatin of Losk, a City of Lithuania, seated on the River Dzwina.

The 22th. The Palatin of Belcz, a City of Black Russia, about Three Leagues
Eastward from the River Bug. In this Palatinat there is a Lake, which grows dry
once every Three years, the Waters retiring with a great Noise into the
Cavities of the neighboring Hills; But they return some time after: and it is
only during this Interval that they can take the Fish.

The 23th is the Palatin of Nowogrodeck, a City of Lithuania, about Three
Leagues from the River Niemen.

The 24th is the Palatin of Plocsko, a City of Lower Poland, situated on the
Vistula, about Three Leagues from the Duchy of Massovia.

The 25th. The Palatin of Vitepsk, a City in the Duchy of Lithuania, situated
on the River Dzwina.

The 26th is the Palatin of Massovia, which is a Province of Poland, the
Metropolis whereof is Warsaw, situated on the Vistula.

The 27th is the Palatin of Polaquia, or of Bielsk, a small City about Four
Leagues from the River Narew. In this Palatinat is the Lake Augustow, which is
Five Leagues long, and half a League broad.

The 28th is the Palatin of Rava, a City in Lower Poland.

The 29th is the Palatin of Brzesty, a City in Lower Poland, about Four Leagues
from Plocsko. In this Palatinat is the Lake Gulplo, which is very full of Fish,
and is Four Leagues long, and one broad. This Lake is the Head of the River
Germ, which runs to Inowlocz, and in the Palatinat of Kalisch changes its Name
to Netec, and afterward empties it self into the River Varta.

The 30th is the Palatin of Chelm, a City of Black Russia, about Seven Leagues
from the River Bug, toward the East. In this Palatinat there is a Lake called
Biale, which signifies White. Its Water is extremely black, and the Fish very
good. It Is said, the Water of this Lake Polisheth every thing that is washed
with it, during the Months of April and May.

The 31th is the Palatin of Mseislaw, a City in the Duchy of Lithuania,
situated on the River Sosz, which empties its self into the Borysthenes, about
Forty Leagues lower.

The 32th is the Palatin of Marienburg, a City in Royal Prussia, situated on
one of the Arms of the Vistula, which falls into the Frischaff. This City was
heretofore the Seat of the Great Master of the Knights of the Teutonic Order;
and in the Church of the Castle are still to be seen a great many Forms or
Seats which formerly belonged to those Religious Knights of St. Mary.

The 33th. The Palatin of Braclaw, a City in Lower Podolia, scated on the River
Bug. This Palatinat, which contains all the Lower Podolia, is at present only
Titular. There is a Lake in the Deserts, betwixt this Province and the
Borysihenes, the Water of which Congeals to Salt by the heat of the Sun; so
that it may be broken in pieces, and carried away in Carts like Ice: but it
Melts immediately with Rain.

The 34th is the Palatin of Pomerania, whose Palatinate is in Royal Prussia.

The 35th is the Palatin of Minsk, a City in the Duchy of Lithuania, seated on
the River Suislocz.

The 36th is the Palatin of Czernichowia, a City of Lithuania, situated on the
River Derna: This Palatinat, which is also a Duchy, is only a Titular Dignity.

Having thus given an Account of the 32 Palatines, 3 Castellans, and one
Starosta, who are Senators, it may not improperly be observed, that, though the
Quality of Castellan and Starosta is inferior to that of a Palatin, there are
Four of them who possess almost the First Ranks among the Lay-Senators. I have
already intimated the Reason why the Castellan of Cracow is the First Temporal
Senator: and as for the other Three, it is probable that this Precedence was
granted them in Recompense of some Brave Actions which the Castellans of those
Cities had performed.

The Office of a Palatin is to Lead the Troops of his Palatinate to the Army;
to Preside in the Assemblies of the Nobility in his Province; to set a Price
upon Merchandices and Commodities; to take care that the Weights and Measures
be not altered, and to Judge and Defend the Jews. He has a Vice- Palatin under
him, who must take an Oath to him, and who ought to have an Estate in Land,
which they call Possessionatus.

The Castellans are the next in Dignity to the Palatines, and there are two
sorts of them in the Kingdom, who are usually distinguished by the Titles of
Great Castellans, and Petty, or Sub- Castellans. The number of the former, both
in the Kingdom and Duchy amounts to 32, and that of the latter to 49. 'Twou'd
be equally tedious and unprofitable to give a particular account of 'em all;
and therefore I shall content my self with observing in the general, that they
are all Senators, Lieutenants, or Deputies of the Palatines and Heads of the
Nobility in their respective Jurisdictions.

In the next place I shall proceed to mention the Officers of State, who are
Senators; The First is the Great Marshal of the Kingdom; The Second, The Great
Marshal of the Duchy. The Third, The Chancellor of the Kingdom. The Fourth,
The Chancellor of the Duchy. The Fifth, The Vice Chancellor of the Kingdom.
The Sixth, The Vice Chancellor of the Duchy. The Seventh, The Treasurer of
the Kingdom. The Eighth, The Treasurer of the Duchy. The Ninth, The
Sub-Marshal, or Marshal of the Court of the Kingdom: And the Tenth, The
Sub-Marshal, or Marshal of the Court of the Duchy. These are all the Members
of the Polish SENATE. I have in another place given a sufficient Account of the
Privileges and Functions of the Officers mentioned here; and therefore I shall
conclude this Chapter with observing, that besides the Four Senators, who
ought always to attend the King, and to assist him with their Counsel in all
Deliberations and Judgments; all the other Senators who are at Court have also
the privilege to assist in such cases. And all those who are present in
Council, and Consent to the Decree, or Sentence, are obliged to Sign it, not
only in Criminal, but also in Civil Cases, that they may afterward be
accountable for their Proceedings to the Whole Body of the Republic.

CHAP. XI. Of the Order of the Nobility or Gentry.
THE Third Order of the Republic of Poland is that of the Nobility, who are
only capable of possessing all the Offices and Lands both in the Duchy and
Kingdom. For all the Peasants are Slaves, and the Burghers of Towns and Cities
are only looked upon as Tradesmen, who can possess at most but some Houses in
the Cities, and the Lands about a League round them. As for Strangers, how
Noble soever they may be in their own Country, and whatever Services they have
done in the Army, to the Republic, they can neither possess an Estate, nor
rise to any higher Preferment than the Command of a Regiment of Foot, or at
most, the Place of a Major General, which is an Office not much different from
that of a Brigadeer in France; for the Polanders will never suffer, that a
Stranger, though never so expert in War, should have the general Command of their
Army.

The Nobility, or Gentry, are the Guardians of the Laws and Liberties of the
Republic, and the Electors of their Sovereign. They bestow the Crown and
Scepter upon him, and furnish him with Ministers and Counselors: They make
their own Laws, and determine both their Duties and Privileges. They are
obliged to defend the Rights of their Country against the Encroachments of any
aspiring Prince, whose Ambition might carry his Designs beyond the limits
prescribed to him by the Laws.

Since the number of the Gentry is so great, that they cannot all assist at the
General Dyets, they choose Deputies in the Petty Dyets, whom they send to the
General Dyets, to preserve their Ancient Privileges and Constitutions, and to
contrive and Enact new Laws for their Security.

The Polish Gentry are generally persuaded, that it is their Interest to
preserve an Uninterrupted Peace with their Neighbors, that they may be able to
preserve all their Provinces: But it is plain from the Event, that they are
extremely mistaken in their Politics; for Poland lying open on all sides, and
being surrounded by so many Enemies, we may easily suppose, that every one of
them may find an opportunity to surprise some part of the Kingdom, before the
People can put themselves in a posture of Defense. All that the King can do in
such a juncture, is to summon the Nobility together, to oppose the Enemy, which
is the same with the Arriere Ban in France, and is called the Postpolite in
Poland. Upon such occasions it is to be observed, that the King must send His
Circular Letters thrice into each Palatinate to Assemble them; That none are
exempted from the Service but the Chancellor, and the Starosta's of Frontier
Places; That the Nobility of Poland are not obliged to go above Three Leagues
out of the Kingdom, That those of Lithuania and Prussia are not obliged to go
out of the Kingdom at all; That the King cannot keep the Gentry in Arms above
the space of Six weeks; and that all the Courts of Justice are shut up during
the time that the Arriere Ban is Assembled.

It is so far from being the Interest of the Republic to maintain a constant
Peace with their Neighbors, that 'twas this very Maxim which occasioned the
loss of the Third part of their Country. For in the Reign of Vladislaus the
IVth, they built Fort Kudack on the Boristhenes, to hinder the Cossacks from
Cruizing on the Black Sea, for fear of Irritating the Turks. But this False
Step, in stead of securing the Quiet of the Kingdom, engaged 'em in a War with
the Cossacks and Tartars, and even with the Turks themselves; and, at last,
made them lose all Vkrania, and the Dutchies of Smolensko and Siberia. 'Twas
their real Interest, not only to suffer the Cossacks to make perpetual
Incursions upon the Turks, but even to assist them in their Expeditions: For,
by this means, they might have kept the Cossacks, who had served 'em so well in
the War against Osman, in subjection to them; and consequently the Polanders
might have been still Masters of so many Fine Provinces which they have lost.

When all the Nobility of Poland are Assembled together, they make a very
Considerable Body, and not one of their Neighbors could resist them, if they
knew their own strength, and could submit to Regular Discipline, and to the
Command of a General. But besides, that it is the Interest of the King, never
to Assemble so great and so formidable a Body: The Polanders have also this
Privilege, that they cannot be kept together above Six Weeks. So that if during
that time the King cannot bring them to a Battle with their Enemies, they may
return home without asking his leave. And consequently, if their Enemies have
never so little Experience in the Art of War, they may safely protract the
time, or retire, till the Impetuous Torrent is over, and afterward renew the
Assault without fear, and with a certain prospect of Success.

That it is not the Interest of a King of Poland, to Assemble the Polish
Nobility in one place, may be evidently demonstrated by the following Instance;
When Sigismond II. Summoned them to appear near Leopold, to oppose the
Moldavians, they were just ready to Revolt against him; the Senators
complaining, that their Privileges had been violated, and refusing to March
against the Enemy, till they were reestablished. This Example alone, which
might be confirmed by many others, is a convincing Proof, that the Convocation
of all the Nobility is both a dangerous and ineffectual Remedy against the
Distempers of the State.

The Polish Nobility have another Privilege, which appears unjust, or at least
seems to encourage their Insolence; for a Polish Gentleman cannot be Arrested
for any Crime whatsoever, unless he be first Convicted by Justice, Nisi Jure
Victus. So that he must be first Cited to appear at the Tribunal, where he is
to be Tried; if he do not appear, he must be declared Contumacious; and if he
appears, and is Convicted, he is Arrested and Imprisoned, in order to be
afterward Indged according to the Laws and the Heinousness of his Crime; so
that it may be reasonably supposed, that he who knows himself Guilty, and fears
to be Cast, will not run the hazard of being Convicted, but will rather choose
to suffer himself to be Condemned for Contumacy, than to venture the losing of
his Head.

Nevertheless, there are some Examples, which seem to contradict this
Privilege, that a Gentleman cannot be Arrested Nisi Jure Victus, and I my self
have seen an Instance of it in the Persons of those who Assassinated
Gonczenski, the Petty General of the Army of Lithuania. The Criminals were,
without any Formality, carried Prisoners to Elbing, and afterward Condemned by
the General Diet held at Warsaw, in the Year 1654, to be Beheaded in the
Marketplace. But it must be confessed, that their Crime was so Enormous; that,
in such a case, the Nobility could not, in Justice, refuse to wave their
Privilege. For those Wretches took that Gentleman in the Nightime out of his
Bed from his Wife, at Vitna, and having put him in a Coach with a Confessor,
whom they brought along with them, they carried him out of the City, and
obliged him immediately to make his Confession, after which they Shot him dead.

The Polish Gentlemen have another Privilege, That no Soldier, or Officer of
the Army can be Quartered upon them; and any Officer who should attempt to do
it, would be Cited before the first General Diet, where he would be Condemned
to Death, or Marked with Infamy; that is, the Criminal would be declared
incapable of having a Vote, or of possessing any Office or Employment. An
Example of which I shall relate, which happened at Warsaw, May 17. 1674, in the
Diet of the Election of John the IIId. and which contributed not a little to
his Election. The Son of the Palatin of Smolensko went to Lodge in the House of
Vicznowieski, by the Order, as 'twas given out, of the Great General Patz,
Palatin of Vilna. The Marshals, who are Judges of those Enormities, Condemned
that Palatin to the Punishment prescribed be the Laws, Two days before the
Conclusion of the Diet: Thus he was deprived of a Right to Vote, which was a
very considerable Mortification to Chancellor Patz his Cousin, who placed a
great deal of Considence in him, as a declared Enemy to the Marshal Sobieski;
and all the French Party, and consequently a zealous Promoter of the Faction of
Lorrain and Austria.

The Constitution that secures the Polish Gentry from being Arrested till they
be Legally Convicted, is certainly a Grievance to the Nation, and seems to
subvert the Common Maxims of Justice: but they have another Privilege that is
equally destructive of Civil Society, and inconsistent with the Principles of
the Christian Religion. For every Gentleman in Poland, is by Law, the Absolute
and Despotic Master of the Peasants that live in his Territories, and may put
'em to Death when he pleases. When a Stranger is surpised at such a Heathenish
Custom, and takes the Liberty to Ask 'em, How Christians can assume a Privilege
so contrary to the Spirit of their Religion? And how the Law, which is a Gift
of God, can establish a (...) so opposite to the Laws of God himself? They
usually Reply, That though they have such a Power, they never make use of it, no
more than we and other Christians use the power we have to kill our Horses:
Adding, That the Peasants serve 'em in stead of Beasts. But besides that the
Comparison is not very Human, and much less Christian; it happens sometimes
that the Gentlemen kill their Peasants, either when they are Drunk, or
Irritated by some Brutal Passion, to which young Men are oftentimes subject.
For the Wives and Daughters of these miserable Wretches are Forced, and Carried
away, without daring to resist their Insolent Ravishers; and this is so common
among the Persants, that few of 'em scruple to choose a Bride that has lost her
Virginity.

CHAP. XII. Of the Officers who are not Senators.
I Must, in the next place, give an Account of those Officers, who have not a
place in the Senate. Of these there are Three sorts, viz. Some are Officers of
the whole Kingdom, and of the whole Duchy; some of the Court; and others of
Palatinats and Starosties. There is a Great Secretary of the Kingdom, and
another of the Duchy; who both have a Privilege to enter into the
Privy-Councils, and to know all that the Chancellours and Vice-Chancellours do
in the Chancery. So that the Office of Great Secretary, is, as it were, a step,
by which they may rise to that of Chancellor; and both those Officers must be
Ecclesiastics.

Next to the Great Secretaries are the Referendaries of the Crown and Duchy;
there are Two of them in each State, one a Layman, and the other an
Ecclesiastic. They present Petitions to the King, and return His Majesty's
Answer: And though they are not Members of the Senate, they have a Privilege to
sit by the Senators in Judgments of Processes upon Information, to give their
Advice, and afterward to Pronounce the Sentence that is given. It Is to be
observed, that all the Judges, and Officers of Justice, all the Advocates,
Proctors, Registers and Notaries, wear a Sabre, or Scimitar by their side, and
do not lay it aside, either when they Judge, or Plead a Cause, and that they
have no other Garb than what they usually wear.

There are Four General Officers of the Army in Poland, 2 for the Crown, and 2
for Lithuania, viz. A Great General, and a Petty, or Lieutenant General. Those
Generals of the Army have no Place in the Senate, unless they be Palatines, or
Castellans; or be possessed of some of those Offices which Entitle 'em to a Place
in the Senate. The Great General Commands the Whole Army, and has Power to
Quarter the Troops where he pleases, the King himself not being able to hinder
him: And this Power is so considerable, that it makes a Great General
formidable to all the Nobility.

His Office is to take care that the Soldiers which are Levied for the Service
of the Republic, commit no Disorders; that the Members of the Diets may not be
over-awed by the Army. He Helds the Army, Orders its Encampments, puts it in
Battalia, and gives the Signal of Battle, and of Retreat; he takes care of the
Convoys and Ammunitions, sets a Price on every thing that is Sold in the Army,
Regulates the Weights and Measures, and Punishes Offenders. The Office of the
Petty General is to take Care of those who are appointed for Guards, and of the
Parties that are sent out to discover the Enemy. He Commands the Foreign
Troops, and even the Whole Army in the absence of the General, and succeeds him
in course upon the occasion of a Vacancy.

There are many other Offices in the Army, the most considerable of which, is
that of the Great Standard Bearer; and the next, that of Great Master of the
Artillery. As for the Offices of the Court, the most Considerable are those of
the Great Chamberlain, Great Master of the Horse, and the Steward, or Master of
the Household. Besides all those Offices, there are others in the Palatinats, as
Chamberlains, Masters of the Household, and many others: for the Provinces of
Poland were formerly divided among several Princes, each of whom had their
particular Officers; and though those Provinces have been long since Reunited to
the Crown, yet the Officers still conti^^e, and enjoy certain Honorary
Privileges, the chief of which is, that they serve the King in their
Palatinates when the Officers of the Court are absent.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Interregnum.
AN Interregnum may happen Four several ways; by the Death of the Prince, by
His voluntary and Public Abdication, by His Forced and Iavo^^ntary, Deposition,
or by His Flight (...) Going out of the Kingdom; but the most usual is, by the
Death of the King; whose Body is immediately laid upon a Bed of State, and some
Senators, both Ecclesiastic and Secular, are chosen to attend him. In the mean
time the Republic Orders all the Necessary Expenses for the Ceremony to be
taken out of the Treasures left by the Deceased King.

The same Honors are also given to the Queens after their Decease, as I had
occasion to observe at the Death of Queen Mary Louise, who died at Warsaw, May
10. 1667. in the Palace which King John Casimir, her Husband, had in the
Suburbs. The next day She was carried to the Castle, where She was exposed on a
Bed of State, till She was removed to Cracow to be Interred. She Died about the
end of a Diet, and almost suddenly, of a Defluxion upon Her Lungs, occasioned
by a too long, and earnest Dispute with General Patz, about an Affair She had
proposed to him, which he would not consent to. For that Princess was so fond
of Intriguing, and so desirous to Govern the State alone, that She was, in a
manner, Jealous of the King her Husband, who durst not speak to any Woman in
private, least she should imagine that he was Governed by another. This
troublesome Constraint made him so uneasy, that he was not much afflicted at
Her Death; for, the same Night he returned from the Diet to the Palace, to see
a Person whom He had Loved before, but durst never entertain during the Queens
Life.

The Interregnum may also happen by a Voluntary Abdication, when a King freely
Resigns the Crown into the Hands of the Republic: But, it is very rare to see a
King Descend Voluntarily from the Throne, and few will imitate the Example of
King John Casimir, who, after he had Reigned Twenty years, with the Love of all
the Nobility, made a Public Resignation in St. John's Church at Warsaw,
September. 16. 1668. Notwithstanding the Earnest Solicitations of the Whole
Senate, and of all the Nobility to make Him alter His Resolution, and the Tears
that were shed by all the People, at the Sight of so Dismal a Revolution. For
he was so Universally Beloved by the Nobility and Senate, that they voluntarily
Assigned Him a Yearly Pension of 50000 Crowns, as a Testimony of their
Acknowledgment toward a Prince who had Governed them so well. Nevertheless
that Pension was never Paid, tho it was afterward Inserted in the Pacta
Conventa, which King Michael Swore to observe after His Election. The Abdicated
King went to France, where he died at Nevers, December 16. 1672. I cannot, on
this occasion, forbear taking notice of an odd Circumstance in the Fate of that
Prince and His Queen: for the latter quitted France and went to Poland, where
She died in Her Husband's City: and the former left Foland, and went to France,
where he died in His Wive's City.

Innovation are always dangerous to a State, and threaten it with some Fatal
Revolution; which the Polanders considering, endeavored to prevent the
consequences of so unusual an Action, causing an Article to be Inserted into
the Pacta Conventa, which they made King Michael Swear to observe, That never
any King should be suffered to Abdicate for the future; but that Article was
left out in the Pacta which King John the IIId Swore after his Election, in the
Church of St. John at Warsaw, June 5. 1674.

An Interregnum may be also occasioned, by the Deposing of a Prince, either for
Heresy, or some other Notorious Crime, as in the Case of Locticus, who was
Deposed for his excessive Debauchery, and Succeeded by Wenceslaus King of
Bobemia, was chosen King of Poland in the Year 1300. But those Instances are
very rare, as well as the Examples of a Prince's Flying from His Kingdom, like
Henry II. King of Poland, and III. of France; who, having received Advice of
the Death of Charles the IXth His Brother, by a Courier that was dispatched to
Him by the Queen His Mother, secretly departed from Cracow, after he had
enjoyed the Crown of Poland Five Months, with the Love of all the Nobility; who
were so troubled at His Flight, and the loss of so good a Prince, that they
Wrote on the 12th of May, 1574. a very Pressing and Respectful Letter to
persuade Him to Return.

The Polanders look upon the Interregnums as the most Favorable Occasions to
confider of the Surest and Most Effectual Ways to Preserve their Liberties: and
though the Royal Authority is then properly Lodged in the Senate, it is in some
measure Represented by the Archbishop of Gnesna, as Primate of the Kingdom, and
the First of all the Senators, as I intimated before.

During the Interregnum, some of the Senators and Noblemen are sent to the
Generals of the Army, to stay with them, and to assist them with their Advice
in Matters relating to the War. Some Senators are also Deputed to the Castle
of Cracow, to Visit the Treasury of the Crown; and to make an Inventary of it
with those that have the Keys, which they present at the next Coronation.
Commissioners are also appointed to enquire into the State of the Revenue that
is set apart for the King's Table, and to give an Account of it to the
Republic.

During the Interregnum, and till the New King be Proclaimed, the Republic
pretends that all Sovereign Princes, and even Crowned Heads themselves, are
obliged to give them the Title of Most Serene. But when the King of France
Writes to the Republic Assembled in a Diet of Election, he makes no mention of
Serenity, and only Writes in these Terms. To our most Dear and Great Friends,
Allies and Confederates, the States of the Kingdom of Foland, and Great Duchy
of Lithuania. Nor is it reasonable that a King of France should give the
Republic of Poland the Title of Most Serene, since they do not give their own
King, either the Title of Most Serene, or of Majesty.

I shall only observe further on this Subject, that as soon as the Archbishop
of Gnesna has Notify'd, by his Circular Letters, that the King is Dead, all the
Courts of Justice are shut up, and are not opened again till after the
Coronation of the New Elected King, except the Marshal's Court, which continues
open; and another, which is established for deciding Controversies that may
happen during the Diet of the Election. But as for all other Causes, and
private Lawsuits, they are not Tried till after the King's Coronation.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Election of a King.
SINCE the Kingdom of Poland is Elective, all Christian Princes may Pretend to
the Succession, and send Ambassadors thither, whether they be Catholics or
not. But those who Aspire to that Crown, must either profess the Roman
Catholic Faith, or resolve to Embrace it after their Election, for otherwise
he cannot be Chosen: and it is only for this Reason that the Pope sends a Nuncio
to the Diet of Election, that he may represent to the Republic, that it is the
Interest of the Whole Church, that they should Choose a Catholic Prince who is
a zealous Assertor of the True Faith of Christ.

The Polanders usually Choose a Foreign Prince for their King, because they
cannot, without Reluctance, submit to those who were formerly their Equals.
They esteem it their happiness that they have the Liberty to Choose such a
Prince as they please; But it is certain, that their Liberty is frequently the
Cause of Fatal Divisions. They will not Choose a Prince who is King of another
Realm, least after his Election, and after he has remained for some time among
'em, he should leave them to Return to his own Country. 'Twas for this Reason,
that after the Death of Casimir III, they would not Choose Vladislaus his Son,
because he was King of Hungary and Robemia; and this was also one of the
Reasons, which, in a Diet held at Radom, in the Year 1382, made the Republic
Exclude Sigismund of Luxemburg, Marquess of Brandenburg, who pretended to the
Crowns of Poland and Hungary, as having Married the Eldest Daughter of Lewis
King of those Two Kingdoms.

Before the Ambassadors come to Warsaw, they are to Notify their Arrival to
the Archbishop of Gnesna, who appoints Lodgings for 'em at some distance from
the City, and sends a Polish Gentleman to each of 'em, to observe their
Actions, and to hinder them from making Parties: But those Rules are seldom put
in Execution; for the Ambassadors of Princes live openly at Warsaw; it is true,
there is a Polish Gentleman appointed to attend every one of 'em during the
Diet, that the Republic may be informed of their Proceedings, and that they
may not have an opportunity to Bribe, or Corrupt the Deputies. But this is an
Inconveniency that cannot be avoided by all these Precations; for the desire of
Money is so reigning a Vice in Poland, and attended with so little Scandal and
Infamy, that the Fidelity which a Polish Gentleman owes to his Country, would
not be Proof against 1000 Crowns.

It Is the Interest of the Ambassadors to Manage all the Senators, and the
whole Order of the Nobility, since the disobliging of one of them may render
'em incapable of Compassing their Designs. Thus the Quarrelling with
Chancellor Patz in the Diet of the Election, Anno 1668. was the true reason
why the Duke of Newburg was Excluded, and Michael Vicznowieski was Elected
King. In the mean time it must be acknowledged, that the Election was
Tumultuary; that the Nobility had not a Free Vote; and that they were in a
manner hurried away by the Violence of the Multitude, which was so great, that
Prasmowski Archbishop of Gnesna, was forced to Proclaim Him, which he was
unwilling to do, because he was sensible of the Dangers that threatened the
Republic in that Juncture, and of the great need they had of a Rich and
Valiant Prince. At the same time he knew, that King Michael wanted both those
Qualities; For he was so poor, that during the Life of Queen Mary Louise, he
had nothing to subsist upon, as I intimated before, but a Pension which She
allowed him of 6000 Livres a Year. And as for his Courage, it may be guessed at
by what happened immediately after his Election, when he durst not resent the
Affront he received from the Marquess of Brandenburg; who, without asking his
Permission, caused a Prussian Gentleman, who had fled to Poland for Protection,
to be seized and carryd away before the King's eyes, and almost under the
Windows of His Palace.

It Is plain then, that the Polanders ought to have Chosen a Prince that was
equally Brave and Rich, and able to Support their Tottering State. For if they
had considered their true Interest, in the choice of a Sovereign, the Turks
would never have had the boldness to Attack Poland, as they did in the Reign of
King Michael, where they entered Vkrania with a Powerful Army, and easily made
themselves Masters of Caminieck, which the Polanders could never retake since.

But as Poland could not choose a poorer, so they could not have Chosen a more
liberal Prince than King Michael. And as he was wholly destitute of the means
to display that Noble and Princely Quality, so Providence ordered, that as soon
as he was Proclaimed King, he found himself Master of richer Furniture, and a
greater quantity of Plate than any of the Kings His Predecessors had ever
enjoyed. For all the Senators and Gentlemen, who were able to make any
considerable Presents, strove, with a kind of Emulation, to express their
Affection to their New Sovereign; so that on the Day of his Election, he was so
amazed at such a sudden and unexpected Alteration, that he could hardly forbear
looking upon it as a Golden Dream.

He was no sooner Proclaimed, but the Chancellor began to Insinuate, that He
owed his Crown to him; nor was it a difficult task to Impose upon a Prince, who
was easily Governed, and had more good Nature than Judgment.

Thus the Chancellor had the pleasure to see that his Power was as great as his
Ambition, but that satisfaction was sufficiently moderated by the Troubles and
Divisions that happened under his Ministry; for having persuaded the King,
without the consent of the Republic, to Marry the Emperor's Sister, by whom he
had no Children. There was such a considerable Party formed against that
Prince, that he was in perpetual danger of being Dethroned, and reduced in a
Cloister, to greater Miseries, than that which he suffered before his Election.
And, to heighten His Asslictions, he perceived that Queen Eleanor his Wife was
engaged in the Party that would have obliged him to Resign His Crown, that she
might Marry a handsome and brave Prince, whose Picture she had seen, and who,
without doubt, had been King of Poland, if Death, jealous of the happiness of
that Country, had not snatched him away in the flower of his Age, to the regret
of all the World, and particularly of Q. Eleanor, who could not forbear
expressing her sorrow by her Tears when she heard the News of his death.

Among the several Princes who pretended to dispossess King Michael, Duke
Augustus, Ernest of Brunswick, Bishop of Osnabrug, who would have willingly
exchanged both his Bishopric and Religion, for the Crown of Poland, was one:
But he was Married, he would have met with greater obstacles than the Prince I
just nown mentioned.

CHAP. XV. Of the Diets in general.
Though as a mark of the Obedience and Respect, which Christians are obliged to
pay to the Clergy, the Polanders have thought fit to give the Bishops the
Precedence in their Diets, as being the Ministers and Dispensers of Holy
Things; it has been sometimes observed, that the Laity have taken the liberty
to dispute that Honor with them. Thus at the Diet held at Lublin, 1501. under
the Reign of Alexander the II. there happened a great contest betwixt the
Bishops and the Temporal Senators; for though the latter were willing that the
Bishops should be Seated all in a Row on the King's Right hand, they desired
that they might also sit in a Row on his Left hand, that so they might not be
altogether beneath them. This Controversy was long and hotly agitated; but, at
last, the King decided it in favor of the Bishops, declaring, That they should
still enjoy their Ancient Privilege, to sit next the King, both on His Right
and Left hand.

A General Diet in Poland, is a Meeting of the Nobility in one place, to
Consult about the Affairs of the Republic. The King may appoint the Meeting
where he thinks fit, except the Diet of the Coronation, which can only be held
at Cracow; but, as for the rest, it has been always in the King's Power to
appoint the place of their Meeting. It Is true, that, for some time, they have
been always held at Warsaw; But, the Lithuanians having made a Complaint some
years ago, that they were exposed to all the Inconveniences of a long and
tedious Journey; it was agreed, that one of Three Diets should, for the
Convenience of the Lithuanians, be held at Grodno, a City of Lithuania in the
Palatinat of Troki, on the River Niemen, about Twenty Leagues from Vilna; It Is
seated partly upon a Plain, and partly upon an Eminence, and is Defended by a
Castle, which was taken and Sacked by the Muscovites in the Year 1655, when the
Whole Kingdom was harrass'd by the Swedes.

The other Two Diets are to be held at Warsaw, which, from the Election of
Sigismond III. to that of John III. was always the Residence of the Kings of
Poland: It is Situated on the Vistula, in the Province of Massovia, and the
Diocese of Posnania. There is a fine Palace in this City, which Sigssmund built
after his Election; but there are no Avenues to it, and the place where it is
Situated is so straightn'd, that one must, in a manner, Divine, how to go into
it. It has a very fine Prospect, but is wholly destitute of Water, Gardens, or
Trees. Nor can those Defects be supplied, because on the one side it is bounded
by the Houses of the City, and, on the other by the Vistula.

Warsaw is composed of Two Cities joined together: The Old Town, which is
Walled with Brick, is small, and ill Paved, as are all the Cities of Poland;
but, to make amends it is Populous, and enjoys a good Trade. The New Town which
is joined to it, is not considerable. Besides those Two Cities, there is also
the great Suburb of Cracow, the Houses of which are, for the most part, built
and covered with Wood, except some Palaces which certain Persons of Quality
had begun to Build before the Swedish Invasion; both because the Kings,
Vladislaus and Casimir, had a Palace there, where they usually Resided; and
because those Princes designed to enclose that Suburb, and the Two Cities with
16 Bastions, which they had already Marked out, and whereof some footsteps are
yet to be seen. The abovementioned Palace, where the Kings, Vladislaus and
Casimir Resided, has a Garden, but is destitute both of Water, and Trees.

There is still a Chapel in that Suburb, called the Muscovites Chapel, which
Sigismond III. built for the Burying place of a Duke of Muscovie and his
Brother, who died in Prison at Gostynin, in the Palatinat of Rava, about Three
Leagues from the City of Plocsko upon the Vistula, to leave to Posterity a
Monument of his Victories over the Muscovites. It was some time ago given to
the Dominican Friars, who have settled a Convent in it.

It Is the Custom in Poland to hold Petty Diets in all the Palatinats, before
they hold a great or General Diet. These Petty Diets must be summoned Three
weeks before they can be held, and held Six weeks before the General Diets. In
order to their Meeting, the King sends Circular Letters to Summon the Nobility,
and to notify the Day of the General Diet; And in those Circular Letters he
mentions every thing that is to be Treated of in the General Diet: All the
Gentlemen in Poland have the Privilege to assist at the Petty Diets, where they
Choose their Nuncio's or Deputies, to whom they give Instructions, Containing
all they ought to grant, or refuse in the General Diet. Those Nuncio's were
first established in the Reign of Casimir III. who, to raise Money for the
Payment of his Army, ordered all the Palatinats to send their Deputies to the
General Diet, to find out the most proper Means to supply his Necessities; and,
since that time, no General Diet can be held without Deputies from all the
Palatinats.

The General Diets are wont to depute 16 Senators, who are Chosen among the
Bishops, Palatins, and Castellans; 4 of whom are to be always with the King, to
take care that nothing be done contrary to the Laws: and since the Year 1649,
they have joined to them a Deputy of the Nobility, who is chosen by all the
Palatinats. Every thing that is concluded and ordained by those Deputies, with
the King's Approbation, has the force of a Law; and if they neglect to reside
at Court, or to perform their Duty, they are Fined; a Layman in 2000 Livres,
and an Ecclesiastic in 6000.

All the General Diets are begun by the Election of a Speaker, or Marshal of
the Deputies, who must be Chosen out of one of the three Nations; First, Among
the Deputies of Upper Poland. Secondly, Among those of Lower Poland: And, in
the Third and last place, among those of Lithuania, which frequently occasions
Debates that lasts for several days. The Marshal of the Deputies being Chosea,
the King gives him his hand to kiss, and afterward makes the same Compliment
to all the Deputies: After which, the Chancellor Proposes the Points that are
to be considered of in the Diet, which are always different, according to the
various occasions of the Republic: In the mean time I cannot forbear
observing, that the Polanders spend more time in Drinking than in Deliberating
concerning their Affairs; for they never enter upon Business till they begin to
want Money to buy Hungary Wine.

After the Chancellor has, in the King's Name, proposed to the Diets all the
Articles they are to Deliberate upon, the Speaker or Marshal of the Deputies
acquaints the King, in the Name of the Nobility, with what they desire of him;
which is to Redress the Grievances, and Regulate the Abuses committed either
against the State, or Particular Persons; to dispose of the Royal Gifts, the
Benefices and Offices that are vacant, and to distribute them according to the
Laws which forbid the bestowing of Two of them that are Inconsistent to one
Person. After which, the Chancellor makes Answer for the King, That His Majesty
will satisfy 'em, after he has taken the Advice of the Senators.

The Marshal of the Deputies has a great Authority over them in the Diet; For
it is he who Imposes Silence, and Speaks to the King and Senate. And
consequently, since his Authority enables him either to Animate or Moderate
their Heats, he is always extremely respected, and the Court is particularly
kind to him. It Is no wonder then that there is so much Intriguing at his
Election, and that the Contest is usually so hot. For it is the business of the
Court to procure a Marshal that will promote their Designs in the Diet; and, on
the other hand, the Deputies who chose him, have a different Interest from that
of the Court, and are always afraid of losing their Liberties, or of seeing
their Privileges abridg'd by some New Laws. Those different Interests are
frequently the reason that there are some Deputies, who, regarding only their
private advantage, oppose the Election of him whom the Court would have Chosen,
that the King may Bribe them with some Benefice, Employment, or Royal Gift; and
there are not only Deputies who make a Noise at the Election of the Marshal,
but, during the whole Progress of the Diet, that they may extort Favors from
the Court; Nay, there are some who force the King to comply with 'em, by
threatening to break up the Diet, if he does not answer their Expectations: For
there are so few of 'em, that have a sincere regard to the true Interest of the
Republic, that there is scarce one to be found among 'em, that is capable of
resisting the Temptation of 2000 Crowns. Thus the Court may purchase the Votes
of the Members, or dissolve an over-bold and obstinate Diet, by seattering
sufficient Sums among the Mercenary Deputies: And even not only the Neighbors,
but the Enemies of the Kingdom may, by the same means, procure a Rupture in the
Diet, when they find the honest Party resolved to take effectual Measures for
the security of the Republic.

Before any thing can be resolved in the Diet, it must be proposed by the
Deputies, and approved by the King and Senate: And before it can pass into a
Law, it must be revised by the Marshal of the Deputies, and two of the Deputies
besides; or else by three Senators and six Deputies: After which it must be
read in the Senate in the King's Presence, and the Chancellors must ask with a
loud Voice, Whether the King, Senators and Deputies, will have the Seal put to
it. Then it is sealed and inserted in the Registers of Warsaw, or in those of
the Chancery of the Kingdom; and one of the King's Secretary's takes care to
get it Printed at the Charge of the Public Treasury, that it may be sent to
the Petty Diets, and to the Courts of all the Palatinats.

They Treat in all Diets, not only of the Affairs of the Republic, but also of
particular Persons. Thus, in one of the Diets, they took cognizance of the
difference betwixt the Order of Maltha, and Prince Demetrius Vicznowieski, who
took possession of an Estate which the Duke Ostrog his Brother-in-Law had given
to that Order. And, in another Diet, those who Murdered Gonczeski, Petty
General of Lithuania, were Prosecuted and Condemned to be Beheaded. But in
cases of Treason against the King, the Polanders pretend, that neither His
Majesty, nor the Order of the Nobility ought to be present at the Judging and
Determining of the Cause; and 'twas on this score, that the Marshal Lubomiski
complained against K. John Casimir, who caused him to be Condemned for
Contumacy, in the Diet held at Warsaw, Anno 1664. Nevertheless, in a Diet held
in the same City, 1582. King Steven Batteri brought several Deputies into the
Senate, to be present at the Trial and Judgment of Sborowski, who was accused
of Treason against the King. Which that Great Prince did, that all the Nobility
might be Witnesses of the Justice of his proceedings.

It Is in a General Diet that they give the Indigenat, that is, the Right of
Nobility to Strangers, which renders 'em capable of Possessing some small
Pensions or Gifts of the Republic. That right is now given to those who are in
Favor at Court, or Protected by some Great Lord; whereas formerly it was
granted only to Officers, as a Recompense for their Services done to the State.
Those who are not Officers, and yet pretend to the Indigenat, by the favor of
the King, or of the Marshal of the Deputies, procuring their Names to be
inserted in the Instructions of the Army, that is, among the Names of the
Officers who demand to be made Gentlemen of Poland; and every one of the
Pretenders gives in an account of his Genealogy, Name, Surname, Family and
Services, and puts his Coat of Arms in the middle: And after they have been
received by the Diet, and their Pattents Sealed, they take an Oath of Fidelity
before the Marshal of the Deputies, by which they Swear to be faithful to their
Country, and to the King: and the Marshal gives 'em a Certificate, declaring,
that the Diet has received such a one for its Natural Son, and that he has
taken the Oath of Fidelity before him. Yet, though a stranger be made a Gentleman
of Poland, the King cannot bestow any considerable Employment, or Consistorial
Benefices on him, or his Children, to the third Generation. For the Republic
has made this Provision, that they may be the better assured of the Fidelity of
those who are entrusted with any Office, or enjoy any Benefices.

According to the Constitutions and Laws of Poland, a Diet must not sit above
Six Weeks, and the Nobility are so fond and jealous of their Privileges, that
when the King endeavors to prolong the Session of a Diet, and even when the
Interest of the State requires the Sitting of that Assembly, the Deputies are
always ready to oppose such an Innovation, and Charge their Marshal to Acquaint
the King, that they will immediately leave the Diet, as soon as they perceive
that he intends to keep them longer than usually: I shall only mention one
Instance of this Unaccountable Obstinacy, which happened in the Diet Assembled
at the Coronation of King John Casimir, in the Year 1649.

The Defeat of the Polish Army at Pilaveze, and afterwerds the Dreadful
Irruption of the Cossacks and Tartars into the very heart of the Kingdom, had
reduced the Republic almost to the last extremity: and since the Diet had been
so busied in determining particular affairs, that they had not time to consider
of the Means to raise a sufficient Army to oppose the progress of so Barbarous
and formidable an Enemy, till the very day before the breaking up of the Diet,
the King and the Senators endeavored to find out a way to avoid the terrible
danger that threatened 'em, and for that end resolved to Prolong the Diet; But
as soon as the Deputies were informed of this Resolution, they sent their
Marshal to the Senators, to put 'em in mind of the Law which forbids the
prolonging of Diets, and afterward to take leave of the King. The Marshal, to
execute his Commission, went to the Senate, and began to thank the King, and to
take leave of Him in the Name of all the Nobility; whereupon the Senators
rising up, desired that they would condescend to sit only one day longer,
representing the Pressing Exigencies of the present Juncture. The Chancellor
seconded these Entreaties with a very Moving and Pathetick Harangue. After
which the Marshal having resumed his Character, which he had already laid down,
went back to the Deputies, and prayed them to give their Opinion concerning the
Prolongation which the King and Senate desired. The Deputies met again at the
return of their Marshal, and were, at last, prevailed with, though not without a
great deal of difficulty, to consent that the Diet should be prolonged, but,
upon this condition, that every one of them should obtain whatever his
Palatinat had charged him to ask.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Diet of the Election.
THE General Diet for the Election of a King is always held in the open Field,
about half a League from Warsaw, near the Village of Vola, where they erect a
sort of Booth covered with Boards, at the Public Charge, which, in the Polish
Language, is called Szopa, or a Shelter from bad Weather. This place is built
and prepared by the Treasurer of the Crown: it is surrounded with a Ditch, and
has Three Doors. The Day appointed for the Diet being come, the Senate and the
Nobility go to St. John's Church at Warsaw, to hear the Mass of the Holy Ghost,
and to beg the Grace of God in order to the Electing of a New King, who may
have all the Qualitys necessary to defend the Interests of the Church and of
the Republic. After which they go to the Szopa, where the Order of the
Nobility elects the Marshal of the Deputies that were sent by the Petty Diets,
who, being Chosen by Plurality of Voices, and having taken the Oath, goes to
Salute the Senators, and to be confirmed by their Approbation.

After these Preliminaries, the Orders of the Senate and Nobility enter into an
Union, or Association, which they Ratify and Confirm with an Oath, Not to
separate from one another; not to Name any person for King; Nor acknowledge him
as such till he be Elected by the unanimous consent of 'em all. They swear also
to preserve all the Rights, Privileges and Immunities of the Republic; and
that he who shall do otherwise, shall be declared an enemy to his Country. They
Promise reciprocally, neither to give their Voices for an Election, nor to
enter into any Agreement with the Candidates, or their Ambassadors, till all
the Irregularities and Disorders that have been committed either in the Kingdom
or Duchy be considered and redressed. They annul and make void all the Decrees
of the Tribunals, and even the Statutes of the Kings that are found to be
contrary to their Liberties, and Promise to make a Law to that Purpose. They
declare, That all the Judgments given before the Publication of the
Interregnum shall be valid; and that they will approve of all that shall be
done by the Court of Justice, established during the Interregnum, which is
called Kaptur, and is designed for the defense of the Country, for Coining of
Money, for raising of Soldiers, and for maintaining the Laws. They forbid any
person to come to the Diet with Strangers, or with Firearms: They ordain, that
the Generals of the Army shall take an Oath before Commissioners, to discharge
the Trust that is reposed in 'em, with all possible fidelity, to make no other
use of their Troops than to oppose the Enemies of the Nation; To defend the
Frontiers of the Kingdom, and to secure the Honor and Liberties of the
Republic. They oblige 'em also to Swear, to Assert the Public Interest, in
case of a Sedition, or Revolt; To restrain the Soldiers from injuring any
person; To receive no Money either from the Clergy or Laity, and to hinder the
Soldiers from receiving any. After which, they forbid the Officers of the Army
to March with their Forces into the Heart of the Kingdom, and much less near
the Diet, upon pain of being declared Enemies of the State: And if the
Republic should be Attacked by such Potent Enemies, that the Army should not
be strong enough to oppose them, they declare, That from that Minute they
Summon all the Nobility to Meet together without delay at the place and time
which the Archbishop of Gnesna and his Council shall appoint; That the Review
of the Soldiers raised in General by the Republic, or in Particular by the
Palatinats, shall be made in the Camp; That each Palatinat shall take care to
pay it is own Troops, and not to Disband any but such as the General Diet shall
think fit to dismiss; That the Army shall not offer any violence to the Persons
or Estates of the Polish Gentlemen or Clergy; and much less to the Royal
Demesnes; And that the Officers shall be accountable for the Injuries done by
their Troops. They forbid the Treasurers of the Crown, and of the Duchy to
give out any Money, without the Knowledge and Approbation of the Arch bishop and
his Council, but only for the Payment of the Troops of the Republic; They
ordain, that skilful and honest persons shall be sent to visit the Salt-works,
and to regulate the Reparations that shall be found necessary; and that the
Deputies of certain Cities shall not be admitted to the Diet till they have
proved their Right.

After the Marshal of the Deputies is Elected, and a Court of Justice
Established, for the security of all that is done during the Diet, they begin
to treat of the Exorbitances, or Irregularities committed against the Republic
in General, or against private Persons. Then they give Audience to the
Ainbassadors of all the Princes, who either Aspire to the Crown, or Recommend
some of the Pretenders.

When the Ambassadors are to have their Audience, the Republic sends for them,
beginning with the Pope's Nuncio; then proceeding to the Emperor's Ambassador,
after him to the French Ambassor, and next to that of Spain: But, since the
Diet of Election, held at Warsaw, after the Death of Sigismund Augustus, when
the Spanish Ambassador demanded Audience before the Ambassador of France, who,
notwithstanding, was preferred before him, whereupon he retired without making
his Harangue; there has never been any Ambassanor from the Court of Spain: For,
as for Don Ronquillos, the Spanish Minister, who was present at the Diet in
1674. for the Election of the late King John III. he never durst assume the
Title or Quality of Ambassador, least he should be obliged to give place to the
Ambassador of France.

The Diet always sends some of the Senators to the Ambassadors. I know not
whether there be any Constitution that regulates the number of those that are
sent to the Ministers; but, I remember, the Diet in 1674. deputed 2 Palatins,
and 4 Casteilans, to the Ambassador of France; and all the Friends of the
French Faction sent their Servants and Coaches, so that his Train consisted of
above 100 Coaches, and more than 3000 Men.

When the Ambassadors receive Audience, they make their Harangue in Latin. The
Archbishop, or Bishop, who presides, Answers for the Senate, and the Marshal
of the Deputies for the Nobility. The French Ambassador, in his return from the
Audience, was attended by the same Train that accompanied him thither. And
since a plentiful Entertainment is, next to Money, the most prevailing and
successful Argument to win the Esteem and Affection of a Polander, it ought to
be one of the principal cares of an Ambassador, to Treat 'em Liberally, and to
allow 'em so much, as may not only fill their Stomachs, but intoxicate their
Brains.

Besides the care that an Ambassador ought to take to Manage the Orders of the
Senate and Nobility, he ought, in a particular manner, to oblige the Clergy,
who, by reason of their Interest and Authority, are most capable of rendering
his Negotiation successful. He must be always ready to make them considerable
Presents, which they receive under the notion of Alms; that in their Sermons
and private Discourse, they may extol the Liberality and Magnificence of his
Master: It Is plain then that an Ambassador ought to be Liberal to all the
various Ranks and Conditions of People, that he may gain the Assistance of
some, and avoid the Opposition of others. Besides, he ought not to pay 'em all
that he promises in ready Money, but give them part at first, and keep 'em in
expectation of the rest, otherwise they do not believe themselves obliged to
keep their Word; and the hopes of receiving more, has a far greater Influence
upon 'em, than the consideration of what they have received already.

I have already observed, and 'twill not be improper to repeat it, that an
Ambassador is obliged to Manage all the Senators in General, as it is in a
particular manner his Interest to Manage the Bishops and Clergy; because they
are the Heads and Masters of Religion, by which the People are usually soonest
gained; But, above all, if an Ambassador designs to obtain the Favor of the
Senate, be must never forget to secure the Assistance of at least one of the
most Considerable Prelates; And it is even expedient to Treat the Clergy as well
as the Laity. For the Money that is spent in Feasts is sometimes bestowed to
better purpose, than that which is given away in Presents, because he that
gives Presents acquires the Jealousy and Hatred of those whom he neglects;
whereas many Persons at once may be obliged by a Well-tim'd Entertainment.
Liberality is the most necessary Qualification of an Ambassador; for, if he
should be Penurious, his Master would be accused of the same fault; and the
People, who Judge only by what they see, would be apt to believe, that his
Parsimony was a Mark of the Poverty of the Candidat whom he Represents.

It Is also no less certain that an Ambassador should pursue no other Interest
than that of his Master, that he should serve him without any private design,
and blindly follow all his Orders and Intentions. It Is for this reason that the
Popes forbid the Nuncio's, whom they send to Poland to the Diets of the
Election of a King, to make any Interest to secure the advantage of the
Privilege which that Prince has to Nominate one to the Dignity of a Cardinal,
that it may appear to all the World, that they are only concerned for the
Public good of Christendom, and that a Minister, who is sent from the Common
Father of the Faithful, comes not thither with a Spirit of Partiality; but only
with a design to promote the Election of a Prince, who may be able and willing
to advance the good of the Church and State. Nevertheless, it has been
frequently observed, that the Nuncio's, contrary to the express Orders of the
Sovereign Pontiff, have acted zealously for their private Interests, and have
made great Party's to secure the Nomination to the Cardinalship.

To return to the Diet; after all the Grievances are redressed, and all the
Ambassadors have had Audience of the Republic, they proceed to the Election of
a King; But before they give their Votes, they Implore, upon their knees, the
Assistance of the Holy Ghost, by Singing the Veni Creator; after which, the
Deputies of each Palatinat give their Votes, and Communicate 'em to the rest;
and if all the Votes be for one Candidate, the Archbishop of Gnesna, or the
Bishop who presides in his Palace, demands thrice, Whether the Grievances be
Redressed, and afterward Proclaims the King Elect, which is also done by the
Marshals of the Crown, and of the Duchy: after which they all Sing the Te Deum.

I observed, that the King Elect, is Proclaimed by the Archbishop, when all
the Votes are for him; For, it may sometimes happen, that the Diet may be
divided, in which case the strongest Party carries it. Thus in the Diet that
was held, after the Retreat of Henry III. one Party Chose Stephen Battori, and
the other Elected Maximilian of Austria; Maximilian designing to enter into
Poland with some Troops, was prevented by Stephen Batori, who arrived before
him at Cracow, where he was Crowned the 18th of April, 1576. Thus all the
Voices were transmitted to King Stephen, whom the Polanders obliged afterward
to Marry the Princess Ann, whom they had already acknowledged for their Queen.

After the Death of Stephen Battori, there happened a much greater Division in
the Diet; for there being Two Parties formed, one of which was supported by
Zamoski, and the other by Sboroski; the former Chose Signismund III. Son to
John King of Sweden, and Catherine Sister of Sigismund Augustus, the last of
the Race of Jagellon, and Nephew to Queen Ann the Relict of King Stephen; and
this Party was so strong, that they Crowned Sigismund at Cracow the 27th of
December, 1587. though Maximilian of Austria, who was Elected by Sborosky's
Party, had been Proclaimed King in the Church of the Bernardins at Warsaw, by
Cardinal Radziwill, who was of his Faction. In the mean time Maximilian
entering into Poland with some Troops, Zamoski pursued him to Byczin in
Silesia, where he defeated and took him Prisoner, Jan. 25. 1587. and obliged
him to renounce his Title to the Crown. So that Maximilian was a Second time
excluded from the Crown of Poland, and the Princes of the House of Austria a
Third time; First, In the Person of Ernest, by the Election of Henry de Valois;
Secondly, In Maximilian, by that of Steven Battori; And a Third time in the
same Maximilian, by that of Sigismund III.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Election of a Successor.
Though the Election of a Successor is contrary to the Laws and Constitutions of
Poland, and inconsistent with the Privileges of an Elective Kingdom; it may
sometimes happen, that the natural affection, which most persons have for their
Children, or Relations, may induce them to make Party's in the Republic, to
get them Chosen during their Life: Thus in the Reign of Sigismund I. his Son
Sigismund Augustus, though but Ten years old, was named King during his Father's
Life, upon these Conditions; That he should not, in the least, meddle with the
Affairs of Poland till after his Father's death; That when he came to be
Fifteen years old, he should Swear to maintain all the Rights and Privileges of
the Republic; And, that this Example should not prejudice a Free Election for
the future; which his Father Confirmed by Letters Patents given at Cracow,
1530. And afterward by other Letters dated at P^otrkow, 1538. for that Prince
lived 82 years. But Sigismund Augustus being dead, the Republic being
Assembled in a Diet held at Warsaw, after they had carefully examined the
Ancient Laws of the Kingdom, made a Constitution, by which they expressly
Prohibited the Nomination of any Successor for the future, during the Life of
the Reigning Prince, that they might Inviolably preserve the Right and Liberty
of Choosing any Sovereign they pleased.

Nevertheless Stephen Battori seeing he had no Children, and considering the
danger to which the Republic was exposed during the Two last Interregnums,
proposed the Election of a Successor in a Diet held at Warsaw, contrary to the
abovementioned Constitution; But the whole Order of the Nobility opposed the
Design of that Great King, who died soon after at Grodno in Lithuania, December.
12. 1586.

Since any Christian Prince may aspire to the Crown of Poland, it is evidently
the Interest of 'em all to oppose the Election of a Successor, which might
render the Kingdom Hereditary, and consequently ruin their Pretensions.

'Twas this Consideration that obliged the present Emperor to send Francis de
Lisola to the Diet held at Warsaw, in the Year 1661. to oppose the Design of
King John Casimir, who would have had a Prince Chosen to Succeed him after his
death: And this Envoy, with the Assistance of John Owerbeck, Envoy of the
Elector of Brandenburg, who was also apprehensive of the same design, formed a
strong Party, and was so effectually seconded by Marshal Lubomirski, that they
broke Casimir's design, and prevailed with the Diet to make a Constitution,
forbidding any person, for the future, to make mention of the Election of a
Successor.

The reason why King John Casimir Summoned a Diet at Warsaw, to deliberate
about the Election of a Successor, was, because that Prince considered the
danger to which the Republic had been exposed for above Twelve years, during
which they had Maintained a War against the Cossacks, Tartars, Muscovites,
Swedes, Transilvanians, and the Marquis of Brandenburg, and that none of all
those Enemies would have Invaded Poland, if they had not been encouraged by his
want of Issue. And therefore he looked upon the Election of a Successor, as the
most effectual way to prevent the disorders that might be occasioned during an
Interregnum, by the Jealousy and Ambition of the Neighboring PrInces, and
especially of the Muscovites, who pretended to make themselves Masters of
Lithuania, and to make all the Inhabitants Slaves.

There were also many Lithuanian Gentlemen who were engaged in the same design
with King Casimire, and had earnestly desired that Prince, and the Nobility of
Poland, to Consent to the Election of a Successor, who might be able, after the
King's death, to oppose the Muscovites, who only waited for that opportunity to
enter into Lithuania with a great Army, and to possess themselves of that
Duchy.

A considerable Number of the Nobility were prevailed with to comply with the
intended Election of a Successor upon these Conditions; That he should be
Chosen again after the death of the King; That he should be a Roman Catholic;
That he should not be a Piaste, that is, a Native Polander; That he should not
be a King, or Sovereign Prince of any other Country; That he should not be a
Neighbor of Poland; That he should be an Unmarry'd Person, and one that was
neither too young, nor too old.

It must be acknowledged that the design was good: for the King, and those who
seconded his desire, looked upon this as the best (if not the only) Expedient,
to secure the Republic from the otherwise unavoidable dangers, to which it
would be exposed during an Interregnum, by the Ambition of it is Neighbors, and
the Jealousy and Factions of those who should aspire to the Crown. But those
who opposed the Election of a Successor, alleged on the other hand, That no
Prudent Person would venture upon a present danger, to avoid a future
inconveniency; That such an Innovation would introduce a Hereditary Succession,
and entirely destroy the Liberty of Elections, notwithstanding all the measures
that could be taken to secure it; That 'twas contrary to the Laws of the
Kingdom to Choose a Prince during the Life of the King; That the Republic could
not consent to such an Election without divesting it self of its Liberty; That
the Choice could not be determined without offending several Princes, and
involving the Nation in new Troubles, at a time when 'twas their Interest to
maintain an uninterrupted Peace with all their Neighbors.

These are the most Material Arguments that were urged on both sides: I leave
it to the Reader to Judge, which of 'em were most agreeable to Reason, that I
may proceed to acquaint him with the nature of the Pacta Conventa, which the
King Elect Swears to observe, in St. John's Church at Warsaw.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Pacta Conventa, or the Contract betwixt the King and the
People.
THE Polanders are so fond of their Liberty and so afraid of losing it, that as
soon as the King is Elected, they make Him Swear upon the Altars to maintain
all their Privileges during His Reign. This is usually called the Pacta
Conventa. which is properly a Contract betwixt the King and the People, by
which the former is obliged to preserve all the Rights and Immunities of the
latter.

According to the Laws of Poland, this important Ceremony ought to be performed
before the King be Proclaimed. Thus at the Election of Henry of Valois, after
they had rejected Ernest of Austria, the Emperor's Son, and Confirmed the
Election of King Henry, John de Monluc Bishop of Valence, that Prince's
Ambassador, was obliged by the Senate to come to the Diet, where the Conditions
that were to be observed by the New King, his Master, were Read in his
Presence: After which he took an Oath to Observe 'em in the Name of Henry de
Valois, and his Brother Charles IX. Then he was conducted to St. John's Church,
where, after the Celebration of the Mass, Henry of France was Proclaimed King
of Poland by the Great Marshal of the Crown, May 18. 1573. Afterward the
Ambassadors that were sent by the Republic, to offer the Crown to King Henry,
obliged both him and his Brother to take the same Oath at Paris, in the Great
Hall of the Palace, on the 10th of September following. This is the Method
prescribed by the Laws for Swearing to keep the Pacta Conventa; But this
Regulation is not always punctually observed; For both King Michael
Vicznowieski, and John Sohieski, took the Oath several days after their
Election at Warsaw, upon the great Altar of St. John's Church.

The Pacta Conventa, or Contract, is drawn up and Methodiz'd by the Order of
the Senate and Nobility; after which the Three Orders go to Church, where the
Great Marshal Reads the whole Contract aloud, of which these are the principal
Articles.

That the King shall not assume the Quality, or Title of Heir of Poland, nor
appoint any Person to Succeed him: but that on the contrary, he shall
Inviolably preserve and maintain the Laws and Constitutions relating to the
Free Election of a King.

That he shall Ratify all the Treaties of Peace made with Foreign Princes.

That he shall make it his principal care to preserve the Public Quiet and
Tranquillity.

That he shall not pretend to the Right of Coining Money, or deprive the
Republic of the profits of the Coinage.

That, without the Consent of the Republic, he shall neither declare War
against any Prince, nor give Orders for the levying of Forces. And that,
without the same consent, he shall neither bring any Soldiers into the Kingdom,
nor suffer any to go out of it.

That he shall not introduce any Strangers, of what Rank or Quality soever into
his Council; and that he shall not bestow any Offices, Dignities or Governments
upon 'em.

That all the Officers shall be Polanders, or Lithuanians, or at least Natives
of such Provinces as depend upon the Crown of Poland.

That the Officers of the Regiment of Guards shall be Natives of Poland, or
Lithuania; that the Colonel shall be a Polish Gentleman, that he shall take an
Oath of Fidelity to the Republic; and that all the Officers shall be under the
Jurisdiction of the Marshals.

That the King shall not Marry without the consent of the Senate, according to
the Ancient Laws of the Kingdom; and that the Train and Attendants of the
Princess, whom he shall Marry, shall be regulated by the Senate.

That he shall never make use of his private Signet, in Affairs that concern
the Republic.

That for the preservation of his Power and Dignity, he shall dispose of the
Offices both of the Republic and Court; least they should be either usurped,
or remain vacant; and that the number of 'em shall not be diminished.

That he shall Administer Justice, according to the Advice of the Senators and
Counselors that attend upon him.

That, for the Expenses of his Table, he shall only possess those Revenues that
were granted by the Republic to the Kings his Predecessors; and that he shall
enjoy 'em only for his Life.

That he shall not confer upon any one Person the Offices or Dignities, which,
according to the Ancient Laws, ought not to be possessed by one Man.

That he shall take care, in the space of six weeks, to fill up all the vacant
Offices.

That the first thing he shall do in the Diet, shall be to dispose of the
Vacancy's, and to cause the Chancellor to publish them; and that in pursuance
of the Laws he shall only bestow them on Polish Gentlemen, who are Persons of
Merit, of the Age required by Law, and of a staid and solid Judgment.

That he and his Council shall so regulate the Troops, as well Horse as Foot,
that the Republic may not stand in need of any Foreign Troops, nor be put to
an unusual Expense, and that the Soldiers shall be satisfied with their pay,
and do no injury to the Peasants.

That hesh all in no wise diminish the Treasure at Cracow, but on the contrary
shall endeavor to augment it.

That he shall borrow no Money, but with the Consent of the Republic.

That if the Exigences of the State require Naval forces, he shall not pretend
to Levy 'em without the approbation of the Nobility, and the Advice of the
Senate.

And finally, That all the Rights, Liberties, and Privileges, that have been
justly and lawfully granted to the Polanders, Lithuanians, and to all the
Inhabitants of the Provinces depending on them, and to all the Cities,
according to what has been ordained in the preceding Diets, and to what shall
afterward be ordained in the following Diets, shall be inviolably kept and
preserved; and that he shall issue out his Letters Pattents to Confirm them in
all their Clauses and Conditions.

They also frequently add several other Articles according to the exigency of
the present Juncture, and the Quality and Circumstances of the Elected Prince.

As for the Ceremonies that are used when they make the King Swear the
Capitulation, The Archbishop, and the Marshal of the Deputies carry it before
him, after the Mass is said, and require him to take an Oath to observe it,
according to his promise. Then the King being upon his Knees before the Great
Altar, says, after the Chancellor,

We N. Chosen King of Poland, and Great Duke of Lithuania, Russia, Prussia,
Massovia, Samogitia, Kiovia, Volhinia, Podolia, Podlassia, Livonia, Smolensko,
Siberia and Czernichovia, Promise to Almighty God, and Swear upon the Holy
Evangelists of Jesus Christ, to observe, maintain, and accomplish all the
Conditions agreed upon at our Election, by our Ambassadors, with the Senators
and Deputies of Poland, and of the Great Duchy of Lithuania, and Confirmed by
the Oath of our Ambassadors; and to perform the same according to all the
Clauses, Points, Articles and Conditions mentioned therein, and in such sort
that the speciality cannot derogate from the generality, nor the generality
from the speciality. All which we promise to Ratify by our Oath on the Day of
Our Coronation.

After the King has Sworn to keep the Pacta Conventa, the Chancellor gives him
the Decree of his Election Written in Parchment, and Signed by the Senators and
Deputies.

The Republic of Poland uses these Precautions at the Election of their King,
that if afterward he should act contrary to what he promises to obsorve, the
Senators may have a right to put him in mind of his duty. It was the breach of
one of those Articles, which gave the Polanders occasion to complain of King
Michael; for, in the Pacta Conventa which he Swore to observe, they had
Inserted this Article; That he should not Marry any Princess without the
Consent of the Republic: Nevertheless, without asking their Consent, he
Married the Emperor's Sister; and the Party that was formed against him looked
upon this as a sufficient ground to compel him to Abdicate.

If the Prince who is Elected be not present at Warsaw, he takes the Oath in
the presence of the Deputies, whom the Republic sends for that purpose, and
obliges himself before them, to observe all the Articles of the Capitulation.
'Twas thus that Sigismond the Third Swore to keep the Pacta Conventa, in the
Abbey of Oliva, near Dantzick, Anno 1587. as they were drawn up by the Senate
and the Nobility.

It Is the Custom in Poland, that the Great Marshal, or in his absence the Petty
Marshal, carries the Staff erect before the King when he goes to any Ceremony.
But it is observable, that from the time of his Election to his Coronation, they
carry the Staff bowed down, that when the King Issues out any Letters, Orders
or Constitutions, he only assumes the Quality of King Elect; and that no
Dispatches can be Sealed but with the little Seal of the Closet, which is a
sign that the Election is perfected by the Coronation, which is, as it were,
the Seal of it.

CHAP. XIX. Of the King's Coronation.
A KING of Poland cannot exercise the Royal Authority before his Coronation:
for he can neither dispose of any Office nor Benesice, nor so much as grant any
Favor, nor use the Great Seal of the Chancery: and the Courts of Justice which
ought to be kept in his Name, and are shut up at the beginning of the
Interregnum, cannot make a Decree till after his Coronation.

It Is the New King who appoints the Day for this Ceremony, which must be
performed at Cracow, in the Cathedral Church, in the Castle. This City takes
its Name from King Cracus, who built it in the Year 700, after he had left
Gnesna, which was formerly the Capital City of the Kingdom. It is situated on
the Vistula, in Upper Poland. It Is the Seat of a Bishop, who is a Suffragan of
the Archbishop of Gnesna: The City is very large, fine, and well built, but
the Streets are ill Paved, as in most other Cities of that Country: However the
Streets are very broad, and straight, with a great Square in the middle, where
the Townhouse is built. The Castle, or the King's Palace, is seated upon a
little Eminence, or Rock, the Foot of which is washed by the Vislula. The
Circumference of this Eminence is very small, and consequently the Palace is of
no very great Extent; and as for the Church, tho it be the Cathedral of a great
Diocese, and the Burying-place of the Kings of Poland; it is one of the smallest
and least Beautiful Structures of that kind that I have had occasion to see in
that Country.

It must be acknowledged, that the King's House is really well built; but
besides the extraordinary smallness and obscurity of the Court, it has neither
Garden, Wood, nor Water; nor is it adorned with any Walls, or Avenues; It was
formerly a strong place, when the strength of places consisted in the height of
their Situation, but it is now only fit to refist some flying Parties of Horse:
it is here where the Jewels of the Crown are kept with the Royal Ornaments, that
are used at the King's Coronation. There is also to be seen in the Little Hill,
or Rising Ground, on which it stands, the Cave or Den of that Furious Dragon,
which made such a terrible havoc in all the Neighboring places, and which,
it is said, Cracus killed, by laying some Meat for him, mixed with Pitch and
Brimstone.

When the Coronation-Day draws near, the King makes his Entry into Cracow on
Horseback, the Sheriffs of the City carrying a Canopy of State before him. The
Troops, both Horse and Foot March before, with their Officers; and are followed
by the Palatines, Bishops and Ambassadors on Horseback. The Ceremony is
doubtless very Splendid, and I know not where a Traveller can have occasion to
see a more Magnificent Cavalcade. A Man who rides on Horseback before the King,
scatters some small pieces of Silver, stamped with the Effigies of the New King,
among the People in the Streets; but this Liberality costs him so little, that
I do not believe there are a hundred Crowns distributed. Thus the King is
conducted from the City Gate to the Castle, passing through the public place,
where there are several Triumphal Arches adorned with Statues, Devices, and
various Inscriptions.

On the day that precedes the Coronation, which is called the day of Expiation,
they perform the Funeral of the Deceased King, whose Body is carried to the
Church of St. Stanislaus at Schalka, where the Marshalls break their Staves,
and the Chancellors their Seals against the King's Coffin. The New King goes
also thither with all the Officers of the Crown and Duchy, and all that are
present at Court. The Company's of Tradesmen walk thither barefoot in
Procession, each of them accompanied with the representation of a Coffin
covered with a Pall, supported by two Men. Thus the whole Multitude goes to
visit the Relics of St. Stanislaus Bishop of Cracow, who was killed in the
Year 1079 by King Boleslaus, as he was saying Mass. After which they bring back
the Body of the Deceased King to the Chapel of the Cathedral Church, which is
the Burying-place of His Predecessors.

The day after the Funeral is the Coronation-Day; The Ceremony ought to be
performed by the Archbishop of Gnesna, as Primate of the Kingdom; yet there are
some Examples to the contrary. For Stephen Battori was Crowned by the Bishop of
Cracow, because the Archbishop of Gnesna was of the Faction of Maximilian of
Austria, whom a Party of Polanders had Chosen; and the late King John Sobieski
was Crowned by the Bishop of Cracow, because the Archbishop of Gnes^a died
during the Diet of Election.

This day the King being Richly Clothed, is conducted in Solemn Procession to
the Cathedral Church, by the Senate and the Nobility. Before he enters into the
Church, the Great Master of the Horse of the Kingdom brings the Crown, Scepter,
Globe of Gold, and the Naked Sword to the Archbishop, who lays 'em upon the
Altar; after which the Bishop of Cracow and Cujavia, having received the King,
and bolding Him between them, present Him to the Archbishop, to whom he makes a
bow.

The King being in this condition, the Archbishop, and the Two Bishops put him
in mind of his Duty, and Obligation to the Republic; after which he kisses the
Archbishops hand, and laying his own upon the Gospel, he Swears to observe
Inviolably all the Articles which he had before Sworn to keep in the Cathedral
Church of St. John at VVarsaw. The Oath runs thus,

We N. Chosen King of Poland, and Great Duke of Lithuania, Russia, Massovia,
Prussia, Samogitia, Livonia, Smolensko, Volhinia, Kiovia, Siberia, Podolia,
Podlassia, and Czernikowia, by all the Orders of both Estates of Poland, and
Lithuania, and of all the Provinces which depend upon them, and are
Incorporated with them, having been Elected freely, and with the Unanimous
Consent of all; Promise sincerely, and Swear before Almighty God, and upon the
Holy Evangelists of Jesus Christ, to Maintain, Observe, Keep and Fulfill, in all
their Circumstances, Points and Articles, all the Rights Liberties, Immunities,
and Privileges, both Public and private (that are not contrary to the common
right, and liberties of both these Nations, or to any Law either Ecclesiastical
or Temporal) that have been justly and lawfully esiablish'd by our Predecessors
Kings of Poland, and Great Dukes of Lithuania, or granted by all the Orders
during the Interregnum, to all the Roman Catholic Churches, Lords, Barons,
Gentlemen, Citizens and Inhabitants of what rank or condition soever, with the
Pacta Conventa agreed upon betwixt our Ambassadors and the Orders of the
Kingdom and Great Duchy of Lithuania.

Moreover, we promise to maintain whatsever was Fu^^ed or Agreed upon in the
Diet of our Election, or shall be Enacted or Agreed upon in that of our
Coronation, to execute the same, and to cause to be restored to the Kingdom,
and to the Great Duchy of Lithuania, and united to their Lands and Revenues
whatsoever has been in any in owner alinated, or dismembered therefront by what
way soever; Not to contract the limits of the Kingdom, and Great Duchy of
Lithuania, but to defend and enlarge them; to establish Courts of Justice in
all places, for all the Inhabitants of the Kingdom, and the Duchy of
Lithuania, and to render Justice to every one without delay, or respect to
persons. And if it should happen (which God forbid) that we should violate Our
Oath in any one point, we consent that all the Inhabitants of the Kingdom, and
of all our Territories, shall be discharged and exempted from the Obedience and
Fidelity they owe us.

After the King has taken this Oath, He kneels upon a Cushion of Red Taffeta,
while the Litany of the Saints is Read; at the end of which they take off his
Clothes, and the Archbishop Anoints his Right hand and Arm up to the Elbow with
Consecrated Oil, and afterward his Shoulders and Forehead; and then they put
on his Clothes again. After this Ceremony, the two Bishops Conduct him to the
Chapel, where they Cloth him with another Habit, somewhat resembling that of a
Bishop; then the Marshals of the Crown and Duchy, with the Officers that are
Senators, place him upon a Throne erected in the Middle of the Church, where He
hears Mass, and is afterward brought back to the Altar, where the Archbishop
puts a Naked Sword into his Right Hand, saying, Receive this Sword, with which
you are powerfully to Protect and Defend the Holy Church and the Faithful.
After which the Great Standard Bearer of the Kingdom Girds it to his side: The
King having the Sword by His side, draws it out of the Scabbard, and beats the
Air four times, in form of a Cross, toward the Four Parts of the World; and
having wiped it upon his Left Arm, he puts it up again into the Seabbard. Then
he kneels, and the Archbishop puts the Crown upon His Head, the Scepter into
His Right hand, and the Globe of Gold into His Left. After which the King
rises, and His Sword is drawn and given to the Swordbearer of the Kingdom, to
be carried before Him; and then Marching between the Archbishop and the Two
Bishops, He is brought back to the same Throne.

All these Ceremonies being ended, the Archbishop returns to the Altar; and
after Te Deum is Sung, and that Prelate Seated, the King comes to make His
Confession to him; after which he gives the Sacrament to His Majesty, and then
the Benediction to the People. This done, the Marshal of the Court Cries, Vivat
Rex; and is Answered by all the People, who Repeat the same words. In the mean
time the Treasurer of the Kingdom scatters Money among the People who are in
the Church. 'Twou'd be needless to describe the Feast that usually follows this
Ceremony, since I intend in a peculiar Chapter to give a particular Account of
the Feasts and Entertainments of the Polanders. Only it may be reasonably
supposed, that a Feast which a King makes, after His Coronation, is very
Splendid and Magnificent.

The Day after the Coronation, the King goes in Great Pomp, being Clothed in
His Royal Robes, to the Townhouse, where, upon a Throne Erected before the
House, the Magistrates come to Assure him of their Fidelity, and present him
with the Keys of all the Gates in a Silver Dish: the Chancellor, or
Vice Chancellor, assures them reciprocally of the Affection and Clemency of the
King, and Reads, with an Audible Voice, the Oath of Fidelity, which they take
kneeling, and holding up their hands. Then they present His Majesty with a
Purse full of Ducats; after which he restores the Keys, and makes some of the
Burgesses of the City, or of some other place, Golden Knights, by striking them
softly with his Naked Sword upon the Shoulders. This done, the Treasurer of the
Crown scatters some Pieces of Silver among the People: at the same time the
King goes to a House that looks into the Square, and afterward returns to the
Castle with the same Train that Accompanied him to the Townhouse.

I have already observed, that it is the Interest of the King of Poland to get
himself Crowned as soon as it is possible, and I shall take this occasion to
show what advantage he receives by it. It Is certain, that as soon as the Polish
Noblemen have Chosen their King, they begin to look upon him as an Usurper of
their Liberties; and, on the other hand, the King looks upon the Nobility as a
Formidable Body, that opposes all his Designs. Now he cannot either weaken
them, or strengthen himself more effectually, than by making 'em pay dear for
the Favors he bestows upon 'em. For, it is in his power to dispose of all the
Offices, Benesices, and Royal Gifts, which amonnt to a third part of all the
Revenues of the Kingdom; which he cannot do till after his Coronation.

Nevertheless, the late King was so far from observing this Maxim, that though he
might have been Crowned immediately after the Day of his Election, which was
May 19. 1674. he did not appoint the Day for his Coronation till Feb. 2. 1676.
during which time he made Two Campagnes, one in Vkrania, and the other in
Podolia. As for that in Vkrania, he set out from Warsaw, August 22. 1674. and
advanced toward Leopold, where his Army was to Rendezvous. There he was
informed, that the Queen his Wife lay sick at Casimirs upon the Vistula;
Whereupon he left the Camp at Leopold, and arrived at Casimirs on the 8th of
October. Not long after he returned to the Army, because the Nights began to
grow so cold, that the Turks who are not accustomed to such a Cold Climate,
began to think of retiring.

After the Turks had withdrawn their Forces, the King led the Army of the
Crown, and that of Lithuania, which both together amounted to about 30000 Men,
into Vkrania, where he kept them so long, that the Lithuanian Troops, under the
Command of the Great General Patz, abandoned him, to avoid the Miserable Fate
of the Polish Army, which was so harassed with Hunger and Cold, that it was
reduced to less than 3000 Men; for the King staid in Vkrania till April, and
arrived on the 25th of that Month at Sloczow, whither the Queen was come to
receive him.

The Turks understanding that the Polish Army was ruined in Vkrania, that the
King was gone back with the Miserable Remnants of his Forces, and that those of
Lithuania had left him against his will, they returned with a Great Army in the
beginning of July, 1675, when the King was at Jawarow, thinking of nothing but
to refresh himself after the Fatigues of the Preceding Campaign. But upon the
first Advice of the March of the Ottoman Army, which consisted of 30000 Turks,
and 80000 Tartars; he set out from Jawarow the 10th of July, and Marched in
have to Leopold, which the Turks threatened to Besiege. He Encamped near the
City with about 3000 Men, whom he had drawn together; and the Turks being
informed of his weakness, sent a Body of 14000 Tartars to force his Camp, but
they durst not Attack him. 'Twas given out, that a great number of Tartars were
killed on the 24th of August, 1675, in the Attack of the Camp at Leopold, though
it is certain that there was only one Horse wounded with an Arrow. For the
Tartars retired without losing one of their Men, or wounding one of their
Enemies.

The Turks, as I intimated before, are not able to bear the extreme coldness of
the Winter in Poland; for, having once entered Russia with a formidable Army,
and not returning soon enough, they were surpised with so violent a Cold, that
above 40000 of 'em were Frozen to death, and many were found dead in their
Horses Bellies, into which they had crept to secure themselves from the Cold.
And it is this that obliges them to retire out of Poland by the end of October
at farthest.

CHAP. XX. Of the Queens of Poland.
HAVING Discoursed at length of the Kings of Poland, and of their Election and
Coronation, it will not be improper to give some account of the Queens: It Is
certainly of great Importance to the Republic, that a King, when he Marries,
should choose a Princess, whose Alliance may be advantageous to the State. And
therefore this Article is inserted in the Paeta Conventa, which the New King
Swears to observe, that he shall not Marry without the Consent of the
Republic. For they are as much concerned as the King himself, in the Choice of
a Queen, though the Polish Nobility are not obliged to Choose any of his Children
to Succeed him. So that a King of Poland cannot Marry without the Consent of
the Republic, unless he resolve to violate his Oath, and expose himself to the
Jealousy and Hatred of His people, who are not easily pacified on such
occasions. Thus when Sigismund III. Married Ann of Austria, without the Consent
of the Republic, and caused her to be Crowned at Cracow in the Year 1592, he
met with so much opposition in the Diet, that was afterward held at Warsaw,
that he was forced to acknowledge his Fault.

As a King of Poland cannot Marry without the Consent of the Republic, so he
cannot Divorce his Wife without the same Approbation. For when Sigismund
Augustus, the last of the Race of the Jagellons, separated from Elizabeth of
Austria, because of a Crime with which she was falsely charged, and after her
Death Married one Radziwill, a Widow of a Palatin of Troki; The Senators were
so exasperated, that they had almost proceeded to declare the Throne Vacant,
because he slighted his Fair and Chaste Queen and Wife, and Married the Widow of
a simple Palatin, without the Consent of the Republic.

But Vladislaus the IV. pursued wiser Maxims: He was sensible of the danger of
Irritating a stubborn and seditious People, and had a more tender regard to the
Articles he had Sworn to observe. For when the King of England offered him his
Niece, the Elector Palatine's Daughter in Marriage, he declined the Match, and
declared, that he neither could nor would Marry without the Consent of the
Republic; which, in that case, he could not expect to obtain, because the
Princess was a Protestant.

When a King of Poland Marries after his Coronation, the Queen cannot be
Crowned without the Consent of the Republic. But if he be Married before, he
may cause her also to be Crowned without asking their Consent. So that the
Report which was spread abroad, after the Election of the late King John III,
was false and groundless: for 'twas given out, That the Queen his Wife would
not be Crowned, and that the austrian Faction opposed it, both because she was
a French-woman born, and because she was but a private Gentlewoman; But the
event showed the contrary; for she was Crowned at Cracow with her Husband,
without the least opposition. But if a Queen of Poland be not a Catholic, she
cannot be Crowned, as it happened to Helen, the Wife of Alexander I. and
Daughter to the Duke of Muscovy, who being of the Greek Church, and refusing to
embrace the Roman Catholic Faith, the Republic would never consent that She
should be Crowned.

Though according to the Constitutions of the Republic, and the Ancient Laws of
the Kingdom, both the Kings and Queens of Poland ought to be Crowned at Cracow;
we find that this Ceremony has been sometimes performed in other places. For
Queen Cecilia, the Wife of Vladislaus IV. was Crowned at Warsaw in the Year
1637. And though there was a Law made the next Year, that the Queens should
always be Crowned at Warsaw, Anno 1670. It Is true, this was done with the
consent of all the Orders of the Republic.

When the Queen is Crowned, the King must desire it of the Republic; he must
be present at the Ceremony himself; Conduct her to the Church, and present her
to the Archbishop of Gnesna, or to the Bishop who is to perform the Ceremony.
The Archbishop Anoints Her with the Consecrated Oil, and puts the Crown upon
Her head, the Scepter into Her right hand, and the Globe of Gold into Her left.

The Queens of Poland have no Officers, but a Marshal and a Chancellor; neither
of whom are Senators, but only Judges of the Differences that happen among her
Domestics. They Answer the Harangues that are made to the Queen, when an
Ambassador makes her a Compliment in His Master's Name, or when a Present is
made to her at the Marriage of a Maid of Honor.

The King furnishes the Queen with Money, to defray the Charge of her Household.
But after the King's death she must maintain her self, and all her Retinue,
with the Revenue which the King bestows upon her, with the Consent of the
Republic, both for her Dowry, and for her Marriage-Present. These Revenues are
called the Reformation, and consist of the Reversion of a certain number of
Starosties, which she cannot enjoy till they become vacant by the Death of the
present Possessors. So that a Queen of Poland is frequently kept from her
Estate till she be just ready to leave it. For sometimes those who possess the
Starosties that are in her Reformation, outlive her. But if the King die
before the Queen's Reformation be settled upon her, the Republic allows her a
Yearly Pension out of the Crown Lands, as they did to Queen Eleanor in the Year
1674, after the Election of King John; for they were so king to that Princess,
as to give her a Yearly Pension of 120000 Livres, by an express Article which
was afterward inserted in the Pacta Conventa; but she chose rather to quit
both that and the Kingdom, than to see a French Gentlewoman succeed a Princess
of the House of Austria.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Polish Army.
THERE is so little Order or Discipline observed in the Polish Army, that the
Country is frequently harrass'd by those who are paid to defend it, and the
Republic is obliged to Raise New Troops every Year.

At the first there were few Cities in Poland; But when the Inhabitants grew
more Industrious in Cultivating the Ground, they were perpetually molested by
their Neighbors, who, by frequent Inrodes, endeavored to deprive 'em of the
fruit of their Labors. In order to oppose these Invasions, the Kings caused
Castles and Fortresses to be built in the Cities, which always subsisted so
long as they were Protected by the Royal Authority, and defended by good
Officers, and Disciplined Soldiers: But since those Forts were neglected,
several Lords have endeavored to usurp the Posession of 'em, that they might
extend their Dominion over the Cities, and oppress the Burghers as they do the
Peasants in the Villages. Those whom the Kings entrusted with the Government of
those Places, did not employ the Revenues that were annexed to 'em, in
Repairing the Walls and Fortificatious; whence it comes that all their Cities
are open; and that the Soldiers, who are put there into Winter Quarters, may go
out when they please and Ravage the Country. For when a Regiment is to be sent
from one end of the Kingdom to the other, the Commander is only Ordered to set
out, and to go to the place appointed, without mentioning either the time, or
the places through which he is to March, or the Cities where he is to Quarter;
so that he may run through the Whole Kingdom, and so sometimes spend a Month
or six Weeks in Marching to a place, which he might have reached in Eight days.
It Is plain, that these disorderly Marches must of necessity waste and destroy
the Cities and Villages through which the Soldiers pass: Nor is the Law able to
to remedy such an insupportable Grievance, because it is not the Custom in
Poland to establish Magazins and Storehouses in any place.

The Gentlemen who go to the Army, spend the best part of their Estates in
furnishing themselves with Magnificent Arms, fine Horses, and rich Apparel,
maintaining a Numerous Train of Servants. Their Estates alone are not
sufficient to defray so vast a Charge; and besides, they receive no Pay for a
considerable time after they enter into the Service; so that they are, in a
manner, constrained to Oppress the People, that they may be able to support
their extravagant vanity. Some who are naturally of a less violent temper,
endeavor to excuse a Fault, which they are forced to acknowledge, by laying
the blame upon the Court, pretending, that the King bestows the Royal Gifts of
the Republic, and the Offices and Dignities upon the Courtiers, or other great
Lords, who either have no need of 'em, or do not deserve 'em, in stead of
giving 'em to those who have done good Service in the Army, where they have
spent their Estates, and exposed their Lives for the defense of their Country;
Others accuse those who are entrusted with the management of the Finances, who
make 'em wait very long for their Pay, and even then oblige 'em to quit part of
it, that they may procure the rest. These Grievances exasperate their Minds,
and frequently occasion great Complaints in the Diet.

When they Levy Soldiers in Foland, the Captains exact Contributions on those
Places where they Raise their Men, and give very little to the Soldiers,
Retaining the Money they Receive on the Public Account, always finding some
unjust pretext to Defraud the Soldiers of their Pay, who are consequently under
a strong Temptation, to Rob and Pillage the Country; the Officers not daring to
Restrain a Disorder which is occasioned by themselves.

To put a stop to these Irregularities, it has been frequently Proposed to the
Diets, by some Wise and Considering Persons, to keep the Soldiers always
Encamped, that they may be perpetually under a Strict Discipline, ready to
oppose the Enemy, and by that means kept from Pillaging and Ruining the
Kingdom. And this Expedient would doubtless be very agreeable and advantageous
to the People, who could, with less trouble, Raise Money to Pay the Troops at
Distance, than Maintain them at Home, and suffer all the Disorders which they
commit in their frequent Marches through the Country. This Remedy has been very
much commended by some, but others are of opinion, that if the Soldiers were
always kept in a Camp, under the Command of one Officer, 'twon'd be a means to
make the Generals of the Armies too Powerful. Thus the Soldiers continue to
oppress the People, and harrass the Kingdom, without any Prospect of Redress.

I intimated before, that the want of Discipline, and the little Order that is
observed among the Polish Troops, is the reason why they are obliged to Raise a
New Army almost every Year; But the manner of Paying their Soldiers, which is
neither every Week, nor every Month, nor every six Months, and sometimes not
at all, is a more dangerous Fault, because it keeps 'em under a perpetual
Temptation to Desert; For when they are in the Army, they live upon Colewores,
Roots, Fruits, which they find in the Woods, and on Horseflesh when they can
get it. It is not the Castom in Poland to give Ammunition-bread, so that the
Officers are forced to let the Soldiers shift for themselves; and consequently,
since the greatest part of them are Starved, it is no wonder that they must
raise a New Army every Year.

They Pay the Officers but once in the Year, and frequently but once in two
years; and for that end they appoint Commissioners to meet at some place Remote
from the Court, because by a Constitution of the Diet, the King ought not to be
present at the Meetings that are held for the Payment of the Soldiers, though
every thing is done in his Name. The Commissioners that are deputed by the
Diet, regulate the Payment of all the Officers, and usually make some
Abatement, especially to Strangers. Nor must they be absolutely blamed for
abridging the Pay of the Officers, because they hardly lay out any Money for
the Subsistence of their Companys; whereas the Commissioners make up their
Accounts as if they had entertained their Soldiers at their own Charges. It Is
plain, the Polish Service is advantageous to the Officers, who are in a
condition to wait some time for their Money.

The Army is usually Paid but once in Two Years, and sometimes the Republic is
not able to Pay 'em then; which occasions an universal Murmuring among the
Soldiers, and obliges 'em sometimes to enter into a Confederacy, which they do
in this manner. After the Officers have long complained of the retaining of
their Pay, and have Remonstrated to the Court, and to the Diet, that they can
no longer subsist without it: and after they perceive that their Complaints and
Remonstrances are neglected, they assemble together, and make a Roko^z, which,
in the Polish Language, signifies a Separation from their Generals. The
Subaltern Officers thus Assembled, choose Two of their number, one for their
Marshal, and the other for his Licutenant: To these Officers, whom they call
Substitutes, they take an Oath of Fidelity, to oblige the Republic to Pay 'em:
After which the Marshal Commands this Confederate Army, as if he were (...) the
General of it. It Is obvious to every considering Person, that such a Revolt
must be attended with Terrible Consequenees; For then the Army, in stead of
Marching toward the Enemy, or Guarding the Frontiers, harasses the Country,
and with an unbridled liberty over-runs the Estates of the Noblemen, making
Necessity the Prtext of all the Disorders they commit.

The Danger of these Confederacies will appear, if we reflect upon the Violent
Proceedings of the Confederate Army, of which Swiderski was Marshal, and
Borzecki Substitute; which was not so much occasioned by want of Pay, as by the
Parties that were formed by some Persons, who hoped to Enrich themselves during
the General Disorder, which could not be quieted, without a great deal of
trouble, at Leopold, by King John Casimir, in the Year 1663.

It Is thus that the Army enters into a Confederacy, though there is a Law, or
Constitution, that whosoever shall presume to hold Meetings, make Harangues,
raise Seditions, or enter into Confederacies, shall be guilty of Death; and
that whosoever shall join the Confederates, shall be deprived of his Estate and
Office.

I have also observed another Defect in Poland, concerning the Office of the
General of the Army, which is given for Life; so that it is not in the King's
Power to Displace a General whom he has once Advanced, though he is often obliged
to confer this Dignity upon some Great Lord, who is perfectly unacquainted with
the Art of War. It Is not at all strange then, that Poland should suffer some
Losses from time to time, and let slip several Opportunities of weakening their
Enemies; For they have more need, than any other Nation, of an Active and
Experienced General, who knows how to manage the Soldiers, and will not keep
them too long in a Place, where there is neither Forage for the Horse, nor
Subsistence for the Foot; who will never engage his Troops in any place, from
whence he cannot easily make good his Retreat; nor ever neglect an advantageous
occasion of giving Battle to his Enemy; and especially one who knows, that a
Numerous Army ought not to engage with a Small one in a narrow and close place;
because, in such a case, a handful of Men may beat a Formidable Army, as it
appears, for Example, by the Instance of Marshal Lubomirski, who defeated the
Vanguard of King John Casimir's Army, at the Passage of Montroi; and of the
Teutonick Knights, who, though much Inferior in Number to the Army of King
Casimir III. defeated them in a place, where King Casimir's Troops could not
extend themselves, nor put themselves in Battalia. If therefore the Polanders
had Experienced Generals, they might, one Day, destroy all the Ottoman
Infantry, for which they have had several Fair Opportunities; they might regain
all that they have lost, and even extend their Conquests farther. But, to
obtain this Advantage, the Office of General of the Army ought not to be given
for Life, but only to Persons of Merry, because there is nothing that more
animates the Courage of an Officer, than the hope of Higher Preferment; and
there are more who aspire to that Honor, when they may attain it by their own
Merit, without expecting the Death of those who possess it: And it is certain,
that heretofore this Office was not given for Life in Poland, as it is at
present. For John Tarnowski was the first whom King Sigismond made Perpetual
General of the Army of the Crown, and a^serwards Nicholas Radziwill was
advanced to the same Dignity in Lithuania.

There is also in Poland another Disorder among the Officers, viz. that they
seldom come to the place of Rendezvous on the Day appointed; for there are many
of them who do not arrive there with their Companies, or Regiments, till a
Month, and sometimes Six weeks after: and even there are some who leave the
Army a Month before the Campaign is ended. The King of Poland and the Generals
might easily Remedy this Disorder, but they dare not attempt to do it, for fear
of offending some Persons of Quality, whose Affection they must carefully
preserve. For they who leave the Army, or come not to the Rendezvous by the Day
prefixed, are commonly Polish Gentlemen, and not Strangers, who are more exact,
and dare not assume such Liberties without asking and obtaining Leave.

As it is impossible to carry on a War without Money, so there is no other way
to Raise Money but by Taxes. And therefore besides the ordinary Revenues of the
Republic, which are the Fourth Part of the Estates and Offices that are in the
King's Gift, The Customs upon Wines and Merchandises, and the Tribute that is
Exacted from the Jews, they impose also in time of Necessity a certain Sum, by
way of Poll, upon every Person's Head, which is no new sort of Tax in Poland:
For King Casimir III. after he had lost the Battle against the Toutonick
Knights, Summoned a Diet at Peotrkow, in which it was ordained, That the whole
Gentry and Clergy, and even the King Himself, should give half of their
Revenues for defraying the Charge of the War.

The Polish Army is composed of Polanders and Strangers: All the Polish Troops
are Cavalry, and are called Husartsz, and Tovarzysz. The Husartsz are Chosen
Men, Brave, and in good Condition. The Tovarzysz are so called from a word
which signifies a Comerade, and both sorts are Gentlemen; The one are Armed
with Lances, and the other with Bows and Arrows; and there are some Troops of
Horse, who have behind their Backs Wings made of Cocks Feathers, which are
usually White, in order to frighten the Enemies Horses, which are not
accustomed to such sights. They are all Richly Clothed with the Skins of
Tigers, Leopards, or Panthers: their Horses are also very sine, and
well-harnessed. In a word, it may be said, that they are the finest and best
Cavalry in the World; and that they would be Invincible if they were more
submissive, and better Paid.

As for the Foreign Troops, they are almost all Infantry, and are called
Foreigners, because they are kept on German Pay, and receive the Word of
Command in the German Language, though most of the Soldiers and Officers are
Polanders. Those Troops are divided into Regiments of Foot, or Dragoons, and
the Regiments into Companys, as in France; But the Soldiers are so miserably
poor, that the greatest part of them have neither Swords nor Shoes. When they
lie in Towns, they live on Three Gros a day, which are worth Two pence of
Polish Money, or a Penny English, and upon what they can steal from the
Peasants that come that come to the Markets; for it is not the Custom in Poland
to give them Ammunition-bread; and even the Officers of Foot are not better
Clothed than our common Soldiers.

I proceed, in the next place, to give some Account of the Equipage with which
the Polanders go to the Army: And first, There are no ^utlers in the Polish
Army; for, besides that, the Soldiers would not pay 'em, they could never
arrive in the Camp without being plundered by the Soldiers, and especially by
the Lithuanians, who are more accustomed to Pillage than the Polanders; so that
every Man must carry every thing that he stands in need of along with him;
which obliges the Officers to hare a great Equipage, and to provide sufficient
quantities of Meat, Bacon, Butter, Salt, Sugar, Comfits, Spices, Beer,
Hungary-Wine, Brandy, Oats, and generally of every thing that is necessary for
themselves, their Servants, and their Horses: They have many Wagons, as well
for carrying all sorts of Provisions, as their Tents, which are very heavy, but
very fine. As for the poor Soldiers, I have already intimated, that they live
upon Roots, and the flesh of dead Horses, or such as they find lying in
Quagmires. For if the Owner does not take speedy care to draw him out, he must
expect to be prevented by the Famished Soldiers, who, in a moment, cut him into
a Thousand Pieces.

It Is generally known and acknowledged, that the success of an Enterprise,
espeially in War, depends in a particular manner upon two things, viz. Secrecy,
and the Certain Knowledge which a General ought to have of the strength or
weakness of his Enemies, and of the place where they are posted. As for
Secrecy, which is the Soul of all Important Affairs; it is so little observed
in Poland, that every petty Officer is acquainted with all the Great General's
Designs: And as for the Knowledge of the State of the Enemy, since the
Polanders never make use of Spies, they never learn any News of the Enemy's
Army, till they meet with some of their Parties. And this is the reason why the
News which come from the Polish Army are so uncertain, that those who are
acquainted with the Country, seldom give any Credit to these Reports.

The Army of Poland being thus Composed, and being accompanied with such an
Equipage as I lately mentioned, is under the Command of a Great General, and of
the General of the Field; and besides these Two General Officers, there are
also others under them, as the Master of the Artillery, the Pissarsz, or
Intendant of the Army, the Great Standard Bearer, the Field-Marshal, the
General of the Sentinels, and the Major-Generals, who are the same with our
Brigadiers.

Before I conclude this Chapter, there is one thing more observable in the
Polish Army, which is, that if News be brought to them, when they are at Table,
that the Enemy appears, they will not stir till they have done, to Mount their
Horses, and pursue their Enemies.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Estates and Revenues of the Polanders.
THE Estates in Poland are of Three sorts, either Royal, Ecclesiastic, or
Patrimonial. The Royal Estates are part of the Domain, and belong to the
Republic. They consist of the Starosties, Salt-works, and half the Revenue of
the Port of Dantzick. As for the Starosties, the King is obliged to bestow them
on Polish Gentlemen, within Six Months after a Vacancy; for it is not in his
Power to reserve any of them for himself, except those that are called Royal
Oeconomies, which, together with the Salt-works, and the Port of Dantzick,
belong properly to him; so that his whole Revenue amounts to but about a
Million of Livers. But then he is not to pay any Troops out of it, not so so
much as his own Regiment of Guards; and all the Officers of his Household, who
are Gentlemen of Poland, serve him without any Salary, in hopes of obtaining
some Benefice, or Starostie. So that he is at no Charge but for his Table,
Clothes, and Stable; and besides, he receives many Presents of Flesh, Fish,
Stuffs, hay and Oats.

The Starosties ought only to be given to old Officers, who have served long
time in the Army, and are, as it were, Super-annuated: for the Polish Word
Starosc, signifies old Age; and he who enjoys one of those Estates, is called
Starosta, from Stary, which signifies an Old Man. There are Two sorts of
Starosties; some are empowered to exercise a Jurisdiction through the whole
extent of their Territory, whereas there are others without any Jurisdiction:
The first are the most considerable, though they are not always the Richest. Each
Starosta is obliged to give the fourth part of the Revenue of his Starostie to
the Republic; and no Man can possess Two of those who have Jurisdiction. The
King may bestow the Reversion of a Starostie upon the Starosta's Wife, except
in Russia, which is a Frontier Province; for since a Starostie is a Government,
the Republic supposes that the Governor ought to reside upon the place: but
Polish Gentlemen may be made Governors of Frontier Places, because the
Republic relies more upon their Fidelity than upon that of Foreigners; though
they are sometimes deceived in this Maxim; For he who surrendered the City of
Caminiec to the Turks, without making any Resistance, was not only a Gentleman
of Poland, but even a Palatine.

As for the Salt-works of Poland, the most considerable are those of Vieluczka
and Boehinia, about Five Leagues from Cracow; which yields about 400000 Livres
Yearly: They were found out in the Year 1252. They resemble deep Mines dug in
the Earth, to which they descend by a hole, like to that of a Quarry. The
Workmen, who are employed in Digging out the Salt, begin to enter the Pits at
Midnight, and those who go down first, begin to come out about Noon, because
they must be let down, and drawn up with a great Rope, like that with which
large Stones are raised up out of Quarries. As they dig the Salt out of the
Mines, they must leave great Pillars from place to place, to support the Earth:
and since these Vaulted Pits are all covered with Salt, when one goes down into
them, he seems to be surrounded with a Thousand Crystals, which reflect the
Light of the Torches. There are some parts of 'em dug so far, that it would be
dangerous to go into 'em, because one might easily lose himself in these
Labyrinths. The Salt is taken out in large Columns, which being loosened from
the Mine, are drawn by Horses just under the Mouth of the Pit, and afterward
drawn up like Stones out of a Quarry. The Horses continue always in those
Subterranean Caverns, but the Men come out every day; and (which is very
remarkable, there is a Spring of Sweet Water in the Salt Pits, of which both
the Men and Horses drink.

After the Salt is brought out of the Pits, they carry those great Pieces, or
Columns, through the whole Kingdom, except Prussia, where they only use French
Salt. Before the Polish Salt can be used, it must be beaten to pieces, and then
ground in a Mill. Besides these Pits of Bochnia and Vieluczka, there are other
Salt-works at Halicz in Pokutia on the Neister, at Kolomey in the same
Province, on the River Prut, and at Pinsk, a City of Lithuania in Pol^sia; and
besides these, there are some others which belong to private Men; for there is
an express Law, that the Republic shall not pretend a Right to the Mines of
Salt, or of any Metals which are found in any Gentleman's Lands. There is also
White Salt made in many other places of Poland, as in the Palatinat of Craeow,
between Oswiecin, upon the Vistula, and Mount Crapat; But this Salt is for the
King's use; besides, they make great quantities of Salt in Russia, by Boiling
Saltwater, which costs 'em little, because that Province is all covered with
Woods.

There are also some Mines of Lead mixed with Silver in the Buroughs of
Ilkusch, Slankow, Kranow and Nowoguiia, which are in the Palatinat of Cracow;
and in that of Sandomir there is Saltpeter at Vieliczca; there is also Vitriol
found at Byecz, and Quicksilver at Tustan in Pokutia toward the Mountains.

The Ecclesiastic Estates are the Benefices, as Bishoprics, Abbacy's,
Priory's, Canonships, Curacies, and all the Lands that are possessed by the
Regular Clergy. The Benefices are not so numerous as in France, for there are
but Sixteen Bishoprics, and some Abbacy's: But the Bishoprics are of a great
extent, and endowed with large Revenues, some of these Prelates having above
100000 Livers Yearly Rent.

The Patrimonial Estates belong properly to the Polanders, whether the Right of
Succession be by Purchase, or Inheritance, and consist in Houses, Lands, Towns,
Villages, Lakes, Mills, Meadows and Woods, but especially in Peasants; for a
Gentleman's Riches are valued by the Number of his Peasants, every one of them
being worth 100 Livres a Year to his Master. These Peasants are Slaves, and
cannot possess any thing: all that they heap together belongs to their Lord,
whom they cannot leave without his permission, unless they turn Priests or
Friars: But these miserable Wretches work so hard, without intermission, that
they have no time to study, in order to fit themseives for admittance among the
Secular or Regular Clergy, except only in the quality of Lay-Brothers, which
the Polish Gentlemen take also care to prevent, by obliging them to Marry
young, that they may not be received into the Convents.

To settle a Peasant upon a Piece of Land, or in a Village, the Lord causes a
Cottage of Wood to be built for him, and gives him Two little Horses, one Cow,
some Hens, Geese and Rye to subsist upon for a Year. In the mean time he
appoints a certain Piece of Ground in the Village, which the Peasant is obliged
to Till for his Landlord, and upon which he is to maintain himself for the
future; for all the Goods of the Village belong to the Lord. The settling of a
Peasant costs a Gentleman nothing but the price which he pays for him; Because
the other Peasants of the Village build the House, and furnish the Cattle,
Poultry, and all that he gives to his new Subject, who, with his Wife and
Children is obliged to work Four days in the Week for his Master, and to spend
the other Two days in Tilling the Ground which is given him for his Subsistence.

When Harvest comes, all the Peasants of the Village go out together to cut
down, and gather in the Corn for their Lord, who appoints certain Persons to
Oversee their Work, and to beat 'em when they are idle. For the Punishment of
the Peasants there is a sort of Pillory in every Village, on which those
Miserable Wretches are sometimes forced to stand a whole day.

One would think the Peasants in Poland should reckon themselves the most
unhappy Creatures in the World, to see themselves reduced to perpetual Slavery,
and obliged to Work continually, without the prospect of one day of rest: But
they do not so much as know that there are any Persons of their condition
happier than they; for when they are young, they see their Fathers treated
after the same manner: And besides, they have this comfort, that they never
want Provisions. Their Wives are employed almost in nothing else than Dressing
their Meat, of which they have usually 3 or 4 sorts every day for Dinner, viz.
a Dish of Pease with a little Bacon, another of Oatmeal, Barley, Millet, or of
the Grain which they call Cachat, and the rest of several sorts of Roots, which
they have in abundance, and very good.

The Furniture of their Houses consists of some Earthen, or Wooden Dishes, and
a Bed, which they make of Chaff and Feathers, with a sort of Coverlet over it.
As for their Children, they never lie in Beds till they are Married, but upon
Boards round the Floor, which they use in many places in stead of an Oven, to
Bake their Bread, and to Boil their little pots of Cachat and Roots. These
Stoves have no Chimney to let out the Smoke, so that their Huts are always full
of a Thick Smoke, which has no other passage but a small Window about Four Foot
from the Ground. When they go into their Cottages, they are forced to stoop,
that they may not be stiff'd with the Smoke which is so thick above the little
Window, that one cannot see the Roof; and yet it is impossible to go to Bed in
the Winter without Stoves, so that the Gentlemen have them in their Houses as
well as the Peasants; But those in Gentlemen's Houses are neatly made of Burnt
Earth, like fine Earthen Vessels, with a Chimney to let out the Smoke.

The Children of the Peasants, especially in Russia, go stark Naked, as well
the Girls as the Boys, till they are Four or Five years of Age. They are never
taught to go, but, as soon as they have got a little strength, the Mother sets
them down at the Threshold of the Door, where they learn, by degrees, to Crawl
along, and get up by themselves, and when they are dirty, the Mother Washes
them in cold Water, which makes 'em so hardy, that I have seen 'em slide
Barefooted on the Ice.

The Peasants are Clothed in Winter with a Wastcoat of Sheep's-Skins with the
Wool; and in Summer they wear a Stuff Coat of a Chimney-Sweeper's Color, with
an ugly sort of Cap or Bonnet. Sometimes they wear Boots, but most usually
Shoes, which they make of the Bark of a Tree. As for the Women, their Habits
are not much different from those of the Country-Women in France; only their
Smocks are so short, that one may sometimes see their Skin between their
Wastcoat and Petticoat. In Russia the Women go all Summer in their Smocks with
an Apron before them, the Strings of which serve them for a Girdle, but their
Smocks reach to their Midleg.

They never Build a House in Poland without a Stove in each Room: Some of the
Gentlemen's Houses are of Wood, and others of Brick; and all so contrived, that
they Lodge only in the Lower Rooms, except in some Houses in the Cities. The
Gentlemen, by reason of the frequent Incursions of the Tartars, have but very
little Furniture, and that of no great value: for they have only little Beds
with Taffeta Curtains, and some Turkey Carpets. They have no more Beds than
what are sufficient for their own Family; so that when one goes to Visit them,
he must either carry a Bed along with him, or resolve to lie upon the Floor.

Most of their Countrey-Houses are of Wood, without Fountains, Gardens or
Avenues, because the Polish Gentlemen take no delight in Planting Trees upon
their Lands, tho it is certain Poland would be a very fit Country for
Fruit Trees, and especially for Apples and Pears, for in some places they grow
wild, and prosper to Admiration; so that they might have very good Sider, which
would save them a great deal of Corn, which they consume in Beer; But they take
very little pains either to Improve their Lands, or Increase their Revenues.

There are many Great Lake both in Poland and Lithuania, with Mills upon them,
for Grinding of Meal and Cachat. But I never saw any Mills for Paper, Cloth,
or Leather, tho they might easily have them, and consequently save all the
Money which Foreigners gain by the Importation of these Commodities. But the
Polanders not only deserve to be Censured for not embellishing their Houses by
Planting Trees about 'em, and Augmenting their Revenues by erecting New Mills;
but are even so little mindful of their Interest, that they neglect some
Advantageous Improvements which would cost 'em nothing but the Labor of their
Peasants.

They have vast Fens and Morasses, and consequently might have a great deal of
Pasturage, so that they might breed and bring up abundance of Cattle, which
would be extremely advantageous to them; for I neither know, nor ever heard of
a Country in which there is more Flesh eaten than in Poland, and consequently
where there are more Cattle killed; nor is there any place in the World where
they use greater quantities of Leather: for every body wears Boots, and almost
all the Gentlemen have Coaches, or Wagons covered with Leather, which they
call Ridevans. Nevertheless in stead of preparing the Hides and Skins of the
Cattle which they kill, they suffer Strangers to carry 'em away into their own
Countries, where they Prepare them, and afterward make the Polanders Pay dear
for that which they Sold for a Trifle.

There are many Lakes in Poland and Lithuania so large, that it would be almost
impossible to Drain them. These Lakes abound with Fish, which the Polanders
usually take in the Winter. When the Ice is pretty strong they make a great
Hole to let down their Nets, and afterward make several smaller holes, from
space to space, that they may draw their Nets along from hole to hole, with a
Rope which is fastened to a long Pole, till they bring them back to the first
large Opening. When the two ends of the Nets are brought together, they pull
them out, and bring up with them all the Fishes that happened to be in that
space of Water through which the Nets were drawn, for they cannot leap over the
Nets because of the Ice. The Fishes thrive so well in those Great Lakes, that
there are an infinite number of Pikes, Four Foot long, and Carps Two and a half.

The whole Country of Poland is full of Woods, and Lithuania much more: And
there are some Forests so large, that it would require, at least, a whole Day
to pass from one side to the other. The Revenue of those Forests, which, for
the most part are Firr-Trees, does not consist in the Sale of the Wood, but in
the gathering in of the Honey and Wax, which they find in the Hollow Trunks of
the Trees, in so great quantity, that in many Places it yields above 10000
Livres a Year. There is so much Honey in Poland, and especially in Lithuania,
that they make a sort of Wine or Mead of it, which they use for their ordinary
Drink. It Is said, that in Muscovy, which lies more Northwards, there is a much
greater abundance of Honey, which supplies the defect of Wine and Beer, and
enables 'em to subsist comfortably in their Cold Habitations.

It Is strange that there should be such vast swarms of Bees in so cold a
Country, since it is observed, that these Animals are more delighted with the
Flowers that are found in hot Countries, than with those that grow in a Cold
Climate. It must be concluded then, that the Bees find some agreeable Liquor
upon the Firr-Trees, and that they are pleased with that sort of Wood; which
the Polanders have very well observed; for all the Hives which they have in
their Gardens are made of the Hollow Trunks of Firr-Trees.

I proceed in the next place to show how the Polish Gentlemen Improve their
Estates, and how they raise their Revenues. It is not the Custom in this
Country to let Estates for Money, except only the Farms of Beer, Brandy, and
the Inns which they call Karczma: All the other Rents are paid in Corn, which
they send to Dantzick to be Sold, in Fish, which is bought by the Merchants, in
Horses, Oxen, Cowes, Calves, Sheep, Hogs, Ceese, Ducks, Turkey Hens, Common
Hens, Chickens and Capons, which the Peasants very carefully bring up, not
daring to eat, or sell any of 'em, or otherwise embezel them, for fear of the
Rod. As for the Butter and Eggs, after the Landlord's Kitchen is sufficiently
furnished, he bestows the rest, with the Flax which the Peasants make, upon his
Wife, which she sells for Pocket-Money; for the Women in Poland are not
suffered to keep the Purse; but when they want any thing they pray their
Husband to give it them, embracing his Knees, and calling him, My Patron, or
Benefactor. The Men do all the Business, and the Women meddle with nothing but
Eating, Drinking and Dancing, there being orders given in the Kitchen to give
them whatever they demand.

Upon every Manor the Lord keeps a Pod Starosta, that is, an inferior
Gentleman, who takes care to gather in the Cattle and other Rents from the
Peasants, to send part of 'em into his Master's Kitchen, and to sell the rest.
But though there cannot be an exact Computation made of the Revenue of Land in
Poland, because consists almost wholly in Commodities, a considerable part of
which is consumed in the Landlord's House; there are Persons of Quality whose
Yearly Revenue is esteemed to amount to more than 100000 Crowns. And formerly
the Polish Gentry were so Rich, that some Lords usually came to the Diets with
a Train of above 1000 Men; and others, upon pressing occasions, have furnished
the Republic with 3000 Men, raised at their own Charge, as did Leo Sapieha
Chancellor of Lithuania, after the great Defeat of the Polish Army at Pilaveze
in Vkrania, on the 29th of September, 1648.

But at present Poland is not so Rich, because it is not so well Peopled as
formerly. Nor can it be reasonably supposed to be either so Rich or Populous,
after it has been harrass'd by so many Irruptions of the Muscovites, Turks,
Tartars and Cossacks, who have, at several times, carried away an infinite
number of Slaves; and after the Bloody and Expensive Wars which the Republic
has maintained against all its Neighbors; And besides, the Plague which
succeeded these Desolations, has Contributed, in a great measure, to Dispeople
part of the Country.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Customs, Humor, and Inclinations of the Polanders.
THE Polanders are naturally so extremely desirous of Money, that they are
willing to submit to any terms to procure it. But those who are acquainted with
their Temper, will never give them more than what they intend to lose; for it
is not their Custom to Pay their Debts, nor so much as to return a Civil Answer
to their Creditors.

Since it may seem incredible that any Commerce can subsist among a People, who
never Pay what they Borrow; it will not be improper to give an Account of the
way of Lending Money in Poland; for Bonds and Obligations are of no use in this
Country. Those who want Money, must either procure a Supply from the
Gentlemen, Merchants or Burgesses: When one Gentleman sends Money to another,
the Borrower Mortgages or makes over a Village to his Creditor, till the Money
be Re-paid.

As for the Burgesses and Merchants, they never lend Money to the Gentlemen,
but upon Pledges, at 14 per cent. Interest, as it is allowed by the Laws of the
Kingdoms. There is a Note, or Inventory taken of the Quantity and Kind of the
Pledges, which the Borrower gives to the person who Lends the Money; and if
they consist of Jewels, as for example, a Pearl-Necklace, it is Sealed at the
two ends with the Borrower's Seal. In the same Note, after both the Quantity
and Value of the Jewels, or Plate that is Pawned, and the Sum of Money that is
Lent are specified, the Borrower obliges himself to Pay the Money at Six Months
Warning, and in the mean time to pay Interest at the rate of 14 per Cent. It Is
also stipulated and agreed upon betwixt both Parties, that if the Borrower
shall neglect to pay Interest for the space of Three years, the Creditor shall,
in that case, have full Power to send them to Dantzick to be Sold: And this is
the only way that the Merchants and Burgers Lend Money to the Polanders, for
otherwise they would never be paid.

Tho it is certain, that the Polanders are passionate lovers of Money, and will
leave no means unattempted to procure it; it is no less certain that they do not
desire it to Purchase Lands, or to Build Fine Houses, or increase their
Revenues; but only to buy Silks, Stuffs, Furs, Fine Horses and Arms, and, above
all, good Hungarian Wine.

The Polish Gentlemen are all naturally civil. They usually invite Travelers
to their Houses, and Entertain them in a very kind and obliging manner. The
Great Lords are very Generous and Magnificent: and, to my certain knowledge,
some of them have taken into their Houses Frenchmen, Italians and Germans, and
Maintained them, till they found some Employment. I know particularly, that
that Chancellor Patz has given both Horses and Money to Strangers, who had done
him no Service at all.

The Polanders are generally very fond of Magnificent Habits after their Mode:
Most of them wear very handsome Boots, the heels of which are shod with Iron, a
Furred Cap, and Vests that reach to their Mid-leg, and are Furred in Cold
Weather. The Great Lords have them Furred with Sable, which is brought them
from Muscovy, and the rest with the Skins of Tygres, Leopards, Panthers, etc.
Some of the Fine Furs cost above 1000 Crowns, but they are only worn at Diets,
and are kept from Father to Son.

Some, though few, are Clothed after the French Fashion, and wear Linen,
Lace, Point, Perukes and Swords: for those who retain the Polish Habit wear no
other Linen but Shirts and Drawers, and some of them Socks. The ordinary
Gentlemen, and even some of the Great Lords, cause some bruised Chaff to be put
into the Feet of their Boots, which serves them for a Sole, and for Socks: But
I speak only of the Gentry, for the Peasants wear no Linen at all, unless
perhaps a Shirt of Course Cloth.

The Polanders cut their Hair above their Ears, and Shave their Faces, leaving
only one large Whisker. They walk gravely with a Pole-ax in their hand, and a
Sword by their side, which they never lay aside but when they go to Bed; for
they wear it even when they go to Confession, and when they Receive the
Sacrament. The Sword hangs at a Thong of Leather to which their Handkerchief is
fastened, with a Knife in a Sheath, and a small Stone, set in Silver, to Whet
their Knife on; every Morning they Wash their Face and Neck with cold Water,
even in the sharpest Weather. This Custom is so generally observed among them,
that the Fathers make their Children Wash themselves as soon as they rise.

Almost all the Women of Quality Dress after the French Mode, especially those
who frequent the Court, and even the Oldest of 'em are very careful to adorn
themselves, and wear Red Clothes. They are extremely fond of Fine Clothes,
Modish Silks, Laces, Points, Ribbons, Hoods, Gloves, fine Shoes, and generally
every thing that is brought from France, which they usually buy very dear. For
provided they be not obliged to pay ready Money, they are willing to promise
whatever is demanded; so that the French Merchants, who always find a way to
recover their Money, grow quickly Rich, for they sell Ribbans for a Crown a
Yard, which cost 'em but 15 Pence at Paris, though the Ell in Poland is but half
a French Ell.

The Polanders are so much in love with Splendour, that the Ladies never go
abroad but in a Coach drawn by Six Horses, even though they only intend to cross
the Street, and to go to a Church over against their Houses. When the Lords or
Ladies go abroad at Night, they have 24 Flambeaus of White Wax carried before
their Coach. The Ladies Trains are frequently held up by Dwarfs, who are born
of Fathers and Mothers of a very large stature. The Ladies are always attended
by an Old Woman, whom they call Majordome. The Gentleman Usher, who ought to
Lead them under the Arm, is an Old Gentleman, who follows them on foot, and
never goes into the Coach; but the Horses go very softly. This Custom does not
proceed from the Jealousy of the Husbands, for they neither do, nor have any
reason to suspect their Wives, because the Polish Ladies are very Modest, and
not at all Coquettes, tho they have as much Liberty as in France; but ordinary
Women are not so nicely virtuous, especially the Maids, who think it no Scandal
to their Reputation to be Unmarry'd Mothers, nor is their Frailty any hindrance
to their Fortune. They usually serve as Nurses; for a Married Woman, tho never
so poor, will not Nurse any Child but her own.

Notwithstanding the Extreme Coldness of the Climate, they are so much addicted
to Bathing, that there is no Gentleman's House without a Bath. There are also
Public Baths in every Town for the Common People: The Ladies and their
Daughters Bath once a Month. It Is an Universal Custom through the Whole Country
to Bath their Infants twice a Day, till they are Two years old; This is
probably the Reason why the Polanders are not subject to Scabbiness in the Face
or Head. The Children are never heard to Cry, because they are not Swathed, but
only wrapped about with Linen Clouts, and consequently have room enough to move
their Bodies; whereas in France they are in a manner Fettered with Cords; And
because there are sometimes Girls to be seen in this Country, whose Stature is
spoiled, which some might attribute to the neglect of Swathing 'em in their
Infancy; I shall take this occasion to observe, that all the Men are very large
and well-shap'd, and that the ordinary Girls are not subject to that
inconveniency; so that we may reasonably suppose, that the Stature of some
Girls of Quality is only spoiled by their Governesses, who put 'em in Clothes
too soon, after the French Mode, or because they gird them too close, and know
not how to Dress them.

The Polanders bear the loss of their Estates, and all other Disasters, with so
much Courage and Resolution, that they seem to be insensible: And as they
endure their own Misfortunes with so little Concern, they have no Compassion
for the Miseries of others. Their Cities being, for the most part, Built of
Wood, which frequently takes Fire; they will stand very quietly to see a House
Burn, without making the least Motion to extinguish the Fire. And even there is
so little Tenderness in their Tempers, that neither the Fathers take care to
Ransom their Children, nor the Children their Fathers, who are carried away
Slaves into Tartary. It cannot be supposed that such a Nation as this regards
the condition of other Kingdoms: And indeed they are so far from concerning
themselves with the Affairs of Foreigners; that tho the whole Christian World
were engaged in an Universal War, they would not so much as offer their
Mediation to Negotiate a Peace.

They neither learn to Ride, Fence, nor Dance in Poland, because they have no
Academies. And, for this Reason the young Lords are generally much addicted to
Traveling, that they may learn the Languages and Exercises that are Taught in
Foreign Countries; Nevertheless, those who stay at home, Ride, Fence, and Dance
after their own Fashion, and without constraint; for the Polanders are
naturally inclined to such Exercises, and are all passionate Lovers of Dancing
and Music. The very Nurses teach the Children to Dance as soon as they begin
to go, and you may frequently see Two little Children Dancing to the Voice of a
Nurse, or Servant; and Peasants Playing upon the Violin, while they are
bringing a Boat laden with Corn along the Vistula.

It Is certain, that the Polanders would be Invincible, if they were
Well-Disciplin'd, for they are so hardened, and enured to Fatigues, that they
look upon the Germans as a soft and effeminate Nation, who are not able to
endure the Toil of War, and the excessive rigor of the Winter. The Polish Army
has oftentimes Encamped in the Snow, and particularly in the Year 1663. King
Casimir set out from Leopold in the beginning of September, and Led His Army to
the Frontiers of Muscovy, where he Encamped all the Winter, and did not Retire
till the next Spring.

Before I conclude this Chapter, I must take notice of Two Distempers that are
peculiar to Poland, of which one is called the Rose, and the other the Plica.
The Rose is a sort of Erysipela, which chiefly breaks out in the Face. The
Polanders Cure this Disease by applying Powder of Chalk to the part, without
Letting Blood; for they fancy that Bleeding would prove Mortal in that case.
The Plica is a Twisting of the Hair, in such a manner, that it is impossible to
unravel it. These Twisted Locks cannot be compared to any thing more fitly,
than to those long and nasty Ropes of Hair upon some Spaniels. The Polanders
give this Account of the Original of this Distemper: They say, That the Tartars
having made a Furious Irruption into Poland, in the Year 1279, and having
killed a great Number of People, they Poisoned their Hearts, and threw 'em into
the Waters, which Infected those who drunk 'em with this Loathsome Disease, the
True Cause whereof is still a Secret to Physicians.

Strangers generally believe, that the Plica is the effect of Slovenliness, and
not of any Distemper: and they are confirmed in this Opinion, because they are
never troubled with it, even tho they live a long time in the Country; for if
their Hair begins to Twist when they fall Sick, they cause it immediately to be
Cut off, which the Polanders dare not do, for fear of losing their Sight, which
they imagine is an unavoidable consequence of Cutting off the Hair in this
Distemper. Yet I have known some, whose Hair was actually Cut off without any
dangerous Accident. But the People are so persuaded that the Plica is a
Distemper, that there are some Old Women who pretend to bring it out upon
Children that are troubled with Languishing Diseases, by mixing and twisting
their Hair, and making their Mothers believe, that the Children are only Sick,
because the Plica cannot break forth.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Religion of the Polanders.
THE Polanders Received the Faith of Christ in the Reign of Mieceslaus, in the
Year 964. and have ever since remained in Subjection to the Sea of Rome, except
some, who, in the last Age Embraced the Doctrins of Luther and Calvin. At
present the Polanders are generally Roman Catholics, except in Russia, where
there are still a considerable number of Persons who observe the Rites of the
Greek Church; and in Prussia, where there are many Lutherans, as at Dantzick,
Elbing, Thorn, and Mariemburg. There were also some Socinian formerly, but King
John Casimir Expelled 'em out of the Kingdom in 1658, and obliged 'em to sell
their Estates in Three years.

In the Reign of Sigismund Augustus, Nicholas Radziwill was the first who
turned Calvinist, and Protected those of that Persuasion in his House at Vilna,
where they Sung the Psalms Translated into the Vulgar Tongue. But that Branch
of the House of Radziwill is now wholly Extinct, the last having left only one
Daughter, who was Married to the Elector of Brandenburg's Second Son.

The Ecclesiastics in General are very much Respected in Poland, but the
Monks, or Regular Clergy, are more esteemed than the rest, and well entertained
every where. They Read Homilies in the Churches, and carry the Sacrament
privately to Sick Persons, and even sometimes Bury the Dead without asking the
Consent either of the Bishop or Curat. The Mendicant Friars, who go about
Begging Alms, enter boldly to the very Closets, without Knocking at the Door.

The Monks in Poland are generally Rich; but they are neither Regular nor
Modest, for they usually Drink in Cellars (which are the Taverns of that
Country) and sometimes to that Excess, that they are not able to walk in the
Streets; without fearing either to be Censured by their Superiors, or to give
any occasion of Scandal to the People. The Fasts that are observed by the
Monks, and by all the Polanders in General, consist only in Abstaining from
Milk, Eggs, and boiled Fish at Night, for they may eat dried Fish for their
Collation; and provided they Fast at that time, they imagine that they may Eat
and Drink all the Day long: They Abstain from Butter, Eggs and Milk on Friday
and Saturday; for they believe there is no difference betwixt Milk and Flesh.

As for the Secular Clergy, there are some of them who have not only Two
Canonships, but Two Parsonages; but there are none of them who take care to
perform the Duties of their Function. The Curates make the Monks Instruct their
Parishioners, and leave the other Duties of their Offices to be performed by
Vicars. The Canons are never present at the Offices, and give a poor Scholar
Two pence a day to say their hours for them in the Quire. And the Bishops
themselves are so careless of their Episcopal Functions, that they dare not
Correct the Inferior Clergy.

The Polanders seem very Devout, and bestow considerable Gifts upon their
Churches; but they are neither Liberal to the Poor, nor careful of their Sick
Servants. They Pray aloud in the Church, and at the Elevation of the Sacrament
at Mass they Beat themselves, and knock their Heads against the Pavement, or
against the Bench on which they sit, with so much Violence, that on such
occasions there is always a great Noise in the Church. The Women commonly use
their Prayer-Books, with a Chaplet of Beads drawn through the middle of 'em. In
Winter all the Ladies of Quality, and even some Men, cause a Furred Bag to be
brought to Church, in which they put their Feet, for the Weather is extremely
Cold, especially for the Women, who have Fine thin Shoes; they wear also a
little Furred Mantle upon their shoulders.

The Churches of Poland are very Fine and well-adorn'd. The Jesuits of Leopold
have a Chasuble covered so thick with Pearls, and so heavy, that they cannot
use it when they say Mass; it is valued at above 100000 Livres. They Sing
somewhat in the Polish Tongue every where, especially in the Parishes at
High-Mass. The Rosary is also daily repeated in the same Language in all the
Churches of the Dominicans, where the Women are seated on one side, and the Men
on the other; the Men alone Singing the Ave Maria, and the Women alone the
Sancta Maria. There are Monks of all Orders in Poland, except Carthusians and
Minimes.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Administration of Justice.
THERE are two sorts of Jurisdiction in Poland, Ecclesiastical and Civil. The
former is in the hands of the Bishops, who execute it by their Officials, from
whose Judgment there lies an Appeal to the Archbishop of Gnesna, the Primate of
the Kingdom. And besides the Authority of the Pope's Nuncio is so great, that
he may Judge all Ecclesiastic Causes by Appeal.

The Civil Jurisdiction is in the hands of several sorts of Judges. The
Starosta's hold Courts within the Extents of their Territories, and each City
has a Right to give Judgment in certain Cases. Every Palatin, Marshal and
Chancellor, has his respective Jurisdiction; The King, the Senate, and the
General Diets determine Civil and Criminal Causes. And besides, the Nobility
have Three Courts, where they give Final Judgment in Causes without further
Appeal. There are Two of those Courts for the Kingdom, and one for the Duchy.
Those of the Kingdom Sit at Peotrkow in Lower, and Lublin in Upper Poland; and
that of the Duchy is held one Year at Viina, and another at Minsk, or at
Nowogrodeck by turns. They are composed of a certain number of Gentlemen both
of the Clergy and Laity, who are chosen in each Palatinat; the Lay-members once
in Four Years, and the Ecclesiastics every Two Years. The Judgments are given
by Plurality of Voices; but, in Matters that are purely Ecclesiastical, the
Number of the Ecclesiastical Judges must be equal to that of the Secular. There
are also Two Courts for Affairs relating to the Finances, one at Radom in Upper
Poland, and the other at Vilna.

The Palatins take Cognizance of nothing but such Matters as relate to the
Jews. The Marshals give Final Judgment, without further Appeal, in all Causes
both Civil and Criminal, relating to the Officers of the King's Household, and
to the Domestic Servants of the Senators who remain with the King. The
Jurisdiction of the Marshals extends over the Merchants, and over all
Forreignners, who are scarcely able to procure Justice in this Country.

The Chancellors only determine such Causes as are brought before them by
Appeal, as the Judgments of the Magistrates of Cities, and of Palatins, when
the Difference is between a Christian and a Jew.

The Punishments of Malefactors are of several kinds: some, for Example, are
Hanged, and others Beheaded. The variety of Punishments does not proceed from
the different Qualities of the Criminals, but from the difference of the
Crimes. For they Hang a Robber, of what Quality soever he be, and they Behead
all sorts of Persons for all other Crimes but Robbery; unless for some Enormous
Villainies, which are Punished, by Breaking the Malefactor on the Wheel, or by
Cutting off two Thougs, or Long Pieces of the Skin of his Back.

Masters have also a power to Correct and Chastise their Servants, which they
do in this manner; if the Servant that is to be Punished be a Gentleman, they
make him lie down upon his Belly on a Carpet that is spread upon the Ground,
then a Man Beats him on the Back with a Cord, or Stick, giving him as many
Blows, or Lashes, as the Master, who is usually present, orders; after which,
he who is Beaten, embraces the Knees of him who caused him to be Beaten, and
calls him his Benefactor. This Correction seems a little too severe; but the
Humor of the People makes it Necessary.

Since I have mentioned the way of Punishing Servants who are Gentlemen, 'twill
not be improper to observe, that Polish Gentlemen may serve as Coachmen, Grooms
Cooks, and do all the meanest Offices, without derogating from their Nobility,
or rendering 'em incapable of the Highest Preferment. For I have known some of
them, who, after they had been Foot-boys to some Great Lord, and others, who,
after they had been Drummers to a Company of Dragoons, were advanced to the
Dignity of Senators; And, in the General, there is nothing but a
Handicraft-Trade that derogates from Nobility in this Country.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Marriages and Funerals.
MArriages and Funerals are extremely Chargeable in Poland; For when a
Gentleman Marries, whether he be Rich or Poor, the Wedding must last three
days. The Marriage of a Waiting-Gentlewoman puts her Lady to almost the same
charge, as if one of her own Daughters were Married. As for the Marriages at
Court of the Queen's Maids of Honor, or of the Daughters of some Great Lords;
on the first and second day the King makes the Wedding-Feast, which is held in
a Great Hall, where Three Tables are spread; the King and Queen sit at the
first, fronting all the rest of the Hall; the Bride and Bridegroom are Seated
by the Queen's side, and the Pope's Nuncio and Archbishop of Gnesna sit next
the King: The Ambassadors are also seated at the same Table, opposite to the
King and Queen; so that they are all under the Canopy of State. Yet there are
some Examples to the contrary; For at the Feast which Sigismund III. made at
Cracow, upon occasion of His Marriage with Constance of Austria, in the Year
1606, he caused the Cardinal Maciejowski, the Pope's Nuncio, who was nominated
to the Archbishopric of Gnesna, to be removed from under the Canopy.

The Ladies, Senators, and all the Officers, except those who are to serve the
King, are seated on both sides of the other two Tables, which are very long:
Before they sit down, they are all called over, in order, that they may take
their Places according to their Rank. The Feast begins usually about Four or
Five a Clock in the Afternoon, and they continue Drinking and Dancing till Two
in the Morning. The Senators rise from time to time from the Table, and go
before the King to Drink His Health, and do Him Obedience by bending the Knee.

Tho the Tables are covered with all sorts of Provisions, yet they Eat but
little at those Feasts, but they Drink abundance of Hungary Wine, which is very
Excellent; and one may say, that tho it is very dear, it is more common, and less
spared than Water; and there is not a Lady at Table who has not before her a
Dozen of Glasses of Wine, of all the Healths that were Drank round; For their
Modesty obliges 'em only to touch the Glass with their Lips; so that they spill
more Wine upon the Tables, and in the Dishes, than they Drink. After the
Entertainment has lasted Five or Six hours, they begin to Dance to the Music
of several Violins, and small portable Organs. All sorts of People Dance in
Poland, both the Old, the Young, the Poor and the Rich. The Old Senators, and
the Old Ladies begin the Dance, which they do so softly and modestly, that one
would think it was a Company of Monks and Nuns walking in Procession: But the
Exercise grows warm by degrees, and ends, at last, with a Great Noise.

On the Second Day every one Presents the Bride with a Piece of Plate; all
those Presents are made before the Queen, and the Bride who sits by her. Those
who Present 'em make Harangues, which are oftentimes long and troublesome; and
the Queen's Chancellor Answers them all. So that this Ceremony, which commonly
does not begin till Noon, lasts sometimes till Three a Clock, after which, they
begin to place themselves at the Tables.

On the Third Day, the Ceremony of the Marriage is performed, all the Young
People Accompanying the Bridegroom and Bride to Church on Horseback. In their
return they pass before the King's Palace, the Trumpets and Kettle-drums
continually Sounding from the Balconies on each side: After which, the same
Train Conducts the King and the Queen, with the Bride, to the Bridegroom's
House, where there is a Magnificent Entertainment prepared for them. After they
rise from the Table they Dance; and the Ball being over, every one retires;
Then the Bride begins to Weep, for it is the Custom of all the Polish
Gentlewomen to shed Tears on that occasion, and to seem very much afflicted;
because, otherwise, they would run the hazard of being looked upon as Impudent
and Shameless Women.

Having given an Account of the Weddings, I proceed to speak something of the
Funerals, which are so Pompous and Magnificent, that they resemble the Triumph
of a Living Man, rather than the Interment of the Dead.

The Corpse being put into a Coffin, is carried upon a Chariot, drawn by Six
Horses, covered with Black Housings. The Coffin is Covered with a large Pall of
Black Velvet, with a Cross of Rod Satin in the middle; Six of the Domestic
Servants of the Deceased, in Mourning Habits, hold up the Corners of the Pall.
The Chariot is preceded by Priests, Monks, and a great Multitude of People with
Lighted Torches of White Wax. Three Men on Horseback carry the Armor of the
Deceased, one his Sword, the other his Lance, and the third his Dart. The
Procession Marches so softly, that it is late before they come to the Church;
where, after the Service is over, those who carried the Arms of the Deceased,
enter the Church on Horseback, and, at a full Gallop, break the Arms against
the Coffin, which is afterward Interred. Then they return to the House, where
agreat Feast is prepared, and not only Drink to excess, but make the
Ecclesiastics follow their Example.

The Mourning Habits of the Men are not different from ours: but, on such
occasions, the Ladies of Quality are Apparalled in course Black S^uff; their
very Linen is courser than Canvas, and those of the Greatest Quality wear the
courset Linen and Cloth. This Habit does not ill become Widows that are young
and handsome.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Diet, and Entertainments of the Polanders.
THE Polanders seldom or never eat any Breakfasts, but both the Men and Women,
especially the latter, usually drink in the Morning Beer boiled with Ginger,
Yolks of Eggs and Sugar. They eat commonly, at their Meals, Beef and Veal,
which are excellent in this Country. Their Mutton is not very good, and for
that reason they usually give it to their Servants. They have generally an
aversion to cold Meat. They have abundance of Gray, but no Red Partridges, and
great store of Hares, but no Rabbets, which they do not look upon as an
Inconveniency; for, generally speaking, a Polander would eat a Cat as soon as a
Rabbet: yet they bring up some White Rabbets in their Chambers for the sake of
their Furs. There are abundance of Bucks, but few Stags in Poland; and many
wild Boars, Hogs, Capons, Hens, Chickens, Turkey Fowl, Pigeons * Ducks and
Geese. There are also many wild^ Geese, Snipes and Ducks in the Summer, but few
in Winter, because all the Lakes and Rivers in Poland are Frozen up in the
Winter; and this is (...) the Reason why we have such abundance of Wildfowl in
the Winter.

There are also in Poland a great many Woodcocks, most of which are about the
bigness of a Capon; but there are very few so large as those in the Forests of
Ardenne and Lorrain: The^e are abundance of Pheasants and Wood-hens in
Lithuania, and store of Bustards in Prussia. The^ are certain Birds resembling
large Sparrows, which come into those Provinces in the Winter: they are called
Snow-birds, and are very agreeable to the taste. The Polanders never eat any
Tame-Fowl, but what is brought in the Morning alive into the Kitchen, where
it is killed for Dinner. They are great lovers of sucking-Pigs, which are very
good Meat when they are Roasted; but are commonly very ill Dressed. The
greatest Lords seldom dine without a Dish of Pease and Bacon; but the Bacon is
cut into slices, and laid upon the Pease. They eat all sorts of Mushrooms that
grow in the Woods, and even those that grow upon Trees, which they gather, and
dry, to preserve 'em. These Mushrooms are reckoned Poisonous among us, but are
as generally eaten in Poland as Poppyseed, which they usually devour like
Millet.

The Polanders never make Potage, but when they meet with any that is made by
French Cooks they eat it with a great deal of pleasure. Their Boiled Meat is
better, and more savoury than ours, because they do not Boil it so much. Their
Sauces are also extremely different from those that are in use among us: They
make a Yellow Sauce, with Saffron, a White Sauce with Cream, a Gray Sauce with
Onions, and a Black Sauce with the Juice of Plums. They season all those Sauces
with a great quantity of Sugar, Pepper, Cinnamon, Ginger, Cloves, Nutmeg,
Olives, Capers, and Prunes, especially in the Sauce which they make for Fish,
which they Dress better than the French. They use so much Spices, that there
are some Lords who spend above 50000 Livres a Year in these Commodities.

They usually eat a great deal of Meat, and little Bread, though there grows
abundance of Corn in Poland, especially Rye, which is much better than in
France: They are also great lovers of Roots, which they dress well, and eat a
great deal of Cachat, which is a sort of Meal made of Corn, as of Barley,
Millet, or Oats, or sometimes of a small Grain which they call Manna. These
Cachats are very good when they are well Dressed and Seasoned: They eat them on
Flesh-days, with Milk and Butter, and on Fasting-days with Oil, but some begin
already to dispense with this Rule, especially on Saturdays.

As there are few Fish in the Baltic, which is the only Sea that borders upon
Poland, they are almost wholly destitute of Seafish; but that defect is
abundantly supplied by the great plenty of Freshwater-Fish, such as Pikes,
Carps, Eels, Perches, Tenches, Breams, Trouts, Barbels, Shadds, Sturgeons,
Salmons, Lobsters, and Lampreys.

The usual Drink in Poland is Beer, but in Lithuania and Vkrania they commonly
drink Mead, because of the numerous Swarms of Bees that are in the Forests of
those Countries. After Meals the Gentlemen, and the Richer sort of the
Burghers, drink a Glass of Hungary Wine, because they are of opinion, that Beer
alone is too cold, and would injure their Stomachs, if not Corrected by the
comfortable warmth of a Glass of Wine.

In Lithuania and Vkrania they have two sorts of Wines made of Honey, Red and
White, or Mead and Metheglin; they are both pleasant Liquors, though they taste a
little of the Wax. The Beer is very good, of an Amber-Colour, and of a brisk
and poignant Sweetness, especially that of Varka, or that which the Gentlemen
make for their private use, which is commonly much stronger than that which the
Brewers make to sell.

Besides Beer and Mead, the Polanders and Lithuanians drink also Hungary,
Italian, French and Rhenish Wines. The first is better and stronger than any
Spanish Wine: It Is brought from Hungary to Cracow, over the Carpathian
Mountains, in large Casks, drawn by Oxen, after which it is put in smaller
Vessels. The best sort is sold for 12 or 15 Livres the Polish Pot, which holds
about 3 Quarts, and consequently we may reasonably suppose that the Poor are
forced to abstain from so Costly a Liquor.

The Italian Wine is brought to Poland by Land; but is not so much used as the
former, both by reason of the great distance, and because of its Luscious
Sweetness, which makes it only fit for Women.

The French and Rhenish Wines are brought by the Baltic-Sea to Dantzic. They
are not only naturally weaker than Hungary Wine, but lose a great deal of their
strength upon the Sea; for it is extremely difficult to Transport the New Wines
in November, by reason of the Ice which makes the Sea impassable. As for the
Rhenish Wine, it seldom goes farther than Dantzic, except a little which is
spent in Prussia; and besides they never drink it without Sugar, because it is
too sharp.

Tho the Polish Brandy, or Aquavitae is made of Corn, it is as good and strong
as that which is made of Wine; but it is almost only used by the common People,
the rest only drinking it when the Weather is excessively Cold.

When the Polanders make a Feast, all the Guests who are Invited must bring a
Knife, Fork and Spoon along with them, because it is not a Custom to lay any of
these Utensils upon the Table; they Sow a piece of Linen round the
Table-Cloath, which serves for Napkins. After all the Guests are come, the
Gates are shut, and are not opened till all the Company are risen from the
Table, and all the Plate is found; for if they did not use this Precaution, the
Footmen would steal part of it; and this is also the reason why they lay
neither Knives, Spoons, Forks, nor Napkins upon the Table.

Every Person of Quality has a Hall in his House, which they call the
Banquetting-Hall, in which there is a place for a Side-Table, surrounded with
Ballisters. This Side-Table, from which the Cloth is never taken off till it
be very dirty, is covered with abundance of Plate, and over it is a place for
the Music, which is usually Composed of Violins and Organs. Those who are
Invited to the Feast bring their Footmen with them, and as soon as they are
seated at the Table, every one of them cuts off one half of his Bread, which he
gives with a Plate full of Meat to his Servant, who, after he has shared it
with his Comrade, stands behind his Master and eats it. If the Master calls
twice for a Glass of Wine, or other Liquor, the Servant brings as much more,
and drinks in the same Glass with his Master without rinsing it. Though there is
a great deal of Meat brought to the Table, there is nothing carried back to the
Kitchen, not even of the last Course; for the Servants seize upon all the Meat,
and their Ladies make each of them carry a Napkin to bring away the Dry
Sweetmeats, or Fruits that are brought to the Table. After they have done
Eating they usually go to Dance.

These People, at least the Genteeler sort, eat very decently; for they never
touch the Meat with their hands, and are so skilful in Carving, that they hold
a Partridge upon the end of their Fork and cut it in Six pieces; But while they
are at Table, they think of nothing but Eating; for the Gate is shut, and is
never opened till after Dinner or Supper.

The King usually Eats only with the Queen, or with some Great Lord; But when
he Hunts, or Travels upon the Road, he causes all the Gentlemen, even those who
serve in his Chamber, to sit down at Table with him; for if he should use them
otherwise, or give 'em the least occasion to think that he slighted them, he
would run the hazard of incurring the hatred of all the Nobility. For an
Instance of which, I shall only observe, that Sigismond of Luxemburg, whom
Lewis King of Poland and Hungary, his Father-in-Law, had Chosen for his
Successor, was Excluded from the Crown, merely because he slighted the
Gentlemen of Poland, and would not make them Eat with him.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the way of Traveling in Poland.
THERE are no Inns in Poland, where one may Lodge conveniently, and be
Accommodated with a Bed. The only Houses of Entertainment are places built of
Wood, which they call Karczma, where Travelers are obliged to Lodge, with the
Horses, Cows and Hogs, in a long Stable made of Boards, ill joined, and
Thatched with Straw; It Is true, there is a Chamber at the end of it, with a
Stove, but it is impossible for one to Lodge in it in the Summer, because of the
Flies, Fleas, Bugs, and the Noisome Smell of the place, for they never open the
Windows, even in the hottest Weather; so that Strangers choose rather to lie in
the Stables in the Summer, than in the Chamber. And besides, the Gospodarz, or
Innkeeper Lodges in that Room with his Children and whole Family, and usually
keeps a Hogshead of stinking Cabbage, the smell of which is extremely offensive
to Strangers, though the People of the Country, who are accustomed to such
perfumes, are not incommoded by it.

Those who have occasion to Travel in the Summer, may avoid part of these
Inconveniences by Lying in a Barn upon fresh Straw; for the Gospodarz gathers
and Locks up every Morning the Straw which was given at Night to those who
Lodged in the Stable or Chamber, in order to reserve it for those who shaall
come to Lodge after them.

When a Forreigner is obliged to Travel in Poland, he ought to furnish himself
with a Calash drawn by Two Horses, a Bed made of a Thin Quilt, a Small
Feather-bed, a Pair of Sheets, a Bolster, a Coverlet, and an empty Straw-bed to
wrap about the rest of the Clothes. All this Baggage is put into a Sack or Bag
of Serge, which serves for a Seat to him that Travels in the Calash. He must
also provide a small Case of six or eight Bottles sill'd with Beer, Wine, or
Brandy, and a Basket for Bread, Boiled Meat and Candles, without forgetting
Oats for the Horses, and Grease for the Wheels of the Calash. And besides, he
must remember to renew his Provisions in every City, for there is little or
nothing to be had in the Country Inns, and the Cities are very remote from one
another.

After one is thus fitted out, the Expense of his Journey is very
inconsiderable, for his Lodging costs him nothing, and I believe the Reason why
the Inns are so poorly furnished, is, because the Gentlemen never pay for what
they have. It Is no wonder then that the Gospodarz deny them every thing, and
usually Salute 'em with this Complement, Niemazs, that is, There is none:
nevertheless, they freely give what they have to Strangers; But since there are
few Travelers, the Innkeepers make no Provision for them; So that they are
obliged to go to the Dvour, or the Lord of the Village's House for what they
want.

The whole Country of Poland is Plain, without Stones, or Hills, and
consequently very convenient for Traveling in a Calash with Two Horses: There
are several Polanders who have no Coachman, and drive their own Calashes, so
that they spend very little upon the Road, especially in Summer; because when
they arrive at the Karczma, they put their Horses to Grass, and make the
Gospodarz give them a little Hay, which he is very unwilling to do, because he
is always afraid that he shall never be Paid. Others Travel on Horseback, and
carry along with them a Small Stiched Quilt to Lie upon, being about an Inch
thick, and a Foot and a half broad, which they fold double, and lay it under
the Saddle; and when they arrive at the Inn, they give the Gospodarz Money to
bring them some Brown Bread, Beer, and a little Oats; so that all the Charge
for the Lodging of a Polish Gentleman, and of his Horse, does not often amount
to above 5 or 6 Gros, which are worth no more than Two pence. And consequently
that which is so Incommodious to Strangers, is very Convenient for those of the
Country, because they can Travel 100 Leagues on Horseback, without spending
above 50 Pence.

As for the Lords and Ladies, they Travel always in Coaches, and carry Wagons
along with them, with Provisions and Beds for themselves and their Women; but
their Attendants who follow 'em on Horseback, are forced to content themselves
with such Lodgings as I described before. I must not forget to intimate, that a
Traveller ought to be very careful in passing over the Bridges, because they
are generally bad, and the Polanders take no care to keep them in Repair.

Those who Travel in Winter ought to provide a sufficient quantity of Brandy,
and a Furred Bag to put their Feet into. For it is so Cold in Poland, that those
who are in a Coach, Wagon, or Calash, cannot otherwise endure it: and since the
Lakes and Rivers are so Frozen, that they easily Travel upon the Ice. They must
take care, when the Earth is covered with Snow, to procure a Sledge, upon which
they must place the Coach or Calash, and draw the Sledge with the Horses.

Travelers are very much incommoded in Winter, especially on Holy Days, for
the Cold is so piercing, that it is impossible to be in a Chamber without a
Stove in it: And besides, on such solemn occasions, all the Peasants of the
Village, who usually drink nothing but Water, meet together to Carouse with
Beer and Brandy, and then Sing and Dance all Night, so that the weary Traveller
cannot so much as shut his eyes.

I have said enough to convince the Reader, that the manner of Traveling in
Poland is extremely Inconvenient to Strangers. As for the Native Polanders, who
Travel on Horseback in the Winter, they have great Boots, into which they put
Chaff, or chopp'd Straw, to keep their Feet warm, and before they Mount their
Horses they drink a large Draught of Brandy to preserve 'em from the Cold. The
Coachmen use the same precaution from the Cold, for otherwise they could never
endure the Sharpness of the Weather, which is so excessively violent, that when
a Man Travels with his Face exposed to the Air, his Nose sometimes Freezes.
Those who have the Misfortune to meet with such a Disaster, must apply Snow to
the part, and carefully avoid entering into a Room wherein there is a Stove, or
into any warm place, for otherwise they would run the hazard of losing their
Nose.

There is no Traveling by Post in Poland, though there are Posts for Carrying
Letters and Pacquets. This Custom was first established by Order of the
Republic, in the Reign of Vladislaus IV. Anno 1647. For before that time the
King's Orders were carried by Gentlemen of the Court, who obliged the
Starosta's to furnish 'em with Horses and Provisions.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Polish COINS.
THE Pieces of Gold which pass Currently in Poland are Ducats, which are worth
2 French Crowns, or 2 German Rix Dollars, or 7 Livres of Dantzick Money, or 12
Livres of the Current Money of Poland, that is in Chelons. A Chelon is a piece
of Copper, smaller than a French Denier; 3 Chelons make a Polish Gros, and 3
Gross 2 Pence of the Country Money. So that to make up these 2 Pence, which
are not worth above one of our Pennys, there must be 9 Chelons, which are not
worth, and weigh no more than 2 English Farthings, whereby one may easily judge
how much the Country is Ruined by so base a Coin, which was first Introduced
in a pressing exigency, to satisfy the Army which had Confederated for want of
their Pay.

The Introducing of base Money into Poland is no new thing, as it appears by
that which was Coined by the Officers of Casimir IV. and afterward occasioned
a Complaint to the Diet held at Peortrkow, in 1459. For at that time the Kings
had the Privilege of Coining the Money, and the first who yielded it up to the
Republic was Sigismond III. in the Year 1632.

There is another Base Coin in Poland, called Tinfe, which was also brought
into the Kingdom in the Year 1663, to pay the Confederated Army. The Tinfe
which is a little larger than a French Fifteen pence, is of Silver, of a Base
Allay. It Is worth 30 Gros of Chelons, which make 20 Pence of Poland, or 10
Common Pence.

Besides the Tinfes, there is another sort of Money called Choustack, which is
also a Piece of Silver of Base Allay, and less than a French Sou: It Is worth 10
Gros of Poland, so that 3 of 'em make a Tinfe. These Base Coyns do not pass so
currently at Dantzick, nor in any part of Prussia; for the Tinfes are not worth
above 18 Gros, and the Choustacks Six Gros, of Dantzick Money, because the
Chelons of Dantzick are worth more than those of Poland, which do not go at all
there.

The Money of Dantzick consists in Ducats of Gold, Ourts, Choustaques, and
Chelons; The Ducat, as I Intimated before, is worth 2 Rix Dollars, or 2 French
Crowns. An Ourt is a Silver Coin of the bigness of a French Piece of Fifteen
Pence, and is worth 18 Gros of Dantzick, or 30 Gros of Polish Money. A
Choustaque is worth 6 Gros of Dantzick 10 Gros of Polish Money; and there must
be 3 Chelons Dantzick to make a Gros: Yet 18 Gros of Dantzick Chelons make 30
Gros of Polish Chelons; Thus a Tinfe, which is worth 30 Gros of Polish Chelons,
is worth but 18 Gros of Dantzick Chelons. The Ducat which is worth 12 Francks
of Polish Chelons, is worth but 7 Franks of Current Money of Dantzick. Five
Choustaques, or an Ourt and 2 Choustaques make a Livre of Dantzick Money,
because 5 Choustaques make 30 Gros, and 30 Gros make 20 Pence. This difference
in the value of the Coins ought to be heedfully observed by Strangers, who have
occasion to pass through Dantzick, because the Bankers take all opportunities
to Impose upon 'em.

An APPENDIX, CONTAINING A Chronological Abridgment Of the HISTORY of POLAND;
Some Remarks upon the Government of that Kingdom, And the ABDICATION of K. JOHN
CASIMIR: And an Account Of the Present State of SOCINIANISM in that COUNTRY.
Lechus. An. Dom. 550.

THE Polish Historians asscribe the Foundation of their Monarchy to Lechus; and
some of 'em think, that the Poles, or Polanders, were first called Polachs,
from the Name of this Prince. He Built the City of Gnesna, and made it the
Place of his Residence.

After the Death of Lechus, the Government of the Kingdom was committed to
Twelve Palatines.

Cracus. An. D. 700.

He Built Cracow, and transferred the Court, or Residence of the Prince, from
Gnesna to that City.

Lechus II.
He Assassinated his Father Cracus in a Wood, and gave out, That he was Torn in
pieces by a Bear.

QUEEN Venda. An. D. 750.

A Princess equally famous for her Beauty and Valor.

After her Death the Kingdom was again Governed by Twelve Palatines.

Primislaus, or Lescus I. An. D. 760.

A Person of mean Birth, but of extraordinary Courage and Wisdom. He was made
Prince, or Duke of Poland with the Unanimous Consent of all the Estates of the
Nation, in consideration of the Important Services he had done to his Country,
and particularly in the War against the Huns.

Lesco II. Surnamed the Black. An. D. 804.

He is said to have Assisted Attila in his Wars against the Romans.

Lesco III. An. D. 810.

The Son and Successor of Lesco II. He was also an Enemy to the Romans.

Popiel I. An. D. 815.

A Debauched and Effeminate Prince.

Popiel II. An. D. 830.

Succeeded his Father, and Imitated his Example. He was Eaten up by Mice.

Piastus. An. D. 842.

He was advanced from the Plow to the Throne, in consideration of his Justice
and Integrity.

Semovitus, or ziemonitus. An. D. 861.

He defeated the Vandals, and Conquered several Countries on the Coast of the
Balthic Sea.

Lesco IV. An. D. 892.

He Concluded a Peace with all his Neighbors.

Semislaus, or ziemomistus. An. D. 913.

He maintained the Peace which his Predecessor had established.

Mesco, or Miecislaus. An. D. 964.

He was Born Blind, but received his Sight during his Father's Life; who, upon
this occasion, consulting those, who pretended to foretell things to come, was
informed, that his Son should be remarkable for Piety. He was the first Duke,
or Prince of Poland, who embraced the Christian Religion.

Boleslaus I. Surnamed Chrobri. An. D. 999.

He laid aside the Title of Duke with which his Predecessors had contented
themselves, and was Solemnly styled King of Poland, and Friend and Ally of the
Roman Empire, by Otho III. An. 1001. He subdued the Bohemians, Moravians,
Silesians, Prussians, and Pomeranians.

Mesco, or Miecislaus II. An. D. 1025.

A Lazy and Effeminate Prince. Under his Reign the Bohemians and Moravians
Revolted from the Crown of Poland.

Casimir I. An. D. 1041.

He was Dethroned, and forced to enter into a Cloister: but afterward raised
an Army, and defeated the Tyrant who had Usurped the Crown.

Boleslaus II. Surnamed the Bold. An. D. 1059.

He Defeated the Huns, and other Scythian Nations, and subdued Moravia: but
notwithstanding all the Glory of his Victories, his Memory is Infamous in
History. He fell in Love with a Mare, and Barbarously Murdered the Bishop
Stanislaus, who reproved him for his Brutish and Unnatural Lust. And for these
Detestable Crimes, both he and his Successors were deprived of the Regal
Dignity. He was expelled out of the Kingdom, and Torn in Pieces by Dogs.

Vladislaus I. Surnamed Hermannus. An. D. 1082.

A Warlike and Just Prince.

Boleslaus III. Surnamed Crivoustus. An. D. 1103.

He assisted the Hungarians against the Romans, and was very Powerful at Sea.

Vladislaus II. An. D. 1146.

He endeavored to Oppress his Brothers, but was at last Defeated, and Expelled
out of the Kingdom.

Boleslaus IV. Surnamed Crispus. An. D. 1146.

He made War with the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa.

Miecislaus III. Surnamed the Aged. An. D. 1174.

He was Deposed for Oppressing the People with Exorbitant Impositions.

Casimit II. An. D. 1178.

Succeeds his Brother, abrogates the Unjust Laws that were established by his
Predecessors, and Frees the People from Tyrannical Impositions.

Lesco V. Surnamed the White. An. D. 1195.

He was Attacked by this Uncle Miecislaus the Aged, and defended himself with
various success, till he was at last surpised as he was Bathing himself, and
thrust through with a Spear. During the Turbulent Reign of this Prince, the
Country was miserably harassed, and the Sovereign Power was, for some time,
assumed by Miecislaus, and afterward by Vladislaus Lasconogus.

Boleslaus V. Surnamed the Chaste. An. D. 1226.

In his time the Tartars made a terrible Havoc in Poland.

Lesco VI. Surnamed the Black. An. D. 1279.

He was Assisted by the Knights of the Teutonic Order, against Conrade, who had
besieged Cracow.

Premislaus II. An. D. 1295.

He Reassumed the Regal Title by the Advice of the Nobility, and was Crowned by
James Archbishop of Gnesna. He undertook an Expedition against the Bohemians,
but was surpised and killed in his Camp, in the First Year of his Reign.

Wenceslaus An. D. 1296.

The King of Bohemia obtained the Crown of Poland: he defeated the Hungarians,
and fought against the Emperor Albert.

Vladislaus III. Surnamed Locticus. An. D. 1305.

He was assisted in his Wars by the Lithuanians.

Casimit III. Surnamed the Great. An. D. 1333.

A Just and Peaceful Prince. He freed the Kingdom from Robbers, who, during the
late Disorders, had made the Ways Unpassable, and Established New Laws to
suppress the Insolence of the Soldiers. He entertained four Kings at a Splendid
Feast, viz. the Kings of Hungary, Cyprus, Denmark, and of the Romans; and gave
his Niece in Marriage to the last.

Lewis An. D. 1370.

King of Hungary is Chosen King of Poland. He Routed the Lithuanians in a
Memorable Battle.

Vladislaus IV. or II. called Jagello. An. D. 1386.

This Prince, who was Duke of Lithuania, and a Pagan, Married Hedwige the
Daughter of King Lewis, and embraced the Christian Religion. He United the
Great Duchy of Lithuania to the Crown of Poland, and Extirpated Paganism out
of that Country. He obtained a Great Victory over the Teutonic Knights in
Prussia.

Vladislaus V. or III. An. D. 1434.

He was Chosen King of Hungary, and was killed by the Turks in the Battle of
Varna.

Casimit IV. Surnamed the Great. An. D. 1447.

He took several Towns from the Teutonick Knights.

John Albert. An. D. 1492.

He died as he was making Preparations for a War against the Turks.

Alexander. An. D. 1501.

This Prince was successful in his Wars against the Moscovites and Tartars.

Sigismund I. An. D. 1507.

He Defeated the Muscovites, Tartars and Hungarians, and Subdued Prussia.

Sigismund II. Surnamed Augustus. An. D. 1548.

This was the last King of the Race of Vladislaus Jagellon.

Henry of Valois. An. D. 1574.

He was Chosen King of Poland by the Intrigues of the French; and Four Months
after his Accession to the Crown retired privately from Poland, upon the News
of the Death of his Brother Charles IX. whom he Succeeded in France.

Stephen Bathori, Prince of Transylvania. An. D. 1576.

A Wise, Brave and Victorious Prince. His Virtues were celebrated at his Death,
in the following Elogy.

In Templo, plusquam Sacerdos.
In Re-publica, plusquam Rex.
In Sententia dicenda, plusquam Senator.
In Judicio plusquam Jurisconsultus.
In Exercitu plusquam Imperator.
In Acie plusquam Miles.
In adversis perferendis, injuriisque condonandis, plusquam Vir.
In publica liberate tuenda, plusquam Civis.
In Amicitia colenda, plusquam Amicus.
In Convictu, plusquam familiaris.
In Venatione, ferisque domandis, plusquam Leo.
In tota reliqua Vita, plusquam Philosophus.
Sigismund III. An. D. 1587.

The Son of John King of Sweden, by Catherine Daughter to Sigismund I. having
renounced the Protestant Religion, was chosen King of Poland by the unanimous
consent of the Nobility. He ordered Maximilian Archduke of Austria, whom the
Crown-General Zamoski had defeated, to be bound with Golden-fetters, and
carried to Zamosch, where he kept him Prisoner two years.

Vladislaus VI, or IV.
The Son and Successor of Sigismund. He had the courage to encounter an Army of
200000 Muscovites with 50000 Men, and routed 'em entirely. After this Memorable
and Important Victory, he took the City of Moscow, and returned in Triumph to
Warsaw, with Two Czars, the Patriarch, the Crown, and 500 Wagons laden with
rich Spoils. He defeated the Grand Signior Osman, and pursued him almost as far
as Constantinople. Afterward, he was so animated with an Imprudent Zeal for
the propagating of Religion, that he resolved to undertake an Expedition to the
Holy Land, and died for grief, because the Polanders refused to raise Subsidies
to enable him to prosecute that design. After his Death the Kingdom was
harrass'd by the Cossacks, who were principally incensed against the Jews and
Jesuits.

John Casimit,
Who was formerly a Jesuit and a Cardinal, was Elected King after his Brother
Vladislaus, and obtained a Dispensation from the Pope to Marry his Widow. He
defeated the Cossacks in a doubtful and uncertain Battle near Beresteczko in
Russia. Having by this Victory curbed that Factious People, and secured the
Quiet of the Kindom, he began to indulge himself in his Pleasures. He Banished
the Vice Chancellor of the Crown, after he had Debauched his Wife; and that
Injured Officer returning to Sweden, persuaded that Prince to Invade Poland,
which he did with so great success, that Casimir was entirely dispossessed. But
he was afterward recalled even by those who joined with his Enemies, and after
several Battles obliged the King of Sweden to make a Peace. At last, by the
persuasion of his Queen, that he might make way for the Prince of Conde to
Succeed him, he Abdicated the Government, and retired to France, where he was
made Abbot of St. Germans.

Michael.
After Casimir's Abdication, several Intrigues were made by the Dukes of
Lorrain, Newburg and York, and the Prince of Conde, who stood Candidates for
the Crown. At that time the Duke of York professed the Protestant Religion; but
when that was objected against him by the Nobility, a certain Jesuit, who was
employed to manage his Interest, declared openly before the Senate of Poland,
that he was a Roman Catholic. At last, contrary to all expectation, the
Election was determined in favor of Michael Coributh Wisnowieczki, who was
descended of the most ancient Family of the Dukes of Lithuania. This Prince
died at Warsaw about a year after his Coronation; and it is commonly believed
that he was Poisoned by a certain Priest. 'Twas observed that when the General
Sobieski, afterward Chosen King, came to see him in his Coffin, the Nose of
the Deceast Prince began to Bleed as soon as he entered the Room.

John Sobieski.
This Prince was descended of a very Noble and Ancient Family in the Palatinate
of Lublin. He was the younger Son of Sobieski Castellan of Cracow, by a
Daughter of Stanislas Zolkiewski, Great General of the Crown. He was made Great
Marshal of the Crown August. 24. 1665, Great General of the Kingdom in 1667,
and Great Master of the King's Household, Palatin of Cracow, etc. He retook 60
Cities from the Rebel- Cossacks in Vkrania. In 1667. he defended Podhais
against the Tartars, and two years after took from them and the Cossacks the
whole Palatinate of Braclaw in Lower Podolia. In 1673. he obtained a Memorable
Victory over the Turks at Choczim on the Niester, where 8000 Janissaries, and
20000 Spahis were killed. He was Chosen King of Poland, May 10th, 1674, and
made two Campaigns against the Turks before he was Crowned. But that which will
for ever perpetuate the Honor of his Memory, is that Glorious and Important
Action which he performed in 1683, when he Raised the Siege of Vienna. The
following Panegyrical Character of that Prince was made upon that occasion.

JOANNI III.
DOminatione, Polonico, Lithuanico;
Liberatione, Austriaco, Pannonico;
Profligatione, Ottomanico, Thracio:
Religione, Christianissimo;
Pietate, Catholico;
Zelo, Apostolico:
Inter Duces, pugnacissimo;
Inter Reges, sapientissimo;
Inter Imperatores, Augustissimo: Cui
Gloria militaris Regna peperit,
Clementia stabilivit,
Virtus perennavit:
Qui
Raro pietatis and constantiae exemplo, propria deserens, aliena defendens,
Docuit quo pacto sacra foederis jura
Jungantur, custodiantur and compleantur,
Ottomani am lunam fulgentissimo crucis vexillo eternam Eclypsim minitantem,
Adeo prospere feliciterque finibus extirpavit,
Vt unum Idemque fuerit
Venisse, Vidisse and Vicisse.
Igitur,
Inter innumeros Christiani Orbis plausus,
Inter vindicatam Religionis and Imperii laetitiam,
Inter cruentae lunae extrema deliquia,
Agnoscant Praesentes,
Credant Posteri,
Non tantum enascenti Evangelio, quo propagaretur,
Sed and adulto ne profligaretur,
Vtrobique a Deo missum fuisse hominem,
Cui Nomen erat
JOANNES. He Married the Lady Mary de la Grange, the Daughter of the Marquess
(now Cardinal) d' Arquien, and Widow of Prince Zamoiski. He died June 17. 1696,
being seized with a Fit of an Apoplexy, after a long Indisposition.

SOME REMARKS UPON THE GOVERNMENT OF POLAND.
IT IS Worthy Observation, as to the Election of a King in Poland, that whereas
the Nobility and Gentry are the Keepers Preservers and Defendors of the Liberty
and Laws of the Country: Now for fear of a Change in the Government, as has
happened in France, Denmark, Swedeland and Italy, where the Nobility, having
been corrupted and bribed with Honors, and other Rewards by the Kings, have by
degrees remitted from time to time some of their Rights and Immunities, ill at
last they have fooled themselves out of their Freedom, into a Slavish
Dependence on the Court; the Republic of Poland, warned by those Examples, to
avoid such a Fate, has made a Law, That the Election of a King must be Nemine
Contradicente. An Instance of this may be given in the Election of King
Vladislaus the Fourth, a most Warlike Prince, who was Chosen King of Poland (in
consideration of the great Services he had done the Commonwealth) with the
unanimous Consent of the Whole Nobility, excepting only one Deputy, who made a
Solemn Protestation against the Votes of all the Diet; yet the said Prince
could not be Crowned without the Consent of the said Deputy; Who being Asked
why he thus Dissented? Answered; That he did it, that by this means the
Privileges of the Nobility might be safe and lodged within his Power, tho all
the rest of the Nobility were corrupted. Having said this, and caused his
Protestation to be entered into the Records and Archives of the Kingdom, he
presently consented with the rest to the Election of Vladislaus the Fourth.

The Polish Nobility being endowed with so many Privileges, and the Deputies
having always a free Vote, the Aristocratical State of Poland cannot well be
changed by any of the Kings of Poland into an Absolute Monarchy: For, whosoever
offers to do this, is declared by the Senate to be Perjured, and no more a
King; which appears by the late King John the Third's Oath in Harnoc.

Besides, the Nobility uses immediately to complain in the open Senate, of the
Tyranny of those that attempt such Innovations; as did a certain Deputy out of
the Palatinate of Posnania. King Stephen Bathori, after many Victories which he
gained, and several Provinces with which he enlarged the Kingdom of Poland,
began at last to endeavor to make himself Absolute Monarch of Poland;
whereupon this Deputy expressed himself in a Speech with so much Freedom,
Boldness and Vehemence, that the King, Ambitious and Passionate in his Nature,
not being able to let the Deputy run on any longer upon that Topic, interrupted
him in these words, Hold your Tongue you Rascal. To which the Deputy made
Answer, I am no Rascal, but a Gentleman of Poland, an Elector of Kings, and a
Deposer of Tyrants. Whereupon the King said to him, If I were not a King -- And
the Deputy Answered, If you were not -- By which Imperfect Reply the Deputy
hinted to the King, that he did not want Courage to engage with him hand to
hand for Liberty, if he had not been checked by his Respect for the Majesty of
Kings.

The King afterward having buried all His Resentments, advanced him to the
Highest Dignities; nor did he believe that this had any ways lessened His
Majesty: on the contrary, he always esteemed him one of the Best Patriots and
Lovers of his Country.

If any of the Kings of Poland aim at Arbitrary Government, or Act contrary to
the Religion and Laws of the Country, he is immediately Deposed, or forced to
Abdicate the Throne. The Form which King Casimire used in His Abdication, is as
follows.

WE make known and Declare to all the World, that being sensible of our
Weakness which grows daily upon us with our Age, we are unable any longer to
bear up under the Burden of so great Weight as the Government of this State is.
Wherefore we voluntarily, and of our own accord, have resolved upon Abdicating
the Throne, that we wight spend the remainder of our declining Life quietly and
in private, and in preparing for a better Life that never ends. For this reason
having called a full Senate at Warsaw on the Twelfth of June in this paesent
Year, we opened our Mind to our Senators and Counselors. Who being struck with
the Greatness and Novelty of the Affair, and reverencing the Laws of their
Country, and referring the Consideration of the whole matter to all the
Kingdom, we accordingly appointed a General Diet of all the Orders of our
Kingdom, to be held on the Six and Twentieth day of August, and at the first
opening of the Diet made known our Intention of Abdicating the Throne.

We have had Experience of the Love and Affection of our Loyal Citizens and
Subjects, who bearing a Grateful Memory of the Deserts and Good Actions of our
most Serene Predecessors; and paying a Deference to the Great Cares, Troubles,
and Dangers me underwent for Twenty Years together in Various Turns of Fortune,
in so many Camps, and in so many Diets, endeavored, by importunate Entreaties
and earnest Requests to keep us upon the Throne. But forasmuch as we constantly
persisted in our Resolution, it was agreed that we should make our Abdication,
or Resignation of the Polish Crown in a Real and Solemn Manner. Upon Mature and
Serious Deliberation, and by the Consent of all Orders of the State, we being
in full souundness of Body and Mind, do freely, and without constraint Abdicate
from this time and for ever the Kingdom of Poland, the Great Duchy of
Lithuania, and the Principalities thereunto annexed. We restore, in full form,
into the hands of the Senate, of the Marshals, and of the State, our Regal
Dignity, and whatsoever else of Ancient Right does belong to the Kings of
Poland, and the Great Dukes of Lithuania. We Absolve all the States and Orders,
and every one of our Subjects from the Oath of Allegiance taken to us; and we
release them from the Obligation of Homage and Fealty. The Duke of Prussia, as
to what concerns us only, we declare free from all Obligation due to us, upon
the account of any Contract made for the Dukedom of Prussia, and upon the
account of any Right of Fealty for Bitovia, and Lawenburgh; and the Duke of
Kureland we likewise declare freed from Homage, and all other Obligations
whatsoever. The Authentic and Original Grant of our Election, made in the Year
1648, We Restore, Cancel, and Annul, without pretending to claim any or the
least Right of Sovereignty to our selves, or any of our Heirs within the
Kingdom of Poland, the Great Dukedom of Lithuania, and the Principalities
thereunto annexed. By which Abdication, or Resignation of the Regal Power,
rightly and lawfully made, and ratified by these Presents, it shall be, and is,
within the Power and Authority of the most Reverend Father in Christ the
Archbishop of Gnesna, Primate of Poland, and Chief Minister of State, to
declare the Throne Vacant, and to perform all that of Right and Custom does
belong to the Archbishop of Gnesna during the Interregnum. And the States of
the Kingdom are empowered to proceed to the Election of a New King, according
to the Laws and Customs of Poland. And we further Promise, that we will by no
means hinder it from being a very Free Election, that we will not promote the
Interest of any Candidate; and that during the time of the Election, we will
remove and abide at a distance from the Place of Election. In Testimony and
Confirmation thereof we have commanded these our Letters Patents to be
Published under the Royal Seal.

Dated at Warsaw at the General Diet of the Kingdom, Sept. 16.
This Solemn Abdication made by King Casimire was afterward Published by the
Senate of Poland: The Substance of which I thought fit to Insert here, that so
the Abdication and Vacancy of the Throne, after the Departure of King James II.
Published by the Parliament of England, might not seem a Novelty: and it is as
follows.

WE the Senate and Officers both of Church and State within the Kingdom of
Poland, and the Great Duchy of Lithuania; and the Marshals of both Countries
being Assembled in the Diet, do manifest and Declare: That after the Examples
of our Predecessors, who esteemed nothing more decent, nothing more worthy to
be transmitted to Posterity than the Respect they paid their Princes, and have
handed down to us the Esteem they had for them; We have always used our
Endeavors to Maintain and Increase the Good Will and Reputation of our
Princes. To the Vigorous Maintenance whereof, not only our Honorable Emulation
of our Ancestor's Virtues, not only the Obligation and Gratitude we owe to the
Royal Race of Jagello, which for almost Three hundred years together has
Governed us so Auspiciously, did excite us: But the Extraordinary Endowments of
His Present Majesty, who has Governed our State with the same Fortune and
Reputation as His Greatest Predecessors, for the space of Twenty years, attract
both our Veneration and Admiration. He was always ready to undertake Noble
Designs; to endure the Heat of Summer, and the Cold of Winter; to be vigilant
in Campains, to suffer hunger and thirst, to lie on the Cold Ground, to spend
sleepless Nights, and as often as there was necessity, or occasion, hazarded
his own Life for his Subjects Safety; He was famous in the Arts both of Peace
and War, and gained an especial Esteem for his Clemency. Whereupon we
interposed the weighty Authority of the most Illustrious Senate, the humble
Requests of the Knights of both Countries, the Entreaties of the whole
Republic, and the Desires of several Princes: Lastly, We Objected to him the
Prohibitions of the Laws, and the Ties of his Oath. But when all these Motives
could not prevail, nor alter the unshaken Mind of His Sacred Majesty from His
Thoughts of Eternity, we were at last forced to yield to the Weight of our
Fates, and no longer to attempt to remove His Majesty from His-Resolution. And
forasmuch as His Sacred Majesty has Issued forth His Letters Patent, which we
had designed for a Pledge of our Constant and Perpetual Fidelity; and has added
another more particular one, whereby he Releases us and all his Subjects from
the Oath of Allegiance, and from all other Obligations: We likewise on our
parts, by these our Letters Patent do Release His Majesty from the Oath made by
His Deputies, as well before His Coronation in the Church of Warsaw, as
afterward in the Cathedral Church of Cracow: and we disannul it to all intents
and purposes, provided that our Rights and Privileges in all things be
preserved, and that this Act may not prejudice a Free Election, our Laws and
Liberties, nor be drawn into a Precedent. In Confirmation of the Premises we
have affixed our Hands.

Dated at Warsaw, Sept. 16. An. Dom. 1668.
From hence it appears, that the Majesty and Authority of the King was Adjusted
to the Liberty of the Senate and the People, and all Orders of the Kingdom,
together with the King, were kept within the Bounds of Equity. So that if at
any time the King should fail in His Duty, and aim at the Invading of the
Properties of His Subjects, he was immediately checked therein by the Authority
of the Senate, who were Sworn to do it; and by this means the King of Poland
dedepended on the Grave Advices of His Senate. On the other hand, the Senators,
and all the Knights Reverence, Love and Honor His Sacred Majesty, and are
ready to lay down their Lives and Estates for His Benefit and Preservation.

AN ACCOUNT Of the Rise of Socinianism in POLAND, And of the Present state of
that SECT.
POLAND was at first Converted by S. Adalbert Archbishop of Gnesna, from
Paganism to Christianity; and has continued steadfast ever since for almost
Seven hundred years in the Communion of the Church of Rome. It was Instructed
in the Romish Principles by him, and has always paid a very great Respect to
the Holy See, and endeavored to excel all others in their Zeal for its
Interests. At present, since the Extirpation of the Hussits, Berengarians,
Picards, Anabaptists, Arians, Tritheists, Photians, Ebionites, Reactitorians,
and a world of such like Heresies, and lastly of the Socinians (who, by the
Countenance of some Noblemen, and the Toleration once allowed, had swarmed in
Poland) the Roman Religion chiefly prevails in that Country. The King indeed
Promises upon Oath, before His Coronation, to Protect the Lutherans and
Calvinists. The Greeks likewise, and the Jews have the same Toleration there,
which they have in many other Countries. And as the Case now stands, that Old
Proverb, which says, Whoever has lost his Religion, may find it in Poland,
falls to the Ground, and is no longer true of that Kingdom.

But forasmuch as a Clear Account of the Present State of the Socinians, how
they crept in, and how they were at last thrown out, cannot be met with in any
other Author; I shall now give it ye as briefly, and orderly as I can.

This Pernicious Heresy of Socinianism, which by Christians ought to be
detested above all others, which does not strike at any particular Article, but
shakes and almost overthrows the whole Fabric of our Religion, came out of
Italy, In the Year 1546.
and began at first in the State of Venice at Vincenza, by Forty Men. Two of
them, Julius Trevisanus, and Franciscus Ruigo, being taken, and Strangled at
Venice, the rest, to avoid the same Fate, left Italy, and dwelt in Turkey,
Poland, Transylvania, Suitzerland, and in other places where a Toleration of
Religion was Allowed.

The first who spread the Errors of this Heresy in Poland was a certain
Dutchman named Spicillus, alias Fricius, a Disciple of Erasmus, and well
skilled in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, under the Reign of King Sigismund Augustus,
in the Year of our Lord 1546. He came to Cracow, where, according to the Custom
of the Country, he was Treated very Nobly as a Stranger by the Mayor of the
City. At this Treat there were several Noblemen, and among the rest, Andreas
Modrevius the King's Secretary. This Man, upon starting several Doubts
concerning the Ever Blessed Trinity, was the first that followed the Dutchman
in his Errors; who, by the Secretary Means, induced the King Himself to be his
Disciple.

The King being thus wrought upon by His Secretary, the Dutchman was soon
followed by Laelius Socinus, who being Banished out of Italy Absconded at
Zurich? where, when he once heard how succesfully the Dutchman had spread his
Heresy in Poland, he immediately takes along with him Alicatus, Parata, and
Ochinus, three of his Associates, and comes to Poland in the Year 1551. He was
Introduced into the King's Court by the Secretary, where he Infused his Errors
into Lismaninus, Queen Bona's Confessor, and many other Courtiers.

Many Noblemen and Senators, of all Orders, were corrupted by these Men, and,
at last, they drew into their Party James Sieninski Palatine of Podolia, and
Lord of Racovia, one of the Chief Nobility. He turned from Calvinism to
Socinianism, and Built a Printing House, and an Academy at Racovia for the Use
of this Sect. This Town being very pleasant for the Temperature of its Air, for
the Sweetness of its Situation, for the Lakes, Fountains, Groves, Walks and
Meads about it, quickly drew thither Faustus Socinus Cousin German to Lelius,
with several others.

Hereupon several Books were Published, and spread over the whole Kingdom: and
the Chief not only of Catholics, but also of Lutherans and Calvinists
embracing the Opinion of Socinus, drew every day great Numbers to their Party.
Whereupon the Republic (for fear least the Sparks already kindled should set
the Whole Nation in Flames, and least the Plague, which had Infected many of
the Members, should, at length, destroy the Whole Body) by the Incitement of
the Bishops, and several other Religious Orders, obliged the King Augustus to
Banish Lismaninus the Queens Confessor out of the Court, and induced him to
issue forth the following Edict against the Growing Heresies in Poland.

The EDICT of King Sigismund against the Socinians.
WHereas all Humane things are altogether vain and unprofitable unless Governed
by the Laws of God, and established by the Integrity and Union of Religion:
Therefore We Sigismund Augustus, by the Grace of God King of Poland, do Publish
and Declare to all and every person that is or may be concerned, that We being
informed by Our Counselors of Church and State, that several Heresies are
every where hatched within Our Kingdom, and that not only New Doctrines and
Ceremonies are Introduced, but also that several of our unthinking Subjects do
openly profess and instruct the same: We following the Examples of our
Predecessors, whose chiefest care and study was to Propagate and Protect the
Christian Faith, and to cut off all occasion of Quarrel among our Subjects, and
of Disturbance in the State (which always attends Dissensions in Religion.) And
thinking this to be the proper Duty of Christian Kings and Princes, do by these
Our Letters Patent Testify and Promise, That We, out of Respect to the
Christian Religion, and out of Love to the Holy Church, will Profess and
Maintain, to the utmost of our Power, within all Our Dominions, the Truth and
Sincerity of the Ecclesiastical Doctrine, and of the Christian Catholic and
Apostolic Faith, as it is professed by the Holy Church of Rome, and as it has
been Received and Professed constantly by Our Predecessors. As for the Enemies
thereof, as well Pagans, who are the Professed Enemies of Christianity, as
Heretics, who, under the pretense of being Christians, and by a false
Interpretation of Scripture, destroy Christianity, and show themselves to be
alienated from the Faith, and the Religion once delivered by the Apostles, and
hitherto Professed by the Roman Catholic Church: These We shall take care to
Suppress, and to Banish out of Our Kingdom. Nor will We ever admit into Our
Royal Council and Senate, nor bestow any Places of Honor or Trust on any who
are tainted with Heresy, provided We are satisfied of it. If any shall be
accused before Us, We will take care, by the Divine Assistance, that the
Statutes of our Realm shall, with the utmost diligence be put in Execution
against them, that so they may be for ever Branded, Stigmatized, and Banished
their Country, unless they shall desire to be Reconciled to their Holy Mother
the Church. The Ecclesiastics, together with their Laws, Immunities and
Privileges, both Public and Private, We will Defend, Maintain and Protect to
the utmost of our Power. To all our Officers and Governors We give it strictly
in Charge; and Command them under the Penalty of our Severe Displeasure, that
they be not Negligent or Remiss in Prosecuting and Apprehending such Offenders:
Whereas on the contrary, if any of them shall be Charged before Us with being
false to his Trust, and to Our Commands, he shall be brought to Condign
Punishment. For the Due Performance of all the Premises, We have Engaged Our
Word to the Reverend Father in Christ Nicolas Ziergowski Lord Archbishop of
Gnezna, and to other of his Bishops, and Our Counselors; and by the Oath of
Our Royal Trust taken to Our Subjects at Our Coronation, We design the Whole
shall be faithfully put in Execution. In Testimony whereof we have Issued forth
these Our Letters Patent, Dated at Cracow, In the Year of Our Lord 1550. And in
the Second Year of Our Reign.

This Edict or rather Manifesto of King Augustus was interpreted by the
Nobility to be directly opposite to their Interests; Whereupon several of the
Chief among them began to stir up Commotions, and rise in Arms. And the Hatred
of the Romish Ecclesiastics against the Socinians increased every day more and
more. Hence sprung many Murders, constant Fewds between the Nobles, and
abundance of Bloodshed throughout the whole Kingdom. The State being engaged in
a foreign War could not then prevent these great disorders: but partly fearing
a Civil War, and partly trusting to the Vigilance and Pastoral Care of the
Ecclesiastics for the present forbear'd putting in Execution the severe Laws
of Jagello against Heretics. But at last they worked their own Ruin. For being
by degrees divided into the Factions of Servetus and Samosatanus, they too far
trespassed on that Indulgence the State allowed them. Several Statues of our
Savior upon the Cross were broken by the Students of Racovia, and several
Blasphemies were uttered in their Books against Christ; and for these things
being severely checked by the Decrees and Edicts of John Casimire, and King
John III. all those who would not Embrace the Roman Faith were to depart the
Kingdom within two or three Years. Since those Decrees of the King and
Republic against the Socinians are still in force, it will not be amiss to
insert them here, and they are as follow.

John Casimire by the Grace of God King of Poland, and Great Duke of Lithuania,
etc.
Though the Being and Propogation of the Arian, or as some call it the Socinian
Heresy in Our Dominions has been always prohibited by Us; yet because the
aforesaid Sect, which Robs the Son of God of his Praeeternity, has by a strange
misfortune, fatal to the State, begun to spread it self for a long time in Our
Dominions as well of Poland as of the Great Duchy of Lithuania: We therefore
reassuming and leaving in its full force the Statute of Jagello our Predecessor
enacted against them, do by the Consent of all Orders Enact concerning
Heretics, that if any such shall dare to Confess, Propagate or Preach the said
Arian Heresy, or to protect and countenance it or its Promoters, within our
Dominions of Poland, the Great Duchy of Lithuania, and the Provinces thereunto
annexed, and shall be thereof lawfully convicted, every such Person shall
forthwith according to the intent of the aforesaid Statute be Beheaded by our
Captains and their Officers, upon forfeiture of their Commission for the
neglect. But whereas We are Willing to extend Our Clemency as far as can be, if
any one refuses to renounce his Heresy, We do hereby grant him the space of
three years for the selling off his Goods, his Estate, and getting in his
Debts. In which time No Assemblies of the aforesaid Sect shall be held, nor
shall they undertake any public Offices under the Penalties aforementioned.

This space of three years was afterward Contracted to two years, as appears
by the following Edict.

WHereas in the Diet of the Year last past, 1668. the Arian, or Socinian Sect
was Banished out of our Dominions by Us, with the Consent of the States, and
Three Years time was allowed them to Sell off their Goods; By the Authority of
the present Diet We grant them Two Years for Selling their Goods, to Commence
from the time of the last Diet, and to end precisely on the Twelfth of July, in
the Year next ensuing 1669, which shall not be prejudicial to those who shall
hereafter return into the Communion of the Roman Catholic Church.

But forasmuch as several Absconded in the Kingdom, and many others were
Protected by the Favor of the Nobles, after the Foreign War in which Poland
was engaged was over, they were all Banished the Kingdom by a Severe Edict,
which is as follows.

We Returning due Thanks to the Lord of Hosts for the Benefits of the last
Year, who has given us so many Signal Victories over our Enemies; and desiring
by this our Gratitude to continue the Divine Favor toward us, when We shall
have Banished out of our Dominions those who oppose the Praeeternity of his
Son. According to our Edicts made in the Assembly of the States in the Year
1668 and 1669, against the Arian or Socinian Sect; We for the preventing the
Absconding of any of the said Sect within our Territories of Poland and
Lithuania, and that the foresaid Laws against them may be put in Execution, do
require all our Officers and Judges to be strict therein. And in the Great
Duchy of Lithuania we assign a Court of Judicature to Determine all such
Causes.

By this last Law Published and Ratified in an Assembly of the States, under
the Reign of the late King, in the Year 1673, The Socinians were driven out of
the Kingdom. How Miserable their present Condition is, and to what Dangers and
Troubles they in their Exile were exposed, appears by this Sorrowful Letter of
one of them to the rest of his Brethren.

A LETTER giving an Account of the Present state of the Socinians.
YOu desire that I should give you an Account of our present Calamity and
Distress, Alas! you command me to renew an unspeakable Woe, to run over again
the Remembrance of our Sorrows, and to make our Wounds, raw and gaping as they
are, to Bleed afresh. My Soul shivers at the reflection of those many Fatal
Blows we have received. Not only my Mind, but my Hand and Pen shake at, and fly
back from the Recital of those Misfortunes which have hitherto pursued us, and
whereof I my self was an Eyewitness. We were, ah we were a happy People: and
now the very remembrance of that Felicity, which our Churches, for so many
years, by the Divine Favor did enjoy, does render the sense of our present
Troubles the more severe. So that we are loath so much as to remember, when,
how, and by what steps we fell from being what we were. And did not the
goodness of the Cause for which we suffer, and the Consolations of this kind of
Patience support our Minds, it would be better for us, who are almost
overwhelmed with such a vast weight of Calamity, to forget all that is past,
that so our present Miseries might be born the more easy. Yet because you are
desirous of having some description of our present Condition, we will give it
you, not drawn in its own proper and lively Colors, but set off in the
plainest Dress, and such things as are but a trouble for us to insist long
upon, these we shall but lightly touch. Nor do I think it worth the while to
give you, in a long train, a Catalogue of unknown Names, if the Faithfulness of
the Relators be suspected, upon the account of the Enraged, or at least
ignorant Witnesses and Judges of our Cause. It Is a great Enhancement to the
Misfortunes of the Miserable. But though fortune has abandoned us in our Misery,
yet we still retain our Integrity. It is best therefore to show you the
Beginnings of our Troubles, and when these are once known, it will be visible
to every one, how absurd and unjust it is to discredit the Truth of those
things, which by the very Nature of our Sufferings cannot be otherwise. The
first Rise of our Troubles we may date from the War begun in our Country with
the Cossacks, in the Year 1648, whereby several Inhabitants of the Country, and
many of our Countrymen, especially those of us, who were borderers on the
Boristhenes, were rifled of our Estates and Possessions, or at least suffered
irreparable Losses. Upon this, long before the Law of Proscripion, made in the
Year 1668, I, with the greatest part of my Estate was ruined; and for the full
space of Ten years before the Banishment was an Exile; and, with several others
of our Friends, were, as it were, cast away before the Storm came. Immediately
after this the Muscovites, and within a while the Swedes, and at last the
Transilvanians, made Incursions into our Country, which put the whole Kingdom
into great Confusion, and not the least Creature in it was free from these
Outrages. For their own Soldiers were so insolent, and the Auxiliary Troops of
Scythia and Germany so violent, that they could neither escape by flight, nor
repel by Arms their unjust Force. We were not indeed the only Persons who
suffered by the Wars; but we alone were those, who, exhausted by so many Wars,
and almost Expiring, were harrass'd by a Peace more cruel than any War, at a
time when others were at quiet: and by our Constant struggling with an adverse
Fortune, it seems as if the former Wars had inspired a Spirit of Persecution
into the Peace which followed. Although in the very heat of the Wars our Enemies
were so industrious, as to find out means whereby the heaviest Weight of the
War might fall on our heads. For upon the Abdication of King Casimire, while
the Swedes were Masters of Cracow, the Deputies, from all Provinces of the
Kingdom, flocked thither to adjust Matters with the Enemy, and their Armies,
with their Generals, separated, and almost all Orders bought their Peace by
Surrendering. But that we might not share the benefit of that short Peace, our
Inveterate Enemies fell upon us and Plundered us, whilst we dreamed of no such
danger, and were every one of us quiet in our own Habitations. This sudden Evil
was the Death of some of our Party, and of some of my own Relations; but
several, who, with much ado, escaped from these Pillagers, fled to Cracow,
which was then Governed by a Swedish Garrison. Tho they were forced upon this
Flight, through Fear, and had long before this voluntarily thrown themselves
under the Protection of the Swedes: yet this was afterward most unjustly laid
to their Charge as a Crime; and no Course of Law was used in the Oppressing of
our Friends. The Romish Mass-Priests, who were Armed themselves, and surrounded
with Armed Troops, set upon the Houses of Noblemen, which they Plundered and
Fired; and abused the Noble Matrons by Rapes, and all manner of Barbarities.
The Supreme Court of Judicature, even before the Law Enacted against us,
exercised the utmost severity thereof against us in many sad Instances: and,
among the rest, my Son-in-Law, the Patron of the Church of Siedlicia, suffered
just before that Law was made. At last, after so many unlawful Prosecutions of
Innocent Persons, came out that Law, an upstart Patroness of all those Injuries
we suffered, and by an unheard of Example, entered, as it were, through the
very Jaws of our Liberty into the Body of our Laws. At first, indeed, it seemed
superfluous, since without a New Law, and contrary to the Ancient Constitutions
of the Government, we were obnoxious, not only to the Injustice of Public
Magistrates and Judges, but also to the Lust and Violence of Private Men. But
yet we soon found it Armed with New Instruments of Mischief, and such as not
only gave a specious pretense to all the unjust proceedings both of Judges and
private persons, but also such as exposed us Friendless and Helpless, and as it
were bound hand and foot to the rage and Odium of our Enemies. We have not time
at present to enquire how unlawfully it was enacted, and how full of
Absurdities it was. It Is enough to show how fraudulent and Cruel it was, even
whilst it pretended to Mercy and Clemency. For we were by the Law constrained
to depart the Kingdom within three years, which time was allowed, under a
pretense of selling off our Effects. But the Benefit even of this unjust Law
deceived many one, that false favor was soon recalled, the time being
contracted to the space of only one Year; so that almost all of us had not
leisure of disposing of our Affairs as We ought. Thereupon very few could sell
off their Effects, and the greatest part of those who did, were forced to part
with very rich Estates to the Purchasers at a very low and almost no price. For
the Injustice of the Purchasers was such, as to take advantage not only of the
urgent Necessity and danger of the Sellers, but likewise of the great want of
Money, and of the Difficulties they labored under, being reduced to great
Straits by the Losses and Devastations of so many Wars.

I will give ye instances of this Nature. A Noble Matron the Patroness of the
Church of Pebrinen, could scarce fell her Dowry worth several Thousand Dollars
for Three hundred Florins. Christopher Osirovius a very Worthy Knight sold his
Estate worth Ten thousand Dollars, for Three thousand Florins, that is for the
tenth part of its due Value. And he truly happened on a very modest Chapman;
for others were forced to be contented with the fifteenth, Others with the
Twentieth part, and many received nothing but a bare promise of Payment. This
obliged several of us rather to make over our Effects to our friends by way of
trust. But at last the Houskeepers with a miserable train of Children and
Kindred were constrained to depart their Native Country. Some went to Silesia,
but the greater number toward Transylvania; but neither of them were free from
the Insults of Robbers. They who went to Transylvania, before they had arrived
at their Journey's End, were Plundered of their Provisions and Effects by the
Imperialist Soldiers, who had, as they say, private Intimations of their March
given them by the Polanders. This Mischance together with the Storm of War
which was hanging over that Country, brought several, who were returned to
Poland, into our Country of Prussia: But the rest with a mind prepared for
danger entered into Transylvania poor and in tatters: where, as the Reward of
so many Fatigues, Troubles and hazards, the Plague and Poverty gave them
entertainment. Is it therefore to be wondered that several in our Churches were
torn from the Faith and the Love of Truth through the dread of so many Miseries
and Dangers? Or rather is it not more to be wondered that any should continue
constant in their Profession? For our Present Persecution did not proceed after
an usual and ordinary way: But to extinguish that Light of Truth which shone
upon us, Satan endeavored all he could to shake our Constancy not so much by
the fear of Death, which is soon over, as by the Torment and Punishment of a
Life stretched out to its full length in Miseries. Nor did the Thunder of the
dreadful Decree you make mention of, whereby we were banished our Country, so
much terrify us, as did that (...) which within a while after was added to that
most Cruel Law by new Edicts of the Diet, and which was afterward exercised in
many cruel Instances. By this we were deprived of all the Service and
Assistance of our Friends, and of all Hopes of Succor from our Country, whilst
those who succored us, or administered to our Wants, if they were thereof found
Guilty, were used more severely than we our selves were. For when any one of us
were apprehended or returned, if he would be reconciled to the Romish
Communion, he was immediately Restored to his Rights and Estate without any
more trouble: But if a Catholic or Lutheran should be found guilty of holding
the Least Commerce and Correspondence with us, his Estate was unavoidably
confiscated, without the least hopes of Remedy. Thus was the only Refuge which
we had left taken from us, and all those with whom we had entrusted any thing
were forced to be treacherous even against their Wills; Nor dared any one to
supply our wants for fear of being punished.

Having thus laid before you the Misfortunes which we undergo, what Man can any
longer make a question of it? Suppose every one of these Exiles when they left
their Native Soil, were enriched with New Treasures for a Subsistence; yet what
by the Expenses of so many Journeys, and what by the Losses they sustained,
these might be well consumed by this time. But if we consider things well, we
shall find that many departed their Country Naked as Men that had escaped a
Wreck: that the rest by Robberies and the Expenses of so many years lost all
they had laid up to serve their Necessary Occasions. And now there was no safe
Retreat remaining for those miserable Exiles, but Troubles and Dangers follow
them wherever they go, and force them to wander like Vagabonds from place to
place. At present a fresh Storm from Holstein, and a fresher from Silesia
threatens us, since it is reported that our friends are to be banished both
these places, which God forbid or at least turn to our Good. And now I begin to
fear that the World looks upon our Troubles as of no moment, or at least thinks
them so light as we can easily bear them; especially since none can imagine
that there are no less than a Thousand Families which stand in need of your
Assistance. But this account would not seem too high, if all, against whom the
severity of this Law is directed, would suffer for the Cause of Christ and
Truth. But alas! A great many Housekeepers (more than we could Wish) that they
may not be obliged to others for supplies, provide for their own Safety by
being already shaken from their Stedfastness, and by absconding in their own
Country; Whereas there are but few, who are so bold as to take upon them the
Yoke of Christ openly. Nor do those who are within the City of Crucburgh and
the neighborhood of it dare appear, least they should be found out by the
Informer of Breslaw a Warm Calvinist. Many are dispersed in safer Places of
Poland and Lithuania, namely in the Upper Silesia, Marchia, Prussia,
Transylvania: and some in Holstein and the Palatinate in A anbeim. We all hold
a mutual Correspondance together notwithstanding the Distance of our
Habitations, as far as it is allowed us, and where we can, we administer to one
another's Necessities. As for the Money lately sent, it was faithfully and
impartially distributed to all who were in Want throughout Silesia, Marchia,
Prussia, Poland, Transylvania, and Holstein, and reached even our Brethren at
Rotterdam and other distant Countries. In behalf of them we touched with a due
sense of that favor return, our most unfeigned thanks, praying the Great God
of Heaven the giver of all goodness, to power down on your Liberal Souls the
full streams of his Bounty; and that he who has promised that a Cup of Cold
Water shall not go unrewarded, would repay you this Extraordinary Refreshment
of your afflicted Brethren in full measure, pressed down, and running over. Oh
how sweet a Smell does such a holy Sacrifice send up to God! How highly
commendable is it in the sight of him who looks down from above, how deeply
does it reproach the Delays and Niggardliness of others. He loves the Cheerful
Givers: He desires nothing from the Unwilling, nothing from the sad and
discontented Soul. He eyes the Mind of the Giver not the Gift. Nor would we be
thought to be over importunate in desiring a necessary Relief. If they can
spare a little out of their Abundance, who among us would desire to defraud the
Poor of it, since we our selves are likewise poor and would not be so cruel to
those in Want, but we are ready to impart to them even that little which we
have? But if any of you have enough and to spare, let him consider his own
Condition as in the Presence of God. We Require nothing of any one beyond his
Abilities, and we require not so much as what is Superfluous, if it seem; a
burden. There is a God who takes care of our Wants and Necessities, and Laughs
at their Preposterous Solicitude, who fear, least that which they can give
would not be enough to Supply our Necessities: as if our Industry and God by
his assistance could not make up the Deficiency. I have but two things more to
add, the first is to inform you, that it was not any sault of the Distributers
that the Wants of all were not relieved, especially in our Prussia. For many of
them daily flock hither, not only out of Poland and Lithuania; but also some of
those who through fear or necessity had revolted to the Romanists, were fallen of
from them again. Of whose place of habitation we had not a certain Information,
so that hence arose the Difficulty of not giving an exact Number of the Exiles.
The second thing is to tell you, that I have a great have many things to
communicate to you, besides those which the Reverend Spinocius brought. In the
mean time my Commentaries on our Saviors first Sermon I intend to dedicate to
you, and will send it the first Opportunity. But I earnestly desire that nothing
may be published under my true Name whilst I am alive and without my Knowledge.
If any such should appear in the World, it is best that Julius Celsus should
bear the Odium of those things which may be offensive. Farewell best of Friends,
and continue to pray to God for me.

Dated Coningsberg, 1681.
Here follows a Petition of the Socinians sent some years ago into England,
representing briefly their miserable Condition in these Terms.
BY the Love of God, by the Bowels of our Savior Christ, We earnestly beseech,
and humbly entreat all and Every of our Brethren of England, that you would
take pity on us most unfortunate Exiles, and with a ready and liberal hand
Supply our Wants. If you have any Humanity to incline you to Pity, or any
Christianity to excite you to Charity, here you have proper Objects for both.
The Cause we suffer for is our Adherence to the Faith in God, our Abandoning
the Superstition and Tyranny of the Papacy, and our endeavors after a good
Conscience. Our Punishment by the Dictates both of Divine and Human Laws is
most Violent and Unjust: And Our Banishment is most Cruel and Dreadful. They
who cannot look upon us as Brethren, In the time of King Charles I.
let them know that they were estem'd so by us, and that their Countrymen were
regarded as Protestants by Us and Ours, Nor did we ever fail by all good
Offices and supplies to cherish and Support the Afflicted and Oppressed exiles.
Let them at least esteem us as Exiles for the Sake of a good Conscience, and as
such who presir'd Obedience to God before all things. Who whatever we are, yet
at least are good Men, and do deserve the Charity of Good men. Let them look
upon us as oppressed by the common Enemy, because we refused to turn Apostates,
and to accept of the Inventions of men for the Commandments of God, the Pope
for Christ. Let them look upon us at least as miserable and as Suppliants, who
either must be Miserable, or Impious. Lastly let them with us reflect upon
themselves, and consider this holy Expression of the Divine Psalmist, Blessed
is he who considers the poor and needy, the Lord shall Deliver him in time of
Trouble. And this of our Savior upon the same Occasion, Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy: And on the other hand that of St. James,
He shall have Judgment without Mercy, that has showed no mercy, and mercy
glories against Judgment. Now the God all Comfort and the Father of Mercies
have mercy on us, and support us by his heavenly Consolation: and grant that
you (Dear Friends and Brethren) who take pity on the miserable, may never again
be Miserable, but enjoy all the Happiness you can Desire. This we pray for you
as earnestly as we beg it for our Selves, who are,

Dated at Cruciberg, June 17. 1678. Dear Friends and Brethren! Your Hearty
Well-wishers, Stanislaus Orzeliowski, Gabriel Morstin, Tolias Morstin, John
Stinctitinius, With Twenty more whose Names I omit.

The Socinians being thus banished out of the Kingdom of Poland and the great
Duchy of Lithuania, they are now settled in the Netherlands, England,
Transylvania, and from thence spread their Errors over the whole World. In the
Ducal Prussia near Coningsberg they have at present a Church and public
Shcools, being protected by the present Elector of Brandenburgh, contrary to
the Laws and Privileges of the Prussians, who every year in their Diets exclaim
against this Injustice of the Elector. But at Racovia, the Seat and Sepulcher
of Faustus Socinus, after many Changes (the Printing house and Academy being
first demolished) came at last by right of Inheritance to the Grand Daughter of
James Sieninski Palatine of Podolia, and Governor of Racovia, who embraced the
Roman Catholic Religion, and is still Living.

And this is the present State of the Socinians, of which none else can give a
Fuller or Larger Account.

A SHORT ACCOUNT Of the Late INTERREGNUM IN POLAND, AND THE ELECTION OF THE
Present KING.
HAVING given the Reader ( Page 221.) a short Epitome of the Most Glorious
Actions of John Sobieski, late King of Poland; it will not be amiss to Complete
his Caracter, to take notice here of his Conduct, during the latter end of his
Life, which has so little answered the Glorious beginning of his Reign.

That Prince entered into a Common League with the Emperor, the Republic of
Venice, and the Pope, against the Common Enemy of Christendom: And
notwithstanding the Emperor and Venetians carried on the War with so much
Vigor and Success, as to give a fair Opportunity to the Poles to regain
Caminiek, and the Provinces the Turks and Tartars have got from them; yet, to
the great Amazement of the World, the Polish Army did nothing at all, and was
not able to Protect their Country against the Excursions of their Enemies, who
committed unspeakable Disorders, and carried a Great Multitude of People into
Slavery. This occasioned Great Murmurs amongst the Poles against their King and
was such a Blot as tranish'd the Luster of his former Actions. Several have
Inquired into the Causes of so odd a Conduct; for, that Prince wanting neither
Courage or Ability, every body thought that the Miscarriage of the Affairs of
Poland was owing to the King Himself.

There have been many Conjectures on this Subject; but the only who appears to
me, well grounded, is that Princes Covetousness; and, after an impartial
examination, this seems to me the only Remora, who stopped the Vigorous
Resolutions that were Yearly taken. Old Men, generally speaking, are Covetous,
the reason whereof is plain enough; but, besides this, almost natural Bias,
the little Esteem the Poles had for Prince James, was a great Motive to engage
his Father to heap up Money, though to the visible Detriment of the Republic.
That Prince seeing, as I have said, that the Poles expressed little esteem for
his Eldest Son, and consequently having no prospect that he should Succeed him,
merely upon account of his being Born of the Royal Family; and on the other
hand, knowing by Experience, that Money is the best Argument to recommend a
Prince to the Choice of the Poles, resolved to Hoard up Money, and therefore
left His Army unpaid, the Magazines unprovided, and lived very Parsimonious in
his House. The same reason obliged him to set a Tax upon several things that
were formerly given Gratis at his Court, as Passes, Petitions, and the like.
France, on the other hand, being sensible, that the Turks could hardly make
head against so many Enemies, if all of them carried on the War with Vigor,
made a good use of the Covetousness of the King of Poland, and by means of a
Yearly Pension to that hungry Prince, disappointed all the Designs of the
Polish Nobility, who could hardly bear, without Murmur, that Caminick should
continue so long in the hands of the Infidels.

A Violent and very Extraordinary Distemper King John labored under, giving
him a sufficient Warning of his Death drawing nigh, he tried several ways to
have his Son Chosen his Successor in his Lifetime, but all in vain; for that
being contrary to the Laws and Constitution of Poland, it has been rarely
practiced, and the King was not beloved enough to oblige the Poles to Act
against their own Laws. Thus stood the Affairs of Poland, when King John Died,
which happened the 17th of June, at Nine a Clock at Night, 1696. The News of
the King's Death was immediately carried, by an Express, to Dardinal
Radziowsky, Archbishop of Gnesna, Primate of the Kingdom, and Regent during
the Interregnum; who made his Entry into Warsaw on the 24th of June, that is,
Seven days after the King's Death, in a most Solemn and Magnificent Manner. All
the Senators and Nobility then in Town Rode forth above a League from the City
to meet him, with Colors flying, and Kettle Drums beating in the midst of an
incredible Crowd of People. His Eminence went directly to the Castle, and
ascended into the Room where the King's Body lay exposed in His Royal Robes;
and having said a short Prayer, went to the Queens Apartment to Condole her
Majesty. He did the like to Prince James and his Brothers, and took upon him
the Government of the Kingdom, calling a General Diet to Meet on the 29th of
August following, to Choose a Successor.

As the Cardinal Primate has made a great noise since that time, it will not be
improper to give his Caracter in this place. He is of a very good family in
Poland, and Son to the famous Radziousky who called in the Swedes under Charles
Gustavus. He is a Man of great Parts, but somewhat obstinate. Pope Innocent XI.
made him a Cardinal without any other recommendation but his own merit: the
then King of Poland though his Relation nor the French King were pleased with his
promotion, though time has discovered that his Eminence is absolutely in the
Interests of France. He went to Rome after the doath of Innocent XI. and was
present at the choosing of a new Pope which, fell on Cardinal Ottoboni. He lived
like a Prince, and his magnificence and Liberality acquired him a great many
Friends.

Upon the 29th. of August the Diet assembled with the usual Ceremony, and after
the Mass of the Holy Ghost had been celebrated by the Cardinal Primate, they
began to talk of the Election of a Marshall or Speaker of their Assembly,
which gave occasion to many disputes. The Lesser Poland pretended that it was
her turn to have a Mareshal chosen out of her Body, and Greater Poland put in
the same claim, but was inclinable to wave it. The Lithuanians opposed it
pretending that the Greater Poland was to take their turn now, that Lithuania
might have theirs in the next Diet, and their dispute grew so high that People
were afraid the Diet would break up without coming to any conclusion. The
Bishop of Posen thought of a new way to put an end to the controversy, and came
to the Assembly in procession at the head of his Clergy pretending to allay
their heats by the Charms of his Benedictions, but this provoked the Deputies
who told him, in great scorn, they were not possessed, and therefore had no need
of his Exorcisms. At last the Lithuanians consented that the Lesser Poland
should appoint the Marshall, and the choice fell upon Monsieur Omienisky
Lieutenant Colonel of the Artillery.

The next day this Dispute was over, news came that the Army had Confederated
themselves for their own Interests; for the King, as I have already observed,
having not taken care to pay the Forces, a vast Sum was due to them for their
Arrears. They chose an Officer, called, Baronowsky for their General, and
promised to remain united till they had received Satisfaction. In the mean time
they resolved to raise contributions for their Subsistence.

This news put the Diet in great Consternation, and likely contributed to the
resolutions they took the same day, which was to lay aside all Objections
against the Validity of the Election of the Deputies with this proviso, that
none should have a voice in the Diet till they had freely satisfied the
Assembly about the reasons that should be offered against them. They repaired
afterward in great Ceremony unto the Senators Hall, and the Marshal made a
speech to the Cardinal Primate, setting forth the deplorable condition of the
Kingdom since the Kings death, returned thanks to his Eminency for his great
care of the Public, and declared that the Deputies were ready to concur to the
utmost of their Power to all the Proposals that should be made for the Good of
the Nation. The Primate returned an answer suitable to the circumstances of the
time, and proposed several Points to be taken into consideration by the
Assembly. 1. An Association of all the Members of the Kingdom for the Security
of it. 2. To draw up Laws and Conditions to which the future King should be
obliged and to publish them that all Pretenders to the Crown might be informed
thereof. 3. To find and apply a proper remedy to the Factions, Quarrels and
Animosities, which had been so prevalent under the preceding Government, and
prevent the like for the future. 4. To provide for the speedy Payment of the
Army, as the only way to prevent Mutinies and Seditions amongst the Soldiers,
and for carrying a vigorous War against the Turks. 5. To repair the defects of
the Artillery, which was in a very bad condition. 6. To settle a sort of Money
that might be current all over the Kingdom to prevent the Inconveniences
proceeding from the diversity of Coyns. 7. and lastly, That the Election of a
new King might be deferred for some time.

Nothing material was transacted since that day to the 10th. of September, that
there happned a violent dispute in the Assembly, whether the Queen should not
be desired to remove out of Warsaw, for though the greatest part of the
Provincial Dyets had resolved not to suffer the Royal Family to reside in the
Place where the General Diet was to Assemble, and that Prince James in
compliance with their resolution had already left that City, yet the Queen
would not conform herself to their desires, notwithstanding the advices of the
Cardinal, the Bishop of Posnania, and the Palatine of Plosko, which put the
Diet in a great heat, some taking that pretense to leave the Assembly. At last
her Majesty was persuaded to yield unto their desires, and left actually Warsaw
on the 18th. of September and went for Dantzick. This calmed somewhat the Diet,
but a dispute between the Cardinal Primate and the Marcsehal of the Deputies
was like to break up the Diet; however it was agreed to enter into an
Association, which was drawn up by a Domestic of the Cardinal Primate, and
read by him to the States. No body made any Objection to the first Articles;
but when he came to mention the Liberties and Privileges of the Clergy, the
Grand Marshal of Lithuania bid him stop, and laid before the Assembly, in a
very Pathetick Speech, the Injury and Affronts he had received from the Bishop
of Vilna, desiring the Cardinal Regent that he might have Satisfaction given
him. The Grand Marshal of the Crown made likewise great Complaints against the
Bishop of Culm, for having Published Libels against him to blemish his
Reputation. The Cardinal Answered them, That as the Spiritual State could not
Judge the Temporal, neither could the Secular give Laws to the Ecclesiastic;
and that it was to be left to the Pope to Punish the Proceedings of the
Bishops, which was Agreed to on both sides.

This Point being thus over, the Act of Association was Read on; but when they
came to the Point of Reconciliation, between those, who being Christians, yet
do not Agree in some Matters of Religion; one of the Deputies made some
Exceptions, and it was agreed, That all things should remain, as to that Point,
as they had done, during the Interregnums of Casimir and Michael.

The Disputes about Fixing the time of the Election of a New King was more
considerable; many of the Deputies insisting, That the Deplorable Condition of
the Republic required a Speedy Choice; but the other Party being Swayed by a
Private Interest, was Stronger; and, upon a Fair Pretense, the Election was
deferred to the 15th of May, 1697, and it was agreed that it should be done in
the Open Field, by all the Nobility Summoned together, as at the Election of
Michael Wieznowisky; and that whoever should Propose a Native of the Kingdom,
should be looked upon as an Enemy of his Country.

This being Concluded, and the Act of Association drawn up, the Deputies met
again upon the First of October, and some of them demanded, that the said Act
might be Read again; but this was Opposed by the Cardinal Primate; saying, That
a Second Reading would only create New Cavils, and so Signed it immediately,
with most of the Deputies, and the rest did the like afterward. That
Association contains many Articles, the Principal whereof are the following.

1. We will keep our selves firmly to the Roman Religion, and will not Elect
any one for King who shall not make Profession of the same Religion. 2. We will
prevent as much as in us lies all Divisions and Misunderstandings which may
grow among the Members of the Republic; nor will we enter into any secret
Practices against the Liberty of the Election, or which tend to the advancing
any one to the Throne, or Acknowledge him for King, unless he has been freely
Elected by Free Voices, and by Unanimous Consent, and has the General
Approbation. On the contrary, we will look upon as Enemies to this Country, all
those who shall acknowledge for King any Person who has not been Chosen after
the said manner. 3. To this purpose the Archbishop of Gnesna shall not Proclaim
any one for King, unless he has first demanded of the Deputies Three times, one
after another, whether they are Content with his Election. 4. Though there may
be in the Republic a Person capable to Wear the Crown with Honor,
nevertheless, to avoid the Troubles that might arise from the Advancement of a
Native of Poland to the Throne, the Deputies of the Lesser Dyets shall bring
along with them Instructions, in reference to this particular Point, That every
Native of the Country shall be excluded from the Crown. Therefore the States
Engage themselves, by this Association, to look upon every Native of this
Country, who shall Aspire to the Crown, as a Public Enemy, and likewise all
such as shall Acknowledge him for their King. 5. If any Foreign Potentate, or
Grandee of Poland, shall endeavor to Advance any one to the Throne by Foul or
Unlawful Means, to the Destruction of the Privileges and Immunities of their
Country, the States shall Unite themselves from this time forward against all
such Potentates, and Promise Jointly to venture their Lives and Fortunes in
Defense of their Liberties. 6. We will preserve an Inviolable Peace with those
who Profess a Religion different from that of the Kingdom, and every one shall
be maintained in their Rights and Privileges, except the Quakers and
Mennonites. 7. The time of the Election is sixed from the 15th of May, to the
26th of June inclusively. 8. The Pretentions of the Royal Family shall be
remitted to the Diet for the Election. 9. The usual Place appointed for the
Election between Warsaw and Woba, shall be Fortified according to Custom; there
shall be Erected a Building for the Deputies, and all requisite Preparations
taken for the Security of their Persons, either going in, or coming out. 10.
Whereas the Army has entered into a Confederacy, for want of Pay, and that it is
necessary that their Association should be broken, we not only Promise them a
speedy Payment, but Authorize the Particular Dyets to find out necessary Funds
for that purpose. 11. Because the New Regulation, drawn up for the Charge of
the Artillery, is not sufficient, the Treasurer of the Crown shall supply what
is wanting, by virtue of the Establishment made in the Year 1659. 12. The
Cardinal shall, during his Regency, Choose, for his Counselors, some of the
Senate and Nobility. Lastly, Deputies shall be Chosen to appoint good Winter
Quarters to such of the Soldiers, as shall give Obedience to the Crown
General, and to Pay them what is their Due; to Reckon with the Army, and
Regulate all Affairs which concern the Salt-Mines.

Deputies were immediately sent to the Army, to endeavor to break the Union,
and oblige them to return to the Obedience of Count Jablonowsky Mareshal of the
Crown. They offered to Pay their Arrears, provided they would Disunite
themselves: But they returned Answer, That though they should receive full
Satisfaction upon their Demands, they would not break off their Confederacy
before the Election of a New King: Whereupon the Treaty broke off, and the
Deputies of the Republic retired to Leopold, where they made a Solemn
Protestation against the Proceedings of the Army; which being sent to the
Primate, was Printed and Dispersed into all the Provinces of the Kingdom, to
let them see they had left no Stone unturned to bring the Rebels to the
Obedience of the Republic. The Cardinal held a Great Council upon this
Subject; where it was Resolved. That no Quarters should be allowed to any
Troops but those, who remained Faithful under the Command of the Crown General;
and then, if the Confederated Troops offered to take up their Quarters near
Leopold, or elsewhere, they should be driven out by Force.

This Resolution did not Discourage the Confederated Army; they gave an Oath of
Fidelity to their New General Baronowsky, who caused a New Standard to be made,
like that of the Crown General, having Painted upon it Two Griffins holding Two
Scimitters in their Claws, with these Words, Pro Patria under one of them, and
Pro Exercitu under the other. The Tartars being got together to the Number of
30000 Men, Introduced a great Convoy of Provision into Caminieck; and having
notice of the Confusion of the Affairs of Poland, made an Invasion into
Volhinia, carrying away a Great Number of People into Slavery; But the
Confederate Troops having pursued them, Charged them with so much Vigor, that
they Routed them, and Retook a good Part of the Booty, and of the Poor People
designed for Captivity.

The Lithuanians had Confederated themselves as well as the Poles, and had
refused the same offers, which exasperated Prince Sapieha their General to such
a degree, that he undertook to Reduce them to their Duty by Force; but the
Confederates defended themselves with so much Bravery, that Prince Sapieha was
forced to return with considerable Loss. This Disgrace put him upon
Negociations, and having gained Monsieur Crispin Vayvode of VVitepsc, one of
the Chiefs of the Army, the rest followed his Example, and the Lithuanian Army
returned to their Duty upon the following Conditions. 1. That there should be a
Perpetual Amnesty for all that had been done to that very instant. 2. That the
Prince should forthwith Pay them the one half of their Arrears, due from the
Republic, out of his own Revenues. 3. That the General should Promise, upon
his Honor, not to Molest any one of the Fraternity, from the Highest Officer
to the Meanest Soldier. 4. That on their side they should engage, by an
Authentic Writing, immediately to quit the Confederacy into which they were
entered. 5. And to submit themselves to the Grand Marshal, and obey his Orders.
6. And lastly, That for the future they should never enter into any other
Confederacy. This Treaty was executed on the 27th of November, and all the
Officers and Soldiers made their Submission to Prince Sapieha.

This Reunion of the Lithuanians weakened very much the Confederated Troops, and
disposed them to hearken to some new Terms that were offered them sometime
after, and to return to the Obedience of their former General, as it will be
hereafter mentioned.

All the World was surprised at the Proceedings of the Poles; and few would
have thought that the miserable condition of their Affairs absolutely requiring
a King, a Private Interest would have prevailed so far upon them, as to oblige
them to defer the Election of a Successor to Sobiesky till May next. The Poles
may say what they please, to justify this Resolution, all their Reasons are
but a thin Varnish over a Private Sordid Interest which Ruled them; for, the
true Grounds of this Delay was, only to give time to many Princes to put in for
their Crown, and make an Interest with them to obtain it, which cannot be done,
without squandring away amongst them Vast Sums of Money. This Consideration
moved sometime ago a Grave Senator to Propose in the Diet, to follow the
example of Cardinals, who Chose always an Old Pope; and, to set forth, in a
very Eloquent Speech, the Advantage that the Nobility would receive from
Frequent Elections: But he was Answered, That he was mistaken in his Politics,
for no Old Man would spend such Sums of Money he had spoken of, and therefore
his Project was Impracticable. The Inconveniences of Elections and
Interregnums are so great, that it is likely the Poles would have long ago made
the Crown Hereditary, in one Family, under a very Limited Power, were it not
for the Consideration of the Money that several Candidates for their Crown must
needs bring into their Kingdom.

In the mean time the Candidates began to make Parties; and, notwithstanding
the Natives of Poland were Excluded, by an Article of the Association before
mentioned, Prince James, and Prince Alexander his Brother appeared amongst the
others who made Interest for the Throne. They had for Competitors, the Prince
of Conti, Prince Lewis of Baden, and the Duke of Lorrrain; for the Duke of
Bavaria would not appear, and ordered his Minister, the Abbot Scarlati, to
Solicit for Prince James. The Divisions in the Royal Family were very
favorable to Foreign Candidates, but they were happily extinguished by the
Reconciliation of Prince James with his Mother, and thereby their Interest,
which was divided before, was reunited, and Prince Alexander quitted his
Pretensions. The Primate contributed much to this Reconciliation, which gave
occasion to believe, that he was not so deeply engaged in the Interest of
France, as it was at first reported, and as it appeared afterward. Prince
James wanted neither Merit nor Money, and yet by an unaccountable Fatality, he
was not much beloved by the Poles, tho they had been Witnesses of his Valor in
several Rencounters. It was thought that the Emperor would have Declared for
that Prince, because he had the Honor to be His Imperial Majesty's
Brother-in-Law; but the Imperial Court was always upon the Reserve; and what
happened in the Election showed, that the Emperor was Engaged for another.

The Prince of Conti is certainly endowed with Excellent Qualities; and tho he
has not met at the Court of France the Encouragement or Reward he deserved, and
though the Most Christian King has not thought fit to trust him with the
Command of his Armies, yet all the World owns that he was very Worthy of that
Great Employment: And most are of Opinion, that the French King was Afraid of
his Capacity. Whatever it be, the King of Poland was no sooner Dead, but the
King of France thought of Promoting the Prince of Conti to the Throne; and the
Abbot of Polignac, his Minister, in his Speech to the Diet that was in August,
Magnified very much the Zeal and Affection the King, his Master, had always had
for the Interests of the Republic; and gave some hints, to let them
understand, that his Kindness was so Great, as to have Chosen a Successor to
their King worthy of their Crown. This was not expressed in plain Terms, for it
was not time to do it: but he began few days after his Cabal, and made use of
such Artifices, to render the Royal Family Odious to the People, that the Queen
was obliged to forbid him Her Presence, and to Complain of him to the King of
France, who disowned, in Public, the Conduct of his Minister, though likely it
was Approved in Secret. The French knowing that Money is the best
Recommendation in Poland, the Prince of Conti was Persuaded to Sell, or rather
Mortgage his Estate; and the French King Remitted Vast Sums of Money to His
Ministers, which Gained him so great a Party, that the House of Austria thought
it was high time to think of Preventing his Election, and therefore to redouble
their Intreague.

If Merit alone had been sufficient to Raise a Prince to the Throne of Poland,
there is no doubt but Prince Lewis of Baden would have carried the Crown; but
His Highness wanting Money, his Party was so inconsiderable, that when the
Election came on, they were not taken notice of: and as to the young Duke of
Lorrain, neither the Great Actions of his Father, nor the Letter of the Queen
his Mother to the Senate, was able to gain her Friends enough to stand it out
against Prince James, and Prince of Conti.

The Winter was spent in Intreagues, and a great many Libels came out upon the
Subject, some Writing for Prince James, others for the Prince of Conti, and
others against both. The Nephew of Prince Sapieha was then at Paris, and having
spent his Money was Arrested for Debt. The Prince of Conti having Notice
thereof, came himself to the Prison, Paid all his Debts, and gave him what
Money he wanted to return home. This young Gentleman was so sensible of the
Generosity of that Prince, and of the Civility wherewith he had accompanied
that Service, that he Proclaimed it in Poland, and engaged his Uncle into his
Interest. However, Prince James seemed to have the Stronger Party, till the
Death of the late King of Sweden, which happened on the 17th of April, 1697.
That Prince, who knew what Pretensions the Poles have upon Livonia, was against
the Election of any Foreign Prince, but especially the Prince of Conti; and as
on the other side, the Republic was obliged to have a great regard to the
Recommendation of that Prince; it is believed Prince James would have been
Elected, for many of those who appeared afterward against him, seemed the most
Zealous for his Interests.

The time of the Election drawing nigh, the Queen thought fit to Remove a
Second time from VVarsaw to Dantzick, to avoid the Troubles that were
occasioned by her Presence in the last Diet; and, in the mean time, Prince
James with Count Jablonowsky General of the Crown, and all the Party of the
Emperor did their utmost to Ruin the Interest of the Prince of Conti; and
because they suspected the Rebellion of the Army to be fomented and encouraged
by the French, the Queen gave a Great Sum of Money to the Crown-General to
endeavor to break off their Confederacy, and thereupon a New Negotiation was
set on foot with the Ringleaders of the Troops, in which the Accounts of their
Arrears were Adjusted between their own Deputies and those of the Republic,
and all other Points were so far settled, that every body thought their
Confederacy at an end; However, the Treaty broke off at the Instigation of one
of their Officers, who spread in the Army, That the Crown-General had Declared,
That he would Cut off the Heads of their General, and of some others: Whereupon
they declared, They would hearken to no Accommodation; and Baronowsky Published
a Manifesto, containing the Reasons of the Army for continuing in this
Confederacy, and resolved to take up their Quarters in Great Poland, and Royal
Prussia. The Deputies of the Republic at Leopold, upon Examination of the said
Manifesto, Declared, That it was contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom; Adjudged
it an Act of Rebellion; and Published a Decree, by which they Declared the
Confederated Troops Rebels, and Enemies to their Country. This Declaration
frighted most of the Troops, and disposed them to demand another Conference
with the Deputies of the Republic; and, in short, they made their Submission
to the Crown-General, on the 11th of May, 1697, in the Great Church of the
Bernardins at Lemberg. Baronowsky, Mareshal of the Confederates Begged Pardon,
with an Audible Voice, at the General's Feet, touching the Footstool of his
Seat with his Forehead, and Kissing his Feet, under which he put the Standard,
which he had Illegally set put. Their Articles of Confederacy were torn to
pieces, which being done, Te Deum was Sung, and the Day concluded with a Noble
Feast at the Crown General's Palace, where Baronowsky and other Officers were
Nobly Entertained.

Though the Emperor had hitherto appeared in the Interest of Prince James, the
Queen of Poland thought to Write in his behalf, both to His Imperial Majesty,
and to the Empress; and much about that time, a Letter, pretended to have been
Written by the Abbot of Polignac to Monsieur Chateauneuf, Ambassador of France
to Constantinople, was dispatched through Poland, and did the French a great
prejudice. This Letter was Written in the Year 1695, and Intercepted by a Party
of Germans, so that it was brought to the Emperor, who thought fit to
Communicate it to the Senate. The Abbot giving an Account in the Letter of the
Ill Condition of the Affairs of Poland; tells Monsieur Chateauneuf, That the
Turks had no reason to be afraid of them, and quit their Enterprises against
Hungary, to oppose a People, who, says he, can do them no harm, because of
their Divisions: And it contains some odd Reflections on the King, and the
Crown-General, as if they had known, and been glad that he should serve the
Turks as Spy. This Letter did so highly incense the Poles, that it was very
much insisted, that the Abbot of Polignac might be compelled to declare,
whether he had done it by his Masters Order, or of his own head? and that if he
did it by Order of the King of France, he might be Expelled the Kingdom, as the
Minister of a Prince Enemy of the Republic: but that if it did appear that he
had committed that Villainous Fact without any Orders, that such a Punishment
might be Inflicted upon him as the Laws Ordained for the Punishment of Traitors.

The French Ambassador denied the Fact, and prepared a Writing to disown the
Letter, and endeavor to prove, that it was Forged by the Enemies of France;
but, as his Party grew so strong as to make him fear nothing, as to the
Consequences of the Impressions that Letter might have wrought upon the Poles,
his Apology was never Published: which Silence has Corroborated all the Proofs
the Imperialists Alleged to Convince the Senate of its being Genuine. The
Abbot of Chateauneuf's Brother, to the French Ambassador at Constantinople
arrived about that time at Warsaw, being sent by the French King to assist
Polignac in his Negotiation, and temper a little his Eagerness and Passion,
which had been like to prejudice the Affairs of his Master. This New Minister
confirmed the Promise Polignac had made to the Poles, and added some others, in
relation to an Advantageous Peace with the Turks.

The time of the Election approaching, the particular Dyets were held in the
usual Form, and broke up with more Tranquillity than was expected. The Nobility
of the Palatinate of Cracow made an Act of Association, whereby they Promised
upon Oath, mutually to assist each other, and not to suffer themselves to be
Corrupted by any Party, but on the contrary to Procure and Promote the Common
Good of their Country with Unanimity and Fidelity.

The number of the Competitors was not much increased; for, besides these I
have already mentioned, no other had yet appeared except the Prince of Newburg;
but few days before the Great Diet began, all the World was Surprised to see
Prince Livio Odeschalchi, Nephew to Innocent XI. putting in for the Crown, for
no body thought he carried his Pretensions so high. However, he was like to
outbid all the rest: And that the Reader may know upon what account, it will
not be improper to set at large in this place the Proposals he made to the
Republic, which are as follows.

SEeing the Magnanimous Prince Odeschalchi, Nephew to Pope Innocent XI. of
Glorious Memory, is one of those that have conceived an Extraordinary
Tenderness and Affection for the Most Serene Republic, as well out of his own
Inclination, as an Imitatation of his Uncle, he makes bold to be one of the
Candidates at the New Election of a King. Not that he has any Design to Cross
the Royal Princes of Poland, no less Illustrious for their own Virtues, than
for the Heroic Achievements of their Deceased Glorious Father; or to oppose
those other Pretenders to the Crown, whether Natives or Foreigners: But, if it
should come to pass, through any unfortunate event, that none of those
Competitors should be Advanced to the Polish Throne, and that the Magnanimous
Prince Odeschalchi should be Preferred before all the rest, he would willingly
submit his Person, and all that he has in the World, to the Most Serene
Republic. And moreover, seeing he should not be Supported by any Foreign
Prince, he should be Solely Beholding for his Election to the Good Will of the
Illustrious Polish Nation, and will Bind himself, as a Testimony of his
Acknowledgment, to the following Conditions.

I. That he will Maintain the Laws and Statutes of the Most Serene Republic,
as also the Conditions that shall be Agreed upon.

II. That he will, in no Manner whatsoever, Violate the Precious Liberty of the
Polish Nation, but rather defend it, upon all occasions, with the Expense of
his own Blood.

III. That for the Payment of the Soldiers, he will Supply the Republic with
Eight Millions of Florins in Polish Money, before he set his Foot in the
Kingdom.

IV. That he will Redeem Elbing from the Elector of Brandenburgh, by
Reimbursing the Money for which it was formerly Mortgaged to him.

V. That he will use his best Endeavors to recover Caminiek, and other
Territories the Turks and Tartars have Usurped from the Most Serene Republic.

VI. That to Discharge the Republic from the Assignments that are usually
allotted to the New Queen, he will never Marry: or if the Nation desires he
should, he will accept of such a Wife as they shall think fit.

VII. That he will take Care for the future the Army shall be Regularly Paid.

VIII. That he will at his own Charges Found a College at Rome for 25 Polish
Gentlemen, and as many Lithuanians, with a sufficient Revenue for their
Maintenance according to their Quality.

IX. That if he comes to Die without Issue, the Republic shall be the Sole
Heiress of all his Estate of Money and Lands, as also of all his Rich and
Costly Movables.

X. For the Performance of all these Promises, he is ready to engage, by an
Authentic Act, to the Most Serene Republic, all his Hereditary Lands in the
Milanese, as also the Dukedoms of Ceri, Bracciano, and Palo, the Marquisate of
Roncofredi, and the County of Montejano, with all the Forts, Arsenals, and
Brass Canon that are in those Places. He will Engage likewise, all the Sums of
Money which he has at Interest at Rome, Naples, Venice, Genoa, Madrid,
Amsterdam, etc.

XI. Lastly, The Envoy of Prince Odeschalchi to the Diet, is ready to make it
Evident to whosoever shall desire it, by Proofs which he has by him, and the
Testimony of several Persons of Quality, that these Lands, and Sums in Bank,
amount to above Twenty Millions of Florins, Polish Money, besides his
Movables, Gold and Silver, Plate, Jewels, Medals, Statutes and Paintings.

These are the Great Offers with which Don Livio Odescalchi expected to dazzle
the Eyes of the Poles; and likely he would have carried his Point, had he not
been Out-bid by some other Prince. To this New Candidate I must add Count
Jablonowsky General of the Crown, Prince Sapicha General of Lithuania, and
Prince Lubiomirsky Grand Mareshal of the Court; but, the Event has shown that
they did Caball for Others, and not for Themselves.

All the Particular Dyets being Held, and the Fort and Bridges, which usually
are wont to be Built upon these Occasions over the Vistula, and all other
Preparations being in a Readiness, the Diet began the 15th of May, with the
Mass of the Holy Ghost, Celebrated by Signior Davia the Popes Nuncio. The
Bishop of Ploskow made a Sermon, wherein he Exhorted the Assembly to have no
other Interest but the Good of their Country; and to lay aside the
Consideration of all Private Advantages, with a Resolution to Advance to the
Throne the Person whom they should deem most Worthy of the Crown. The Sermon
being over, they repaired to the Place of the Election to Choose a Mareshal,
but they soon perceived the Spirit of Division was more Powerful amonst them,
than the Christian and Judicious Advice of the Bishop of Ploskow; so that the
Election of their President was put off till the First of June, upon Pretense
that the Assembly was not Complete: And, in the mean time Monsieur Omienisky,
who was Mareshal of the Preliminary Diet, was desired to perform the Function
of Mareshal or President till another was Elected. One of the Palatines of
Lesser Poland Proposed to Enquire into the Authors and Abetters of the
Confederacy of the Army, before they proceeded to the Election of a King, or of
a Mareshal; but this Proposal, and some other of this Nature, put the Assembly
into such a Heat, that the Mareshal was obliged to Adjourn them to the next day.

The Choice of a Marshall took up the Diet from the First of June to the 16th,
because of the Two Parties striving to gain this Point. The French were for
Count Bielinsky Grand Chamberlain, and the other Party for Czartorisky Son of
the Grand General of Poland; and because the President of the Diet has a Great
Influence over the Palatines, they perplexed the Affairs so much on both sides,
that it was thought at first the Diet would break up for want of a Mareshal: At
last, the Suffrages being Collected and Told, the Plurality was found for Count
Bielinsky, who was thereupon Proclaimed Mareshal. This was a Trial of Skill and
Strength between the Two Parties; and therefore the Court of Vienna had
Judiciously foreseen, from the Mighty Opposition they met with from the French
Faction, that the Prince of Conti was like to carry the Crown, unless he was
oposed by a more considerable Rival than Prince James, for then all other
Parties vanished away. Therefore the Emperor made a Proposal to the Elector of
Saxony, who was then at Vienna, to put in for the Crown of Poland, assuring him
of a Powerful Assistance. The Elector being a Young Prince, was easily dazzled
with the prospect of a Crown, and accepted, with all imaginable Satisfaction
the Proposals of the Emperor. His Religion was not so great an Obstacle as one
would have thought; all his Doubts and Difficulties were easily removed in Two
or Three Conferences he had, pro forma, with the Bishop of Javarin his Cousin;
and all other Measures being taken with a great Privacy, the Elector took Post
for Dresden, where he Arrived on the 11d of June, and having Mustered his
Forces, which had been drawn up, to the Number of 7 or 8000 Men, upon pretense
of going into Hungary, Marched for Silesia, upon the Frontiers of Poland. All
the World was Surpised at this March; but the Baron of Fleming, who arrived at
Warsaw at the same time, as Envoy Extraordinary from Saxony, having Published
his Masters Design to Stand Candidate for the Crown of Poland, the French
perceived that they had been Grossly Mistaken, and that they would have to deal
with a Powerful Competitor. It Is to be observed, that the French thought at
first, that the Elector was about to Disturb the Peace of Germany, it being
given out, that he was Dissatisfied with the Emperor, and recalled his Troops
from Hungary; and therefore they were like Thunder-struck't at the Proposals of
the Baron do Fleming, which were as follow.

1. The Family of Saxony is so Illustrious, that Emperors of Germany have been
Chosen out of it, and among others, Otho III. who raised the Duke of Poland to
Regal Dignity.

2. The present Elector is in the Flower of his Youth, not being above 27 years
of Age, endowed with all Military Virtues, of which he has given sufficient
Proofs upon the Rhine, in Brabant, and chiefly in Hungary.

3. He has Embraced the Catholic Religion, as his Envoy is ready to prove.

4. He has but one only Son, to whom he will leave the Electorate of Saxony,
with several other Territories, so that he will be no Charge to the Republic,
the Elector not seeking the Crown only for himself, but out of a Design of
Advancing Religion, and Defending the Liberties and Privileges of the Nobility.

5. His Electoral Highness will have no regard to a sordid and particular
Interest of Vacant Preferments, but only to Virtue and Merit.

6. Immediately after the Election he will give Ten Millions, not in Paper, but
in Ready Money to Pay the Crown Debts.

7. He Promises to take Caminieck with his own Men and Artillery.

8. He will Unite the Vkrain, Walachia and Moldavia to Poland.

9. To prevent the dangers of any War, wherewith the Commonwealth may be
threatened, he promises, if required by the Senate, to Assist the Republic with
6000 Men at his own Charge.

10. If the Exchange of any one of his Hereditary Countries, in Lieu of any
Province of Poland, be more for the Convenience of the Republic, he promises
to consent to it.

11. He will Erect an Academy in Poland for the Instruction of the Polish
Nobility in the Mathematics, and all Military Exercises.

12. He will reform the Coin of the Kingdom, and Restore Trade, to which
purpose his City of Leipsick may be greatly Serviceable.

13. The Frontiers shall be put into a good Condition, and Men kept on Foot in
the Exercise of Arms.

14. The Republic has nothing but good to expect from the Election of His
Highness; and the Pope's Nuncio, and the Emperor's Ambassador will Certify
for him, as to the matter of Religion.

These Conditions being more Advantageous to the Republic than any that had
been yet made, it is not to be wondered at, if so Great a Party of Polanders
gave their Voice for the Elector of Saxony, though he had not time enough to
purchase a Party with Money. The Pope's Nuntio Answered, That his Religion
ought not to be an Obstacle to his Election, seeing he had Embraced the
Catholic Faith, as it appeared by a Certificate under the Hand and Seal of the
Bishop of Javarin which he knew. The Bishop of Passau, Ambassad or of the
Emperor, appeared publicly for His Electoral Highness; and, in short, his
Party grew, in few days, so strong, as to exceed the French, as we are going to
Mention.

The Election of a Marshall, and some other Preliminary things took up the
Diet till the 20th of June; the Pope's Nuncio had public Audience that day;
and the next day the Emperor's Ambassador had his; the 22d the French
Ambassador was heard, and afterward the Envoy of the Elector of Brandenburgh;
so that the Diet could not go on with the Election of a King till the 25th. The
Royal Family's Party made a Fair Appearance at the beginning, several of the
Palatinates having represented to the Electors the Merits of Prince James, his
Great Alliances, and several other things fit to engage the Republic to
present him with their Crown: Others proposed Don Livio Odeschalchi; but the
French Party seemed still more Numerous. The 26th the Saxon Party grew
stronger, notwithstanding the Intreagues of the Primate, who Rode from one
Squadron of the Nobility to the other, Recommending to their Choice the Prince
of Conti; but his Competitors had such a Majority, that it was thought the
Elector of Saxony would have been Proclaimed that day. However, the Partiality
of the Primate was such, that the Grandees quitted the Field that day, without
coming to any Resolution. They Met again the next day, being the 27th of June,
and Resolved not to Separate, till they had made an End of that Grand Affair.
The Cardinal did his utmost to bring the Nobility to the Prince of Conty's
Party, but his Endeavors were in vain; for, on the contrary, a great many left
him, and went over to the Saxons: yet, in Spite of all the Opposition, the
Primate, at the Head of his Cabal, Ordered the Trumpets to Sound, and
Proclaimed the Prince of Conti; and repairing, with all the have he could to
St. John's Church, caused the Doors to be shut, and Sung Te Deum in the Dark.
The Cardinal having left the Field, the Marshall of the Crown, the
Crown-General, and the Heads of the Parties of Saxony, and Prince James,
Protested against the Irregular and Violent Way of proceeding of the Primate,
as contrary to the Laws and Freedom of Election; and having United themselves,
they proceeded to Collect the Suffrages in a Legal Way, and afterward
Friderick Augustus Elector of Saxony was Proclaimed King by the Bishop of
Cujavia, who immediately repaired to the Great Church in Warsaw, with the Saxon
Party, where he caused Te Deum to be Sung, with the Usual Ceremonies. The 28th
they repaired again into the Field, and sent for the Cardinal, who refused to
come; and thereupon they sent for the Baron de Fleming, to Treat with him about
the Pacta Conventa, and the Royal Diploma was ordered to be prepared. The Grand
General caused an Act to be drawn up, and Signed in the Field, whereby it
Appeared, that there were but 80 Standards (or rather Squadrons) for the Prince
of Conti, whereas there were 250 for the Elector of Saxony.

The Envoys of the other Competitors extremely blamed the Conduct of the
Cardinal Primate, for refusing so much as to Propose any of their Masters to
the Republic, and for his Concealing a Letter from the Czar of Muscovy, in
Favor of Prince James, containing an Express Claus, That Poland must expect a
Declaration of War so soon as they have Elected the Prince of Conti. It Is
certain, that the Partiality of this Prelate can hardly be matched; for had he
been ruled by the Interest of the Republic, as he ought to have been, he would
have Declared for the Elector of Saxony, as being the most Advantageous Choice
the Poles could have made, considering the Riches and Valor of that Prince,
who is able of Himself to Support the Crown of Poland, and Restore it to its
former Dignity.

The Pacta Conventa being Drawn up, the Baron de Fleming repaired in great
Splendour on the 13th of July, to the Great Church in Warsaw, and Swore to them
in his Master's Name. They were likewise Subscribed by most of the Nobility and
Senators. The Reader will find an Account in the foregoing Chapters of the
Pacta Conventa, and an Abstract of the most Principal Articles thereof;
however, I think fit to Insert at Large in this place the Pacta Conventa Sworn
by the Envoy of Saxony, because there is some Additions made to them by reason
of the Circumstance of Time and Persons. These Articles were Sworn by the King
Himself at the Coronation.

1. The Kingdom of Poland shall be always Preserved in its Right of Electing a
King, so that it may never become Hereditary.

2. No King shall be Elected who shall not be Devoted to the Roman Catholic
Church, and who shall not take an Oath constantly to persevere in her Communion.

3. Liberty of Conscience shall be Inviolably preserved in its full strength
and vigor; and as for the Greek Religion, that shall be taken into
Consideration after the Coronation.

4. No Presents shall be taken from those who shall sue for any Offices or
Starosties.

5. The Queen shall not Intermeddle with Affairs of Government.

6. As to the Administration of Military Affairs, the Presidents of Vladislaus
II. and John Casimir shall be followed.

7. The present Alliances of the Crown of Poland shall be Renewed.

8. Endeavors shall be used to recover Vkrania, and to make a perpetual Peace
with the Muscovites.

9. The Revenues or Money shall not be applied to the particular Benefit of the
King, nor shall any Money be Coined without the Consent of the Republic.

10. No Foreign Forces shall be brought into the Kingdom without the Knowledge
of the Republic.

11. None shall be Employed in Embassies but Gentlemen of Good Fortunes.

12. No body shall be Naturalized but such as have done the Republic some
Signal Service.

13. No body shall be admitted to any Preferment in the King's Household, unless
he has first Served the Crown.

14. No Person whatsoever shall be permitted to enjoy any Petty Revenues of the
Crown without the consent of the Republic.

15. No Person shall enjoy two considerable offices at one time, such as those
of the Marshall and General, but they who now enjoy any offices, shall
continue in the Exercise of 'em, and enjoy the Revenues thereof without any
defalcation.

16. The ordinary Order in the administration of Justice shall be presev'd
without any alteration.

17. The King, when he has retaken Caminieck, shall cause it to be fortifyed at
his own charge, but after that, the Republic shall keep the said
Fortifications in Repair.

18. The King's Guard shall consist of the Natives of the Kingdom.

19. If the King become a Widower, and has a desire to marry, he shall advise
with the Senators about the choice of a Wife; and if he takes a Forreigner, She
shall not have above Six foreigners in her Service.

20. Only the Latin and Polish Languages shall be made use of for the King's
Letters and Orders.

21. The Laws called Pacta Henricea shall be observed in the Judgments called
Post curialia.

22. All the differences that are now depending shall be determined with all
the Speed that may be.

23. No new Custom or Novelty shall be admitted in the order of the King's
Table, but the ancient Custom shall be exactly observed.

24. Places becoming vacant in the Intervals of Dyets shall be supplied in six
weeks.

25. The Militia shall be so regulated at the Diet of the Coronation that is to
come, that there shall be no need of Foreign Troops, and Military discipline
shall be exactly observed.

26. The Salt shall be taxed and shared out in all the Palatinates according to
the ancient Custom.

27. All Gentlemen shall have the freedom of the Salt and Mines.

28. The Ancient Privileges of the Palatinates shall remain inviolable.

29. The Prorogatives and Priveledges of places, Towns and Cities shall be
restored, wherever they have been abolished.

30. All the Privileges which belong to the Universities of Cracow and other
Cities, as well Eclesiastick as Secular, as also all the Articles which were
promised upon Oath at the Coronations of the Kings Henry, Stephen, Sigismund,
Vladislaus, John Casimir and others, shall be revived at this Election; which
if it be not done, or any thing endeavored to the contrary of these Articles,
then the Inhabitants of Poland and Lithuania shall be free and disingaged from
their Obedience.

These Articles being Signed without exception, a great Embassy was appointed
to go and offer the Crown to the Elector, who was already advanced to Tarnowits
on the frontiers of Poland. The Son of the Grand General of the Crown, ten
Senators and seventy Knights, attended by above 2000 Gentlemem were appointed
for that Service. The Elector gave them Audience in the Fields near Tarnowits,
under a very Rich Tent; and appeared on that occasion with an extraordinary
Magnificence. The Ambassadors and Gentlemen of their Retinue paid him all
respect as to their Prince, and kissed his Hand; and there was afterward a
noble Entertainment. The new King and the Bishop of Passau Ambassador of the
Emperor to the Diet of Poland sat at one Table, the Ambassadors and other
Persons of Principal quality were at another Table, and their Retinue at a
third. After Dinner the king went with the Ambassadors to view his Forces that
were encamped near that Place; and conferred the command thereof to the first
Ambassador, who received it with all Submission. The Speech of the said
Ambassador is so singular that I think fit to insert it here, as well to give
an example of the Eloquence of the Poles, as to show what opinion they have of
their Crown, which they think, it seems, above all other Crowns of the World.

Most Serene and Most Potent King,
THE Most Serene Republic of Poland, which alone has preserved her Ancient
Liberty, and which, after so much Blood as has been drawn from her own Veins,
may be called the Wonder of preceding Ages, gives you to understand, by our
Mouths, That you have been Elected by our Free Suffrages, KING of Poland, Grand
Duke of Lithuania, Russia, Prussia, Massovia, Samogittia, Kiovia, Volhinia,
Podolia, Polaquia, Livonia, Smolensko, Servia and Czernicovia. It Is upon you,
Most Serene Elector of Saxony, that we have cast our Eyes, and whom we Embrace
and Cherish, not only for the sake of so many Emperors, Kings, and Great
Captains from whom you are Descended, but for the sake of those Heroic
Virtues, that render your Name and Reputation so bright and glorious to the
World, besides an Infinite Number of Signal Endowments that make you worthy of
a Scepter. Could our Republic mistake her self in so Noble a Choice? Has she
not Chosen a Hero Beloved of Heaven and Earth? A Hero who has Won so many
Victories from the Barbarians, and who is laden with so many Laurels? Has she
not preferred Augustus before all the rest? who, before he was Chosen to Supply
her Vacant Throne, so well deserved to fill it by His Valor, Fame, and Eternal
Honor? Certainly we could never hope for Comfort after so many Calamimities,
which we were no longer able to bear, but in expectation that your Reign will
put an end to them. You have Triumphed, Most Serene King, over the Turks,
Triumph now over the Hearts of the Polanders: Stretch forth over our Crown your
Arms so well accustomed to Vanquish the Infidels. The People who give you
their Suffrages, give 'em to a Prince whom Rome looks upon as her Defender, and
Christendom as her Bullwark; a Prince whose Experience, Policy, Achievements,
and so many Victories, cannot but gain th Esteem of all the World. And who can
better Rule a Nation, who has Subdued so many Countries, and is still Famous
for the preservation of her Liberty, than Your Majesty, Most Serene King, in
whose Countenance, and continued Course of Life, we behold that Courage, and
every thing that is capable to draw Veneration to Your Person? Poland, that has
always been so Warlike, and Nursed up in Arms from her Cradle, shall behold
You Imitating, if not Surpassing, the Heroic Actions of Your Ancestors,
endowed with a Martial Heart, breathing only what the Sublimest Bravery
inspires into your Breast, and full of Majestic Sweetness. She will admire
Your Generosity, and all those Royal Manners, that must needs force the World
to confess, that it is only in Your Breast where Majesty Resides.

Lastly, She will behold and admire You, not only for Your Natural Endowments,
and those Rare Perfections You have Acquired in Your Illustrious Family, and in
Climates where Your Valor has been signalized but for Your Embracing our
Religion. This is that Light which renders Heaven Serene, and dissipated those
Clouds and Tempests which at first obscured Your Free Election. Most Fortunate
Prince, You have Rejoiced the Holy City; You have paid Your Ancient Mother the
Honor due to Her, and Saxony is become, by Your Change of Religion, a Thousand
times more Illustrious than by Your perpetual Victories. By abandoning the
Errors of Your Country, You have found Crowns amongst Foreigners. There were
several Competitors, Excellent Princes, and of great Worth, who Aspired to the
Crown of Poland, but none of 'em who had Heaven a sharer in the Contest. You
only were the Person who began with God, and for Your Premium carried the Prize
of that Faith which You had Recovered. That thing once Confirmed to us, we gave
You our Free Suffrages with all our Hearts, and have Proclaimed You to Reign
over us. We are Ignorant whether You will, or will not be our King, but are
Assured that You are Valiant, Warlike, Affable, Pious, Catholic, and give You
our Hearts, our Prayers, our Tongues, and all we have in the World. Our
Republic, now Your own, whose Fame is so far spread, Venerates, Loves Your
Person with an entire Affection, and desires Your Presence, as one whom she has
Chosen for her King, or rather as one whom God Himself has Chosen, and whom we
as Frankly and Freely Receive. What We have done, not in the Dark, but in the
View of Heaven, this Day we here Confirm by these Letters. We Invite Your
Majesty, after Your having been Proclaimed, not by Tumultuous Factions, nor by
the Fury of Inconsiderate Rashness, or that we had put our Crown to Sale, but
by the Unbiased Wishes and Desires of the People, who Invite Your Majesty with
a Profound Sincerity of Heart, and at Ardency of Desire not to be expressed.
Come then, Blessed Prince, since God has so Decre'd it, since Poland so
Earnestly Desires it, since Rome Rejoices at it, since Germany Approves the
Choice, since Europe applauds it; since all the World, the Barbarians only
excepted, send up their loudest Acclamation to Heaven in testimony of their
Content. Christendom is preparing for Your Majestys immortal Renown, Asia her
Spoils, and Poland a Crown environed with Laurels. May all Your Undertakings
prosper: appear in the midst of us and Reign over us. And as for my self in
particular, how happy am I, upon the Frontiers of my Country, and at the head
of this noble Embassy to give Your Majesty the same suffrages, which I had
given You before in the Field of Mars. How happy am I to have been chosen to
bring you the Tidings of Your being Proclaimed. It Is so great an Honor for a
noble Polonian that he could not wish a greater. Now then, after we have thus
congratulated Your Majesty, we will return and spread the report of Your Fame
amongst our Brethren. We will bless our selves for what we have seen, we will
Publish what You are, and how great our Hopes in so Illustrious a Prince.
Lastly, we will declare Your Glory among the Nations, and all the Earth shall
be full of Your Majesty.


This Speech is full of very high Compliments, for notwithstanding the Elector
of Saxony is a Prince endowed with several good qualifications, yet, I dare
say, all the accomplishments attributed unto him by the Polish Ambassador do
very seldom meet together in a Prince so young as his Electoral Highness;
therefore an ingenious Gentleman has very well observed, that the Poles thought
fit to make use of these insinuating flateries to inform their new Prince, what
sort of King they desire, what sort a Prince they expect he should be, and in
what manner they could wish he would deport himself amongst them, If this was
their meaning I must excuse their flatery and confess that it is the best use
that can be made of it.

In the mean time the Party of the Prince of Conty concerted Measures how to
Support their Election, and the Cardinal Primate sent a Letter to the Elector
to compliment him out of the Throne; but the Letter being directed to the
Elector of Saxony without mentioning King Elect of Poland, it was sent back
without being opened. The design of that Letter was to represent to his
Electoral Highness that the Prince of Conty had been Unanimously chosen by the
Nobility, whereas his Election was only supported by some few Men, and
therefore they hoped from the Justice of his Electoral Highness that he would
not trouble their Free Election. They protest to have a great respect for his
Heroical Virtues, but that it was never their intention to Burden his Serenity
with the Public Government of their Kingdom whilst he was so Gloriously
employed against the Common Enemy.

This Artifice having not succeeded as they expected, they made a Protestation
on the 25th. of July against all that should be done by the Party of Saxony,
but by Name against Stanislaus, Jablonousky, Castelan, and Felix Potosky
Polatine of Cracavia Grand General and Inferior General of the Crown, Joseph
Sluska Castellan of Vilna Inferior General of Lithuania, Stamstaus, Dabsky,
Bishop of Cujavia, and several others, whom they Charge with a design to
overturn the State, which as they say, appears by their openly protecting the
Promoters of the Confederacy of the Army, their delaying the choice of a
Marshall of the Diet, and lastly by Electing against the Laws observed in
Election, a Lutheran for King, notwithstanding the Prince of Conty had been
Lawfully and Freely Elected, and Proclaimed by the Primate. They protest also
against the Pacta Conventa which they presumed to draw up, and caused 'em to be
Sworn to by a Calvinist Ambassador, the Sacrament being clandestinly exposed.
This is the Substance of their protestation; but though they are so positive in
their Accusations, the other Party, as we have seen, pretends to have done
nothing against the Laws of their Country, but on the contrary charge the
Primate and his Party with irregular Proceedings, which after all is certainly
true.

The Elector of Saxony went the 26th. of July from Tarnowits to Picari, where
he went to Church with the Ambassadors, being received and complimented at the
Church Door by Monsieur Crispin Bishop of Samogitia and Brother to the
Lithuanian Ambassador, who carried the King Elect to the Place that was
prepared for him near the Altar. There the King made a new Profession of Faith
and received the Communion from the hands of the Bishop. After the Mass, he
Swore to the Pacta Conventa, and then Te Deum was sung which was attended with
the loud Acclamations of the People and other Demonstrations of Joy.

The next day his Majesty treated the Polish Ambassadors, the Bishop of Passau,
and several other Lords in a Castle belonging to the Bishop of Cracow, where he
made the following Speech to the Nobility Assembled to Congratulate him.

My Dear and Good Friends;
YOu have Chosen me to be your King, you are come to offer me the Crown, and
you have brought me hither. I am come and have quitted my Territories and my
Country for your sake; not to be a burden to you but to bring abundance along
with me, my Wealth, my Forces and all that belongs to me, to augment as much as
in me lies, the Glory and Honor of your Nation, by Fighting against the
Enemies of the Kingdom, more especially those of Christendom. Be assured that
my Heart shall be always Constant and Sincere toward my Faithful Subjects, and
that my Sword shall only be employed in the defense of your Liberties and the
Authority with which you have invested me.


This short Speech was so kindly received by the Nobility that were present,
that they made new Protestations to venture their Lives and Estates to maintain
him in the Throne against all his Enemies.

From Picarri the King continued his March toward Cracow, into which Place he
did not think fit to make any entry but passed on to the Castle of Lopsow
belonging to the Kings of Poland within a mile from that place. He viewed
privately the Fortifications of that Capital, which he found in a very ill
condition, and therefore gave immediate Orders to repair and enlarge them. In
the mean time the Bishop of Cujavia in the King's Name, sent out Circular
Letters for a general Diet to meet at Warsaw, and the Cardinal Primate Summoned
another to meet the 26th. of August.

It Is to be observed that the Party who Chose the Elector of Saxony, empowered
their Ambassadors to agree with him about the Number of the Forces that he was
to bring into the Kingdom, till he was in the peaceable Posession of the
Throne, and accordingly, the Saxon Troops that were in Silesia Marched to
Cracow, and Encamped in the Neighborhood of that City, into which the Elector
made his entry the 8th. of August, being received by the Inhabitants with all
immaginable Demonstrations of Joy. His Majesty went directly to the Castle,
which had been prepared for his Residence during his stay at Lopsow, and called
a great Council at which most of the Senators and Officers of State were
present, where three things were Proposed to be Considered of. 1. What was fit
to be done in relation to the Diet Summoned by the Primate to meet at Warsaw
the 26th. of August? 2. How to Pay the Army. 3. Whether the Mediation of the
Elector of Brandenburg or any other foreign Prince should be desired or
accepted? As to the first it was Resolved not to permit the said Diet to meet,
and that the Saxon Forces should for that purpose March toward Warsaw, unless
the Primate and his Adherents did within a Fortnight, to be reckoned form the
second of August, own the Elector of Saxony for King of Poland. 2. That the
Castellan of Culm should begin to pay the Army on the 15th. of August, out of
the Moneys provided by the Kings Orders. 3. And lastly, that it was not proper
to desire to accept the Mediation of any Foreign Prince, seeing it might be
looked upon as a Tacit Concession that the Election had not been duly made.

The Provincial Dyets met in the mean time in order to send Deputies to the
General Diet Summoned by the Primate, but several broke up without coming to
any Resolutions, and some others, as that of Warsaw, resolved to send Deputies
to assist at the Coronation of the Elector of Saxony, which was appointed to be
performed on the 15th. of September at Cracow. An Envoy of the Czar of Moscovy
arrived at Cracow about this time to Congratulate his Majestys Election, and
offer him an Army to reduce the Rebels to his Obedience.

Notwithstanding the March of the Elector, the Diet called by the Primate met
at Warsaw on the 26th. being composed for the most part of Members gained by
the French Money, and so soon as they were together, one of the Deputies
protested in the Name of the Elector of Saxony against all their Proceedings,
but the other drawing their Sabres he was in great danger of being Killed, and
forced to retire for his Security, so that some others who designed to make the
same protestation held their Tongue, and left the Assembly. This irregular Diet
having chosen their Marshall took upon them, to declare all those that should
join with the Elector of Saxony, Enemies of their Country, and that their
Estates should be seized and Confiscated. They entered also into an Assocation
engaging to stand by each other, and maintain the Authority of the Primate. It
was resolved also that the Elector should be once more desired to leave the
Kingdom, and that upon his refusal, Prince Sapieha whom they chose General,
should march to Cracow and oblige him to quit that place by Force.

The Kingdom being thus threatened with a Civil War, a great many Noblemen were
for a new Election, which gave some hopes to Prince James, and obliged him to
come Incognito to Gurau within five Leagues of Warsaw to confer with some of
his most intimate Friends; but they saw no liklihood of Succeeding, considering
the Animosity of the two other Parties, and the Presence of the Elector of
Saxony.

The Elector of Brandenburg, who has a great Interest in the Tranquillity of
Poland, offered his Medation; and there were several Conferences between Prince
Lubomirsky, whom the Elector of Saxony had appointed his Plenipotentiary, and
the Cardinal Primate. The French Faction had no other Design in their
Negotiations, than to hinder, or at least delay the Elector's Coronation; for,
though the Regent had called a New Diet, to Meet the 26th of September, yet the
Saxon Party were informed, That the Primate had sent new Expresses to hasten
the Prince of Conty's departure from France, that he might Arrive in Poland
before that Day.

This, and the Violent Proceedings of the Primate, in Seizing the Castle of
Warsaw, and turning out the Vayvode because he was in the Saxon Party, gave a
just and reasonable Suspicion to the King and his Adherents, that these
Conferences were only an Amusement on purpose to gain Time, and therefore His
Majesty, with the Advice of the Great Men about Him, resolved to proceed to His
Coronation the 15th of September, according to the Resolution formerly taken.

There were Two Great Difficulties to be removed.

1. The Cardinal was in Possession of the Corpse of the Late King, and the Laws
of Poland Requiring, that it should be Buried the Day before the Coronation of
His Successor; The Saxons were mightily perplexed, and did not know what to do
in this Matter.

2. The Regalia being kept in the Castle of Cracow, in a Place esteemed Sacred
by the Poles, under Four Locks, the Keys whereof are Committed to the Primate,
the Great Treasurer, and Two other Senators, that the same may not be Opened
but in the presence of them Four: They did not know how to come at them, none
of those Men being in their Party: but after several Consultations, it was
Resolved, That these Formalities ought not to prevent the Great Advantages that
the Republic expected from His Majesty's Coronation, and that therefore the
Obsequies of the Late King should be made by Representation, and that the Door
of the Place where the Regalia were kept, should be broke open in the presence
of the Senators, and some other Great Men.

This Resolution being taken, the King made a Most Magnificent Entry into
Cracow on the 13th of September, which it would be too long to recite here; The
Palatines, Bishops, Ambassadors, and the King Himself being on Horseback most
Richly Accoutred. The next day the Funeral of the Late King was performed, and
on the 15th His Majesty was Crowned by the Bishop of Cujavia, Assisted by
several other Bishops, in the Presence of a Great Concourse of the Nobility,
among whom were the Crown General, the Prince of Lubomirsky, and most of the
Senators: It were tedious to repeat here the Ceremonies practiced on this
Occasion, and therefore we must Refer the Reader to the XIXth Chapter of this
Book, which Treats at large of the King's Coronation. The Solemnity of the Day
concluded with a Great Entertainment, with Firing of the Artillery of the
place, and with Three Salvo's of all the Saxon Forces Encamped under the Walls
of Cracow.

The next Day His Majesty being Clothed in His Royal Robes, went, in Great
Pomp to the Townhouse, and being Set upon a Throne Erected before the House,
the Magistrates came to Assure Him of their Fidelity, and Presented Him with
the Keys of their Town in a Silver Dish. The Chancellor, in the King's Name,
Assured them of His Maiesty's Clemency and Affection; and Read, with an Audible
Voice the Oath of Fidelity, which they took Kneeling: After which they
Presented, according to Custom, a Purse full of Ducats to His Majesty, who was
pleased to Confer the Order of Knighthood upon some of them. All the People
being about the Throne, a Gentleman who had the Office of Treasurer, scattered
some Money amonst them; which Liberality was Proclaimed by Great Acclamations
of Joy, and Long Live Friderick Augustus Our KING.

The Diet which was Called some time before Met at Cracow, according to Custom;
and, at their first Meeting, some of the Deputies of the French Faction made
some Reflections on the Castellan of Cracow, and other Senators, who had advisd
the Hastening of the King's Coronation; which, as they said, ought to have been
deferred till the great Dispute concerning the Crown was accommodated, to
which, they said, the Primate and his Party were inclined; but they were
Silenced by the rest of the Deputies, who would not hear such Discourses. The
Contest about the Choice of a Marshall went so far, that the Sabres were
drawn, but at last the Matter was Composed, and the Starost Minsky of Lithuania
was Chosen on the 24th of September, and so the Diet went on upon Public
Business.

Some days after the Coronation the King held a Great Council of War, wherein
it was Resolved to send a Detachment of His Forces toward Dantzick, to prevent
the Prince of Conty's Landing, and another to Warsaw, to Secure the Place, and
Disperse the Rebels, which was accordingly done, the King in ending to repair,
in few ways, to Warsaw at the Head of His Army. But the Primate having received
Advice of His Majesty's Coronation, and of His design to March to Warsaw,
caused the Corpse of the Late King, with all the Artillery and Ammunition of the
Place to be Embarked on the Vistula for Jarreslow, designing to retire himself,
with the Marshall of the Nobility of his Party, to Lowitz, a Strong Place in a
Morass, belonging to his Eminence, which he did few days after.

The whole Party was much Surprised at the News of the King's Coronation, for
they did not think that the Saxons would have proceeded to it, because of the
Reasons I have mentioned; however they were not Disheartened; and they Summoned
the Nobility of Upper Poland to Meet at Lenovi, under the Command of the
Castellan of Calish: In the Lower Poland at Zawickhorst, under the Command of
the Palatine of Be^z; but the Rendesvous of the Lithuanians was left to the
Prince Sapieha, who was to have the Chief Command till the Arrival of the
Prince of Conti, who was daily expected.

That Prince set out form Dunkirk the 6th. of September on board the Chevalier
Bart, and Arrived at Dantzick the 25th. He sent a Gentleman to give Notice of
his Arrival to the Magistrates, and desire a free Passage through the City: To
which they Answered, That they had a great Respect for his Highness, but that
the Elector of Saxony having been Crowned, they could do no more for him, than
give him the Liberty to come ashore himself with his Servants alone, but not
suffer any Officers or Soldiers to Land, or Pass through their City. The Prince
was very much Mortifyed at the Answer of the Magistrates, but his Mortification
increased much on the 29th of the same Month, that he was an Eyewitness of
their Proclaiming his Competitor with all imaginable Solemnity, which was a
great disappointment to his Party, who thought to have had their Rendesvous in
that Place. They had also bought several Pieces of Cannon and Ammunition, but
the Magistrates would not suffer them to be carried away, and forbid the
Inhabitants, upon Pain of Death, to Sell any Arms or Ammunition to Strangers.
The Primate came Incognito to Confer with his Highness, with Five or Six other
Gentlemen.

In the mean time the King thought fit to send Circular Letters to all the
Provinces of the Kingdom, as well to notify his Coronation, as to Answer some
Calumnies raised by his Enemies; The Substance of those Letters were That his
Majesty being by the Free Choice of the Kingdom Elected and Crowned King of
Poland, he was concerned to find there should be any Persons so much Enemies of
their Country, as to go about to Violate the Rights of the Gentry and disturb
the Public Peace: That he understood they Complained of his having Possessed
himself of the Castle of Cracow, and brought Forces into the Kingdom; but that
he had done nothing therein but with the advice of the Senators and Great
Officers of the Crown, and that the Troops he had with him were no more than
were necessary for the Security of his Person: That notwithstanding the
unreasonable Opposition of the Adverse Party, he had used all endeavors to
gain them by fair Means, but the same not having had the effect he hoped for;
his Majesty Places his Confidence in the Protection of Almighty God, and does
not Doubt but they who Chose him King will be careful to maintain their own
Honor and Liberty.

Immediately after the Coronation the Castellan of Cracow was sent to the Army,
who having received the Arrears due to them declared they were ready to obey
his Majestys Orders. The Primate had sent some Deputies to engage them to come
over to his Party, but he having been informed at lemberg of the disposition of
the Troops, they did not think fit to venture to go to the Camp, for fear the
General should proceed against them as Public Enemies.

Thus stood the affairs of Poland toward the latter end of September 1697. and
notwithstanding the Obstinacy of the Primate and his Party, one may reasonably
believe that the Prince of Conti will find himself disappointed, his Competitor
having many great advantages over him: for although one would suppose, which is
certainly false, that their Parties in the Republic are equal, yet the
Electors Territories bordering upon Poland, and all the Neighboring Princes as
Sweden, Moscovy, the Emperor, Brandenburgh, etc. having declared for him, his
Party must needs prevail upon the Prince of Conti, who has nothing to rely
upon, but the supplies from France, which will be very uncertain considering
the distance from France, to Poland, and the dangers of the Sea in this Season
of the year.

The Reader does perhaps expect that we should inquire which of the two
Elections is conformable to the Polish Laws, or whether either of them may be
said to be so, which is neither improbable nor impossible; but this inquity
would be useless, for as things are now disposed, there is no likelihood that
this Affair will be decided by the Laws of Equity. However we may venture to
say that there were some irregularities in both Elections, but much more in
that of the Prince of Conti, and that the irregular proceedings in the other,
were chiefly occasioned by the partiality of the Primate. The French Party
exclaim very much against the Bishop of Cujavia for having Proclaimed the
Elector of Saxony, but whatever they may say this Prelate is not to be blamed
as to that point. It Is true it belongs to the Archbishop of Gnesna to Proclaim
the Kings of Poland, but this is to be understood when the Election is
Unanimous, for if it were in the Power of the Primate alone to Proclaim a King,
the Election would never be Free, and he might at that rate Proclaim whom he
should please. It appears by the foregoing account that the Elector of Saxony
had the Majority of Voices on his side, and this is enough to justify their
proceedings, seeing the Primate and his Party ought to have Submitted.

Money being the only Soul that enlivens the Affairs of Poland, it were more to
the purpose to enquire which of the two Competitors can spare most money, for
let their Right be what it will, the first who wants money, will be in the
wrong, and lose the Crown; but the Case is now different: the Elector is
Crowned, and has a good Army of his own and needs not to rely entirely on the
Fidelity of his Party. That Prince is certainly very Rich, but yet, his Purse
bears no proportion with that of the French King, who having already spent so
much, will neglect nothing at all to set the Prince of Conti upon the Throne.
The Winter drawing nigh, the Baltic Sea will be Unnavigable, and likely none
of the German Princes will give him leave to march an Army into Poland through
their Territories, so that the Prince of Conti has nothing to rely upon but his
Party, which is very precarious: for after all it is likely that the Poles will
open their eyes, and consider that they have nothing to fear from France,
whereas they must expect a continual War with Germany if this present King
receives any disgrace, and is obliged to retire into his own Country; insomuch
that although they should beat him out of the Kingdom, the controversy would not
be at an end, for his Dominions bordering upon Poland, he may invade them at
any time.

These Reasons are so strong, that one would think they should have already
prevailed upon the Poles; but their Mercenary Nobility is Influenced only by
Gold, and does not care for the Public Good, so long as they find their
Private Interest in Intestine Divisions.

The Court of Rome, who had a great Share in the Election of the King of
Poland, keeps now an exact Neutrality; but those Refined Politicians will soon
Declare for one of the Competitors, and doubtless for the Present King, because
of the Great Advantage they expect from the Conversion of that Prince to their
Religion, which certainly weakens much the Protestant Interest in Germany.

The Long Continuance of the Prince of Conti in the Road of Dantzick, without
offering to go on Shore, is an Ill Omen for his Affairs; and seeing his Party
have resolved to give him only the Title of Protector of the Religion and the
Liberties of Poland; it is doubted whether he will Accept of it, it being a
Tacit Confession that his Election was Illegal; but if he does not scruple to
take it, it is likely that he will make himself such a Sort of Protector as
Oliver Cromwell was; and, perhaps the Historians of this Age will say of him,
in case he Succeeds, what was said of the Successor of Julius Caesar, Augustus
Arma, quae in Antonium acceperat, in Rempublicam vertit: And really I would not
blame him for it, for he must needs spend as much Money as the Crown of Poland
is Worth, and perhaps a great deal more. But I must give over Conjectures, time
will soon bring this Great Controversy to an End.

The Reader must not expect here a Caracter of the King of Poland, this
undertaking is above my reach, therefore I must break off my Discourse after
having observed that he was Born May 12th. 1670. Second Son to John George
Elector of Saxony and of Anne Sophia Sister of the Present King of Denmark. He
has made several Campaigns on the Rhine and Flanders, and after his Brothers
Death, he Commanded in Chief the Imperial Army in Hungary in the years 1695.
and 1696. and has showed on all Occasions an Extraordinary Bravery. He Married
before he was Elector the Daughter of the Markgrave of Bareith of the House of
Brandenburgh. His Majesty is of a very strong Constitution and parhaps the
Strongest Man alive.

FINIS.

