THE Complete Gunner, IN THREE PARTS.

PART I. Showing the Art of Founding and Casting Pieces of Ordnance, with the
composition of Metal thereunto necessary.

The Composition and Matters of Gunpowders, the Several Sorts, Colors, and
Operation.

PART II. Discovers the necessary Instruments, and variety of Instructions to
the completing of a Gunner, with a Table of Squares and Cubes serving for the
Resolution of Questions of Gunnery and other Arts.

AS ALSO The way of taking Heights, Distances and Profundities, either with or
without Instruments.

PART III. Shows the Nature of Fireworks, the manner of Composing many that
are Excellent and Useful both for Sea and Land, for the defense of our selves
as well as the offense of our Enemies.

Translated out of Casimir, Diego, Vffano, Hexam, and other Authors.

To which is added the Doctrine of Projects applied to Gunnery by those late
famous Authors Galilaeus and Torricellio, now rendered into English.

TOGETHER WITH Some Excellent Observations out of Mersennus and other famous
Authors.

LONDON, Printed for Rob. Pawlet, Tho. Passinger, and Benj. Hurlock. 1672.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
AMong Arts and Sciences Mathematical Gunnery will not deserve the least
respect which has been practiced for many years (as you may read in the first
Chapter of this Book where we treat of its Original) and from time to time
Necessity and Art together have produced many new Invention: so that some may
judge it almost impossible to add more unto this Art; and are ready to say of
this as of other Studies, Nil dictum quod non dictum prius. But we have not
only endeavored the inquisition into the most knowing Professors of these Arts
both German, Italian, Frenchmen, Netherlander, etc. from whence we have drawn
the more Excellent and useful parts which were never before in our English
Tongue; but may boldly adventure to call some things in it new: And finding the
great Occasion which these present times do require in the knowledge of these
things made me the readier to compose this Work, adjudging it a very great
injury to our Countrymen to be deprived of the knowledge of such things which
are of so great importance in this very juncture of time. I did therefore
encourage my self in this Work, hoping my endeavors in the same will show my
willingness to serve my Contrymen: And as it is the part of wise men not to
censure any thing, without a good consideration and a perfect knowledge of the
subject upon which they ought to ground their judgment: So also I hope you will
not blame my Endeavors, when you have judiciously examined the same. I have
divided it into three Parts, endeavoring that it might be imperfect in nothing
that is necessary to this Art, or useful for a Gunner to know. I will assure
you that I have no other end in publishing this Treatise, than what I have
mentioned before.

I shall only crave your pardon for the faults that may be committed in the
Printing, as being not there present at the Correction of any part of it, my
occasions calling me other ways: yet I hope their care was so much that the
faults are not material, or at most not so much but your Courtesy may supply
that defect. So I recommend this Work to your good reception, and bid you
farewell.

W. T.

THE Complete Gunner.
CHAP. I.
Treating of the Earth necessary in making of Molds for the Casting of Pieces
of Ordnance, with the manner of Casting, etc.

WE will not dispute of the first Invention of Guns, that is, whether it came
from Archimedes, as the Italians do report, or from an Englishman, or from a
Monk, for this knowledge matters not much to the Art, nor is it of any
profitable signification to the Artist; especially considering, that Authors do
not really consent in this thing. Our intent is therefore not to trouble the
ingenious Students with vain uncertain repetitions, but to composea complete
Piece of Gunnery, and therein to discourse from the beginning to the end, all
that is necessary to be known or learned (after the knowledge of common
Arithmetic) by one that intends to be a perfect Pro^icient in the said Art. We
do suppose it therefore necessary for a Master Gunner to know first the making
of Molds and casting of Pieces. Therefore I shall first begin to discourse of
the property and Nature of the Earth fit for casting, or making Molds; for this
is of great moment, considering that many, or indeed most Earths are not for
this purpose; for the Earth ^^t for the casting of Pieces of Ordnance must be
such as will not be melted or fuse, although it be put into a very great fire,
but must remain firm and hard: and these Earths are generally of a Reddish, or
Iron-like color, which is well known to many Potters, especially such as make
Chemical Vessels. The Earth being obtained, it must be sifted and cast up after
the usual manner, as men do in the making of Mortar; then let it be moistened
with an Alchalated Water (especially such as is made of Niter) for that
purpose, and make it like paste; then, as is usual, let it be beaten up
strongly with an Iron Bar; the more it is beaten the better it is: in the
beating add one sixth part of Horse dung, and a proportionable part of Flox or
Hair, and let it again be well beaten and incorporated, always keeping a Moity
of this Earth without Hair or Flox, which is for Groundwork; and these
Compositions or Earth thus incorporated, you must reserve for the making your
Molds for Pieces of Ordnance, according to the Rules prescribed in the next
Chapter.

CHAP. II.
Of making Molds, and Casting Pieces of Ordnance, with the ^^^ture of Metals,
and allowance of Powder for proof.

AS a Master Builder when he intends the Building a Ship, makes first a Mold or
Moddel of the same; so the Master Gunner, or he that takes in hand the business
of Casting Guns, must have a form or Model of his Piece intended made of wood,
or such other matter he may think most convenient, which then being brought to
the Founder with an intent to be Cast, must first be smeered all over with Palm
Oil, or instead of that, our Lard or Hog's Grease, then first cover it over
with the said earth thinly, and let it dry leisurely, then lay on more,
increasing it to such a thickness, as you may judge convenient for your
purpose; and it must be so made that it may be taken into several parts, so
that the pattern may be taken out, and the Mold again exactly closed, and the
outside strengthened with Iron plates as long as the Chase of the Piece is, and
hooped together with Iron hoops to knock on and off. Then must there be made
(with the same earth upon a square Bar of Iron, bound round with a Cord that
the clay may stick well) a form exactly round, of the fashion of the concave of
your Piece (whether you intend it a Cylender or a Chamberboard Piece)
proportioned both in length and diameter, and it must be placed exact^ly in the
middle of the concave; and when all is well joined together, be sure it be well
pollished and smoothed, that the Metal may run the better, and be the clearer
from flaws, holes, or clefts.

In the beginning of your work take care that your Mold be exactly
proportionable as to height and substantialness of Metal, according to the
nature of the Piece you intend. That is, the Canon double-fortified must be so
cast that the Diameter at Muzzle be but (...) of the Diameter at Britch. The
lesser Cannon at Britch to be (...) ^o big as the greater Cannon 9/16 at
Trunions, and (...) at Muzzle, whereas ordinary fortified Cannons have at the
Touchhole 7/8 at the Trunions 5/8 and at the Muzzle (...), all lesser Pieces
in that kind have 18/1^ at the Touchhole (...) at Trunions, and (...) at
Muzzle; and the ordinary fortified Culverins are fortified every way like the
double fortified Cannon, and the lesser Culverin like the ordinary fortified
Cannon in all respects.

Great care must be taken in the Casting of Pieces of Ordnance, that they be
equal every way in proportion of Metals, that is, that the Cylender be in the
very middle of the Metal, that it may be truly bored, otherwise your Piece
will fail the Artist that shall use it, until the error be known.

In the next place let the Trunions be exactly placed in a Diagonal line with
the Axis of the Piece; and they may be placed in their proper distance from the
Muzzle and Britch, if you observe these Rules. Take the length of the bore of
the Piece from Muzzle to Britch, divide that measure by seven, and multiply
that sum that comes of the Quotient by three, the Product will show you how
many inches the Trunions must stand from the lowest part of the concavity of
the Piece.

And farther note, that the Trunions ought to be placed so, as (...) of the
Circumference of the Piece, may be seen in that place where the Trunions are
set.

When all additional Patterns, as Britch, etc. be made and Luted in their
proper place, all things at pleasure being neatly added to the pattern, let the
Mold then be fixed or placed so as is most convenient for the pouring in the
Metal; so when the Metal is cast, the perfect impression will be made upon the
superficial part of the Piece, and the Cylender will keep the bore proposed
according to what you have prescribed, the length of the Piece and its Diameter
of the bore may be found by the following Table in the next Chapter. For the
Metals generally used for those Guns, generally called brass Guns, they are
mixtures, and many times varied as experience will give leave. Some of the
chiefest do approve of this mixture, that is, to every hundred Weight of Copper
24 pounds of Tin, and 6 pounds of Lattin. Others to 100l. of Copper, add 8 l.
of Tin, and 10 l. of Lattin. Others to ever 100l. add 20l. of Bell-Metal, which
is 25l. of Lead and Tin to every 100l. of of Copper. Some add Tin, Lead,
Copper, and Lapis Calaminaris together; so every one follows such ways of
Composition as does most please his own Experience. The Copper and other better
Metals being once melted, the Tin and Lead is added for the better and quicker
fusion; and the higher the Metal is in fusion, the more solid and compact your
Metal will run and settle. The Lattin does incorporate and cause the Piece to
be of a good color, and the Tin does strengthen and bind the other matters
together. Now a Piece of Ordnance being Cast, before it comes to Service, it
must be put to trial; for which purpose there is used for proof, according to
the weight of the shot, about two thirds, or four fifths of that weight in
Powder, and for smaller Pieces more.

CHAP. III.
The Names of the principal Pieces of Ordnance used in England, their Weight,
Length, Diameter of the Bore, Height and Weight of the Shot, allowance of
Powder.

THe greatest in use is the Cannon Royal, which is in weight of Metal about
8000l. in length about 12 foot, carries a Shot of 7^ inch. Diameter, and its
weight is 58l. of Iron, its bore is 8 inches, requires for her charge in
Powder, 32l. 8z.

Demi-Cannon of the greater size, called by some Cannon of Seven, whose weight
of Metal is 7000l. in length about 12 foot, carrying a Shot of 6^ inch.
Diameter, and its weight of Iron is 42l. 10z. the Diameter at bore is 7 inches,
requires for her charge in Powder 20l.

Demi-Cannon great size, it is weight of Metal is 6000l. in length about 12
foot, carrying a Shot of 61/4 inch. Diameter, and its weight in Iron is 34l.
the Diameter at bore is 6(...) inch* requires for her charge of Cannon Powder
18l.

Demi-Cannon ordinary, its weight of Metal is 5600l. in length 11 foot,
carrying a Shot of 6(...) inch. Diameter, its weight in Iron is 32l. the
Diameter at bore is 6(...) inch. requires for her charge in Powder 171/2
pounds.

The lowest Demi-Cannon, whose weight of Metal is 5400l. being in length
sometime 10 and sometimes 12 foot, it carries a Shot of 6 inches, the weight of
that Shot in Iron is 30l. the Diameter of the bore is 61/4 inch. it requires
for charge in Powder 14l.

Culverin of the largest size, weighs about 4800l. being in length 10 or 12*
foot, it carries a Shot of 5(...) inch. Diameter, the weight of that Shot in
Iron is 20l. the Diameter of the bore is 6(...) inch, it requires for charge
in Powder 12l. 8z.

Ordinary whole Culverin weighs about 4500 l. being in length about 12 foot, it
carries a Shot of 5 inches Diameter, the weight of that Shot of Iron is about
17 l. Diameter at bore is 51/4 inch. it requires for charge in Powder 11 l. 6
z.

Culverin of the least size, weighs about 4000 l. being in length about 12
foot, it carries a Shot of 4(...) inch. Diameter, the weight of that Shot of
Iron is 15 l. Diameter, at bore is 5 inch. charge of Powder is 10 l.

Demi-Culverin of the greatest size weighs about 3000 l. being in length 10 or
12 foot, carries a Shot of 4(...) inch. Diameter, the weight of that Shot of
Iron is 12 l. 11 z. Diameter of the bore 4(...) inch. charge of Powder is 8 l.
12 z.

Demi-Culverin ordinary, weighs about 2700 l. being in length 10 or 12 foot,
carries a Shot of 41/4 inch. Diameter, weight of that Shot of Iron is 10 l. 12
z. Diameter of the bore 41/2 inch. charge of Powder is 7 l. 4 z.

Demi-Culverin lower than ordinary, weighs about 2000 l. being in length 9 or
10 foot, carries a Shot of 4 inches Diameter, weight of that Shot 9 l. Diameter
of the bore 4(...) inch. charge of Powder is 6 l. 4 z.

Saker of the oldest sort, of 1800 l. weight, being in length 9 or 10 foot,
carries a Shot of 33/4 inch. weight of that Shot 7 l. 5 z. Diameter at the bore
4 inches, charge of Powder 5 l.

Saker ordinary, of 1500 l. weight, in length about 9 foot, carries a Shot of
3(...) inch. Diameter, weight of that Shot 6 l. 0 z. Diameter at the bore 33/4
inches, charge of Powder 4 l.

Saker of the lowest size, of 1400 l. weight, in length about 8 foot, carries a
Shot of 31/4 inch. weight of that Shot 4 l. 12 z. Diameter at the bore 3 inches
and a half, charge of Powder 3 l. 6 z.

Minion of the largest size, of 800 or 1000 l. length 8 foot, height of the
Shot 3 inches, weight of the Shot 3 l. 2 z. height of the bore 3 inches, and
one quarter, the charge of Powder, if of 800 l. two pounds and a ^alf, if of
1000 l. three pounds and a quarter.

The ordinary Minion of 750 l. in length 7 foot, height of the Shot 3(...)
inch. weight of the Shot 3 l. 4 z. height of the bore 3 inches, charge of
Powder 2(...) pounds.

Faucons of 750 l. length 7 foot, height of the Shot 21/2 inch. weight 21/2
pounds, height of the bore 23/4 inch. charge in Powder 21/2 pounds.

Fauconet of 400 l. in length 6 foot, height of the Shot 2(...) inch. weight 1
l. 5 z. height of the bore 21/4 inch. charge 1 l. 4 z. of Powder.

Rabnet of 300 l. length 5 foot, height of the Shot 1(...) inch. weight 8
ounces of Iron, height of the bore 11/2 inch. charge of Powder 12 o^nces.

Base of 200 l. length 4 foot, height of Shot 11/2 inch, weight 5 ounces,
height of the bore 1(...) inch. charge of Powder 8 ounces.

There are other Pieces in use in our Nation, which are called Bastard Pieces;
of which you shall have a particular account in its proper place.

CHAP. IV.
The Names of the Principal parts of a piece of Ordnance.

IT is necessary for him that intends to be a Gunner to understand, after the
knowledge of the Piece in general, to know and learn every part and member of a
Piece of Ordnance; for well understanding the same take these Instructions
following.

All the outside of the Piece round about is called the superficial part of the
same, or Surface of the Piece; the Inner part is called the concave Cylinder,
and Soul of the Piece.

The full length is called the Chase of the Piece; so much of the Cylinder or
concave of the Piece as contains the powder and Shot is called the Chamber or
charged Cylinder, the remaining part to the small end of the Gun is called the
vacant Cylinder.

The Spindle standing out, or Ears by which the Piece must hang in the
Carriage, is called the Trunions; the space between the Trunions, the gravity
of the Center.

The Pumel or Button at her Coyl or Britch-end is called the Casacabel or her
Deck, the little hole the Touchhole, all the metal behind the touchhole the
Breach or Coyl, the greatest ring at her touchhole the Base Ring, the next
ring or circle the reinforced Ring, the next the Trunion Rings, the next before
the Trunions is called the Cornish Ring, the foremost next the Muzzle is called
the Muzzle Ring, Lastly, all the rings, Circles, Eminencies, at her Muzzle, and
so those behind the base Ring, are Frizes.

Let the Piece with its several names be placed by this Chapter. Fig. 1.

CHAP. V.
The Mounting of a Piece of Ordnance in its Carriage.

THe Gunners upon Land-Service, for the convenience of mounting a piece of
Ordnance, that is by any means whatsoever dismounted, have for their principal
Services, a Screw* and a Ghynne, and their appurtenances (which you will find
in their proper place) by whose help they are able to mount a Piece, and place
him in his Carriage, whereby he may be able to perform the work intended. Which
to perform artifi^ially, observe these Rules.

Before you endeavor to mount your Piece, above all things have a great and
diligent care that the Ghynne be very firmly set, so that it may not slip any
way; bu^ so placed, that the Pully or Truckle coming down from the head, fall
just between the Trunions, or gravity of the Piece, whereof to be assured you
may let ^all down from the head of the Ghynne a Plummet with a Line* or for
want of a Plummet any stone made fa^^ to a Line, and so moving the Ghynne ^^til
the said Plummet ^all ju(...) upon the Center of Gravity, which is between the
Ears of the Piece, that the met^^ may fa^l near equal, or that an easy hand
may poize i^; and this care must be the more, if the Ground whereon the Ghynne
stands be sandy or loose Ground, or (...) Earth be b^ggy soft, so that the feet
may ^^il or sink in or give way* according (...) the greatness of the weight.
For sometimes it may be necessary to put planks or some solid thing under the
Ghynne and Pins to stay them; but this as necessity shall require.

Now the Ghynne firmly placed and settled, the Gunner must get up by the Ladder,
or some Steps, to the head or top of it, having the Rope in his hand, shall put
it through the uppermost truckle of the head, and let it fall down to another
man again, that he may catch it, that he may put it through one side of the
Piece to fas^en it into the Ears of the Piece, and so having put it through
them he may draw it up, until he can give it him that is above, and then put it
through the other hole of the Truckle, and give it to him that is under him,
who must reach it again to him that is above, and so fasten it to the head of
the Ghynne, giving it some turns until it come under the uppermost Truckle.

This done, he must fasten it with great diligence to the lower Truckle, by
putting the Ears as through the Ring which is under the said Truckle; after
this begin to Hoyse your Piece, and in the Hoysing put a spar or some such
thing into the mouth of the Piece, so that thereby it may be governed, and may
not sway from one side to the other, which would be dangerous; for if it should
strike against the Rouler or any one of the feet of the Gynne, it may break
all, and so spoil both the work and the men tending upon it. Therefore I say,
be sure that those who stand by the Spar be careful in guiding the Piece and
keeping it steady and right, until the weight of the Piece is well settled, a
diligent Eye being had all this while, that neither the feet of the Gynne, nor
Rope give way; and be sure every part of the Rope draw equal, and that there be
no Knicks, or that they be not tangled one amongst another; and for that
purpose, when they begin to hoyse the Piece, blows must be given upon the
Tackling until it be set tort, and all bear equal.

But if you should perceive that the Ghynne or any part give way, presently let
your Piece sink, and underlay and settle well the feet of the Ghynne, and that
as gently as may be, to the end the Cross beam or Rouler may not be disjoined
or broken.

Then wind it up carefully and very gently by the help of two men only, and in
such a manner, as when one of the Leavers is brought down, it must be held
there fast until the other has got purchase, and then must this other also be
brought down; this must be reiterated so often until it be so high that the
Carriage may be placed under it, so that the Trunions may fall into the
Sockets, or holes of the Carriage, and then Guide the Piece by the Spar, so
that it fa^l easily in, and so rest it self in the Carriage, and then let it be
well clasped over, and then locked in and fastened with Forelocks, and so you
may draw away your Piece where you please. On board Ships this Ghynne is not of
use, it being the Boatswains business to fix a Tackle that may be able to hoist
up any Piece into its Carriage, the Slings one part must come about the
Casacabel, and the other part about a Billet, so made that it may fit in at the
Muzzle, and by strength of hands, or by help of a Windless, or Capstain, it may
be hoysed up so that the Carriage may be brought under; so that the Gun being
Loared, its Trunions may fall in to the holes of the Carriage, which then clasp
over with its Iron Clasps; let them be Forelocked, and then with Hand-Tackles
be brought where you please.

See the Figure of the Gynne, and the Field, and Ship-Pieces mounted in the
Figure 11.

CHAP. VI.
The way to draw a Piece of Ordnance, with the necessary things thereunto
belonging both for Land and Sea.

SEeing we have discovered the way of Casting a Piece, and Mounting it in its
Carriage, it follows in the next place that in this Chapter we treat of, and
show the manner of drawing them from place to place, for Service; where care
must be taken what the way is that you are to pass, for if the way be foul,
moorish, and dirty, there is then required as many more Horses as in good
ways. That is,

For a whole Cannon of 8000 l. you may use 15 couple of Horses, besides the
Tyllar.

For a Demi-Cannon of about 6000 l. you may use 11 couple of Horses, besides
the Tyllar.

For a Piece of 4000 l. weight, you may use 8 couple of Horses, besides the
Tyllar.

For a Field Piece of about 3000 l. use 6 couple of Horses, besides the Tyllar.

For a Saker of 1800 l. weight, you may use 4 couple of Horses, besides the
Tyllar.

For a Piece of 1500 l. weight, you may use 3 couple of Horses, besides the
Tyllar.

For a Faucon, two couple of Horses, besides the Tyllar. For a small Drake of
about 250 l. one Horse will serve: and by the same Rule you may find how many
Horses will draw any weight whatsoever.

Many times when Horses are wanting, men are made use of: Upon such occasions,
you must divide your men into three drawing files, according to the greatness
of the Piece; now to the end the Ranks may spread, and every man may draw
equally alike, fasten to the end of the Carriage a Cross beam or bar, to which
you must fasten the drawing Ropes, equally at such distance, that one may not
impead the other, and let there be besure one to steer the Piece when you come
to any winding or turning. If the drawing Ropes be long, it is necessary to
cross it with Ropes, or some light pieces of wood like a Ladder, with two or
more cross pieces; let them be made fast for the better and more steady
drawing, and to every there must be a Neckline fastened to the Ropes, and so to
cast over every man's Sholders, in manner as is used to draw our Western Barges:
And you must know your proportion of men fit to draw any Piece of Ordnance, and
that must be regulated according to the goodness or badness of the way, and so
more or less men, allowing every man to draw about 50, 60, or 80 pounds; for
it is supposed a man may draw in ordinary way 50 or 60 pounds but in very good
way more than 80 pounds, however it is good to have men enough. Let the Sponge,
Ladle, etc. be made fast along the Piece to the Ring and Britch end. Sometimes
by reason of the unevenness, steepness, or other defects of the way, it
sometimes happens, that you may be forced to dismount your Piece, and remount
it again; there it is necessary every Gunner have with him a Ghynne, a Wynche,
and all appurtenances necessary thereunto. As to the Sea Gunner on board Ship,
their occasions require no more than the Wynch; and their Piece being mounted
according to the directions given in the former Chapter, then with one or two
Tackles he bring the Piece to the place desired, where it ought to be well
fastened in its place; for which purpose there is thereunto required Tack^es and
Britchins; and in case of foul weather, or that any of the Gee^ or Tackling be
suspected, or by my much tumbling every thing hanging upon the Nail, for fear
any Bolts should give way or draw, it i^ usual to nail down to the Deck with
Spikes, one Coin behind each Truck, or at least the after Trucks, which to
great Pieces are commonly dead Trucks; so that each Piece may have little or no
play.

But in case any thing should give way in foul weather, then with all speed
dismount the Piece as soon as possible you can, for fear of further mischief;
for which purpose put in his way as he runs from side to side, Rugs, Pillows,
Beds, etc, and stand ready with Crows and Handspikes, and with Tackles, to
hitch or ketch him close and fast to any Ring by the Ship side, or such other
place as best presents. As for the length of the Tackles useful, it is usually
known thus; see how long the Piece is, and make the Tackles four times as long,
and let the Britchin be twice the length of the Piece, and something more. The
manner of drawing of Pieces by Man and Horse, you will see in the third Figure.

CHAP. VII.
To Grove or Examine the goodness of a Piece of Ordnance, whether it be Flawed,
Hony-Combed, Cracked, Chamber-bor'd, etc. With the difference of Common,
Legitimate, and Bastard Pieces.

IT remains necessary for this Chapter to treat, or show the way to know,
whether a Piece be serviceable or no, which is usually done in the first proof
by Powder, which we intend not to Write of here, having mentioned it before,
and more will be said, when we have showed the composition of Powder. That
knowledge of a Piece we here intend, is to examine a Piece, bought, or to be
taken into Service, whether good or serviceable, or out of many Pieces to make
choice of the best, or such as are freed from holes, flaws, cracks, honycombs,
etc. And first to know if a Piece be free from crack, or have holes through,
take a long stick, longer than the Piece, made of a Hoop-stick or otherwise,
slit it at one end, so that you may put a short piece of Candle in it, then
light the Candle, and put it into the Piece, and so putting it along easily,
whilst another laying his Eye close to the Piece, do go along equally with the
Candle, until the whole Piece be viewed, and so by help of the Light within
side, the Eye without side will perceive whether there be any Flaws, Cracks,
etc.

This may be done by the reflection of the Sun beams in at the Muzzle of a
Piece, by help of a Looking-glass, or pollished Steel; but many times a Piece
may be Flawed or Hony-combed, and cannot be discerned through the Piece, and
then the best way to find them out is thus; make the usual search with two or
three Springs, or in case you have them not, bend the Iron point of a Half
Pike, then put it into the Piece up to the Britch end or bottom of the
Cylinder, turning it round carefully and gradually, as you pluck it out, and if
there be any Honey-combs, Cracks or Flawes, the end or bended point of the Half
Pike will stick or catch at them.

To know whether the Piece be Chamber-bor'd, take a priming Iron that is small,
or a piece of Wire, bend it a little at the end, but so that it may go down at
the Touchhole, and put it down so far as it will go; Then at the Touchhole
close by the Metal of the Piece, make a mark upon the Wire; then gently pluck
it up upon one side of the Touchhole, until the bended point stop upon the
Metal or upper side of the Chamber; and then make another mark upon the Wire,
just by the Touchhole; then draw out the Wire, and the distance between these
two marks, is the height of the Chamber or bore of the Piece at Britch: take
the height of the bore at Muzzle, and if this height at Muzzle agree with that
taken at the Britch of the Piece, then is the Piece full bored; but if they
differ, so much as the difference is, shows the tapering of the Piece, and
according to this must your former be made for your Cartredges. There is
another way to know whether a Piece be Chamberbor'd, or Tapering by the
disparting of a Piece; which way we shall show in its proper place, where we
treat of disparting a Piece of Ordnance.

Now although we have mentioned in the former Chapters the most usual Pieces of
Ordnance; yet, as I have said, there are other Pieces which are longer, or
shorter, which are used, and are generally called by the name of Bastard
Pieces, and they are distinguished from the common Legitimate Pieces thus; The
Legitimate Pieces have their due length of Chance, and are proportioned
according to the true height of their bore. Bastard Pieces are shorter Chases,
such as the proportion of their bore does require, and are therefore called
Cuts of the same nature of the Piece they agree with in the bore; as those of
Demi-Culverin bore, are called Demi-Culverin Cuts, etc. There are also Pieces
called Extraordinary, which are such whose Chaces are longer than is usually
for that bore.

Now we have well and duly understood how, not only to make, but also to
examine and prove a Piece of Ordnance, in the next place shall follow their
use, set down in due order: Wherein first it is necessary for us to treat of the
nature of Gunpowder, and its various Compositions, with the Materials necessary
thereunto, and afterward show its use.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Materials used in the Composition of Gunpowder; and first we will treat
of the Original of Saltpeter.

IT is believed by many in these latter times, that the Saltpeter now in use,
is not the Niter of the Ancients, but a new Invention used or found out for the
Composition of Powder; And that theirs was only a Niter generated by nature, or
that Salt that is coagulated of it self, without any humane Artifice, in the
Caverns of the Earth, from whence they took it which nevertheless they divide
into four different Species, to wit, Armenian, Affrican, Roman, and Egyptian;
and this Egyptian holds its name by a certain Region in Egypt, in which is
found great abundance. Serapian delivers to us, that the places from whence
they drew their Niter were all one and the same, like them where common Salt is
formed, in which the water running does congeal, and condenseth like a vulgar
Stone, from hence came it to be called stonified Salt, or Sal-Peter. The same
Author does a^^irm, that Niter was found of diverse colors, viz. White,
Reddish, Livid, or Lead-like, and all other colors it was able to take; he
says likewise that it was found in different forms; for some was found full of
holes or caverns like a Sponge; others on the contrary were firm, close,
sollid, shining, and Diaphanous as Glass, which being let fall easily will
split in thin leaves, and is fryable in beating; and from its various
appearances is judged its manifold virtues, in one more powerful than another,
which is known by its operation.

From hence we see that which is to be found from the testimony of the best
received Authors about the Mineral Niter, and in none is any mention made of
Artificial Saltpeter, or such as we at present make use of generally, which is
called properly Saltpeter, Sal Nitre, or Halinitre; yet is there very little
difference between the Natural that uses to be brought to us, and the
Artificial; for if we compare the virtues and operations of the one, we shall
find them in our uses no way d^ffering, as Scaliger testifies, saying that the
ancient Niter is not much different from ours, particularly if we consider its
tenuity and sub^il part.

There is of the ancient Niter found upon the superficies of old Walls, exposed
to the humidity; but particularly in Cellars and deep Caves, and in covered
Vaults; it resembles perfectly a certain Brine, or white Gelly, or fine Meal,
or in more proper speaking, fine Sugar, and is many times white as Snow; and
this thus had, the virtues are to be commended, which I my self have taken the
pains to collect, in the imitation of many others which I have often seen;
which if now it be desired to prepare this Salt according to the method of our
Art; It will be congealed into small little long Christals like Isicles, and it
will be like that of the Ancients. But as it is impossible to find so great a
quantity, as the continual use does consume, and necessity does excite to this
day for the supply of all Wars, which have been great, and in few years
consumed many great and vast places of the Universe: We are therefore
constrained to this new subject, and are forced even to study and invent in
these latter ages a new way to supply the want of the former, which being made
with much labor and industry from the bowels of the Earth, and then purified
and washed diverse times to separate it from its more gross and Terrestrial
parts, and taken from its first crudity, that its may show its likeness of its
Mother, it is in the end perfectly purified and brought to such a height, that
it differs nothing to he of the same form and virtue of the ancient Saltpeter.

Wherefore if I may be admitted to speak my thoughts upon it, I shall say
openly and plainly, leaving none in doubt, the Ancients did indeed find natural
growing Niter, which came out of it self at the tops of Rocks, filling the
clefts and holes, and there condensing into small Icicles, it hardness and
petrefies. This Niter is natural; but since Art is the Imitator of Nature, as
it is allowed by all, then you may not think it strange, if we can by a little
of her aid, and by force of industry, attain to the perfection of her
productions; nay, (if I may be bold to say it) such as shall surpass by far,
the more perfect of her works. Do we not daily see an infinite of very
principal Works brought to light, after a long and painful travel, which is not
permitted nature to imitate, although she did employ at the best all her secret
and full strength to come to perfection. It may from hence *herefore be
concluded that our Salt made by the Art of Fire, is such as is every way
agreeing with that of the Ancients, not any way differing one from the other;
especially as to those uses we intend here. For if according to our method
given in the next Chapter, I dare affirm, in all our uses it will truly
imitate the natural, but the more, if it be purified and purged many times: So
that at last it will come to be more excellent than the Ancient and natural
Saltpeter; which is plainly seen in the ordinary way of purifying Common Salt
or Sugar, which by Art is so purged, that it comes to be far purer and whiter
than 'twas before, in its first natural dress. And this we do suppose to be a
sufficient argument, or reason, for us to judge that our Artificial Saltpeter
is not only as good, but far more excellent than the natural: Which being thus
allowed, we will add only a few words of the properties of Niter, and so pass
to its Artificial preparation. And first of the spetting quality and noise it
makes in the fire, which Scaliger would have to be caused by its terrestrity
that it holds in it self, which we cannot allow of, but rather judge otherwise;
for if the Earthy part were the subject that made it make such noise, then the
Earth it self might be adjudged to make a far greater noise, seeing it is also
mixed with this Element, and yet we find it cracks not at all, being put in the
fire; therefore by consequence this reason is void. Well then, is it of its
rarity, which Aristotle calls (...) and (...), This cannot pass for a truth,
since daily experience does let us see that the Mushrooms, or Toad-stools, and
many other things which are of a most rare thin nature, yet make no noise when
put upon burning coals. Neither is the hardness that is joined to these more
subtle parts, the cause of the cracking; For we see that the Pumice-stone will
not spet nor crack, nor make any noise in the fire, although it be of a
substance sufficiently spungy and hard. There must therefore be another thing
that must be the cause of this spetting, and all the noise that is made by
Nitre, when it is embraced by the fire. The Divine Praeceptor, in the 11
Section of his Questions says, that the Salt cracks in the fire, because it
contains in it much moisture, which being attenuated by the fire, and rarefied
in a high degree, converts all into Spirits, and an Airy nature; For in it
there is contained more of a Spirit, than watery matter, which being brought to
the fire, the two fiery Spirits mutually attract each other, and joining
together, do become Master of the lesser part the Water; for the fire of the
Niter being fortified and put into action by the common fire, the Water is
constrained from its bonds, and can stay no longer there, but must of a sudden
depart, and in its way, by the violency of its departure, overthrows all such
obstacles as come in its way: And in this action the external air being
strongly and violently agitated, by their refraction, it breaks with
impetuosity or great violence, and from thence by consequence follows that
hideous and fearful noise which commonly and ordinarily happens, in the
combustion of Saltpeter, and other Compositions mixed with it, whereof
Saltpeter is the greatest part.

CHAP. IX.
The way of Preparing Saltpeter from a Nitrous Earth.

THe Earth and matter of Saltpeter is found commonly in great abundance, in
obscure shadowed places, where no Rain nor any fresh water does penitrate, nor
likewise where the Sun by his rays can communicate his heat; it is likewise
drawn from Horse dung under Stables, and from covered places where great and
small Cattle are shut up; likewise in such places as men use to piss in, or
Jaqueses, or the like places; or in places where has been made great Fights, or
where has been laid up together many dead Bodies, and earth thrown upon them:
For from thence in few years may much Saltpeter be drawn. I shall declare
three several ways whereby to ground your judgment with more certaint^,
concerning the goodness of the place from whence one would draw the Saltpeter,
which is most necessary to be known by all Saltpeter men, or such as intend to
manage these Affairs.

The first is, that such Earth as you suspect to hold Saltpeter, be put upon
the Tongue, and if it prick a little sharply, it is a most certain sign you
will not loose your labor in taking it to task; but on the contrary if it be
not biting, or a little corrosive, it will not well answer your money and
labor in preparing of it.

The second way to know a good Nitrous Earth is this: make a hole in the Earth
with a sharp pointed thing, either of Wood or Iron* and in it put a piece of
Iron red hot; after having stopped the hole, let it stand until it be quite cold,
then draw it out, and if you find a little after about this Iron some Citrine
marks, inclining a little after to a whiteness, you need not doubt that earth;
but further assure your self it is very good to put to work.

The third way is, throw a little of that Earth upon burning Coals, and if you
perceive it make any noise, and that it spets in the fire, or that clear and
shining sparks come from it, you may from thence judge that that Earth holds a
forcible matter of that nature.

After you have found a proper Earth to draw Saltpeter from, and that by some
of these proofs you have testimony of its goodness and worth, let be taken of
it a great quantity, or as much as you please; let it be carried to a place
appointed for this purpose, then prepare to burn a good quantity of Wood,
either of Oak, Ash, Elm, Maple, or other sorts of hard Wood, that you may have
Ashes; then take two parts of these Ashes, one part of quick Lime, mix them
well, and put this mixture by it self; for such uses as I shall show you anon.

Take then Vessels of Wood, or Pipes, or Hogsheads cut in two parts, for they
must be able to hold a good quantity of Water, make a hole at the bottom about
one or two fingers breadth, put into the hole a small wicker thing, or you may
whelm over it an Earthen Dish, after put Rushes all over the bottom (not
excepting the hole) or in its place clean straw; this Vessel being thus fitted,
dispose of it in this manner; Set it so, that under may stand a lesser Vessel
of Wood to receive the Liquor that shall distill down from the upper Vessel;
after put into the upper Vessel about the height of a hand of this Saltpeter
Earth, which has been before for some time dried in the Air; upon this Earth
put the height of three or four fingers of the mixture made of Ashes and quick
Lime, and then again of the Saltpeter Earth, after of the Ashes about the same
height as before; and continue this fashion, putting Earth upon Ashes, and
Ashes upon Earth, until the Vessel be full within a hands breadth at the top,
to hold the Water that is put in; this done put upon it fresh Water as much as
shall be necessary, viz. so much as must surmount the Earth two or three
fingers breadth, and look that it pass through all the Earth, and run drop by
drop through the hole at bottom of the Vessel into the Tub standing under, and
you shall have a Nitrous Lixivium, according to the quantity of Water as you
poured into the Vessel; which if you judge is too little, you must reiterate
the infusion, and the second time also the water passing through the Earth will
carry with it a substance; And so the third time.

This done, put all the Lixivium into a ^ettle of a sufficient bigness, and let
it be boiled upon the fire very easily, and moderately at first; after increase
the fire to the consumption of the Liquor, or a little more, keeping
continually skimming it all the time it boyls. And when it is thus consumed,
pour it into wooden Vessels that are broad, and cover them over with Clothes,
and let them stand until the pure part Christalize into white Salt, and the
feculent or more terrestial part settle to the bottom. In the mean time
continue pouring in of the Lixivium again into the Kettle, boiling and skimming
it as before; and this do until all your Lixivium be boiled up and poured into
wooden Vessels to Christalize.

Then from the wooden Vessels, inclining them gently, pour all the Lixivium
(leaving the settling at bottom by it self) into your Copper as before, and
boil it up again with a good fire until half be consumed, or until it begin to
thicken, or until by putting a little upon a stone or piece of board, it do
immediately congeal.

Then take it from the fire, and when it is a little cooled, pour it as before
into wooden Vessels or Boles, and put into each about a hand in height; then
cover each Vessel with course clothes, put it into a cool place, and two or
three days after you will find your Saltpeter congealed and thrust together
in small Christals, like transparent Ice, sticking to the sides of the Vessel,
and likewise upon some sticks for that purpose, provided the rinds being taken
off and placed in the wooden Vessels before the pouring in of the Liquor; get
diligently together the Peter, as well that which sticks to the sides of the
Vessel, as that to the sticks, in a Vessel of wood proper to receive it, and
cover it, and keep it dry. The remaining water you must boil up as before, not
forgetting to separate it from its residence.

Whilst it is boiling, it happens sometimes that the Liquor may rise and boil
over the Cauldron; to prevent that danger, have in readiness other Lixivium,
made of three parts of Ashes, and one part of quick Lyme, as we spoke before,
in which is dissolved Roch Alum, allowing to every hundred weight of Lixivium,
four pounds of Alum; and when it begins to rise, pour in a little of this from
time to time; And by this means you will see that the water that was hastening
to come over, will fall down; and that the common Salt and more terrestrial
part will settle to the bottom.

The Earth remaining in the Wooden Tubs from whence the salt was drawn, must be
put in some covered place made for that purpose, where neither Sun, Rain, nor
any other water may come; and there it must be spread all abroad about a foot
high: Then you must have in readiness Horse dung or the Excrements of all sorts
of Beasts, great and small, and put off this upon the other, about the height
of three or four foot; then take all that was skum'd from the Lixivium in
boiling, and the water that is left and will not shoot, and the bottoms that
are left in the wooden Vessel, where the Saltpeter did shoot, and throw them
away, as hurtful and useless, upon the Dunghill; throw likewise every day, or as
often as you can, the Urine of men, and let it lie two years, and you shall
have your Earth filled with Saltpeter as before, with a greater abundance:
You may likewise throw upon your Dunghill, the Horns, Claws, and Hoofs of
Beast, and then from this Earth it will be very easy to draw good Saltpeter
by the method we have prescribed.

CHAP. X.
To Clarify and Refine Saltpeter.

TAke as much Saltpeter as you please, and being put in a Copper, pour upon it
so much fair water as will dissolve it, that is about eight of Water, and three
of Salt; and pour upon the same of the former Lixivium, prepared of Ashes,
Quick-lyme, and Roch Alum; boil it upon the fire until all the Saltpeter be
dissolved; that being done, have in readiness a Vessel of Wood sufficiently
big, and so disposed, that another may stand under the same: which must, before
it be so set, be peirced in the middle, and the hole covered over with an
Earthen Dish: Let the uppermost Tub be filled five or six inches with fine
clean sand; then let the Tub be covered over with a course cloth, and pour
through the same into your Sand-Tub your dissolved Saltpeter, and so it will
distill by little and little into the Vessel which stands under; and so passing
through the Sand, it will be discharged of all its superfluities, and will
leave the most terrestial part, and such as is useless, in the Sand, which
water again put into the Cauldron, and boil it up as formerly, until it may be
fit to congeal, and in the end pour it into wooden long flat Vessels as before,
and in two or three days 'twill be shot into Christals as formerly; which if
you would have purer, you must reiterate this work once more, or you may put
upon this Peter, Lyme-water, filter it and boil it up according to Art, and it
will be pure.

Saltpeter may be purified thus; put your Saltpeter in a Vessel of Copper,
Iron, or Vernish't Earth (I like a Crucible best) which being put to a small
fire, augment it gradually until all the Salt be melted and boiled; then take
common Sulphur finely pulverised, and throw it upon the liquified Saltpeter,
which will quickly take fire and burn, and by the same means consume all the
gross and viscous humors, with the terrestrial Salt remaining useless amongst
the Saltpeter, before the rectification; besides you may reiterate this work
by putting on fresh Sulphur many times, until such time all the strange humors
be quite consumed; in the end, the Saltpeter being well melted and well
purified, pour it upon well polished Marble or Plates of Iron, or Copper, or
glazed Earth, and let it cool, and you will have a Saltpeter congealed, almost
resembling in color and hardness the true Alabaster.

CHAP. XI.
How Saltpeter Meal is made without any beating, for the making of Gunpowder.

Saltpeter well purified, must be put in a Kettle, upon a furnace over a fire,
then moderately increase the fire with Bellows to such a degree of heat, until
it begin to smoke and evaporate, until the Salt begin to lose its humidity, and
obtain a whiteness, and so keep continually stirring it with a wooden or Iron
Ladle, for fear it should return into its pristine form, and hereby will be
taken away all its fatty greasiness that may be commixt. This being done, pour
so much water into the Kettle as will cover the Saltpeter, and when it shall
be dissolved, and it has obtained the consistence of a thick Liquor; then with
a wooden stick or Ladle keep continually stirring it without any intermission,
until all its humidity be evaporated, and all be reduced into most dry white
Meal.

CHAP. XII.
To make Saltpeter with the flower of Did Walls, of Caves, Cellars, Uaults,
etc.

GAther together a good quantity of this Flower, which you may find upon the
Surface of Old Walls, which are in moist places under the Earth; you may also
make provision with a certain Salt which sticks to Lyme, or upon ruinated
Walls; which Peter, one Sardi a Roman took notice of, was always well
practiced at Bruxells in Brabant, as he confesses in his fifth Book of
Artillery, Chap. 49. First, see how much Saltpeter matter you have; then take
one fourth part so much of quick Lyme, pour upon it warm water, boil it well,
and clarify it according to custom, then put your Saltpeter matter into a Tub
with a tap in it, and a little Earthen Dish before the hole of the tap within,
pour into this Tub the Lie, and stir it well with a stick until all the Salt
Peter be dissolved in the Water; then let it distill leisurely into a Vessel
that stands under the tap; and at last being all dissolved and run out, put
this water into a Kettle, and boil it over the fire, until so much be consumed,
that the remainder being dropped upon a Tyle-stone or Board, do congeal, and be
of hardness, but not too hard; for if it be very hard, the water is burnt; but
if too soft, not enough. When it is well boiled and scummed, take it from the
fire, and proceed with it as in the tenth and eleventh Chapters.

CHAP. XIII.
How to examine the goodness of Saltpeter.

PUt upon a Wooden Table, or any clean and smooth Board, a little Saltpeter;
then give fire to it with a live coal, and observe these Rules following, viz.

If it make the same noise in burning as the common Salt does when it is thrown
upon live coals, it is a sign it holds yet much common Salt.

If it hold a thick and fat scum, it is a sign it is fatty and viscous.

If after the Salt be consumed, there rests yet crass and filthy matter upon
the board, it is an infallible sign that the Salt contains yet a quantity of
earthy matter, and so much the more, if you see much dregs after the combustion
of the Saltpeter is past; and therefore the less powerful and active.

But by contraries, if it render a clear long flame divided into many streams,
and that the superficies of the board remain neat without any filth; or that it
be consumed so that nothing is left, but a white clean ash, without making much
noise, or great trembling, you may then conclude that the Saltpeter is good,
and well cleansed, and in its perfect preparation.

CHAP. XIV.
The true way to purify Saltpeter, and separating it from all offending and
superfluous matter; as common Salt, Uitriol, Alum, and all fatty and viscous
humors.

TAke Two pound of Quick-Lyme, Two pound of common Salt, One pound of
Verdigrease, One pound of Roman Vitriol, One pound of Sal-Armoniack, beat them
all together; after put them into an Iron Vessel, and pour upon them a good
quantity of Vinegar, or in default of them, good clear water; and make a
Lixivium, which you shall let rarifie and clarify of it self, standing the
space of three days; after put your Saltpeter in a Kettle, and pour upon the
same as much of this Lixivium as will well cover the Saltpeter; put it upon a
fire sufficiently moderate at first, increasing it until it boil to the
consumption of half; take it then away from the fire, and pour it by gentle
inclination into a wooden Vessel, and throw away all the dregs and Salt which
remains in the bottom of the Kettle: That done, let the Saltpeter water
cool, and continue your preparation as we have given before, where we treated
of refining Saltpeter.

CHAP. XV.
How to clarify common Sulphur, and to know its goodness.

WE experience often, and without contradiction, that not only Saltpeter is
filled with terrestrial qualities, but Brimstone also, which is not only of a
fatty and certain oleganious humor, but likewise a noisome quality which is in
the compound, common to one and the other of its matters; from hence (if we
desire to be curious in our work) we judge it may be necessary to purify
Sulphur, and to procure to it by power of clarification, a nature most sublime,
subtle, fiery and volatile. The order and method that ought to be used in
this, is thus; in Vessels of Iron or Copper, melt your Sulphur with a very
gentle fire over Coals, well lighted, and not flaming; and when it is melted
with a Ladle, skim neatly off all that rises on the top and swimmeth upon the
Sulphur; then not long after, let it be taken from the fire, and strained
through a double Linen Cloth into another Vessel, pouring it through at
leisure; thus all the Oily matter and crassy substance remains in the Cloth;
but under in the Vessel will be a pure Sulphur, such as we have before spoken
of.

To know the goodness of Sulphur you must do thus: Press it between two Iron
plates, that are hot, and if in the running it appear yellow, without any bad
odor, and that which remains be of a reddish color, one may believe it is
natural and excellent; so likewise it is a good sign, if when it is set on fire,
it do freely burn all away, leaving little or no resident matter. For if
Sulphur be pure and good, we do find that there is such a sympathy between it
and fire, that the fire is desirous of the Sulphur for its nutriment, and that
reciprocally the Sulphur is pleased likewise to be thus devoured and consumed
by the Element of fire; so that if some fragment of it be put about some pieces
of Wood, if this shall feel the fire at some distance, it seems as if it did
attract it to it self, and does sometimes unawares at a distance catch or take
fire, if great care be not taken.

There is a certain kind of Sulphur which will not burn so freely as other
Sulphur, nor send forth any ill scent, but being put upon the fire, melts no
otherwise than common Wax; and this Sulphur is found abundantly near Mount
Aetna, as Carniola of Libavius reports, in his first Book of the Apocap.
Hermel. but this Sulphur is commonly red, as also is that which is found in the
Heil des Heim (as Agricola mentions in his first Book, Chap. 22.) And upon the
testimony of John Johnson, Adm. Not. Clas. 4. Chap. 13. Sulphur is found
likewise of diverse other colors, as pale, Yellow, Green, as is many times to
be seen and found sticking about Stones and Rocks: So, that a man may, without
any great difficulty, take it from thence, and make it into a Mass.

That which is clear, perfectly yellow, not very hard, nor too much shining, is
the very best. Yet there is another Sulphur which looks greenish, and has
never past the fire; and this is called Sulphur Vivum, and by some Virgin
Sulphur, by reason Women and Maids had a custom to compose with it a certain
fucus or Paint, with which they used to adorn their faces.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the third principal in Composition of Gunpowder, viz. Coal, and its
Preparation.

IN the Month of May or June, when all sorts of Trees are easy to peel, by
reason in that time there comes out a sap, and they are fuller of humors than
at any other time of the year, Cut then a great quantity of Hazle or Ash, the
length of two or three foot, of the bigness of half your fist, taking away from
them with a Bill all that is Superfluous, then take away the rind likewise; and
of these make little bundles, and make them very dry in a warm Oven; then in a
place chosen for that purpose, that is plain and even, set them upright one by
another, and set them on fire; and after you see the fire well lighted, and
that the fire has reduced them all into burning Coals, cover them closely and
diligently with watered earth, so that it may have no respiration, or that no
Air may pass in; then, the flame being thus stifled upon the Coals, they will
remain pure and whole, without being charged with much Ashes; then 24 hours
after, you may take them away and keep them for to serve you in your business,
and put them to such uses as we shall write of hereafter.

But if you have occasion for a small quantity only, take then of the Arms and
Limbs of such Trees aforesaid, that is of Teil wood, of Juniper, of Ash, etc.
Cut them in small pieces, and dry them well; then shut them in an Earthen
Vessel, and lute the Cover on the top with Clay; then place Coals round about
the Pot, and let it be all covered with Coals, leaving them so the space of a
good hour, continuing the fire all this while in the same degree of heat; at
last let it cool of it self, and when it is cold, open the pot, and take out the
Coals for your use.

CHAP. XVII.
The ways of Compounding or Making Gunpowder.

THe ways of Compounding of Gunpowder have been so commonly known, that not
only such as are conversant in fireworks do understand the same, but others
also; so that it is made a particular Trade: nay, that which is more strange,
the Country people in Polonia have learned to prepare it with their own hands,
without the use of any Artificial Engine, or Chemical Vessel. For I have seen
many of the People of Podolie, and Vkrains, which we call now the Cossaques,
who prepare their Powder quite contrary to the common way, or that which is
used by Fire-Masters. For they put Sulphur, Saltpeter, Charcoal, all together
in an Earthen Pot, a certain proportion of each; (which proportion one to the
other they have learned by experimental practice) upon which they pour fair
fresh water, which they boil upon the fire until all the water is evaporated,
and the matter become thick; then they take it from the fire, and dry it in the
Sun, or in some warm place, as a Stove, or the like; then they pass it through
a Hair Sieve, and reduce it into small Grains. There are others that take these
Materials, and grind them upon a smooth flat Stone, or a smooth Earthen Dish,
and then having moistened it, by their Skill they bring it into Grains; which
powder brought to this degree of perfection, they serve their occasions with as
much utillity and profit, as if it had been made by the hand of one of the most
knowing or skilful Powder-makers in the world.

It is in my judgment, labor lost to speak more of these superficial ways;
but come to the order and method which is necessary and usually observed in the
preparing of Gunpowder: It shall likewise suffice me to propose in this
Chapter some Compositions most excellent and best approved; which are these,

Compositions for Cannon Powder. Compositions for Musquet-Powder. Compositions
for Pistol-powder. The first.
Saltpeter 100 l. Sulphur 25 Coals 25
The first.
Saltpeter 100 l. Sulphur 18 Coals 20
The first.
Saltpeter 100 l. Sulphur 12 Coals 15
The Second.
Saltpeter 100 l. Sulphur 20 Coals 24
The Second.
Saltpeter 100 l. Sulphur 15 Coals 18
The Second.
Saltpeter 100 l. Sulphur 10 Coals 8


You must first finely powder these compositions or mixtures, for Cannon or
Musket Powder, and after moissen them with fair fresh water or Vinegar, or
with Aquavitae; but if you will have your Pistol Powder stronger and more
violent, you ought to stir it up several times whilst it is in the Mortar, with
this following liquor; that is, a water distilled from Rinds of Oranges,
Citrons, or Lemons, by an Alymbeck, or any other Chemical Vessel; then let all
be beaten and well brayed 24. hours, and then in the end reduce it into very
fine small grains.

A Liquor for this purpose may likewise be made of twenty parts of Aquavitae,
and 12 parts of distilled Vinegar made of Whitewine, and four parts of Spirit
of Saltpeter, and two parts of water of Sal-armoniac, and one part of Camphire
dissolved in Brandy-wine, or reduced into Powder with powdered Sulphur, or
reduced with Oil of sweet Almonds.

To Corn Powder well, you must prepare a Sieve with a bottom of thick
Parchment, made full of round holes; then moisten the Powder that must be
corned with its water, and make it up in Balls as big as Eggs; which put into
the Sieve, and with it put a wooden Bowls, and when you have so done, sift the
Powder so, as the Bowl rouling about the Sieve, may break the Clods of Powder,
and make it pass through those little holes into Corns.

It is observed by Fire-Masters and Gunners, that Powder when it is Corned, is
of much greater force and power, than in Meal; from hence it is concluded, that
powder when it is put into a Piece of Ordnance, ought not to be pressed or
beaten home too hard in the Piece; for thereby it will loose its form of
grains, and thereby loses a great part of its strength that it had, and is
therefore not able to throw out the Bullet with so great a violence, as if the
Powder had been gently thrust home to the Britchend.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the several Colors which are to be given to Powder.

KNow first that all the blackness which you see in Gunpowder comes from the
Coal; not that this color is absolutely necessary to be conjoined to its
nature, or that it is absolutely necessary to be given to it, for its
meliorating or making it more vigorous; this is not so; but by contraryes you
may be permitted to give unto it any such colors as you shall think fit,
without prejudice or hinderance of the Powder and virtue of it. For if instead
of Coal you take rotten dried wood, or Sawdust well dried, or white paper
moistened and dried in a Stove and powdered, or indeed any other thing of a
combustible nature, or that is well disposed to take fire (such as you read
hereunder) and to this you may add a color according to your fancy and
pleasure; and you will infallibly have a Powder that will make the same Effect
as the black powder. And for this purpose I shall lay down in this Chapter
certain mictions, with which I served my self many times, and therefore known
to be experimental truths.

White Powder.
Take Saltpeter six pounds, Sulphur one pound, of Sawdust of the Elder Tree
well dried and powdered one pound, these mixed according to the directions in
the former Chapter, there will be made a Powder of a white color. Or thus,

Take Saltpeter ten pounds, of Sulphur one pound, of the woody part when the
Hemp is taken away, one pound, etc. Or thus.

Saltpeter six pounds, Sulphur one pound, of Tartar calcined until it be
brought to a whiteness, and the Salt extracted for use, one Ounce.

Red Powder.
Take of Saltpeter twelve Parts, of Sulphur two parts, of Amber one part, of
Red Sanders two parts, etc. Or,

Take Saltpeter eight pounds, of Sulphur one pound, of dried powdered Paper
boiled up in a Water, wherein is Cinaber or Brazil Wood, and then again dried,
one pound.

Yellow Powder.
Take Saltpeter eight pounds, Sulphur one pound, Wild or Bastard Saffron
boiled in Aqua Vitae, after dried and powdered, two pounds, etc.

Green Powder.
Saltpeter ten pounds, of Sulphur one pound, dried Wood or Saw-dust boiled in
Aqua Vitae with some Verditer, then dried and powdered, of this two pounds.

Blew Powder.
Saltpeter eight pounds, of Sulphur one pound, of the Saw-dust of the Teil
Wood boiled in Brandy Wine with Indigo, and after dried and powdered, one pound.

CHAP. XIX.
Still Powder, or Powder without Noise.

THere are several that do Write many strange things concerning this Still
Powder, or Powder, without noise, or as some do give it the name, Deaf Powder,
whereof they have treated prolixly; the which I think not convenient to do, by
reason I am loath to tire the Reader with any such Discourse, as tends not much
to Edification: I shall therefore put down certain mixtures, which I have known
to be more excellent and best approved.

First way.
Take Common Powder two pounds, Venus Borax one pound; these being well
powdered, mingled and incorporated together, must be made up into Corn Powder.

Second way,
Take common Powder two pounds, Venus Borax one pound, of Lapis Calaminaris
half a pound, of Sal-armoniack half a pound; powder and mix them well, and make
them up into Grains.

Third way,
Take common Powder six pounds, of Live Moles burnt in an Earthen Pot, of Venus
Borax half a pound, mix them as before, etc.

Fourth way,
Take Saltpeter six pounds, Sulphur eight pounds and a half, powder of the
Second Bark of Elder Tree half a pound, common decripitated Salt two pounds;
make Corn Powder of these according to the precedent order, or accustomed
method.

To these known things, I shall add here a thing whereof you may make
experience if you please; it being only taken from the Books of Authors,
without any trial made by me; which you may also find written in the natural
Magic of John Baptist^ Porta, which is in our English Tongue, where he says,
that if you add burnt Paper in the Composition of Gunpowder, or the double
quantity of Hay seed well beaten; these will take away a great part of the
strength, and will hinder it from making so great flame and noise.

Some do say that the Gall of a Pike does the same effect, if it be mixed and
mingled with the same; but we shall leave the belief of these things to the
faith of such Authors as have experimented the same.

There are some wise and knowing men in this Art, attribute the cause of this
noise, or as some do express it, this horrible noise, produced by a Cannon
after the firing, not to the Powder, but to the beating and contusion of the
Air which is enraged, or in a passion, by being so furiously endeavored to be
stifled or choked by a strange and extraordinary movement, of which we have
spoken more at large in the former Chapter, where we treated of Saltpeter. Yet
in favor of the Sons of Art, we shall never theless give you the opinion of
Scaliger, taken out of his his fifteenth Book, in his Exer. Exoter. against
Cardan of Sub^il. Exer. 25.

Long p^jus illud cum sonitus causam a bellicis machinis editi, attribuis Sal
Petrae; nan^ t^nuissimu^n in pulverem comminu^um cavernulas amisit. CHAP. XX.
The Proof or Trial of Gunpowder.

IT is accustomary for men skilled in these Arts, to try Powder three several
ways; that is, by sight, by touch, and by fire: And first, for the trial by
sight; it is thus,

If the Powder be too black, it is a manifest sign of too much humidity, or too
much coal; now if it contain too much, as you suppose, rub it upon white Paper;
if it black the Paper more than other good Powder use to do, it is a sign there
is more coal in it than ought: for such Gunpowder as is of a fair azure
color, or a little obscure, something bordering upon red, is the best sign, and
the most assured testimony of good Powder.

Secondly, Gunpowder its goodness is known by the touch, in this manner, crush
some Corns under your fingers ends, and if they easily break and return to Meal
without resisting the touch, or without feeling hard, you may assure your self
from thence, that your Powder has in it too much Coal.

If by pressing it a little hard under your fingers upon a smooth hard board,
or upon a stone, you feel amongst it small grains harder or more sollid than
the rest, which do in a manner prick the ends of the fingers, and do not yield
to the finger but very difficultly, or hardly, you may infer from hence that
the Sulphur is not well incorporated with the Saltpeter, and by consequence
the Powder is not well and duly prepared.

You may draw infallible proofs or conjectures of the goodness of Powder by its
burning, if after you have made little heaps of Powder upon a clean and even
Table, distant one from another about a hands breadth, you then put fire to one
of them only; and if it take fire alone, and burn all away without lighting the
others, and make a small thundering noise, or make a white clear smoke, and that
it rise with a quickness, suddenly, almost imperceptible, and if it rise in
the Air like a circle of smoke, or like a small Crown; this is an infallible
sign the Powder is good, and perfectly well prepared.

If after the burning of the Powder there remain some black marks upon the
Table, this then signifies that the Powder contains too much Coal, which has
not been enough burnt.

If the board looks greasy, then the Sulphur and Saltpeter is not enough
cleansed, and by consequence it retains much of their terrestrial matter and
oily natures which were naturally conjoined to their matters. If you find small
grains, white and Citrine, it is a testimony that the Saltpeter is not enough
cleansed, and by consequence it retains much of its terrestrial matter, and of
common Salt, and besides, the Sulphur has not been well powdered, nor
sufficiently incorporated with the two other matters of its Composition.

If two or three Corns of Gunpowder be laid upon a Paper, distant about a
fingers breadth one from the other, and you put fire to them, if the fire be
good and strong, they will fire at once, and there will remain no grossness of
Brimstone, or of Saltpeter, nor any thing but a white smoaky color in the
place where they were burnt, nor will the Paper be touched. If small black
knots, which will burn downward in the place where proof is made, remain after
firing, they do show that the Gunpowder has no^ enough of Peter, and that it
is of little force or strength.

Good Gunpowder will not burn your hand, if it be set on fire there.

Gunpowder that is very sharp or eager in taste, is not well purified, and will
turn moist.

Amongst many sorts of Powder, to know the best, make a little heap of every
sort at a distance one from another; observing well when you fire each heap,
which of them does soonest take fire, for that which soonest takes fire, smoaks
least and clearest, and rises quickly up close and round, and leaves little or
no sign behind it, is the best Powder.

There are Instruments likewise invented for the trial or proof of Powder,
which the most part of Fire-Masters and Gunners are accus^omed to use, which
are described at large by other Authors; therefore we shall not here repeat the
same; considering likewise, that we have found by experience a great fallacy in
the same, for that one and the same Powder, in the same measure and quantities,
has raised the cover to different degrees of height.

CHAP. XXI.
To forti^^ weak Powder, and amend that which is spoiled, and bring it to its
full strength again* and to preserve good Powder from decaying.

WE call such Gunpowder weak, which has much degenerated from its first
strength, and the force which it did acquire in its first preparation; as such
as has dak^n wind, we^, or air; for these do diminish the quantity of
Saltpeter, and actually separate the Sulphur and Coal.

There are two different ways that these accidents do happen; that is, by
being many years made, or lying in a mo^st place long; for in time the
Saltpeter alter^ and separates it self, being naturally subject to alter, and
return into its first matter; for Saltpeter in its beginning or original being
engendered of water, or of a certain Saline bu^^our, no otherwise than other
Salts are produced of their own proper Brines, does at last, or in a long time,
separate it self from the Coal and Sulphur(...) and so return to a Brine water
again, as it was in the original, and so abando^^ (...) two matters that
adhered to it* the Sulphur and Coals loosing nothing of their weight, seeing
that no humidity that is attracted, can ^e able to dissolve them* b^^ rather by
the contrary, the Coal does attract greed^ly, and becomes more ponderous.

If for the reasons before said you desire to repair and restore the strength of
Gunpowder that begins to alter, or that has quite lost its force, its defects
may be amended three several ways, etc. viz.

The first is thus, make a Lie of two parts of Aquavitae, and one part of
clarified Saltpeter made into fine Powder, of good Vinegar made of good Wine
half a part, of Oil of Sulphur one eighth part, and as much Camphire dissolved
in Brandy; these put together, do make a Lixivium, which must be strained
through a large Strainer, and then with it you may amend your powder that is
decayed, by moistning it with the same, very often, and drying it by the Sun in
Wooden Vessels, and then putting it up in a dry place, free from any humidity
or air, and then it will not in a long time again be damnified.

The second way to repair Powder is thus, examine how much your Powder weighed
when it was first put into the Cask or Barrel, then see how much it does now
weigh after it is damnified (it being first dried if it chance to be wet) then
see the difference between these two weights, and add so much Saltpeter to
your decayed powder, mix it well, and make it up into Corns again, and preserve
it as before.

The third way to restore the strength of Gunpowder, is such as is most plain
and commonly used amongst the Powder-men; they put upon a Sale-cloath or smooth
place or board, a portion of damnified Powder, to which they add an equal
weight of that which is new made, and then with their hand or wooden Shovel
they mingle it well together; then they dry it in the Sun, and put it up into a
Barrel again, and keep it in a dry and proper place.

Yet there is another way may be allowed, but this is almost the same with
making new Powder, and it is thus; Take what quantity of decayed Powder you
please, put it into Earthen or Wooden Vessels, pour upon the same three times
so much hot water, stir it well about, and when it begins to be cold, or has
stood one hour or two, strain the water away, and to the feces put more water,
stirring it well about, then let it stand and settle as before, and strain it
from the feces, this do a third time, and you will have drawn out all the
Saltpeter; put these waters in a clean Kettle, and boil it away until so much
be consumed, as that a drop dropped upon a Stone or Iron do congeal, then pour
it into some wooden Vessel that it may congeal into Saltpeter; and that water
as remains, you must boil up again as before; and if need be, you must in the
boiling skum what rises on the top of the water. Having by this Art obtained
the Saltpeter out of the decayed Gunpowder, you may according to the
proportions given in the Composition of Powder, mix it with its remaining
Sulphur and Coal, or fresh Sulphur and Coal, which is better; and after it is
well mixed, Corn it according to the given Rules; then let it be well d^yed,
and put up into dry Powder Barrels, and let it be conse^ved in a dry place from
Air or any Moisture.

Some do mend their Powder in this nature, they moisten it with Vinegar or fair
water, beat it fine, and sift it and dry it, and to every pound of Powder they
put one Ounce of Mealed Saltpeter; then moisten and mix them well, so that
neither may be discerned one from the other, but that they be perfectly
incorporated, which you may know by cutting the Mass with a Knife, or breaking
it: When it is well compounded, let it be Corned in manner as we have before
prescribed.

If your Composition of Powder be made up with Aqua vitae, and so made up into
great Balls, and well dried in a Stove, or in the Sun, and put into glazed
earthen Pots, and close covered, you may keep it as long as you please, for age
will not decay it.

There ought always a care to be taken by Gunners or Fire-Masters, or such as
have the charge of Gunpowder, to choose if they can such places as are dry, and
stand upon the best ground, free from dampness of the Air or any water possibly
coming near. Every Gunner, etc. ought to take care that his Barrel be turned
upside down, or any Carthredge ready filled; for if the Powder attract air, the
Peter with the moisture it has attracted, will in time separate from the other
matters, and sink to the bottom; so that the Powder in the upper part will
loose its strength, which is prevented by turning and shaking them every
fourteen days, and airing them at the Sun at convenient times. And as it is
necessary a Gunner should have Carthredges filled for present Service, those
ought also to be turned out and filled again every fourteen days more or less,
as the Gunner in his judgment shall allow of.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the property and particular office of every Material in the Composition of
Gunpowder.

WE ought infallibly to believe that Gunpowder was not found out casually, or
by fortune; but invented by a true knowledge, and by reasonable speculation in
Natural Philosophy; considering that to this day no man has opposed
(notwithstanding many persons have made it their endeavor) or could find any
other Materials like unto these, or of such a nature, which being well united
and incorporated together, they are able to produce a fire so vigorous,
fearful, powerful, and above all, so inextinguishable that the whole Universal
matter is consumed in a moment; which is the more to be believed, since we make
not much difficulty, particularly in this our Age wherein we live, to add many
things to the invention of others, and that (as the Physicians say) all that
had a beginning does pass from imperfection to perfection. We desire therefore
it may be permitted (since the Inventors have left us nothing in Writing) to
propose here some Observations of Speculative truths, drawn from Experiment,
which have been made about the strength, nature, effects, and Office of all the
matters comprehended in the Composition of Gunpowder, as well of the
particulars, as all made up into one body. For I believe, that having
insinuated into a perfect knowledge of the properties, and the affections, as
well specificated as general, of all its Ingredients, no body more will fall
into those Errors which are too often committed in the Art of Pyrotechny.

We must therefore know, that Gunpowder was not without reason composed of
these three materials, to wit, Salt-Pete^, Sulphur, and Coal, but to the end
that one might remedy or supply the defaults of the others. And this is it
which is easy to be comprehended in the effect of Sulphur; for this is
naturally the very aliment of the fire, seeing it joins with it so willingly
and freely, and having once taken fire, is most difficult to put out, being no
otherwise rightly than a flaming fire, or, to express it better, a pure flame;
and therefore has an aptitude to inflame the Saltpeter, by its activity, more
than any other kind of fire. But as the Saltpeter lighted does go promptly
into certain windy exhalations, it has thereby such a strength in it, that it
would by its ventosity put out the flame which the Sulphur has conceived, and
by consequence deny it self of that which the Sulphur communicates to it;
hereby you may see, if one had made a simple composition of these two things
only, that is, of Sulphur and Saltpeter compounded well together, if fire were
then applied, they would in truth be suddenly enflamed, but they would soon
after go out, that is, the fire will not continue to the Conflagration and
Consumption of the whole matter, the reason whereof we have given a little
before. It was therefore by good reason adjudged, that Coal well dried and
powdered, being adjoined to these two materials in a certain proportion, was an
excellent remedy for the supplying of this defect, seeing that Coal is of such
a property and of such a nature, that if it be held to the fire, it will soon
light and be reduced to a fire without any flame; And from hence it comes to
pass, that the more it is agitated by the Air, or by wind, the more the fire
augments, and will not go out, but conserve it self until the matter that
nourishes it is totally consumed; a little ashes only excepted. From hence it
was concluded that a Composition made of these three Ingredients, such as is
our Gunpowder, will conceive fire, and will be conserved, enflamed and consumed
unto the last Atome. For it is most certain, that if we approach fire with it,
the Sulphur which the fire extremely loves is soon taken with it, and holds
the same and introduces it, not only into the Saltpeter, but the coal also at
the same moment, without producing any flame. Now this fire (as we have said
before) cannot be suffocated by wind, but on the contrary is enflamed the more,
and takes new strength by the agitation of the Air. And as this Sulphur is a
great neighbor of the fire either with or without flame, so it cannot hinder
it from taking fire; and it is the flame of the B^imstone embraces the
Saltpeter, and the Coal continues it. And by consequence these three materials
joined together, and well incorporated, and then lighted, produces a fire,
until all its aliment and substance be universally consumed and annihilated:
Yet there must care be taken that none of these substances have any accidental
defaults, either in humidity or disproportion, either more or less. We will
conclude then all that we have said, that the true office of Sulphur in the
Powder is to conceive the flame or receive the fire, and having received it, to
communicate it to the other matters; and that the Coal has a particular care
to retain and consume it* and to hinder the fire (after it is once introduced
by the Sulphur) from suffocating or going out by any windy Exhalation and great
violence caused by the Saltpeter; and lastly, that the most notable and
particular office of the Saltpeter is to produce and cause a most vehement and
powerful ventosity or windy Exhalation. And in this which I have said, lies
all the truth of the strength, power and expulsive motion and activity of the
Gunpowder; and by consequence Saltpeter alone is the first and principal
cause of all the admirable and astonishing Effects produced by Gunpowder; and
conseqnently, the two other materials are alliated with the Saltpeter for no
other end than to make it break forth into fire and wind. For proof of this, if
any one will make a Composition of Sulphur and Coal only, and with it charge a
Piece of Ordnance, he will find that this will not move or thrust out a Shot of
Iron or any other metal; the reason of this weakness is easy to be understood
by our foregoing discourse, because the violent expulsion depends absolutely in
the Saltpeter, and in this only expulsive faculty, and not in any of the other
matters. Yea I believe that one may prepare Gunpowder without Brimstone or
Coal, rather than without Saltpeter; or that a man may without much difficulty
prepare other matters, that the one may do the office of Sulphur in kindling
the matter, and the other that of Coal in Conserving it and keeping it without
flame. But any other thing that has such hidden natural properties to cause
such a ventous Exhalation, so violent and capable to produce such prodigious
Effects, as Saltpeter, may not be produced.

CHAP. XXIII.
Now to prepare ^ommon Match and Extraordinary Match, that is such as will
render no Smoke nor bad scent.

FIrst there must be made Cords of coarse hemp, or rather of Tow, about the
bigness of half your thumb, or a good finger in Diameter; then take the ashes
of Oak, Ash, Elm, or Maple, three parts, of quick Lyme one part, and make
thereof a Lie after the usual manner; which being done, add to it of the Liquor
drawn from Horse dung neatly strained and leasurely exprimed through a
strainer, or linen Cloth, two parts, of Saltpeter one part, and being all
well mixed, put into a Copper your Match Cords, and pour upon them your
Lixivium, and make a small fire under the same, augmenting it gradually, until
it be great, which you must keep boiling two or three days continually; not
boiling it dry, as some of our Writers prescribe, but supplying it continually
with fresh Lixivium, for fear both Match and Kettle burn for want of Liquor; in
the end having taken out the fire, take the Cords out of the Liquor, and wring
them hard in your hands, rubbing off the moisture from them with a piece of
Cloth, that comes forth in the wringing; then hang them in the Air or Sun upon
long Poles to dry, and when they are well dried, make them up in bundles, and
carry them into a commodious place to keep for use.

But to make Match that will never have bad scent nor smoke, you must get a
certain quantity of red Sand, or Gravel well washed, and purged from all its
filth; put it into an Earthen pot that is not varnished, then put into the pot
upon the Sand, your common Match, or any other made of Cotton, or the like
matter, and coil it in such manner, that there be half a fingers breadth of
interval between every coyl of the Match, to the end they may not touch each
other, but that the Match in its turning or Coyles have its sides equally
distant one from the other; then throw again upon that a good quantity of Sand*
and coyl in the Cord again as before: Continue thus your work until your pot be
full, then cover the pot with a cover of the same earth, and close well the
joints with Lute made of fat Earth that no Air may enter; This being well and
surely done, put lighted coals round about the pot, and let it stand in this
posture some time, then take it away and let it stand until it be quite cold
before you open it; When it is perfectly cold, take off the Cover, pour out the
Sand, and draw out the match, for it is prepared, and will burn as we have said.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the Square and Cube Roots.

WE have already in the Second Chapter of this Book shown the way of molding
and casting pieces of Ordnance; if well understood, you cannot be ignorant in
the way of Casting Shot. Therefore to avoid any thing that might be tedious or
unnecessary to the Students of this art, we will come to the most necessary
things concerning Shot, that is, such as every Gunner ought to know. But
because most of the propositions depend upon the knowledge of the Square and
Cube Roots, which many (though otherwise knowing in most common Arithmetic) do
not understand, I thought it good therefore to show the Extraction of the
Square and Cube Roots after a very easy way; with the necessary propositions
in Gunnery, thereunto belonging.

A Table of Squares and Cubes.
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 Roots. 1. 4. 9. 16. 25. 36. 49. 64. 81 Squares. 1.
8. 27. 64. 125. 216. 343. 512. 729 Cubes.

The Extraction of the Square Root.
Set down any number of figures as you shall think good, as, 2735716, then
begin at your first right hand figure that is at 6, and make a prick under it,
and so along every other figure as you may see here already done; and seeing
the first prick to the left hand falls to be under 2, therefore seek in the
Table above in the rank of Squares for this number 2, or the nearest ^
number less, which here we find to be 1, and over it we find the Root to be 1,
which must be placed in the quotient, and likewise under the first prick to the
left hand, then having 1 for a Divisor, and 1 for the quotient, say but the
common Rule of Division, 1 times 1 is one, 1 from 2 and there remains 1; which
sent over the 2, then double the quotient and it makes 2, which place between
the two first pricks to the left hand that is under 7; then say how many times
2 in 17, (here you must be very cautious not to take too many) which here may
be six times, place the 6 in the quotient as before, and under the second prick
that is under 3, and divide as before, then double the quotient which is now 16
and it makes 32, place the 2 between the second and third prick, viz. under 5,
and the 3 before it under the 6, so the 32 will stand under the 175 which is
above; then say how many times 3 in 17, which you will find to be 5, place it
in the quotient and under the third prick, and divide as before, always setting
the Remainder over the head of its proper figures; then double the quotient
again, which is now 165 and it makes 330, place the o^ between the two pricks
as before, and place the figures before it to the left hand, as you see above,
and the first figure to the left will be 3 which stands under 13; then say how
many times 3 in 13, which will be 4, which place in the quotient, and under the
fourth or last prick, and divide as before; so you will fin^ no Remainder,
which assures the number given to be a square number. The proof of these is
known by multiplying the square Root found in it self (taking in the remains if
any be) and it must produce that given number, otherwise it is false. Note how
many pricks you have, and so many numbers must the quotient consist of.

If the number given be not a true Square, then a fraction will remain, which
fraction you may find out the value thereof to a tenth, hundredth, or a
thousandth part; etc. Doing thus set next to the right hand after the Sum
proposed, two, four, or six ciphers, or more (for the more cyphe(...) you put,
the less is your Error) and every two ciphers will produce a fractional figure
more than the Integers belonging to the proper quotient, which are tenths,
hundredths, or thousand parts of a Unite, according to the number of ciphers
added; that is, if you add two ciphers, then you find the tenths of a Unite
etc. But the Square Root being not of so much use in Gunnery, as the Cube Root,
we shall proceed no farther to Exemplify the same, supposing it to be done
already in the Tre^tise of Military Discipline.

The Extraction of the Cube Root.
Begin at your right hand, (as you did in Extracting the Square Root) and set
pricks under every fourth figure, that is, leave two figures unprickt, or
between the pricks, and so proceed to the left, until you have done as here you
see, 7 5 6 7 8 7 3 2 (the number of pricks show the number of figures that will
be in the quotient.

Then see by the Table before in this Chapter the nearest Cube to the numbers
standing over the first prick to the right hand, which is 75, I search in the
Table of Cubes and find the nearest number to it in the Table of Cubes to be
64, and its Root 4, which must be set down in the quotient, and likewise its
Cube 64* under the prick; and if that number does not amount to so much as the
number standing over the prick, then substract it from the same, and set the
Remainder over head.

Then triple the qu^tient, and that triple you must set under the next number
to the right hand, before that prick where you did last end.

Multiply that tripled number by the quotient, and set it d^^^ under the first
triple, and that number let be your Divisor.

Then (as in common Division) must you look how many times the Divisor in the
figures is standing over them, and place that in the quotient.

This done, Multiply your quotient by your Divisor, and set it under your
Divisor, with a Line between.

Then multiply the last figure in the quotient by it self, and then in the
triple, and set that figure under the former, one figure more to the right hand.

Lastly, Multiply the last figure cubically, and set that Sum also one figure
to the Right hand; then add all these three multiplications together, and
substract it out of figures standing over the first and second prick, and the
Remainder set over them.

This done, again triple the quotient, and proceed exactly as before etc.

If your number be not an exact Cube, but some numbers remain whereof you
desire to find the exact fraction, that is as near as possible may be, viz. to
a tenth, hundredth, or a thousandth part etc. To find the tenths add three
ciphers, the hundreds 6 ciphers, the thousands nine ciphers, at the Right hand
of your figures, according to the directions given in finding the fractional of
a square. But these Rules being something tedious to many men, we will for their
encouragement and ease add a Table of Squares and Cubes whereby any man may
find, by inspection only, the Square and Cube of any number of Inches, and
parts of an Inch, to a tenth part, provided your number exceed not 100 inches,
which will be found very necessary, and save much labor, as will appear by the
following Examples. But first we will present you with the Table it self.

A Table of Squares and Cubes, very useful for the speedy Extracting of Square
and Cube Roots, for the Resolution of Questions in Military Affairs: Whether
for the Ordering of Battalions, or Gunnery, etc.
R Aq Ac 1 1 1 2 4 8 3 9 27 4 16 64 5 25 125 6 36 216 7 49 343 8 64 512 9 81
729 10 100 1000 11 121 1331 12 144 1728 13 169 2197 14 196 2744 15 225 3375 16
256 4096 17 289 4913 18 324 5832 19 361 6859 20 400 8000 21 441 9261 22 484
10648 23 529 12167 24 576 13824 25 625 15625 26 676 17576 27 729 19683 28 784
21952 29 841 24389 30 900 27000 31 961 29791 32 1024 32768 33 1089 35937 34
1156 39304 35 1225 42875 36 1296 46656 37 1369 50653 38 1444 54872 39 1521
59319 40 1600 64000 41 1681 68921 42 1764 74088 43 1849 79507 44 1936 85184 45
2025 91125 46 2116 97336 47 2^09 103823 48 2304 110592 49 2401 117649 50 2500
125000 51 2601 132651 52 2704 140608 53 2809 148877 54 2916 157464 55 3025
166375 56 3136 175616 57 3249 185193 58 3364 195112 59 3481 205379 60 3600
216000 61 3721 226981 62 3844 238328 63 3969 250047 64 4096 262144 65 4225
274625 66 4356 287496 67 4489 300763 68 4624 314432 69 4761 328509 70 4900
343000 71 5041 357911 72 5184 373248 73 5329 389017 74 5476 405224 75 5625
421875 76 5776 438976 77 5929 456533 78 6084 474552 79 6241 493039 80 6400
512000 81 6561 531441 82 6724 551368 83 6889 571787 84 7056 592704 85 7225
614125 86 7396 636056 87 7569 658503 88 7744 681472 89 7921 704969 90 8100
729000 91 8281 753571 92 8464 778688 93 8649 804357 94 8836 830584 95 9025
857375 96 9216 884736 97 9409 912673 98 9604 941192 99 9801 979299 100 10000
1000000 101 10201 1030301 102 10404 1061208 103 10609 1092729 104 10816 1124864
105 11025 1157625 106 11236 1191016 107 11449 1225043 108 11664 1259712 109
11881 1295029 110 12100 1331000 111 12321 1367631 112 12544 1404928 113 12769
1442897 114 12996 1481544 115 13225 1520875 116 13456 1560896 117 13689 1601613
118 13924 1643032 119 14161 1685159 120 14400 1728000 121 14641 1771561 122
14884 18158^^ 123 15129 1860867 124 15376 1906624 125 15625 1953125 126 15876
2000376 127 16129 2048383 128 16384 2097152 129 16641 2146689 130 16900 2197000
131 17161 2248291 132 17424 2299968 133 17689 2352637 134 17956 2406104 135
18225 2460375 136 18496 2515456 137 18769 2571353 138 19044 2628027 139 19321
2685619 140 19600 2744000 141 19881 2803221 142 20164 2863288 143 20449 2924207
144 20736 2985984 145 21025 3048625 146 21316 3112136 147 21609 3176523 148
21904 3241792 149 22201 3307949 150 22500 3375000 151 22801 3442951 152 23104
3511808 153 23409 3581577 154 23716 3652264 155 24025 3723875 156 24336 3796416
157 24649 3869893 158 24964 3944312 159 25281 4019679 160 25600 4096000 161
25921 4173281 162 26244 4251528 163 26569 4330747 164 26896 4410944 165 27225
4492125 166 27556 4574296 167 27889 4657463 168 28224 4741632 169 28561 4826809
170 28900 4913000 171 29241 5000211 172 29584 5088448 173 29929 5177717 174
30276 5268024 175 30625 5350375 176 30976 5451776 177 31329 5545233 178 31684
5639752 179 32041 5735339 180 32400 5832000 181 32561 5929741 182 33124 6028568
183 33489 6128487 184 33856 6229504 185 34225 6331625 186 34596 6434856 187
34969 6539203 188 35344 6644672 189 35721 6751269 190 36100 6859000 191 36481
6967871 192 36864 7077888 193 37249 7189057 194 37636 7301384 195 38025 7415875
196 38416 7529536 197 38809 7645373 198 39204 7762392 199 39601 7880599 200
40000 8000000 201 40401 8120601 202 40804 8242408 203 41209 8369421 204 41616
8489664 205 42025 8615125 206 42436 8741816 207 42849 8869743 208 43264 8998912
209 43681 9129329 210 44100 9261000 211 44521 9393931 212 44944 9528128 213
45369 9663597 214 45796 9800344 215 46225 9939375 216 46656 10077696 217 47089
10218313 218 47524 10360232 219 47961 10503459 220 48400 10648000 221 48841
10793861 222 49284 10941048 223 49729 11089567 224 50176 11239424 225 50625
11390625 226 51076 11543176 227 51529 11697083 228 51984 11852352 229 52441
12008989 230 52900 12167000 231 53361 12326391 232 53824 12487168 233 54289
12649337 234 54756 12812904 235 55225 12977875 236 55696 13144256 237 56169
13312053 238 56644 13481272 239 57121 13651919 240 57600 13824000 241 58081
13997521 242 58564 14172488 243 59049 14348907 244 59536 14526784 245 60025
14706125 246 60516 14886936 247 61009 15069223 248 61504 15242992 249 62001
15438249 250 62500 15655000 251 63001 15813251 252 63504 16003008 253 64009
16194277 254 64516 16387064 255 65025 16581375 256 65536 16777216 257 66049
16974593 258 66564 17173512 259 67081 17373979 260 67600 17576000 261 68121
17779581 262 68644 17984728 263 69169 18191447 264 69696 18399744 265 70225
18609625 266 70756 18821096 267 71289 19034163 268 71824 19248832 269 72361
19465109 270 72900 19683000 271 73441 19902511 272 73984 20123648 273 74529
20346417 274 75076 20570824 275 75625 20796875 276 76176 21024576 277 76729
21253933 278 77284 21484952 279 77841 21717639 280 78400 21952000 281 78961
22188041 282 79524 22425768 283 80089 22665187 284 80656 22906304 285 81225
23149125 286 81796 23393656 287 82369 23639903 288 82944 23887872 289 83521
24137569 290 84100 24389000 291 84681 24642171 292 85264 24897088 293 85849
25153757 294 86436 25412184 295 87025 25672375 296 87616 25934336 297 88209
261980 298 88804 26463592 299 89401 26730899 300 90000 27000000 301 90601
27270901 302 91204 27543608 303 91809 27818127 304 92416 28094464 305 93025
28372625 306 93636 28652616 307 94249 28934443 308 94864 29218112 309 95481
29503629 310 96100 29791000 311 96721 30080231 312 97344 30271328 313 97969
30664297 314 98596 30659144 315 99225 31255875 316 99856 31554496 317 100489
318550132 318 101124 32157432 319 101761 32461759 320 102400 32768000 321
103041 33076161 322 103684 33386248 323 103329 33698267 324 104976 34012224 325
105625 34328125 326 106276 34645976 327 106929 34965783 328 107584 35287552 329
108241 35611289 330 108900 35937000 331 109561 36264691 332 110224 36594368 333
110889 36926037 334 111556 37259704 335 112225 37595375 336 112896 37933056 337
113569 38272753 338 114244 38614472 339 114921 38958219 340 115600 39304000 341
116281 39651821 342 116964 40001688 343 117649 40353607 344 118336 40707584 345
119025 41063625 346 119716 41421736 347 120409 41781923 348 121104 42144192 349
121801 42508549 350 122500 42875000 351 123201 43243551 352 123904 43614^08 353
124609 43986977 354 125316 44361864 355 126025 44738875 356 126736 45118016 357
127449 45499293 358 128164 45882712 359 128881 46268279 360 129600 46656000 361
130321 47045881 362 131044 47437928 363 131769 47832147 364 132496 48228544 365
133225 48627125 366 133956 49027896 367 134689 49430863 368 135424 49836032 369
136161 50243409 370 136900 50653000 371 137641 51064811 372 138384 51478848 373
139129 51895117 374 139876 52313624 375 140625 52734375 376 141376 53157376 377
142129 53582633 378 142884 54010152 379 143641 54439939 380 144400 54872000 381
145161 55306341 382 145924 55742968 383 146689 56181887 384 147456 56623104 385
148225 57066625 386 148996 57512456 387 149769 57960603 388 150544 58411072 389
151321 58863869 390 152100 59319000 391 152881 59776471 392 153664 60236288 393
154449 60698457 394 155236 61162984 395 156025 61629875 396 156810 6299136 397
157609 62570773 398 158404 63044792 399 159201 63521193 400 160000 64000000 401
160801 64481201 402 161604 64964808 403 162409 65450827 404 163216 65939264 405
1640^5 66430125 406 164836 66923416 407 165649 67419143 408 166464 67917312 409
167281 68417929 410 168100 68921000 411 168921 69426531 412 169744 69934528 413
170569 70444997 414 171396 70957944 415 172225 71473375 416 173056 71991296 417
173889 72511713 418 174724 73034632 419 175561 73560059 420 176400 74088000 421
177241 74618461 422 178084 75151448 423 178929 75686967 424 179776 76225024 425
180625 76765625 426 181476 77308776 427 182329 77854483 428 183104 78402752 429
184041 78953589 430 184900 79507000 431 185761 80062991 432 186624 80621568 433
187489 81182737 434 188356 81746504 435 189225 82312875 436 190096 82881856 437
190969 83453353 438 191844 84027672 439 192721 84604519 440 193600 85184000 441
194481 85766121 442 195364 86350888 443 196249 86938307 444 197136 87528384 445
198025 88121125 446 198916 88716536 447 199809 89314623 448 200704 89915392 449
201601 90518849 450 202500 91125000 451 203401 91733851 452 204304 92345408 453
205209 92959677 454 206116 93576664 455 207025 94196375 456 207936 94818816 457
208849 95443993 458 209764 96071912 459 210681 96702579 460 211690 97336000 461
212521 97972181 462 213444 98611128 463 214369 99252847 464 215296 99897344 465
216225 100544625 466 217156 101194696 467 218089 101874563 468 219024 102503232
469 219961 103161709 470 220900 103823000 471 221841 104487111 472 222784
105154048 473 223729 105823817 474 224676 106496424 475 225625 107171875 476
226576 107850176 477 2274^9 108531333 478 228484 109215352 479 229441 109902239
480 230400 110592000 481 231361 111284641 482 232324 111980168 483 233289
112678587 484 234256 113379904 485 235225 114084125 486 236196 114791256 487
237169 115501303 488 238144 116214272 489 239121 116930269 490 240100 117649000
491 241081 118370771 492 242064 119095488 493 243049 119823157 494 244036
120553784 495 245025 121287375 496 246016 122023936 497 247009 122763473 498
248004 123505992 499 249001 124251499 500 250000 125000000 501 251000 125751501
502 252004 126506008 503 253009 127263527 504 254016 128024064 505 255025
128787625 506 256036 129554216 507 257049 130323843 508 258964 131096512 509
259081 131872229 510 260100 123651000 511 261121 133432831 512 262144 134217728
513 263169 135005697 514 264196 135796744 515 265225 136590875 516 266256
137388096 517 267289 138188413 518 268324 138991832 519 269361 139798359 520
270400 410608000 521 277441 141420761 522 272484 142236648 523 273529 143055667
524 274576 143877824 525 275625 144703125 526 276676 145531576 527 277729
146363183 528 278784 147197952 529 279841 148035889 530 280900 148877000 531
281961 149721291 532 283024 150568768 533 284089 151419437 534 285156 152273304
535 286225 153130375 536 287296 153990656 537 288369 154854153 538 289444
155720872 539 290521 156590819 540 291600 157464000 541 292681 158340421 542
293764 159220088 543 294849 160103007 544 295936 160989184 545 297025 161878625
546 298116 162771336 547 299209 163667323 548 390304 164566592 549 391491
165469149 550 302500 166375000 551 303601 167284151 552 304704 168196608 553
305809 169112377 554 306916 170031464 555 308025 170953875 556 309136 171879616
557 310249 172808693 558 311364 173741112 559 312481 174676879 560 313600
175616000 561 314721 176558481 562 315844 177504328 563 316969 178453547 564
318096 179406144 565 319225 180362125 566 320356 181321496 567 321489 182284263
568 322624 183250432 569 323761 184220009 570 324900 185193000 571 326041
186169411 572 327184 187149284 573 328320 188132517 574 329476 189119224 575
330625 190109375 576 331776 191102976 577 332929 19^100033 578 334084 193100552
579 335241 194104539 580 336400 195112060 581 337561 196122941 582 3387^4
197137368 583 339889 198155287 584 341056 199176704 585 342225 200201625 586
343396 201230056 587 344569 202262003 588 345744 203297472 589 346921 204336469
590 348100 205379000 591 349281 206425071 592 350464 207474688 593 351649
208527857 594 352836 209584584 595 354025 210644871 596 355216 211708746 597
356409 212776073 598 357604 213847192 599 358801 214921799 600 360000 216000000
601 361201 217081801 602 362404 218167208 603 363609 219256227 604 364816
220348864 605 366025 221445125 606 367236 222545016 607 368449 223648543 608
369664 224755712 609 370881 225866529 610 372100 226981000 611 373321 228099131
612 374544 229220928 613 375769 230346397 614 376996 231475544 615 378225
232608375 616 379456 233744896 617 380689 234885113 618 381924 236029032 619
383161 237176659 620 384400 238328000 621 385641 239483061 622 386884 240641848
623 388129 241804367 624 380376 242970624 625 390625 244140625 626 391876
245314376 627 393129 246491883 628 394384 247673158 629 395641 248858189 630
396900 250047000 631 398161 251239591 632 399424 252435968 633 400689 253636137
634 401956 254840104 635 403225 256047875 636 404496 257259456 637 405799
258474853 638 407044 259694072 639 408321 260917119 640 409600 262144000 641
410881 263374721 642 412164 264609288 643 413449 265847707 644 414736 267089984
645 416025 268336125 646 417316 269586136 647 418609 270840025 648 419904
272097792 649 421201 273359449 650 422500 274625000 651 423801 275894415 652
425104 277167808 653 426409 278445077 654 427716 279726264 655 429025 281011375
656 430336 282300416 657 436649 283593393 658 432964 284890312 659 434281
286191179 660 435600 287496000 661 436921 288804781 662 438244 290117528 663
439569 291434247 664 440896 292754944 665 442225 294079625 666 443556 295408296
667 444889 296740963 668 446224 298077632 669 447561 299418309 670 448900
300763000 671 450241 302111711 672 451584 303464448 673 452929 3048^1217 674
454276 306182024 675 455625 307546875 676 456976 308915776 677 458329 310288733
678 459084 311665752 679 461041 313046839 680 462400 314432000 681 463761
315821241 682 465124 317214568 683 466489 318611987 684 467856 320013504 685
469225 321419125 686 470596 322828856 687 471969 32424^703 688 473344 325660672
689 474721 327082769 690 476100 328509000 691 477481 329939371 692 478864
331373888 693 483249 332812557 694 481633 334255384 695 483025 335702375 696
484416 337153536 697 485809 338638873 698 487204 339068392 699 488601 341532099
700 490000 343000000 701 491401 344472101 702 492804 345948408 703 494209
347428927 704 495616 348913664 705 497025 350402625 706 498436 351895816 707
499849 353393243 708 501264 354894912 709 502681 356400829 710 504100 357911000
711 505521 359425431 712 506944 360944128 713 508369 362467097 714 509796
363994344 715 511225 365525875 716 512656 367061696 717 514089 398601813 718
515524 370246232 719 516961 371694959 720 518400 373248000 721 519841 374805361
722 521284 376367048 723 522729 377933067 724 524176 379503424 725 525625
381078125 726 527076 382657186 727 528529 384240592 728 529984 385828362 729
531441 387420499 730 532900 389017000 731 534361 390617891 732 535821 391223168
733 537289 393832837 734 538756 395446904 735 540225 397065375 736 541696
398688256 737 543169 400315553 738 544644 401947272 739 546221 403583419 740
547600 405224000 741 549081 406869021 742 550564 408518488 743 552049 410172407
744 553536 411830784 745 555025 413493625 746 556516 415160936 747 558009
416832723 748 559504 418508992 749 561001 420189741 750 562500 421875000 751
564001 423564751 752 565504 425259008 753 567009 426957777 754 568516 428661064
755 570025 430368875 756 571536 432081216 757 573049 433798093 758 574564
435519512 759 576081 437245479 760 577600 438976000 761 579121 440701081 762
580644 442440728 763 582169 444184947 764 583696 445933744 765 585225 447687125
766 586656 449445096 767 588289 451207663 768 589824 452974832 769 591361
454746609 770 592900 456533000 771 594441 458314011 772 595984 460099648 773
597529 461889917 774 599076 463684824 775 600625 465484375 776 602176 467288576
777 603729 469097433 778 605284 470910952 779 606841 472729139 780 608400
474552000 781 609961 476279541 782 611524 478211768 783 613089 480048687 784
614656 481890304 785 616225 483736625 786 617796 485587656 787 619369 487443403
788 620944 489303872 789 622521 491169069 790 624100 493039000 791 625681
494913071 792 627264 496793088 793 628849 498677257 794 630436 500566184 795
632015 502459875 796 633616 504358336 797 635209 506261573 798 636804 508169592
799 638401 510082399 800 640000 512000000 801 641601 513922402 802 643204
515849608 803 644809 517781627 804 646416 519718464 805 648025 521660125 806
649636 523606616 807 651249 525557943 808 652864 527514112 809 654481 529475129
110 656100 531441000 811 657721 533411731 812 659344 535387328 813 660969
537367797 814 662596 539353144 815 664225 541343375 816 665856 543338496 817
667489 545338513 818 669124 547343432 819 670761 549353256 820 672400 551368000
821 674041 553387661 822 675684 555412248 823 677329 557441767 824 678976
559476224 825 680625 561515625 826 682276 563559976 827 683929 565609283 828
685584 567663552 829 687241 569722789 830 688000 571787000 831 690561 573856191
832 692224 575930368 833 693889 578009537 834 695556 580093704 835 697225
582182875 836 698896 584277056 837 700569 586376253 838 702244 588480472 839
703921 590589719 840 705600 592704000 841 707281 594823321 842 708964 596947688
843 710649 599077107 844 712336 601211584 845 714025 603351125 846 715716
605495736 847 717409 607645423 848 719104 609800199 849 720801 611960049 850
722500 614125000 851 724201 616265051 852 725904 618470208 853 727609 620650477
854 729316 622835864 855 731025 625026375 856 732736 627222016 857 734449
629422793 858 736164 631628712 859 737881 633839779 860 739600 636056000 861
741321 638277381 862 743044 640503928 863 744769 642735647 864 746496 644972544
865 748225 647214625 866 749956 949461896 867 751689 651714363 868 753424
653972032 869 755161 656234929 870 756900 658503000 871 758641 660776311 872
760384 663054848 873 762129 665336617 874 763876 667627624 875 765625 669921875
876 767376 672121376 877 769129 674526133 878 770884 676836152 879 772641
679151439 880 774400 681472000 881 776161 683797841 882 777924 686128968 883
779689 688465387 884 781456 690807104 885 783225 693154125 886 784996 695506456
887 786769 697864103 888 788544 700227072 889 790321 702595369 890 792100
704060000 891 793881 707247971 892 795664 709432288 893 797449 712121957 894
799236 714516984 895 801025 716917375 896 802816 719323136 897 804609 721734273
898 806404 724150792 899 808201 726572699 900 810000 729000000 901 811801
731452701 902 813604 733870808 903 815409 736314327 904 817216 738763264 905
819025 741217625 906 820836 743677416 907 822649 746142643 908 824644 748613312
909 826281 751089429 910 828100 753571000 911 829921 750058031 912 831744
758550528 913 833569 761048497 914 835396 763551944 915 837225 766060875 916
839056 768575296 917 840889 771095213 918 842724 773620632 919 844561 776151559
920 846400 778688000 921 848241 781229961 922 850084 783777448 923 851929
786330467 924 853776 788889024 925 855625 791453125 926 857476 794022776 927
859329 796597983 928 861184 799178752 929 863041 801765089 930 864900 804357000
931 866761 806954491 932 868624 809557568 933 870489 812166237 934 872356
814780504 935 874225 817400375 936 876096 820025856 937 877969 822656953 938
879844 825293672 939 881721 827936019 940 883600 830584000 941 885481 833237621
942 887364 835896888 943 889249 838561807 944 891136 841232384 945 893025
843908625 946 894916 846590536 947 896809 849271123 948 898704 851971392 949
900601 854670349 950 902500 857375000 951 904401 860085351 952 906304 862801408
953 908209 865523177 954 910116 868250664 955 912025 870983875 956 913936
873722816 957 915849 876467493 958 917764 879217012 959 919681 881974079 960
921600 884736000 961 923521 887503681 962 925444 890277128 963 927369 893056347
964 929296 895841344 965 931225 898632125 966 933156 901428696 967 935089
904231063 968 937024 907039232 969 938961 909853209 970 940900 912673000 971
942841 915498611 972 944784 918330048 973 946729 991167317 974 948676 924010424
975 950625 926859375 976 952576 929714176 977 954529 932574833 978 956484
935441352 979 958441 938313739 980 960400 941192000 981 962361 944076141 982
964324 946966108 983 966289 949862087 984 968256 952763904 985 970225 955671625
986 972196 958585256 987 974169 961504803 988 976144 964430272 989 978121
967361669 990 980100 970299000 991 982081 973242271 992 984064 976191488 993
986049 979146657 994 988036 982107784 995 990025 985074875 996 992016 988047936
997 994009 991026973 998 996004 994011992 999 998001 997002999 1000 1000000
1000000000

CHAP. XXV.
The Use of these Tables in Gunnery.

QUEST. I.
By knowing the Diameter and Weight of any one Shot, to find the Weight of
another Shot, being both of one and the same Metal.

THe Shot whose weight we know not, we must have in Diameter likewise, which is
found thus, Gird the Shot with a Line, then divide that into twenty two equal
parts, and seven of those is the Diameter or the height of the Shot.

But if you have a pair of Callapars by you, the best way is to take the
Diameter with them. The fashion and form of taking the Diameter of a Shot, is
as here you see in the figure following. woodcut of calipers measuring a piece
of shot

If an Iron Shot of 4 Inches Diameter weigh 9 l. what shall a Shot weigh whose
Diameter is twice as much, that is, 8 Inches.

Cube each Diameter, then multiply the Cube of the Shot whose weight is
required by the Diameter of the given Shot, and that Sum divided by the Cube of
the known Diameter, the quotient is the Diameter of the Shot required.

Example. ^

This question may also be performed by the former Table of Cubes, if you
search in the Collum of Roots until you find your Diameters in a right Line
with the same under the word Cube, you will find the Cube answerable to the
number given, thus; you will find the Cube of 4 to be 64, and of 8 to be 512,
and this 512 multiplied by the weight of the known Bullet, viz. 9 l. it makes
4608, which divided by 64, gives the weight of the Bullet to be 72 l. which was
to be known.

QUEST. II.
Knowing the Diameter and weight of one Shot, to find the Diameter of a Shot
that weighs twice as much.

Suppose the known Shot was 4 Inches Diameter, and weigh 9 pound, and it were
required to find the Diameter of a Shot, whose weight is twice as much, that is
18, find the Cube-Root of each Shots weight, then multiply the Diameter of the
Shot whose weight is known, by the Cube of the Diameter of the Shot whose
weight is required; and that Sum divided by the Cube of the Diameter of the
known Shot and the quotient is the Diameter required. Example. By the former
Rule, or by the Table, the Cube of the pounds will be found to be 2, 08, and
the Cube of 18 will be 2, 62, now multiply this last number by 4, and it makes
9, 48, which divided by 2, 08 will give in the quotient 5, 03 for the Diameter
required.

This question may very easily be wrought by the Line of numbers, thus; divide
the distance between 9 and 18 into three equal parts, and that extent will
reach from 4 Inches to 5, 03 Inches, the Diameter required.

QUEST. III.
How the former question may be Resolved Geometrically.

Make a Square of the Diameter of the lesser Bullet, then draw a Line from
Corner to Corner, and this Line thus drawn shall be the Diameter of a Shot
twice the weight of the other; which if you divide into two equal parts,
setting one foot of your compasses in the middle, you may draw a Circle, and
that circumference will represent unto you a Bullet twice the weight of the
lesser Diameter.

This work may be proved Arithmetically thus; the Diameter of the lesser Bullet
is 4 Inches, the Square thereof 16, which being doubled is 32; and the square
Root of this 32 is 5, 65, and so much is the Diameter of the greater Bullet,
which weighed 18 l. There arises here a difference between this way and the
former, but this way is the most true; not but that both Rules are true in
themselves, but the former depending upon finding the Cube Roots, which cannot
be found much more exacter than what I have done, and so working by them, and
they not being exact, causes the difference in the work.

QUEST. IV.
How to find the Diameter for the Weight of any Shot assigned.

Suppose a Shot of 27 l. be 6 Inches Diameter, how many Inches Diameter is a
Shot of 64 l.

Find the Cube of 64 in the Table, and it will be found to be 4; which multiply
by 6, and it makes 24; which divided by 3, the Cube of 27, and it gives 8
Inches for the Diameter of the Shot or Bullet which was required.

QUEST. V.
How this Question may Geometrically be resolved.

Mr. Gunter in his first Book, Section 4. has showed how to make a Line of
Solids on his Sector; but this Rule shows us the proportion of the Diameters in
Weight, having a Shot of one pound, two pounds, three pounds weight of Metal,
or stone, etc. For if the given Shot be one pound, divide the diameter of that
Shot into 4 equal parts, and 5 such parts will make a Diameter of a Shot of the
said Metal, as is proposed, that shall weigh just twice as much. And divide the
Diameter of a Shot that weighs just two pounds into seven equal parts, and
eight such parts will make the Diameter of a Shot of 3 pounds weight. And
Divide the Diameter of a Shot of 3 pounds, into 10 equal parts, and 11 of such
parts will give a Shot of 4 pounds weight. And divide a Shot of 4 pounds weight
into 13 parts, and 14 such parts will make a Shot of 5 pounds in weight. And
divide the Diameter of a Shot of 5 pounds weight, into 16 equal parts, and 17
such parts will make a Diameter of a shot that will weigh 6 pounds. And so
dividing the Diameter of a shot 6 pounds weight into 19 equal parts, and 20
such parts will make a Diameter of a shot that will weigh 7 pounds. Thus
dividing each next Diameter into three equal parts more than the next less
Diameter was divided into, and with one part added to the Diameter of a shot it
will weigh just one pound more, and so may proceed infinitely.

A second way to Perform this work.
Find exactly the Diameter of a shot whose weight is just one pound, then
describe a Circle whose Diameter shall be equal thereunto, and divide it into
four equal parts, as a b c d, and draw the two Diameters a c and d b crossing
the Center, and then take the distance d c in your Compasses, and lay it off
from e to 2, and this will be a shot of two pounds weight.

Then take the distance d 2, in your Compasses, and set it off from e to 3, so
will that distance be the Diameter of a shot of three pounds weight; and so you
may proceed in the same manner at your pleasure; as you may see by the
projection.

Likewise having the Diameter of a Shot of any weight, the double of the
Diameter is the Diameter of a Shot that weighs eight times as much. So that if
a Shot of four Inches Diameter weigh nine pounds, a Shot of eight inches
Diameter will weigh seventy two pounds; as you may see by this following Table
of the weights of Shot. nested circles inscribed by angles

QUEST. VI.
If a Shot of three Inches and a half weigh sir pounds, what will a Shot of
seven inches and three quarters weigh.

You may for 3 put 3, 50. and for 7 put 7, 75. then you may Cube them the
common way; then multiply the second by the third number, and divide by the
first, the Quotient gives the content.

You may more easily work it by the Table of Cubes aforegoing; that is, against
the Root 3, 50. you will find its Cube to be 42, 875; and against the Root 7,
75. you will find its Cube to be 46, 548. and this multiplied by 6, and divided
by 42, 875, will leave 65, 14. that is 65 pounds and (...) parts of a pound. In
this nature may any Fractions be wrought, even as easy as whole Numbers,
especially if you reckon your Fractions the Decimal way, or bring them into
Decimal Fractions by Reduction.

QUEST. VII.
The Proportions between Bullets of Iron and Bullets of Lead or Stone, that is,
by knowing the Weight of an Iron Shot, to find the Weight of a Shot of the same
Diameter made of Lead or Stone.

The Proportion between Lead and Iron is as 3 to 2, so that a Shot of two pound
of Iron is the same Diameter as a Shot of 3 pounds of Lead.

Example. If a Shot of Iron of 3 Inches Diameter weigh 6 pounds, what will a
Shot of Lead of the same Diameter?

For 3 Inches put 3, 5, and say, if 2 give 3, 5, what will 3 give? ^

This 52 pounds is the weight of a Shot of Lead of 3 Inches and a half Diameter.

The proportion between Iron and Stone is as 3 to 8, so that a Shot of 12 pound
of stone is as big, or the same in Diameter, as the like Shot of Iron that
weighs 32 pounds; but some say the proportion between Marble and Iron is as 15
to 34.

A Bullet of Lead to the like of Marble is in proportion as 4 to 1.

The proportion between Lead and Brass is as 24 is to 19.

The proportion between Iron and Lead, as some say, is as 19 to 28.

The proportion between Iron and Brass is as 16 to 18.

By these Rules we may Calculate a Table very easily, to know if an Iron Shot
be wanting, and a Shot of any of the other metals to be had, what height and
weight either Shot of Lead Brass or Stone ought to be, to fit any piece of
Ordnance; and by the same method we have here Calculated a Table, which does
show the weight of any Shot of Iron, Lead or Stone; from 2 Inches to 9 Inches.

This is worthy to be observed, that you ought not to have so much Powder to
Load a Piece that must discharge a Marble Shot, as an Iron Shot; but the
proportion must be abated as the proportions between Stone and Iron does allow
of.

A Table of the Diameter and Weight of all such Shot as are generally used in
England, from one to eight Inches Diameter, with the length of every Piece
fitting to carry such a Shot.
The Names of the Pieces of Ordnance. Diameter of the Bore. Length of the Gun.
Weight of the Gun in pounds. Breadth of the Ladle. Length of the Ladle. Weight
of the Powder. Diameter of the Shot. The weight of the Shot. He shoots point
blank. The Inches. The Parts. The Feet. The Inches. The Pounds. The Inches. The
Parts. The Inches. The Parts. The Pounds. The Ounces. The Inches. The Parts.
The Pounds. The Ounces. The Paces. A Base. 1 2/8 4 6/8 200 2 0/8 4 0/8 0 8 1
1/8 0 5 60 A Rabanet. 1 4/8 5 6/8 300 2 4/8 4 1/8 0 12 1 3/8 0 8 70 Fauconets.
2 2/8 6 0/8 400 4 0/8 7 4/8 1 4 2 2/8 1 5 90 Faucons. 2 6/8 7 0/8 750 4 4/8 8
2/8 2 4 2 5/8 2 8 130 Ordinary Minion. 3 0/8 7 0/8 750 800 5 0/8 8 4/8 2 8 2
7/8 3 4 120 Minion of the largest size. 3 2/8 8 0/8 1000 5 0/8 9 0/8 3 4 3 0/8
3 12 125 Saker the lowest sort. 3 4/8 8 0/8 1400 6 4/8 9 6/8 3 6 3 2/8 4 12 150
Ordinary Sakers. 3 6/8 7 9 0/8 1500 6 6/8 10 4/8 4 0 3 4/8 6 0 160 Sakers of
the oldest sort. 4 0/8 10 0/8 1800 7 2/8 11 0/8 5 0 3 6/8 7 5 163 Lowest
Demiculvering. 4 2/8 10 0/8 2000 8 0/8 12 0/8 6 4 4 0/8 9 0 174 Ordinary
Demiculvering. 4 4/8 10 11 0/8 2700 8 0/8 12 6/8 7 4 4 2/8 10 11 175 Elder sort
of Demiculvering. 4 6/8 12 13 0/8 3000 8 4/8 13 4/8 8 8 4 4/8 12 11 178
Culverings of the best size. 5 0/8 10 11 0/8 4000 9 0/8 14 2/8 10 0 4 6/8 15 0
180 Ordinary Culvering. 5 2/8 12 13 4500 9 4/8 16 0/8 11 6 5 0/8 17 5 181
Culvering of the largest size. 5 4/8 12 1^ 0/8 4800 10 0/8 16 0/8 11 8 5 2/8 20
0 183 Lowest Demicanon. 6 2/8 11 0/8 5400 11 4/8 20 0/8 14 0 6 0/8 30 0 156
Ordinary Demicanon. 6 4/8 12 0/8 5600 12 0/8 22 0/8 17 8 6 ^/^/8 32 0 162
Demicanon of great size. 6 6/8 12 0/8 6000 12 0/8 22 6/8 18 0 6 5/8 36 0 180
Canon Royal, or of 8 0/8 12 8000 14 6/8 24 0/8 32 8 7 4/8 58 0 185

QUEST. VIII.
How to make a Shot of Lead and Stone together (the Stone being first put into
the middle of the Mold, in which the Lead must be afterward Cast round about
the Stone) to be of the like Diameter and Weight as an Iron Shot is of.

It is found by Experience that if you take five parts Lead, and one part of
Stone, it will come very near the matter. By these Rules have we Calculated
this Table.

It is found by experience, that if you take 5 parts Lead, and one part Stone,
it will come very near the matter, wanting not above 3 Ounces, which is
nothing, respecting the difference you shall find in Pibble Stones. Here you
have a Table how much Lead, and how much Stone must be together, to make the
equal of Iron Shot, from 1 inch, and to every half in the first and second
Column to 8 Inch. Diameter; the third Column is how much Lead, the fourth how
much Stone, the fifth how much weight both together.

Inches. Quart. Lead. Stone. Both together. Poun. Ou. Poun. Ou. Poun. Oun. 1 0
1 2/3 0 0 1/3 0 2 1 2 0 6 0 1 0 8 2 0 14 0 4 1 2 2 2 0 12 0 8 2 4 3 3 2 0 10 3
12 3 2 5 0 1 0 5 0 4 7 7 1 8 8 15 4 2 10 8 2 2 12 10 5 14 7 2 14 17 5 5 2 19 4
3 12 23 0 6 25 0 5 0 30 0 6 2 32 0 6 0 38 0 7 40 0 8 0 48 0 7 2 48 0 10 0 58 0
8 59 0 12 0 71 0

Its use is thus; knowing the Diameter of the intended Shot, enter the Table in
the first and second Columns, and against them, in the third and fourth
Columns, you have the Weight of Lead and Stone, that will make a Shot of the
same Diameter with a Shot of Iron, whose weight is in the fifth Column.

Example. An Iron Shot of 2 inches Diameter, will weigh 1 pound, 2 ounces; If I
enter this Table with 2 inches, in the first Column against it, I shall find
that I must have 14 ounces of Lead, and 4 ounces of Stone, and this will make a
Shot of 2 inches Diameter equal to the weight of the Shot of Iron.

QUEST. IX.
To find the sollid Content, and thereby the weight of any Iron Shot.

By the former Table or otherwise, find the Cube of the Diameter, which if you
multiply by 11, and divide by 21, gives the sollid Content of that Bullet in
inches and parts.

Now to know how many pounds weight any such body does contain, multiply the
sollid Content by 4, and divide that Sum by 16, it will show how many pounds of
Iron that Bullet weighs, for an inch square of cast Iron weighs 4 ounces.

CHAP. XXVI.
Questions about Pieces of Ordnance.

BEfore we come to work what we intend concerning a Piece of Ordnance, it is
necessary to understand these Propositions following.

PROP. I.
^aving the Diameter of a Circle, to find the superficial Content.

Multiply the square of the Diameter of any Circle by 785 398, and the product
that shall come of that Multiplication is the Superficial Content.

PROP. II.
Having the Diameter of any Circle, to find the Circumference thereof.

The common way of proportions is, as 7 to 22, so is the Diameter to the
Circumference; but more exactly it is done, if you multiply the Diameter by 3,
14, 16, or it may be done thus, as 113 is to 355, so is the Diameter to the
Circumference.

PROP. III.
Having the Circumference of a Circle, to find the Superficial Content.

Multiply the Square of the Circumference by 079, 578 will give the Superficial
Content, or Multiply the Diameter by half the Circumference, and that Sum is
the Superficial Content.

PROP. IV.
Having the Circumference of any Circle, to find the Diameter.

Multiply the Circumference by 318 308, gives the Diameter of that Circle.

PROP. V.
To measure the Frustrum of a Cone or Pyramid, knowing both the Diameters and
length of the said Frustrum.

Multiply the Diameters one by the other, and add to them both their Squares,
and that Sum divided by 785 39, the one third part of the Remainder is the
Content of the Cone.

PROP. VI.
By knowing the weight of any one Piece of Ordnance, to find the weight of any
other Piece of Ordinance.

If a Saker of 4 inches Diameter weigh 1400l. how much will a Cannon of 8
inches Diameter weigh, supposing they be equally fortified, (otherwise this
Rule will not hold true) Cube each Diameter, or seek in the foregoing Table,
and you will find the Cube of 4 to be 64, and of 8 to be 512, then say as 64 is
to 1400l. so is 512 to 12919 pounds, and this is the weight of a Cannon that is
able to carry a proportionable Charge.

PROP. VII.
To find the sollid Content of the Concavity, Cylinder, or Soul of a Piece of
Ordinance.

By the Rules given in the first of these Propositions, find the Superficial
Content or Ayrea of the end of the Cylinder, which multiplied by the length,
will give the sollid Content.

PROP. VIII.
To find the sollid Content of the Soul or Concave of a Piece of Ordnance, if
it be Tapering, or the Section of a Cone.

The working of this Proposition is the same as in the fifth Proposition, or
you may for brevities sake, add both the Diameters together, and the half of
that may be accounted the mean Diameter, by which you may find the Superficial
Content by the first Proposition, which multiplied by the length, gives the
sollid Content.

PROP. IX.
How by knowing the weight of any one Piece of Ordnance, to find the weight of
any other, being of the same shape.

With your Crallapars take the greatest thickness of the Piece whose weight you
know, and likewise of the Piece whose weight you know not; then by the former
Table find the Cube of each Diameter, then say, as the Cube of the Diameter of
the Piece whose weight is known, is to the weight of the same Piece, so is the
Cube of the Diameter of the Piece whose weight is unknown, to its weight sought.

But if the Pieces be not of one and the same Metal, after you have found the
weight, supposing it to be the same Metal, then you must by the Rules given in
the 24 Chapter, proportion the weight according to the Metal the Piece is of,
whose weight you know not, and if the Piece whose weight you know, do differ in
proportion, as if one be of Iron, the other of Brass, the proportion is as 16
to 18, etc.

PROP. X.
By knowing the weight of any one Piece of Ordnance, to find the weight of any
other Piece of Ordnance, although differing in shape or form, knowing the
Diameters at Britch, Muzzles, and length of the Pieces.

By the Rules given in the ninth Proposition, find the sollid Content of the
Piece whose weight you know, supposing it to be a sollid body without a Chamber.

Then take the sollid Content of the Concave part, by Rules given in the
seventh Proposition, if it be a Cylinder; or by the ninth Proposition, if it be
Tapering. This latter Content that is of the Concave being deducted from the
former Content of the whole Piece, gives the sollid Content of the whole Metal
in the Piece.

Observe the same Rule in finding the sollid Content of the Piece whose weight
is unknown; Cube both the sollid Contents, and say, as the Cube of the sollid
Content of the Piece whose weight is known, is to his weight; so the Cube of
the sollid Content of the Piece whose weight is unknown, is to his weight; but
if they be not of one and the same Metal, we must work by proportions,
according to the Rules given in the 24th. Chapter.

By these Rules, when Weights and Scales have been wanting, have I found out
the weight of several Pieces of Ordnance; and if exact account be taken with
good judgment and consideration had, of the difference of the Trunions and
Britch end, especially if there be any great difference in the Pieces, you
cannot err much; for the Rule being demonstratively true, the operation truly
done, cannot err.

PROP. XI.
To find the weight of any Piece of Ordnance, where we have no other Piece of
Ordnance, whose weight is known.

Find the sollid Content of the Metal according to the Rules given in the tenth
Proposition; then multiply that by 4, and dividing that Sum by 16, will give
the weight of the Piece, supposing it to be Iron; for it is generally allowed
that one inch square of Iron will weigh just four ounces.

If the Piece whose weight you seek be not of Iron, but of some other Metal;
then work by the Rules given in the 24th Chapter, for the difference of the
weight of Metals.

CHAP. XXVI.
To know the Allowance or Proportion of Powder proper for any Piece of
Ordnance.

THe general way is to allow for such Brass Pieces as are above 4000 l. five
ounces and a half of powder to a hundred weight of Metal.

But for Culverin of Brass fortified of above 4000 l. about 3 ounces and a half
complete; yet there is used also generally for the proof of Shot three fourths
or four fifths of the weight of the Iron Shot, but for the Service not above
half the weight of the said Shot.

For Culverin, the whole weight of their Shot for proof and for action, is two
thirds of its weight.

The Saker and Faulcon four fifths, the weight of their Shot; and for lesser
Pieces the whole weight, and one third more for proof; but for action just its
weight: but when they grow hot, a part must be abated according to discretion.

You must note, if you know how much Powder will Load a Brass Piece, three
quarters so much will Load an Iron Piece of Ordnance.

SECT. I.
If Weights and Scales be wanting, and Ladles and the Cartredge not marked, yet
to judge a reasonable Charge for any Piece of Ordnance.

The Allowance that may be made for Cannon is two thirds, the Diameter of the
Cylinder for Culverin three Diameters, for the Saker three and a half
Diameters, and for lesser Pieces four Diameters of the Cylinder, which length
will also serve for the Cartredge.

SECT. II.
By the weight of Powder for any one Piece, to find the weight of Powder proper
to any other Piece of Ordnance.

To perform this work you must find by the foregoing Table the Cube of the
Diameter of the bore of the Piece, whose allowance of Powder you know; also the
Cube of the Diameter of the bore of the Piece, whose allowance of Powder you
desire to know: Then say, as the Cube of the known Piece is the quantity of
Powder known, so is the Cube of the Diameter of the unknown Piece to the
quantity of Powder proper to the unknown Piece.

SECT. III.
Practical Experiments concerning the Allowance of Powder necessary to any
Piece in time of Service.

It is always necessary to take care in time of Service of over-loading a
Piece, which Error many run into, only minding the bore of a Piece, and not
minding whether the Metal will bear it, and so endanger themselves and other
standers by. To avoid such errors observe these experienced Rules.

To a Demy-Cannon fortified of Brass about 4400, or a little more, there is
allowed by the Tower 5 ounces and a half of Powder to every hundred weight of
Metal; yet in time of Service Gunners do allow but 3 ounces to every hundred
weight of Metal, which does amount to 10 l..

Demy-Cannon Drake of Iron about 3800 l. is allowed by the Tower 3 ounces and a
half of Powder to every hundred weight of Metal, which will be durable in time
of Service; but there are Drakes of 4400 l. which must be allowed more,
according to the proportion of their weight.

Culverin fortified Brass of 4600 l. is allowed by the Tower 3 ounces and a
half of powder complete to every hundred weight of Metal, which may be burnt in
time of Service with very little abatement.

Culverin Drakes of 4000 l. or thereabouts of Iron, for these Pieces may be
allowed in time of Service 3 ounces to every hundred weight of metal, but
proportionably must be allowed for Pieces of greater or lesser weight.

The 12 Pounders fortified of Brass of 3200 l. for Guns of this weight and
nature is usually allowed 3 ounces and a half for every hundred weight of Metal.

Demy-Culverin Brass of 3300 l. there is allowed by the Tower for Pieces of
Ordnance of this nature 3 ounces and a half and something more, to every hundred
weight of Metal, the which is approved a very sufficient Allowance.

Demy-Culverin Drakes of 2900 l. is allowed by most two ounces three quarters
to each hundred weight of metal, which will be durable in time of Service.

Saker fortified Brass of 2000 l. is allowed 3 ounces and something more for
every hundred weight of Metal, but there may be a small abatement in time of
Service.

CHAP. XXVII.
To know whether a Piece of Ordnante be truly bored or no.

YOu must provide a Pike-staff, about a foot longer than the bore of the Piece,
and at the end thereof fasten a Rammer head, that will just fill all the bore
to the touch hole; and at the other end of the staff, you must bore a hole big
enough to put through a Rod of Iron, which must hand from the same; and at the
other end of the Rod must be made a weight about the bigness of a Saker Shot,
this is done to make the Pike-staff and Rammer head to lie with the same side
upward when they are taken out of the Piece, as they did when they were within
the Piece; then you must put your Instrument thus prepared into the Piece,
letting the Iron Ball (that is at the end of the Rod, which is put through the
hole bored a cross the Pike-staff) hand perpendicular; then take your priming
Iron, or some other bodkin, and put it down the touch hole to the Rammer head,
making a mark therewith; this done, draw out your Instrument, and lay the same
on a long Table, with the Iron Ball hanging off the end perpendicular, as it
did when the Instrument was in the Piece; then observe, whether the mark you
made upon the Rammer head when it was in the Piece, be just upon the uppermost
part of the same, if it be, the bore of the Piece lies neither to the right
hand nor to the left; but if you find it any thing to the right or left hand,
so much lies the bore either to the right or left, and the Piece in Shooting
must be ordered and charged accordingly.

But if you would know whether the bore lie more upwards or downwards, then
bend a Wire at the very end, so that it being put in at the very touch hole,
may ketch at the metal when it is drawn out, then put the Wire down the touch
hole till it touch the bottom of the metal in the Chamber, then holding it in
that place, make a mark upon the wire just even with the touch hole, after draw
up the wire until it ketch at the metal on the top of the Chamber, and holding
it there, make a mark as before; the difference between the two marks is the
just wideness of the Chamber, and the distance between the first mark and the
end of the Wire (having half the Diameter of the Chamber of the Piece
subtracted from it) will leave half the Diameter of the Piece, if the Piece be
true bored; but if the Piece's number be more than half the Diameter of the
Piece, the bore lies too far from the touch hole, and the upper part of the
metal is thickest, but if lesser, the lower part of the metal is thickest or
has most metal.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the necessary Instruments for a Gunner, with several other necessary
things.

A Master Gunner intending upon service, ought most chiefly to be prepared with
these Instruments, as Calabers, Compasses, height board, Sight Rule, Gunners
Scale, and a Gunners quadrant; to divide as well into 12 as 90 equal parts,
with a Geometrical Square, to make Montures, Levels, heights, Breadths,
Distances, and Profundities, (of which you shall read more in the Second Part;)
also with a little brass Level, Scales, Weights, Priming-Irons, Moulds to make
Cross-bar Shot for Muskets, a Book of Accounts, and an Iron wire or Spring,
and a Transome to dispart a Piece of Ordnance; that the Transome may go up and
down according to the Diameter and thickness of the Piece, let the Transom be
long enough to reach the base Ring, from the touch hole. In the next place he
ought to be very expert in the knowledge of cutting out, making up, and
finishing all sorts of Ladles, Spunges, Rammers, Cartredges, etc. For which
purpose you may have Recourse to the foregoing Table. And because it may
sometimes happen by reason of the steepness, badness and unevenness of the way,
you may be driven to dismount and remount your Piece, e're you get up to the
top of a Hill; therefore you must carry with you a Gynn and a Wynch, with all
the appurtenances thereunto belonging; as wind Ropes, an Iron Goats-foot, with
a Crow, Pins, Truckles, Pullies to help you at a dead lift.

CHAP. XXIX.
The making of Rammers, Spunges, Ladles, and Cartredges, Formers, Carriages,
Wheels, Trucks etc. with the Height of Shot fit for any Piece.

FOr the better expedition of this work we have in the former Table showed the
length and breadth of each Ladle, always remembering that you cut each Ladle
somewhat longer, that is, allowing so much more as must be fastened to the
staff, or so much as the staff goes within the Plate.

The Buttons or heads of the Ladles must be near the height of the shot.

For Spunges, the bottoms and heads must be of soft wood, as Birch and Willow,
and to be one Diameter and three quarters in length, and three quarters or very
little less of the height covered with Sheeps skin, and nailed with Copper
nails, so that together they may fill the hollow of the Piece; Let the bottoms
and heads of the Rammers be made of good hard wood, and the height, one
Diameter of the Shot, and the length one third of the Diameter of the Shot.

To make Ladles for Chamber bored Pieces, open your Compasses to the just
Diameter of the Chamber within one eighth part of an Inch, Divide that measure
in two equal parts, then set the measure to one of them, and by that distance
upon a flat or paper draw a Circle, the Diameter of that Circle is one fourth
part shorter than the Diameter of the Chamber; Take three fifths of that Circle
for the breadth of the Plate of the Ladle. But for Cannon, the length ought to
be twice and two third parts, to hold at twice the just Diameter of the Powder.
As for Example,

The Diameter of a Circle drawn for a Cannon whose Chamber bore is 7 Inches,
contains six and three quarters, the circumference whereof is 21 Inches 6/7,
and three fourth parts thereof is 12, and so much ought the Ladle to be in
breadth, and in length 18 parts. By this Rule you may make a Ladle for any
Taper'd Piece.

Take notice for a general observation, that a Ladle 9 balls in length, and two
balls in breadth, will near contain the just weight in Powder, that the Iron
Shot for any piece weighs.

Lastly, for Cartredges, they are generally made of paper Royal or Canvas. Take
the height of the bore of your piece without the vent of the Shot, and cut the
cloth or paper of 3 such heights, for the Cannon in length 3 Diameters, for
the Culverin 4 Diameters, for the Saker and Faulcon etc. half of the height of
their proper bores, and leaving in the midst at the top or bottom one other
such height, to make a bottom for the Cartredge, cutting each side something
larger for Sewing, glewing, or pasting them together; you must have a great
care to augment the goodness of your powder, and likewise the heating of your
Piece, and so augment or diminish the quantity of Powder.

Let your Former be made to your Ordnance to the height of your Shot, and a
convenient length longer than the Cartredge ought to be, and tallow it over
first that the paper may slip off, and then put your paper on your Former. If
you make your Cartredge of Canvas, half a Diameter more is allowed for seams,
but if you make it of paper, half or three quarters of an Inch overplus for
pasting will serve, being lapt once about the Former; having the bottom fitted
upon the end of the Former, which must be hard and close pasted by the lower
side of the Cartredge, then let the lower end of the Cartredge be pasted down
hard round about the bottom, and let them be well dried before you fill them,
and mark them how high they must be filled.

And if you have no Scales nor weights by you for Cannons, put two Diameters
and a half for the height the powder must come, for Culverin 3 Diameters, for
Saker 3 and a half Diameters, for lesser Pieces four Diameters of the Cylinder.

For Carriages of Pieces of Ordnance for Land service the Rules are given thus
one and a half the length of the Cylender is the length of the Carriage, and in
depth four Diameters of the bore of the Piece at the fore end, in the middle
three and a half, and at the end next the ground two and a half, let the
thickness be the Diameter of the Shot, the wheels should be one half of the
length of the Piece in height, but for Saker and Minion you must exceed the
former proportion by one twelfth part, the Faulcon and Faulconet by the sixth
part.

The Naves, the Cheeks called Limbres, and wheels, are usually made of Elm, but
the Transoms, Axeltreces, Fore-Carriage and Cross beams, are made of Oaken
Timber.

For drawing of Guns by men in case horses be wanting, there is usually allowed
to every sixty, eighty, or a hundred weight of metal to one man, according to
the nature of the ground whereon they are to be drawn.

As for Sea Carriages, they are so well known to every Carriage-maker that they
need not to be spoken of.

As for fitting Shot to each Piece, it is the opinion of most Gunners, that
every Piece of Ordnance ought to have its Shot within one quarter of an Inch of
the Diameter of the bore; others do say, that the one and twentieth part of the
Diameter of the Piece's Cylender is more proper and correspondent for all sorts
of Pieces whatsoever; Every man may make choice of that which by experience he
finds best.

CHAP. XXX.
How a Gunner ought to charge a Piece of Ordnance.

HAving showed the complete making of Pieces of Ordnance, and the preparing of
powder and Shot, with the due allowance of powder fit for every Gun, with all
the Instruments and Materials necessarily belonging to a Piece, as to its
Rigging and Loading; It remains now, that we go Artist like to work to charge a
Piece, and order all things for the best convenience, and that the less danger
may follow when you come to Action or Service; and for that purpose having
planted your Piece upon the platform, have in readiness powder, Bullets,
Linstocks, Scowrers, Rammers, and the rest of your things. Stick up your
Linstock to Leeward of you; then to work with your Piece. First, clear your
Piece within with the Scowrer, and see that the touch hole be clear, and not
stopped, and so clear, that no dirt or filth be in the same; Then let him that
is by to assist, (for a Piece cannot be managed by less than two) bring the
Budg-barrel with the powder just before the mouth of your Piece, put then your
Ladle into the same and fill it, and if it be over-full, give it a little jog,
that the overplus may fall down again into the barrel; after this, put it
gently in at the mouth of the Piece, even until the end of the Ladle be thrust
up to the Britch end of the Piece; then must you turn the Ladle gently and
softly, and let it lie within the Chamber of the piece, drawing out your Ladle
almost to the Muzzle of the Piece, put it back again to take up the loose
corns, which were spilt by the way, and to bring them up to the Charge of
powder; this done, the Gunner must draw out his Ladle, and take out of the
Budg-barrel a second Ladle full, (by our former Rules given he must know the
quantity of powder that his Piece will require) and so putting it in the Piece
up to the former Ladle-full, then you may draw it out, and do as you did
before, that no loose corns may lie in the bottom of the Piece; and in drawing
out his Ladle, he must have a care that he let not fall any powder upon the
ground; for it is a thing uncomly in a Gunner, to trample powder under feet.
Then take a wisp of Straw, Hay, or any other thing, and put it hard in at the
mouth of the Piece, then turn your Ladle end for end to come to the Rammer,
thrust it into the Piece after the wisp, and drive it up with it, and it will
carry all the loose corns which possibly may be scattered in the Mold of the
Piece; having driven the wad up to the powder, give it two or three gentle
shoves to make it lie close only, but drive it not too hard least you break
your powder too much, which would hinder its force; The wisp or wad being close
to the powder, draw out the Rammer and put in the Bullet, which roll gently in
the Piece up to the wad that was before put in to keep up the powder; the Shot
being in, put in a second wad after the Bullet, and thrust it also home to the
Bullet. Always remembering whilst the powder is putting in and wadding up, one
be ready at the touch hole and keep it stopped with his thumb, that no powder fly
out at the touch hole, but that it be likewise filled with powder, which may be
supplied out of his powder-horn.

The Gunner that Loads a Piece is to be very careful, and endeavor always not
to stand before the muzzle of his Piece whilst he is loading the Piece, but on
one side of the same, least a danger or mischief might happen to him. And thus
the Piece having its due Charge of Powder and Bullet, he must cover the
touchhole with an Apron made of Lead, or for want of that, with dried
Sheep-skin; then let him level his piece and set away the Budg-barrel of powder
with the rest of his things, in some hollow place under the ground covered over
safe; he must then attend the Gentleman of the Ordnance, or other chief
Commander, their Order or Command, before he give fire.

Touching the Charges of Pieces, I have given full instructions necessary
thereunto, with the weight of powder and Shot for any piece. But to say
something here touching the quantity of powder, proper for a Load; we do find
some difference amongst Authors; Some whereof do maintain, that there ought to
be allowed to every Piece for its Charge so much powder as half the weight of
the Bullet; others are of the opinion, that the more powder is put into a
Piece, the swifter and farther the Bullet will fly, urging many reasons to
prove it. But experience, the Mistress of this Art instructs us better, for
if a Piece be laden with two thirds of the weight of her Shot in powder, it
sends the Bullet or Shot going more swiftly, and will carry it farther, which
has been very many and often times tried, so that at this time, it is without
contradiction.

Again, others do maintain, that if one should forcibly Ram the Bullet, then
the powder might take fire before it cast forth the Bullet, and then would
cause the Bullet to fly farther than otherwise it would do; but you must
consider in so doing, you either endanger the breaking of the piece, or else
the making it crooked and unserviceable; because your ordinary Pieces will not
bear so great a Charge of powder. This has been tried by the Sea side before
his Excellency Prince Maurice, of famous memory, where first one and the same
Piece was Laden with ten pound of fine powder, to see how far She would carry
the Bullet; the place being marked where the Bullet rested. The Piece was
laden again with nine pounds of powder which shot as far as when the Piece was
Laden with ten pounds of powder. But last of all, this piece of Ordnance being
Laden or Charged with 7 pounds of the same powder, it carried her Bullet
further than the two former Shots; whence one may observe that a piece of
Ordnance may be Overcharged, and therefore a good Gunner ought to have a
singular care to give unto his Piece her due measure and Charge.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of the Office and Duty of a Gunner, with all his Properties, Endowments and
qualifications.

HE that intends to be a Master Gunner, and would not abuse himself nor others
of the same profession, must be qualified according to our Instructions
following, viz.

He ought to be well skilled in Arithmetic, and to understand the Extraction
of the Square and Cube Roots, and to have knowledge in Geometry, according to
our Instructions in the second part, whereby he may be able to take heights,
depths, breadths and lengths, and to draw the plot of any piece of ground, to
make Mines and Countermines, Rampars, Baskets of earth, and such like things
used in time of war, as well offensive as defensive.

He ought most chiefly upon Land-Service to be well skilled in the making
Platformers, with Defenses, Troniers, Gabbions, Loops, Parapets of Earth, and
Paggots of 23 or 24 foot high; two foot high of Earth, bed upon bed, unto
eleven foot high, and after three foot Terra plene, to raise the Tronniers and
Loops, so that for the Cannon it be three foot wide in the Barbe, and within
twelve foot wide, without the lower part thereof to descend Scarp-wise, the
better to discover the Enemies avenues and offend them more freely, for
avoiding the blast and Smoke and ruin it would else make: for Culverin two
foot and a half within, and nine foot without will serve; and for less Pieces
the less measure.

If the Battery be to be made with Gabbions, they being filled with Earth
without Stones, moistened and Rammed 7 foot in Diameter, three Ranks between two
Pieces, if the place will permit, or two at least; and three Rows also one
before the other, setting one between two, so that if one Rank will have three,
the second will have two, and the third one; but it will be hard to make a safe
Battery with Gabbions, Cannon or Culverin proof.

Concerning Plat-forms. Let the platform for a Cannon have thirty foot for
reverse, and 27 foot for a Demy-Cannon, and he ought to see that his plat-forms
be even, or rising one foot for 20 foot backward the better to stay the
Reverse, and facilitate the bringing the piece when Laden to the Loop. The
platform ought to be made clean, that no stones or other things lie in the way
for the wheels to run upon, whereby may be hindered the true intent of his Shot.

He must before any service is, examine his Piece of its goodness or defect;
according to our former Instructions given in this behalf, he must also be
furnished with all necessary things for his Artillery, the particulars thereof
we have mentioned in the 29 Chap. but because it takes not up much paper we
will repeat them here again, viz.

Wheels, Trucks, Axeltrees, Ladles, Rammers, Spunges, Worms, Tampions,
height-board, Auger-bit, fitness and roundness of the Shot, Chane-Shot,
Crossbar Shot etc. Canvas or strong paper for Cartredges, Calabers, Compasses,
Sight Rule, Gunners Scale, Quadrant, Scales, Weights, priming-Irons, and Aprons
to cover the Touch hole.

Before he come upon Service, he ought to examine and prove the goodness of his
Powder and Match, and examine it according to the Rules given where we treat of
the Examination of the goodness of Powder.

A Gunner ought to be most careful to see that the Powder be placed safely from
danger of his own, as also the Enemies Ordnance, and to be furnished with
artificial Torches, Dark Lanthorns, with all sorts of Fireworks, of which you
shall have a particular account in the Treatise of Fireworks at the end of
this Book.

He must have by him his Gyn and Winch, Hand-Spikes, Crows, to mount and
dismount Guns at pleasure as occasion may serve, also Coins, Budge-Barrels,
Powder Baskets to carry Shot to your Piece, to keep his Linstocks well armed
with good Match.

He must always have by him a Ruler, Scale, Compasses, to measure the
Diameters or Bore of every Piece, and likewise the length of the Cylinder
within, the better to fit her with due Shot and Proportion of Powder.

He must learn by such Instructions as we have already given, the Names,
Length, Weight, and Fortification of every Piece about the Chamber, and to tell
readily how much Powder is a due Charge for every Piece, and what Shot is
necessary. How many Persons must attend in time of Service, how many Horses or
Oxen will draw a Piece of Ordnance, and in case they be wanting, how many men
will serve. How many pound weight of Shot one man may drive before him in a
Wheel-barrow from place to place.

A Gunner ought chiefly to Charge and Discharge a Piece of Ordnance Artist
like; and when he opens, or orders to be opened the head of a Powder Barrel,
let no Iron Tool be used thereunto for fear of taking or striking fire; for
that purpose therefore it is usual to have wooden Mallets, which will prevent
such dangers.

Every Gunner before he begins to make a Shot, ought to consider that a wad
of Hay, or of untwisted Ropes, will make the Shot shoot wide of the Mark.

He ought to consider whether the Trunions be placed in their due place in the
Carriage, whether the Carriage have its due length, whether one wheel be not
higher than the other, or whether one wheel does not reverse quicker or sooner
than the other, for these will cause the Piece to err, and to shoot wide of
the Mark.

Every Gunner ought to consider, that if his Piece lie point blank or under
Metal, then he ought to put in a sufficient wad after the Shot, to keep it
close to the Powder; for if it should not be close, great danger might follow;
for if the Shot should lodge any distance from the Powder, then in the firing
of that Piece it would break off in that very vacant place between the Shot and
the Powder, and so do damage to himself or standers by. If your Piece be
mounted, you then use no wad at all after the Shot.

Every Gunner ought to have standing by him some Tubs of water to wet his
Spunges in, whereby to cool his Piece in time of Service, as also to be ready
upon occasion to put out any Fire that might happen in time of Service.

Every Gunner ought to try whether his Piece is truly bored or not; if it be
not, he is to take it into consideration, and to order his proportion of
Charge, according to the thinnest part of the Metal, to prevent all danger.

A Gunner ought to take his Observation of the Mark or place he intends to
direct his Shot to, just over the middle of the bore within the Piece, for by
this means he may be able, by his Skill, to make a true Shot in a bad Piece.

A Gunner, that he may the better direct his Shot to the place desired, ought
to consider the difference of the Metal of the Piece at Britch and Muzzle, and
thereby truly how to dispart a Piece, be it either true bored or not. Of
disparting a Piece, I shall show how it may be done several ways in the
following or second part of this Gunnery; where we come to the practical part
of the Art in handling a Piece of Ordnance upon all occasions.

THE Complete Gunner. THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I.
The Description and use of the Geometrical Quadrant, for the taking Heights,
Distances, Depths, etc.

FIrst, you must make a common simple large Quadrant thus with your Ruler, draw
the Line A B, and with the Distance A B in your Compasses upon the Center A
describe the Arch B D, then with the Distance A B, setting one foot of your
Compasses in B, set it off upon the Arch B D, and it will reach to L, divide
the Arch B L into two equal, parts and that will be at E; The distance O L,
being set upwards from L, will reach to D; so then drawing the Line A D, will
make the Quadrant A B D, and the Arch B O L D will be divided into three equal
parts; now every one of those parts must again be divided into three equal
parts, and every one of them into 10 equal parts, so will your Quadrant be
divided into 90 equal parts, called Degrees.

plumb line, quadrant, and compass

Of the Scale.
From any part of the Lines A B and A D, at equal distance from the point A, as
at g and h, raise two perpendicular Lines which will meet in the point m, which
we divide here into 12 equal parts, but may be divided into 100 or a 1000 equal
parts at pleasure, and the more parts they are divided into, the more exact
will your work be; let these Lines g m and h m be marked into the Divisions
from the point A.

Let two sights of Brass be placed upon the Limb of your Quadrant, at the
places marked E and F.

Let the Division upon the Line h m, being next the sights, be (...) right
shadow; the Division upon the side g m, left or contrary shadow.

Let a Line with a Plummet be fitted to your Quadrant falling from the Center
A, as you see in your Figure.

CHAP. II.
The Use of this Quadrant in taking the Perpendicular or direct height, by help
of the Suns shadow.

COnvey the left side of the Quadrant Geometrically toward the Sun, the Thread
and Plummet having their free course, moving it up or down until both your
sights have received the Sunbeams; then if your Thread be found in the twelfth
part, all things that are upright or truly perpendicularly elevated, are equal
in height with their shadows.

If the Thread with the plummet be observed to cut any of those parts next the
sights, called right shadow, between m and h, then every upright thing is more
than the shadow, by such a proportion as 12 exceeds the parts where the Thread
was found.

If the Thread fall upon the first division, then 12 times the shadow is the
height. If it fall upon the second Division, 6 times the shadow is the height.
If it fall upon the third Division, 4 times the shadow is the height. If it
fall on the fourth Division, 3 times the shadow is the height. In the fifth
Division twice and two fifths of the shadow is the height. In the sixth twice,
in the seventh once, and five sevenths in the eighth Division, one and a half
in the ninth, one and a third in the tenth, one and a fifth part in the
eleventh, once and the eleventh part of the shadow is the height on the twelfth
part, then the length of the shadow is the height, as we said before.

Or in few words it may be done thus, Multiply the length of the shadow by 12,
the product divided by the parts in which you found the Thread, your quotient
shows the height.

But if the part cut be on the contrary shadow, that is, if the Thread fall
between g and m, augment then the length of the shadow by the parts declared by
the plummet, and the increase divide by 12, and the product is the Altitude.

woodcut of people using quadrants to measure the height of a tower

Example. In the Foregoing figure it is plainly to be perceived, when the
figure falls upon the 12 Division, the shadow is equal with the thing it
self; In the 6 of the right, it is but half, in the 6 of the contrary it is
twice the height, and so to conclude, as the side in the right exceeds the
parts, so does the Altitude the shadow; and the contrary in the contrary
shadow. Behold the figure 6 where you will find the Thread cutteth 6 parts of
the contrary shadow upon the Quadrant, the shadow B C then being 210 foot,
multiply (as I have said) the length of the shadow 210 foot by 6, the parts cut
by the Thread, and it makes 1260, and that divided by 12 rises 105, which is
the Altitude of such a body, that casts a shadow of 210 feet.

Also the height of any unknown thing may be known by taking the length of its
shadow, and the length of the shadow of any staff set upright whose length is
known, saying, as the length of its shadow is to its height, so the length of
the shadow of the unknown thing is to its height.

CHAP. III.
Without Shadow or any Supputation by your Quadrant Geometrical, to take
heights approachable.

LIft up ingeniously your Quadrant exactly made toward the thing to be
measured, looking diligently through both sights backward or forward, as
occasion is given, until you see the top, so that your Line or Thread fall just
upon the middle of 12 Division; now if you measure your distance from you to
the foot of the Object, which is the point directly under the top, then have
you the Altitude of the highest summitie to the right point or base in height
equal with our standing, adjoining with it the height of your eye downwards.

woodcut of people using a quadrant to measure the height of a tower

CHAP. IV.
With the Aid of two Stations to find out Inapproachable heights.

SEek two Stations going hither and thither, yea, toward or from the thing you
intend to measure, so that in the one place the thread may fall just in 12, and
at the other Station in 6 points of a right shadow; then if you double the
Distance of both places, the Summitie shall appear from that part of the thing
measured, which is equal in height with your Eye; or if your standing be even
with the Base, joining to that double distance the height of your eye, you have
the whole Altitude from the ground, etc. If the one Station cause the Thread to
fall in 12, and the other in 8 of a right Shadow, then triple the Distance
between the two Stations, so have you the height also: Or if the one be in 12,
and the other in 9 of right shadows, then quadruple the distance, the one under
12, and the other under 6 of the contrary shadow, and the place between both
Stations is equal with that you measure, ever understanding from your Eye
upwards.

woodcut of people using quadrants to measure the height of a tower

CHAP. V.
How by the Quadrant, with Calculations, speedily to find all heights
accessible.

YOur Quadrant, as in the former Figure, handsomely elevated against or toward
the thing to be measured, perceiving through both sights just the top, mark
well the Division or points crossed by your Thread, whether it be of the right
shadow, then multiply the distance between you and the foot of the Object by
12, and divide that Sum by the parts cut upon your Quadrant, which your Thread
manifests; and the remainder is the height of the Object from your Eye.

But if the Thread fall upon contrary shadows, work contrarily, that is,
augment it by the part, and divide that Sum by 12; Remembering ever to add the
height of your eye downward to your quotient; so have you your desire, the Base
being equal with your standing.

woodcut of people using a quadrant to measure the height of a tower

Example. Admit the Thread with the plummet note 6 parts of contrary, as you
may see in the foregoing figure, the distance from the base A to your standing
B 115 foot multiplied by 6, so have you 690, which divided by 12 yields 57
(...) foot; to this adjoyn 5 foot (being the height of your eye from the
ground) and so find the Altitude to be 62 foot.

To find what part of your Altitude is Level with your Eye.
Cause the Plummet and Thread to fall upon the side of your Quadrant where the
Degrees begin, which you will find before in the Description of the Quadrant to
be the side A B, and then searching through the Sights that part, that which
you can spy of your Altitude (the plummet hanging upon the said Line A B) is
level with your Eye^ the height whereof from the base compared with the
Altitude of your Eye, discovers the inequality or difference of the ground,
that is to say, how much higher or lower the base of the thing to be measured
is than the ground at your Station, which difference, as you shall see cause,
added or subtracted from your heights found as is before declared, yields
most exactly the true Altitude: And thus you may be assured never to err, how
unequal or uneven soever the ground be.

You may also by two things of one length joined thus in a right Angle, find
the Altitude of any thing.

Let the end C be applied to your Eye, then go two lines forming a right angle
backward or forward as you shall see cause, till you can espy the top and Base
of your Altitude by the Extremes A B; and in so doing, the distance between
your foot and the Base is equal to the height, without adjoining the Altitude
of your eye, which in all the rest before showed is required. Only here you
must take heed so to couple A B and C D, that in beholding the Altitude, your
Line A B may depend perpendicular or parallel to the height. In like sort may
you mete the distance of any two things in sight, and that exactly, if you use
discretion in placing A B, that it be always parallel to the thing measured,
which may easily be done by help of a Line and Plummet upon the side A B.

CHAP. VI.
To Measure the Distance any place is from the top of a Castle or Work.

THis Work is Performed as the former in the 2d. Chap. only here with a Plummet
and Line we take the height or depth from the top of the Castle A, to the foot
of the Castle B; and suppose that to be equal to the distance there taken, and
the distance B C equal to the height, and then work by the Rules there given,
and you will find the distance C B. This is so plain there needs no Example.

CHAP. VII.
To get the Length or Distance of any place or Mark in sight, be it never so
far, without Instrument.

AMongst many practices I find this the onliest way to obtain our desire
without the help of an Instrument, yet in this is necessarily required to have
ground enough at liberty on one side. Then begin thus; at the beginning of your
Length set up a staff or mark that may be seen afar off, then go from it
Orthogonal or Square-wise on which side you will 200 foot; the more ground the
better; Put up there a staff also: now convey your self to the first staff or
mark, going back from it 300 foot, more or less, at your pleasure, set up there
a third staff so, that the first mark or staff and it agree all in a straight
Line from your sight to the farthest part of your length by the judgment of
your eye; now go side-wise from thence as far in a right Angle, until the
second mark offer it self aright between the extreme part of your length and
sight, and there put the fourth staff. All this performed, seek out the
distance between the first staff and the Second, and that name your first
distance; then the distance between the first and third, name your second
distance; Again, the distance between the third and fourth staff is the third
distance. Deduct your first distance from the third, so remains the Divisor;
then multiply your third distance by your second, and the product divide by
your Divisor, the quotient shows the true length from the third staff to the
fortress or mark desired: for plainness behold the figure.

triangle with labeled angles and sidse, a castle wall at its apex

Example. Here this Letter A represents the Castle, being the distance to be
measured; B is your first staff; C the second staff, differing from B the first
Orthogonal 100 foot; D the third staff, being distant back from the first in a
Right line with the mark A 133 foot; E is the fourth staff, running sidewise
Orthogonally, or in a Square, from the third, until the farthest part of your
length A, is perceived in a right Line with the second staff at C; and this
distance D E let be 120 foot. Now by Substraction take 100 from 120, there
remains for a Divisor 20; then multiply 133 by 120, so rises 15960, which
divided by 20, and there comes 798 foot, the true distance between D and A,
from which if you abate A B 133, there remains B A your propounded distance.

But forasmuch as this conclusion is to be done without Instrument, and here
Orthogonal motions sidewise is required, it shall be requisite also to declare
how an Orthogonal or Right angle is upon a sudden to be made; ye shall
therefore (according to Pythagoras's Invention mentioned among the Definitions
at the beginning of this Book) take 3 Staves, Cords, or such like, making the
one 4 such parts, as the other is 3, and the third 5; This done, conjoyn their
ends together, and the angle subtended of the longest staff is a right, which
first placed at B, and after at D, directing one of his comprehending sides to
A, the other shall guide you to C and E; or if you desire with more expedition
to dispatch, and not to tarry the proportioning of Cords, or such like, to this
Pythogarick Rule, take any 3 Staves, Sticks, or Threads, and conjoyn them,
making a Triangle, it matters not of what form or fashion they be, (...)
placing one angle thereof at B, turning one side to A, direct your self
sidewise to the other, always remembering to place the same angle at D, and
departing sidewise again in like manner, in all the rest do as before is
declared. Thus using any mean diligence, yuo shall most exactly measure any
distance.

CHAP. VIII.
With Halbeards, Pikes, or any Staves, having no other Instrument, you may
measure the Distance between any two Towers, Castles, or other Marks, lying in
a right line from you, not coming near any of them.

YOu must first (as we have declared in the last Chapter) prepare a Triangle,
with joining any three Staves, or such like, together, which you must (at your
standing) place in such sort, that one of the sides containing the Angles, may
lie directly toward the Mark: Then setting up a Staff, Pike, or other Mark
there, depart sidewise, as the other side of your Angle shall direct you, so
far as you list, the more ground the better, and there set up your second Staff
or Mark; then go directly back from your first Staff (always keeping it
exactly between your sight and the Mark) as many score again, or Pike lengths,
as you list, setting up a third staff; this done, you shall place the same
Angle you used at your first Staff now again at your third staff, in all points
as it was before; the one side of the Angle lying directly toward the first
Staff, the other side will show you whither you shall go to place your fourth
Staff; for passing still in a right line with that side of your Angle, you
shall at the last find the second justly situated between you and the farthest
Mark, and there set up the fourth Staff; then remove your Angle again to the
second Staff, and placing there as before, the one side even with the first
Staff, pass on in a right line with the other, until you come directly between
your nearest Mark and the fourth Staff, and there pitch up the fifth.

woodcut offering bird's-eye view of fortifications, overlaid by triangles with
labeled angles

Now you must measure how many Paces, Halbeards, or Pikes length, are between
your first and second Staff, deducting that from the distance between the third
and fourth, and the Remainder shall serve you for a Divisor; then multiply your
distance between the second and fifth Staff by the distance between the third
and fourth, the product divide by your reserved Divisor, and it yields in the
Quotient the true distance between these two Marks. See the foregoing Figure.

Example.
Let A B be the two Marks, whose distance I would measure; my standing place
where I set up my first Staff, I; in the middle, my Triangle made of three
Staves, Halberds, Bills, or any such like things, K L M; the Staves or Halberds
of which I make my Triangle N, which I first place at C, secondly at D, thirdly
at E; and note, at C and D the situation of the Triangle is all one, but at E
it somewhat differs, as you may behold in this Figure, which I would have you
note, lest happily you be deceived in your practice.

C E the distance between the first and third, deducted from D F the distance
between the second and fourth, there remains H F your Divisor; which measured,
I admit 50 Halberds lengths, the distance between G E 30 Halberds lengths, the
space between D F 100 Halberds length, now 100 multiplied by 30 produces 3000,
which divided by 50, leaves in the Quotient 60. I conclude therefore the
distance between A and B to be 60 Pikes lengths.

This one thing is to be taken notice of especially, that whatsoever you mete
the space G E withal, that you use the same in measuring H F; and as for D F
it matters not what you measure it withal, for your Quotient shall bear the
same denomination. Preciseness is to be used in placing of your Triangle, and
in measuring E G, and H F, otherwise error may ensue; especially if D F be but
a small distance, and the Angle at B very sharp. There needs in this matter
no further admonition, small Practice will resolve all doubts.

CHAP. IX.
To measure the distance between any two Forts, Castles, or other places,
howsoever they be situated, though there be Rivers, or such like Impediments
between, that you cannot approach nigh any of them; and that without an
Instrument also.

LEt your Angles, as before has been said, be prepared of any three Staves,
etc. you shall first at pleasure set up one Staff, and applying thereunto your
Angle in such sort, that the one containing side lie directly to one of the
Marks (which here for distinction sake I will call the first) go backwards too
and fro until you find your second Mark precisely covered with your Staff,
nothing what part of the line or side subtending the Angle it cuts by your line
visual, and there make a fine notch or mark upon that subtending Staff; which
done, you shall go sidewise from the first erected Staff, as the other
containing side of your Triangle will direct you, so far as you list, and then
set up your second Staff; yet pass on from thence in a right line with that
containing side of your Angle that rises from your Staves, and comes somewhat
toward the Mark, and go so far until you spy your self just between your third
Staff and your first mark, there set up your fourth Staff; then resort to your
Angle again, and standing behind the second Staff, note whither a right line
from the Angle to that notch (before made on the subtendent Staff or side of
the Triangle) will direct you, for that way precisely shall you go on until you
come in a right line with the second and third Staff, and erect there the fifth
Staff; this done, measure the distance between the second and third Staff,
reserving that for a Divisor; then multiply your distance between the first and
third Staff, by the distance between the fourth and fifth Staff, the product
divide by your reserved Divisor, and it yields in the Quotient the true
distance between the two marks.

trapezoids with labeled angles

Example.
Let A B be the distance I would know, C my first Station where the first Staff
is erected; I my Triangle made of three Staves, and placed at the Station C,
directed with one of the containing sides to A, which is the first mark, as you
may see in the Figure, and with the other side to D and E the second and third
Staves; H is the notch or mark upon the side subtended to the Angle, where the
line visual from C passes to the second mark B; my Triangle now I situate at
D, as it was before at C, the one contained side lying even with the erected
Staves, the other directed to my fourth Staff F, placed in a right line with E
the third Staff, and A the first mark. Again, my line visual proceeding from D
to H, the notch in the subrended side of the Angle is extended to my fifth
Staff G, situated exactly between E the third Staff, and B the other mark:
This done, I measure the distance between my second and third Staff, finding it
20 foot; likewise between the fourth and fifth Staff, and find it 72 foot;
finally between the first and third Staff 65 paces; so that according to the
Rule before given, multiplying 65 by 72, I have 4680. which divided by 20,
yields in the Quotient 234, and so many paces is there between A and B.

I have not set out the Figures in just proportions answering to these numbers,
for that is not requisite, but in such form as may best open and make manifest
the situation of the Staves and Triangle, wherein consists all the difficulty
of this Practice.

CHAP. X.
How you may readily find out the distance to any Tower, Castle, Forts, etc. by
help of the former Quadrant.

LEt the Quadrant be made upon a square Board as is there marked A D B Q. Let D
B be divided into 90 Degrees or equal parts; and instead of the 12 equal parts,
or right and contrary shadows, g m and h m, let the two sides D Q and B Q be
divided each into 1200 equal parts, or as many as you please, and marked from
the Center A, and have a Ruler or Index to be moved round upon the Center A^
having two sights upon it, set just upon the feducial line of the Index, and
let it be divided into such equal parts as the Lymb B Q, or D Q.

Let this Instrument thus fitted be handsomely placed upon its Staff, or
otherwise, lay the feducial of your Index upon the beginning of the Degrees of
the Quadrant, and turn your whole Instrument (the Index not moved) till you may
espy through the sight your mark, then remove your Index to the contrary side
of the Quadrant, placing the line feducial on the side line where the degrees
end, and look through the sights, and in that very line set up a mark a certain
distance, the farther the better; this done, take away your Instrument, and set
up a Staff there, and remove the Instrument to the mark you espied; set your
Index on the beginning of the Degrees, moving your whole Instrument, till you
find through the Sights the Staff at the first Station, then remove your Index
(your Quadrant keeping its place) till you may again espy through the Sights
your mark; which done, note the Degrees cut by the line feducial, and then work
thus, upon some even smooth Superficies, whether it be Board, Plate, or Paper:
Draw first a straight line, and open your Compasses to some small distance,
call that space a score, and make so many such divisions upon your Line as
there is scores between your Stations; then upon the end of your line raise a
perpendicular, and fixing one foot of your Compasses at the other end, opening
it to what wideness you please, draw an Arch rising from the same line that
represents your Stationary distance, and dividing it into 90 equal parts or
Degrees (as you was taught in the making your Quadrant) extend from the Center
to the number of Degrees cut by your feducial line, a right line, until it
concur with the perpendicular before erected; then see how much of that space
(which represents the score in dividing your Stationary distance) is
contained in the perpendicular; so many score is the mark off from your first
Station, and by dividing the Hypothenusal line, you may find the Distance from
the second Station.

Example.
A the first Station, C the second, D the mark, A C 80 paces, Degrees of the
Quadrant cut by the line feducial at the second Station is 71 d., and H is the
unity or measure representing one score, E F 4 parts, G F 12, G E 12, or
thereabouts: Thus may you conclude the mark to be distant from the first
Station 12 score paces; the Hypothenusal line or distance of the mark from the
second Station, 12 score and 13 paces.

See the Figure.
woodcut of person using quadrant to measure distance between cannons and city
walls

To perform this Work by Calculation.
In the foregoing Figure, B is the place to be measured, A the mark where I
first disposed my Instrument, from it I go Orthogonally to C, the Index suppose
cuts there 400 in the right side of your square; the distance between B and C,
I have supposed 80 paces; wherefore multiply 1200 by 80, and there comes
96000, which divided by 400, declares unto me 240 paces, the true length from
A to B. Or by dividing 1440000, the square of 1200, with 400 the parts cut, you
shall produce in the Quotient 3600, your proportionable part found by the Rule
of Reduction, which augmented in 80, yields 288000, and that divided by 1200,
brings in the Quotient 240, which is the length A B agreeing with the former
operation.

But if you would find C B, or the Hypothenusal line, being the distance
between the second Station and the mark; then by the former Table of Squares,
or with your Pen, find the Square of A C, and the Square A B the distance
already found from the first Station, these two Squares added together, the
Square Root of that Sum is the distance C B, viz. 253 paces; or if the Sum of
the Square of A B and A C be sought for in the Table of Squares, you will find
against it 253 paces, the length of C B, which was to be found; for the Square
of A B more, A C is always equal to the Square of C B, and the Square of C B
less, the Square A C is equal to the Square of A B.

CHAP. XI.
To measure the distance between any two marks that lie in one right line from
the Eye.

THis may be resolved by the former Proposition, measuring how far either
distance is from your self, and then deduct the one from the other; or thus,
another way, the side of your Geometrical Square directed toward them, depart
Orthogonally, as is before declared, 100 or 200 paces at your pleasure, but the
more the better; then place your Instrument again, turning the side of it
toward the first Station, remove then the Index to either marks, nothing what
parts at either place the Index does cut of the Scale; and if the Index at both
times falls on the left side, deduct the lesser from the greater; with the
number remaining, augment this distance between your Stations, and dividing by
the whole side of the Scale, your Quotient is the distance. If the Index fall
on the right side at either time, then must you by the Rule given in the Ninth
Chapter, reduce them into proportional parts; or if at one time it fall on the
left side, and at another time on the right, then shall you only reduce the
parts cut on the right side; which done, deduct as before is said, the lesser
from the greater, and with the remainder multiply your distance Stationary, the
product divided by 1200, yields how far one mark is beyond another.

Behold the Figure.
woodcut of person using quadrant to measure distance between cannons and city
walls

Example.
Admit A B the marks in a right line from C your first Station, D the second
Station Orthogonally situated from C, where your Square being placed, suppose
your Index first cut 800 parts on the left side, and after 900 parts on the
right side; you must divide the Square of 1200 by 900, as was taught in the
former Chapter; so will your Quotient amount to 1600, from which if you
withdraw 800, the parts cut on the left side, there will remain 800, which
multiplye^ by 200 paces, the distance Stationary C D, there amounts 160000,
this divided by 1200, yields in the Quotient 133; therefore the distance from
A B, your mark, is 133 paces, 1 foot, and 8 inches.

CHAP. XII.
To measure the Distance between any two marks lying in one plain level ground,
howsoever situated, without Arithmetic.

THis at two Stations may be done, as we have done before; but we will here
suppose but one Station, knowing the distance from that Station to each place,
and the Angle it makes with each Station; then by help of a pair of Compasses,
and any line of equal parts, this is most easily wrought, as is well known to
small Practitioners in this Art, it being also the 4th Question in Right-lined
Oblique Triangles.

I did intend to show the working of every one of these Questions by
Logarithms; but considering a Gunner has not always such Tables by him (and
if he have them and understands right-lined Triangles, doubtless he may easily
apply them to this work) I therefore thought what I have done in this case to
be sufficient.

CHAP. XIII.
The Description of an Instrument, whereby to plot out any Coast, Country, City
or Garrison, and to take the distance to every Remarkable Object.

THis Instrument is four square, with a Circle in the middle, divided into 360
equal parts or degrees. Let the division of the square be from 1 to 100, or as
many as you can; you must also have fixed to it an Index, with sight upon the
same, as you may see by the Figure following in the next Page. It is called a
Circumferenter or Geometrical Square.

To draw a Plot of any Coast or Country in such sort that you may readily tell
how far any place is distant from you, or one from another.
YOu must ascend some high Tower, Hill, Cliff, or other place, from whence you
may commodiously behold on every part those places you intend a Plot of, there
set up your Instrument upon its staff, and in such sort place it by help of
your Needle, that the four Semi-Diameters stand due East, West, North, and
South; then turn your Index to Town, Village, Haven, Road, or such like,
espying through the Sights the middle or most notable mark in them, noting
withal in a Table by it self the degrees cut by the Index in your Instrument,
which we call the Angles of position, and so make a Table of the first Station.
Then search out square inscribed by a circle, its circumference divided into
360 degrees with your Eye, viewing round about, some other lofty place, from
whence you may behold again all these places, for that shall be your second
Station, and turning thereunto the Index of your Instrument, note what degree
it touches; this done, remove your Instrument thither, and place it in all
respects as 'twas before, and turning the Diameter or Index of your Instrument
to every place, espying through the Sight all such marks as you saw before,
noting again the degrees ^ut, or Angles of position, writing the names of every
place, and its degree by it; so have you a Table also of your second Station;
with these Tables you shall resort to some plain smooth superficies of Board,
Parchment, Paper, or such like, and thereon describe a large Circle, divide it
into 360 degrees, like to the Circle of your Instrument; then from the Center
thereof to every degree noted in your first Table, extend straight lines,
writing upon every one of them the name of his place; and upon that line that
represents your second Station fix one foot of your Compasses, opening the
other at pleasure; and draw another Circle, and divide it also into 360
degrees, and from the Center thereof extend right lines to every degree noted
in your second Table, writing as before upon every one of them the name of
their places or marks; finally, you shall note diligently the concourse or
crossing of every two like lines, making thereon a star or such like mark, with
the names of the place^ thereunto belonging. Now if you desire to know how far
every of these Towns, Villages, etc. are distant from each other, you shall do
thus, measure the distance between your Stations by Instrument or otherwise, as
you have been before taught, and divide the right line between the Centers of
your Circles into so many equal parts or portions as there are Miles, Furlongs,
or Scores, between your Stations; then opening your Compasses to one of those
parts, you may measure from place to place, always affirming so many Miles,
Furlongs, or Scores (according to the denomination of that one part whereunto
you opened your Compasses) to be between place and place, as you find by
measuring there are parts.

Example.
There is a Sea Coast having sundry Harbors, Towns, Villages, Castles, and
such like situated thereon, whose Plot in due proportion I require, with the
exact distances of every place one from the other.

Having therefore elected a lofty ^eat, from whence I may behold all these
places (my Instrument situated as is declared) removing the Index to a Castle
that is farthest, being a Castle standing in the mouth of a Haven, having
received it through my Sights, the line fiducial of my Index cutteth 30
degrees; then I remove it to the next, being a Village or Fish Town, and the
Index cutteth 50 degrees, and so round to all the rest; and thus I shall have
the Table of my first Station, as follows,

The Table of my first Station.
Degrees. The Castle. 30 The Village. 50 The City. 75 The Eastern Head of the Bay.
95 The Western Head of the Bay. 97 The Fort within Land. 130.

This done, I behold another Hill or high place; from whence I may in like
manner view all those places, and turning my Index thereunto, I find the Line
fiducial lying upon 180 Degrees; then carrying my Instrument thither, and
placing it in all points there, as it was at the first Station, I turn my Index
again to my first Mark or Castle, and find it to cut in 15 Degrees, at the
second 25, etc. as you may see in this second Table.

The Table of my second Station.
Degrees. The Castle. 15 The Village. 25 The City. 40 The Eastern Head of the Bay.
50 The Western Head of the Bay. 55 The Fort within Land 80.

With these Tables I repair to a Paper, Parchment, etc. and by the former Rules
draw the Figure following.

various labeled angles

Having thus completed your Plot, and found the distance between A and B to be
5 miles, make a Scale according to that distance, divide it into miles and
parts, and with it you may measure your distance from place to place, or the
distance from any of your Stations to each place, according as you have
occasion.

Thus passing or changing your Station, you may make several Plots, containing
the true proportion and distance of Towns, Villages, Ports, Roads, Hills,
Rivers, and all other notable places throughout a whole Realm.

Thus I suppose we have writ all such propositions of measuring of heights,
distances, and profundities, etc. as may be necessary to our work. We will next
come to the more Practick part, of mannaging a Piece of Ordnance to do the best
Service.

CHAP. XIV.
The Description and use of the Gunners Scale.

THis Scale is made according to the Diameter of our English Ordnance, not
above 8 inches long, being the Diameter of a Cannon Royal; they are generally
made of Box, Pear Tree, or Brass, any well seasoned Wood that will not warp may
serve: Upon one side I have set the names of all sorts of Ordnance; and in the
Angle of meeting with the names, is the Angle at the Bore; and between that and
the next less Diameter, is the common length of such a Piece; and upon the step
of breadth is the number of paces these Pieces shoot point blank; and right in
the Angle of meeting, betwixt the two Diameters, with the Angle of meeting with
the names, is first the weight of the Gun, the breadth of the Ladle, the
length, weight of the Charge of Powder, the Diameter of the Shot, weight of the
Shot, and a line of inches, and tenth parts of an inch. The Backside is also
divided into inches and quarters of inches, and over them is showed the weight
of every Iron Shot answerable to those inches, with the tables for types of
shot and types of cannon, two eight-inch rulers, and a quadrant Edward Fage in
Hosier Lane Londini Fecit
weight of the like Bullet in Lead and Stone; each being distinguished. You may
also if you please have upon this side the Gunners Quadrant, and such other
things as you shall think fit, as you may see in this Figure following, where
all things are distinguished by their Names, and need no more Explanation.

You will observe by this Instrument, that the Ladle is but 3 Diameters of the
Shot in length, and part of the Circumference, from the Cannon to the whole
Culvering, and the charge of Powder will be found to be about 2 Diameters of
the Piece; from the Culvering to the Minion, the Charge may fill 2 Diameters
and a half; and from the Minion to the Base 3 Diameters; but of this matter we
have spoke at large in the first part of this Book; but there having left out
the Table of Periors and Drakes, I thought good here to insert it.

A necessary Table of Periors and Drakes proportioned.
Names of Pieces. Height of the bore in inches. Length in Diameter. Weight in
met. pound. Weight of Powder. Length of the Ladle. Canon Perior. 9. 10. 12. 8
3500 3, 3 ^/^ 4 3 D. Canon Drake. 6 16 3000 9 pound. 4 Culvering Drake. 5 16
2000 5 4 D. Cul. Drake. 4 16 1500 3 4 Saker Drake. 3 18 1200 2 4

CHAP. XV. How to make a true Dispart of any true bored Piece of Ordnance.
KNow first, that to dispart a Piece of Ordnance, is no otherwise than to bring
the Diameter at Muzzle to be equal to the Diameter at the Base Ring; in true
founde^ Ordnance, half of the Diameter of the Cylender is the dispart; but more
generally it may be done thus, Gird the Piece round about the Britch with a
thread, after do the like by the Muzzle Ring, lay these two strings straight
upon a Table at length, and make two marks for the length of each string;
divide the distance between each of these two marks into 22 equal parts with
your Compasses, and 7 of them are their Diameters; then measure how much each
Diameter is in length, and substract one Diameter from the other, then take the
just half of the difference, and that is the true dispart of your Piece in
inches, and part of an inch.

But these Diameters are better and more artificially taken with a pair of
Crallipars, as we have showed before in taking the Diameter of a Shot, and then
measured upon your Scale of inches and parts, will give you the true Diameters
of the Piece both at Britch and Muzzle, with which work as above.

Also you may find the true dispart of a Piece thus; Put a small Wire or
priming Iron in at the Touchhole of the Piece to the bottom of the Concave;
then mind what part of that Iron is even with the Base Ring, and make a mark
there; then take it out and apply it to the Muzzle, and place it upon the lower
edge of the Concave of the Piece as upright as you can, and mind what part of
the Iron or Wire is even with the upper part of the Muzzle Ring, and there make
a mark; for the difference between these two marks, is the true dispart of the
Piece: or after you have placed your Iron upon the Muzzle as before, cause a
dispart to be raised so high as that mark which was made upon the Iron when
'twas put down the Touchhole.

If from the top of the dispart a fine thread or line be carried to the Muzzle
Ring, you will see how high you may make a dispart at the Trunions.

Or thus a dispart may be made at the Trunions; lay a piece of soft Wax upon
the Trunions, and let one raise it high, or depress it, until that the Metal at
the top of the Base Ring, the Wax between the Trunions, and the dispart of the
Muzzle, be all three of one height precisely; but the former way with a thread
is more exact.

A Piece of Ordnance may be disparted thus; take two sticks (each of them must
be longer than the Piece) and also make a Plummet of Lead to hang in a small
thread made fast to one end of the stick, which lay cross the top of the Base
Ring, to and fro, until the Plummet descending from the end thereof, may just
touch the side of the Metal of the said Ring; then keeping fast the stick in
that place, hang your Plummet down by the other side of the stick, until it on
the otherside just touch the Metal of the Base Ring; when you have done, cut
off the stick just in that place by which the Plummet descended,
perpendicularly, and this length is the just Diameter of the Base Ring; after
this manner you must proceed to take the Diameter at the Muzzle. Then lastly,
set these two sticks together even at one end, and mark their difference in
length or height; for just half of that difference is the dispart of that Piece.

I would advise all Sea Gunners upon some occasions to use Disparts between the
Trunions of their Pieces, made of a just height, on purpose to serve that
place, by the method we have even now prescribed, and let them be tied about
the Piece with a twine, because else at every Shot they will be to seek, when
upon a sudden they should use them, and they will much avail and stand them in
great stead. I could express other ways, only I think these sufficient.

CHAP. XVI.
How to give Level with a Piece of Ordnance to make a Shot at any Mark
assigned.

SEt your dispart on the Muzzle Ring, just over the Center of the mouth of the
Piece, which you may best do by putting a stick cross the bore, and dividing it
into two equal parts; then with a Plumb line hanging over the mouth of the
Piece, being guided by the divided stick, you shall have good aim where to set
your Dispart; this being done, go to the Base Ring, if the Piece be true bored,
then find which is the highest part, and middle of that Ring; but if the Piece
be not true bored, then find which part of the Base Ring is just over the
Cylender, and take that for your true line: when you have found out the
dispart, and placed it, and also found what point in the Base Ring is to answer
to it, then make some very small mark on the Base Ring in that place, hold your
head about two foot from the Base Ring, and there you may best observe, as the
Piece is traversing, when you are in a direct line with the mark; this done,
give one of your men order to raise and fall the Piece with his Hand-spike as
you shall appoint him, until you can, holding your head two foot from the
Britch of the Piece, with your eye perceive the mark at the Base Ring, and the
top of the dispart in a direct line with the mark you must shoot at; at that
instant stop the motion of the Piece with a Coin, that it may remain as you
have directed it; then Prime your Piece, and give fire.

two cannons firing at a tower, and a cannon in the tower firing at a church
The way of Shoting Mira Comme; or by the metal of the piece. 412. Paces.
Shooting punctually, Levill by a dispart 206. Paces. 248 4/10 paces, right
Rainge folio 72: 73.



Before you place your Dispart, you are to take notice whether the ground be
Level whereon the Wheels of the Gun stand, or if they be not one higher than
the other, and if the Trunions stand just over the Axeltree of the Wheels or
no; whether one Trunion lie higher on the Carriage than the other: whether the
Gun be truly placed in the Carriage or not; that is, that it be not nearer one
side than the other: whether the Carriage be truly made according to the
direction we have already prescribed in the first part; whether the Axeltree be
placed just cross the Carriage or not.

CHAP. XVII.
How, if a Shot do carry to the right or to the left, under or over the mark,
by reason of some known fault, to amend it in making the next Shot.

AFter you have made one Shot, and find the Piece carry just over the mark,
then do all that has been taught again, and when your Piece lies directly
against the mark, observe how much the last stroke of the Shot is above the
mark, so much longer make your dispart, that the top of it may be just seen
from the Britch of the Piece, in a direct line with the stroke of the Shot;
when it is of this length, then level your Piece with this new dispart to the
assigned mark, Give fire, and without doubt it will strike the same.

If the first Shot strike under the mark, then bring the Piece in all points as
before to pass, mark how much of the dispart is over the stroke of the Shot,
and cut it just so short, as being at the Britch you may discern the top of it,
with the mark on the Base Ring and stroke of the Shot in a just right line, and
when you perceive it is of such a length, level the Piece to the assigned mark,
as at the first, then Prime and Give fire.

If the first Shot strike on the right hand of the mark, to mend it you must
level the Piece as formerly; you standing behind the Britch of the Piece,
observe the stroke of the Shot over the dispart, and that part of the Base Ring
as you at that instant look over in a right line toward the dispart, and the
stroke of the Shot, set up in that place a Pin with a little soft Wax on the
Base Ring; so this Pin will be in a right line with the dispart and stroke of
the Shot: This being done, level your Piece to the mark assigned by this Pin
and the dispart, and without question you will make a fair Shot; for when you
level by the Metal of the Base Ring where the Pin is placed, and the mark of
the Piece standing at that direction, look over the top of the dispart from the
notch in the Base Ring, and you shall find it to lie just so much to the left,
as the former Shot struck to the right, from the assigned mark, which should in
all likelihood now strike the mark.

But if a Shot be both too wide and too low, then you must use both the
directions above taught, to make the next Shot: first regulate the dispart by
cutting it shorter, according as the Shots mark is lower than the assigned
mark; when this is done, then proceed to my directions to mend shooting wide,
and these things performed with care and diligence, cannot choose but mend a
bad Shot.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of shooting at Random at a Mark beyond the right line of the Pieces reach, or
right Range of a Shot; and the way of framing a Table of Randoms, by help of
the Gunners Quadrant.

FOr the effecting of this matter, we must have a Quadrant with a Thread and
Plummet (which is described in the first Chapter of this second Section) to one
side of this Quadrant; so that one end of the Ruler may go into the Cavity of
the Piece, and let a Piece of Lead be fastened to the end of the Rule, to make
it lie close to the bottom of the Metal within, the Quadrant hanging without,
and the Plumb-line swaying or hanging down from the Center of the Quadrant,
perpendicular to the Horizontal line; for the Quadrant being thus placed, you
may mount a Piece to what degree you shall find fit to shoot by.

Now every one that will learn to shoot at Random, must draw his Piece on a
level ground, where first shooting level, he must observe that distance in feet
or paces, then mount his Piece to one degree, and mark where that shall graze;
thus finding the distance of every degree from the level to the tenth degree,
by these distances make a Table, to which annex the degrees against the
distance; by which Table you may (using the Art of Proportions) find how far
another Piece will convey her Shot from degree to degree, and in Loading your
Piece for this work you must have your Powder exactly weighed, and likewise the
Wad, and let the Piece cool of it self, and this you must do every time; and if
the Piece be mounted, there needs no Wad after the Shot; also you must have a
special care of the strength of the Powder, and let the Powder equally, and
with the same force and strength be pressed home, as near as possible you may.

CHAP. XIX.
An effectual way to make a Shot out of a Piece of Ordnance at Random.

HE that intends to be expert at these things, ought principally to endeavor,
at one time or another, to obtain so much liberty of his Superior Commanders,
as to make two, three, or more Shot with the Piece he chooses, or intends for
most Service; then must he measure the distance from the Platform to the first
graze of the Shot; and must apply it to the Table, which I have here inserted,
being the experience of such as have been knowing Gunners. But first I shall
set down Mr. Nigh of Worcester's Experiment, not as he is Mathematician, as he
writes himself (which Title none of our Learned Mathematicians of England do
assume) but as he was a Practical Gunner, and made these several experiments
upon four several degrees of Mounture, viz. 1 degrees. 5 degrees. 7 degrees. 10 degrees. from
thence was found these Randoms.

At 1 degree, the Shot did light from the Piece or place of standing 225 paces.

At 5 degrees, the Random was 416 paces.

At 7 degrees, the Random was 505 paces.

At 10 degrees the Random was 630 paces.

And by these Experiments a Table may be framed according to this Rule. As the
known degree of Mounture, is to the number of paces the Piece carries; so is
the number of degrees proposed, to the distance required.

The use of this Table will plainly appear in one only Example.

A Table of Randoms.
Degrees. Paces. 0 206 1 225 2 274 3 323 4 370 5 416 6 461 7 505 8 548 9 589 10
630

Suppose you make trial of your Piece of Ordnance, according to the method
prescribed in the last Chapter, and find that at 6 degrees of Random upon a
level ground, the Shot is conveyed 619 paces, and you are to ply your Piece
against a place which lies beyond the point blank, the distance being 498
paces, to know the degree the Piece must be elevated too, do thus; in this
Table of Randoms against 6 degrees, there is 461 paces; then say as 619 paces
is to 461, so is 498 to 375; which number, or the nearest to being sought, in
this Table is 370, and stands against 4 degrees, but because it is not exactly
the same number, you must find out the part of a degree or minute, by a Table
of proportional parts; but if the mark you shoot at be lower or higher than
your Platformer, then you must add or substract so many degrees or minutes from
the degrees and minutes found, and the remainder is the degree you ought to
mount your Piece to.

Now that we may be understood well, we must know that there are two sorts of
Ranges or Motions of a Shot, of which you may see more in Chap. 20. the one is
called the Right Range, and the other is termed the Curved or Crooked Range,
and these two there termed a Compound Range, is called the Dead Range, that is
to say, the whole distance from your Platform from whence the Shot was made, to
the place where the Bullet first grazes; yet the perpendicular descending of
the Bullet is also called the Natural motion, as you may see by the figure
hereafter placed. Captain Hexham in his Book of Gunnery, shows how by finding
out the Random of a Cannon for the first degree of Mounture to find the Random
for every degree to 45 degrees, which is the utmost Random, after this manner;
First, find out how many paces the Cannon will shoot, being laid level by the
Metal (which he accounts for one degree of Mounture) divide this distance by
50, then multiply the Quotient by 11, and that will bring out the number of the
greatest digression or difference between Range and Range, which being divided
by 44, the Quotient will show the number of paces which the Bullet will loose
in the other Ranges from degree to degree. Example. A Battering Cannon being
laid by the Metal, will shoot his Bullet (as he says) 1000 ordinary paces, two
foot and a half to each pace; which being divided by 50, the Quotient will be
20, which multiplied by 11, is 220 paces, which is the number of the next
digression made in the second degree: which 220 divide by 44, the number of the
remaining degrees yields 5, which is the number of paces to be diminished in
each degree; and by this Rule this Table is framed.

A Table of Randoms to 45 Degrees, accounting 2 Foot to the Pace.
The Degrees of Mounture. Paces diff. 0 0775 225 1 1000 220 2 1220 215 3 1435
210 4 1645 205 5 1850 200 6 2050 195 7 2245 190 8 2435 185 9 2620 180 10 2800
175 11 2975 170 12 3145 165 13 3310 160 14 3470 155 15 3625 150 16 3775 145 17
3920 140 18 4060 135 19 4595 130 20 4325 125 21 4450 120 22 4570 115 23 4685
110 24 4795 105 25 4900 100 26 5000 95 27 5095 90 28 5185 85 29 5270 80 30 5350
75 31 5425 70 32 5595 65 33 5560 60 34 5620 55 35 5675 50 36 5725 45 37 5770 40
38 5810 35 39 5845 30 40 5875 25 41 5900 20 42 5920 15 43 5935 10 44 5945 5 45
5950

But this Table of Alexander Bianco for all sorts of Ordnance, I do account as
one of the best.

A Table of Randoms for the six points of the Gunners Quadrant.
1 2 3 4 5 6 Faulconer. 375 637 795 885 892 900 Faulcon. 550 935 1166 1254 1309
1320 Minion. 450 765 954 1026 1071 1080 Saker. 625 1062 1325 1425 1487 1500 D.
Culvering. 725 1232 1537 1653 1725 1740 Culvering. 750 1275 1590 1710 1785 1800
Demi-Canon. 625 1062 1325 1425 1487 1500 Canon of 7. 675 1147 1431 1489 1606
1620 Double Canon. 750 1275 1660 1710 1785 1800

The use of this Table is thus; having resolved upon what point of Mounture,
look in this Table for the name of the Piece, and right under that point
against the name of the Piece, that is in the common Angle, you shall find the
number of paces of her Random sought.

CHAP. XX.
How to find the right Range of any Shot Discharged out of any Piece, for every
Elevation by any one right or dead Range given for the Piece assigned.

THe right Range of every Piece being discharged in a level, or parallel to the
Horizon, is allowed by some not to exceed 185 paces, that is 5 foot to a pace,
yet some reckon much more, but then they account ordinary steps or paces of two
foot and a half; and Batteries made with such Pieces are usually made at 100 or
120 such paces, at which distance they do the best execution.

The utmost Random likewise of any Piece that is from the Platform to the first
graze of the Bullet, I find by some to be about ten times the distance of the
right Range; and accordingly I have so set it down in the Table.

As for the Ranges to the other degrees and points of the Quadrant, I find
these Tables in Good Authors.

A TABLE OF Right Ranges, or Point Blanks. A TABLE OF Randoms, or the first
Graze. The Degrees of the Pieces Mounture. The Right Range in Paces, 5 Foot to
a Pace. The Degrees of Mounture. The Paces of the Random, 5 Foot to a Pace. 0
192 0 192 1 209 1 298 2 227 2 404 3 244 3 510 4 261 4 610 5 278 5 722 6 285 6
828 7 302 7 934 8 320 8 1044 9 337 9 1129 10 354 10 1214 20 454 20 1917 30 693
30 2185 40 855 40 2289 50 1000 50 2283 60 1140 60 1792 70 1220 70 1214 80 1300
80 1000 90 1350 90

This Table is rather proportional than real, and does best agree with greater
Ordnance; but by help of it, working by the Rule of proportion, you may know
the Random of any Piece of Ordnance; by first (as we have said before) making
one Shot, and measuring from your Platform that distance. You may make a Table
for your Piece thus,

Suppose a Saker being mounted to 5 degrees, shoot the Bullet 416 paces, how
far will it shoot being mounted 10 degrees?

As 722 the Tabular distance for 5 degrees of Mounture, is to 416 paces the
distance found,

So is the Tabular distance for 10 degrees of Mounture, 1214. to the distance
required, which will be found to be 699, 5 paces.

Now if you desire to know how much of the Horizontal line, is contained
directly under the right line of any Shot, called the right Range, made out of
any Piece at any elevation.

First, know that in plain Triangles, the violent motion or right line of a
Shot is supposed to be the Hypothenusal, the Angle of Mounture to be the Angle
at Base; these are given, and the Horizontal line is the Base which is to be
found; there the proportion will run thus;

As the Radius 90 degrees. is to the number of paces in a right Range;

So is the Sine Complement of the Angle of Mounture, to the Horizontal Base, or
the right line which lies parallel to the Horizon under the way of the Shot.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the violent, crooked, and natural motion or way of a Shot, from the time he
is discharged, until it is descended.

BY the third and fourth propositions of the second Book of Tartagilia, his
Nova Scientia, he shows that every body equally heavy, as a Shot in the end
of the violent motion thereof, being discharged out of a Piece of Ordnance, so
it be not right up or right down, the curved Range shall join with the right
Range, and to the natural course and motion betwixt them both, which distinct
motions you may see in the last foregoing figure.

In the 17 proposition of the same Book, he proves that every Shot equally
heavy, great or little, equally elevated above the Horizon, or equally oblique
or level directed, are among themselves like, and proportional in their
distance, as the figure following shows, as A E F is like and proportional in
right and crooked Ranges unto H I, and in their distances or dead Ranges A F
unto A I.

And in his 4th and 6th propositions of the same Book, he proves that every
Shot made upon the level has the mixed or crooked Range thereof equal to the
Arch of a Quadrant 90 degrees; and if it be made upon an elevation above the
level, that then it will make the crooked Range to be more than a Quadrant: And
if that be made imbased under the level, that then the crooked Range thereof
will be a Quadrant.

And in his 9th proposition of the same Book, he shows, that if one Piece be
Shot off twice, the one level, and the other at the best of her Random at 42
degrees. Mounture, that the right Range of the length is but the of the dead range
of the best Random. He that desires a further Demonstration of these
Propositions, may peruse his said second Book de Nova Scientia.

parabolas of cannonballs in flight, inscribed by labeled triangles

CHAP. XXII.
The making of a Gunners Rule, which will serve for the elevation of a Piece,
which is sometimes better than a Quadrant; and the dividing it into degrees by
help of a Table, fitting it for any Piece from 5 foot to 14 foot long.

BEcause the Quadrant cannot be conveniently used at all times, especially when
the wind blows hard, and, being near the Enemies Guns, the Plumb-line is too
long before it stands still; to remedy this, the Gunners Rule was invented, the
figure hereof is as follows; it must be 12 or 14 inches long, according as
the Gun will require, it must have a long slit down the middle thereof like the
Eye-Vane of a Quadrant or back Staff, the head thereof make circular or a
little hollow, as you see in the figure the Instrument is described standing,
at it is to be placed upon the Britch of a Piece of Ordnance; in the middle of
the small narrow slit you must place a Lute string or a well twisted Silk with
a Bead running upon the same to be set to any number of inches and parts, or to
such a degree of the Quadrant, as you must mount your Gun unto; and on the one
side of the slit you must place a division of inches, and let every inch be
divided into 10 parts, and then it will serve for all sorts of Guns; but if it
be for a particular Gun, then on the other side you may place the degrees and
parts, when you shall find by the length of your Piece, how many inches and
parts of an inch goes to a degree; but to use it with all sorts of Ordnance,
let it only be divided into inches and parts.

a ruler

To fit this Rule for one Gun only, here is the Rule for the decimation of the
degrees; note, this Table has 11 Columns, the first shows the length of the
Piece in feet and half feet, the other 10 Columns in the head are 10 degrees,
and under is inches and the 100 parts of an inch, from 1 degree to 10 degrees;
and so you may take them out of the Table, and put them on your Ruler.

The len. of the Piece. 1 Degree. 2 Degrees 3 Degrees 4 Degrees 5 Degrees 6
Degrees 7 Degrees 8 Degrees 9 Degrees 10 Degr. Feet and Feet. Inch. 100 Inch.
100 Inch. 100 Inch. 100 Inch. 100 Inch. 100 Inch. 100 Inch. 100 Inch. 100 Inch.
100 4 Foot long. 1 3 2 6 3 8 4 11 5 14 6 16 7 19 8 82 9 25 10 28 5 Foot and
half. 1 14 2 28 3 42 4 56 5 70 6 84 7 98 9 12 10 26 11 40 6 Foot long. 1 22 2
44 3 66 4 88 6 10 7 38 8 58 9 78 11 8 12 29 6 Foot and half. 1 36 2 72 4 8 5 44
6 80 8 17 9 53 10 89 12 25 13 63 7 Foot long. 1 47 2 94 4 41 5 88 7 35 8 82 10
30 11 77 13 24 14 73 7 Foot and half. 1 58 3 14 4 71 6 28 7 85 9 42 10 99 12 55
14 14 15 71 8 Foot long. 1 68 3 36 5 4 6 72 8 40 10 8 11 76 13 44 15 12 16 82 8
Foot and half. 1 79 3 58 5 37 7 16 8 95 74 12 53 14 32 16 12 17 92 9 Foot long.
1 89 3 79 5 68 7 58 9 47 11 ^7 13 27 15 18 17 8 18 98 9 Foot and half. 2 00 4 0
6 0 8 0 10 0 12 10 14 2 16 3 18 4 20 4 10 Foot long. 2 10 4 20 6 30 8 40 10 30
12 61 14 73 16 84 18 56 21 8 10 Foot and half. 2 21 4 41 6 69 8 88 11 81 13 28
15 48 17 68 19 89 22 10 11 Foot long. 2 31 4 62 6 93 9 24 11 56 13 88 16 22 18
51 20 82 23 14 11 Foot and half. 2 42 4 48 7 26 9 68 12 10 14 53 16 95 19 37 21
80 24 21 12 Foot long. 2 53 5 6 7 59 10 12 12 65 15 18 1^ 71 20 25 22 78 25 33
12 Foot and half. 2 63 5 20 7 89 10 52 13 15 15 78 18 41 21 4 23 67 26 33 13
Foot long. 2 74 5 48 8 82 10 96 13 70 16 44 19 48 21 92 24 68 27 40 13 Foot and
half. 2 84 5 68 8 52 11 36 14 20 27 4 19 88 22 72 25 56 28 42 14 Foot long. 2
95 5 90 8 85 11 80 14 75 17 70 20 65 23 60 26 56 29 53

The use of this Table in graduating the Rule is very plain; for if your Piece
of Ordnance be 8 foot long, and you would mount your Piece two degrees, seek
for 8 foot under the title length of the Piece, and in the common Angle against
the length of the Piece under two degrees you will find 3, 36, to make a
degree; that is 3 inches and 36 parts of an inch, divided into 100 parts, and
to this you may set your Bead.

The use of the graduated Rule is thus: having loaded your Piece, and brought
your Piece of Ordnance in a right line with your mark, the dispart being placed
upon the Muzzle Ring, in like manner place your Rule upon the Base Ring, and
let one standing by hold it, for the foot of it let it be fitted round to the
Gun; so you may be sure to place it right, and you may estimate on its
perpendicular well enough; now having before the distance to the mark you
intend to shoot at, and admit you have found it to be 461 paces, and the first
Shot you made for practice out of that Piece conveyed her Shot at two degrees
of Mounture 274 paces; then by our former Rules and the Tables of Randoms,
there I find 461 against 6 degrees, which is the degrees I must mount my Piece
to reach 461 paces.

Then to find by this Table how many inches and hundred parts of an inch 6
degrees will require, look in the Table above, and find on the left hand in the
first Column the length of the Piece, and just under the degrees (as is
aforesaid) you shall find the inches and parts of Mounture, to which set your
Bead on your string, that is in the sight, to so many inches and parts as the
Table gives; then mount the Piece higher or lower, until you bring the Bead to
the top of the dispart and mark, all in one line; stop then the Piece in such a
position with a Coin, then prime and give fire.

If you will shoot by the Metal of the Piece without a dispart, then subtract
the height of the dispart out of the inches found by the Table, and to the
remainder mount your Piece.

If you have no Quadrant nor a Ruler, and would make a good Shot, look in the
Table, and find the length of the Piece and the inches that you ought to raise
your Piece unto, then cut a piece of stick just of that length, and set it upon
the Base Ring, and bring the top of that stick, the top of the dispart, and the
mark, all in a right line with your eye, and you will make as good a Shot as if
you had a Rule and Bead, or Quadrant.

If you will have no dispart, take your dispart and measure it upon the
aforesaid stick at the Base Ring, and from it cut off the length of the
dispart, and the remainder use upon the Base Ring.

But if the Mounture should be so small that the inches of the dispart should
be more than the inches answerable to the degrees of Mounture; then cut off
from the dispart so much as it is longer than the other, and place it upon the
Muzzle Ring, and bring the upper part of the Base Ring, the dispart, and mark,
in a right line with your Eye, and you will this way make a level with a stick
without Instrument, as well as if you had Ruler or Quadrant.

CHAP. XXIII.
How to make a Shot at the Enemies Light in a dark night, and to make at a
Company of Horsemen or Footmen passing by, and also to make a good Shot at a
Ship Sailing; and how a Shot lodged in a Piece, so that it will not be driven
home to the Powder, may be shot out without hurt to the Piece.

TO shoot by night at the Enemies Lights, dispart your Piece with a lighted and
flaming Wax Candle, or with a lighted Piece of Match, that with your Eye you
may bring the Base Ring, the fired Match on the Muzzle Ring, and the Enemies
Light, in a right line, or mark; then give fire, and you will make a good Shot.

If you make a Shot at a Company of Horse passing by, take a Piece that will
reach the way the Horse or Foot are coming in a right line, then let your Gun
be so loaded with Powder as it may presently take fire, and let your Shot be
fit for your use; then take notice of some Hillock or some turning cross way
for the mark, and when the Enemy comes near to that way in a right line with
your Gun, give fire; but for shooting at a Ship upon the River, you must put
your Piece to some eminent mark on the other side of the River, and when the
Head of the Ship shall begin to be between the Piece and the mark, then give
fire.

But if by some mischievous accident a Shot is lodged in the concavity of a
Piece, and there sticks, and will not go home to the Powder, or come out; then
the Gunner, to save his Piece from breaking, must imbase the mouth of the
Piece, or put it under the line of level, then put in at the Touchhole fair
warm water at several times, so that it may run out at Muzzle or Mouth of the
Piece; and when all the Saltpeter is washed from the Powder, which is known by
the taste of the Water, then let the Gunner clear the Touchhole, and put in as
much Powder as possible he can, and prime and give fire, and it will serve to
draw out the Shot.

But when a Shot has lain long in a Piece until he is grown rusty, and so
sticks fast, put strong Vinegar warm into the mouth of the Piece, and with the
Rammer strike the Shot until it does move; then put in Vinegar until it run
clear through the Powder and Shot; prime as before, and give fire with good
Powder, and if it do not run through after it has stood three days, clear the
Touchhole, prime and give fire.

A man may also shoot farther than ordinary in one and the self same Piece, if
the Powder be gently driven home, and wadded accordingly; then the Shot being
compassed with Paper, Leather, Oakam, or such like, to fill close to the Powder
with a good Wadd, putting after it a Tampion of Cork, and with a Sponge moisten
it with Oil, anoint the vacant Cylender, and so Barricado the Piece that it
may not reverse in the Discharge.

CHAP. XXIV.
A Discourse by way of Dialogue between a General and Captain, concerning the
Assaulting a Town or Work, etc.

General. HAving brought your Approaches near unto a Town or a Fortress,
whether would you choose a Bulwark or a Curtain to be battered with your
Ordnance?


Captain. A Town may be assaulted in diverse places; sometimes you assault one
side, when as you make your Battery on another; sometimes you choose a Bulwark,
otherwhiles a Curtain to be battered, with this intention, to take in the Town
as soon as possible may be. As for me, if I were to take in a great Town which
is populous, I had rather choose to batter a Curtain, than a Bulwark, which
has a high catt, or mount upon it: especially, seeing that in great Towns the
Bulwarks lying one far from another, they do show the skirt of the Curtain very
open.


Genesis Why would you rather choose a Curtain than a Bulwark?


Capt. Because your Bulwarks are always stronger, and better fortified than
your Curtain, and being it is the principal strength of a place, and better
furnished with Platforms, ^lanks, etc. it will require more time, labor, and
charge to batter, than your Curtain.


Genesis But what General is so ill experienced, as to labor to batter a Curtain,
having two strong Bulwarks on both sides of him, to flanker him when he is to
put over his Gallery, and to give an assault upon the Curtain: peradventure for
his labor and pains, he may be well beaten.


Capt. Soft (Good Sir,) Suppose that after a great deal of labor and pains you
have battered a Bulwark, and falling up to the breach to assault it, you find
it cut off, an Enemy lodged in it, must you not then begin to sap forward
again, to make a new battery? whereas on a Curtain there is not that means of
cutting it off, as upon a large Bulwark.


Genesis Have you ever seen the experience of it?


Capt. Yes Sir, the Prince of Orange took in the Bosch by a Bulwark, and also
Breda, but Mastrick was taken in by making a breach, and springing of a mine,
upon the Curtain between Jonger Port and a Bulwark; howsoever the Town of
Cortes upon the frontiers of France, was first battered by the Archduke of
Austria upon the point of a Bulwark, near unto the very joint of the Curtain,
where a high and a strong turret stood, which did annoy us much, so that we
could not advance forward, but were constrained to leave off our approach on
that side, and began to make a new Battery for a breach in a Curtain on the
Field-side, where there lay a strong Bulwark to defend it, which did our men a
great deal of harm; but howsoever, with great difficulty and much ado, we took
in the Town that way, by lodging our selves in the Curtain. Likewise the City
of Cambray was battered, and taken in upon a Curtain, for all there were two
strong Bulwarks that flankered it, which if we had run our line upon a Bulwark,
we should not have forced it so soon; yea such an occasion might present it
self, that a General may be forced to batter both the one and the other, or to
find out some secret way by undermining a wall, and blowing it up with powder.


Genesis This is for your great Towns; but what say you to a Castle, a Citadel,
or some narrow Fortress, how will you go to work to take in those with the best
advantage?


Capt. As for your Forts, and Castles, it is much better to batter them upon a
mount or a Bulwark, than upon a Curtain: my reason is this, that in these your
Bulwarks lying close one by another, will flank one another with the greater
force, and hide the Curtain much better to defend it, so that one cannot so
easily force it, if the said defenses be not taken away.


Genesis Go to then; a Town then being to be battered, either upon a Curtain or a
Bulwark, how many Pieces of Ordnance would you have to do it, and, how and in
what manner would you place, and plant your Ordnance upon your batteries to
make a good breach?


Capt. To effect this, I would have 18 Pieces of Canon and half Canon, (for
lesser Pieces for Battery are now grown out of use.)


Genesis Whether would you choose more whole Canon or half Canon?


Capt. To batter a place well either upon a stony or earthy wall, you may
assure your self, the more whole Cannon you have, the greater and the more
sufficient your breach will be: for your great battering Pieces do spoil and
beat down any thing, which does meet with their great force and violence:
Howsoever of late years experience has taught at diverse Seiges that your half
Canon which are more portable, having good store of them, will do the business
as well as your whole Canon.


Genesis But at what distance would you make your Batteries, for these 18 Pieces
of Canon, and how near unto the place, which you intend to Batter.


Capt. I would counsel a General to approach as near unto that place as
possible may be, and make his Batteries some two or three hundred paces one
from another, and that if it were possible to advance covertly the Approach and
sap, even up to the Counter-scharfe, and very brink of the Moat, to prepare a
way for his Gallery: not only to Batter that place being at hand with the
greater force, but also to keep in, and hinder an Enemy from Sallying out upon
the Besiegers, to discover and dismount their Ordnance in Casemates, or if they
have sunk any in their Walls or False-bray, and so to terrify them, that they
dare not stir out.


Genesis I am also of your opinion, and hold it for good, yet I fear this will not
be so soon done, and is sooner spoken, than executed, and that before you can
bring your approach and sap so far, it will cost you warm blood, and a great
many men's lives, if you have a stout Enemy within to deal withal, and one that
is very Vigilant, and careful to stand upon his Guard, and his defense.


Capt. It Is true, this cannot be done without danger, and the loss of men, but
he that is fearful must stay at home, and not come into the Wars where there is
neither place nor time, which does free or exempt him from danger: yet the
danger is not always so great, especially in such places, where you have Earth
enough to work with, to cast up your sapps, and to heighten and deepen your
Approaches, which will show you the way, for the more higher you find the
ground in Approaching to the edge of the moat, the deeper Trenches you may
make, and cover your self by casting up of blinds continually, to keep you from
the sight of the Besieged; and it is better, when you have brought your
approach as it were under them, than if you were 200 or 300 paces distant from
them.


Genesis I pray you Good Sir, how would you plant, and divide these 18 Pieces of
Canon?


Capt. I would make a great Battery with 8 of them to beat upon a right line,
either upon a Curtain, or the point of a Bulwark (which the General shall find
fittest) Two Batteries with each 3 Canon to play slope-wise from the great
Battery; as the ninth plate and 28 and 29 figures shows, and two Batteries,
with two half Canon a Piece, to play as it were cross-wise upon the breach. And
thus you see your 18 Pieces planted upon 5 Batteries, as you may observe in the
9th. Plate, and the two Figures of a Curtain and of a Bulwark following.


Genesis Good Sir tell me I pray you how many shot will these 18 Pieces of Canon
make in 10 hours, and how much powder will they require.


Capt. In 10 hours they may make some 1500 shot, and will require a matter of
25000 pound weight of powder, that is 150 barrels full, each barrel containing
160 pound weight in it.


Genesis You make your account then that every Piece in the space of 10 hours is
to shoot 80 shot, that is 8 shot an hour for every Piece.


Capt. You may make 10 shot in an hour if you please, if your Pieces be
renforced; but as for your ordinary Pieces, they have not metalline substance
enough to bear it: considering also that after you have made 40 shot out of a
Piece, it will be so heated, that it must have a cooling time, which must be at
least an hour, for otherwise your Piece being grown over hot, it may cause
danger.


Genesis Methinks that 80 shot for a Piece in so long a time were too little,
having often heard, that in that while, a Piece may well be shot off 130 times;
can you give me your resolution upon this?


Capt. I will tell you Sir what happened once in the Island of Bomble, Anno 1599.
we planted a Piece by a mill, by which we did annoy the Enemy very much, so
that they were forced to make a Battery, and planted a whole Canon, and a
demy-Canon upon it, seeking to dismount ours. Now shooting with this Piece from
four of the clock in the morning, till eleven toward noon, this Piece had a
cooling time the space of two hours, and about one of the clock we began to
play with it again, and continued shooting with it till 4 a clock in the
afternoon; but this Piece being not able to endure the force and heating of so
many shot, we were constrained to leave off with it: and yet ceased not
shooting with our other Pieces from another Battery by command from Don Jews
de Valasco, General of our Ordnance, and shooting cross-wise with some other of
our Pieces, we put the Enemies two Pieces to silence in the space of an hour; a
Soldier of ours standing by, was curious to keep a tally of the number of all
the shot we made from the morning till four a clock in the afternoon, and
showed me 80 notches, which deducting the two hours cooling, our Piece planted
at the Mill made 8 shot in an hour, which was as much as could be required of
it.


Senior Diego Uffanogive your Translator leave to interrupt you a little, and
so to conclude this discourse. If you remember at the Seige of Ostend, which
you mention ofttn in your Chapters and Dialogues, you were without, and I was
within the Town, that on the seventh of January, Anno 1602. Stilo Novo, After
Sir Francis Vere of famous memory (who defended and kept the Town against you)
had deluded you with a Parley, only to gain time, and to make up our Canon and
Sea-beaten works along the skirt of the old Town, his Highness the Archduke
resolved to assault us, and that morning began to batter Sand-hill and
Schotenburgh, to make a breach for you against that night, with intent to
Assault us (as you did) and to have entered the Town, and have put us all to the
Sword, the Relation whereof you shall hear in the end of this Book. Now you had
placed and planted your 20 Pieces of Cannon to batter them in this manner, 8
from your Battery at the foot of the Downs, 8 from a Battery on the right hand
of the Downs, 6 from your pile Battery, 6 more which you had made upon the
Sand, and as it were raised out of the Sea: the first shot upon the breach in a
right line, and the other two slopewise, as your two figures following do
demonstrate. These 20 Pieces of Canon toward noon had a cooling time, for a
matter of some 2 hours, just as you have said; and afterward you began to
batter the breach and old Town again, till it was almost twilight, and then
they cooled again, till you were ready to give us an assault; and before you
fell on, as I do well remember, you shot off one of your Cannons with a hollow
Bullet, which flew over the Town and made a great humming noise, as a warning
Piece to the Count of Bucquoy, who lay on the East Side, that you were then
ready to fall on, and that he should do the like, this was your Signal. Now
General Vere knowing well your intent, gave order to the Gentleman of our
Ordnance who had the guard upon Sand-hill, that he should keep a true Tally,
and an account of all the shot you made that day, with your 20 Pieces of Cannon
upon the breach and the old Town, which being cast up, there were found to be
made that day from morning till night 2200 shot, which was found to be an 110
shot for every Piece, and 11 shot an hour for every Piece, which is more than
8; but I verily believe your Pieces were renforced. This by the way, and so I
return again to your own Dialogue. Genesis (Good Sir) I pray show me how you would
batter the point of a Bulwark (as the figure 28 following demonstrates,) and
give me some reasons as well defensive as offensive.


Capt. I am willing to give your Lordship content, and say, If I were to batter
the point of a Bulwark or a Bastion, I would have the same number of battering
Canon, and planted in the same form and manner as they were for the Curtain,
and to shoot sloap and cross-wise also; and if your approaches were advanced so
far, they should be planted upon the very brink of the moat and upon the
Counterscharfe, I would plant 4 of them so, that they should dismount the
Enemies Canon in their Casemates, or any, if they had sunk them in their
Falsebray, which should wait upon that occasion.


Genesis I am of your mind, and prefer such a battery before all others, who are
of the opinion that they had rather choose a Curtain than a Bulwark to be
battered.


Capt. You have heard my reasons for that, and see the figures following traced
out to you. But as for your Bulwark the besieged may cut it off (as you may
mark in the figures of Retrenchments and Cuttings off in the second part of
this book) for indeed it will be a hard matter to force an Enemy out of a
Bulwark, who is resolved to loose it by peecemeal and degrees; and there is not
so much danger in assaulting of a Curtain, which being once well battered and
beaten down with your Ordnance, you have an easier way and entrance to fall on
with your Troops of men, to enter the Town or Fortress; but for the defense
which is made from your Flanking Bulwarks, or your Casemates, you must make
Batteries upon the brink of the moat against them, (as is said) to dismount the
Enemies Pieces, and to flanker with your Ordnance the Parapets of the Bulworks
to beat them about their ears, that the Bulworks may lie the more open to you,
and I think this way is the least danger.


Genesis But the Besieged, their cuttings off, may they not be made as well upon a
Curtain as upon a Bulwark.


Capt. No, for the Rampire being thinner, you have neither so much ground, nor
the like accommodation in a Curtain as in a Bulwark; and indeed, a Governor of
a Town, or of a Fortress, if he were put to his choice, had rather to be
assaulted on a Bulwark (than on a Curtain) by cutting it off into the form of a
half moon, that he might make a new resistance, and defend it with a less
number of men. Besides, in a Bulwark the Besieged have this advantage over the
Assailants, which is very dangerous for them, that they may make a Mine within
the bowels of their Bulwark when an Enemy shall attempt to assault it, and
thinking to enter the Breach and take the Town, they may be blown up into the
Air by a Countermine; the like also may happen to the Besieged, the Assailants
springing their Mine also in a Bulwark, when they think they stand upon their
best defense.


Genesis May not the like be done also in a Curtain?


Capt. No, it will not take the like effect as in a Bulwark; for a Breach being
once made in a Curtain, for as an Enemy may assault it at large, so they may
bring a greater number of men to fight, to help to defend it; whereas in a
Bulwark they are penned up and straightned in a narrow place, which may be cut
off, and will require a fewer number of men to defend it, whereas those which
are to force it, must be constrained to bring up a great many men to assault,
who in an instant may be in danger of blowing up.


Genesis Your reasons (Good Captain) are not to be slighted; but as for me, I hold
it safer, to batter and assault the breach of a Bulwark, than of a Curtain. For
though the besieged may cut it off, and defend it with a fewer number of men,
yet the Assaulters have this advantae over the Besieged defendants, that they
have more place and elbow room, and may find a less resistance than in a
Curtain, seeing that one may make as a great a breach in a Bulwark as in a
Curtain, because your Ordnance may beat it flat, and level with the ground; and
choosing rather a Bulwark: I will herewith conclude this discourse, and now
show you the figures both of the one, and of the other in this following plate.


cannon firing on a wall from a variety of angles How one must Batter a Courtine


cannon firing on a bulwark from a variety of angles How one must Batter a
Bulwark
betwixt 86 and 87



CHAP. XXV.
Containing the demonstration of Morters, and the use of them.

YOur great and small Morters, are not only serviceable in a War offensive, by
shooting and casting of great Grenades, as of 100, 150, 170 pound weight, and
smaller of 40, and 50 pound; but also by casting of Fireballs, Stones, old
Rubbidge, and Pieces of Iron, into Cities, Towns, and Fortresses; and may be
used also defensively, to be shot from Towns and Forts into any Enemies works,
and approaches; especially they are of singular use, when an Enemy has
covertly approached, and lodged himself under some Bulwark, Tower, or Turret,
and is a beginning to undermine them; which if they do, you may plant one of
these Morters at a reasonable distance, on the inside of your Wall, and
shooting your Granado, as it were bolt upright into the air, by its natural
fall, it may light just into the Enemies works, and there with great violence
breaking among them, it will make them cry, fly, and forsake the place; you may
also fire them out of a place, by casting good store of Hand Grenades down
among them, and so annoy them, that the work will be too hot for them.

Two of these Morters are represented unto you, in the Plate and Figures
following number. Now for the shooting a way of your great Grenades or
Fireballs, you must ever remember, but to take or 1/7 parts of fine Powder of
the weight of your Granado or thing which you shoot; but if you are to shoot
away a Bullet without any Fireworks in it, or some massy stone, or such like
solid thing, then you must take but half the weight of it in fine Powder,
which, having given fire to the Mortar, will send it going merrily.

The use of them is not to shoot in a right line, as other Ordnance do, but in
an oblique line, as you may see by the two Figures following, unless your
Mortar be mounted to 90 degrees, mounting them usually above 45 degrees, namely
to 60, 70, 80, and sometimes more or less, as the distance and fall of your
Granado or Shot shall require.

Having before shown you the making and use of the Quadrant, it remains now
that I come to the charging and use of a Mortar; now before you put in your
Powder. it must be well sponged and cleared, whether you charge it with loose
Powder, or Cartouch, turning the mouth almost bolt upright; the Powder being
put into the Chamber, you must stop it with a Wadd either of Hay or Oakam, and
after a Tampkin of some soft wood, and this with the Powder that was put in
first, it must fill up the whole Chamber thereof, that there may be no vacuity
between the Powder and the Wadd, or between the Wadd and the Shot; this done,
the shot shall be put in at the mouth, with another Wadd after it; but you must
have a care that your Mortar be not much mounted, lest your shot flies out too
soon, and the Wadd between the Tampkin and the shot will not only save the shot
from the Tampkins breaking of it, but also is to avoid vacuities which may
endanger the breaking of the Piece by second expansions.

Now then having resolved of the premises, touching your Piece, Shot, and
Powder, as abovesaid, and upon the distance and mounture of your mark, as the
Rules and Tables following shall direct you, then for the bending and disposing
of it to the assigned mark; lay first a straight Ruler upon the Mouth of your
Mortar, and upon it place a Quadrant (as you may see by the Figures) or some
other Instrument cross-wise, to set the Mortar upright, for shuning of wide
shooting, and then placing them fore-right to elevate it into the resolved
degree of Mounture, to avoid short or overshooting, accordingly as the Tables
following will teach you; for having made one shot, you may thereby proportion
the rest, considering whether you are to shoot with or against the wind, or
whether it blows toward the right or the left hand, whether weakly or
strongly, and so accordingly to give or abate the advantage, or disadvantage,
which judgment and discretion will induce you thereunto, and the help of the
Rules following.

Now we will come to the use of a Mortar, and that in this example following;
Suppose an Enemy be approached to the Basis, or foot of a Wall or a Bulwark,
and there is a rooting, and begins to make a Mine, and having Chambred his
Powder, intends to blow it up, and that there is no other means left you, to
repulse and hinder their egress and regress into it; but by shooting out of
your Morters some Grenades, Fireballs, Stones, and Rubbish among them, or at
least by casting many Hand-Granadoes down upon them. To do this either by force
or policy, it behooves a good Canonier or Fire-worker, to know first (as has
been taught) how far his Mortar will carry a Granado, or any solid thing else,
which shall be shot out of it, being set upon such and such a degree and
elevation as the Mortar Figure will show you. As for Example, take your aim
level with the mould or mouth of your Mortar, noted A upon the Quadrant, and it
will carry 200 paces, where you see the Granado falls upon the letter A; but
your mortar being elevated to the mark B, it then will carry its Bullet 487
paces; if to the second C, then 755 paces; if to the third D, it will carry 937
paces; if to the fourth E, then 1065 paces; if to the fifth elevation F, then
1132 paces; if to the sixth G, which is in the midst of the Quadrant, and lies
then upon its highest elevation, it will carry 1170 paces, as you may see by
the several falls of the Bullets upon every Letter. The second Figure shows you
a Mortar casting a Granado upon a Castle, as you may see by the Example.

Another Table of Diego Uffanoes for Mortar Pieces, with their Randoms made for
every degree, between the Level and 90 degrees, as follows.
Degrees. Pac. Degrees. 0 100 89 1 122 88 2 143 87 3 364 86 4 285 85 5 204 84 6 224 83
7 243 82 8 262 81 9 280 80 10 297 79 11 314 78 12 331 77 13 347 76 14 363 75 15
377 74 16 392 73 17 406 72 18 419 71 19 432 70 20 445 69 21 457 68 22 468 67 23
479 66 24 490 65 25 500 64 26 510 63 27 518 62 28 524 61 29 526 60 30 534 59 31
539 58 33 543 57 34 549 56 34 552 55 35 558 54 36 562 53 37 568 52 38 573 51 39
477 50 40 580 49 41 582 48 42 583 47 43 584 46 44 582 45 582

A Mortar Shooting upon a Castle


a quadrant, mortar, and labeled parabolas describing the paths of various
shots How you are to use the Quadrant before described for a Mortar, as you may
see by the falling of the Granado upon the Lettors


THE Complete Gunner THE THIRD PART. OF ARTIFICIAL FIREWORKS.
THe number of artificial Fireworks which are practiced as well in Armies upon
Land in the attacquing and defense of places, as in defense of Ships at Sea,
whereby warlike Executions may be performed, are many and various, according to
the ingenuity of the Fire-Master: And the ways of preparing them are so many,
as it is impossible for us in this room we have allotted to prescribe all that
are known. We shall therefore be contented to make choice of some of the best
and principal things among so great a number, but more particularly of some
most admirable inventions; and we shall give a Chapter to every kind of
Fire-work, considering they differ among themselves both in fashion and effect,
and every one has its name which is particularly applied to it. But before we
begin with our composition we shall begin with the particulars, and their
preparation unto this work, whereby they may be the more exalted, and have the
greater efficacy. The more principal materials, that is, Peter, Charcoal and
Sulphur, are mentioned at large in my first part of Gunnery, and therefore we
shall proceed.

CHAP. I.
To prepare Oil of Sulphur.
TAke a good quantity of clarified Sulphur, (the way of Clarification we have
showed before) melt it over a very gentle fire in an Earthen or Copper Vessel,
then take old red Tyles that have been already used in buildings, or if you
cannot find such, take new Tyles that are well baked, and that have not taken
dirt, break them in pieces as small as a Bean, and throw them into melted
Brimstone, then mingle your Brimstone with the remaining fragments of the
Bricks, until they have drank up all the Sulphur, then let them be put into a
Limbeck upon a Furnace to distill, and after the Oil is drawn according to a
Chemical order it will be very excellent, and aboveall, have a very combustible
quality, proper to the Compositions of artificial fires.

To prepare Oil or Balsam of Sulphur.
Fill a long body of Glassfull of Sulphur well powdered, then pour upon it Oil
of Turpentine, or Oil of nuts, or Juniper, in such a quantity that the oil with
the Sulphur may fill but the half part, place it in an Iron Kettle; with Sand
round about it, and a small heat for 8 or 9 hours, and you will see that the
Oil of Turpentine will convert the Brimstone into a red Oil, as fiery and
combustible as before.

There are those that take the following matter to the preparing the oil of
Sulphur, to the end it may be rendered more combustible, viz. Sulphur 1 l. of
quick Lyme half a pound, of Sal-armoniac 4 ounces.

Above all this, the Chemists know how to prepare a certain oil of Sulphur,
(which they call a Balsam) of which the virtues are so admirable, that they
admit not any body, either living or dead, to be touched with putrification,
but will conserve it in so perfect and entire state, that neither the
pernicious Influences of the celestial bodies, nor that corruption which the
Elements produce, nor that which reduces things into their Principles, can any
way damnifie it, if anointed with it. There is also from it prepared a certain
fire (as Tritemius teaches) with flowers of Sulphur, Borax and Brandy-wine,
which will remain many years without extinguishing of it self. Others that are
knowing, do attest that a Lamp may be filled with such like Oil, from whence
all that are within the Light of it, will appear as if they had no heads.

There is another way of making Oil of Sulphur which is very admirable and
excellent, which is prepared thus. Incorporate well together an equal
proportion of Sulphur and Saltpeter, reduce them into most subtle Powder, and
pass it through a fine sieve, then put them into an Earthen Pot that has never
been used, and pour upon them Vinegar made of White Wind or Aqua-vitae, as much
as will cover the Powder; Close the Pot in such manner that no air may any wise
enter, and put it thus in any hot place so long time until all the vinegar be
digested and vanished. Lastly, take that matter which rests in the Pot, and
draw from thence an oil, by Chemical Instruments proper to this work.

CHAP. II.
The preparation of the Flowers of Benjamin.

TAke Benjamin a certain quantity of ounces, put it into a Gourd or a Limbeck
glass, and close it well with a blind head (as they call it) then have in
readiness an earthen vessel, set it upon a Tresfoot, or for the more certainty
upon a small Furnace, place it in your glass body, and compass it well about
with fine Sand or ashes so high as the matter is in the glass; after make a
moderate fire under it, for fear the Limbeck heat too soon, and be too hot, for
that will make the flowers become citrine or yellow, when they ought to be as
white as Snow. Observe when you see the flowers begin to raise a vapor or
small fume, continue your fire in that same degree the space of one quarter of
an hour; after you shall see the flowers risen unto the internal Superficies of
the blind head, then take it away carefully, and put to it another that shall
be quite cold, and put that which you have taken off upon a white paper until
it be cold, then gently with a Feather or wooden Spatula, cause the flowers to
come forth of the blind head, and gather them together carefully: thus you may
add a third or fourth blind head, and in time many, until all the Benjamin
cease to fume.

Benjamin may be made into flowers another way, thus; put into a glazed pot a
certain quantity of ounces of Benjamin, and place it upon warm ashes, and when
you see it begin to fume, cover the vessel with a Cornet of paper made in the
form of a Cone, and a little larger than the orifice of the pot, leave it there
about one quarter of an hour, after take off the Cornet, and take the flowers
and gather them together; then put upon the vessel another Cornet of paper, and
let it stand as long as before; take it off, and gather the flowers to the
former, and continue thus putting Cornet after Cornet, until your flowers be
entirely evaporated.

CHAP. III.
The preparation of Camphire.

TAke Juniper Gumm (which is called sometimes) Sandarach, white varnish, or
Mastick most subtly powdered 2 l. white distilled vinegar as much as is
necessary to cover the Gumm in a glass, set it deep in horse-dung the space of
20 days; then take it and pour it forth into another glass Vessel with a wide
mouth, and let it stand thus in digestion a whole month, and in it you shall
have Camphire congealed in form of a Crust of bread, and which has in some
measure the resemblance of the ver^able or true Camphire. The Camphire has
such a love for the fire, that being once lighted, it goes not out until it be
quite consumed. The flame that comes from thence is very clear, and of a very
agreeable odor; after it has remained suspended in the air some time it
vanishes insensibly. The cause that produces all these rare effects from
Camphire, is by reason its parts are extreme subtle and airy.

I do add to all this, that it may be easy to reduce Camphire into Powder, to
make it useful in artificial fireworks, if a man crumbles it and beats it
gently, rouling it with Sulphur. The oil of Camphire, which serves also for the
same effect, is made by adding a little of oil of sweet Almonds, and stir them
well together in a brass Mortar, and pestle of the same metal, until all be
converted into oil of a greenish color.

Or a man may put it into a Glass Viol which must be close stopped, provided
also that the Camphire be true and natural, and not a Cheat; then put that
Glass into a warm Furnace, and draw it out, when you shall see all the Camphire
turned into a pure clear oil, which will burn with an admirable vivacity.

CHAP. IV.
Water of Sal-armoniac.

TAke Sal-armoniac 3 ounces, Saltpeter 1 ounce, reduce them into a most subtle
Powder, and mix them well together, after put them into a Limbeck, and then
pouring on them some of the best and strongest Vinegar, you may distill the same
into a water with a small fire.

CHAP. V.
Of a certain artificial water which will burn upon the Palm of your hand
without doing any harm.

TAke Oleum Petroli, and of Terebinthi, and of Calx vive, of Mutton fat, and of
Hogs Lard, of each equal parts, beat them well together, until they be well
incorporated, then cause them to be distilled in warm ashes, or upon burning
coals, and you shall draw from thence an excellent oil.

CHAP. VI.
To prepare Fire-Spunges.

TAke of the oldest and greatest Toad-stools which grows at the Root of Ash,
Oak, Birch, and Fir Tree, with many other Trees which produce them freely; get
a good parcel, string them, and hang them in the Chimney, and leave them to
macerate; being well mortified and macerated, take and cut them in pieces, and
then beat them with a wooden Mallet; this done, boil them over a small fire in
a strong Lie, and a sufficient quantity of Saltpeter, until all the humidity
be evaporated: At last, having put them upon a Plank or even board, put them in
a warm Oven, and let them well dry there; having drawn them from thence, you
must beat them with a wooden Mallet as before, until it become wholly subtle
and soft; being thus prepared, you must keep them in a commodious place to
serve you upon occasion.

CHAP. VII.
How to prepare Match or Low for Artificial Fires.

MAke Cords of Tow, Hemp, or Cotton, which you please, of two or three twists,
not made too hard, put them in a new Earthen pot Vernished, pour upon them
Vinegar made of good white Wine four parts, of Urine two parts, of Aqua vitae
one part, of Salt Peter purified one part, of Cannon Powder reduced to Meal one
part: Make all these Ingredients boil together upon a great Fire, to the
Consumption of all the Liquor; then spread upon a great smooth Plank or Board,
the Meal or Flower of the most excellentest Powder that you can get. Having
drawn your Match out of the Pot, roll them in the Powder, and then dry them in
the shade or Sun, for it matters not which, and the Cords or Match that are
thus prepared will burn very quick.

Francis Jouchim Prechtelin, in his second part of his Fireworks Chap. 2.
describes a certain Match, which is extreme slow in burning, and is thus made;
take Mastich two parts, Colophonia one part, Wax one part, Saltpeter two
parts, Charcoal half a part, then, having melted all and mixed them well upon
the fire, take a Match made of Hemp or Flax of a sufficient bigness, and draw
it through this Composition, making it go down to the bottom of the Vessel,
drawing it often through, until it has gotten the bigness of a Candle, and
when you desire to use it, light it first, and when it is well lighted blow it
out, and there remains none but a burning Coal.

CHAP. VIII.
Of certain Antidotes excellent and approved against the burning of Gunpowder,
Sulphur, hot Iron, melted Lead, and other like accidents, drawn from the
particular Experiments of Cozimu Nowicz.

SECTION. I.
Boil Hogs grease in common water, over a most gentle fire, the space of some
time; then take it from the Fire, and let it cool, and after expose it to the
fair and clear weather three or four nights; after having put it into an
Earthen pot, melt it again upon a small fire, and being melted, strain it
through a Cloth into cold water, after wash it many times with good clean and
fresh water, until it come as white as snow; this done, put it into a glazed
pot to serve you at your occasions. The use is thus, you must anoint the burnt
part as soon as you can, and you will see a quick and admirable effect.

SECT. II.
Take Plaintain water, Oil of Nuts of Italy, of each as much as you please.

SECT. III.
Take Mallows water, Rose water, Plume Alum, of each as much as is necessary,
and mix them well together with the white of an Egg.

SECT. IV.
Take a Lixivium, made of Calx Vive and common water, add to it a little Oil of
Hempseed, Oil Olive, and some whites of Eggs, mingle all well together, and
anoint the burnt place with this Composition. All these Ointments cure
burnings without causing any pain. These I have often experimented upon my self.

Some Receipts from diverse Authors.
Take Oil of Olives, Oil of sweet Almonds, Liquid Vernish, each one part, juice
of Onions two parts, with these chafe the part affected.

If there be already blisters raised and Ulcerations in the parts, this
following Ointment is most excellent.

Boil a great quantity of the second Rind of Elder tree, in Oil of Olive, then
pour it through a Linen cloth; add to it a little after two parts of Cerus or
burnt Lead, of Lytharge of Gold, of each one part, put them into a Leaden
Mortar, and then stir them about and mix them so, that they become in the form
of a Linament.

Take melted Lard, pour it into two Ounces of Morrel water, and one Ounce of
Oil of Saturn, then mingle them well together: 'this Remedy is soeveraign.

Take the Mucilage of the Roots of Henbane, and of the Flowers of Poppies, of
each one Ounce, Salt Peter one Ounce, mingle them all with Oil of Camphire, and
make a Linament according to Art.

Or take the juice of Oynions roasted in embers two Ounces, Nut Oil one Ounce,
mingle them all well together.

Or take of the Leaves of Ivy two m. or handfuls well beaten up with Plaintain
water, Oil Olive one pound, make all boil with four Ounces of good white Wine,
until the Consumption of the whole Wine, at the end of the decoction add Wax as
much as is necessary, to give him the form and consistency of a Linament.

Again, take old Lard, let it be melted over the flame, and poured into two
Ounces of the juice of Beets and Rue, of the Cream of Milk one Ounce, Mucilage
of Quinceseeds and Gum Tracanth, of each an Ounce and a half, mix them well
together, and make thereof a Linament. This remedy is none of the worst, we
took it from Joseph Quercetanus, in libro Sclopetrio.

CHAP. IX.
Of Hand Grenades.

THe Hand Grenades respecting their form, are Globically or perfectly round
and hollow in their interior part in manner of a Sphere; they are called Hand
Grenades, or Handy Grenades, because they may be grasped in the hand, and
thrown to the Enemies; and if we should dwell upon the denominations of the
Latin, we may call them as they do, Granades Palmares, they are commonly of
the bigness of a Bullet of Iron of 5, 6, and 8 l. they weigh sometimes 1 l. and
sometimes one pound and a half, some are of two pounds, and others of three
pounds; there is given to these sort of Globes the names of Grenades, by
reason of the great resemblance they have with the Fruit Punique, which we call
Pom-granad; for as these do shut up in their rinds a great quantity of grains;
so our Military Globes are filled with a number of Grains of Powder, almost
innumerable, the which having received the Fire, do break into a thousand and a
thousand shivers, leaping against the Enemy, and piercing if it could all such
things as it meets opposing its violence. They are generally made of Iron or
Copper, carrying in its Diameter about three Ounces, being about the length of
a Barley Corn in thickness of Metal; they are filled commonly with Gunpowder,
and sometimes of other Compositions, there is added to its Orifice a small Pipe
commonly called a Fuse, which is filled with a matter or Composition that is
slack or slow in burning, but nevertheless very susceptible of the Fire, and
capable to hold fire some time, for fear that it should break in the hands of
those that manage it, and intend to throw it.

There is amongst Fire-Masters accounted three sorts of Hand Grenades, the
first and most common are made of Iron; others are made of Brass, allayed with
other Metals in the melting; the third sort is of Glass.

If you cause them to be made of Iron, take such as is most fragile, and as
little wrought as possible you can get; if you will cast them of Copper, you
must allay six pound of Copper, with two pounds of Tyn, and half a pound of
Marcasite, or you may put one part of Tyn with three parts of Lattin or of
Auricalque. Those that are made of Iron are in thickness about the ninth part
of the Diameter; those that are made of Brass must have one tenth part of the
Diameter in thickness of Metal. Lastly, such which you cause to be made of
Glass, must have one seventh part of their Diameter in their thickness.

The largeness of the Orifice in which you must put in your Fuse made of Wood,
whose upper part must be about 2/9 the Diameter of the Granado, and the small
hole in the Fuse should have the largeness of ^/^^ of the same Diameter, the
rest of the capacity of the Shell must be filled with well grained Powder, the
length of the Fuse must be about of the Diameter, and the top must be broad,
and a little rounding like a Hemisphere, the hollow and inner part of the Fuse
must be about 1/9 Diameter at the small or inner end, and 2/9 at the outer end:
Men do generally fill the void place with Powder ground most subtly, which
must be moistened with Gum-water, or dissolved glue, that it may join the
better. As for the Fuses, they must be filled or charged with one of the
Compositions hereunder written; afterward you must fasten it well and close
with Tow or Okham, and the Pyrotechnian Lute which the Germans call Kit, which
is made of four parts of Ship Pitch, two parts of Colophonia, one part of
Terrebinthe, and one part of Wax; you must put all these Ingredients in a
glazed Vessel, and melt them upon a small fire, then mix and mingle them well
together.

Compositions for Charging the Fuses of the Hand Grenades.
Powder 1l. Saltpeter 1l. Sulphur 1l. Powder 3l. Saltpeter 2l. Sulphur 1l.
Powder 4l. Saltpeter 3l. Sulphur 2l. Powder 4l. Saltpeter 3l. Sulphur 1l.
Another sort of Grenades.
I shall here represent you with a Hand Granado, which may be hid at the
entering of a passage, or any such place where we suppose the Enemy must come:
This Granado has two holes opposite, passing just cross the Diameter, in which
must be fastened a Fuse of Wood or Metal with holes in several places, and all
about it within let there be beaten Powder, and through it you must pass a
common match. lighted at one end, and at top let there be a third hole, by
which it must be charged with a good grained Powder, which must be close stopped
again with a Tampion, and then is your Granado prepared. I suppose it not
necessary to say much of the use of this Granado, and since it is so easy to
be understood by what we have said, and that the occasion you will have of such
things will forge your Inventions enough to put them in practice.

CHAP. X.
How and where a man ought to heave Hand-Granadoes.

ACcording to the definition which we have given of them, it is most evident,
and I suppose no body will doubt, that they are to be taken in the hand, and
that we must grasp them to throw them at the Enemy. It is said before that this
kind of Arms is as well defensive as offensive; therefore we shall not rest
upon the proof of these things; those that have been at the managing of them
must instruct them that are ignorant.

We shall say only this, that the Places where these Hand Grenades are used at
Sea, are where Ships are Board and Board to clear the Enemies Decks, so that
the way may be cleared there. Upon Land Service they are used immediately after
the good and happy success of a Mine which has made a great overture in a
Rampire, overthrowing one part of the Wall, Bulwark, or Bastion, to give place
to the Assailants, to do their endeavor to get into the breach; it is there
that the Besieged as well as Besiegers may make use of these Hand Grenades;
it is there where you shall see the more generous of both sides armed with Fire
and Flames, defending valiantly the quarrel of their Prince, the interest of
their Party, (...) Liberties and their Lives. They are employed also upon other
occasions, to wit, when the Besiegers are come up to the Walls of the Rampire,
and so well placed, that making winding Stairs in the thickness of the
Platform, they mount insensibly by retact; so that the Besieged cannot any way
hinder by the defense of their Flanks, nor be kept safe by the Rampires
themselves. Upon these occasions I say, the Besieged ought to pour down a a
quantity of Hand Grenades from aloft, or from the top of the Walls, upon their
under-miners.

And sometimes they are also thrown at a distance greater than ordinary,
according to the occasion; but when this cannot be done by the natural strength
of a Soldier, without the aid of some artificial Instrument, the Masters in
this Art have invented certain small Engines, made like unto one of our
Ducking-Stools, with a Rope at one end to pluck it down by force, and at the
other end a hollow place to lay the Balls in that are to be thrown, and with
this Engine well contrived, one may throw upon the Enemy, not only Hand
Grenades; but also a quantity of other Artificial Military Fires, as glistring
or shining Globes, Bombards, Fire-pots, and many other such like things, of
which we shall speak in their place, may be thrown at a greater distance than
is possible by the hand only.

This Instrument is not very difficult to make, it may easily be comprehended
by what we have said. I shall only advertise you of one thing, that the longer
the arm of the Engine is on that side that is to hold the Grenades, more than
the other part to which the Rope is fastened, the greater force the Engine will
have; but you must understand this measure to be made from Axes or Iron Rolls,
upon which the Arm moves.

CHAP. XI.
Of glistring or bright shining Fireballs.

DIssolve upon the fire in a Brass or Earthen Vessel an equal portion of
Sulphur, black Pitch, Rozin, and Turpentine; then take a Ball of Stone or Iron,
that the Diameter be far less than the Diameter of a Cannon, or Mortar Piece,
for which you intend this Globe; plunge this Shot in this melted matter until
it be all over covered with the matter about its exterior part, draw it from
thence, and role it gently in Corn Powder, that done, cover it all over with a
Cotton Cloth; then plunge it again in your Composition, and reiterate the
rolling it in Powder, as before, then cover it a second time with another
Cotton Cloth; and thus continue dipping your Bullet, and wrapping it about
with Cloth, until your Shot has acquired a just bigness, exactly to fill the
Orifice of the Engine, remembering that the last Coat of the Shot must be of
Corn'd Powder: Being then thus prepared, it must be put into the Cannon or
Mortar Piece naked, without any other thing compassing it, immediately upon the
Powder in the Chamber, which must make the Bullet come forth; Then give fire
freely to your Piece, to throw the shot where you intend it.

CHAP. XII.
Of Balls which Cast forth so great a smoke, that they blind whomsoever they
come near.

IT is accustomed to do great execution by favor of the night, in occurrences
of War, as well as in many other occasions: I mean not here to speak of the
darkness of the night, for that is naturally effected by the first Causer of
all things, from the order that he has established amongst the Beings; but I
intend only here to treat of the darkness that is made Artificially, and
particularly such as may be produced and made to last a little time in a close
or narrow place, according to the Rules of our Art, to be made for the blinding
of the Enemy, which would force into our beings, and would attaque us by main
strength, in a design to take away our Lives, Honor, and Goods; or when we
have a design to facilitate the passage for the Assailants, in confounding or
oppressing the Besieged in their Forts, with a cloudy and thick fume, in such a
sort that one may take them as amazed Fish in troubled waters. For this purpose
are Globes prepared, which whilst they are on fire, produce a smoke so
vehement and unpleasant, and in so great abundance, that it is impossible to
withstand the incommodity without bursting asunder; see here the Method. Take
Ship Pitch in the Stone 4 l. Liquid Pitch 2 l. Colophonia 6 l. Sulphur 8 l.
Saltpeter 36 l. melt all these Drugs upon burning Coals in any vessel
whatsoever, adding after 10 l. of Coal of Sawdust made of the Pine or Firr-Tree
6 l. Crude Antimony 2 l. incorporate and mix them very well together; then put
into this melted ma^ter Tow, Hemp, and Linen Clothes a great quantity, and
boil them well in this Composition, and when they have drank up all the matter,
then form them into Balls of such a big^^ss as you please, so that it may be
cast with the hand, or with the Engine mentioned in ^he last Chapter, according
as you shall find most convenient. And this is out true way to make Night at
Noonday, to obscure the Sun it self, and to blind the Eyes of the Enemies for
some time. And this is the most lawful way that one may follow, because it
shows its original from natural things, and we may believe th^^ it is always
sufficient justice, so that the Wars where such things are practiced, be ^ot
unjustly enterprized.

CHAP. XIII.
Stink Balls.

STinking Globes are made to annoy the Enemy by their stinking vapors and
fumes disagreeable to Nature; nay so unsufferable to the Nose, and to the Brain
it self, by its most violent stink, that by no means it can be endured. The
preparation is as follows, Take of Powder 10 l. of Ship Pitch 6 l. of Tar 20
l. Saltpeter 8 l. Sulphur Colophonia 4 l. make all these Ingredients melt at
the fire by a small heat, in an Earthen or Copper vessel, and all being well
melted, throw into the melted matters 2 l. of Coal dust, of the cuttings or
filings of Horses Hoofs 6 l. Assafoetida 3 l. Sagapenum 1 l. Spatula foetida
half a pound: Mingle and incorporate them well together; then put into this
matter Linen or Woolen Cloth, or Hemp or Tow, so much as will drink up all
the matter, and of these you may make Globes or Balls of what bigness pleases
your self best, according to the method and order as we have heretofore
prescribed.

The Globes or Balls may be made Venomous or Poisonous, if to their Composition
be added these things following, viz. Mercury sublimate, Arsenick, Orpiment,
Cinaber, to which may also be added many other Poisonous matters, which I shall
forbear to mention, considering every one by Nature is apt enough to learn to
do that which is mischievous.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Shooting of Shot made red hot in the Fire.

IT is practice that has been practiced in former times to shoot red hot
Fireballs, and was counted of great defense, as you may find amongst many
other things in the Works of Diodorus Siculus, where he says, Tyrios immisse
in Alexandri Magni machinamenta massas ferreas candentes: Out of many Authors
may be proved the customary use in former times of Shooting red hot Pieces of
Iron., which we shall not dwell upon, but come to the Practice. First, you must
Charge the Piece of Ordnance according to the customary manner, his due
proportion of Powder, upon this Powder you must put a Wooden Cylender or Fidd,
of a just and equal wideness with the bore of the Piece, which must be driven
very stiff home to the Powder, and for your better security, you must put upon
this another wad made of Straw, Hay, or of Oakam, or Tow; this being done, let
the Piece be laid a little under Metal, and then cleanse the vacant place or
hollow of the Piece with a Sponge, so that all the Grains of Powder that are
there, may be taken away. This being done, lay your Piece to bear with the
place you intend to shoot at, according to the method we have given in the
second Part of Gunnery, and let your Piece thus remain until you have put in
your red hot Bullet: your Bullet must be sure to be exactly round, and not so
high, but that it may run freely down in the Piece to the wad, the Shot being
red hot, take it out of the fire with a pair of Tongs made for that purpose,
and put it into the Piece, and give an attentive Ear, for as soon as the Shot
is supposed to be up to the Wad, give immediately Fire to your Piece of
Ordnance.

There are others which put into their Pieces Boxes made of Plate, of Iron or
Copper. Others do put into their Pieces Potters Clay, and upon them the fiery
Bullet, which with a quick hand they thrust home with a Rammer, which ought to
be defended from fire by lining the Rammer head with Copper. But these are more
perilous; and therefore we account that method above to be the best, and most
free from danger.

CHAP. XV.
To Arm Pikes to defend a Ship or any other place.

TO arm Pikes, to defend a ship, or breach, or to enter the same, or to stick
in the sides of a ship, or other place, take strong Canvas, and cut it in
length about a foot, or 14 inches, and six inches high in the Center, and let
the ends be both cut taper-wise, then fasten the Canvas at both ends with
strong twine, and fill it with this receipt.

Powder bruised 8 parts, Peter in Roch 1 part, Peter in meal 1 part, Sulphur in
meal two parts, Rozen Roch three parts, Turpentine 1 part, Verdigrease part,
Bole-armonick ^/3 part, Bay salt ^/^ part, Colophonia ^/6 part, Arsnick 1/8
part, mix them very well together, and try them in the top of a Brass
Candlestick, when the fire does burn furiously with a blew and greenish color,
then fill the Canvas, and roll it over, being first armed with strong twine all
over, with this liquid mixture molten in a pan, Pitch four parts, Linseed Oil 1
part, Turpentine part, Sulphur 1 part, Tarr ^/^ part, Tallow one part; and as
soon as this is cold, bore two holes in each of the same next the Iron an inch
deep, with a sharp Iron Bodkin, filling the same with fine bruised powder, and
putting in every hole a little stick of two inches long, which are to be taken
out when you would fire the same; this composition will burn furiously.

And remember you cut off the staff some three inches from the work, and put
thereon a brass socket of f^e or six inches long, and then cut the end of your
staff to fill the socket, for when you fire your work, you may stick it in the
side of a ship, and pull the staff out again, so will not the work be so easily
avoided, as when the staff was on, and hangs at length, because the very weight
of the staff, and length thereof, will be a means to weigh down the work, or
that the enemy may come, and thereby pull it out, or beat it off quickly; let
the Composition and work contain in weight about 7 pounds, then will it do
execution, and work a better effect, than if it were of less weight, by much,
by reason the composition else would be wasted, before it comes to effect its
E^^cution.

To burn the sayls of Ships a pre^^y distance or to fire Thatched houses,
Cornstacks, or any other combustible matter apt to burn, when you cannot come
to the same; it is good to have certain strong Cross-bows to bend with Racks or
Gaffels, and so shoot Arrows armed at the heads with Wildfire, made of the
composition as above, and about three inches in length, and one inch and a half
in the Diameter, tapred as before in all points: or you may have long bows, but
then let your Arrows be also longer, which for diverse services may do great
good.

CHAP. XVI.
To charge Trunks with Balls of Wildfire.

TO charge Trunks to shoot little Balls of wildfire, either to offend or
defend, you must first charge him with two inches of good Powder, and then with
a Ball of wildfire a little lower than the concave of the Trunk, let the Ball
be bored through cross-ways, and primed full of fine powder. Lastly, with slow
receipt, then with powder, then with a Ball again as aforesaid, until you have
filled the same within of an inch of the mouth, which would be filled up with
fine powder and receipt mixed together. Some do use to have at the mouth two
Iron stirts to stick them in the side of any thing, or to defend ones self from
the Enemy from taking it off with a thrust while they do Execution.

To make the Ball.
The Ball of Wildfire must be thus made, Take untwisted Match, Tow, and Hemp,
the which be moistened in Aqua-vitae, or boiled in Saltpeter water: then take
of bruised Powder six parts, of Saltpeter one part, of Brimstone finely beaten
one part, of coal made of light wood moistened with a little Linseed-oyl and
Turpentine wrought together, one part: then lay the Tow or Oakam, abroad in
thickness of the back of a knife, and as broad as a great Oyster-shel, put into
the same as much as you can grasp together in your fist, and tying the same
hard with a pack-thread, coat it over with molten Brimstone, and when you would
use the same, bore it through with a Bodkin, and fill the holes full of fine
powder bruised.

To make Bullets of Wildfire to shoot out of a Trunk, which will be as hard as
a Stone.
Take Sulphur in meal six parts, of Rozen in meal six parts, melting the same
in some Pot over a slow fire: then take stone pitch one part, of hard wax one
part, of Tarr part, of Aquavitae part, of Linseed Oil part, of Verdigrease
part, of Camphire part, melting all these together. Likewise stir into the same
of Peter in meal two parts, and taking it from the fire, put therein four parts
of bruised powder, working the same well together in your hands, and roll it
round of the bigness you mean to make your balls of, boring two holes through
the same cross-ways, which must be primed with bruised powder. These balls
being cold, will grow very hard, and fired will burn furiously.

To make Hedg-hogs.
To make Hedg-hogs, or balls, you must fill them with the same receipts you do
your Arrows, and Pikes, and let them be five inches in the Diameter, and well
armed with twine before you coat them, and after boared two holes, and primed
with fine powder: then put in two sticks, and using them, pull them out again,
and at the said holes fire them. The spikes end of Iron must be like Deaths
Arrow heads, five or six stirts a piece to hang in the sayls, or stick in or
upon any place assigned; and remember in the arming, to leave a noose to throw
him being fired, out of your hand.

To make Powder-pots.
They are made of black Potters clay, or thick glass, round Bottles with ears
to tie matches, lighted at both ends, the pots or glasses are to be filled with
dry fine powder, and thrown upon the decks, or other where, which will much
prejudice the Enemy, and many times fire their own Powder-chests.

ARTIFICIAL FIREWORKS FOR RECREATION.
AMongst all Artificial fires that have been put in practice many years, the
Fuzees (which the Latins call Rochetae, and the Greeks Pyroboli) have always
had the first Rank; (nevertheless this Greek word does not well agree with the
Etymology of the word Rochetae) seeing that (...) signifies properly Tela
ignita, that is, burning darts or Arrows, the Italians call them Rochetae and
Raggi, the Germans Steigen de Kasten, Ragetten, and Drachetten, the Poles Race,
the French Fuzees, the English Rockets, or Serpents. If we consider the
invention of them, it has been of so ancient standing, that the construction
is now very common and familiar amongst all the Pyrobolists and Fire-masters;
the which, although it appears very easy in it self, yet there is in it
labor, and requires that he that applies himself to this work should not be
careless, but on the contrary take all the care and diligence that possibly he
can have for the preparing of such perilous things, considering likewise the
expenses and losses are irreparable after the experiment made; and seeing that
nothing can be put in practice in public Recreations without these Fuzees,
therefore I think I am something obliged here to show the true way of preparing
them, with their particular use.

CHAP. I.
How to make Rockets.

I Intend not here to write the Construction of Moulds fit for this purpose,
but rather leave the more curious Students herein to the works of Casimier
Siemienowicz, Lieutenant General of the Artillery in the Kingdom of Polonia,
in his great Art of Artillery written in the French Tongue and Printed at
Amsterdam, and also in our Contrymen Mr. Bate and Mr. Babington etc. That
which I intend to do, is to teach you how they may be made by hand, or by help
only of a Rouler to Roll the Paper upon; let it be turned to the thickness you
intend, only let the Rouler be 8 times the Diameter in length. If it be three
quarters of an inch in thickness, the length will be three inches. Roll your
Paper hard on the Rouler until the thickness be one inch and a quarter Rouler
and all; then glue the uppermost paper, and the Case is made. On the choking
or contracting the paper together at one end, within one Diameter of the end,
except only a little hole, about one quarter the Diameter of the bore thereof,
to contract these Cases on this manner, do thus, wet the end about one inch in
water, then put the Rouler in again, and tie a great packthread about the wet
within three quarters of an inch of the end, put another thing almost of the
same Diameter with the Rouler in at the wet end about half an inch, hold it
there, get some other body to draw the packthread together, you holding the
Rouler and Rammer, one put down to the end within one inch, and the Rammer
which must be little less than the Diameter to meet with that end within half
an inch, in which the contract or choking must be; the packthread having drawn
it together, tie it fast on that place, take out the Former, let it dry, and it
is done; when the hole is contracted together, make it so wide as is before
taught, with a round bodkin, which you must provide for that purpose.

CHAP. II.
How to make Compositions for Rockets of any size.

THese ways which I will teach you I take them not upon trust out of every
Author, but such as are men of known experience, as that Casimier before spoken
of, and others of the like repute. And first, for Rockets of 1 ounce, you must
use only Cannon-powder dust being beaten in a Mortar, and finely sifted, and
this will rise swift, and will make a great noise, but carries no tail: Those
of most beauty in their operation are made of 1 ounce of Charcoal-dust, eight
ounces of Powder, this Composition will hold for Rockets of one, two, or three
ounces; but for those of four, take three ounces of Charcoal-dust, to one pound
of Cannon-powder dust, continuing that Rule until you come to Rockets of ten
ounces, and from thence to Rockets of a pound; for there used to be one pound
of Powder-dust to 4 ounces of Charcoal-dust. But for better satisfaction
observe these Rules.

For Rockets of one pound. Take Powder 18 l. Saltpeter 8 l. Charcoal 4 l.
Sulphur 2 l, For Rockets of two or three pound. Take of Saltpeter 60 l. Coal
15 l. Sulphur 2 l. For Rockets of four or five pound. Take of Saltpeter 64 l.
Coal 16 l. Sulphur 8 l. For Rockets of six seven or eight pound. Saltpeter 35
l. Coal 10 l. Sulphur 5 l. For Rockets of nine or ten pound. Saltpeter 62 l.
Coal 20 l. Sulphur 9 l. For Rockets from eleven to fifteen pound. Saltpeter 32
l. Sulphur 8 l. Coal 16 l. For Rockets from sixteen to twenty pound. Saltpeter
42 l. Coal 26 l. Sulphur 12 l. For Rockets from thirty to fifty pound.
Saltpeter 30 l. Coal 18 l. Sulphur 7 l. For Rockets from sixty to a hundred
pound. Take Peter 30 l. Sulphur 10 l. Coal 10 l.
CHAP. III.
To fill the Rockets with this Composition.

PLace the mouth downwards where it was choked, and with a knife put in so
much as you can of the receipts provided for that size at one time; then put
down your Rammer, which must be longer and narrower than the Former or Rouler
upon which you made the Cases, and with a hammer of a pound weight, give three
or four indifferent knocks, then put in more composition with your knife, until
it be full, at every time knocking the like as before with the Rammer, until
the composition come within one diameter of the bore of the top, there put down
a piece of pastboard, and knock it in hard, prick three or four little holes
therein, then put fine pistol powder in almost to the top, and upon that
another cap of paper, upon which put a piece of leather, that it may be tied on
the top of the Rocket, and fast glued on, then get a straight twig, and bind it
upon the Rocket with strong packthred; it must be no heavier, than being put
upon your finger, two or three fingers breadths from the mouth of the same, it
may just ballast the Rocket; then it is prepared for use.

CHAP. IV.
How to give fire to one or more Rockets.

SEt your Rockets mouth upon the edge of any piece of timber, battlement of a
wall, top of the Gunners carriage wheel, or any dry place whatsoever, where the
rod or twig may hang perpendlcular from it, then lay a train of powder that may
come under the mouth thereof, give fire thereunto, and you have done. But if
you would fire more Rockets than one, that as one descends, the other may
ascend by degrees, make this composition following of Roch peter 8 ounces,
Quick Brimstone 4 ounces, and fine Powder dust 2 ounces, which lay in a line
from one Rocket to another, they being placed ten inches or a foot one from
another, give fire to this composition, and it will work your desire, by
causing one to mount into the air when the other is spent; but before you place
your Rockets, remember to prick them with the bodkin.

CHAP. V.
Diverse and sundry Compositions for Stars.

A Composition for Stars of a blew color mixed with red.
TAke of Powder mealed 8 ounces, Saltpeter 4 ounces, Quick Brimstone 12
ounces, Meal all these very fine, and mix them together with two ounces of
Aqua-vitae, and half an ounce of Oil of Spike, which let be very dry before you
use it.

Another Composition which makes a white and beautiful fire.
Take Powder 8 ounces, Saltpeter 24 ounces, Quick Brimstone 12 ounces,
Camphire 1 ounce, Meal these Ingredients and incorporate them: Now to meal your
Camphire, take a brass pestle and mortar, wet the end of the pestle in a little
of the Oil of Almonds, and it will meal to powder, then keep it close from the
air, else it will become of no use,

Another white fire which lasts long.
Take Powder 4 ounces, Saltpeter 16 ounces, Brimstone 8 ounces, Camphire 1
ounce, Oil of Peter 2 ounces, Meal those that are to be mealed, and mix them
according to the former directions.

CHAP. VI.
The manner of making Stars; and to use them.

TAke little four square pieces of brown paper, which fill with the composition
you approve of best, of the three last taught: so double it down, rouling it
until you make it round, about the bigness of a nut, or bigger, according to
the size of your Rocket, that you intend them for, prime them, withdrawing
through them Cotton-week, and they are prepared.

You may also make them after this manner, you must have a rouler which must be
as big as an ordinary arrow, which shall be to roll a length of paper about it,
and with a little glue past it round; when it is dry draw out the rouler, and
fill it by little and little, with a thimble; still thrusting it down, every
filling of a thimble, with the rouler; which being filled, cut it in short
pieces, about half an inch long; then having in readiness either hot glue, or
size, mingled with red lead, dip therein one end of your short pieces, lest
they take fire at both ends together, and because that it may not so easily
blow out: these being thus finished, set them to dry until you have occasion to
use them: and then putting the open end in powder on the top of the Rocket, in
that place after the first pastboard, or cover, is placed in a Rocket; next the
composition, where I taught you before to put powder for to make a report:
which now you must leave out to place in these Stars; after this manner make
two or three holes in that pastboard, which prime with powder-dust: and
thereupon put a little Pistol powder, to blow the Stars out when the Rocket is
spent: after the powder, put as I have said before, the open ends of these
Stars, down upon that powder: when you have put them so close as they can stick
one by the other, put a little small corned powder on the top of them, to run
between them, and put another tire of Stars upon that, and in like manner a
third tire upon them, till you come to the top of the Rocket-case, there put a
paper over the head of it, and tie it close about the top, that none of the
powder come from under or between the Stars.

How to prepare the Cotton-week, to prime the first sort of Stars.
Take Cotton-week, such as the Chandlers use for Candles, double it six or
seven times double; and wet it thoroughly in Saltpeter water, or Aqua-vitae,
wherein some Camphire has been dissolved, or for want of either in fair water,
cut it in diverse pieces, roll it in mealed powder, dry it in the Sun, and it is
done.

CHAP. VII.
How to make silver and golden Rain, and how to use them.

NOw I show you the order of making golden Rain, which is after this manner;
you must provide store of Goose-quills, which being provided, you must cut them
off so long as they are hollow, the composition to fill these must be made
thus; two ounces of cole-dust to one pound of powder well mixed; having filled
many of these quills, you shall place them in the same place as I taught you to
put the powder and Stars, first putting a small quanity of Pistol powder under
them, to blow them out when the Rocket is spent: upon this put your quills, as
many as will fill the top of the case, with the open end downwards; so soon as
the Rocket is spent, you shall see appear a golden shower, which by some is
called golden Rain: The like way you may make silver Rain, filling the quills
with the Composition for white Stars.

CHAP. VIII.
How to make Fisgigs, which some call by the name of Serpents, and to use them.

YOu must provide a small rouling pin, about one quarter of an inch in
thickness, upon which roll seven or eight thicknesses of paper: fill them four
inches with powder dust, sometimes putting between the filling a little of the
Composition for Rockets of 10 ounces: and at the end of four inches choke him;
fill two inches more with Pistol powder; then choke the end up: at the other
end put in a little of the mixture for Stars, and choke between that and the
composition, and you have done: put diverse of these with the Starry end
downwards, upon the head of a Rocket, as you did the quills, with powder to
blow them out; when the Rocket is spent, they will first appear like so many
Stars; when the Stars are spent, taking hold of the powder dust, they will run
wrigling to and fro like Serpents; and when that Composition is spent, they
will end with every one a report, which will give great content. I shall have
occasion to speak of these Fisgigs in other Fireworks.

CHAP. IX.
How to make Girondels, or (as some call them) Fire-Wheels.

A Fire-Wheel is often required in great Works for pleasure, and therefore I
have thought fit and necessary, to set down their description, as well as of
all other sorts of Fireworks; First, you must make a Wheel of Wood, so big as
you please, to make Girondels, and unto these bind Rockets very fast of a mean
bigness, with the mouth of one toward the tail of another, thus continuing
until you have filled your Wheel quite round, which done, cover them with paper
pasted very curiously, that one taking fire, they may not take fire all
together; and daub Soap upon them quite round, leaving the mouth of one of them
open to give fire thereto; for the first Rocket having burned, will give fire
to the next, keeping the Wheel in continual motion, until they be all spent:
there may be bound fire Lances to these Girondels, either upright, or near,
overthwart, which will make to appear diversity of fiery Circles; Your care
must be, to place the Girondels at a convenient distance, from other
Fireworks, lest they should cause confusion, and spoil all your Work.

CHAP. X.
How to represent diverse sorts of Figures in the Air with Rockets.

I Have taught you to make a report upon the head of a Rocket, and also to
place golden or silver Hair or Rain, or Stars, or Fisgigs, which when you have
diverse Rockets to make for a great Fire-work, let one be with a report, the
next with Stars, another with Gold Hair, or Rain, one with Silver Hair or Rain,
for standing just under the Rocket it appears like Rain, but being aside
hand, like Golden or Silver Hair: and upon the head of another Rocket place the
Fisgigs, which when the Rocket is spent will first appear like so many Stars,
after they are ended, they will show like Serpents wrigling to and fro, and
lastly, give every one his report.

It is a rare thing to represent a Tree or Fountain, in the air, which is made
by putting many little Rockets upon one great one, passing all the rods of the
little ones through wires, made on purpose upon the sides of the great one, or
some other way, as your industry will discover; now if the little ones take
fire while the great one is mounting up, they will represent a Tree, but if
they take fire as the great one is descending or turning down again toward the
ground, then they will be like a fountain of fire; if there be two or three
little Rockets amongst others, that have no rods, they will make diverse motions
contrary to the rest, very pleasing.

If before you put the Fisgigs upon the head of a great Rocket, you with a
small string tie them together, a foot of line between; when they are on fire
in the Air you will see very great variety of Figures, because as they wriggle
to and fro, they will pull one another after them, to the speculators great
content: it will be pleasant if you tie them not altogether, but three or four,
which will in the firing of them, be distinguished from the rest, with great
variety.

CHAP. XI.
How to make a Rocket, which firing it out of your hand, shall continually be
in agitation, either on the earth, or in the air.

HAving prepared a Rocket with a report in the head, such as I taught you first
to make, tie it to a bladder, so that the end of the Rocket may come to the
month of the said bladder, and bind it over very strongly, then firing it out
of your hand, cast it away from you, it matters not which way, so it will come
to the ground; there by reason of the bladder, it cannot stay, but presently
rebounds upwards, moving to and fro, until all be spent: there is another sort,
and that is a small rocket, put into a bladder, and so blown up round about it,
and tied about the neck thereof, which will have delightful motions.

CHAP. XII.
Of the many defects in Fuzees, how they may be avoided, and of such things as
ought to be observed in their good Construction.

THe first and most notable defect which is observed in Fuzees, is that after
they are lighted or risen into the Air the height of 1, 2, or 3 Perches, they
break, and do dissipate without making their entire effects.

The second, which is little better, is after it is remaining suspended upon
the nail it consumes but very leisurely, without going away or raising it self
in the Air.

The third is, when they are raised in the Air, they describe only an Arch of a
Circle like a Rainbow, and return upon the earth again before the Composition
in the Fuzee be consumed.

The fourth is when it moves in a spiral manner, whirling in the Air without
observing an equal motion; that is not right as it ought to be.

The fifth is when it mounts sloathfully and negligently, as if it disdained or
refused to elevate it self into the Air.

The sixth and last is, that the Case or Cartouch remains hanging upon the Nail
quite empty, and the Composition does rise and dissipate alone into the Air.
There is many other vexations and inconveniences which may give trouble to the
Practitioners in these Arts with vain expense, which would loose too much time
to repeat: It will be sufficient if you take notice of these which are
principal, whereby, if by ill fortune you be fallen into any of these defaults,
you may correct your error easily, and then immediately correct those faults.
And for this purpose, observe the rules given in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XIII.
Infallible Rules by which you may make Fuzees, or Rockets, without any
default.

FIrst, that they have their height proportionable to the Diameter of their
Orifice, as we have before declared.

Secondly, the Cartouch ought to be of wood, or glued or pasted paper, not too
thick, nor too thin.

Thirdly, they ought to be made of strong paper of indifferent dryness,
properly rouled and well compacted close upon the Former.

Fourthly, the necks ought to be bound about very strongly and firm, in such a
sort, that the knot of the thread, and the folds of the Cartouch, may not lie
amiss one upon the other.

Fifthly, all the Materials of the Composition must be exactly weighed
according to the proportion of the Orifice of the Fuzee that you would charge,
and also well beaten and sifted particularly; after, having weighed them again,
and mixed them in one body well together, you must pound them again, and pass
them through the Sieve as you did before.

Sixthly, that the Saltpeter and Sulphur be powdered and clarified as much as
possible may be, and the Coal perfectly well burned and exempted from all
humidity, and made of wood that is light and soft, as the Teile, the Hazle, and
the branches of the Willow Tree; and on the contrary, it is necessary to have a
care, that you make not use of such Coals as are made of Birch, Oak, nor Maple,
because they contain in them much weighty and terrestial matter.

Seventhly, matters for Rockets or Fuzees ought to be prepared immediately
before they are intended for use, and not before.

Eighthly, the matters of Composition ought to be neither too dry nor too
moist, but moistened a little with some Oliganious matter, or with a little
Brandywine.

Ninthly, there must be put into the Cartouch always an equal quantity of the
Composition at a time, and so beat it down alike; and thus do until it be
filled.

Tenthly, you must beat the Composition always with the Rammer right up, or
perpendicularly, and take care that in the beating it be not made crooked.

Eleventhly, You must strike down the Composition with a wooden Mallet, that is
of heft proportionable to the bigness and thickness of the Rocket, and always
with an equal strength, and just number of strokes, every time you put in any
of the Composition.

Twelfthly, in Cartouches made of paper, you must put in round pieces of wood
hollowed; but in those that are made of wood, you must put such as are smooth,
without any channel or hollowing, to the end that it join the better to the
sides of the Fuzee, where it must join firmly, as well without as within.

13. The Fuzee must be peirced with a Bit or Awl that is convenient, in such a
sort that the hole be not too big nor too straight, nor too long nor too short.

14. The hole must be made the most straight and perpendicular that may be
possible, and just in the middle of the Composition, to the end that it lean
nor to any one side, more than to the other.

15. The Fuzee must not be peirced before it be intended for use, and after it
is pierced you must handle it tenderly, only with the ends of your fingers, for
fear of deforming it.

16. The Perch or Stick to which you fasten the Fuzee, ought to be
proportionable as well in length as weight; it must not be crooked nor winding
in any manner, neither unequal, nor full of knots, but straight as possible can
be made, and must therefore be made smooth, and straightened with a Plain, if
need requires.

17. After they are Charged, they must not be laid into too dry a place, nor in
a place too moist, for the one or other of those accidents may hurt them;
therefore let the place be temperate.

18. When you would use them and put them into action, hang them upon a nail
perpendicular to the Horizon.

19. You must not think to raise a bundle of a great weight, or that has too
great a disproportion to their strength, you must adjoyn them together so
rightly, that all together may have a proper form, and reasonable to pass into
the Air, and to elevate it self on high without any difficulty, and in such a
sort, that those bundles may not by any means give hinderance or stoppage to
their rising in a straight line; and take care most exactly that the Fuzee be
not so big, but that they may retain as near as you can a Pyramidal or Conical
form, when all its weight that may be is adjoined to it.

20. Men ought to shun as much as possible those nights that are rainy, moist,
and when the Sky is darkened with black clouds, as being very incommodious and
offensive to the Fuzees. And more than that, avoid impetuous Stormy winds, and
the Whirl-winds hinder no less than the first.

21. You may not reject above other causes, the different effects which are
produced by sundry Fuzees (although they be charged with one and the same
Composition) no otherwise than thus, that they were not made with an equal
diligence either in the Charging or Peircing, or in the other Circumstances,
which you were obliged to observe; or in this, that it may be some may have
been kept in a more moister place than the others, where they have acquired too
much moisture, which causes to them, effects much different one from another,
as well in Rising as in Consuming.

22. If you would make appear in the Air streams of fire, or a quantity of
burning sparks or stars, or long large rays to dart from the Fuzees; there is
accustomed to mix with the Composition some small quantity of powdered Glass
grossly beaten, filings of Iron, Sawdust. One may also represent fire of diverse
colors, as we have showed before in the fifth Chapter; but more particularly
thus; if you put a certain portion of Camphire in your Composition, you will
see in the Air a certain fire which will appear, white, pale, and of the color
of Milk; if you put Greek Pitch, which is a light yellow Pitch used in
Plasters, called Pix Burgundy, it will represent unto you a red flame, and of
the color of Brass; if you put in Sulphur, the fire will appear blew; if
Sal-Armoniack, the fire will appear Greenish; if from Crude Antimony, the flame
will be Red, Yellowish, and of the Color of Honey; if the filings of Ivory be
added, they will render a Silver-like, White and shining flame, yet something
inclining to a Livid Plumbous color; if the powder of Yellow Amber be added,
the fire will appear of the same color, with the Citrine; lastly, if black
Pitch be added, it will throw forth an obscure smoaky fire, or rather a smoke
that is black and thick, which will darken all the Air.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Odoriferous Aquatick Balls.

CAuse to be made by a Turner, Balls of wood, hollow within, about the bigness
of a Wild Apple, which you must fill with some one of these Compositions
hereunto annexed, and they being all prepared and charged, you may throw them
into the water after they are lighted, but it ought to be done in a Chamber or
close place, that the fume may be the better kept together, and this must be
done with some small end of our Match made of prepared Flax or Hemp, to the end
that the Composition which is shut up in the Globe may take fire with the
greater facility.

The Compositions are these that follow, viz.
Take Saltpeter, Storax Calamite, one Dram; Incense one ounce, Mastick one
ounce, Amber half an ounce, Civet half an ounce, of the Sawings of Juniper wood
two ounces, of the Sawings of Cypress wood two ounces, Oil of Spike one ounce;
Make your Composition according to the Art and Method given. Or,

Take of Saltpeter two ounces; of Flower of Brimstone, Camphire, half an
ounce; powder of yellow Amber half an ounce, Coals of the Teile tree one ounce;
Flower of Benjamin, or Assa sweet, half an ounce; Let the matters that may be
beaten be powdered, afterward well mingled and incorporated together.

CHAP. XV.
Compositions to Charge Globes or Balls, that will burn as well under as above
water.

FIrst, take Saltpeter reduced into fine meal 16 l. Sulphur 4 l. of the
sawings of wood which has been first boiled in a Nitrous water, and afterward
well dried, 4 l. Of good Corned powder half a pound, of the powder of Ivory 4
ounces. Or thus,

Saltpeter 6 l. Sulphur 3 l. of beaten powder 1 l. Filings of Iron 2 l. of
Burgundy pitch half a pound. Or thus,

Saltpeter 24 l. of beaten powder 4 l. Sulphur 12 l. of Sawdust 8 l. of yellow
Amber half a pound, of Glass beaten in gross powder half a pound, of Camphire
half a pound. For that which concerns the manner of preparing all these
Compositions; it differs nothing from what we have prescribed in the making of
Rockets, only it is not necessary that the materials be so subtly beaten,
powdered nor sifted, as for those Fuzees, but nevertheless to be well mixed one
among another. Care must be taken that they be not too dry when you charge the
Globes or Balls, and for that purpose they may be moistened with Linseed-oyl,
Oil of Olives, Petrole, Hempseed, Nuts, or any other fatty humor that is
receptible of fire.

Note,. that amongst all these Compositions of matters that will burn in the
water, which I have here proposed from my own particular experience, every one
may make them as pleases himself best, provided he always take the materials
in proportion one to the other, as they ought. But nevertheless I shall counsel
you to experience from time to time your Compositions, for the greater surety,
before you expose them to the public view of the world. It is also amongst the
rest very necessary that you learn the force and strength of every material you
put into the Compositions, whereby you may at your pleasure know how to alter
and vary your proportion, as you shall judge fit.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Stars and fiery Sparks, called by the Germans Stern-veuer and Veuerputzen.

I Have showed the Composition of Stars in Chap. 5. I have also showed the way
of making them up, and their use, and also I have showed the manner of giving
to them various Colors, as in the 22 Rule of the 13 Chapter, where I had an
intent to say no more of these things: But finding in Master Cazimier's
Artillery these Compositions, which I judge may prove very excellent; therefore
I thought good to insert them, that I might leave out nothing that might make
more perfect any thing we treat of.

First, you must know that between fiery Sparks and Stars there is this
difference, that the Stars are greater, and are not so soon consumed by the
fire as the Sparks are, but do subsist longer in the Air; and do shine with
greater substance, and with such a light, that by reason of their great
splendour, they are in some manner comparable with the Stars in the Heavens.
They are prepared according to the following Method.

Take Saltpeter half a pound, Sulphur two ounces, Yellow Amber powdered one
Dram, Antimony Crude one Dram, of beaten Powder three Drams. Or,

Take Sulphur two ounces and a half, Saltpeter four ounces, Powder subtly
powdered four ounces, Olibanum, Mastick, Crystal, Mercury sublimate, of each
four ounces, White Amber one ounce, Camphire one ounce, Antimony and Orpiment
half an ounce; All these materials being well beaten and well sifted, they must
be mixed together with a little Glue or Gum-water, made with Gum-Arabick or
Tragacant; then make them into small Balls about the bigness of a Bean or small
Nut, which being dried in the Sun, or in a Pan by the fire, may be kept in a
convenient place for such uses as we have spoken of in the fifth Chapter of
this Book. You must only remember, that when you would put them into Rockets or
Recreative Balls, they must be covered on all sides with prepared Tow, of which
we have showed the way of preparing in the seventh Chapter of the first Part of
our Fireworks.

Sometimes Fire-Masters are accustomed to take in the places of these little
Balls, a certain proportion of melted matters, of which we have spoken in the
first Part of Fireworks; But if these do not please you, by reason of their
swarthy color, but you rather desire to see them yellow, or inclining somewhat
to white, then take of Gum-Arabick or Tragacant four ounces, powder it and pass
it through a Sieve, of Camphire dissolved in Aqua-vitae two ounces, Saltpeter
a pound and a half, Sulphur half a pound, Glass grossy powdered four ounces,
White Amber an ounce and a half, Orpiment two ounces, make all these
Ingredients into one mass, and make Globes of them as before. I Learned this,
says my Author, from Claude Midorge.

For the method of making Sparkles in particular, it is thus; Take Saltpeter
one ounce, of this Liquid matter half an ounce, of beaten Powder half an ounce,
of Camphire two ounces; after you have beaten all these materials into powder,
every one by it self, put all of them into an Earthen Pan, and put upon them
the Water of Gum Tragacanth, or Brandy-wine, wherein you have dissolved some
Gum Tragacanth or Arabic, until it be of a good consistency; that done, take
an ounce of Lint, which has first been boiled in Brandy-wine or Vinegar, or in
Saltpeter, and after dried again, and the threads drawn out; then put it into
the Composition, and mix them well together, so well and so long until it has
drank up all the matter; of these Compositions make little Balls in the form of
Pills, and of the bigness of great Peace, which you must roll in mealed
Gunpowder, and dry them, whereof you may serve your self, according to the
method we have prescribed.

Besides these, there are certain odoriferous Pills prepared, which are
employed in small Engines and fiery Inventions, which are showed in Chamber
Roams, or close Cabinets, these are commonly prepared of Storax, Calamite,
Benjamin, Amber, white and yellow, and of Camphire, of each one ounce,
Saltpeter three ounces, of Coals made of the Teil Tree four ounces; beat all
these Ingredients to powder, then incorporate them well together, and moisten
them with Rose Water, in which is dissolved Gum-Arabick or Tragacanth, to make
thereof little Balls; at last, having fashioned them, expose them to the Sun or
to the fire to dry.

THE DOCTRINE OF PROJECTS APPLIED TO GUNNERY.

By those late famous Italian Authors GALILAEUS AND TORRICELLIO.

Now rendered in ENGLISH.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1672.

THE PREFACE.
GALILAEUS in his 4th. Dialogue of Motion, has largely treated of aequable and
accelerate or increasing Motions, as also of that of Projects, or things shot,
and thence derived several Propositions or Conclusions, and has likewise made
several Tables touching the Amplitudes or Base Lines, and the Altitudes or
Heights of the Semiparabola's or Curves described by the Motion and Ranges of
Projects. The which Doctrine the late Famous Torricellio of Florence, having
with great Judgment much advanced and facilitated, applying the whole to the
Art of Gunnery; that the benefit of his pains might redound to the English
Reader, that is especially Delighted or Exercised in the Affairs of Mars, it
was thought fit to render the same into English.

THE DOCTRINE OF PROJECTS APPLIED TO GUNNERY.
PROPOSITION.
The Impetus B A (that is, as much as is that of the moveable naturally falling
from B to A by the Which Definition is; when we name an Impetus given, we
determine it in spaces, according as Galilaus uses; Exemp. Great. When we say,
let the Impetus given be A B, then we mean, let the Impetus given be so much as
is requisite to throw the Project from A to the highest point of the
perpendicular B; or, which is the same, as much as is the Impetus of a moveable
naturally falling from B to A.
Definition) as also the Direction A I, according to which the Projection is to
be made with the said Impetus being given: it is required to find the
Amplitude, Altitude, and the whole future Parabola of this Projection.

Through A and B draw the Horizontal lines A D, and B L, a square inscribed by
various lines and angles and describe the Semicircle A F B about the Diameter A
B, which shall somewhere cut the line A C, seeing that A D is a Tangent. Let
the Section be in F, and draw the Horizontal line F E, and prolong F G equal to
F E; then by G let fall the perpendicular L G D; then about the Diameter G D,
by the points G and A, describe the Parabola A G, which can be but one, by the
precedent Which Lemma was; that about the Diameter G D, thorough the Vertex G,
and any assigned point A, there cannot be described more than one Parabola.
Lemm. of Propos. VIII.
Lemma; nor can there any other Parabola be described about the Diameter this
is the Parabola sought. For the directive line of this Parabola is AI, seeing
that it touches the Parabola in A, for EG, or AD, is double to FG by
construction; and therefore DG, and GI are equal: wherefore AI is the Tangent
to the Parabola.

Again, I say, that this Parabola is described by the Impetus given; for AE,
OF, and EB, or those three lines equal to DG the Altitude, GF the Semi-base,
and GL are in continual proportion. Wherefore GL is the sublimity, by the V.
Proposition De metu Projectorum.
of Galiaeus, and its Corollary.

Then thus: the Impetus of the Parabola AG in the point A, is as much as that
of the Cadent naturally falling from L to D, (by X. of Galiaeus) that is, from
B to A, or of the Project ascending from A to B: therefore the Parabola has in
the point A the Impetus that was given: wherefore that is done which was
required.

But because this Proposition is of great moment, for clearing of those that
follow, we will prove it another way.

Let the same Impetus A, B and the same direction AFC be given: the Parabola
made by this projection is sought, describe as before, a Semicircle about the
Diameter various labeled lines and angles AB, which shall cut AC: seeing that
AD is a Tangent. Let it cut it in F, and drawing the Horizontal line EFG, so as
that OF and FG may be equal, described, or conceive a Parabola to be described
along by the points A and G about the Diameter GD. I say, that this is the
Parabola of the Project, if it be thrown from the point A, according to the
Direction AC, with the Impetus AB. Now if the moveable do not run along this
same Parabola it will run along some other; as suppose A P: let the Vertex, or
the highest point of this Parabola AP be found, and let it be P.

First, it is manifest that the point P cannot be in the line LD; because since
the line AC touches each Parabola, that ID the common Axis should be cut into
two equal parts in two points by the Vertex's of the Parabola, is absurd. Nor
can it be in the line EG: for drawing the Diameter, suppose MN, thorough the
^^rtex, that MN should be cut into two equal parts by the line EG, is absurd:
for only ID, of all the lines parallel unto it in the angle CAD, can be cut
into two equal parts.

Now let the point P fall any where at pleasure, and draw the Horizontal line
PR: for as much as PN and PM are equal, by the II of * this, NR and RA, PR and
RS Which second Proposition is, that the sublime point of the Range of any
Project [P] does cut the Perpendicular [M] intercepted betwixt the Horizon and
line of direction, into two equal parts.
shall be equal. And because the Parabola AP has the Impetus BA; that is, OM,
the Point O shall be its sublimity: and for that reason the lines OP, PR, and
PM shall be in continual proportion; and the Rectangle OPM equal unto the
square PR: and changing the lines with their equals, the Rectangle BSA shall be
equal to the square SR: therefore the R is in the point Periphery of the
Semicircle: which is absurd; for the right line AF shall meet with the
Periphery in two several points: wherefore, etc.

COROLLARIES.
FIrst, Hence is manifest, that the Impetus of a parabola inscribed by various
angles any Machine being given, as for example EA, if there be described about
EA the Semicircle ADE, one may assign the Altitudes and the Amplitudes of all
the projections that can be made by the same Machine. For example; the Impetus
EA remaining still the same, let projections be made along the lines of several
elevations AC, AD, and AB. The projection made according to the direction AC,
shall ascend as high as to the Horizontal line FC prolonged: and the projection
made along the direction AD, shall have its Apex in the line HD prolonged: and
of the projection made according to the line AB, the greatest Altitude shall be
in the Horizontal line GB prolonged.

2. In the Book of Galilaeus de motu naturaliter accelerato, it is proved, that
projects thrown with the same Impetus out of A, if born up by plains of several
inclinations, do always arrive unto one and the same Horizontal plain. But
here it appears, that the several ascensions of projects do vary when they
are thrown thorough the pure Air, without any fulciment put under them,
according to several elevations. For the moveable shall less ascend, which is
emitted along the line AB less elevated, than that which shall be projected
along AD more elevated.

3. It is manifest also, that no Altitude can in such sort ascend, as that it
may reach unto the Horizontal parallel that is drawn through E the highest point
of the perpendicular projection.

4. It is also manifest, that all Amplitudes do always increase from that
projection which is called the point blanck Randon, until you come to the
projection made at the Semi-right Angle. And from the Semi-right unto the
perpendicular, they always diminish until they come to nothing; which happens
in the perpendicular projection, which has no Amplitude.

5. From whence we may observe, that the Amplitudes of each Parabola made by
the same Impetus, the elevations of which are equi-distant from the Semi-right,
are equal to each other. For, since the lines AB and AC are equi-distant from
the Semi-right elevation, the Arches DB and DC a parabola inscribed by various
angles shall be equal, as subtending equal Angles: and consequently the BA and
CE, the remainders of their Quadrants shall be equal: therefore also the Sines
of them, BG and CF, shall be equal. And for the same reason, the whole
Amplitudes of each Parabola, which are Quadruple to the Sines BG and CF, shall
be equal.

6. It is manifest likewise that the Altitudes and Sublimities of projections
equi-distant from the Semi-right, are reciprocally equal to one another, that
is, the Altitude of the one is equal to the sublimity of the other.

7. We will therefore make a Corollary of that which to Galilaeus was an
arduous Theorem, to wit, that the Semi-right Or Randon.
projection is the greatest of all those made by the same Impetus. For, if you
suppose the Angle CAD to be Semi-right, CD shall be the Semi-Diameter; that is
the greatest of all the Sines that can be given in the Semicircle.

8. It is manifest also, that the whole Amplitude of the Semi-right Parabola is
double to the line of the Sublimity, or the Impetus AB: for it has been
demonstrated to be Quadruple of the right line CD, that is double to AB.

a parabola inscribed by a right triangle

PROP. II.
The Impetus and Amplitude being given, to find I incite this Proposition, as
being also cited in the ensuring Discourse.
the direction according to which the Parabola was made; as also to find the
Altitude.

LEt the given Impetus be AB, and let AD be the fourth part of the Amplitude
given. About AB described the Semicircle ACB, and erect DCE, (which if it
shall not fall in the Semicircle, the the problem is impossible) and let it
cut the Semicircle in the points C and E. I say, that either the direction AC
or AE, if the given Impetus AB be retained, shall described a Parabola, whose
Amplitude shall be Quadruple to the line AD, this is manifest from the things
preceding. For projections made with the Impetus AB, according to the
directions AC, or AE, have an Amplitude Quadruple to GE, or FC or AD, which are
equal to one another; and the Altitude may in the one be AF, as also in the
other AG, as appears, etc.

labeled parabola and lines

In this place I have thought sit to insert the Tables following: the first
Classis of which contains three Tables, the same with those of Galilaeus,
which we placed Part. 1. Dial. 4. Page 241. of this present Tome, but different
in many of the Numbers, as being desumed from the Tables of Sines and Tangents,
whereas Galilaeus Calculateth his with much labor, according to the Principles
of his Doctrine of Projective motion, laid down in that his fourth Dialouge.
The second Classis consists of two Tables added by Torricellius, the one of
Durations, the other of Elevations or Randons: the Explanations and
Calculations of which are annexed to them by the Author, but here omitted on
the account of brevity.

TABLE I. The Amplitudes of the Semi-Parabola's described by the same Impetus.
The greatest Amplitude is supposed to be of 10000 parts; and the Number of the
Table are double to the right Sines of the arches of the elevation.
Degr. of Elevat. Ampl. of Semi-P. D. of Elev. 1 349 89 2 098 88 3 1045 87 4
1392 86 5 1736 85 6 2079 84 7 2419 83 8 2756 82 9 3090 81 10 3420 80 11 3746 79
12 4067 78 13 4384 77 14 4695 76 15 5000 75 16 5299 74 17 5592 73 18 5870 72 19
6157 71 20 6428 70 21 6691 69 22 6947 68 23 7193 67 24 7431 66 25 7660 65 26
7880 64 27 8090 63 28 8290 62 29 8480 61 30 8660 60 31 8829 59 32 8988 58 33
9135 57 34 9272 56 35 9397 55 36 9511 54 37 9613 53 38 9703 52 39 9781 51 40
9848 50 41 9903 49 42 9945 48 43 9976 47 44 9994 46 45 10000 45

TABLE II. The Altitudes of the Semi-Parabola's, whose Impetus is the same with
that of the precedent Table. The greatest Altitude is supposed to be of 10000
parts; and the Numbers of the Table are double to the halfs of the versed Sines
of the Arches of the Elevation.
D. of Elev. Altit. of Semi-P. 1 3 2 12 3 27 4 49 5 76 6 109 7 149 8 194 9 245
10 302 11 364 12 432 13 506 14 585 15 670 16 760 17 855 18 955 19 1060 20 1170
21 1284 22 1403 23 1527 24 1654 25 1786 26 1922 27 2061 28 2204 29 2350 30 2500
31 2653 32 2808 33 2966 34 3127 35 3290 36 3455 37 3622 38 3790 39 3960 40 4132
41 4304 42 4477 43 4651 44 4826 45 5000 46 5174 47 5349 48 5523 49 5696 50 5868
51 6040 52 6210 53 6378 54 6545 55 6710 56 6873 57 7034 58 7192 59 7347 60 7500
61 7650 62 7796 63 7939 64 8078 65 8214 66 8346 67 8470 68 8597 69 8716 70 8830
71 8940 72 9045 73 9145 74 9240 75 9330 76 9415 77 9494 78 9568 79 9636 80 9698
81 9755 82 9806 83 9851 84 9891 85 9924 86 9951 87 9973 88 9988 89 9997 90
10000

TABLE III. The Altitudes and Sublimities of the Semi-Parabola's, whose
Amplitudes are equal, Viz. always 10000 parts; the Altitudes are the halfs of
the Tangents of the Angles of the Elevation; and the Sublimities are the halfs
of the Tangents of the Complements of the Elevation.
D. of Elev. Altitudes. Sublimi^ies. 1 87 286450 2 175 143186 3 262 95406 4 350
71503 5 437 57150 6 525 47572 7 614 40722 8 703 35577 9 792 31569 10 882 28356
11 972 25723 12 1063 23523 13 1154 21657 14 1247 20054 15 1340 18660 16 1434
17437 17 1529 16354 18 1625 15388 19 1722 14521 20 1820 13737 21 1910 13025 22
2020 12375 23 2122 11779 24 2226 11230 25 2332 10723 26 2439 10252 27 2548 9813
28 2659 9404 29 2772 9020 30 2887 8668 31 3004 8321 32 3124 8002 33 3247 7699
34 3373 7413 35 3501 7141 36 3633 6882 37 3768 6635 38 3906 6400 39 4049 6175
40 4196 5959 41 4346 5752 42 4502 5553 43 4663 5362 44 4828 5718 45 5000 5000
46 5178 4828 47 5362 4663 48 5553 4502 49 5752 4346 50 5959 4196 51 6175 4049
52 6400 3906 53 6635 3768 54 6882 3633 55 7141 3501 56 7413 3373 57 7699 3247
58 8002 3124 59 8321 3004 60 8660 2887 61 9021 2772 62 9404 2659 63 9813 2548
64 10252 2439 65 10723 2332 66 11230 2226 67 11779 2122 68 12375 2020 69 13025
1919 70 13737 1820 71 14521 1722 72 15388 1625 73 16354 1529 74 17437 1434 75
18660 1340 76 20054 1247 77 21657 1154 78 23523 1063 79 25723 972 80 28356 882
81 31569 792 82 35577 703 83 40722 614 84 47572 525 85 57150 437 86 71503 350
87 95406 262 88 143186 175 89 286450 87 90 Infinita. 00

TABLE IV. The Durations or Impetus of Projects made by the same Impetus
compared to the Horizon. the greatest Duration or Impetus is supposed to be of
1000 parts; and the Numbers of the Table are the right Sines of the Elevations.
Degr. of Elevat. Dur. on Impet. 1 75 2 349 3 523 4 698 5 872 6 1045 7 1219 8
1392 9 1564 10 1736 11 1908 12 2079 13 2250 14 2419 15 2588 16 2756 17 2924 18
2090 19 3256 20 3420 21 3584 22 3746 23 3907 24 4067 25 4226 26 4384 27 4540 28
4695 29 4848 30 5000 31 5150 32 5299 33 5446 34 5592 35 5736 36 5878 37 6018 38
6157 39 6293 40 6428 41 6561 42 6691 43 6820 44 6947 45 7071 46 7193 47 7314 48
7431 49 7547 50 7660 51 7771 52 7880 53 7986 54 8090 55 8192 56 8290 57 8387 58
8480 59 8572 60 8660 61 8746 62 8892 63 8910 64 8988 65 9063 66 9135 67 9205 68
9272 69 9336 70 9397 71 9455 72 9510 73 9563 74 9613 75 9659 76 9703 77 9744 78
9781 79 9816 80 9848 81 9878 82 9903 83 9925 84 9945 85 9962 86 9976 87 9986 88
9994 89 9998 90 10000

TABLE V. The Degrees of Elevation to which the Piece is ^ be mounted, that the
Amplitude of the Projections may be made of the given measure. We suppose all
the Projection to have the same Impet. that is to be made by the same Piece and
that the greatest is 4000 paces.
Spaces, on equal increases of the Projection. Spaces. Degrees. of Elevat.
Complement. 10 00 17 89 43 20 00 34 89 26 30 00 52 89 08 40 1 09 88 51 50 1 26
88 34 60 1 4^ 88 17 70 2 00 88 00 80 2 18 87 42 90 2 35 87 25 100 2 52 87 08
110 3 09 86 51 120 3 27 86 33 130 3 44 86 16 140 4 01 85 59 150 4 19 85 41 160
4 36 85 24 170 4 54 85 06 180 5 11 84 49 190 5 29 84 31 200 5 46 84 14 210 6 04
83 56 220 6 21 83 39 230 6 39 83 21 240 6 57 83 03 250 7 14 82 46 260 7 32 82
28 270 7 50 82 10 280 8 08 81 52 290 8 26 81 34 300 8 44 81 16 310 9 02 80 58
320 9 20 80 40 330 9 38 80 22 340 9 56 80 04 350 10 14 79 46 360 10 33 79 27
370 10 5^ 79 09 380 11 10 78 50 390 10 29 78 31 400 11 47 78 13 410 12 06 77 54
420 12 25 77 35 430 12 44 77 16 440 13 03 76 57 450 13 22 76 38 460 13 42 76 18
470 14 01 75 59 480 14 21 75 39 490 14 40 75 20 500 15 00 72 00 510 15 20 74 40
520 15 40 74 20 530 16 00 74 00 540 16 21 73 39 550 16 41 73 19 560 17 02 72 58
570 17 23 72 37 580 17 44 72 16 590 18 05 71 55 600 18 26 71 34 610 18 48 71 12
620 19 10 70 50 630 19 22 70 26 640 19 54 69 06 650 20 16 69 44 660 20 39 69 21
670 21 02 68 58 680 21 25 68 35 690 21 49 6 21 700 21 13 67 47 710 22 37 67 23
720 23 02 66 56 730 23 27 66 33 740 23 52 66 08 750 24 18 65 42 760 24 44 65 16
770 25 11 64 49 780 25 38 64 22 790 26 06 63 54 800 26 34 63 26 810 27 03 62 57
820 27 33 62 27 830 28 03 61 57 840 28 34 61 26 850 29 06 60 54 860 29 36 60 21
870 30 14 59 46 880 30 50 59 10 890 31 27 58 33 900 32 05 57 55 910 32 45 57 15
920 33 28 56 32 930 34 13 55 47 940 35 02 54 58 950 35 54 54 06 960 36 52 53 08
970 37 58 52 02 980 39 16 50 44 990 40 57 49 03 1000 45 00 45 00

The use of the Precedent TABLE.
SUppose that the greatest Range, namely the Range made at the elevation of the
sixth point of the Quadrant by a Culverin, be, for example, 4000 Geometrical
paces, I desire with the same Piece to make a shot in such manner that its
Range may be just 2360 paces long. I take the fourth part of 2360, which is
590, and I look upon the Table, and find against that Number, that the
elevation to be given to the said Piece is 18 Degrees and 5 Minutes, or Gr. 71.
and Min. 55, its Complement. And I say, by the things demonstrated, that the
forementioned Piece with one of these two Elevations, shall carry the Ball 2360
paces distance above the Horizon. But those Elevations which exceed the sixth
point of the Quadrant, are not inserted for the use of * Artillery, but only
for Morter-Pieces, Rams, and Grenades. It is to be That is, all long Pieces.
noted, therefore, that with that same first Elevation the Ball will make a low
Range, a high, arcing parabola inscribed by a lower, flatter one but swift, as
the line marked A, and with a great Horizontal Impetus, proper to make breaches
in Walls, or give other lateral impulses. But with the other Elevation it shall
describe the Range B, which shall be slow in its Horizontal motion, but with
sufficient perpendicular Impetus at the last, proper to batter Vaults, Roofs,
and to make other breaches perpendicular to the Horizon; or to cast things to
any determinate mark. as^ v. gr. little Baggs imbaled with Cord, full of
Sulphur, Salt-Peeter, or Meal, or Balls with Letters or other things within
them. In a word, both those Elevations that are equally distant from the sixth
point, will carry the Ball unto the same place: but yet with this difference,
that with the first and least Elevation it shall fall to the Earth (as Gunners
speak) Grazing; and with the second and greater Elevation, it shall descend
almost plumb, or perpendicular.

I know that its very seldom, and perhaps never found, that the greatest Range
of a Piece of Ordnance is just those 4000 Paces, as it seems to have been
supposed in the Calculating of our Table, and also in those of Signiore
Galileo, so that the said Table might seem unuseful: but we shall show, that
the supposed number of 4000 does not therefore serve to any great particular
Machine, to the end it might serve to all in general. It is necessary therefore
to take notice, that that same suppositious Number of 4000, is not of Paces, or
of Else, or of Yards, or of any other determinate measure, but of abstracted
parts, such yet, whatever they are, as being convertible into any kinds of
possible measures, they do make the Table general, as well for the Culvering,
as for the Mortar-Piece or Cross-Bow. And to give an example how it may be
adapted and applied to all the Species of Artillery, and how the Abstract parts
may be reduced into Geometrical paces, we will do thus.

The greatest Range of a Canon, by experiment made thereof, is found to be
suppose 2300 paces; and I would with the same Piece make a shot that should be
860 paces, I do thus: If the greatest Range 2300 give 860, I ask what the
number 1000, the greatest of the Table will give? I work and find 374: which
number being sought in the Table, is found to be betwixt 370 and 380. Therefore
taking the part proportional according to my Judgment, I find the Arch of its
Elevation ought to be Grad. 11. very near, or its Complement gr. 79. And thus
it is certain, that that same Piece which being mounted to six points did carry
2300 paces. being elevated gr. 11. or 79. of the Quadrant, shall carry 860
paces, as we did desire.

PROBLEM.
How by a Shot made casually, one may find the greatest Range of an Ordnance.

LEt a Piece be directed according to the Mounture A C; of which let the
Elevation be the Angle B A C, whatever it is. And the said Angle being measured
with the Quadrant, let it labeled parabolas, angles, and lines be sound; for
example, gr. 30. then let off the Piece, and let the Shot reach to the point B:
and let the line A B be carefully measured, which suppose to be v. gr. 2400
Geometrical Paces, I say that these two things being given, namely the
Elevation, and the length of the casual Range A G B, you have therewithal given
the line A D, which is the half of the greatest Range, according to what has
been demonstrated in the last Corollary of the first Proposition, De Motn
Projectorum.

The Angle of Elevation C A B gr. 30, being given, the right Angled Triangle E
A C shall be given in Specie: and because A B is given in paces, A E shall be
given, which is the fourth part thereof, namely 600 paces. Let us therefore, to
find the quantity of A D, work in this manner by Calculations and Sines.

Say, if as the Right Sine 86602 of the Angle A C E, gr. 60. that is, of the
Complement of the Elevation, is to the side A E, which is 600: so is the whole
Sine 100000 to a fourth number 693: and thus the Hypothenuse A C shall be 693
Paces. But because that the right angled Triangle A C D is given in Specie,
begin again and say, as the right Sine 50000 of the angle A D C, which is equal
to the angle given of the Elevation E A C, is to the right Line A C, which is
found to be 693 paces, so is the whole line to a fourth number 1386. And thus
the right line sought A D, shall be 1386 paces. But because A D, being the line
of Impetus or Sublimity, is equal to half the greatest Range; if we double
1386, we shall make the number of 2772 paces; for so much shall be the length
of the desired greatest Range of that Gun, which being elevated to the Randon
of gr. 30, is found to carry 2400 paces.

But with much more brevity, and at one single working, we may perform the same
thus. Suppose the whole Sine to be C F, then F A and F D shall be the Taugents,
one, of the angle of elevation, and the other of its Complement. Say, therefore
as the whole Sine is to C F, which is 600: so is 230940 (which is the sum of
both those Tangents) to a fourth number 1386. And thus the right line AD is
found, as before, 1386 paces: which being doubled, will give the measure of the
Semirect, or greatest * Randon, as you well call it. Or the best of the Randon.


COROLLARIES.
1. BY way of Corollary it may be advertised, that this is the manner of
arguing from any Range of a Piece, how much the same should be to shoot upwards
by a perpendicular line; which shall be as much as the line AD found out by way
of Calculation.

2. The same line AD, directs us from what Altitude it would be requisite to
let fall a Cannon Bullet, that it may arrive at the Earth with the same Impetus
that the Cannon it self conferreth, always allowing for the impediment which
the Crassitude of the Air may occasion, which acknowledge must be sensible for
to vary the demonstrated Proporsitions of Ranges, but much more for to obstruct
this effect.

PROBLEM.
How with the sole Table of Sines we may know the greatest Altitude, to which
the Ball has attained passing through the Air in a Range, the Elevation and
length of the said Range being given.

IN the precedent Figure, let there be given the angle of the Elevation CAB,
and the length of the Range AB: it is required to know the greatest Altitude to
which the Ball has arrived thorough the Air: and this shall be EC. Take again
AE 600 paces, that is, the labeled parabolas, angles, and lines, identical to
previous figure fourth part of the whole length AB: and then say, as 86602 the
Sine of the Angle ACE, the Supplement of the Elevation, is to AE, 600 paces, so
is 50000, the Sine of the Elevation EAC to a fourth number: and we shall find
346 paces for measure of the Altitude CE, that is, of the greatest Altitude to
which the Ball had attained in its passage through the Air,

It is to be noted, that great Guns are not always used so as that the Ball
goes to determine in the same Horizontal plain from which it did depart, as
Galileo's and our Tables do suppose. Therefore being to shoot upon the side of
a Hills declivity or aclivity, as also being to shoot from the summity of a
Rock upon the Horizontal plain that is below, there has no man's as yet reduced
the measures of these Ranges to an Art. The Table of them might be calculated,
but every one will perceive, that it being to be composed by every grade of the
Pieces Elevation or Mounture, and by every grade of the Hills inclination, and
by every pace of the Hills Altitude, the Multiplication would be almost
infinite. We will therefore only give you the general Rule for calculating
those Ranges when they shall occur.

A Piece with the direction AB, makes the Range ACD: but I would shoot along
the inclined plain AC; and I desire to know what AC, the length of the Range of
that shot upon this plain, shall be. labeled parabolas, angles, and lines Draw
BD by the point D, and HF by the point C, perpendiculars to the Horizon; and
draw a line from F to E; which by the things demonstrated, is parallel to AB.
Measure with some Instrument the angle DAE, that is the Hills Elevation, and,
by the Table of Amplitudes, you shall find the length of the Horizontal Range
AD. Then say, as DB the Tangent of the angle of the Pieces, Elevation is to BE,
which is the difference of the Tangents of the two angles DAB and DAE known,
(one being the Elevation of the Piece, the other the Elevation of the Hill
above the Horizon) so is DA known, in paces, to a fourth number: and the right
line FA shall befound in paces. Then say again, as the whole Sine is to that
fourth number, which is the measure of AF in paces, so is AC the secant of the
angle FAC, to a fourth number: and thus you shall know the number of paces that
measure the line AC, that is, the length of the Range that that Piece will make
upon the plain AE, when you shoot upwards.

labeled parabolas, angles, and lines

But when from the point A it is required to shoot downwards by a descending
Hill, as AB, we shall find the quantity of the Range AB, that is, the place
where the Ball falls, in this manner. Let the direction AE, that is, let the
angle of the Pieces Elevation be given; also let there be given the angle of
the Hills inclination CAB. Let us imagine the Horizon to be AC, and let us draw
BE and HDF perpendiculars to the same: and conjoyn or draw a line from C to H,
which line shall be parallel to AE. Now upon the Table of Amplitudes we shall
find how many paces AD is, but we seek the quantity of AB. Therefore make the
calculation thus; as FD the Tangent of the angle of the Pieces Elevation is to
DH, the Tangent of the inclination of the plain; so is AD, known in paces, to a
farther number. And this shall be the measure of DC in paces; and thus the
whole line AC shall be known in paces. Then say again, as AC the whole Sine is
to AC known in paces, so it AB the a fourth number: and this last number shall
be the measure sought of the right line AB in paces; that is, the length of the
Range upon the descending plain AB. It happens also many times, that we are
to shoot at plains perpendicular to the Horizon, as at the Walls of Cities, or
Towers, or other ways; therefore also in this case we will subjoyn the
Computation for finding the Altitude of that point in the said Wall where the
Ball is to hit.

labeled parabolas, angles, and lines

Let the Direction of the Piece be the Line AB, and the Horizon AC, and the
Wall of the Tower DE perpendicular to the Horizon: and let the distance AD be
known in paces. Let us suppose that the Ball passes freely without hitting the
Wall, and falls upon the Horizon in C. The Table of the Amplitudes gives the
quantity of AC, but we seek the Altitudes DE. Draw CB perpendicular to the
Horizon, and DF parallel to AB, and then draw a line from F to A, which shall
pass through the common Section of the Parabola, and of the Wall, as may be
collected from the things already demonstrated. Now say, as CA the length of
the Horizontal line is to CD the difference betwixt the lines AC and AD already
known, so is BC the Tangent of the angle of the Elevation of the Piece, to CF
the Tangent of the angle FAC. Again say, as the Sine Total is to AD known in
paces, so is the last found Tangent of the angle FAC to a fourth number: which
shall be the desired measure of the right line DE in paces. And thus we have
found the point E in which the said shot would stick. The same calculation may
be also deduced. Although the Wall DE be not perpendicular, but scarfed, as
those of the modren Fortresses; but fearing to procure you more trouble than
benefit, I will refer the care of that to the Geometrician that has a mind to
undertake it.

The Amplitudes of the Parabola's, of which Galileo, and also we do treat,
suppose that the Range terminates not upon the plain of the Field, but in that
Horizontal plain that passes by the Muzzle of the Piece. The other is only
true when the Piece is placed with its Carriages in a Trench, so that the mouth
of the Piece lies exactly level with the ground. But because this is not
usual, and because the Ranges do determine in the Horizon that touches the
lower parts of the Wheels, we will Geometrically enquire how much a level
Range, or Horizontal Range may be prolonged by means of the Altitude of the
Muzzle of the Piece above the plain of the Field. It seems that the
Semidiameter of the wheels, and the thickness of the Metal do cause the Muzzles
of ordinary Artillery to be above the Horizontal Site about two Braces. I
suppose therefore the Muzzle of the Culvering to be at A. and let the Horizon
be BC; and let the Altitude of the Muzzle be the right line AB, supposed to be
two Braces; and let the Range ACD be the level Range. The right line BC is
sought; let the Semirect Range, or the best of the Randon of the same Piece, be
the Parabola AEF; and let it be supposed that AF be 5000 Geometrical paces,
that is a 15000 Florentine Braces. Describe the usual Semicircle of the first
Proposition AHI, and having drawn AL equal to AI apply LD. The right line AI,
by the things demonstrated, shall be the Impetus of the Parabola AEF, or of ACD
(for they are Ranges of the same Piece) therefore AL shall be the fourth part
of the right side of the Parabola ACD: therefore LD shall be double of LA: but
AF has been demonstrated to be also double of AI; therefore LD and labeled
parabolas, angles, and lines AF are equal; and there are three lines given,
that is, LA 7500. LD 15000. and AB 2. And therefore, working by the Rule of
three, as the right line LA is to AB known; so is the square of the right line
LD to another number: we shall find 60000; which shall be the square of the
right line BC; and extracting the Square root thereof, we shall find the line
BC to be 245 Braces. We conclude therefore that that Machine which makes its
greatest Range of 15000 Braces, in case it shall have its Muzzle raised above
the Horizon, will make its level Range, that is, without any Elevation or
Mounture, to be in all 245 Braces long. Next, how much every other Range not
level, but inclined upwards or downwards, by occasion of the Altitude of the
wheels, or of a Bastion, or of a Mount, or of any other situation that raises
it above the Horizontal plain, may be prolonged, shall be found thus.

It is certain, that being to shoot from the top of a Rock, or of a Castle
placed in the top of an Hill, or from any whatever high place above the
Horizontal plain of the Field that lies below, the Ranges will prove much
longer than those noted upon the Table of Amplitudes; and this difference shall
be so much greater, by how much the situation of the Artillery shall be higher
above that Horizontal plain in which Balls are to hit, and the Rangers to
determine.

labeled parabola, angles, and lines

Let the height of the Hill or other place be G F, and from the point F, let a
line be drawn upon the plain of the Field G E: and let us suppose the Horizon
to be F B: now having made the Range F C B E at an Elevation, the measure of G
E is sought.

By the Table of Amplitudes, we find the quantity of A B, and by the Table of
Altitude, we find A C, the height of the Parabola. And for the working of the
Computation, it may be performed sundry ways.

Let the number of A B be squared, and divide that square by A C, and the
Quotus shall be the right side of the Parabola F C B: Then multiply that Quotus
by C D, and the square Root of the Product shall give D E.

Or we may work thus:

Draw the number D C into C A, and the square Root of the product shall be the
mean proportional betwixt D C and C A. Then say, as C A is to the
forementioned Root, so is A B to another number. And this fourth number shall
again be D E.

Or lastly, in this manner:

Say, as the number C A, the Altitude of the Parabola in the Table, is to the
number C D, the Altitude of the Parabola and Range together, so is A B the
Semi-Amplirude of the Parabola in the Table to another fourth number.

Then take the number that is mean-proportional betwixt that last number and A
B, for that mean-proportionall shall give you the said D E. And for as much as
D G, equal to A B is known, the whole line G E shall be known.

But some might allege, that from the Mount G F, it may perhaps be required
to play with Guns oftener downwards than upwards; therefore it would be
necessary to know by a Geometrical Rule, the length of Ranges, which is done in
this manner. Let the Range to be made downwards be that marked F H, with any
whatever angle of inclination beneath the Horizon: G H is sought. Imagine with
your self that the Range is to be made above the Horizon with the self same
inclination; and by the precedent Rules, the quantity of D E is found as above,
or D H, from which if we take the part already known F A, or D G, there shall
remain known the quantity required G H. But if gr. 40 being given for the
Elevation of the Range A B C, and the Base A C 1600 Paces, we would know all
the different Altitudes of the Ranges of the Ball upon any point of the line A
C, work thus: Having divided A C in the labeled parabola and lines midst, and
erected D B, this shall be the Supreme Altitude, and shall be found in the
Table of Altitudes and Amplitudes working in this manner. In the Table of
Amplitudes right against gr. 40. of Elevation, I find the line A D to be 9848
parts: but in the Table of Altitudes I find the line B D to be 4132 parts.
Then, by the Rule of Three, I say; if A D 9848 give 800 paces according to the
supposition, how many paces shall D B, which is 4132 parts, give? and I find,
that the right line B D is 336 paces. Now let any point be proposed, as E, over
which you would know the Altitude of the Range of the Ball, that is the line E
H. Let the right line A E be supposed 1000, and E C 600: and work the Rule of
three again, in this manner. If the square of A D, which is 640000, give the
Rect-angle of the right lines A E and E C which is 600000, what shall the
number B D (which was found to be 336) give? and I find 315 paces. Therefore
the Altitude of the Parabola over the point E, was 315 paces; which is that
that was sought.

It shall suffice to have hinted this little for the Calculating of some
varieties that may happen about these Ranges. Other cases may be put, like to
these, and particularly those of their conversions; but from the knowledge of
these, those may easily be deducted: and the Ingenuity of any Geometrician,
applying himself thereto, shall find less difficulty in resolving many of these
Problems of himself than in undergoing the length and obscurity of our
explanations. Therefore we will proceed to the making of the Quadrant, the
which seems really appropriated, nay, made by Nature on purpose for to
measure Scientifically and Geometrically the Ranges of Projects.

Of the Quadrant.
LEt us now come to practice; and by help of an Instrument, let us resolve some
of the Propositions above demonstrated. We will make a Military Quadrant, which
with invariable certainty shows (at least to Geometrical Philosophers, if not
to practical Gunners) what Mounture or Elevation ought to be given to any
Piece, to the end that the length of the Range may prove to be of such a
certain measure. We will also resolve, by help hereof, all Problems that can be
framed about the shooting of Artillery, which were heretofore promised by
Tartaglia, and reduced into Tables by Galileo, with something over and above.
Military Industry did find that the use of a Machine so noble, and of so great
consequence as the Canon, would be too much confined, and of too little
benefit, if it could not be made use of save only at that small distance to
which it carries a point blank, or in its level Range, without giving it with
the Quadrant the advantageous assistance of some elevation. It was therefore
enquired how a man might do that with the same Piece, which of it self did not
carry more than 200 or 250 Geometrical paces, he might shoot 400 and also 600
paces, and more and more, until he come to the length of the greatest Range
that can be made by that Piece. The Invention was thus: They began to help the
Piece by Elevation, that is, they directed it not straight upon the object
which it was to hit, but, holding it in the very vertical of the object, they
elevated it above that right line which goes from the Piece unto the object:
and this they did sometimes more, and sometimes less, according as the force of
the Shot was to be greater or lesser: An Artifice that from the very beginning
of the world has been known even to artless Boys. We see that when they with
a Ball of Snow, or other matter, do aim to hit a mark that is very near, they
throw it directly at the mark: but being at another time to aim at one which
stands farther off, or being to throw Stones at each other, they do not throw
Horizontally, or directly at their Adversaries, but turning the cast half way
into the Air, without having ever had any other consideration, they do all
throw at the elevation of the fifth, and also of the sixth point of the
Military Square to them unknown: But Gunners, in process of time, have found an
Instrument, that does with facility measure these Elevations.

Nicolo Tartaglia of Brescia, a famous Mathematician, did invent a Square with
unequal sides joined together with the Quadrant, which has for more than a
hundred years past, been generally used, and is still the only Regulator of
Gunners, not only to manage great Guns, and to raise them to those Mountures
which they call Randons, but also to level them in the Point Blank Ranges;
Tartaglia divided that Quadrant into 12 equal parts, beginning the Numeration
of them from the lesser [or shorter] side; he also subdivided each of those
into other 12 equal parts, naming those first Points, and these second Minutes
of the Quadrant. We will insert the figure of the Quadrant, and show how it
measures the Elevation [Mounture or Randon] of the Piece.

Let the Canons * Soul be A B, fixed at some certain Mounture: put into the
Muzzle Her Concave, Cilinder, or Bore.
thereof the greater of the Quadrant C A: so that it be applied to the lower
side of the said Soul, and let the Plummet fall in D. I say that the Angle E C
D, that is the quadrant measuring an angle arch E D, is the measure of the
Elevation of the Piece. Draw an Horizontal line A F, the angles at the point G
shall be right: But the angle A C F is also right. Therefore the angles C A F,
and F C G are equal by the 8 of the sixth of Euclid. Or thus; Draw thorough C
the Horizontal line. If H I now from the right angles H C D and A C E there be
taken the common part A C D, there shall remain the Angle E C D of the
Quadrant, equal to the angle of the Piece under the Horizon H I, or above the
Horizon A F, which is the same as being alterne.

By the help of this Quadrant Gunners have with long observations composed such
a Praxis, as that they know how many points they are to mount v. gr. a
Culvering of 40 pound Ball to hit a mark distant; for example, 700 Geometrical
paces, or at any other distance.

But the truth is, the observations are so sallible, and the Gunners so few
that have made them, and made them exactly, that the use of Artillery, taking
from it the Range of Point Blank, must needs have very little of certainty in
it.

If one would collect some certain Science touching the ordinary Quadrant, it
would be necessary to make the Experiments not only with all sorts of Balls,
and with all the varieties of Powder, but in all kind of Pieces, as also in all
those that being the same in specie, are of different grandeur; and lastly, at
all possible degrees of Elevation. A Multiplication that almost runs up into
infinity. And we observe that these Experiments ought to be all made one by
one; for it is not true, that by way of proportion one may from three or four
Ranges of a Canon made at several elevations, argue to any others, no not of
the same Canon, laden with the same Powder and Ball. That this is so, may be
demonstrated by help of the Tables made by Signiore Galilaeo, and by us. For
example, That Canon which being elevated at the sixth Point, curryeth its shot
4000 paces, elevated at one Point, ought to curry the sixth part, at two points
the third, and at three points the half of that Range. But the thing falls out
far otherwise: For being elevated to one point, it curryeth 1032 instead of
666, which is the sixth part of that same greatest Range 4000: at the second
point (and note that with this Mounture, Pieces carry always the half of the
greatest Range) in our case will curry 2000 in stead of 1333, which is the
third part: At the third point it will curry 2824, instead of 2000, which is
the half of the greatest Range: at the fourth point it will curry 3464 instead
of 2666: At the fifth point it will curry 3860, in stead of 2333, which are 5
sixths of that greatest Range: See therefore how that increasing equally the
Mountures of the Piece, that is shooting first at one point only, then at two,
three, four, etc. unto the sixth, the increases of the lengths of the Ranges do
not increase equally, that is with the same proportion wherewith the * Randons
increase. But the first point currying 1032, the second increases above it Or
Mountures.
968, the third increases 824, the fourth 640, the fifth 396, the sixth 140.
Therefore to derive some rule from the Experiments, it were necessary to make
them exactly, at all the Grades of Randons, in all sorts of Pieces, with all
varieties of Powders, and different matters of Balls; and happily one might
say, it were necessary also that every Gunner made them by himself. Things
almost impossible to reduce unto Rules, from which any certainty might be
gathered, if the Theorick and Geometry had not given us a manifest Science
thereof, by means of that one sole Proposition of Galileo, in which first of
all men he has advertised and taught us, That Pro^ects do all move in a
Parabolical Line. Upon this supposition we will ground the Instrument promised:
and though by the impediment of the medium the Parabola's become too deformed,
or by many other accidents the Ranges prove very inconstant, yet it suffices
us to have given indubitable satisfaction to the School of Mathematicians, if
not to that of Gunners.

Before we set down the making of our square, which consists only in
describing one single Semicircle, we will divide the ordinary Quadrant into
unequal points, so as they may not measure the Randons of the Piece, but the
lengths of the Ranges, which is that that serves to our purpose. Thus we shall
be assured, that the Gun, if it shall be elevated to one point of the said
Quadrant, shall carry to such a distance, whatever it be: and elevated to two
points, shall precisely double that Range: and if to three, it shall carry
three of those spaces; if to four and a half, it shall carry four and a half;
if to five and a quarter, it shall carry five and a quarter; and thus until you
come to the sixth point, shall the points of the Quadrant in the Instrument,
and the spaces of the Ranges in the Field, always increase in the same manner,
and with the same proportion, and from the sixth to the twelfth point, they
shall go in the same manner decreasing. The construction and demonstration is
Geometrically taken from the proposition which we have made the First of this
our Book of Projects, which by the Amplitude given, teaches us to find the
Elevation. And it serves in common for whatsoever sort of Artillery and Mortar
Pieces, and for any sort of Ball or Powder.

Let the sides of the Quadrant be A B the greater and A C the lesser; then
making A the Center, describe the Quadrant C D E, upon which the unequal points
are quadrant measuring an angle to be marked or set off: and about the Diameter
A C draw the Semicircle A F C; and having drawn F G perpendicular to A B, and
Tangent to the Semicircle, divide A G into six equal parts to find the six
points of the Quadrant, and then again, each part into 12 to find the Minutes,
(if the size of the Instrument shall admit of this second division) now let one
of the six parts be G H. Draw H M I parallel to G F, cutting the Semidiameter
in the points M and I, and then from the Center A, draw the right line A F D,
and D shall be the sixth point of the square: draw A I L, and L shall be the
fifth point of the square: draw A M N, and N shall be the seventh point; and so
of all the rest. Note, that the division will be the more exact, if after you
have found the 1, 2, 3, etc. points, you do by the Transportation or setting of
them off, design the ninth, tenth, and eleventh. The half points, quarter
points, and Minutes, are found in the same manner by subdividing each of the
portions of the line A G into two, into four, or into twelve parts, which
raising perpendiculars from the points of the Divisions: Those perpendiculars
shall cut the Semicircle, and by the points of the Sections shall the
Diameters be drawn in the Quadrant, and these shall cut the Quadrant in the
parts desired, of Half points, Quarter points, or Minutes.

Now it is manifest by our I. Proposition, that if the line of the *direction,
or of Of Mounture.
the elevation of the Piece shall be A O, or A P, the Amplitude or length of
the Range shall be as the Quadruple of the S O; and if the direction shall be A
M, or A N, the Range shall be as the Quadruple of R M: and if the elevation
were according to the line A F D, the Range shall be as the Quadruple of Q F:
but the lines S O, R M, and Q F, by our construction do equally exceed: And,
therefore, likewise their Quadruples, or the Ranges aforesaid, shall equally
exceed one the other.

The use of the aforementioned Division made in the ordinary Quadrant.
LEt there be propounded any Piece of Artillery, or Mortar-Piece; and with it
let there be one single Experiment made, that is, let it be elevated to any
point, as for example to the fifth. Let it off, and measure the length of the
Range, and let it be found, verbi gratia, to be 2000 parts; this done we may
know how far the same Piece will carry, being charged in the same manner, and
elevated to any whatever other Point or Minute: which shall be easy by the
Rule of three, the points in this Instrument, as well as the length of the
Ranges, being proportional. The Praxis is this; I desire to know how far the
sixth point carries, I thus say, If five points give 2000 paces, how much
shall six points give? and I find 2400 paces. I say then that the shot of that
Piece at the sixth point, that is at the greatest Range, will curry 2400 of
those parts, at which of the fifth point it curried 2000.

And take notice by the way, that instead of performing this operation with the
points 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12, It may be done with their Complements, which
are 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, and 0.

But if it were required (which imports much more) that we should elevate the
aforesaid Piece in such sort, that the length of the Range ought to be; for
example, 1300 paces, we are to work thus. If 2000 paces, were made by 5 points,
or to say better, by 60 Minutes of the Quadrant, by how many points shall 1300
paces be made? the working will be 2000. 60. 1300. 39, and we shall find that
for to make the Range of 1300 paces, it would be necessary to give the Piece
the Mounture of 39 Minutes of the Quadrant, or of three points and a quarter.

The manner how to Compose our Square.
BUt if we would frame an Instrument, which shall not only measure the length
of the Ranges made at several Randons, but also the Altitude of the Parabola,
^he duration or time of the flight [or Range] the sublimity, and the other
things demonstrated in the aforesaid Book of Projects, all this shall be
performed with the sole and simple Semicircle of I. Proposition. But let us
proceed to the making of it.

labeled rectangle inscribed by a labeled parabola

Take the Rect-angled Plate A B C D, of Brass, or other solid Matter, having
the side A E long, for the applying of it to the Piece. Upon the Diameter A B,
draw a Semicircle A F B, which shall be the Semicircle of Proposit. I. De
Projectis; and in B place the Thread and Plummet, and divide the Semicircle A F
B into 90 equal parts, which shall be the 90 degrees of the Quadrant; or into
144 equal parts, which shall be the equal Points and Minutes of the ordinary
Quadrant. Let us now demonstrate Geometrically, that this square is convenient
to measure, with exceeding plainness, the lengths and the Altitudes of the
Ranges, the times of their Durations, the sublimities of the Parabola's, and
the Elevations of the Pieces. And then we will set down the Division of the
Lines thereupon, without the need of any Table for the using of the same.

Let us, as in the subsequent Figure, place the square aforementioned E A B C D in
the mouth of any Piece, E A at pleasure, and let the Plummet fall upon the
point F of the Semicircle A F B, divided into 90 equal various labeled lines
emerging from the mouth of a cannon parts. It is certain, in the first place,
that the Arch B F measures the Elevation of the Piece E A above the Horizon.
For we having by the Division of the Semicircle into 90 parts only, valued
every two degrees for one; we have made the Arch B F to be the measure of the
Angle B A F, that is, of the Elevation of the Piece above the Horizon; which
Horizon shall ever be the line A F. I say moreover, that if we should suppose
the line A B, Diameter of the Semicircle, to be the Impetus of the assigned
Piece, or the half of the greatest Range, the line F H, perpendicular to the
Diameter, shall be the fourth part of the Amplitude or length of the Range; B H
shall be the supreme Altitude of the Parabola: A H shall be the sublimity; and
B F shall be the time of the Ranges Duration.

That this is so, shall thus be demonstrated (having reference to the I.
proposition of Projects, and its Corollaries.) Let the line of the direction A
B I be prolonged indefinitely, as also the perpendicular T B L; then by
imagination take B L of such a length, that it may be really equal to half the
greatest Range of our present Piece. And about the Diameter B L, let there be
imaginarily drawn the great Semicircle B I L; cutting the Circumference B I in
any point I; and draw the Horizontal line I M. It is manifest, by the
afore-cited Propos. I. of Projects, that the line M I shall be the real fourth
part of the length of the Range; as also, that D M shall be the (not imiginary,
but real Altitude of the said Range; and so the other measures in the
Semicircle B I L, shall be all true and real. Now observe, that the Triangle H
B F is like to the Triangle B I M, as being right-angled, and having two angles
at the Point B. Therefore the same Proposition shall be between all the small
and imaginary measures of the square A C, as is between all the true measures
in the imaginary and great Semicircle B I L; that is, the lines, A B, B F, F H
and H B, shall be to one another in the same proportion respectively as L B, B
I, I M, and M B. Therefore, as to arguing in the proportions, we may without
any error, as well make use of those feigned proportions upon the square, as of
the true ones, imagined in the Amplitude of the Air.

It remains now that we show how this Doctrine, which has hitherto been a mere
Speculation, may now reduced to Manual practice, and that with facility. Every
one sees that for our obtaining knowledge of the quantity of the lines A B, B
F, F H, and H B, and their proportions in the precedent Figure, it would be
necessary that all the aforesaid lines were divided into most Minute parts with
some common measure. To this purpose, therefore, we will divide the Diameter A
B, and Semi-Diameter E D, into equal and very small parts, as appears in the
following Figure; (upon which let us describe the imaginary square) and then
let us give to each division of the circumference, its guides parallel to those
Diameters, that so in them the number and quantity of the lines which shall be
Indices of the length and Altitudes of the Ranges, may be read or found: And in
the point of the angle of Semicircle B, place the Thread and Plummet.

As to the number of parts into which the Diameter A B is to be divided, it
shall be left to the choice of every one; but yet it will be convenient to make
choice of the number 2000, for that it will facilitate the Arithmetical
operation.

It is to be noted, that if any one will make a square, as has been said, on
purpose for one kind of Artillery only, he shall without the least trouble of
Calculation, have the measures of all its Ranges.

The Division of this square is to be made a posteriori, in this manner. Make
an Experiment of the greatest Range of that same Piece to which you would have
the square to be adapted, and let it be found v. gr. to be 3000. Then divide
the Diameter of the square into 1500 parts, and the perpendicular Semi-diameter
into 750 equal parts; that is, imagine that the Diameter A B 1500, is the half
of the greatest Range 3000; as also, that the perpendicular Semi-diameter E D
750, is the fourth part of that greatest Range. And thus, every of the other
Elevations being afterward given, as soon as we shall apply this Square to the
Muzzle of the Piece, we shall immediately see how many paces is the length, and
how many the Altitude of the Range, etc. And this square made v. gr. for a
Canon of 60 pound Ball, would be also good for every other Canon of 60 pound
Ball, that should be the same in length, and other proportions, with that.

It Is true indeed, that if we would make the square universal, to serve
indifferently for all Species and Magnitudes of Artillery, we must then do
thus. Divide the Diameter A B in the precedent figure in 2000 equal parts: also
let the Semi-Diameter E D be divided into 1000 equal parts, (we by reason of
the smallness of the figure have divided it only into 100, taking the parts by
ten and ten.) This done, let there be drawn by the Divisions of the
Circumference, cut into equal degrees, as is usual, the guides parallel unto
the Diameters, that so one may upon those Diameters read or find the quantity
of the right lines, as they shall happen to be.

Now let a Piece of Ordnance F G, unknown, be given. Then make the previous
Experiment in this manner. Apply the square to the Muzzle of it, and let the
thread fall in any place, as in I. Then find by the means various labeled lines
emerging from the mouth of a cannon of its guide, the quantity of I O upon the
divided Semi-Diameter, and keep it in mind, and then shoot off the Gun, and
measure the Range, which suppose to be, for Example, 1250 paces: charge the
Piece again in the same manner, and give it a different Mounture, so that the
thread may fall elsewhere, as in M: the length of this Range is sought. Say
thus: If the number of I O give the length 1250 paces, how many paces shall the
number of M L, that is found upon the divided Semi-diameter give? and you shall
in like manner find the length of that Range numbered in paces.

If you desire the Altitudes, and not the lengths of Ranges, then make the same
working as before, but not with the lines I O and M L, which give the lengths,
but with H O and H L, which give the Altitudes. And if we would have the
sublimities, it would be necessary to work with G O and G L. But, which more
imports, if any one after the previous Experiment has been made, shall
desire that the same Piece may make an assigned Range, in length, v. gr. 2200
paces, we are to find what elevation ought to be given to the Piece. Work thus:
If the 1250 paces of the previous Experiment give I O numbered, what shall the
2200 paces give? and you shall find a number, which suppose for example, to be
ascribed on the square unto the line M L. the Piece Therefore is to be raised
to such a Randon, that the thread may pass through the point M; and then the
Range shall be 2200 paces.

The times or durations of the Ranges are given by the Lines H I and H M: and
to find the Quantity of these it may be done two ways. First, by way of
calculation: For the square of the time H I (in the precedent Figure) is
always equal to the two squares of the Altitude H O, and of the fourth part of
the length I O. Secondly, by making to all the Divisions of the Perifry B, C,
D, (in the present Figure) from the Center A the circular guides B E, C F, D H:
for A H being thus divided into very small equal parts, it shall measure all
the right lines, A B, A C, and A D, which are the times of the Ranges.

various labeled lines emerging from the mouth of a cannon

Yet we confess as to Military use, the Amplitudes or lengths of Ranges, only
seem to Import; and they are of great moment: the rest are all accessory
curiosities, which serve much more to the pleasures of Geometry, than to the
occasions of War; therefore he that would have the square made only for this
respect of Longitudes, may take the Semicircle A B C of Brass (as in the
present Figure) having its side A D, and with the Semicircle E B, divided into
most minute and equal parts, beginning the numeration from the point E; and may
give moreover to all the points of the Perifry F, G, H, I, their guides G H,
and F I parallel to A C: And thus he has divided and numbered upon E B all the
lines F N, and G O, which serve for the Amplitudes or Longitudes of the Ranges.

labeled parabola and lines

A Table which shows how many Degrees and Minutes of the Ordinary Quadrant
inserted Page 20. each Point of one Square, the Points of which are unequal,
does contain.
Points unequal of the Square Degrees of the ordinary Quadrant half 02 23 I 04
48 half 07 15 II 09 44 half 12 19 III 15 00 half 17 50 IV 20 54 half 24 18 V 28
13 half 33 14 VI 45 00 half 56 46 VII 61 47 half 65 42 VIII 69 26 half 72 10 IX
75 00 half 77 41 X 80 16 half 82 45 XI 85 12 half 87 37 XII 90 00

For Example, It is demanded where the Division of the one seventh unequal
point does fall. Look upon the present Table, right against the number VII, and
you find that it falls upon gr. 61. and min. 47. of the ordinary Quadrant.

But since we are fallen upon the consideration of the Motion and Impetus of
Projects, we cannot balk the occasion of adding something concerning the variety
of their Forces in battering upon resisting Superficies, sometimes with greater,
and sometimes with lesser Angles of Inclination. Galilaeo considers the
Impetus of these Projects in every Point of th^^^ Panahola, and measures how
much it is in its self, that is, in respect of that Plane in which it does
perpendicularly hit.

We presupposing that an Impetus, when it is upon the act of striking, is, as
to it self, always the same, will consider and measure how much it is in
respect of the resisting Plane, varyed only by the diversity of the Angles of
Incidence. There is no Gunner so unskilful, but he knows that Cannon Bullets
in hitting a Wall, have always lesser and lesser force (if all things else be
alike) by how much the Angle of Incidence is more and more acute. So that if
the said Cannon with sixty pounds of Iron, and forty of Powder, not only
pierces, but beats down a Courtin, with its perpendicular Range, it shall
scarce hurt it (though it have the same Charge, and the same distance) with the
Projection of the Range, which they call *Grazing. Di striscio.
The Problem, for any thing that I know, is unhandled. Therefore if we shall
produce something that is less subsistent, and not purely Geometrical, either
admit it till some others shall better handle the Doctrine, or wholly reject
it, it matters not which.

SUPPOSITIONS.
1. WE will speak only of the Ranges of Great Guns; therefore, Let us suppose,
that that portion of the Line which the Ball makes a little before, and a
little after its blow, be as it were a Right Line. I know that we treat of a
Line really curved; but being (if it were entire) in length more than three
thousand Geometrical paces, we may take a yard, or a foot, or an inch thereof,
without any sensible error, to be a Right Line.

three lines of increasing size, labeled A, B, and C

2. Let us suppose secondly, that the Forces or Impetus's of Galil. 2. de Motu
equabili.
Projects are as the Spaces which they pass or curry in the same Time; that is,
If the Spaces A, B and C shall be past by the Moveable in the same Time; the
Impetus's or Forces in striking, shall be as the Spaces A, B and C respectively.

3. But if the same Space shall be past by the Moveable in diverse Times, the
Impetus's or Forces of the Moveable in battering Galil. 3. de Mota equabili.
shall have the Proportion reciprocal of their Times. That is, If the same
Space D shall be past one while in the Time E, and another while in the Time F;
the Force of the first shall be as F, and of the second as E.

three unlabeled lines of varying size

4. Let us suppose, in the next place, that all the Ranges have, as to
themselves, the same Impetus: which will happen if the Piece being fixed
always in the same place with the same Charge, the same Mounture, and
Distance, etc. the obliquity of the Wall be only varied.

This supposed: when a Cannon Bull^t approaches to the opposed Wall, the Line
and Direction of the Range is either perpendicular to the Wall, or not. If it
be perpendicular, the Percussion operateth with such a certain force: which we
will prove to be the greatest that that Range can have. If it shall be at
Oblique Angles, as the Line A B unto the Wall B C, I do note that in respect to
the Wall B C, there are in the a right triangle and a wall Line of the Project
A B, two Motions compounded together: that is, one of approximation
perpendicular to the Wall, the other of passage lateral, or parallel to the
same. The perpendicular Motion is both represented and measured by the Line A
C; the parallel Motion by the Line C B: for both the Spaces A C and C B are
passed by the Ball at the self same Time.

Now observe, that of these two sorts of Impetus, one only is to the purpose,
for increasing the Forces to make a breach in the Wall, and to drive the Ball
into it; to wit, the Impetus of the perpendicular Lation A C. The other,
although it were infinite, will never increase the force of the Project against
the Resistance of the Wall, unless the perpendicular Lation be withal
accelerated. Nay, if the Horizontal Motion were simple and alone, without any
mixture with the perpendicular Motion, what other would the Ball do but run
equi-distant unto the Wall, without ever touching it, so far would it be from
breaking it; although it were a very thin Glass? When therefore, the Direction
of any Projection being given, we shall know how much of this perpendicular
Impotus enters into the Composition of the Motion, we shall also know the
Activity or Moment of the Project toward the Resistance of the opposite Wall.

Let the Line of any Incidence at pleasure be A B upon the Plane B F taken with
any whatever Inclination: but withal, let the portion A B be so small, that
it may be taken for Right. Draw an arc, inscribed by triangles, atop a plane A
C perpendicular to the Plane, and conjoyn C B. So much, therefore, of Parallel
Motion shall be in the Line A B, in respect of the Wall B F, as is the Line C
B. But of this we make no account; for being multiplied, it does not help, and
diminished it does not weaken the Moment, if the other Impetus do remain
unaltered and the same. Of Perpendicular Motion in the same there shall be as
much as the Line A C: and the force of the percussion shall be greater and
lesser, according as A C, greater or lesser, shall be past in the same Time.

Let us suppose, now, that the force of the Evidence A B be as A C. To know the
force of any other Incidence D B, let D B be taken equal to B A, and having
drawn D E perpendicular unto the Plane, the force of this Incidence shall be as
that same Line D E. For if A B and D B are equal, and are the Ranges of the
same Piece, they shall be past in the same Time. Therefore A C and D E, are
also past in the same Time: By Supposit. 2.
Therefore the Impetus's, as to the Wall, are as A C to A D. We will therefore
infer, that,

PROPOSITION.
The Activities or Moments of Ranges differently inclined, are as the Right
Sines of the Angles of Incidencies.

COROLLARIES.
IT is deduced from hence as a Corollary, that the Perpendicular Incidence A B,
has greater Force than all others, the force of it being as the Whole Sine.
And the parallel Projection shall have no force, its force being as the
No-Sine. The Incidence D B at the Angle of gr. 30. has half of the total
force, its Sine being the half of the Semi-diameter. The others, likewise,
according as they shall have greater or lesser Right Sine, shall have greater
or lesser force.

2. The Forces of Projections have reciprocally the same proportion that the
Sides of the Triangle have, which shall be formed upon the Plane by the Lines
of the Incidencies.

Let a Projection be made along the Line A C, and another along the Line A B.
And let the P^ane of the Triangle A B C be perpendicular to the Wall. Because
now the Space A C is past by the Ball in the Time A C; and the Space A B, that
is (the parallel Motion deducted) the same Space A C, is past in the Time A B,
the Forces shall be reciprocal to the Times: that is, the force along A C shall
be as A B, ^ and along A B, shall be as A C. By Supposit. 3.


a right angle and a wall

3. Projects shall then have the same force in battering, when the Impetus's
shall be as the Secants of the Complement of the Incidencies.

Let the Impetus along a right angle atop a plane the Perpendicular A B, be as
A B; and let it have such a certain force. To the end that the Impetus along
the Inclined A C may have the same force, I say that the Impetus along A C,
ought to be unto the Impetus along A B, as A C is to A B: which A C is Secant
of the Angle B A C, Complement of the *Inclination. Or rather of the Incidency.


For if the Impetus's along A B and A C shall be as the Spaces A B and A C, the
Movables shall, in the same Time, pass the two Lines A B and A C, that is, the
same By Supposit. 2.
perpendicular Approximation A B. Therefore they shall have the same force
against the Wall.

4. Moreover, if with such a Piece, and along the Line C B, the Ball shall but
just enter wholly into the Wall, then along an arc, inscribed by a triangle,
and a wall all the more elevated Lines, it shall not only wholly immerge into
the Solidity, but shall still make deeper impression or entrance, because it
has greater force. But because each of the less elevated shall have lesser
force, none of them shall enter wholly into the Wall, nay some rebound and fly
back.

Yet let all this be spoken abstracting from a certain Effect of Pliancy or
Refraction that Projects produce in passing with Inclination from the Rare
Medium to the Dense, the Line incurvating contrary to that of the Refraction of
Light, and visible Species.

FINIS.
TO THE INGENIOUS Student.
IT being well known among the Learned, that the late famous Mersennus of
France, a most diligent Collector and Publisher of the choicest Mathematical
inventions of that time, has among his Physico-mathematical Reflexious, and
Mechanics, diverse material Experiments and Theories relating to the Art of
Gunnery, it was thought fit for the Readers benefit to cause the same to be
translated, and submitted to his censure.

Moreover that Author giving all his distances in feet, or paces of three feet,
or fathoms of six foot; It was thought likewise expedient to put the Reader
into a capacity of reducing the same to our English measure, to which purpose
there being an accurate experiment, made some time since by the most learned
and Reverend Doctor John Wallis Savilian Professor of Geometry at Oxford, take
an account thereof, as the Doctor communicated the same to a friend of his
here, namely, that he has formerly compared the French and English foot very
exactly, both measures being as he was assured very exact to the Standards of
each Nation, and he found the French foot to contain of ours 12 4/5 Inches (not
missing so much as 1/100 part of half an Inch.)

OF THE Swiftness OF SOUND.
The swiftness of Sound is greater than the swiftness of Bullets shot off, and
finishes 230 fathon^s in the space of one second minute.

WHosoever would try the swiftness of Sounds by night, and by day, either in
valleys, woods, or mountains, either with or against the wind, or when it is
rainy or fair weather, shall find in all respects as I have tried it, that
there will be always the same swiftness of Sound.

But after that you have searched out a second by 230 fathoms, he that shoots
off a lesser Gun, may again retire 230 fathoms, so that he may be gone back
from you 460 fathoms, the same or the like Sound in passing over that way will
spend two seconds; which when it shall be five times multiplied by us, that we
should hear the Sound 1150 fathoms, the flash by night breaking forth from the
mouth of the Gun is always seen at that distance before the Sound is heard
five seconds of time. And seeing we make a French league to be 2500 fathoms,
and the circuit of the Earth 7200, of such leagues, you may easily conclude in
what time the sound does pass over one whole or several leagues, for the
swiftness of the sound is not diminished by its debility, whenas the last part
of the Sound that may be heard does emulate the swiftness of the first.

The Sound of the Gun therefore will pass over a league in the space of 11
seconds, seeing a league contains 11 times 230 fathoms (the space passed over
in a second minute) less only by 30 fathoms, which are here scarce worth
consideration, because that they are passed over by the Sound in the seventh
part of a second.

From which many things may be gathered; first, that a Soldier attentive my
decline or shun the shot of a Gun at one hundred fathoms, is he foresaw the
flash of it; which I thus demonstrate: It is evident from observation, that a
Bullet in flying 100 fathoms does at the least spend a second of time, and the
Sound of it in passing of them does at the most spend but half a second.
Therefore the Soldier from the fire seen (if Vision can be in an instant) has
a whole second wherein he my easily go three or four paces before that the
bullet can fly so far; also there remains to him half a second from that point
of time in which he hears the Sound, until the coming of the Bullet: although I
would not advise any one to try that, unless he first fortify himself with a
shield, helmet, and all other kind of Armor, that he may be out of all danger.
But any one may try it behind a wall, to which the Sound will come before the
Bullet.

Secondly, from the Sound and fire observed, may be known how much the Guns are
distant that are shot off against the besieged, or besiegers, even as to the
ingenious Gunners there will not be wanting matter to promote their Art.

Thirdly, by hearing the Sound of Thunder, and seeing the lightning go before
may be known how far it is off, so that if the Thunder be not changed from the
place where the lightning was seen; for how many seconds (whether measured by
the pulse, which exactly continues a second, or by a Pendulum or any other
Watch) there are between the Lightning and the Sound, so many 230 fathoms are
to be reckoned; so that if you number five seconds it may be distant from you
half a league; if ten seconds a whole league, whether the distance shall be
upright, or sidewayes and oblique, for it matters nothing.

Fourthly, If by the turnings and windings or Circles in the air a sound in the
same manner may be considered, and caused, as we see circles extende^ in the
water struck with the finger or a little stone, as all almost believe, and if
from the swiftness of bodies in like manner moved we my ghess at their
crassitude, thickness and weight, we may say that water is 1380 times thicker
and heavier than air; for as much as the Semidiameter of Circles of the Water
in any manner struck, which is made in a second of time, scarce exceeds a foot,
in which time the semidiamiter of Circles in the air, made also by any
percussion is 1380 foot, that is 230 fathoms; which proportion of gravities
come very near to observations by him mentioned. There is yet one thing that
may cause some doubt, which is, that the Sound of greater Guns moves more
slowly than of lesser, whereas our Geometer in the siege at Theodonis observed
that their Sound was heard, from the fire seen, after thirteen or fourteen
seconds of time, when yet he was scarce half a league distant from those Guns;
And the Sound according to that which has been before said, may pass over a
whole league and more in that time: Wherefore the Sound of those Guns does seem
to be different from that of lesser Guns.

The Author having by this discourse argued that the Sound of Guns is heard at
the distance of above 16 miles a minute (which is almost as swift as the
Copernicans suppose the Earth to move in its diurnal revolution about its Axis)
it was thought fit to subjoyn hereto the Authors latter thoughts of the same
Argument, published three years after.

OF THE SWIFTNESS OF SOUND, And force of Bullets shot out of Guns.
WHen I have oftentimes considered that the Sound passes over 230 fathoms in
the time of a 2d or sixtieth part of a minute; and that there seem to arise
someed doubt, whether there should be that Swiftness of the Sound of greater
Guns, as there is of lesser, with which I tried; at length it was observed that
in the space of eleven seconds, the Sound of the greater Guns of the Kings
Armory, have passed from the same Armory, after the flash was seen, as far as
our house, or the Vicennian Convent, whilst for obtaining the surrender of
Pouploon the Guns were shot off by night.

But when with a fathom I found that it was 3524 fathoms from Port Saint
Anthony to the gate of the aforesaid Convent, where the ear was, and to the
wall of the Vicennian Castle first meeting it, near 2500 fathoms, it is certain
first that it is a just league of 2500 fathoms from the Garden walk of the
Armoty, from whence the Guns are wont to be shot off, to that Castle: for if
any thing in the passage must be diminished that distance will well enough
equal it, whereby the corner of the Garden is more distant, or the walk by
Sequana nearer from the Castle, than Port Saint Anthony.

It is evident therefore that the Sound runs over more than 230 Fathoms in each
second, to wit, 320 in every second, which make 1920 foot; which since any one
can prove by his own experiments, I need not say more thereof.

But some may imagine that hence perhaps must be concluded that greater Sounds
pass more swiftly, which disagrees with diverse observations. But when sometimes
these experiments shall be repeated, that I may number the seconds, I shall
advertise, for as much as I conjecture that there is no swiftness of sound
greater than that, which I have proved of 230 fathoms for a second; for in
these small matters I do not approve that common saying, He that acts by
another, seems to act by himself; who want not opportunities may observe for
their own satisfaction.

But now we shall add some thing concerning the swiftness of Bullets shot out
of Guns. When therefore at the Marquess of Doraisons four leagues from the
Sextian waters, I commanded a Brass Gun nine foot long, whose name was the
Marchioness, commonly called la Marquise, (whose Bullet was two pounds and an
ounce, but quantity of Powder, such as is wont to be in the use of lesser Guns,
the weight of one pound) to be levelled horizontally, with a plum line I found
that the Bullet shot off Horizonitally, in the time of five seconds had passed
over 630 fathoms or 3780 foot, and had reached the horizon, or fell to the
ground, as was evident by the huge quantity of dust raised by the blow.

Moreover that point of Earth which was first struck by the Bullet was
depressed under the horizon of the Gun 27 fathoms, for otherwise the Range
should not have been so great before its fall to the earth, which meets so much
the more slowly by how much it is the more depressed under the Horizon of the
Gun shot off, and I presume I have attributed a lesser swiftness to the Guns
than is just, unless yet the Bullets of the greater Guns shot off with very
fine powder, which we used, may exceed the swiftness of Bullets shot from
Harquebuzes; of which thing I do not yet pass judgment, till experiment, shall
bring some further evidence: but I shall propound some things newly observed.

Now therefore of the Bullet which I made trial of, I affirm that the swiftness
was so great that, at least, in each second minute it could pass over 126
fathoms.

I said, at least, because the observers know that the force on the Bullet does
go before the excussion or flash of the powder, and the perceiving thereof; so
that half a second may well be attributed to this time. Moreover in the first
second the Bullet passes more swiftly, in which time I doubt not but it passes
over 150 fathoms; Lastly, if by reason of that tarrying which. happens between
the smiting of the Earth until the dust is seen to rise, we should augment that
swiftness by so many fathoms as it could pass over in half a minute, to wit 70,
and that the swiftness be supposed almost equal for the time of five seconds,
and in each second of that time that it passes over 140 fathoms, that is, if
the point of the Earth first struck were 700 fathoms distant from the Gun, it
would reach it in the time of five seconds. Then the swiftness of the Bullet
may be determined from what has been said, to be 130 fathoms, at least, in the
time of a second: which also agrees with the experiments of Bullets shot from
lesser Guns: to wit, they pass an hundred fathoms in the same time as the Sound
of the Gun has the same passage.

For if, behind a wall that is to be struck by the Bullet, the ear be
attentive, in the same instant the sound and the percussion of the Bullet is
heard, as if the very Bullet had caused that Sound; which doubtless you shall
find to be true as I did if you try: although it will be worth the labor to
prove it, not only with that most refined powder, which they are wont to use
who shoot at a mark for a wager, but also with the courser sort of Powder for
great Guns, that it may be observed whether it causes any sensible difference
of the swiftness.

Whatsoever powder you use, the least swiftness of the Bullet, may be defined
in the first second an hundred, the greatest 150 fathoms, if you but so much
Powder into the Gun as is necessary for a good shot; for if you put in but a
few grains which can scarce shoot the Bullet off, another thing. is to be said.

I add that a Bullet shot vertically or Perpendicularly upright from the
aforesaid Gun in its ascent and descent, spends 36 seconds: which if it spend
so much time in its Rise as in its fall, and that a heavy body descending in
the time of 18 seconds always keeps the same proportion in hastening its
descent which it keeps in the four first seconds, the Vertical ascent shall be
648 fathoms, forasmuch as a Bullet of six pound Weight of that Gun, which the
Illustrious Knight Hugenius caused to be shot off at the Hague upon my request,
in its ascent in the time of 16 seconds passed over 512 fathoms, which falling,
pierced three foot into the Earth.

But two things there are which may lessen the space of the ascent; first, that
perhaps the bullet may not spend so much time in its ascent as in its descent,
because Arrows in ascending pass over the same way in three seconds of time
that in descending they do in five seconds: furthermore should we imagine to
shoot with the mouth of the Gun toward the Earth, the Bullet would pierce
deeper into the Earth, than by its mere fall, as it happens in Arrows: whence
there arises in me no small suspicion that the eyes in the ascent of the Bullet
are deceived, to wit that the Bullet was even falling when it was yet esteemed
to ascend: which also may be imagined of Arrows, which perhaps had began to
descend when they should seem to be inverted, that the point which went before
ascending should likewise descending antecede: which you may conclude of from
the small blow of the Bullet descending, unless you may contend that the stroke
made by the Bullet shot upright from the mouth of the Gun and falling upon the
Earth very near, is greater indeed than the stroke of the same Bullet shot from
the greatest height, and that not by reason of the greater swiftness, but by
reason of the air so unawares intercepted and oppressed, that it may much
better turn over or bore through the Earth, than when it is prepared for the
last motion by the Bullet falling slowly.

Which indeed can be known by Rocks and Mountains 600 fathoms high, to wit, one
standing on the top shall observe what time the Bullet that is shot off at the
foot of the Mountain, shall spend in coming to the top or any other place of
the Mountain, and a fign being given shall warn the leveller of the Gun of the
time, or from it shall learn the time of the ascent and descent: from which
cutting off the time of the ascent shall conclude how much shorter it shall be
in the time of the descent; which also may be observed by an iron Bullet
red-hot shot off in the night, whilst it can be seen light to the greatest
height: however it is I think fit to add the observation of that Holland Gun,
which being levelly or horizontally shot off, carried a Bullet of six pounds
398 paces, before it first touched the Earth, taking a pace for three foot;
after this Space it made eight leaps, and at length it ceased at 1750 paces: we
have here expressed the distance between each leap, as likewise the distance of
each grazing from the Gun.

Paces. The passage in the air was 398 The first leap 392 790 The second leap
275 1065 The third leap 179 1244 The fourth leap 150 1394 The fifth leap 81
1475 The sixth leap 73 1548 The seventh leap 78 1626 The eighth leap 124 1750

Moreover a middle range of 45 degrees was 3225 paces, whose half if we take it
for an upright or vertical shot, will be 3225 foot, or 537 fathoms, for which
before we counted only 512. Hence it comes to pass that we may judge that a
vertical shot in the ascent does not proceed by the same or equal and
proportionable degrees of swiftness, by which it falls in its descent, for at
least there are wanting 25 fathoms, by which 512 differ from 537, although that
way of him that levelled the Gun, in counting by common paces, restrained to no
rule, cannot be so certain, but that the other may differ from it, so that it
cannot with undoubted certainty be reduced to our defined fathoms.

Whoever therefore would certainly try, let him have a chain or wheel for
counting of fathoms or any other determinate measures, as is done in the
passage of the league of 2500 fathoms from the Bastilian Tower erected right
over against Port Saint Anthony as for as the walls of the Vicennian Castle
that first meet.

There remains one thing that may diminish the upright height, to wit, that
the Bullet spends more seconds in the descent than it ought, after it comes to
the point of equality, after which it does not any more augment its own
swiftness: so that not only 16 seconds are to be reckoned for the descent of
the Holland Bullet, but perhaps 20, and 12 are to be counted for the ascent.

For although in moderate heights of 40 or 50 fathoms, the access to the point
of equality, in leaden Bullets may not be sufficiently observed, it does not
thence follow that it comes not to such a point, in greater heights of an
hundred or more fathoms; yea experience proves the Contrary.

Let there be taken a Corken. Bullet which is at least 70 times lighter than a
leaden one, yet both them almost in the same time make a three foot space,
although perhaps the Cork attains its point of equality within 50 foot.

But whether a leaden Bullet 70 times heavier, can pass over a seventy fold
space, that is, 3500 foot, before it comes to its point of equality, which
little differs from the height to which Bullets arrive that are vertically shot
out of Guns, although I cannot yet conclude, yet it seems probable enough to
me. Moreover the force will never be augmented after the arival at that point,
if the greater force shall be argued from only the greater swiftness. But note,
it has been observed by a Noble man who related it to me, that a field Gun 18
foot long, and cut shorter foot by foot, did always curry its shot the
further till it came to be eleven foot long, and then it began not to give so
great a Range.

To which may be added from the experience of some in small Guns, that if it be
over charged with Powder, part of the Powder will blow out of the Gun without
firing. Morever if the Bullet be not quite remmed home it will pierce the
further, and the Gun recoyle the more.

Also that where the Gun is found most to furr with many shootings off with
Powder, there it ought to be cut off, the remainder being the proper length
requisite.

It has been related that a ship becalmed and tormented with the Cushee Piece
of a Galley, that lay in a manner out of shot, was at the last reached by the
industry of a Mariner, who wrapping up a much lesser sized Bullet than the Bore
of the Gun made use of required, in a good Wad did shoot as far as the Galley,
thereby retaliating the Injury received.

Of the Depression of shot below the Mark.
I Have often took care that a Gun should be shot off commonly called an
Harquebuz, at the space of an hundred fathoms from the mark, that is, six
hundred foot, which make three hundred common paces, and found that the Bullet
was depressed under the mark-line eight or ten foot, which would scarce have
made a greater space, if it had fallen perpendicularly down at the same moment
of time it was left off.

Again at the the Marquess of Doraisons, a Bullet shot off, in the space of
five seconds of time fell 27 fathoms beneath its horizontal line or mark; and
whereas perchance the rising of the dust, and the perceiving of it might make
us lose a second of time, and that we retain only four seconds, then in each
second the Bullet should be carried 157 fathoms (surely not more) yet it ought
to have descended 32 fathoms, if it descends so much horizontally shot off as
it would naturally fall were it not shot off, and therefore it either loses
some thing of its descent by reason of its being shot off, or in running 360
fathoms, it spends not so much as four whole seconds of time, but rather about
3.

We add that something is by this means abated from the swiftness of the fall
for the space of 27 fathoms which the Bullet in shooting off did descend, or
fall below the mark: so that all things considered, I would not as yet start
from that opinion, which holds that two heavy bodies, to wit, two Bullets,
whereof one may fall perpendicularly from its place above the Horizon, and the
other be forced Of this there is a controversy between Borellius who published
a Treatise de vi percussionis, the which was writ against by Honorato Fabri ^^
his Dialogues of Motion.
horizontaly, shall both in the same moment of time arrive at the ground or
Horizon: for example, if the pit of the aforesaid Marquess be 27 fathoms deep,
as indeed it is, if I rightly remember, or also a little deeper, 32. a Bullet
shot into the fields enclosed between the Sextian waters, will hit the horizon,
the same moment, that the like Bullet falling, shall the superior superfice of
the aforesaid point of the water.

There is another thing that I may suspect, whether or no the surveyour has
accurately enough measured the horizontal depression; however it be, you see
with what difficulties experiments are hedged in, and how much natural
knowledge is indebted to them, who are enriching the same with exact
Observations.

But note that the air that meets the bullet that is shot off does so much
hinder or diminish its motion, as much as a wind of the same swiftness with the
Ball, blowing continually against the same in a vacuum.

For is it not the same impediment, or destruction of the same force, if the
bullet beats the air or is beaten of it? But when I said it was known by
experience, that water does so much the more descend, by how much the slower it
moves horizontally, and the same may seem to be concluded of other projected
heavy bodies; I advertise that observations are not yet made so exact as that
any thing of this nature should be too positively asserted.

Of the Impediment of the Air.
IN regard that Bullets shot from Guns do about the end of their motion utter a
more vehement noise or hissing than about the middle or onwards; there is no
doubt to be made but that they move more slowly, and the force decreasing as
the swiftness, Mersennus concludes that the Curved range line described by a
Bullets motion cannot exactly describe a Parabola, but however the Theory is
tolerable, admiting the first violence to move in the touch line of a Parobola,
and it is likely the greater Mountures cause the greatest difference, because,
there is so much the more Air beaten and removed by the passage of the shot.

But yet it is most hard to find out, how much the Air hinders; for although it
seems to hinder so much, as the wind agitating the air with the same swiftness,
strikes upon the Bullet shot off; yet we are Ignorant of the force of that wind
compared with the force of the Bullet shot off; unless we may appeal to our
other experiments in which is shown that the air is ^^ least a thousand times
lighter than water: and sccing that a leaden Bullet is eleven times heavier
than water of the same bulk, a leaden Bullet will exceed the weight of the air
11000 times: and therefore the air agitated by the same swiftness of the
Bullet, meeting with the bullet, seems to take away the 1100 part of the
swiftness from the Bullet shot off.

Which impediment truly is so light, that in the description of the Parabole it
scarce ought to be considered.

Those things are very excellent which the famous Torricellius has set forth
in his approved Treatise, to which Mersennus referrs his Reader.

Experiments OF SHOOTING.
Wherein is explained various observations concerning Guns; And what might
happen to bullets shot off in a vacuity, diverse ways compared with those
which are obstructed in the Air.

WHenas I made trial about the shooting of Bullets in Guns only of an
indifferent bigness (which we commonly call Harquebuzes) which in the ascent
and descent together spend 22, 23 or 24 Seconds of time, Peter Pe^il a man most
skilful and accurate in observations whilst he lived at Francopolis, found (at
my request) the Range of a shot, out of a great gun, at the elevation of 22
degrees, whose iron Bullet weighed 33 pounds and, to be 1900 fathoms, which the
Bullet flew or passed over in the space of 20, 21 or 22 seconds; the Gun being
placed at 8 fathoms in the Castle above ground or Horizon; from which place a
Bullet of 12 pounds which so many pounds of gun-pouder shot off at the
elevation of 16 degrees above the horizon, spent in the air 16 seconds.

Besides, a Culverine of 12 foot long and horizontally levelled being 6 fathom
high above the Horizon of the ocean and shot off, the Bullet, whose diameter
was almost five Inches, continued 8 seconds of time in the air; when yet
another Bullet whose diameter was 6 Inches and 1/^, also horizontally shot off
out of an other Gun 12 foot and long, spent only 6 seconds in the air; another
Gun shot off at the Elevation of 15 degrees, its Bullet spent 24 seconds in the
Air.

An Iron Culverine of 10 foot long, whose Bullet, had a diameter of almost four
inches, horizontally l^velled, and standing 9 fathoms above the surface or brim
of the Sea, spent only three seconds, in Its horizontal Range, after which
grazing five times above the Ocean, spent four other seconds.

Three days also before the taking of Theoud, Robervallus our Geometer
observed, the Bullets of Guns shot off from the City against our Soldiers, for
the most part to spend only 14 seconds of time in the air, after which there
was a hissing increased more and more until the force and motion of the Bullet
was almost quite extinguished, and that after the shot had flew almost half a
league.

Which being supposed it may be Theorically concluded, how great the shoots
ought to be at whatsoever elevation above the horizon, if they be in such
Proportion one to another, as shots in a Vacuity, no Medium hindering; that is,
for example, if the range of 45 degrees be double the height of the
Perpendicular or vertical shot in a space not hindering, so is the range of 45
in the air to the vertical in the air, and so of the rest; which observations
only will teach; which yet are most difficult in the greater sort of Guns or
Bows, especially the perpendicular, whose height we can scarce certainly know,
unless some rock might be found high enough, to whose top, or some certain
place, the Bullet or Arrow may come, the height of which top or place we may
afterward measure.

No Towers surely are high enough; and by the time of the descent or fall of
the Bullet, to conclude a place may be found to which bullets, darts, or other
things that are cast upright or vertically ascending, do come, does therefore
fail, because they do not observe the same rule of swiftness in descending; as
is evident from darts, to which seeing it happens in their ascent or rise of 50
fathoms to be slackned in their descent or fall, something like this may be
also thought to happen to Bullets, to wit, when they descend from the height of
a thousand fathoms.

But you may avoid these difficulties: for if from that rock in the Dolphinate,
whose height it is said is 600 fathoms or more, a stone or bullet of Iron or any
other matter be let f^ll, * the time of its falling being noted, as for
example, if in the space of 18 seconds it fall from the height of 648 fathoms
(as Experiments of this kind the Reader will doubtless find, as also others
about Pendulums in the Opuscula Posthuma of 1. Bap. Batiani.
truly it should fall, if the spaces be in Duplicate ratio, or as the square of
the times in the whole descent) then we have rightly judged before of the
vertical altitude or perpendicular shot (which the Bullet of an indifferent Gun
reaches) that is the height of 288 fathoms; which yet I cannot credit;
otherwise the middle shot or range of 45 degrees of that Gun at least would be
double to that perpendicular or vertical one, that is to say, it would be 576
fathoms, whenas I found it not 400 fathoms.

Besides these observations I shall add those which the industrious Galeus an
Engineer to diverse D^kes in whose presence he made them, writ with his own hand
and gave me, which that you may more easily understand, let the greater Gun K,
which we commonly call a Cannon, be parallel to the Horizon, and let the eye be
taking aim by the points I and O, the horizontal shot being supposed O P, or in
the figure beneath, S X, or, T V, he says that the remainder of the rang which
bends till it touches the horizon in the point L, is almost equal to the
horizontal shot, that is, that there is almost as much space made by the bullet
from that point, from which it begins to bend toward the horizon, un til it
touch it, as it had made before the bending of it.

various angles and parabolas

But now let us suppose that horizontal shot O P, or T V, removed to the lower
figure in which let A B be the horizontal plain, and let the the aforsaid
horizontal shot be A I, Galeus contends that the middle range of 45 degrees,
which is the longest of all, is eleven fold the length of the horizontal shot O
P, or A I: And in those Guns which are half the weight of the foregoing greater
Guns, to be in respect of A I, as 10 and is to 1, and in lesser Guns as 10 to 1
that is our figure, as A B in respect of A I; in which the middle range is A G
E B; for that is the middle range which passes through the middle of the
quadrant PH 5, which they call the sixth point, because it is the middle part
of the half circumference A, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, divided
into 12 equal parts; which joynd to the quadrant PH 5, may be useful for
levelling the gun at any elevation above the horizon, if it shall be divided
not only into 12 parts, but also into an 180 degrees.

And hence he concludes that the dead or exact Horizontal Shot or range, that
is in the figure, R L I to be in Proportion to the middle range as 1 to 6; or
in lesser Guns, as one to five; which dead Horizontal ranges is to the range of
an Elevationof one degree, as five to six, or more exactly as 55 to 67, or as
14 to 17.

But when the recoyling of the greater Gun is hindered, the dead Horizontal
range will be greater by a seventh, eighth, ninth, or tenth part, than that
range which is made with recoyling; in lesser Guns it will be a twelfth or a
fifteenth part less.

Moreover he asserts that the middle range A 6 E does proceed righton without
arching by the line A G, which may be almost equal to A 5, that is, almost 5
fold or 4 the Horizontal shot: then not only that it does ascend to the point
D, so that the greatest height of the middle range may be fourfold the
Horizontal, and be over the line A C sixfold the same which some affirm; but he
by observation says is false against Tartaglia; affirming that the greatest
altitude must be F E, answering the point 7, that is seven distances of
Horizontal range from the gun A, that F E may be almost five fold the
Horizontal-range.

Galeus did likewise well conjecture that the Curve for the middle range does
come near to the Curve of an hyperbolical or parabolical line, and that not by
force of reason, but only from observations. Moreover the greatest range at
forty five degrees elevation he makes 16200 foot, that is 2700 of the French
fathoms; who because he used feet less than ours, you might account it for 2500
fathoms, that the said range may answer to our league, and that the bullet
might pass through the air in near half a minute, or 30 seconds of time: and
because the dead Horizontal range may be 1/^ of the utmost, it will be 2700
foot or 450 fathoms, which being supposed the Horizontal range will scarce
exceed 200 fathoms.

Mersennus in this place has published a table of ranges made by the said
Galeus, but it being apprehended that the same is not so near the truth as that
of Torricellio, or another here published in English by the ancient well known
Teacher of the Mathematics Mr. Henry Bond; that the same may be preserved and
become more common in use we have inserted the same.

Two Tables of RANGES According to Degrees of MOVNTVRE.
By H. Bond.
The first Table.
degrees 1 8758 2 7813 3 7077 4 6482 5 5991 6 5581 7 5234 8 4932 9 4669 10 4440 11
4237 12 4055 13 3889 14 3741 15 3606 16 3483 17 3370 18 3266 19 3279 20 3080 21
2996 22 2978 23 2845 24 2776 25 2712 26 2651 27 2593 28 2538 29 2486 30 2437 31
2391 32 2344 33 2300 34 2260 35 2221 36 2183 37 2146 38 2111 39 2077 40 2044 41
2012 42 1981 43 1952 44 2007 45 2041 46 2076 47 2113 48 2150 49 2189 50 2230 51
2272 52 2317 53 2363 54 2412 55 2463 56 2516 57 2572 58 2633 59 2695 60 2762 61
2832 62 2908 63 2989 64 3075 65 3168 66 3268 67 3376 68 3493 69 3621 70 3762 71
3916 72 4086 73 4276 74 4489 75 4732 76 5006 77 5303 78 5690 79 6263 80 6641 81
7274 82 8059 83 9061 84 10430 85 12330 86 15140 87 19850 88 29250 89 37480 90
00000 Finis.

The Second Table.
degrees 1 1.142 2 1.280 3 1.413 4 1.543 5 1.669 6 1.792 7 1.911 8 2.028 9 2.142 10
2.253 11 2.361 12 2.467 13 2.572 14 2.674 15 2.774 16 2.872 17 2.968 18 3.063
19 3.156 20 3.248 21 3.339 22 3.428 23 3.516 24 3.603 25 3.689 26 3.774 27
3.858 28 3.941 29 4.024 30 4.105 31 4.186 32 4.267 33 4.347 34 4.426 35 4.505
36 4.584 37 4.662 38 4.740 39 4.818 40 4.895 41 4.972 42 5.050 43 5.127 44
4.985 45 4.902 46 4.819 47 4.736 48 4.653 49 4.570 50 4.487 51 4.403 52 4.318
53 4.234 54 4.148 55 3.062 56 3.976 57 3.889 58 3.800 59 3.712 60 3.622 61
3.532 62 3.440 63 3.347 64 3.253 65 3.158 66 3.061 67 2.963 68 2.864 69 2.762
70 2.659 71 2.554 72 2.448 73 2.339 74 2.228 75 2.114 76 1.998 77 1.880 78
1.758 79 1.634 80 1.506 81 1.375 82 1.241 83 1.102 84 0.960 85 0.812 86 0.661
87 0.504 88 0.342 89 0.174 90 0.000 Finis.

The use of the first Table, by Example.
1. Suppose a piece curry a shot 763. paces at 13. degrees of Mounture, What is
the Horizontal Range? Multiply the Number against 13. degrees, which is 3889.
by 763. and from the product cut off a figures toward the right hand, leaves
the paces of the Horizontal Range desired.

The use of the second Table, by Example.
2. Suppose a piece Curry a shot 374 paces at the Horizontal Range; How many
paces shall it Curry at 16. degrees Mounture? Multiply the Number against 16.
degrees, which is 2. 872 of this second Table, by 374. and from the product cut
off 3. figures toward the right hand, leaves the Number of paces desired.

3. Having the paces of any degree of Mounture to find how far that shall curry
a shot at a greater degree of Mounture. Example.

Suppose a piece Curry a shot 543 paces at 11. degrees Mounture; How may paces
shall it curry at 19. degrees Mounture? First multiply the Number against 11.
in the first Table, which is 4237, by 543. and Multiply that product again by
the Number found in the second Table against 19. degrees, which is 3. 156. And
from the Last product cut off 7. figures toward the right hand, and the
remainder are the Number of paces desired.

1. By the pieces Mounture, and the paces she curries a shot at that Mounture,
to know how many she curries at level Range, by the direction aforesaid.

2. Having the level Range of a piece, to find how many paces that shall curry
at a Mounture given, by the directions aforesaid.

3. Having the paces that a piece Curries at one Mounture, to find how many
paces it should curry at a greater Mounture, by the directions aforesaid.

The Ranges of Spouts or Squirts compared with the Ranges of Bullets shot out
of Guns.
FOr as much as a Bullet spends a greater time in its fall than its rise, like
darts; or the descent is not so swift, that it should always hasten in that
degree whereby in three or four seconds, we have found its swiftness to be
increased, which I suppose to be confirmed from this reason, because a bullet
descending cannot have so great a power to smite, as it has ascending, so that
approaching the Earth it is not so swiftly moved, as when it comes from the
mouth of the Gun, for when the swiftness of any thing projected is equal, it
equally strikes.

Therefore I account Spouts useful, seeing they bring us to the knowledge of
shooting, of which otherwise we could not judge, by reason of the difficulty of
trial which is most easily discerned in tubes: for because any one may compare
in a little time what ever shot he pleases with another, to wit, a middle Range
Former Figure.
with a vertical, or Perpendicular one as to time and height, that this may be
the better understood, in the following figure let the Cock be A above the
Horizon A B, and let the altitude of the tube be A 12, whose vertical Squirt is
A PH, Experience teaches us that the length of the middle Squirt A B, is
double to the Vertical A PH.

But to what height the middle Squirt ranges, whether to D or E, which also you
may understand of Bullets shot from Guns, there is none hitherto has observed:
but it is one half of the vertical PH A, wherefore the point D or E is higher
than it ought to be, and whatever is said by the ingenious, may be corrected by
spouts.

There are other things also that want inquiry into; for example, how it can
come to pass, that a bullet shot out of the mouth of a Gun from O to P comes
right on, when in that time it flying along the line O P a hundred fathoms
ought to fall toward the center of the Earth 12 foot, if the horizontal motion
of a thing violently projected hinders not its natural motion, as many imagine
in a vacuity or place that does not impede.

For although that can partly be explained by the diversity of the lines, which
is sound in Guns, to wit the line R X Y, which follows the outside of the Gun,
and that which they call Linea animae S Z, which passes thorough the axis of
the hollow M N to the aforesaid side, is in no wise parallel: because, to wit,
the bullet K or H levelling at L may ascend to the side line I L, or the point
S passing to Z may ascend to the point X of the side line R Y: yet another
thing is to be added, when what is aforesaid is not true, when the eye of the
shooter takes not aim by the line I L or R X but by the line M N or S X: for
then the bullet K does not descend so much, as it would if it were left to it
self in the air.

Add, that the water out of the Cock fitted to the Horizontal Squirt does not
descend so much, as it would if left to it self; for it is manifest by
Experience, that the Horizontal Squirt of 30 foot, which continues two seconds,
descends not so much as eight foot, when according to the law of bodies of
equal weight, it should be (...), or at least by reason of the resistance of
the air breaking the water it ought to descord 30 foot.

FINIS.

