LETTERS WRITTEN By Sir William Temple, During His being AMBASSADOR AT THE
HAGUE, TO THE Earl of Arlington and Sir John Trevor, Secretaries of State to K.
Charles II. Wherein are discovered many Secrets hitherto concealed. Published
from the Originals, under Sir William Temple's own Hand: And Dedicated to the
Right Honorable Sir Thomas Littleton, Speaker of the House of Commons.

By D. Jones, Gent

LONDON: Printed and are to be Sold by A. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms, in
Warwick Lane. 1699.

TO THE Right Honorable Sir Thomas Littleton, Speaker of the House of Commons.
SIR,
THE following Letters containing the Particulars of some Part of the Foreign
Negotiations of one of the Ablest and most Accomplished Ministers we had then
in Being; I Will presume upon your Goodness to Pardon me in adventuring to
Address them to your Honor, since you move in so Public a Sphere, and are so
competent a Judge both of their Use and Genuineness, whereof had I not been
more particularly assured, I should not have been so Unjust to the World, nor
so wanting to my Self, as thus to expose them to Light; much less would I have
been so Audacious as to prefix Your Name before them. To these two
Considerations Your Honor will allow me to beg the liberty to subjoin the
Irresistible Weight Your Public Usefulness has added to my Inclinations
herein, whereby I cannot forbear to give my poor Testimony (this being the
first Opportunity) of the Veneration I have for those excellent Virtues that
have enabled you, to the no great Credit of some of Your Predecessors, and
Emulation of such as shall come after, to carry it with so Even an Hand,
between Court and Country (which however they have been distinguished, are
inseparable in their Interests, and none but ill-minded Men will go about to
disunite) and that to their equal Benefit and mutual Satisfaction, as well as
suitable Return of both's Affection to you for it: Insomuch that as the
Philosopher of old indefinitely called Man Fibula Mundi, in regard to his two
constitutional Parts of Soul and Body, whereby as it were Heaven and Earth, the
most distant and disagreeing Parts of the Universe were united into one
Individuum; So by a Peculiarity of Management in Your Honor, you may as justly
and truly this day in your Station be termed Fibula Angliae; and that you may
always continue to be so, and a constant Ornament to the Chair you fill, is as
little doubted of, as it shall ever be rejoiced in, by

Your Honor's Most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, D. Jones.

The PREFACE.
IT is more out of a Prevalent Regard to Custom in this kind, than any
Consciousness I am under, of the real Necessity there is to premise any thing,
concerning these Letters, written by Sir William Temple, during some part of
his Public Ministry at the Hague, in a Reign which, in many parts of it, has
been as obscure, as some have thought it contemptible and little.

For as to what regards the Genuineness of them (against which, in things of
this Nature, the greatest Objections are usually made) I think no Person that
has any tolerable Acquaintance with, or Idea of the Transactions of those
times they refer to, but will acknowledge they are Self-justifying and carry
their own Light in so clear a manner along with them, as to be beyond all
Contradiction or Dispute: To say nothing of the whole Contexture and Evenness
of the Style, so fully expressive of his Mind that wrote them, (which was so
peculiar to himself, and wherein never any Gentleman was more happy) which of
it self being as it were inimitable, is next to a Demonstration of their Truth:
But for a further Testimony hereof, and that as far as in me lies, I may leave
no Scruple unanswered, I have the Originals by me under his own Hand, which any
Gentleman may freely see for his further Satisfaction.

I shall not enter into a Detail of the particular Discoveries contained in
them, but herein will wholly leave them to answer for themselves: Only I cannot
but observe, that the Years to which they relate, being the obscurer Part of
King Charles II's Reign, the Publication of them, I can look upon no otherwise,
than as a Debt we owe to History in general, (the most useful Part of Humane
Learning) and to our own Nation in particular, who is more immediately
concerned; and then seemed to be in a struggle, whether, as in Ancient Times,
she should continue to hold the Balance of Europe in her hands, though the
Defection afterward both in her self and her other Confederate Crown, (wherein
each of them proved much less Scrupulous in breaking the Triple League; than
they seemed unresolved to enter into it) are but too notorious, and cannot be
thought on by a right English Heart, without some sort of Indignation But how
unsteady soever at any time things went at Home, our Learned Author will be
found to be ever constant to himself, and to retain the same English Spirit in
this, as in all his other Negotiations; Which is so much the more Glorious to
his Memory, when he had so few Cotemporary Ministers either at Home or Abroad
of his Temper, of which yet the Honorable Person, to whom most of these
Letters were directed; I mean, Mr. Secretary Trevor (for the other, I have
nothing to say to) was deservedly one, and who will be ever remembered by those
that know his true Character, with the greatest deference.

It remains therefore for me to observe, That as it appears by Sir W. Temple's
Memoirs already published, he had also written others relating to the times of
these his Letters, whereof there is now but little Appearance, and many
Judicious Persons have given over any Expectations, of their ever coming to
public View: It is some sort of Satisfaction to my self, as it is a Benefit to
Mankind, to be in any Measure able to supply that Defect by the Publication
hereof; concerning which, I have nothing more to say, but that the three last
Letters, written also upon Public Occasions, though by other Hands, and of a
latter Date, having something of Curiosity in them, I thought it not
unseasonable to annex them hereunto, as being all I am at present able to
communicate for the Public Good, which I would always in my Station endeavor
to promote with all Application and Sincerity.

From my Lodgings, over against the Paul's- Head, in Paul's- Chain, May 11.
1699.
LETTERS OF Sir William Temple, etc.
LETTER I. Hague, October. 2. S. N. 1668.
My Lord,
SINCE my last I have received your Lordship's of the 14th; and in one Letter
from Mr. Williamson, an Account of what was Resolved at the Foreign Committee,
to whom your Lordship only referred the Determination of what manner the
Amendments of the Marine Treaty should be pursued. And accordingly I have since
fallen into the Debate of that Affair, with Monsieur de Wit, in all its
Particulars; and the Differences between us are not great, and some of his
Exceptions seem so reasonable, that I must be furnished with Arguments to
maintain the Points against him, if they must be insisted on; For, I confess, I
can find none of my own.

Upon the first, He consents to the change of the Form of Certificates, and
will accept of such as we shall draw up, so they mean equal on both sides,
mutati^ mutandi^: But to that which the East India Company say, of their desire
that Trade may rather be carried on without any Certificate at all, he says, He
does not see how that can be, or to what purpose in that case, all the Articles
are about Contraband Goods, since it is by the Certificate whereby it is known
what the Ship is, and what the Goods are she carries, and thereby all further
trouble of search is avoided. He says, He should be content, and the Advantage
would be theirs to have all Trade free, and none to ask at Sea what another
Ship was; Whether it went, or what it carried: But since that cannot be, there
is no way of avoiding Disputes, besides that of Certificates. And indeed, I
doubt the Merchants in that err, or rather, considered not the main end of the
whole Regulation, which was to avoid Quarrels between the Nations, but only
their own private Interest, in saving the trouble and Charge of Certificates;
which made them likewise desire it might be from the Magistrates of the Ports
from whence the Ships parted, not from the Admiralty.

Upon the second, He consents to the Proposal in the Margin, with only the
leaving out these two Words, Of India; so as the Rule may be generally to all
places, and not confined to the Indies; which I had nothing to say against,
believing those Words fell in only by the Matter's coming from the East India
Company, without notice of any other Traders*

Upon these two Points I had given your Lordship the Account formerly of my
having at several Discourses gained his Consent; and I do not find that any
thing he excepts, as in them, is different from what we mean our selves.

For the other Points which are wholly new, and Additions to the Treaty, they
cost us a great deal more Debate, which I shall not trouble your Lordships
with, but only the Result at least of the Opinion he gave me leave to write to
your Lordships, as his upon them; though the first, second, and fourth were all
of more difficult Digestion, and such as, I doubt, would have given some Work
to the Commissioners in pursuance of the Breda Treaty, so much as to have
touched; for the Truth is, our Trade in the Indies being so little, and theirs
so much, all Equalities of this kind are gains to us, and loss to them.

For the first of the four Particulars not provided for in the Marine Treaty;
He consents to one half of the Period, ending with the Word Government. But for
the other, allowing liberty to pass any River, or Pass, leading to any place of
Trade, although the other Company have a Fort, or Castle, upon the said River,
or Pass, he says, it cannot possibly be; nor would it ever be executed, though
the States should consent to it: For in those Passes, the very End of either
Companies Building a Fort, or Castle, was to secure the Trade of such a Country
to themselves, so as they would by this Article loose all the benefit of the
Expense they had been at; That if to such Nations there were any other way
found, not under the reach of their Cannon, that Passage should be free; But
under a Fort built to the aforesaid Ends, he did not believe any Orders would
compel those in it, either of our Nation, or theirs, to see the Trade they had
secured to themselves, drawn away to the other Nation, by a free Passage.

The second Particular I got wholly agreed to, though with much Difficulty, as
importing, I suppose, more Advantage to us than any of the rest, considering
how many more Nations the Dutch trade with than we, by virtue of such
Agreements.

The third was without difficulty, importing, as we both conceived, no more
than was before provided by the Marine Treaty, and more particularly.

For the fourth, He could not consent it should extend further than to Ships
belonging to either Company, or to any Nations, or People, subject to either
Company, and consequently under Protection of the said Company; For the making
it now in the Words of our Article, [ To any Nations with whom either Company
shall Trade, and not in Enmity with the other Company;] would occasion only
either Companies selling their Passports to all the Nations that would buy
them; leaving it afterward to dispute upon any Accident that should arrive,
whether such Nation were in Enmity with the other Company, or no, the Natives
maintaining the Negative, and perhaps the Company the Affirmative; And it may
be upon pretense of some new Injury which had lately given the occasion of the
Enmity; and where such Disputes should be determined, was difficult to find.
Besides, He argued from common use of Nations, that Passports operated only
toward those who were subject to such as granted the Passport, or else by
Alliance and Accord between Nations, to such as were one another Subjects, and
under their Protection; But how it should extend to other Nations, because they
were not in Enmity with our Ally, he could not see any reason, nor had heard
any Example: But on the other side, it was ever to be supposed, that there
would be no need at all of Passports from the one, to such as were not in
Enmity with the other Nations; being to be esteemed as Just in their Actions,
and not likely to disturb, or seize another, without, at least, pretense of
Enmity, which would be a sort of Piracy at Sea, or Robbery at Land; but in case
such a thing should happen, no other Nation concerned themselves in it, unless
it was offered to their Subjects, and consequently to Persons under their
Protection.

I thought his reasoning seemed good; and besides, I imagined the thing was not
of weight; for wherever one Company found a Nation not in actual Enmity with
the other, and had a mind to protect their Navigation, they might do it by
receiving that Nation into their Protection, and their giving them Passports as
Subjects to them; But where Nations will not submit to such a Subjection, they
must protect themselves. And this was the Result of our Conference, which came
to no sort of Agreement on either side; since I neither had power to do it from
His Majesty, nor he from the States; So that we can only represent on each side
what past; and attend our Orders upon them, and he in the mean time dispose the
States to his Opinion, when we meet to treat and conclude formally upon them.

When I receive Instructions, I suppose it will be necessary to know the Manner
as well as the Matter we are to agree on; that is, whether a new Marine Treaty
to be made with these Particulars to be digested into the Body of it; Or else
these to be perfected in an Instrument by themselves as additions to the Marine
Treaty. For the doing it with or without Commissioners, I can say nothing,
since so great Authors are on both sides; but if both seem necessary, one to
the Substance, and the other to the Form, I was thinking whether two or more
might not be joined in Commission with me to treat, and conclude it with
Commissioners of theirs, and those to be acquainted beforehand with what was to
be expected upon this Matter: But I know not how our expectation of having the
Commissioners meet at London, would be satisfied by their meeting at the Hague,
nor how Forms go in joining Commissioners to an Ambassador for a particular
Business, and so I leave it.

The Account your Lordship expects from me of the new Governor in Flanders,
will be very lame, Men disagreeing much in his Character. The common Voice
making it very low in those Qualities themselves, which are most essential to
his doing well; but the Baron d'Isola, in his Letters hither, running it very
high as to his Abilities; the Appearance of which must needs have great
Disadvantages from his Arrival in a strange Country, without one word of any
Language besides Spanish, without Clothes, or Retinue, or hitherto the Show of
a Governor, the Marquess having not yet (at least till within this Day or two)
given up the Charge.

He is a Person of about Forty Years old, little and lean, with long black
Hair, and a Face that the Dutch call Ill-favored; of few words, prerending to
come in blind Obedience to the Queens Orders, which found him a Hunting, and
sent him away in the same Clothes, and with the same Retinue, which are about
eight or nine Persons, among whom a Natural Son (for he never was Married) and
a Secretary, said to be a very able Man. How four Women came to be a Hunting
with him, I know not; but it seems so many came with him too, and went to
Zealand upon his first Arrival. He intends, they say, to stay at Mecklyn till
the Plague ceases, or at least abates at Brussels, and perhaps Don Estevan
intends to be Minister of State; for he tells me the Constable has sent very
earnestly for him, and away he is gone this Day.

The Prince of Orange is expected to Day or to Morrow in Town. Monsieur Odijck*
tells me, His Highness is much concerned in the Attempts of removing the Scotch
Staple from Teweet to Dort, that it will be twelve Thousand Guilders a Year out
of his way; That those of Tewe^t offer all that can be asked, and more than
those of Dort; That His Highness has written to His Majesty about it, and hopes
He will not allow it, being a thing, as he says, of Sir William Davison's only
contrivance, and in the desire whereof the Scotch Merchants are no way agreed.

I have sent this Post, a Bottle of Juniper-Water for His Majesty, which he
pleased to tell my Wife he desired: It goes by Mr. Bucke, a Gentleman belonging
to the Duke of Ormond. If the King likes it, I shall endeavor to get more, and
should have said this to my Wife rather than your Lordship, but that I hear His
Majesty will be out of Town. I am ever,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful, and most Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER II. Hague, October. 5. S. N. 68.
My Lord,
I Have since my last received your Lordships of the 18th past, and you will
have already found, that the King's Commands in it, concerning my Procedure
upon the East India Propositions, are obeyed. Upon my next Conference with
Monsieur de Wit, I shall press the Reference of the Guinea Business to
Commissioners, and let the other rest where it is, till I have an Answer upon
my last.

I must likewise expect Instructions how to proceed upon the Concert desired
between us, Holland, and Sweden, for the Guaranty of the Peace, both upon the
present State of Affairs between the two Crowns, and in case of the King of
Spain's Death; For I hardly know how to begin, or what to propose, till I know
how far Spain will comply with the Swedish Payments, or how Sweden will digest,
or resent the delay or want of Satisfaction; besides neither French, nor
Spaniard, make any mention of the Guaranty; and these States have resolved not
to give it Spain, without the Satisfaction of the Swedish Subsidies.

I know not whether it will be seasonable to press it here, without further
Conjunctures, or at least, some Occasions given me from hence: But of this my
Lord Keeper in your Lordships Absence, promised I should receive further
Directions, and I may have some light given me from the Marquess Castle
Rodrigo, if he passes this way, as I hear he intends, having commanded a Friend
of mine at Brussels, to tell me, Ie l'embrasseray devray que partir on Espagne.
Don Est^van told me, That in his last Letters from Spain, they told him, they
were disposed to pay the Swedish Subsidies as much as we could wish them, Pero
que stavan impossibili^ados.

The Prince of Orange is not returned as was expected from Breda, but is gone
into Guelderlandt to Hunt, as his Friends say; but the common Talk will have
it, That it is upon some such other Chase as his last in Zealand; the Effects of
which are now no more talked of, nor will be, unless renewed by some other such
Adventure, or by his coming back hither, which they now talk of on Monday or
Tuesday.

I need not write here what Particulars, I know you hear by other Papers, as of
Monsieur d'Estrades* leaving his Embassage here, and Monsieur Pompone's coming
in his room, and all such Matters which come to your Lordship from another
Hand, which I would be glad to know how you are satisfied with.

When I hear the Perfection of Sir John Trevor's good Fortunes, I shall give
him Joy of them; In the mean time I give it your Lordship, upon your having
brought about what I saw you had long desired, and upon your having a Friend of
so great Merit, and so generally avowed both by the King, and I suppose, by the
Commissioners of the Treasury; For they will have it here, that the King lays
down 8000l. to bring this about, which is a good Bargain for both him that
comes in, and him that goes of. God send they may think I deserve my Bread
while I am abroad, and that I may be able to eat it when I come Home, which
will very much depend upon them I am sure. Pero lo mucho se guasta, y el poco
basta; at least it will to me whenever the King gives me no Necessity of
Living, as I am sure, I do now to every Body, rather than to my self. I am ever
as becomes me,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful, and most Humble Servant, W. Temple.
I forgot to tell your Lordship last time, and know not whether it be worth
telling you now, That the Resignation of the Polish Crown was made on the 16th
of last Month; That the King retires to Avignon, and that the Regalities will
continue in the Primate, Archbishop of Gnesna, till the Convention of the
States, which is appointed in January: But being to be made in the open Field
by the Customs of that Nation, it is not thought likely to be till March. The
Competition seems to lie between the Duke of Neuburgh, and Duke Charles of
^o^rain; His Majesty knows whether it will be fit to make any Compliment to the
Duke of Neuburgh, or to interpose his Offices in this Election, as well as
other Kings.



LETTER III. Hague, October. 12. S. N. 68.
SIR,
HAving by this last Post received the knowledge from my Lord Arlington, of His
Majesty's having called you into a share of His nearest Trust; and thereby done
Justice, both to His own Affairs, and your Merits: I could not omit rejoicing
with you upon so Happy an Occasion, and telling you the part I take in all
increases of your good Fortunes and Honors, which I wish you may advance by
the same Ways you have begun them, which I reckon to have been your avowed
Usefulness to His Majesty's, and the Kingdoms Service.

I hope you will esteem it a Duty of your Charge to receive poor Ministers
Abroad into your Protection, of which Number, some of our Friends will take
care that I shall be one; and in it there is nothing so troublesome, as that
all should come from one Hand, and not so much as allow some variety in a Man's
Ill Fortunes. However, mine shall never trouble me, so much as the Good Ones of
my Friends shall please me; and yet I will not allow yours to add any thing to
the Professions I have already made of being,

SIR, Your most Faithful, and most Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER IV: Hague, October. 22. S. N. 68.
SIR,
WHEN I have acknowledged the Favor of yours of the 8th, I will make no other
Return to the great Civilities of it, since there is no sort of Equality in
that Commerce between us; All I can say upon that Subject being but what is due
from me to your Office as well as to your Person; Whereas the least Advances
you please to make in that kind, are more than I can pretend to, and so carry
the weight of Obligations with them; and therefore if you please, having
acquitted my self of the Ceremonies due to the change of your Station in my
last, I shall in this pay what I owe to that charge of Affairs, which my Lord
Arlington told me, was left upon your Hands in his Absence.

I know not whether the Business of the Marine Treaty be forgotten, or no; But
I never heard one word of it since I transmitted Monsieur de Witt's Reflections
upon it to my Lord Arlington, who sent me word it was left to your care. I am
of Opinion that since it is stirred, and the Dutch see we are unsatisfied with
the first, the sooner this Matter is agreed, the better, that they may not
continue long in doubt how far our Complaints are like to reach, nor fear our
improving them upon the Advances they make to our nearer Confidence and
Friendship.

For the Business of the General Guaranty, I am glad I consented not to have
the Proposition of it given to the Swedish Envoy here, since I hear my Lord
Keeper and you are scrupulous in it. That which is proposed were certainly
better, for each to pay a Third, if we may do it in our manner, and afterward
to comprehend Spain in our Alliance upon such Terms of advantage as we can gain
from them. And this was given me in my Instructions, and I often advanced it
here at my first coming as an Expedient, in case Spain should refuse the
Satisfaction; But the Dutch would never hear of it, and especially Monsieur de
Wit believing the Sum accorded to Sweden, to have been out of proportion: And
though he would be content Spain should pay whatever we can induce them to; yet
he will by no means consent to Holland's satisfying any part; so that I never
yet thought sit to mention to Monsieur Appleboom, the way in which we pretended
to pay our Share, not foreseeing the Affair at all likely to take that Train.
On the other side, since the Queen of Spain's Refusal, the Swedes seem not
concerned in what Spain does upon this Matter, pretending we and Holland are to
take care of their Satisfaction, and that they are to look no further, as you
will see in this enclosed Paper; and Monsieur Appleboom upon all occasions
presses us to advance the whole Sum to Sweden, and seek our Satisfaction of
Spain afterterwards. In the mean time, our care was, that neither Spain nor
Sweden should fall into any Counsels disagreeing with the Ends of our Triple
Alliance, the one by disappointment of the Subsidies promised, and the other
upon being pressed to Payments upon Treaties where they had no share, and by
which they were to receive no benefit, since the Guaranty of the Peace of Aix,
was promised them, upon their giving Orders to the Baron Bergeyck to Sign it.

Upon these Considerations Monsieur de Wit and I fell into those Thoughts
which you will find expressed in his Paper sent by last Post, and by which we
hoped Spain might be induced to make good the whole Satisfaction since Holland
would take no share in it, unless for the future in case of Action upon the
Guaranty. That which leads me to those Conceptions (besides the necessity,
since no other occurred) was that by the very Articles of the Peace of Aix,
ratifying that of the Pireneaes, if we give Guaranty for one, we do it actually
for the other too; And besides, I could not think there were any hazard for the
King in what posture of Affairs soever to enter into Action against France upon
the pursuit of their Greatness, when He did it jointly with Spain, Sweden, and
Holland; for with that Circumstance I imagined the occasion of doing it, was
ever rather to be sought than avoided.

However I shall go on to Sound and Press Monsieur de Wit yet farther, whether
taking upon them a part of the Swedish Satisfaction* will go down here, or no;
and if I find any hopes of it, I shall then likewise Sound Monsieur Appleboom,
whether our way of paying one Share will be accepted in Sweden, which perhaps
may be as doubtful as the other. In the mean time I should be very loath we
should give the Dutch any grounds to suspect, that having brought them to make
bolder Paces against France, then they were inclined to (only upon Confidence
of our Company) we should begin to make our Paces upon the same way with more
Reserve, and Caution; which to say truth, is a scruple has been in many of
their Heads, and very often consest to me by several here: And if it should
increase far upon this occasion, and at the same time a stop be given to some
agreement upon the Marine Treaty, whereby we should own our Satisfaction in
that Matter, I doubt it might be of ill consequence, since any change of
Dispositions would be, I think, for the worse; their present ones running the
High Road to loose all sort of Considence, or Dependence upon France; and
consequently having it upon us, in which I presume, it is our Interest not to
fail them.

However, I suppose, all are of Opinion, that the gaining full Powers this way,
both from Spain and Sweden, toward a general Concert in this Affair, is to be
desired, and that is my chief care to bring about; and I hope it will be so too
in England.

My Lord Keeper's Illness, and my Lord Arlington's Absence, make me save their
trouble this Post; and therefore I desire you will please to communicate to
them what falls to your share, with the enclosed from Sweden, though I cannot
hear that Negotiation is yet advanced any farther than Letters. I am ever with
very much Reason, and very much Truth,

SIR, Your most Faithful humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER V. Hague; October. 26. S. N. 68.
SIR,
SINCE a very long one to my Lord Arlington, with the Account of my late
Conference with Monsieur de Wit; I have the Honor of yours of the 13th, with
an Instruction, though not in form, for my carriage in the present Affair,
concerning the Swedish Subsidies. I have neither Time left, nor shall I have
occasion to say much upon it, but hope the want of form in that Instruction
will be supplied; and for the Substance, I shall make it my utmost Endeavor
here to bring it about, though I can promise nothing as to the Success of it yet,
having ever found them resolved against it.

I shall say no more, but that you put me here upon very hard Parts; my whole
Business having been hitherto, since the first step I made last Year into this
Country, to engage Holland into as bold and forward Paces against France, and
for the Defense of Spain, as we were content to make our selves; and they
remember very well the Proposal I made them last Winter, of an Offensive and
Defensive League to that purpose. How far beyond Hopes I have succeeded in this
pursuit, I need not tell you after the Paper Monsieur de Wit drew up as an
Expedient for the Swedish Satisfaction. The Province you give me now, is to
temper them in this warmth upon this occasion, and yet to satisfy them that
His Majesty's backwardness to accompany them in it, as far as they are willing
to go, proceeds not from any change of Measures, or Temper in us; though to avoid
it, we are content to lay down a good Sum of Money for Sweden, which they think
is a Commodity we cannot spare, but upon a very great Occasion. I that know the
King a little, and His Ministers a great deal, believe this perfectly, but
doubt it will not be without difficulty to make every Body else believe it;
especially at a time when all Mouths here are full of Monsieur Colbert, and his
Negotiations: However, I will go as far in it as I can, and doubt not to go as
far as any Man else shall do, by the Credit of my Plainness and Truth among
them here, and by their belief that when the King falls into other Measures, he
will use some other Hand here, and not mine; which, I hope, you will be of
Opinion to do as my Lord Arlington promised me he would. In the mean time to
help me in this Pass, I wish I might have something given me to say about the
Marine Treaty, and that the Imprisonment of this poor Man at Harwich, were out
of the way, unless we are sure we have Right of our side; and such a Right as
we are resolved to make out, upon every occasion, for upon a less than this, I
think we cannot do it.

I will presume to say, That you have now sufficient Testimonies of what I
always persuaded my self concerning Monsieur de Witt's being a perfect
Hollander, and no more a Frenchman than any thing else: I will now tell you my
further Opinion of him; which is, That if we think to make use of any Advances
he may have made against France, past retreat, toward the gaining any Points,
or Advantages of the States, which he esteems not reasonable or fit, he is a
Man to venture all, rather then suffer, or consent to it, this Maxim running
through his whole Frame; That a State is at an end, when they are brought to
grant the smallest Matter out of Fear, or to offer at purchasing any Alliances,
otherwise than by Mutual Interests, and Reciprocal Advantages. I say this,
because Actions spring much from Men's Dispositions, who are in the Head of
them; and there is nothing so necessary toward Treating, as knowing the
Persons with whom they are to Treat. By the next I hope to give some account,
what progress I am likely to make upon my last Instruction.

I beg your Favor in excusing me this Post to my Lord Keeper, from whom I
received one at the same time with yours, and your Justice in esteeming me what
I am always,

SIR, Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER VI. Hague, October. 30. S. N. 68.
SIR,
SINCE my last, I have made the best use I could of the very good Arguments you
were pleased to furnish me with in yours of the 13th, for disposing them here
toward your Expedient of sharing the Swedish Subsidies, and satisfying them of
our fair Intentions in waving that other of the General Guaranty proposed here.

I have in a long Letter to my Lord Arlington, given an Account of that
Conference, to which I must beg leave to refer you, as containing the Answer
both of what came to me from your Hands in that of the 13th, and likewise in
another of the 16th, which I receive just upon the close of this Packet,
containing the pursuit of the same Counsels you were pleased to transmit to me
in your last.

Though I have time left to do no more, yet I would not omit to acknowledge it
by this Post, and to continue the Assurances of my being ever as becomes me,

SIR, Your most Faithful Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER VII. Hague, November. 4. S. N. 68.
SIR,
I Am to acknowledge one from you of the 1st past, with a Command from His
Majesty to complain of an Insolence committed by one Brackel, a Dutch Captain
in the Mediterranean, and to demand Reparation in His Majesty's Name, which I
shall not fail to do by a Memorial to the States at their next Sitting, and
send you an Account of it by the next Post.

Upon the last I gave them in Major Bannister's behalf, they immediately
ordered Letters to be written to the States of Zealand for his Liberty, which,
I doubt not, he has by this tme; having had Assurances given me by some of the
Lords of Zealand, that it should be done before any Orders came from the
States General to that purpose: And I have taken this occasion to discourse
with Monsieur de Wit concerning the Liberty of all English Transporting
themselves and their Estates from that Colony, which at last he seemed to think
reasonable, notwithstanding any Oaths they may have taken: The only Difficulty
which I foresee in it, will be about their Lands and Immovable Goods, for
which, I see not how they will get Satisfaction, in case the Dutch that remain
combine together, either not to buy at all, or to do it at the most
Inconsiderable Prizes.

I am very glad to know of any Minister from His Majesty, being* on his Way to
Brussels, for all our great Business lies now at the Spaniards Door: And they
have here a Minister, I doubt, very unlikely to bring it to any Conclusion, and
yet Jealous of seeing it pass through any other's Hands, and so unsatisfied
with the Talk of the Baron d'Isola's going to Hamburgh, or coming hither. God
send us a good Issue in this Negotiation, which, I confess, I something
apprehend, and that the Spring should find our Triple Alliance as loose as the
Summer left it, which our Neighbors, I doubt, will not fail to make the best
Advantage of.

I must acknowledge your Favor in the Offers of taking care of me, upon the
review of the Establishments for Ambassadors; For if it were my Talent either
to ask or complain, I doubt I should have as much reason as another Man, in a
place where by all Men's consent, the same Train of Living will cost a full
third part more than either at Paris, or London: And for the necessity of
appearing, the late Ambassadors of France, Spain, Sweden, and Portugal, have
brought it as high, as in any other Court, by the Number of Liveries, and
keeping Public Tables; Whereas Sir Dudley Carleton, the last English
Ambassador here, keept no Page, and but two Footmen, and one Coach and four
Horses; And had his House allowed him by the States, which is to cost me 200 l.
a Year. And yet upon the Establishment of those Times, and the Count d'Estrades
here, mine was fixed; whereas the Count, tho* he had but Ten Thousand Crowns a
Year for his Embassage, yet had Sixty five Thousand Francs a Year of the King
His Master's Money, for his Governments and Embassage together: Besides a
Regiment here in Holland, which made him live at a Rate that will cost his
Successors dear, unless by common consent we can all agree to reduce it; Which,
I am sure I should be as glad of for the Ease, as the Parsimony of it. Unless
we can do this, I resolve to live on, as I thought it was necessary, for the
King's Honor I should begin, for the rest of one Year, and lie at the King's
Mercy for it, as well as I do for having had my whole Train of Ambassador to
Aix upon my Hands two Months, by his Majesty's Commands, without one Penny's
Allowance for it. And therefore I shall not trouble you with any Complaints
concerning my Establishment, having once said, That since the King thought such
Retrenchments necessary, I was content to give the Example, and would go
through with it, so long as my own Fortune would bear me out without Ruin: But
in case the Establishment be broken for other Persons, I will not believe the
King will break the Absolute Promise he made me (as the Commissioners likewise
did) that I should share with them to the full in the Advantage of it, which is
all the Pretension I will recommend to my Friends Justice and Favor. For in
such a Distinction, the Dishonor of it will be yet more sensible, than the
Disadvantage. I know not how to excuse this Trouble, but that the obliging
Advances you were pleased to make me upon this Subject, were the occasions of
drawing it all upon you from,

SIR, Your most Faithful Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER VIII. Hague, November. 13. S. N. 68.
SIR,
I Have since my last, had the Honor of two from you of the 23d and 26th past;
And must refer you for Answer to all Points in the first, to this Nights
Dispatch to my Lord Arlington; and likewise to the first part of your second,
having valued that strain of His Majesty's Confidence with the States, as far
as I could; And I hope, upon the whole, to keep all in good Temper here, whilst
no change of Temper happens among their Neighbors.

I sent immediately your Letter to Monsieur Van Benninghen, but doubt I shall
not receive much Assistance from him, in disposing the States to the sharing of
the Swedish Subsidies; Against which, he seems as much bent as Monsieur de
Wit; And more upon promoting the other Expedient of Inviting Spain to the
whole Payment, by a General Guaranty.

I expect your Resolutions there upon the Marine Treaty; For though I am not
called upon for them here, yet they would be glad to see an end of all, upon
which they foresee Disputes may arise.

For the second part of your last Letter, I have particularly informed my self,
and find, that the Military and Oeconomical parts, have ever been perfectly
distinct in the Administration of the Admiralty of these Countries; And that no
Prince of Orange ever had any thing to do in the Disposition of the last, nor
any of the Lieutenant-Admirals since; as Tromp, Opdam, or Ruyter; The course of
that Administration being subordinately in the several Admiralties, but
supreamly in the States themselves, as the Military part is now, since the
Death of the last Prince of Orange.

There are five several Admiralties under these States; The first of Rotterdam,
the second of Amsterdam, which bears a double Share with the rest, the third of
Zealand, the fourth of North-Holland, the fifth of Friezland. In the Time of
Peace, the Ships maintained by the States, are only for Convoys; And toward
their defraying, the Customs upon all Merchant Ships, are paid in to the
respective Admiralties where they come in; And all that Revenue is, by these
Admiralties, employed in the maintaining of Convoys for their Merchants. In
Time of War, the States resolve what Number of Ships they will set out, and
send for Commissioners from each Admiralty, to consult with, concerning the
Sizes of them, to be furnished by the several Admiralties: And likewise
concerning the Charge of Equipping, Victualling, and Maintaining them. When
this is agreed by the States, with the Commissioners of the several
Admiralties, the Moneys are assigned by them accordingly, to the Admiralties,
by whom the whole Care is taken of applying it, according to the Proportions
agreed on.

The Benefit of the Admiral, and Lieutenant Admirals, consists chiefly in the
Share they have of all Prizes taken; The Prince of Orange having had no
particular Pension as Admiral, but One Hundred and Twenty Thousand Guilders a
Year, as Captain General and Admiral; And de Ruyter, at present, not having
above Five Thousand Guilders a Year, as Lieutenant Admiral. Upon setting out
any Ships, the several Admiralties named two Captains, of which, the Admiral
chose one, which the States do now, since the last Prince's Death; And the
Lieutenant Admiral has only Power to supply provisionally any void place when
he is at Sea.

If you desire to be satisfied in any Particulars I have not touched, you need
but repeat them in any new Commands; Which shall be Obeyed by,

SIR, Your most Faithful, Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER IX. Hague, November. 30. S. N. 68.
SIR,
I Have this Day received the Honor of one from you of the 13th Current, and
doubt not you will before this arrives, have received the Account I gave in my
last, of the great Satisfaction Monsieur de Wit expressed upon the last Paper
transmitted me, in answer to his Memorial, and upon the whole Business now in
agitation, which will now run on with joint Motions, as well as Intentions; And
the Issue of them must be expected from Spain, which makes it very doubtful to
me, considering the posture of their Affairs, and course of their Councils, and
the great Dissatisfaction they express with the delay of our Guaranty, and the
refusal of entering into a Defensive Alliance with them.

Our want of Ministers in Spain, and their want of such here, as are very
proper* for the present Conjuncture, are very great Maims in this Business.

My Lord* Arlington has all I can yet say upon the Marine Treaty; And I am very
much of your Opinion, That since this is begun, it will be better to end it,
before we pursue that of Guiny any further: Tho* I omitted not to pursue that
as far as I could, with the Informations and Instructions I had upon it; And
signified to my Lord Arlington, in my last upon that Subject, what further
Pieces would be necessary for any further prosecution of that Matter.

I shall put in a Memorial to Morrow for the Liberty of Major Bannister; Which,
I believe* I had before obtained from the States of Zealand, in particular,
without troubling His Majesty about it, had one of my Friends been as diligent
in that Matter as he promised me. I send you enclosed, the Charge upon which he
was sent from Surin^m; And for as much as I can hear of the Business, I am of
Opinion his Case is hard, though Monsieur Meerman says, It is in Dispute, whether
the inhabitants there not going away, as was at first permitted, but staying
and taking the Oath of Fidelity to the Dutch, became not their Subjects. I
enclose a Letter I lately received from Major Bannister, and doubt not of
Satisfaction to His Majesty, in what concerns him. I am ever with very much
Passion and Truth, though at this time, with very much haste,

SIR, Your most Faithful Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER X. Hague; December. 11. S. N. 68.
SIR,
I Am to acknowledge one from you of the 24th past; Whereby I find that the
Agreement fallen into, concerning the Guaranty, was as welcome in England, as
it was here; And I doubt not but there will be the same Concurrence on both
sides, in the way of pursuing it, though I can yet give no further Account of
that Matter, having been so Indisposed, since my last, with an extreme Cold,
that I have been forced to keep my Chamber. I cannot tell whether Monsieur
Beverning, or Van ^enninghen, will be pitched upon to go to Brussels, nor in
what Quality they will go: Whether as deputed from the States, or without
Character, but it is certain what you observe, That if I go, it cannot be as an
Ambassador, but Incognito; And for my Letters of Credence, or Powers, they must
be according to what His Majesty shall think of to be Treated there: I suppose
the Point will be the Accom^li^h^^^t of our Guaranty, upon their Satisfa^t(...)
of the Swedish Subsidies, and for the Offers which will be pressed by the
Spaniards, of a Defensive League. I suppose the Intention is to let them draw
no further than into such Discourse as may sound the bottom of those Advantages
they may carry with them. But to the main End proposed, next to that of the
Subsidies, by these States in this Negotiation, is to possess Spain, all that
can be, with the Assurance of the same Support to Flanders, they will give to
any of their own Provinces: So to raise the Confidence both of Spain, and the
Government in Flanders, and keep them from any thoughts of Treating with
France; or abandoning the utmost Defense of those Provinces. I doubt there is
another, Point where^n the States will prove something forwarde^ than His
Majesty, as well as they seemed so in the Guaranty of the Pyrenoean Treaty,
which is in a concert of doing our jo^^t Offices to dispose France to some
assurance of not breaking this Peace, as far as it touches Flanders, even upon
the King of Spain's Death; Which is a Point, that though I had the first Orders
to Sound them in, yet I know not whether we are disposed to keep pace with them
now in it, but should be glad to know His Majesty's Thoughts, for my own
Government upon ^cca^^on.

There is another Point likewise, wherein I should be glad to be instructed;
which is in case we succeed in inducing the Spaniards to reason upon our
Guaranty; Yet I am confident they will ^^^^st* as the Marquess ever did, u^^^
ou^ entering into a particular concert with them, upon the Specification of
Means and Forces* by which every one should ^^ ^^^iged to maintain the Peace,
in case of a Rupt^^e from France; In which concert, (...) should be likewise
comprehended ^s well a^ we.

For the second particular of your Letter, which concerns Major Bannister,
there need nothing more be said to prove the Reason his Majesty had to demand
his Liberty, which, I will hope, he has already, having never heard from him
since the last Assurance I had from the Lords of Zealand, there should be no
difficulty in it.

I cannot yet give any further Account concerning the Marine Treaty, but shall
press it on upon my very first stirring out of my Chamber. This I cannot but
remark upon it; That notwithstanding those high and violent Exclamations that
were made by some, (and as they said, the City) against the Marine Treaty, as
it was ^* greed to by his Majesty last Winter upon so great Motives from the
Conjuncture of other more public Interests at that (...); Yet all that Noise
produced only two Exceptions against any thing contained in that Treaty, and
already agreed by the Treaty of Breda, with the Term of a Provisional, that
differed little or nothing from a Perpetual. That having induced the Dutch to
give His Majesty entire satisfaction upon those two Exceptions. I do not find
we think any thing considerable gained by it, unless we gain likewise every one
of five or six new Propositions made by the East India Company upon that
Subject; and such, as I doubt, whether Sir George Downing would have given any
hopes of before the War, though the End of that cannot be supposed to have given
us any great Advantage in our Negotiations here. I said every one of our
Propositions, because I find by your last Letter, nothing will be thought done
without that Point of passing by their Forts, which* I know, will be of more
Difficulty than all the rest; And upon which, I desired to be furnished with
Arguments from President and Practice in the Indies, as well as from Reason
grounded upon the Ius Gentium here in Europe; The whole course of things being,
as Monsieur de Wit says, quite different in the Indies, from what it is any
where else; And disagreeing with all common Rules of Justice and Right observed
in other places, as he was, I remember, very large in instancing upon our
forbidding all to Traffic in our Colonies.

I observe, you say this of passing by Forts, was never denied before the Dutch
began it; Whereas I remember one of Monsieur Van Benninghen's Arguments upon it
was, That it would be d'introduire une noveaute; For all Nations had done it,
from the very first of the Spaniands Discoveries in the Indies; That the first
Footing used to be made by any European Nation in those Parts, was only upon
Coasts and Rivers; Where being fixed, they propagated their Commerce and
Plantations by degrees into the Country; And did it chiefly by forbidding all
other Nations to come, or Trade into those Parts, whose Passes were first
seated by their Forts. Besides, he said it was observed indistinctly to all, as
well as by all, that if they gave this Liberty to us, it would be immediately
demanded likewise by the French, and other Nations their Allies, to whom it was
equally now denied as well as to us.

I remember Monsieur de Wit went further into the History of those Parts, and
the Transactions there, and told me, That our Interest in the Indies, lay
chiefly in Colonies, and theirs chiefly in Forts upon large Coasts, and
Agreements with the Natives for sole Commerce; That in the first, our Interest
was much greater than theirs, but in the last, theirs very much greater than
ours; So that though those Points carried the Face of being Reciprocal, yet the
Disadvantage and Loss was single to them, whilst we forbid their Traffic to
our Colonies, which was the main of our Interest, and they suffered ours under
their Forts, and to the Nations in Contract with them, which was the main of
theirs. I repeat these Discourses to the Ends I may be furnished with Reasons
upon them at our further Conferences, in case they continue to insist upon
theirs. It seems further, by your constant m^ntion of the East Indies alone
upon this Subject, you intend not the Rules agreed upon, should reach only to
them; Whereas if they grant any thing hard to ^^em there, I suppose they will
insist upon its being general to West, as well as East.

I beg my Excuses may go here to my Lord Arlington, having nothing to
communicate this Post, but what was due in Answer to the Particulars of yours,
nor received any from his Lordship these four last Posts. Having nothing more
to add to this Trouble, I Kiss your Hands and remain,

SIR, Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XI* Hague, December. 14. S. N. 68.
SIR,
THough I have so ill a Head still with my Cold, that I could hardly hold (...)
in my Letter to my Lord Arlington; (...) I cannot omit the Acknowledgment of
(...)rs of the 27th past, with the enclosed (...)ter of Credence to the
Constable, and (...)py of it.

(...) cannot yet tell how soon I shall make (...) of it, since it must be in
concert with (...) States: Nor do I know whether it will (...) first be
necessary for me to have Pow(...) as well as Credence.

(...) forgot to tell my Lord, that the Prince Orange came to me last Night to
let me (...)w, that hearing the ^^^^^^ were en(...)g into some Neg^^iati^^^
with Spain, (...)ad put up a Memorial to desi^^ the Sa(...)ction due to H^s
(...) (...) ^he P^^ce Munster, might be (...) it and ^esired me I would (...)
(...) M^je^^y wise to instruct any Minister ^^ ^^^ to (...) purpose.

I will believe Major Banister is by this time with you, and has waked People
at the Exchange, out of their Dreams upon that occasion: For I have assurance
from the States of his Liberty, and hear not one Word from him. I am with that
Duty as becomes me,

SIR, Your most Obedient Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XII. Hague, December. 18. S. N. 68.
SIR,
I Am to acknowledge the Honor of one from you newly arrived, of the 4th
Current, with enclosed Copies of Monsieur Boreel's Memorial, and His Majesty's
intended Answer upon the Detention of the Dutch Captain, and shall not fail to
make the Explication as fair as I can, when occasion is given me: But I am yet
in doubt, whether we having done our selves Right so fully in this Matter, it
will be my part to make the first Complaints, or expect theirs, and return mine
in Satisfaction of them; which Doubt I was more confirmed in, by a Clause of my
Lord Arlington's Letter, that bids me, in case it falls out so, that I hear of
the Captains being gone away, then I should make few words of this Matter,
contenting my self with a positive Demand of the Prisoner Jones; So that I
shall let two or three Days pass in expectation of hearing what becomes of the
Captain, or how the States resent it.

I hope Major Bannister will get away with this Packet, who doubts of Jones
his coming to Surinam about any fair Errand* He will be the best able of any
Man, to give His Majesty an Account of those Plantations; And you will find by
them, our Countrymen there are not in Chains, as they would have it upon the
Exchange All the End of either good or bad Usage toward them from the Dutch,
proceeding, as I suppose, only from their Desire^ to induce them to an
Willingness of continuing there; To which, I do not conceive bad Usage a common
Motive. On the other side Major Bannister has had from them all the Offers he
could wish o^ Advantage; and twice among others, that of being Governor there.
I think the Man may be of much use to the King in those Parts where he has
spent, in a manner, his whole Life, and is (as he says of himself) a mere
Indian: And I judge it so far, as to believe him without the Artificial Vices
of Europe, as well as without their Fashions and Manners; And therefore it will
be necessary, if you intend to make use of him, to give him a little
Countenance, till he gets into some Acquaintance, having none at all in England.

I will save you the Trouble of repeating what I have written to my Lord
Arlington, concerning the Marine Treaty, and can yet say nothing of my Journey
to Brussels* neither Monsieur Van Benninghen, nor Beverning, having accepted of
the Commission; Though Monsieur de Wit tells me, The States will lose no time
in it, but he judges it necessary for us, both to have Powers, as well as
Credentials to produce, since the Constable has so. I Kiss your Hands, and am
always,

SIR, Your most Obedient, Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XIII. Hague, December. 28. S. N. 68.
SIR,
I Have this Day received the Honor of Two from you of the 8th and 11th
current; Whereby I understand the Release of the Captain of the Dutch Vessel,
at the Isle of Wight, so as there is nothing left for me to endeavor in that
Matter, but Mr. Jones his Liberty, which I have no reason to doubt of; Having
gained Assurances last Saturday from the several Deputies of Zealand here, as
well as from Monsieur de Wit, the Day before; That they would upon my Memorial
to the States, use their Interest pour adoucir ^*Affaire, in the Terms it was
then understood, and dispose the States to write away to the States of Zealand,
to give Orders to their Captain, for the speedy Release of his Prisoner; Of
which, I doubt not, you will suddenly receive a good Account.

I shall be glad to be furnished by the next with the Replies you are pleased
to promise me to the several Arguments used here against that single
Proposition of the East India Company, upon which I see the whole strength is
put to gain there, and to defend here, which is sufficient demonstration of the
Importance of it, and that, and the King's Pleasure, sure Argument's enough to
me, for the inciting all my Diligence and Zeal toward the effecting your
Desires upon them.

But I cannot yet say any thing of the Success, though I shall think you make a
very great step toward it, if you send me very sound and fair Answers to those
several and particular Arguments used here against it, which I sent you in two
of mine, ^oing, I think, all I had met with; But ^ome of them of such seeming
force against a Man unarmed in the Point, and un^erst in the Field, that, I
confess, all my Retreat was to the Interest the Dutch had to satisfy us,
(transcendent to the Considerations of Traffic) and to the unlike^^hood I saw
of their doing it without ^ompliance to us in this point, though it should be,
as they say, new in Practice of ^he World, and draw on the Consequence ^f the
same Indulgences to all their other ^llies, or of Disputes amongst the Offi^ers
and Traders in those Parts.

I can add nothing to what I have for^erly said of my Brussels Journey, the
Thoughts of that, or any thing else, being not like to be resumed till after
the Holydays of this Week, which Monsieur de Wit is gone to pass at Amsterdam,
and all the Deputies of the States, into their several Towns, and intend not to
be back till the End of the Week. I believe before they resolve to send to
Brussels, they are willing to see what may be the End of the Baron d'Isola's
Journey hither; Who has been now several Days expected: But upon what Errand,
or whether with or without particular Character, or Commission, is not known.

I have nothing to add to this, but to wish you a Merry Christmas, and to
assure you of my being always,

SIR, Your most Obedient, and most Humble Servant, W. Temple*

LETTER XIV. Hague, January 1. S. N. 68.
SIR,
I Have this Day the Honor of two from you of the 5th and 18th, with two
Papers enclosed in the first concerning the East India Propositions, and one in
the last about the English Company at Dort. I am very glad to be possessed of the
several Arguments given me both in the first Papers, and yours of the 18th, to
support the Reason of your Demands, and instances upon the Point of passing
their Forts; And, I suppose, the Issue of it will lie chiefly upon that
Particular, wherein I am glad to find all your Assertions so positive, that is*
the Newness of their Practice to the contrary, limited to the Seven Years last
past, which, if well grounded, make the thing clear on our side, in my Opinion,
and I shall endeavor to make it clear to them; That as their Hardships to us,
in this Indian Commerce, have already given the occasion to one War, so the
continuance of them, must of necessity do it in time to another, which must
make the force of all our Arguments, though something weaker, for the Ill
Success of the last: But considering their Constitution, and that of their
East India Company, whose Strength is grown to be, in a great degree, that of
the State, and whose Interests are infused through all the Parts and Members of
it, it must be great Respects here that draw them to any in those parts, where,
I doubt, they are too strong to be argued with, but with Reasons from hence. I
resolve against our next Conference, to digest the force of all your Reasons
and Answers to theirs, into a Paper in French, and leave it with the
Commissioners to reflect upon, after I have discoursed the Matter to them: For
I cannot expect their Resolution, as you seem to hope, at their next sitting,
and without report to their Principals. In this pursuit I shall loose no time,
Monsieur de Wit being expected back from Amsterdam this Night: Monsieur Van
Benninghen returned Yesterday, as most others will do suddenly after, having
past the Holydays in their respective Towns.

I shall likewise, upon occasion, assist those of the English Company of Dort,
in pursuance of his Majesty's Commands, which I did as well as I could before,
only upon the Name of a National Thing: And indeed, without my appearing in it,
the Thing had been resolved by the States, to the Companies prejudice, some
Weeks since; For it is a Matter all the Towns in Holland, except Dort, are bent
upon.

I send you enclosed, the Resolution of the States, upon my Memorial in behalf
of Mr. Jones his Liberty, which I doubt not of, but wonder very much to hear
nothing yet of Major Bannister's Arrival in England. I have nothing left but to
wish you a Merry Christmas, and continue the assured Professions of my being,

SIR, Your most Faithful Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XV. Hague, January 8. S. N. 68.
My Lord,
THE last Post brought me your Lordships of the 22d past, with the enclosed
Copies of the Instruments given to the Count de Dona, concerning the Swedish
Subsidies, and the Method of obtaining them; Which Pieces had not been before
Communicated to me from your Lordship, or any of your Officers: But I thought
it necess^ry at my coming hither, to see them, and so procured a Copy from
Monsieur ^e Wit, by which I learned what he maintained; That we had no
Obligation to Sweden, besides that of our Offices to Spain; And at the same
time, I confess, wondered to see the Guaranty promised to Spain, upon their
Signing the Peace, and an Engagement made to Sweden, not to perform the Effect
of it without the Payment of their Subsidies, which was no Condition in our
promise to Spain. All that I can think of to reconcile this Contradiction, is
the Necessity we found of engaging Sweden, and the Uncertainty we were in of
the Peace being effected after our Promise of the Guaranty was given, which was
some few Days before my going to Aix. If we had any other Reflections in this
Negotiation, I should be glad to know them, being like to have use of them in
treating with the Spaniards, at least if their Ambassador here be instructed in
their Intentions. For two Days since, he was upon these Discourses, declaiming
hard against the Dutch, for imposing first an Unjust Peace upon them, and
afterward such a Sum granted to the Swedes for their good Pleasure; Since if
the Swedish Troops had been kept up, it was at the Desire of the Dutch, not of
the Spaniards, who made the Peace upon assurance in ours and Holland's
Guaranty: And whatsoever Sums were promised Sweden by the Triple Alliance,
were, as he alleged, after the Peace concluded. Though he mentioned the Dutch
only in his Complaints, yet I knew he forgot not their Partners in the course
of that Action: But I thought it not necessary to enter into the Defense of it,
by the exact Computation o^ the Dates of the Instruments, or any thing besides
the necessity of keeping Sweden from engaging with France, and asked him,
Whether i^ they could have a General Guaranty of their Dominions from the
Triple-Alliance, he thought it not cheap bought at Five hundred Thousand
Crowns. He said, that was promised by us at the Signing of the Peace, that if
they had it from Sweden it was enough to pay what they expected upon the
Execution of it for the time to come; That if it were necessary to do it for
the Time past, they would come in for their share, and with that fell into
Passion against Monsieur de Wit; Who, h^ said, hindered them from being
received into the Triple-Alliance, Par un, Politic qui le tromperoit a la
^in; That for fear of offending France, which they could not do more than they
had done already, they would force Spain to Counsels they had no mind to, and
much more to this purpose.

In the mean time the Swedish Ministers here, are not empowered to join with us
in a General Guaranty, and make many Difficulties in their Discourses upon it,
as to the extent of it beyond the Defense of Flanders, and to the more open and
direct shocking of France; But all this from them seems to tend toward the
obtaining further Annual Subsidies from Spain, secured to them by us and
Holland, as well as ascertaining the sudden Satisfaction of what is already
promised; So that between the Weakness of the Spanish Treasures and Councils,
and the Swedes hardness in bargaining, and selling the very found of his Name
at so dear a rate, I doubt much, as I have done long, to find this Matter of a
difficult Issue, but the first Pace that I see is to be made in it is, since
the Powers are in the Constables Hands, to make a short Trial of the utmost
Spain will do; And procure if we can at least the Promises of Satisfaction to
Sweden, and value them to Sweden, as far as we can toward continuing them in
the Alliance, upon Hopes, if not present Performances from Spain: And this, I
shall endeavor, if either the Baron d'Isola comes hither, which, they say, has
been delayed by his Illness; Or if upon the Arrival of His Majesty's Powers and
Instructions, a Person from hence be ready to accompany me in a Journey to
Brussels. For the States have not yet engaged any Person toward it, and have
this Quality of all other States, to be very slow in their Resolutions, unless
when they are pressed by some instant Necessity.

I cannot yet meet with my Commissioners upon the Marine Treaty; The first of
them* Monsieur Huygens, being but come Yesterday to Town since the Holydays;
And Monsieur Meerman, who is the second, being but this Day expected. In the
mean while I loose no time in advancing it by Conferences with the particular
Persons among them; Who assure me, and Monsieur Van Benninghen expressly for his
Town of Amsterdam, that if it be, as we represent it, either the Redress of a
late Innovation, or the prevention of one we fear, that those we have hitherto
called their Forts, prove but their Warehouses built in other Princes
Territories; We shall have all the Satisfaction we can wish in it, and may
assure our selves they intend not any juggling with us, or disputing upon any
thing that is fair and reasonable; But declare, it for his Opinion, That in all
these Matters of Commerce between us, they should not only give us what is
reasonable, but something more, if it be necessary to the fortifying of our
Alliance: He assures me, that since my last Conference with Monsieur de Wit,
he has sent to Amsterdam for a more particular State of this Matter, in order
to our Satisfaction: But they both desire we would be likewise more particular
in naming the Places we are most concerned in, that thereby they may come to
know exactly the nature of our Demand.

I know not any thing I can add to what I have said already concerning
Instructions and Powers to be sent me for Brussels, though your Lordship is
pleased to desire it from me. His Majesty knows how far he would have me go,
and by what steps, and accordingly my Instructions must be drawn, and the
Powers upon them either general, or referring particularly to the Guaranty
intended. But, I suppose, in both Instructions and Powers, there will be a
Clause obliging me to do all in conjunction with the Holland Minister. And I
should be glad to know likewise whether in case upon the arrival of my
Instructions, I am pressed both by the Dutch, and the Season, to make this
Journey before I shall have ended the main Negotiation; I am to leave this last
imperfect, till my return: For as this seems to be laid to Heart in England, I
should be loath, without express Orders, to leave it for any other Occasion.
The Portugal Ambassador is every Day expected, upon whose Arrival, I shall not
fail to pursue your Lordships Commands, in valuing His Majesty's Offices as far
as I can, toward that Conclusion, as well as endeavor to continue the Baron
de Bowstetten's good Offices in Switzerland. I am ever as becomes me,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful, and most Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XVI. Hague, January 15. S. N. 69.
SIR,
MY last Dispatches to my Lord Arlington, will, I hope, excuse my not having
then (as I ought) acknowledged yours of the 22th past, and given you the best
Account I could of what it chiefly concerned, which was the Progress upon the
remaining Point of the Ma^ine Treaty; Wherein I have confidence of succeeding,
if upon your Specification of particular places, they are found to be of the
same Nature you have defined them in general* That is, Magazines fortified, or
small Forts built for security of their Merchandises, in the Territories of
other Princes; Or else such Forts by which we have usually passed without
interruption, till of late Years.

My Lord Arlington was pleased in his last, to promise me this Specification,
which is all that remains toward bringing the whole Matter to an Issue: And
till that arrives, I think there is not much lost by the delay of our
Conference, though I have sent every Day to the first Commissioner according to
the Form, to know whether they are ready, that I might appoint an Hour for it:
But he has been so regular a Man the remainder of these Holydays, that what
with his being at Dinner sometimes at eight at Night, and in Bed other times at
eleven in the Morning, he has not yet brought it to pass, though made me now
expect he will to Morrow:

Concerning the Business of the Merchants Company at Dort, I have not received
any new Complaints from them, or Fears, since His* Majesty's Order to interpose
in that Business; Which, to say truth, I had stopped the last Assembly of the
States of Holland, wholly by Monsieur de Witt's Address; Who being of the Town
of D^rt, I ^ind is no Enemy to the Company, but for that very reason is tender
of appearing in a thing upon which all the other Towns of Holland are bent.

I have endeavored against this next Session of the States of Holland, to
engage Monsieur Van Benninghen, to temper his Town of Amsterdam in that Matter,
but find him difficult in it: His chief Reasons are,

First, It was a voluntary thing of the States, at the time of their greatest
dependence upon England, while they had our Money and Men, and we their Towns.

Secondly, That they had then the same Privilege granted to their Merchants at
London.

Thirdly, That it was granted with a Clause of the States revoking i^ at any
time at three Months warning given the Merchants.

And Lastly, That the raising our Customs upon their Commodities, since those
Times, has been so exorhitant, that if the King expects the continuance of this
Company here, the States have reason to hope he will come to some Moderation
toward their Trassick there; Since if the Privileges of this Company should
be taken away, our Merchants would be only brought to the same Payments that
theirs are, upon the Importation of our Clothes, and consequently would not ^ay
a fourth part so much Custom for a whole Piece of our Cloth, as we have laid
upon every Yard of theirs.

After all these Reasons, I believe the whole Matter was both raised and
revived by the Town of Rotterdam, upon the Removal of the Company some Years
since, from thence to Dort; And now upon the Removal of the Scotch Staple to
the sam^ place, from Terveur, and Sir William Davison's having sent Orders to
all the Scotch Traders at Rotterdam, to remove from thence to Dort. So that
there seems to be more of Envy in it from the other Towns of Holland and
Zealand against Dort, for having engrost the two Staples, then of Peek, against
the English Company. But since His Majesty has commanded me, I shall watch the
Motions of this Matter the best I can, and thought it necessary for once, to
give you this General Account of the State of it.

You will have found, that the Alarm you mention in your Letter given by the
Report of the Commissioners at Lis^e being parted without any Agreement, was
rather a Presage than a Truth: For I have not met any Person here, that has had
from the beginning, any hopes of a Conclusion there. The French are certainly
resolved to keep that Door open, and so have the Time when to fall in, left at
their own choice. It will be our parts, I suppose, to delay it all we can, as
well as to hind^r it at last, as far as we are able, And if the Returns of
their Complements to us of late, will do any thing toward it, I wish we had an
Ambassador already in France, though I am apt to think it must be by bold and
firm, rather than civil Paces, that they must be induced to give over this
Design, which we might make perhaps safely and quietly enough, if we were
fallen into a right concert upon our Triple-Alliance; I mean such, wherein both
Spain and Sweden would find their Satisfaction: And if we had once diverted
France from the sudden Violence of their Proceedings, we might employ our
Offices toward a Treaty of convenience by some Exchanges between the two
Crowns; For in the Posture those Countries now lie, I do not think it possible
they can be long preserved, but that either the Nobility, or the Cities would
throw them into the French Hands, or the difficulty of guarding them invite the
Spaniards to do it themselves.

I hear nothing yet of the Baron d'Isola's arrival, and doubt whether it may
not be delayed by these Frosts, which till they are old enough to bear, make
all impassable between this and Antwerp.

Monsieur Silvercrown, the new Swedish Commissioner, was with me lately, and
seems a more understanding Man, and of more Credit with the chief Ministers at
his Court, than Monsieur Appleboom. He gives me assurance of the Swedish
Intentions to observe the Triple-Alliance, and hopes that if Spain can be
persuaded to pay their Subsidies, though at some reasonable Terms, Sweden will
be contented.

He makes Difficulties upon the General Guaranty, or at least, makes it fit to
be given with a Temper of all the Civility that can be to France, and precedent
Endeavors of making them satisfied with it: I told him, the last would
certainly be a vain Endeavor, but the first, I thought the King and States
both well enough inclined to, and resolved to make the Offer equally to both
Crowns.

He advises us first to bring Spain to what Issue we can upon the Point of the
Subsidies, and afterward to Negotiate what we desire in Sweden by the Dutch
Ambassador in that Court, (who, he says, is very Grateful there) and jointly by
ours, if he arrive in time, which, I suppose, is to tell us that we are not to
expect Powers to be sent from Sweden hither. I know nothing more worth your
Trouble at present, and therefore shall end this with the Profession of my
being always,

SIR, Your most Faithful Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XVII. Hague, January 25. S. N. 6^*
SIR,
I Hope my Letter last Post to my Lord Arlington, will excuse my not having
that Busy Day acknowledged the Honor of two I received from you since my
last, of the 1st and 5th; The first of them will have received its Answer by my
last Dispatch upon the Marine Affair, with the Article as I have hopes to pass
it here, in case it be approved in England; The last containing only the
Promise of my Instructions, and your Complements to Monsieur Van Benninghen,
will need no return: For I shall acquit my self of them at his Return from
Amsterdam, where, I hope, he will do us Service in our Marine Business: But I
can assure by Advance, that he is much your Servant, and upon all occasions
does you Justice, which is as much as you need desire, and more then falls to
every Man's Share from his Friends.

I mentioned in my last, to my Lord Arlington, a Writing sent hither from
Sweden, to prove us and the Dutch obliged to pay their Subsidies, which is
long, and digested by Civil Lawyers rather than Statesmen, or Merchants; And
therefore I trouble you not with sending a Transcript of it, but have copied
out in the enclosed Paper, the Parts that I most reflected upon, not so much
for their Strength of Argument, but for an Indication of the Temper with which
it was written. For as to the first, I think all may be answered in two Words;
First, that we never promised it, and then, That we never intended it. Nor is
it very fair to say, The King has so interpreted it, because he was once
content to pay his Share in case of dividing the Sum, nor in the course of the
Writing to make themselves pass for the only Principal that was of weight to
make the Peace, for which they draw into Argument, Expressions we have used to
that purpose, with intention only to oblige Spain to do them the Reason we
desire.

I have since discoursed this to Monsieur Silvercrown, and told him, I thought
it better this Paper might not be avowed by any Authority in Sweden, while we
were in hopes of obtaining their Satisfaction from Spain, and upon the pursuit
of it, as we are at present; And upon his pressing the necessity of finding
some speedy way to satisfy them, for fear they should be induced to take their
Measures with France: I told him I would not suspect that, knowing they were
engaged in this Alliance by other Considerations than that of such Sums of
Money; That however, such Arguments might be used to Holland, but not to us;
For if by Sweden's, or Holland's fault the Business of our Triple-Alliance
should break, and each Party be left to take their own Measures with France, we
could very well give both of them the start of us in that Pursuit, and yet come
sooner and best to the End: For we understood our selves so well as to know we
were more considerable to France, either for or against them, then not only
they, or Holland* but then all the Nations of Christendom besides; And if we
were at any time to be bought, there would be more given for us, than for them
all.

He confessed it, and assured me of all his Endeavors to temper and represent
Matters so in Sweden, as to bring all to a good Issue, if Spain proves any
thing reasonable: And, in pursuit of that, I assured him of His Majesty's
utmost Endeavors, and of my having received the most pressing Commands.

Well, I hope our turn will yet one Day come, of speaking as boldly in our
Negotiations, as any of our Neighbor Kings; For what has been may be again.
The French give us a good Example, and will in time, I suppose, come with the
Roman Ambassador to draw a Circle about the Prince they Treat with, and command
an Ay, or No, before they stir out. they are great Designs to be driven on all
at a time, to have a Fleet of a Hundred Men of War, with all Brass Guns, to
Establish a Trade in the Indies, to value their own Manufactures by Exclusion
of all others, to resume all the Domain of the Crown, to suppress utterly all
those of the Religion in France, to conquer Flanders, and to be the sole and
positive Arbiter of all Differences among his Neighbors. Unto the Issue of all
these, must go a great deal of Time and good Fortune, and Negligence or Ill
Counsels of other Princes and States.

In Spain, I doubt not, they will find enough of both, but if what the Baron
d'Isola promises be true, I hope not enough to hinder the Effect of our
Triple-Alliance; Though I am, I confess, better satisfied of the Parts, than
the Plainness, and Sincerity of that Minister: Otherwise he makes us believe
there will be Two hundred Thousand Dollars ready to advance upon the Swedish
Subsidies, and gives hope of the rest at easy Terms, in case they like the
Project of our Guaranty.

I have nothing to increase this Trouble, beyond the Assurances of my being
always,

SIR, Your most Obedient, and most Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XVIII. Hague, January 29. S. N. 69.
SIR,
I Have since my last received both yours of the 8th and 12th; The first
accompanied by my Powers and Instructions, which are full, and clear to those
Ends we have lately had in our Eye. I shall use them to my best Endeavors,
according to His Majesty's Intentions, particularly the last Article, and see
not any thing at present to make me despair of Success, in case the natural
quickness of Counsels in France, and slowness in Holland, suffer what we are
about, to be effected in time.

The State of this Matter, according to the present Dispositions I meet with
here, I have entertained my Lord Arlington with, more at large this Post, and
so shall forbear your trouble in the Repetition.

I am glad, in the mean time, to find you so positive; That if Spain perform on
their part, you shall prevail with Sweden to go as far with us as the Guaranty
of the Peace at Aix, in its extent; For of that I can yet draw no confident
Hopes from the Swedish Ministers here, though they are both inclined to it.

I was very sorry to give my Lord Arlington an Account in my last, of a new
unlooked for Stop given my former hopes of concluding suddenly the only Article
which remains disputed in our Marine Propositions: Monsieur de Wit has since
entertained me with a larger Account of the Jealousies raised upon that Matter
among the Indian Directors at Amsterdam, coming likewise from Monsieur Van
Benningher; But I find nothing new in it, beyond the Suspicions they have
conceived of our intending something they think not of, by desiring a General
Article for prevention only of an Inconvenience, which we have not yet
suffered, or at least before we think fit to give any one Instance of it, to
instruct them only in the Nature of the Grievance we apprehend: But I shall
enlarge no further upon it, since Monsieur de Wit tells me, That Monsieur Van
Benninghen resolves to give you a large Account from Amsterdam of all that is
suggested there upon this Subject. For the Pensioner, he seems to have no other
Reflections yet upon it, then that such a Clause, if we, that is, our
Merchants, have any reserved Meaning in it, should upon change of Ministers, or
Conjunctures, be made the occasion of new Disputes between us, as he says Sir
George Downing's Interpretation of those Words in the Treaty of 62, Litem
inceptam prosequi, or de poursuivre leur procez entame; Drawing that which was
intended for a legal Decision before the Judges where it was begun, to a
political Decision between the King's Ministers and the States, was, in short,
the Ground of the last War: How truly he says this, I know not, but, I believe,
he truly means to prevent all occasions of future Quarrels between us, while we
are of that mind: And therefore I am still in hopes of his Endeavors to pass
this Article, if that Suspicion may be taken away* Which, perhaps, one or two
Instances either of what we have suffered, or what we apprehend, would do. In
the mean time I cannot persuade him to what you seem to agree in declaring,
That without this Point they yield us nothing in all the rest: For they think
it is a very great Matter they yield in the Description of une ville bloquee ou
assiege^, to be both by Land, as well as Sea, which cannot be done there: so
that he says, we gain the Liberty of Trading with all Nations, with whom they
may be at War, and lie before their Havens with their Fleets, which was a Point
could never be gained of them in Cromwell's Time. They think likewise they
yield a great deal in that of the case where one Company has contracted for the
sole buying up any Commodity of any Nation: But I have no reason to think you
are very well pleased with my representing their Arguments or Discourses upon
this Subject, no more than they are with yours, though both, perhaps, be
necessary; And therefore I shall not enlarge this Trouble beyond the Assurances
of my being always,

SIR, Your most Obedient, and most Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XIX. Hague, February 5. S. N. 69.
SIR,
^ Have since my last, the Honor of yours of the 15th past; Whereby I find ^ou
expected my next would be from Brus(...)ls, after the Receipt of my Powers and
(...)structions some Days before arrived; But (...)e great Business of our
Adjustment with (...)pain, upon the Swedish Subsidies, being, as (...)e hope,
come to an Issue here by full (...)owers to the Spanish Ambassador, I know
(...)ot whether that Journey will hold, or (...).

Monsieur de Wit thinks it may still be (...)cessary, if it be but to give
Heart to the (...)eople there who need it much, and to (...)ache some Entrances
with the Constable, (...)on the best Ways and Methods of settling (...)at
Country in a posture of not falling (...)der another Surprise from France: But
I (...)all have time to consider whether that be (...)rand enough for such a
Journey, when I (...)ar the States Resolutions about it; For (...)thereto it is
only Monsieur de Witt's pri(...)ate Opinion. And they not having proceeded so
far as to engage any Person in it, when there was more occasion, it is possible
they may now desist from the present Thoughts of it.

I can give no further Account of our Marine Treaty, expecting your Answers to
their Desires of some Instances, when we either had felt, or apprehended the
Grievance in that only Article which remains. I find Monsieur Van Benninghen
has been very large upon that Subject in a Letter to you from Amsterdam, which
Monsieur d^ Wit showed me a Copy of, and would have had me transmitted, for
fear of the Originals miscarrying: But I thought it not necessary, both in
regard of the Safety of all Letters in their usual course; and to say truth,
because I found not the Arguments very weighty, and a Bias in the^ toward the
leaving out that whole Article, or at least confining it to particular places,
of which instance should be made. Whereas Monsieur de Wit had always declared,
That the Instances were desired only for Information in the nature of our
Demand, and not to insert in the Article.

I am apt to believe, that it is only Jealousy on both sides, which makes this
point so much insisted on by us, and so much apprehended by them, at least if
we can give no particular Instances of the Grievance: For they are positive,
that with the knowledge of the Directors, no such thing is practiced. However
some Expedient must be found out to agree it: If you ^urnish me with Instances,
that will be some Assistance to me; If you cannot do that, I was thinking
whether it might not be an Expedient to add to the Article, as I transmitted
it, some such Words, that this should be done in the same manner as was ^sually
practiced between the two Companies, before such a Year, naming two or three
Years before the War, since you af(...)rm before that time no such thing was
^retended or exercised by them: But I have mentioned nothing of any such
Ex^edient here; nor shall till I have answer ^f my last, and your result upon
it, after having communicated it to those who are ^ost concerned to understand
it.

I know not whether I thought it worth ^aking notice of, that the Admiral of
Den^ark came hither some Days since, about ^^e long debated Difference between
that King and these States, upon certain Sums ^f Money, and likewise about
agreeing upon the Measures of Ships that pass the ^ound. I am always,

SIR, Your most Faithful Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XX. Hague, February 12. S. N. 69.
SIR,
I Am to acknowledge the Honor of o(...) from you of the 26th past, approvin^
the State of our Affair with Spain, whi^^ you will since find is drawn to a
Head* And in case His Majesty approves of t(...) Form of the Guaranty, we have
nothi^^ left to transact in this Matter, but wit^ Sweden; Toward which my Lord
C^lisle's Journey, if so sudden, as we here believe, will much contribute.

I doubt Monsieur Boreel has but a col^ Scent in his Pursuit of the Zealand
Preten^^ons at Surinam; But the truth is, that i^ ^ase the English Planters all
remove together from that place, the Plantation is as good as wholly lost to
the Dutch, their Numbers there being wholly inconsiderable, and their Nation
not at all fit for that Business of Planting, which makes them never like to
grow considerable in the West Indies: But otherwise for the Reason of the
thing, I never saw the least color o^ it on their side, nor find that Monsieur
de Wit offers at maintaining it, when upon occasion, I have fallen into the
Discourse of it with him. So that I should think my self happy, if I had no
greater Difficulties upon my Hands here than what are likely to arise in that
Affair when it comes in play: Though, I think, you judge very prudently, that the
Time for it will be rather after we shall have come to some Issue in our Marine
Treaty than at present, that so we may have but one Knot to untie at a time.

How I shall succeed in the last, I am yet to learn from my farther Conferences
here upon the Papers last sent me, which I have newly received, and are
Translating, that I may upon occasion use them here; I mean the Arguments as
well as the Articles: That which troubles me, is to see I am of late gone back
on both sides, for what Monsieur de Wit and I had agreed on, is strongly
opposed by those of Amsterdam, and being at first approved in England by the
East India Company themselves, as my Lord Arlington wrote me word, they have
since, as I now find, altered their Minds, and propose to have the Passage free
under all Forts, tho seated in Countries that are absolutely under the Dutch
Occupancy and Subjection, which is a new Point, and that which I am sure in
several of your Letters you have said distinctly, was never aimed at. But since
this is now in my Hands, you may be assured, that it shall go as far as it is
possible to pursue it by any Cares and Endeavors of mine. I am sorry I am not
made acquainted with the Particulars of the Case at Iuccatra, which, it seems,
is alleged as the only occasion of this Apprehension and Proposal from our
Merchants; For as to that of the Fort upon the River of Iambre, Monsieur de
Wit, I remember, alleged that as an unreasonable thing, if they should
pretend it, where the River was so broad, that the Ships were not under the
certain unavoidable danger of their Canon, which he would have had the measure
of the free Passage: But of these Proceedings you will be troubled hereafter
with farther Accounts from,

SIR, Your most Obedient Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XXI. Hague, February 26. S. N. 69.
SIR,
I Am to acknowledge two I have received from you since my last of the 5th and
9th current, which came together to my Hands, with one for Monsieur Van
Benninghen, which I this Day delivered, and fell into the longest Debate that I
have ever had with him upon the Subject of it, but with so little success, that
I shall have no Pleasure in repeating it; And yet I verily believe we do not
disagree in our Meaning, though we cannot come to agree in ways of expressing it.

They insist still upon some Instance of what we complain of, and are the less
satisfied at every new pursuit I make, without producing what they have from
the first demanded: They protest their East India Company knows not what ours
means by saying they might Instance in Iacatra, and think I do not deal
sincerely with them, in suppressing the Particulars of the Fact as it past
there, which is the only place we have mentioned, as giving occasion for this
Apprehension of ours, and Demand upon it.

Mons. Van Benninghen swears to me in the solemnest manner that can be, and
which is not usual with him, that his Heart is more bent upon finding out a way
to satisfy us in this point, than to satisfy either the Estates, or
East India Company here, and that upon any occasion we shall produce of
Complaint, both he, and all the rest of the States, know they ought to give us
all Satisfaction that Reason shall require, and even beyond reason in things
that are not of the last importance to them; As he says, they have showed in
agreeing to that Article about defining a Town bloque ou investie, which has
raised such a Clamor among those of the East India Company here, against the
Commissioners who treated it with me, That they know no way of satisfying them,
but by the absolute Will of the States General, and representing to them how
much they ought to give toward our Satisfaction in this Conjuncture. He says,
that all Sir George Downing could find to complain of in the Indies, was the
stopping of our Ships by their Fleets that lay before Cochin and Cananor, which
is provided against in that aforesaid Article: And if there had been any
Innovation in Matter of Passage by one another Territories, as we intimate
there began to be, on their side about two Year before the War, it is impossible
but they must have heard of it at a time when all things were ripped up. That if
we can mention any such Innovation differing from what has been the ancient,
constant, and general Practice, in both India, and Africa, by our Nation as
well as all other Europaean Nations that have had any thing to do there, they
will be the readiest in the World to redress it: But at the same time he
professes to think it absolutely impossible to make any Draught of an Article
concerning passing of Forts, which may not be made use of Pour bouleverser
toutes les Affairs des Indes; And that as much as he can see into it, may not
be of the same consequence as if we should demand of them absolutely to break
their East India Company. The many large and various Instances he used to prove
this you will better have from his Hand than mine, and therefore I shall omit
the rest of his Discourses, which ended in bewailing our falling so earnestly
upon such a Point as this, in which it was so impossible for them to agree with
us, and not at the same time to lay the Foundation of a certain Breach
hereafter, by the Disputes which must arise upon it. That the ill Effect upon
which he made his chiefest Reflections, was the Interpretation I told them was
made of it in England, to the Disadvantage of their Intentions and Dispositions
of living well with us in point of Commerce; That on the other side very many
here interpreted this Demand as a Mark of our Resolutions not live well long
with them, in point of our Alliances, and so made them think of ballancing
still between us and France, till they could find with whom they were like to
meet with the most present Safety, and leave future Times to future Councils*
That for his part, and all the most foreseeing Heads among them, they were of
another mind, and thought the only bottom they had left was upon our
Friendship. But on both sides, the continuance of such Jealousies as were apt
to arise from our Disputes upon this Point, could not be without ill Effect.

And upon all this I concluded it would be necessary for him to make a step
over into England, and try whether the King's Ministers there, and he could
understand one another better than we had done here, which he seemed to think
not unnecessary; And for my part, I think it the only thing left to be done in
this Matter.

Since my last, some Commissioners have been with me from the States, to
acquaint me with the Letter which goes this Night to His Majesty from them,
upon the Business of Surinam, wherein you will find they are come off from the
Disputes they formerly engaged in, of the English Planters there having
forfeited the Right to the first Articles of Surrender, by which they had
liberty to remove, and that the Matter lies now in this compass here, that such
of the English there as either have now, or shall have hereafter a desire to
leave that Plantation, shall not only have Leave, but Assistance from the Dutch
Governor, toward their Removal, but that on the other side His Majesty shall
not send any Commands to them to remove, nor Threats in case of their Stay
there; as they say has been practiced by my Lord Willoughby: So that all which
will be left, if this be agreed to, will be only to find out a way of knowing
what Inhabitants, at their own Motion, have a desire to Stay, and what to
Remove.

I told them I could not say any thing of the King's Resolution therein, but
should signify what I understood of their Meaning to His Ministers by this
Post, which carries their Letter to His Majesty. Major Scott, who came lately
from England, and is seeking Employment here, tol^ me, some of them were
considering whether they might not deal with the Dutch in the New Netherlands,
as we do with the English at Surinam; But that, I suppose, depends upon the
Articles of each Places Surrender. Now I Name Major Scott, tho a Man wholly
unknown to me, I cannot but confess, that having since his coming hither,
talked a great deal with him, seen his Maps, and a long Preface to the Book of
them he intended to set out, I cannot but be sorry, he should have met so much
Discouragement in England, as to seek Service in other Nations: For, I cannot
think but the Man must of necessity signify a good deal of good or ill to us
in those Ports as he is made use of by us, or other People.

If His Majesty have the same Thoughts, and that He is worth the retrieving, I
should be glad to know it, and shall in the mean time have some Eye upon his
Progress here. The Necessity of these Troubles, will, I hope, excuse the length
of them from,

SIR, Your most Obedient, and most Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XXII: Hague, March 1. S. N. 69.
SIR,
I Was very sorry to find by yours of the 12th past, any News of your
Indisposition, and will hope by the next to meet with that of your Recovery,
and in the mean time give you as little Trouble as I can, and no more upon the
Marine Article, than to acknowledge the Receipt of the last East India
Companies Paper enclosed in yours, which I have already communicated here, and
shall pursue at a Conference to Morrow.

The States of Holland, at their last breaking up, past a Resolution for taking
away the Exemptions of the English Company at Dort, from the usual Customs,
which are one Florin upon a Piece (or thirty six Yards) of English Cloth; Which
as soon as I heard of, I put in a Memorial to the States General, to desire
they would not proceed upon that Business, without entering into Conference with
me upon it, which they have resolved, and the Particulars among them would
persuade me, that it is a Matter so far from prejudicing, that it will rather
increase the Export of our Manufactures, and which they have proceeded upon
only for the Peace of their Towns, all the rest of Holland mutinying against
Dort in this Matter. And to say the Truth, I think this has been now wholly
renewed by that Resolution, which I never understood, of His Majesty's removing
the Scotch Company from Zealand to Dort, at Sir William Davison's sole pursuit,
for ought I hear: For thereby the Prince of Orange has been very much injured,
as he says, to the value of 1^00l. Sterling a Year; And which perhaps he lays
more to Heart, the Province of Zealand, which is his chief Friend and Dependant
here, has been apt to interpret it a mark of His Majesty's having no
consideration for the Prince: Several Scotch Merchants here seemed unsatisfied
with it, and others divided in the Point; and Sir William Davison upon his
removal from Amsterdam to Dort, when the Company removed from Zealand, sent
Letters to the Scotch Inhabitants at Roterdam (as the Deputies of Roterdam
allege) charging them to remove from that Town to Dort, and threatening them in
case of their Noncomplyance. Upon this the Town of Roterdam, who had some Years
past lost the English Company, being new netled, set this Matter on foot, and
all the other Towns of Holland, seeing Dort possessed of two Companies, fell in
warmly upon the Scent, and Zealand sensible of what they have lost, is of the
same Mind; And Monsieur de Wit, though he has upon his Countrymen's Instances
(I mean those of Dort) delayed it for one Assembly of the States of Holland,
yet he could put it off no longer, and durst not openly appear, where the
Interest of his Town seemed cross to that of all the rest of his Province: So
that what will be the Issue of it, I know not, till we fall into Conference
about it.

Sir Peter Wych past this way on Wednesday, and went after one Nights stay in
pursuit of my Lord Carlisle, who parted from Amsterdam for Swoll, on Monday
last. I am always,

SIR, Your most Faithful, Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XXIII. Hague, January 29. S. N. 69.
SIR,
I Am to ask your pardon for not acknowledging one from you of the 19th past,
by the last Ordinary, and I this day find my Debt increased by the Honor of
one of the 23d, by which I am glad to hope there will be some facility given on
their side, as well as it is pursued here by all my Endeavors, toward the
Composure of the Points we differ in upon the Article of the Marine Treaty that
has broken our Heads so much and so long. The Deputies, designed to be sent
hither from the East India Company, instructed in that Business, are expected
here this Week, and till we see the Overtures that will be made, or Arguments
that will be used by them, I must suspend my Judgment of what the Issue will
be; God send me out of this Bryar, and I never hope to fall into such another.

Monsieur de Wit, and the rest here, will be very well pleased, if the King
think sit to let Monsieur Sylvius pass by Lunenburgh; and I shall make them
sensible, that if it be so resolved, it is wholly in compliance with them.

They would have been glad likewise if my Lord Carlisle had had leave to call
at Denmark, though upon a private Visit, in confidence that would have drawn on
a Dispatch from that Court to England, and consequently a Composure of those
Unkindnesses, which France makes use of to the engaging that Crown more
entirely to themselves: But these People though perhaps the best Judges of
Interest, are the worst of Honor and of all the Punctillio's that depend upon
it.

I hear nothing of my Lord Carlisle, since he parted from Amsterdam* but expect
Mr. Thynn here every Day, who, I hear, intended to meet him at Hamburgh, and
then come straight hither.

I will not trouble you with the Repetition of any thing I have written in
other Letters this Post, which I kn^w you will have your share of, nor with
enlarging upon the Professions of my being,

SIR, Your most Faithful Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XXIV. Hague, March 22. S. N. 69.
SIR,
SInce my last I have received yours of the 5th current, with the enclosed
Packet for Sir Gabriel Sylvius, which he is possessed of; And in order to his
Journey toward Lunenburgh, has begun to take his leave, where it was due here.
I have put the Compliment of these Dispatches from His Majesty, wholly upon
Monsieur de Wit, who seems to take it, as he ought to do, and to be satisfied
with all he hears of the course of His Majesty's present Counsels, both from
Monsieur Boreel, and all other Hands. He tells me his Letters from their
Ambassador in Sweden, give him a very good Account of the Dispositions of that
Court, which agreeing with what I hear both from Monsieur Appleboom, and
Sylvercrown here, makes me hope all we wish in their Resolution upon the
Projects of the Guaranty and Subsidies lately sent them over.

The Duke of Lunemgburgh's Minister here is of Opinion Sir Gabriel Sylvius will
find those Princes likewise in the same Dispositions, and obliged by this
Compliment from His Majesty: I doubt of two Difficulties in the engaging them:
First, that they will expect to be admitted as Principals in our Alliance; And
then that they will insist upon some Money by Sweden's Example

The enclosed I have newly received from the Baron Bonstetten, by which you
will find the Negotiations in Switzerland toward the common Alliance, proceed
but slowly; That which they would persuade this State, is to allure them by
settling constant Pension upon the small Catholic Cantons, where they persuade
him about fifty Thousand Franc's a Year, would do the Buness* And among the
Protestant Cantons, there is nothing of that kind admitted (as they say) and so
nothing needed, but Monsieur de Wit is averse from this Counsel, arguing, that
where things are wholly Venial, and at so small Rates, there can be no
certainty; and that 50 from hence may serve turn, only till 60 be offered from
some other Hand. He is in the mean time extremely glad to hear we are like to
fall into a good Correspondence with Denmark, and hopes the Hold of France will
wear off in that Court, as ours grows on.

Considering how weary you must needs be of so much as has been written of late
upon the Subject of passing those enchanted Forts, I suppose you will be
content I trouble you with nothing in that Matter by this Ordinary, the States
having not yet signified any thing to me of what has been, or is ready to be
represented to them by the Deputies of the East India Company, who have been
three Days in Town, and I hear were prepared to entertain them with long
Reasonings upon it. I am of Opinion, that without producing Instances of what
gave us the Apprehension at least, if not the Danger of new Practices, which we
desire to prevent, or without showing that the mention of Porcat and Iacatra,
(which is all has yet been spoken of) is to the purpose of this Complaint; It
will be hopeless to do any thing in this Matter, the Jealousies of our reach in
it are grown so great, and now they have started a new one, which is, That this
Proposition, (nor any thing toward it) was never made by us in any time of our
hardest Demands (even by Cromwell's) but only in the last Paper of Sir George
Downing, so as they will have it, that he has cast it in, as une pie^^e
d'achopement enter les d^ux Nations, knowing by his Transactions, and the
Constitutions here, it was a thing could never be yielded: But I must expect
the next Conference, to be able to give a further Judgment upon the whole
success.

I cannot end this without acknowledging very sensibly the obliging Expressions
at the end of your last, concerning your favor to me in my Wife's present
Solicitations of the Performance in what His Majesty was pleased to promise me
at my coming away, as to equality with his other Ministers. Monsieur de Wit
had heard the King had granted it, and came to make me a Complement Yesterday
upon it, assuring me he had several times spoken of it among his Friends here
with Trouble; That he knew in the Train I lived, 'twas impossible to hold out
upon what I had before from the King, which from so frugal a Man, is perhaps as
good a Testimony, as what I hear some Persons, who have no more to do in it
than he, take great pains in representing to the contrary. I am ever with very
much Reason and Truth,

SIR, Your most Faithful humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XXV. Hague; March 26. S. N. 69.
SIR,
I Have received yours of the 9th, with the enclosed Answer to the Dutch
Ambassador's Memorial upon the Affair of Surinam, upon which I cannot mark any
seeming difference in the Pretensions of His Majesty and these States,
concerning the execution of those Articles of Surrender, unless there should
arise a Difficulty upon the ways of Transporting such of our Planters, as have
a desire to remove: For the Dutch, according to the Article, pretend their
Governor is alone to have that Charge and Care, but they fear His Majesty will
think of sending Ships of his own to that purpose, which they think would have
an Influence upon the Dispositions of the English Planters there, and upon the
Peace of the Colony. When Monsieur Boreel arrives, I may, perhaps, have
occasion to enter farther into this Matter, and am glad to be so well informed.

Sir Gabriel Sylvius began his Journey last Night toward Lunemburgh; and I
hear there are Letters this Morning arrived here from Lubec, which left my Lord
Carlisle upon the Point of Embarking there directly for Stockholm the same Day
the Post parted, so that I doubt neither of the Pacquets dispatched after His
Lordship, had reached him time enough to turn his Journey through Denmark but
some other Hand will, I hope, be found in those parts to supply that turn
before it cools.

I have heard nothing from the States upon our Marine Article, since the
Arrival of the Deputies from Amsterdam, which made me resolve to put in this
enclosed Memorial Yesterday, to press them to a short Conclusion; Wherein, as
in all our Conferences, I endeavored to make the firmness of our Alliance
depend much upon our Satisfaction in this Point, being an Argument will always
hold good, how much soever the others may be disputed. I cannot guess more by
much Discourse I have lately had with Monsieur Van Benninghen, than that if we
are content with the Ancient Practice for the time preceding 62, or 63, in
which Years we say our Complaints, or Apprehensions began, we may be assured of
it, but I shall never talk three Words upon this Matter with any of them,
without being pressed upon giving Instances. I hope you and Monsieur Van
Benninghen, will have the Honor of ending this Affair, which I should have
been very glad of, but doubt it will be denied me. However, so it be done to
our Satisfaction, I shall not repine. I am of Opinion, at last the States will
send him over, and considering your Acquaintance so well contracted already,
his Dispositions so warm in all Points tending to the good of our Alliance, and
the great Influence he has upon the Town of Amsterdam, and, indeed, through the
whole Province, I am confident 'twill be of good Effect, and much Use may be
made of it to the Advantage of our Concerns here.

The Deputies of the States of Zealand, have this Day made their Harangue to
the States of Holland, representing the occasion of their coming, to be for
settling such a^ Union between the two Provinces, as they may henceforth appear
but one in all that regards them; But they descended to no Particulars, only
desiring Commissioners.

The Point they will begin with, is tha(...) of the Judicature, and settling it
^o be o^^ and the same for both the Provinces; (...) they agree in that, I
believe this Meeting will not pass without some Proposition^ concerning the
Prince: The present Dispositions on both sides, seem to be no^ very distant.
Zealand, perhaps, with the Prince's Contentment, will consent to the
Abolishment of the charge of Stadtholder provided the Prince may be at the
sam(...) time admitted to the Charge of Captai(...) General, with Session in
the Council o(...) State, and a considerable Pension: Holland would fain have
their consent to the first, upon a Decree of those Conditions to the Prince, at
the one or two and twentieth Year of his Age: What the Issue will be I know
not, but find many of the Province of Holland, in the mind, that some end must
be found in this Affair of the Prince, for the general Quiet of the Provinces.
Discourses have of late been set on Foot about his Highnesses Marriage, and
some German Princesses named, but this Talk is yet in the Air. I am ever,

SIR, Your most Faithful, Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XXVI: Hague, March 29. S. N. 69.
SIR,
I Have received yours of the 12th, with the enclosed Article both in French
and English, and a Paper from the East India Company, with Reflections upon the
Arguments used here against our long pursuit of that Article, but they being
newly come to my Hand, I cannot answer for the Effect they will produce: I
think I may for Monsieur d^ Witt's inclination toward it, not discerning much
in it different from the Concept which he proposed to Monsieur Van Benninghen.
But as he ever gave me that Proposition, or intended I should send it into
England, and three Days after he had communicated it to me, let me know that
the Directors of the East India Company, and Monsieur Van Benninghen had sent
to desire him not to proceed in that Matter, till the Arrival of the Deputies
here, so I have no hold upon him for the States agrecing to it, besides the old
Arguments joined with these new ones, I have received to induce them; of all
which I shall make the best use that I can possibly toward obtaining our Ends,
and am pretty confident, if I had brought over such an Article as this with me,
and proposed it before so much Dust had been raised about this Matter, I had
passed it among the rest; But the East India Company here are now grown so
Jealous, that there is no dealing with them in this Point. I have had long
Discourses since my last, with Monsieur Valkeneer, the chief of the Directors,
and who has the greatest Influence upon the Town of Amsterdam; And he says,
That since we can complain of nothing past in reference to passing of Forts, he
wonders that of all other Times, we should choose this to apprehend new
Injuries, when we know as well as they, that how strong soever they may be in
the Indies, the Consideration in which we are to them here, will of it self
prevent any such, and remedy and punish them where we can prove they have been
committed. He says, he is confident they mean all that our Ministers desire,
and would be ready to do it in any Particulars we should instance* but the
variety of Forts, Possessions, Occupations, Subjections, Passes, and manner of
Trassick, is so Infinite in those parts, that none can know what they do in
passing a general Article of this Nature. And this was the Sum of his
Reasoning, besides all those Arguments you have so often had already from the
other Ministers here. So soon as the East India Paper is Translated into
French, I shall enter once more upon it with Monsieur de Wit, and by him shall
be able to guess what we may hope for in Issue of all this Debate.

The Fears given here by the King of Spain's late Illness, and the Disorders
arrived since in Spain, upon Don John's occasion, give very much matter of
Discourse here, and Visions of ill Accidents, for which they see no remedy.
They apprehend twenty things without other reason than their own Fears, and, I
hope, one among the rest is, That the Spaniards grow difficult upon the Point
of paying the Subsidies; That they are Treating with France, and will at length
Sacrifice Flanders for the safety of the rest. I hear this only from the common
Noise as yet, which, perhaps, proceeds from their Unquietness here, whenever
they think of the Accession of Flanders to France, but I wish it proves always
a needless fear; For so busy as they are in France, and so idle as they are
Flanders, must, I doubt, come to ill in time. The French Ambassador is much
scandalized at the liberty of Talk used by every one here upon this occasion:
He tells me, for ought he sees, all his Business here will be to take the Air,
and that all the Interests and Supports that this Country had so long with
France, are now plainly turned to us; and that he knows they are endeavoring
to find Measures with us and Sweden, against his Master, in case of the Spanish
King's Death, which, I find, is the thing he lays most to Heart: But I assure
him, the King has no such early Thoughts; And what he will have when such a
case arrives, I am very little able to tell, so far am I from being instructed
in them.

The Portugal Ambassador made his Entry Yesterday, but finds some new
Difficulties in his Business here.

Your Commands about the last enclosed to Mr. Thynn, shall be punctually
obeyed, as all others you please to lay upon,

SIR, Your most Obedient, Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XXVII. Hague, April 2. S. N. 69.
SIR,
SInce my last I have had a Conference with Monsieur de Wit, upon the Subject
of the last Papers transmitted to me from the East India Company, the new
Project of the Proposition for passing the Forts, and your Letter which came
with them, and served much to clear our meaning in both the former.

As to the first, Monsieur de Wit said, he could not judge of the greatest
part of those Instances, by being a Stranger to most of the Names, as well as
Transactions in those parts; That of about five or six of them which he had
been acquainted with, there was not one which touched in any manner this Point
of passing the Forts: That for the others he would endeavor to inform himself,
being desirous of nothing so much as to know one Instance of a Fort, by which
we thought we had right to pass, and had been hindered, and desired now to have
that Right preserved to us by this proposed Article. For all the other
Instances whereby we averred the Wrongs which had been done us in that Trade,
he said, it was the same thing as to rip up the occasions of the late War,
wherein each Party still maintained they had wrong done them by the other; And
so in those Instances which he was acquainted with of these mentioned in the
last Paper, they could not yield we had those Wrongs done us which we pretended.

As to the Isle of Ceylon, he said, he knew not the State of it, but if it were
as we related it, they should be very unreasonable to exclude us from the Trade
of those parts of it where they had no Forts, nor Dominion, and he should be
the first to condemn them; And he thought the same of the other case whenever
it should happen of their building any Fort to hinder our Passage to any place
where we had our Traffic already established.

For the Proposition, he presently observed it was drawn upon that which he had
sent in his Letter to Monsieur Van Benninghen, and said, He doubted I had sent
that into England, which he had only communicated to me before he dispatched it
to Amsterdam. I confessed it, and that in the time his Secretary had left it with
me to peruse, I had taken a Copy of it, and sent it over to the end our
Ministers might see his Thoughts upon it, and at least be satisfied of his good
Intentions. He said it was a thing that he could not own further than having
sent it to Monsieur Van Benninghen, that since he and the Directors had
returned him their Opinion, that it was impracticable to digest any general
Article in this Point, he could not press on any such Proposition, how
agreeable soever to his own Thoughts. But for the Draught it self, he observed
several material Differences from what he had sent to Amsterdam; As first, that
those words relating to the ancient constant Practice de longues annees, (which
were put in on purpose to salve the Jealousy of the East India Company here,
that we aimed at nothing new, but what had always been used between us till
about the Years 62, or 63) were in this Paper wholly left out. That the Words,
a cet ^ffet, speaking of Houses, or Forts, to be built for hindering our Passage
to Places where our Traffic was already established, were likewise left out;
So as whatever Wrongs they should suffer from any Nation, they should be
hindered from subduing them, and subjecting them by Forts, according to their
Custom in those Parts. And Lastly, That to the Words of Forts that should be
hereafter Erected, we had added, or already Built, without yet instancing
particularly in any such Fort as was already built, to hinder our Passage, and
where we desired redress; So that if what we desire be as we seem to mean, only
for prevention, we need not add, Already Built; If there be any such, we could
not do fairer than to name them. Upon the whole, he advised I would not
communicate this Proposition to the Commissioners: First, Because they would
see by it, that his Proposition to Monsieur Van Benninghen had been sent into
England, which they might believe was with his consent, and think he did not
deal fairly to do that without their Communication. And Secondly, Because it
would increase very much the Jealousy of those concerned in the East India
Company, to see that those Word* were left out which confined the manner of
passing Forts to the ancient and constant practice between* the Nations, by
which they would conclude, our aim was at some Innovations, and where that
might end as to Pretenses and Disputes, none could tell. I gave him Thanks for
his Advice, but desired to be excused, for since the Proposition was sent me
over to be communicated here, I could not suppress it, but must propose it to
the Commissioners at our next Conference, and know their Sense and Resolution
upon it, since this, I supposed, was the last they were like to receive from
us. He then desired that I would at the time of proposing it, let the
Commissioners know how his came to be sent over into England, and that I would
give him a Copy of those parts of your Letter, which seemed to clear our
meaning in this Matter, the Expressions seeming to him very clear and fair; And
he assured me he would make good use of them: To both these I consented, and so
upon it we are to have a Conference, I suppose, within very few Days, at least
as soon as the present Business in the States of Holland will give their
Deputies leisure, which, I doubt not, will be some time this Week.

They have yet given me no account of the Deputies of the East India Company,
arrived last Week from Amsterdam, and I am not forward in calling for it,
hearing they have put in a very long Paper to prove the impossibility of
framing any general Article upon this Matter: Besides, I believe the Intention
goes on of dispatching Monsieur Van Benninghen suddenly into England, upon this
Point and some others of more general consequence; And that he went last Friday
to Amsterdam with Monsieur Valkeneer, to try whether that Town would give him
leave to make this Journey.

Monsieur Boreel is here arrived, and gave the States an Account Yesterday of
his Embassage, to their Satisfaction. He is the most pleased that can be with
His Majesty's, and His Ministers Carriage toward him, and their Dispositions
toward these States, only I find the Italian Abbot, lately come out of France,
will not, out of his little Head, and the Circumstances that cause his
Jealousy, are as pleasant as those of Lovers.

The Matter of Judicature which lies between Holland and Zealand, is like to
draw out in length* and will end, I doubt, rather in the Separation, than
Reunion of the Provinces upon it. Nothing is yet mentioned between them
concerning the Prince of Orange.

They continue much in pain about the King of Spain's Health, and the Disorders
of Madrid; Nor does the French Ambassador satisfy them, in saying, they need
not trouble themselves about the Accession of Spain to France; For if the King
of Spain should Die too Morrow, it is out of all question Don John would be
Crowned the Day after.

I hear nothing further as yet from the Swedish Ministers, nor any thing worth
the increase of your present Trouble from,

SIR, Your most Faithful Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XXVIII. Hague, April 5. S. N. 69.
SIR,
I Am to acknowledge yours of the 19th past, which furnished me with
Reflections of very great moment toward prevailing with the Dutch for our
Satisfaction in the Point so much contested between us; And whenever I receive
Commands to use them in the Conferences I have with the Commissioners, to the
end they may be reported to the States, as grounded upon my Instructions, I
shall do it to the full: Whereas I have hitherto contented my self upon all
those Occasions, to go no further, than to tell them with much Constancy and
Plainness, That they cannot reckon upon the firmness and continuance of our
Alliance, but by doing us right in the point of Commerce, and reducing it to
equality, and particularly in this Article, without which our Merchants will
not be persuaded they can be secure in their Indian Trade, but shall, in a
little time, be wholly beaten out of it, which the Nation will never endure;
And that to make an Alliance perpetual, it must be grounded in the Genius of
the People, as well as in the King's Personal Dispositions, who would always be
so wise as to comply in a great measure with what the People thought their
Interest.

Thus far I have gone with the Commissioners upon several Conferences, and
still left them with Protestations, as being as sensible of all I said, as I
could wish them; And that there is nothing we could demand without ruin to
their Establishments, or without giving greater occasions for future Disputes
and Quarrels, which they would not readily consent to; discoursing upon their
Interest to preserve our Alliance as far as I can do my self, and the most
serious among them ever put most weight upon the last Consideration, of leaving
a Door open for perpetual Disputes by a general Article, which mentions all
Forts that are or shall be erected, and all Nations not in the Occupancy and
Subjection of either Company: Whereas the Nature of Forts, and Subjections,
they say, are so various in those parts, that room will be left for our
Merchants to quarrel every Day, upon pretensions to be grounded on such an
Article.

I have since your last, in my private Visits to some of them hinted the ill
Consequences you there mention, and how France that grasps at all, and has a
mind to grow in the Indies as well as here, will not fail, in such a
conjuncture of offering us all the Advantages we can ask upon a Conjunction
with us for beating the Dutch out of the Indies, as we and they together did
formerly the Portuguese: But this they will not believe we can hear of, while
they offer us to redress any Complaints we can make against their present
Practices there. But however, all Considerations together, have made them
already fall upon the Proposition in the States of Holland, of sending some
able Minister over into England, till an Ambassador in Ordinary be sent to
reside there. In the mean time I am to have a Conference with the Commissioners
to Morrow upon your last Proposition, which I tell them, is the last they are
like to receive; By the next you will have the Issue of it. Monsieur Groote,
that is now in Sweden, is at length resolved upon to be sent Ambassador into
France.

Though the States have been something perplexed with the Relations of their
Ambassador at Madrid, concerning some Discourses made him by Count Pignoranda
upon the Unreasonableness of their paying the Swedish Subsidies in the time of
a full Peace, instead of reserving them to engage that Crown when a War begins;
Yet the Spanish Ambassador will not own any Difficulty likely to be made on
their part in that matter, provided Sweden consent to what has been proposed,
of which we yet hear no further Account. I am always with much Passion and
Truth,

SIR, Your most Faithful Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XXIX. Hague, April 12. S. N. 69.
SIR,
I gave you no trouble by last Post having nothing to bear me out, besides a
short account of my last Conference with the Commissioners, which I sent in one
to My Lord Arlington. I have since seen Mounsieur de Wit and others of the
chief Persons here, and once more talked all the matter of that Article to the
Grave, I fear; for though they will not come to any positive denial, yet by
several Circumstances, and the Manner and Style of their Discourses, I am of
Opinion it will prove a desperate pursuit. For they now say, it is a matter
that cannot be argued fairly with the Kings Ministers in England, by my
Representations from hence of what they say, but must be opened and cleared,
viva voce, by some Ministers of theirs in England; but at the same time they
say, it is a hard thing to press a State to any Contract, which they think will
be ruinous to them, that the performance of all Contracts which are entered
into, may be pressed reasonably, whatever they import, but in making new ones,
each party uses to find their Account. That the danger of Interpretations to be
raised upon any Articles, how clearly soever penned, they have sufficiently
felt, by Sir George Downing's sense given upon the words, Litem inceptam
prosequi, which was the occasion of the War; and now by our interpreting the
Articles of Surrendering Surinam to import a liberty for the King to send and
command all the English there to remove, with threats of Loss and Ignominy, in
case of their remaining there, which was (as they say) by the Articles left to
their own choice. And this, Mounsieur Boreel tells them, is maintained in
England, though it be not directly expressed in the Kings last Answer. But this of
passing Forts and Lands not in Occupation of either Company, is, they say, a
thing so little understood at these distances, that they conclude it impossible
to frame any Article upon it, which will not in a Years time engage them in
quarrels with us, or in the ruin of their present Establishments in the
Indies. At the same time they press me very much to conclude the rest of the
Articles, while the States seem disposed to pass them, though some of them, as
they pretend, are of very hard Digestion, and would leave this of the Forts to
further light and satisfaction, but with assurance of Redressing any Complaints
we can exhibit of particular Grievances, contrary to the ancient and constant
practices, and writing severe Letters to all the Officers of the East India
Company in those parts, to be sure to give us no such occasion, and to desist
immediately, if any such has happened. By all these Discourses, and the whole
course of this matter from the first, I cannot but judge it will prove a
business out of my reach here, and that we may take our Measures upon that
conclusion, how tender soever they are of letting it come to a direct Refusal.
And as I gave my Lord Keeper such a hint near two Months since, so now seeing
the several offers which have been since made at new Expedients, takes no
effect, I cannot but again repeat it, that we may not be deceived in what
Reckonings we make upon this matter. And yet it is possible than if Monsieur Van
Beninghen goes over, he and our Merchants may come to understand one another
better, then they have done at this distance.

The States have yet taken no Resolution in that point, by reason of his being
so deep engaged in pursuing a proposition, upon which the Town of Amsterdam is
very warm; which is, for taking away a considerable part of the Customs upon
the Entry of the Ships, which they think of very great Importance, to the
conserving and increasing the Trade of these Countries: But the Admiralties
maintain the necessity of keeping up the Tax to find Money for Convoy's, and
the safety of their Ships abroad. I do not hear either this matter, or those
between Holland and Zealand, are like to be decided this Session of the States
of Holland, which will end the beginning of next week.

Monsieur de Wit tells me, that by their President's Letters from Copenhagen,
they find my Lord Carlisle's passage that way and Complement, has been so well
taken, that the King of Denmark will make no difficulty of sending an Embassage
into England; and further, that there is an entire disposition in that Court,
to grant us equal privileges with any of his Nation in our Commerce there,
which Monsieur de Wit professes to be very glad of.

He tells me, the French Ambassador is very earnest with him, to make his
Demands apart from us and Sweden, of what they desire from his Master, to quit
their Jealousies and Apprehensions upon the business of Flanders, and to
restore the confidence betwixt them. That his Master is resolved to satisfy
them, if they will make their Demands apart, but that the manner of doing it by
an Alliance of several States, is too Choquant, Et contre ^ honneur de Son
Maistre, and ce qu' un Roy jeune and brave and puissant ne peut pas trouver
bonne. He tells me that he answered him positively, that this State would
absolutely proceed in conjunction with us and Sweden, in what ever should be
transacted upon this Subject, and no otherwise; and that since the same thing
would satisfy us all, it would be much better for France at the same time, to
satisfy three then one. Monsier Appleboom sent me word this day, that Monsieur
Mareshal is Arrived here, being joined in Commission with him, for Transacting
the matters of the Guarantee, Subsidies, and what else concerns the joint
Alliance, and that they expect* every day, that Secretary which was with the
Count Dhona in England, to Arrive here with full Instructions upon the whole
business.

I received a Letter from you lately by the Kings Command, in favor of Captain
Hooper. His pretensions I find are of a different Nature, one for Arms he
bought, and the other to be restored to the pension he enjoyed before the Wars.
I have spoken again to Monsieur de Wit, and Meerman about him, which I had
done several times at the Captains being here; they say the first is
reasonable, and will be satisfied, but that the other cannot be done, because
it draws in consequence the pretensions of all other English Officers, who lost
their Pensions upon the same occasion, of which they name several that the
States would be very willing to oblige out of particular Esteem, were it not
for the general consequence of it. I kiss your Hands, and am ever,

SIR, Your most Obedient, and most Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XXX. Hague, April 16. S. N. 69.
SIR,
I did not intend any thing I had written, should give you the trouble of so
much Reflection, as you are pleased to make in yours of the 30th past, upon the
passage of your former Letter, which carried so much Truth, and so much
Prudence in the Considerations you had furnished me, that I had often made use
of them in all private Discourses with the chief Persons here, as those which
were likely to have the greatest effect. But as yet nothing has past farther in
that matter; the Commissioners having not renewed our Conference, nor given me
any account of the States Resolution upon our last, in that endless Affair of
the Marine Article: Though they will by no means agree with me so much as in
that Appellation, but say they have consented to all his Majesty's desires, in
what can be said to touch a Marine Treaty; but in this, make only a difficulty
in what concerns the Trade with Nations at Land, as well as the passage of
Forts upon Rivers. In short, nothing hits in this matter, though Monsieur
Meerman assures me, both he and Monsieur de Wit are of Opinion, that it draws
not to so great consequence as those of the East India Company are possessed, who
think their Company were absolutely broken, if any such Article were framed, or
else that we should fall into a War upon it. And he says Monsieur de Wit told
him plainly, he durst not proceed further in it, for fear of drawing so great
an envy and clamor upon him, as that of a Company which is spread so far and
so deep through the whole State. And yet the Company themselves would fain
persuade me as well as the States, that for Redress of any particular injuries
or hardships that we can complain to have suffered already, or shall at any
time hereafter, contrary to the ancient and constant practice of all Nations in
those parts; they will be ready at all times to give the serverest Orders we
can desire to those in the Indies, and be as severe in seeing them executed:
And this is the Sum of the Discourses I have had upon this Subject, since my
last, with Addition, that they must commit it to a Minister of theirs in
England, pour tascher de venir aux plus grand Esclaircissement, upon which I
suppose, some Resolution may possibly be taken in the States of Holland before
they part, which will be to morrow or next day.

For the business of Surinam in which I received your Commands, I have
thereupon Discoursed with Monsieur Boreel, and the Pensionary of Zealand, who
assures me, that the States there will be content, Orders should be sent for
entire Liberty to be given to all our English Planters, who have a mind to
remove from that Colony, to do it with their Families, and to sell their
Estates; according as he says is agreed by the Article to that purpose, in
which they comprehend their Slaves. I suppose the words of the Original
Articles must decide that point, which they have promised to send me, having
never yet been Transmitted to me from England. He says farther, that if I will
signify the Names of any particular Families that have testified their desire
to Remove, the Orders shall go not only for Liberty, but Assistance in the
Transportation at the usual Rates, according to the Article, at least he
declares this as his Opinion, and what he shall endeavor to persuade the
States to: For I have sufficiently beat them out of all Cavil, upon the
Validity or Performance of the Articles. But they seem much unsatisfied with
all the first part of the Kings last Answer, which justifies all my Lord
Willou^^by's proceedings, and seems to revoke all Orders formerly given for
Reparations in that point. So that they say, it will come in among the other
Expenses, which his Lordship has forced them to; that their Ships will have
gone to the Barbados with the Kings Orders, for sending back the 200 Slaves,
and will be forced to return without effect. They seem to wonder likewise, that
his Majesty has not thought fit to take any notice of the Letter sent by the
States General upon this matter.

I shall expect the Letter of His Majesty's, you promise me, concerning the
Merchant Adventurers, though if His Majesty gives me leave, I shall make use of
it or not as I see occasion; and as those of the English Company of Dort think
will be most for the benefit of their Affair, which yet sleeps, and while it
does so, they are well, and I suppose it will not be our part to wake it.

Monsieur Mareschall who is joined in the powers Sent to Monsieur Appleboom
from Sweden, upon the Affairs of the Tripple Alliance, has been with me, and
though the Secretary they expect with the last Orders, be not yet arrived, they
are ready, they say, however to begin a Conference, which may possibly be on
Thursday. The chief of his Discourse with me was in General, upon that Crowns
esteem of His Majesty's Alliance, and Disposition to comply with his Counsels
and Resolutions in this Affair, which was the occasion of his Orders to see me
first upon his Arrival. That which I could gather out of the rest, was that
they would be willing to proceed as tenderly as they could toward France, in
either offering the Guaranty at the same time to both, or rather giving it
particularly to neither, but only in general against him that shall break the
Peace. Next, that they would have nothing to do with Spain, but only with us in
the whole Affair of Subsidies, and leave us to order all that concerns us with
Spain; And Lastly, that they would have the last Term of eight Months for the
last portion either taken away wholly, or else shortened. But I suppose I shall
know more plainly what they will be at, upon our next meeting; for this Morning
they sent me word they had received the Letters they expected, with farther
Instructions, though not the last which come by the Secretary. I have nothing
to bear me out in the increase of this Trouble, from

SIR, Your most Faithful, Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XXXI. Hague, April 19. S. N. 69:
SIR,
I am to acknowledge yours of the 2d current, with an enclosed from His Majesty
to the States, upon the Subject of our Merchant Adventurers at Dort, to whom I
shall give notice of it, and make use of this Letter, as they judge, will be
most for their Advantage. It is certain as you say, that this Attempt of the
States of Holland has been very unseasonable, and upon that Argument alone, I
had the good fortune to stop the current hitherto, which was very strong, by a
Confluence of all the Towns of Holland, except that of Dort: But I do not think
there was ever any thing intended, of what it seems the Merchants represented
to the Council, that the States did it with a design of laying such Customs
upon our Woollen Manufactures, as might wholly discourage the Transportation of
them; for all which those of the Company save, is but a Guilder on every piece
of Cloth, besides the Privileges as to the Expense and Living of the
particular Merchants; and I look upon the Trade of coarse Cloths, to be a thing
which can never fail us, since no other Nation can make them so strong and
cheap as we, so that the Dutch knowing they will ever find a Market abroad,
will rather aim at drawing them always through this Country, that so they may
be the Retailers of them to other Nations, than endeavor to Discourage their
Importation, which will but divert their current through Flanders by Emden, and
other parts of Germany, where they are chiefly vented.

The Pensionary of Zealand has been very earnest with me, to endeavor the
restoring of the Scotch Staple to Treveur, which will be of good consequence to
the English Company, much satisfy the Prince of Orange, and the States of
Holland too I believe, and indeed, how a thing that was of 200 years standing,
came to be altered without great change of Circumstances, I could never tell. I
wrote about it lately upon the Princes particular desire, but received no
answer upon it.

The States of Holland are retired, and the Deputies of Zealand likewise,
having concluded nothing more upon their Differences, then only to meet again
about the beginning of May, so that in their Conferences hitherto, there has
been no occasion of mentioning the Princes interest, which must fall into
debate, I suppose, before the other ends. I hear the Province of Zealand has
much distracted the Intentions, of sending Monsieur Van Benninghen over, as
believing it a design in those of Holland, to alter the Ancient Disposition of
that Ambassy, which has been appropriated to Zealand, as also to compose the
business of the East Indies, though at the cost of the other difference about
Surinam, in which Holland is little concerned, as Zealand is in the other.

Yesterday I had a Conference with the Ministers of Sweden, and the Deputies of
the States, upon the Acts of the Guaranty and Subsidies, where after some
offers by the Swedish Ministers, at the change of any Expressions that might
seem hard toward France, and the reading over the Act of Guaranty, wherein
they could six upon nothing that could bear much of that Interpretation; they
at length consented to it in the very Terms which were Transmitted over to his
Majesty, and approved by him, as well as by the States. They debated likewise
the Terms of the Subsidies, but at last concluded it either necessary to have
the whole Sum paid, or else good caution given for the two last Terms, upon
which they might (as I gather.) hope with small loss to raise the Sum, and
leave those they deal with, for the advance to any further Risque, and in these
points they desire our further Interposition with the Spanish Ministers,
professing to have nothing to do with Spain in the end, no more than the
beginning of this Affair; and declaring upon all occasions with great Nicety,
that their Master was content to give the Guaranty, only in pursuit of his part
in the Tripple Alliance, and his public regards toward the Repose of
Christendon, and not induced by any consideration of Gain or Advantage, which
might be pretended to be made them by the Subsidies, which were grounded upon a
particular promise of ours and Holland, after the Tripple Alliance was
concluded.

As for the Instrument about the concert of Forces for Support of the Peace,
the Swedish Ministers say, they are not yet instructed in it, and that their
Master is of the mind, I told them in private, the King was off, not to let it
accompany the Guaranty, but follow afterward as an Act between those of the
Tripple Alliance, and not to be given Spain as the other was; And joining our
Strengths in this matter, we had the less Resistance from the Dutch
Commissioners, though they at first began to press us hard, for the finishing
that at the same time; So as it was concluded, I and two of the Commissioners
should go to Morrow to the Spanish Ambassador, and let him know, that upon
Agreement, the three several parts of the Triple Alliance were now content to
give the Guaranty which had been desired by Spain, and in the Terms which had
been communicated before to their Ministers; provided they were ready to
satisfy what had been so long desired upon the matters of the Swedish
Subsidies: And thereupon to press him to the whole payment, or to the caution
of particular Men in these Countries, empowered to it by their Correspondents
in the Spanish Dominions. In the first point we shall have no Success, and I
know not whether the Dutch desire it in the second, or have much reason to do
so: For they had rather, I suppose, have this Tie last still for 16 Months
longer up on Sweden, than cease by such caution, as will immediately raise the
Money, which is that the Swedes would be at, and stick not to argue from their
Apprehension of Disorders in Spain, which may hereafter disappoint them, which
cannot happen, but at the same time they must render useless the further
effects of the Triple Alliance.

I apprehend the Spanish Ambassador will stand upon the Conclusion, and at
least Communication of the third Instrument for concert of Forces, and that he
will be privately encouraged to it by the Dutch Ministers, who are very earnest
upon the finishing that Transaction, and the Swedes seem not unwilling, having
upon the Dutch pressing it upon the Conference, declared, that though they were
not yet empowered as to that particular, yet their Master understood that should
be likewise concluded before their Commissioners ended, or Monsieur Marshall
parted from thence. In this point I desire further Instructions of his
Majesty's pleasure, how I am to carry it if I think my self pressed on all sides
upon it, for hitherto I have diverted it as dexterously as I could, but doubt,
I may be brought to a direct point in it.

I have had since my last no further discourse about the Marine Article, but
only of the breaking up the last Conference. Monsieur de Wit told me, he must
come next Week and talk with me about it. I am ever as becomes me,

SIR, Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XXXII. Hague, April 23. N. S. 69.
SIR,
UPon Saturday last I and the Deputies of this State, gave the Spanish
Ambassador an account of our Conference with the Swedish Ministers, and of our
being all ready to give Spain the Guaranty desired, upon their Satisfaction of
the Subsidies to Sweden. He would fain have persuaded us to the addition of
some words, as in one place that mentions the French's Contravention to the
Peace, he would have inserted Directement or Indirectement, and upon the
mention of warranting the Peace of Aix, he would have added et celle des
Pirc^ees d'autants qu'ell 'est confirm^e par cette derniere. The Dutch made not
much difficulty upon either, but I said absolutely, I could not change a
Syllable of the Act Transmitted into England, without first communicating it to
his Majesty, and I believe the Swedish Ministers were under the same
Restrictions, which the Spanish Ambassador resolved to try and sound it so; and
that I suppose will put an end to his further Niceties.

Upon the whole, his Answer was, that when we Signed other Acts of Guaranty, he
would Sign that for payment of the Subsidies; and when the Ratification arrived
from Sweden, the Money of the first payment should be ready at Amsterdam,
though he says it is yet at Sevill. For the caution we demanded for the two
latter Terms to be given of Burgers in Amsterdam; He said, he would write to
the Constable, and I find has a design of satisfying it by some Tolls upon the
Meuse, which lies in an open Country, and will be first exposed to the War.

By further and freer Conference with Monsieur Marshal, I find that the
difficulty made by Sweden hitherto of entering into the particular concert at
the same time with the Guaranty (as both Spain and Holland desire) proceeds
from an imagination they have of inducing, at least Holland and Spain, if not
us, to contribute toward the maintaining constantly even in time of Peace, a
Swedish Army on foot in the Duchy of Bremen, which I doubt will not succeed on
any side: However knowing his Majesty's unwillingness to enter at present into
that Concert, I make use of the Swedes to cover me, when I am pressed upon it,
either by Spain or Holland; saying, his Majesty is first resolved to know the
Swedes mind, and afterward that his Majesty's Answer is but a business of ten
days.

The Spanish Ambassador has lately put in a Memorial here full of the Alarms in
Flanders, that the French would make an Attempt upon Conde, or some other of
the pretended places; upon which the Constable had received orders from the
Queen, that in case of any such Action, though pretended only upon those
places, he should look upon it as an opening the War in all parts, and proceed
accordingly, being resolved rather to lose all they possess there in the Field,
than to suffer any new Indignity.

My Lord Carlisle assures me by one from aboard the Ship which was carrying him
from Coppenhagen to Stockholme, that the Orders were given to open the Trade
for our English Merchants in those Dominions, according to the Treaty of 60, in
which that King desired only that the 3d Article might be altered. And that the
Viceroy of Norway was appointed for the Ambassy into England. They tell me he is
that young Gabel, who is now in France, Son to the Stadtholder Gabel, that
shall be joined with him.

The Devotion or Leisure of these Holy days, has suffered no business here
since my last, and so given no occasion for tho increase of this Trouble; from,

SIR, Your most Obedient, and most Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XXXIII. Hague, April 26. S. N. 69.
SIR,
THough I was sorry for the occasion given us of new Jealousies by the Arrival
of our East India Ships, yet I was glad to receive by yours of the 9th current,
any new Arguments to pursue the difficult point I am here engaged in. I could
not but communicate to Monsieur de Wit such parts of the Letter as I thought
to my purpose; because I could add nothing to the strength of the Motives, nor
the Terms. He said upon it, that this was all general, but he hoped that upon
the Arrival of these Ships and Letters with so fresh Intelligence, you would be
at the trouble of sending me some particular Complaints, to the end the States
might give order for their immediate Redress, and come to understand the nature
of the Grievances we feared. He said, that which he should be glad to see, was
an Information that at such a time (since we say the occasion of our jealousies
began) such a Ship was hindered by such a Fort from making a passage, which had
been formerly permitted us, or such a new Fort was erected, and had blockt up a
passage which was formerly free, or that at such a time the Dutch Company had
made War upon such a Nation, where our Trade was before Established, and possessed
themselves of it, that so the States might examine the grounds of such Actions,
to the end both of Remedying and preventing them. And he hoped such Instances
might be given without mingling them with former matters, which had been
liquidated between the Nations by former Negotiations, in some of which we
appeared to have had reason, and had received Reparation, and in others upon
Examination, we had proved to be ill informed. From this we fell into large
debates about the necessity of framing some Article upon it, and the ill
consequences of failing in it, whether it were by direct or tacit refusal: But
I did not find that either of us could say much upon this beaten Theme, which
had not been said before. He allows all that I can say upon the ill
consequences of any dissatisfaction between the Nations, and the necessity of
our Alliance to them in this Conjuncture, and that he has thought of it more
than of any matter that has been a great while upon his hands, but cannot yet
find any disposition in the Directors, to believe it possible to frame any
Article upon it, without incurring the danger we would avoid of Disputes
between us. He said, he hoped we would not take it ill, that they made
difficulty of entering into a new Contract with us, since in all Alliances,
Reparations were necessary, but new Contracts were always voluntary. However,
he desired me that I would give him a Copy of those parts of their Letter which
I had read to him, which he would send away that very night to Amsterdam, and
make the best use of it he could, either to dispose Monsieur Van Benninghen to
go suddenly into England, or to think of some new Expedient in this matter: For
he was of Opinion, that one or other of them was necessary; but having been
already disavowed in two Draughts, he had proposed to the Directors, he durst
not offer at it again alone. He confessed, that by the Dissatisfaction of the
Province of Zealand, and particularly of Monsieur Boreel, upon the Discourse of
Monsieur Van Benninghen's going over, and by Domestic Affairs of his own, and
others of his Son, he had been of late wholly discouraged from undertaking the
Journey, how much soever he had once resolved it, and been since pressed upon it
by several of the States, but that he would shortly give me an account of the
effect, at his next dispatch to Amsterdam, with which our Discourse ended.

For the business of Surinam, he has assured me of his endeavors to bring it
to what we desire, as is so clearly expressed in your last Letter; and I doubt
not but the Resolutions of those of Zealand upon it, will be brought hither by
their Deputies about the beginning of next Month, in which the Pensionary of
Zealand promised to employ himself at his return thither.

The Swedish Ministers press still to have caution to the two last Terms, which
may be as good as Money, and upon which they may raise it presently without
much loss; and withal, they are very earnest to have the first payment made
upon their Signing the Guaranty, without staying for the Satisfaction. I doubt
very much of the Spanish Ministers being induced to either of these, and all
that I and the Dutch can do in it, is to assure the Swedes of the same Offices
from his Majesty and the States toward Spain for completing, as for beginning
their Satisfaction.

I find by Monsieur Marshall since my last, that in case of this Affair's being
well ended, which I see little doubt of, they have Orders to consent to the
Framing and Signing a project of Concert between those of the Alliance, as to
the number and quantity of Forces, which each of them shall furnish; but
without any sort of Specification concerning the manner of acting, or without
particularizing the Assistance of one King or another, but the Forces to be
employed against that King that shall break the Peace; and they will be content
with their proportion at Twelve thousand Men. I have nothing to increase this
Trouble, beyond the professions of my being always,

SIR, Your most Obedient, and most Humble Servant, W. Temple.
Just upon the closing of this Letter, the Spanish Ambassador brings me the
enclosed Copy of the Answer arrived from the Constable, to the account given
him of what past here in our Conferences the last Week, about the Guaranty
offered, and the caution demanded by the Swedes.



LETTER XXXIV. Hague, May 3d. S. N. 69*
SIR,
I am not yet able to make any particular answer to the several parts of your
Letter of the 13th, but doubt not to gain an Order from the States, in
consequence of the Surinam Articles, for Liberty and Assistance of those that
desire to remove, to which end I shall have a Conference with the Commissioners
on Monday next, and have before*hand Monsieur de Witt's promise of Assistance
in that matter, which I resolved to defer no longer, though the Deputies of
Zealand are to be here on the 14th Current, who promised to bring the
Resolutions of their Province with them.

Monsieur Marshall has been out of Town since my last, so that we have yet no
Result from him or Monsieur Appleboom concerning the Guaranty, nor whether they
intend to Sign it without partiticular caution for the remainder of the
Subsidies: But the last sent me word this Morning, that he expected the other
in Town to morrow, after whose return they would suddenly acquaint us how far
they could proceed in all the matters that are before them; though I shall
divert their coming to any Resolution in that of the concert of Forces, as long
as I can, and to be sure come to none my self upon it, till I know his
Majesty's further pleasure.

Monsieur de Wit tells me, that Monsieur Van Benninghen had a large Conference
with the Directors at Amsterdam upon the subject of your Letter, some parts
whereof concerning the new Complaints, arrived by our last Ships, I had
communicated to him; and that they promised him a further consideration of it,
and that they would Transmit the Result of all they should deliberate upon that
Subject, in a Letter hither, which they say I may expect next Week. Monsieur de
Wit is very desirous that Monsieur Van Benninghen would go over upon this
occasion, and has desired me to endeavor the disposing him to it, which I
doubt will be difficult. He alleges many considerations of his Town and
Charge, and has others of his own, I suppose; among which, one that he never
mentions, I doubt, may have some weight; which is, that he is in the midst of a
Building here that he began last Summer, and intends to finish this, and seems
a little fond of the care of it. I am ever as becomes me,

SIR, Your most Faithful, and most Humble Servant. W. Temple.

LETTER XXXV. Hague, May 10. S. N. 69.
SIR,
I have received your last of the 23(...) past, and was sorry you had occasion
to put me again in mind of the Orde(...) about Surinam. I gave in a Memori(...)
concerning it again, the beginning of th(...) Week; but Monsieur de Wit has
been o(...) of Town ever since Monday Night, a(...) for that reason I have not
yet pressed to h(...) my Conference, fearing in case it hap(...) in his
absence, either nothing would (...) done, as it commonly happens; or el(...)
the Learned Deputies might give so(...) stop to the way of doing it, which
M(...) sieur de Wit has declared his Satisfacti(...) in. But if he comes back
to morrow, (...) hope to see the dispatch of it before th(...) next Post.

Since my last, the Act of Guaranty h(...) been Signed by all parties in the
form, whic(...) goes here enclosed, and differs from wh(...) I sent before,
only in the omission of two words of no moment, and which came I suppose rather
by chance then on purpose. They are only the words Respectivement, and Voysias;
but the omission has happened to run through all three Instruments. They are
all in my possession, and likewise the Spanish Ambassador's Act for payment of
the Subsidies, there by consent to remain till the Money on one side, and the
Ratification on the other side Arrive. But yet he is so Punctillious, that he
will not be satisfied, unless the word Ratifier be put in at the latter end in
stead of Procurer; which as I conceive* cannot be as it now runs, without
Nonsense, since it refers to the Trois Originaux, before mentioned to be Signed
by the two Kings and the States, which are in effect the same with
Ratifications, and so we should oblige our selves to make a Ratification be
Ratified. But yet this old Ambassador will not understand it, and I doubt will
put us to the trouble of Signing new Instruments, unless Monsieur de Wit at
his return can satisfy him better than I. But I suppose this change of the
last Lines, if it should be made, will signify nothing to the Instrument which
the King Signs; and which if it be an Original, and not a Ratification, will
end at those words, De la cause qui en te* cas deviendra commune. I know not
when there the Spanish Ambassador was more Ar tificial or no, in another change
he made in his Instrument of Subsidies, where he has put in, qu' ayant traitte
et adjuste avec la triple alliance touchant la Guarentie et le payement de
subsides, he promised. But I told him plainly the Swedes would never consent to
any such Clause, nor own that they had ever treated with any Minister of Spain,
touching either Guaranty or Money, which they pretend to give and receive only
in pursuit of their Alliance with us and Holland to that purpose: And the
Spanish Ambassador has promised me, to send me another Instrument without that
Clause, though with much ado. Between so much Delicacy on both sides, I have
had trouble enough to bring People together, that have not yet seen one
another, and they make me much acknowledgment of it on both sides, by which
means I have the luck to be in both their confidence; and to find that however
they are come to agree at last, yet they are but very little satisfied with one
another manner of proceeding.

Monsieur Marshall has once more promised me, that they will excuse themselves
from falling upon the particular concert, till the first payment be made, and
that when they do, they will go no further than Generals, and against the
Violator of the Peace, without specifying one thing more than another, so as it
may be only a concert between our selves, and not to be given to Spain as was
designed, by that Grown and this State. All which, I suppose, is exactly
agreeable with the Kings intentions, as I find them expressed in your last, that
is, in case it cannot be deferred without disagreeing from the two other
principals; but I shall be sure to bring nothing to an issue, without first
acquainting you with what passes in that particular, and receiving his
Majesty's commands upon it. I can say nothing more of the Marine Article since
my last, having not heard of Monsicur de Wit or Van Benninghen since.

They will not be so consident in Flanders, as I see, we are in England of this
Summer's passing without* Action, but take great* alarm at the noise of the
French Kings coming to Marymon^ the end of this Month, with those Troops which
they call ^a M^i^^n de Roy, and they say consist of 12000 choice Men. The
States have lately had some Letters, which make several of them jealous of
M^^str^^^^ likewise, in case of the French Troops gathering in Flanders: But I
hope all their designs in France this Summer, will lie toward Candia, since
you say those Succors proceed, though I find by several Letters from Italy,
they much doubt in those parts, whether the French Intentions that way, are
sincere or not, and whether that King will not yet find some pretext to delay
them till the Town be taken, which is now said to be in much danger. I am
always,

SIR, Your most Obedient, and most Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XXXVI. Hague, May 16. S. N. 69.
SIR,
I was taken up with such long Conferences, upon the Marine and Surinam Affairs
with the Deputies of Amsterdam and Zealand, that I had not time to give you the
trouble of them, when the last post went away, which I should have been sorry
for, if my Success had been likely to please you: The Sum of all Monsieur Van
Benninghen's Reasonings who was the mouth of the rest, run'd upon those two
points so often touched, that we demand new methods to prevent a Disease; but
will not say when or where we have felt it, or any Symptoms of it, whereas let
them but know in particular what we ask, and we may be sure of this States
doing all that can be for the Kings Satisfaction. The other was, that we
understand our selves too well, and the present conjuncture to fear any
injuries from them in the Indies, who have no other support here, besides our
Alliance, and upon that point, said as much as I could have done my self,
though without any conclusion to our purpose, nor has he yet sent me a Copy of
Monsieur Valkeneer's Letter, or the Expedient proposed in it, which I mentioned
about a fortnight since. So jealous are those of Amsterdam in this matter, that
they cannot fall upon any sort of Proposition, but they presently imagine
twenty Interpretations we may raise upon it, beyond their meaning; and I
believe they fear it more now, then if our Friendship were less necessary to
them. Monsieur Van Benninghen promises every day to send to Monsieur Valkeneer,
to propose his Expedient, and Monsieur de Wit says, if we cannot agree upon it
here, Monsieur Boreel shall be instructed upon his going into England, either
to give or receive Satisfaction in it; and this is all I can yet get from them,
and know not how to help my self.

The Pensionary of Zealand was harder in his Arguments about Surinam,
maintaining first, that after the conclusion of the Peace, the King had no
further right to interest himself in any thing that past in that Colony, no
more then they in the New Netherlands, or Spain in the Burse, or Breda, or all
their other Towns surrendered upon Articles, but whose Sovereignty by the
Peace, was given up to them. That if Articles were not observed, the
Inhabitants might complain, but to them only who were by the Peace become their
Sovereign, and not to any other Prince. But though they waved that in
compliance to his Majesty, yet they had reason to wonder why we should press so
far for satisfaction in this matter, without giving it in the wrongs, they had
received from my Lord Willoughby, after such peremptory commands from the King
in their behalf, and that if the Kings O^ficers would not obey him, we had
reason to fear the same from theirs, and here I was to hear a long deduction of
my Lord Willoughby's Action, with all the aggravation that could be, but having
weathered these two points, we fell upon the Articles themselves after his
having professed that they should be observed, and upon the fifth he argued, that
the words [together with their Estates,] could mean only the product of their
Estates sold; because after mention of power to sell their Estate, it is said
immediately after. [And the Governor in that case shall promise, that he be
Transported,] 2dly, That this appeared to be the meaning, and not that they
should have liberty to carry away their Slaves, because there was another
express Article which was the 19th, to give that liberty particularly to those
who would go off with the Fleet that was there, and which would have been
needless, if it had been comprehended by the former Article. 3dly, That if this
were so meant, they would have a privilege more than either they had while
they were his Majesty's Subjects, or than any of theirs; for in none of our or
their Plantations is it (as he says) permitted, that any Inhabitant who
removes, shall carry away his Slaves, but he is to sell them there, because
they are an essential part of the fruits of the Land, and without which, the
Soil is nothing worth. These were his main Arguments, and I used the best I
could to maintain my point, and we parted with assurance of his utmost
endeavors, to give his Majesty satisfaction without the ruin of the Colony.
The other Deputies have promised me the same, but I doubt it is only with
intention, to ascertain the satisfaction of those that remove, for such of
their Slaves as are necessary to the Lands there, at the current price of
Slaves in those parts, for this I hear is whispered among them, as an expedient
in the business. But I cannot yet get their Resolution, which I doubt is
something delayed, by the present Affairs between Holland and Zealand, which
are every day in agitation, though a day passes not without calling upon them
about it, which is always answered with promise of dispatch.

Since the writing of this, I have yours of the 11th, which signi^ies his
Majesty's satisfaction in the Negotiations here about the Guaranty and
Subsidies, and intentions to dispatch suddenly the Ratification of the first. I
was surpised this Morning, when Monsieur Marcschal came to me, and showed me
the Swedish Ratification, which was just then arrived, and could wish the
Spaniards had made as much have with their Money, of which I can yet hear no
News from the Spanish Ambassadors, and wish, that after all these pains that
have been taken to make this party, it be not broken at last by the extreme
Negligence, or Disorder of the Spanish Court, and Counsels; for their spoiling
all their own Affairs, and ruining themselves, are things that, I think, God
alone can help. In the mean time I know not whether the Count de Molinas being
made sensible of this particular, Will contribute any thing toward it.

Sir Tho. Higgons parted from hence on Saturday for An^werp, and gave me the
same assurance, I see you have received, of the German Princes disposition in
the present Affairs of our Alliance, which you would have reason to be firm in,
if the French Ambassador had any in the long Discourses and Applauses he has
been making this Afternoon upon this point, that never any King had in any
Negotiation given such a Coup de Maistre, and just after a War, made Holland
depend more upon him, then he could have done by a Conquest. Que (...)d' avoir
trou^e le def^^t de ^^^^ees et pousse son coup a^ corur; and th^n, Ne ^^^^^ pas
le modeste la dessi^^, car vous s^^^ez qu' ils sont a vous, et le premier pas
que nous serons j^^^is ^n Flandres, v^us disposerez de la Hollande comm' d'^ne
de vos provinces, and twenty Strains of this kind, in which I showed him how
much he mistook, since in 8 Months time I could not make an end of one Marine
Article, nor compass the execution of those of Surinam, which were Arguments
enough, of the little influence we had here, or of my unsuccessful
Negotiations. For the rest, he turns all the fears of the Spaniards, en
ridicule, says, the French King has not above 6000 Men in the Camp, has sent
7000 effective to the Relief of Candia, has no present Application, but to
finish the Fortifications of the Conquered places, and without the death of the
King of Spain, has no thoughts but of Peace and Devertisement. He laughs at the
Counsels here about increasing their Forces, and at their Alarms of the Bishop
of Munster's arming and providing Ammunition, and if all be true, his Master
has the sport of of being quiet himself, and yet troubling every body else. I
am always as becomes me,

SIR, Your most Obedient, and most Humble Servant, W. Temple.
At this Instant, Monsieur de Wit sent to excuse the delay of the business of
Surinam, upon the Affairs between the two Provinces, which have wholly taken
them up for some days; but promises me an end of it before this week passes.



LETTER XXXVI. Hague, June 4. S. N. 69*
SIR,
I omitted to acknowledge by the last Post, one I had then received from you of
the 13th past, because I could then add nothing to what I writ to my Lord
Arlington, having not communicated the papers you were pleased to send me, upon
the Subject of the Dutch Peace at Macassar. I have since done it, and
discoursed with Monsieur de Wit upon them, who has taken them into his hands,
to communicate with the East India Company, and receive their Answer, which I
thought best to attend, before I put in any Memorial to the States, and so made
it public; because I find great use is made by the French, of the matters
depending between us and the Dutch to possess other Princes, and especially
those in Germany, with an Opinion of the unsteddiness of our common Counsels,
in the pursuit of the Tripple Alliance, which may be of ill consequence to the
general Affairs of this conjuncture: For unless we are forced to fall out, it
will more than any thing, conduce to the present Peace of Christendom, so much
desired by us both, that we be thought very good friends, whether we are so or
no. I am sure we should be so, if it were not for the East India Affairs, but
what they may produce in time, God knows; for I take it for an ill presage to
find upon all those matters, not only our Merchants, but our Ministers on both
sides have Opinions strangely different, as to what is Reason and Equity
between us. For I have both my Lord Arlington's and your Opinion upon this
Action at Macassar, in terms which make me see it is ressented in England; and
in the Paper of the East India Company, which is sent me over as the ground of
my demands, one point absolutely insisted upon, is Reparation of the Damages
sustained there about four Months after the Treaty Signed at Breda. When I read
the whole thing to Monsieur de Wit, he would very hardly believe those papers
had been perused by our Ministers, but that they came immediately from our
Merchants, and made it very strange we should complain of any Hostilities that
had been done there, when we were as much in War as we had been a year before,
unless we could prove the hard usage of Prisoners, which he said was a thing
not to be countenanced or suffered by them. For the demand of Reparation, he
desired me only to read the 7th Article of the Treaty at Breda, which gives 8
Months time on the other side the Equinoctial, for notification of the Peace;
and says, that all Merchandise or Movables taken within that time, shall
remain to the possessors without any exception, or any regard had to the making
Restitution, or Compensation. I must confess, I was at a stand in both these
points, but will believe it came from the inequality of the match between
Monsieur de Wit and me, in the point of Reasoning; and therefore I must desire
to be fortisied from better hands. That which occurs to me upon this matter,
is, that we cannot complain of them for what past in the War, but that in
pursuit of our pretense upon the Marine Article, for passing Forts, we may
demand that no Progress of their Conquests in the Indies, should be made use of
to deprive us of a Trade we had before established in the Countries of any
Indian Princes, nor no Treaties be made with any of them, to exclude us from
such Trade: And this I tell Monsieur de Wit and all of them, upon all
occasions will be absolutely necessary, if they intend to live long in good
intelligence with us, and in good humor between the Nations. And after all
their Arguments from Justice or Practice, I tell them, that whether it be by
means just or unjust, usual or unusual, we shall never endure to see our Trade
in the East Indies devolve every year by degrees into their hands, so as to
give us apprehensions of our total Loss, and their absolute acquisition of it.
I will add nothing more upon this Argument, (for all that is said upon it,
would be endless) but expect their Answers upon those Papers, and what they
promise of Proposals toward some expedient in the Marine Article from
Amsterdam, for from thence it must come, Monsieur de Wit protesting, it is a
thing he dares not meddle in, but by orders from thence, which I have some
reason to believe.

I have expected all this day the Resolutions about Surinam, having been
assured I should have them, but it grows so late, I begin to doubt it; and the
rather, because these two days have been all in disorder with the Prince's
Feasts to the Deputies of Zealand, and the States to the French Ambassador. The
Affair between the two Provinces, is like to come to an issue, by an Expedient
lately proposed, of the Zealanders quitting their Session in the Courts of
Justice, but having the same share in the Supreme Court of Appeals, which they
had before in the other; and I do not find this is like to bring on any sudden
mention of the Prince between them.

The Bishop of Munster makes a good deal of talk here, as I am sure, you know,
by the common News. The truth of his business is, that his Troops in Garrison
are increased to about five or six Thousand, and that he has about ten Thousand
of his Peasants listed in Companies, who are paid at the rate of a Crown a
Month, but which seems to be done with intention of drawing them into Service,
though he professes no intentions of any designs, but only to guard himself, in
case the Dutch, now they are every where in Peace, should think of revenging
themselves for his last adventure. It is not yet resolved, whether these Alarms
will produce the Augmentation of the Troops here, which has been so often
spoken off.

The paper mentioned in yours of the 18th will be very welcome, being much
inquired after by the Swedes; I mean, his Majesty's Answer upon their
Propositions. I advise them to go as far as they can with Holland, with
confidence his Majesty's concurrence will not fail them, but they would have
our Assistance too. I know nothing to increase your trouble, beyond the
professions of my being always,

SIR, Your most Faithful, Humble Servant, W. Temple*

LETTER XXXVII. Hague, June 7. S. N. 69.
SIR,
I have this day received yours of the 26th past, and am like to make you a bad
return, by answering it both in ill health, and ill humor: For I shall soon
grow weary of my employment here, when I find I cannot be useful in the degree
which is desired by his Majesty, as well as by my self, and I doubt it will
prove true, what I often tell the Ministers here, though they take it in jest,
that my Star is past, and in stead of that lucky one which influenced my former
Negotiations, I have met another that crosses me in all I now engage in. I find
by your last as well as by the former, what I am to insist upon in the business
of Surinam, and did it to the utmost in those Conferences I gave you the
account of, and have since expected the States Resolutions thereupon, which
have been so often promised me, and yet I am not possessed of them, though they
tell me I shall before the closing of this Packet. But I am not so impatient
to see them, since a Visit I received last night from the Pensionary of
Zealand, who begun with his having deferred it some days, because he would not
come without giving me the certainty of those Resolutions having past the
States, and in such form, as he doubted not I would be satisfied with: For they
had done all that could be in compliance to his Majesty, though they knew very
well he had no right to interpose in this matter, any more then they did in the
behalf of the Dutch in the new Neatherlands, upon which point of all Right
ceasing, after a Cession made of the Sovereignty by the Peace, he at large
insisted. He would not pretend to tell me the particulars of the Resolutions,
which he said should not fail to be in my hands to day, but as far as I can
gather, they amount no more than to orders for their Governor, that
Proclamation shall be made to declare liberty given to all that desire to
remove; that they come and given in their Names within a certain time, and
shall have another convenient time allotted them to sell their Estates; and if
they cannot find a Ghapman in that time, the States will buy them at the usual
prices, and the Slaves at the same prices they cost, and after that they shall
by the Governor be furnished with convenient Shipping, and at usual Rates to
Transport them to such parts as they desire.

The debate I fell into with him upon the point of carrying off our Slaves,
admitted nothing new, that I remember, besides what I related to you from our
former Conferences; but upon the other point of their Orders, or the Duplicates
being carried thither by one of the Kings Ships, which Monsieur de Wit, and
the other Commissioners in our former Conference, had not seemed at last very
averse to, I found this Gentleman in quite another language, and nettled at the
Advice, it seems, he had received, that the King intended to send Major
Bannister thither, and employ him and a Ship of our own in this Removal. He
fell into long Discourses of the mischiefs the Major had practiced against them
there, and of the Reasons there had been for the States of Zealand's Sentence
against him, and particularly that part, that he should never return thither,
which he was sure they would be resolute in, and after that of the little
appearance, they should suffer any of our Ships to come thither, when none of
their were suffered to touch at any of our Colonies in those parts; but so far
from it, that they had now a complaint to make about an English Ship from
Guiney with Slaves, that was by stress of Weather forced lately into Surinam,
and selling their Slaves there, had freighted themselves with a sort of Wood,
that was necessary for those of the Barbados, where as soon as this Ship
arrived, all the wood was immediately consiscated, because it was upon the
account of some of the Inhabitants of Surinam. Upon these points, we talked our
selves out of breath, and into very ill humor, which he would have ended, by
saying, he did not doubt but when I saw the Resolutions of the States, I would
be satisfied with them, though I have no belief of it at this time. In all
these Discourses, I ever wave answering the long and bitter complaints they
fall into against my Lord Willoughby, and the demands of Reparation, so that I
doubt Monsieur Boreel will be very ill company upon that Subject, when he goes
over, which is intended within a fortnight or three weeks.

I heard about ten days since, that Mr. St. John's, that was chief Justice in
Cromwell's time, was come to some place, not far from Utrecht, and a Son of his
with him, who was lately at Amsterdam. I took no notice of it, because I
suppose he is free to go where he pleases; and I know not whether I had reason
to make any reflection upon a great many English landing at Rotterdam, from
several Vessels, and passing by this place toward Amsterdam, and I suppose
with design of going to visit Mr. St. John's. One of them was Mr. Walter St.
John's, with his Lady, another was Sir Foulke How; there was a Sir James too
with them, whose Name I could not be assured off, though the Person I employed
told me, he heard him once called by it, and thought it was some such Name as
Sir James Bagg, and that there was another whom he had often seen go in and out
of the Parliament House. There are about 30 in all, as I hear, with Women and
Servants: But passing in several companies, lodging in Dutch Houses, and
seeming to do it with a design of being private, this made me curious to
enquire more of them, and send to Rotterdam, to enquire how they came over.
With much ado I found the House they lodged in there, and that they came part
in the Dutch Paquetboat, and part in a Vessel from a small Creek in Essex or
Suffolk, and two Gentlemen in a Ship from Weymouth in Dorsetshire; that they
were Visited at Rotterdam by Desborough, Helsey, one Major White, and Bolsprit
a Merchant, all Men of the same Strain, who were locked up in a room with them
five or six hours, and White and Helsey went away with them upon their Journey
toward Amsterdam. I have engaged one to follow them, and give me a further
account of them, if he ran, though I know not at all what such Persons, their
Journies, or Meetings can signify: However, I thought it fit to give you
notice of it, because you may by comparing Circumstances, unknown to me, make
perhaps other Reflections.

Of the Medals you mention, I can hear nothing here further, than what Mr.
Perwick wrote me last Post from France, that there were such Medals made there,
and dispersed on purpose to peak us against the Dutch.

For Sir Samuel Morland's Cipher, we have the Key of it here, but my Secretary
tells me, there is something altered by you in the rule and use of it, since
last year, so that he has been out in something. Mr. Perwick wrote from France
for a Trial between us; therefore I should be glad you would please to send
your exact Rule, as you now use it, with a good quantity of the ruled papers,
by some safe hand.

Persons of all Nations here, take part in the hopes given us by the Queen, and
especially the Dutch, whose chief Ministers seem to me very much concerned in
it, so that I can assure her Majesty, it will be very ill taken abroad, if she
disappoint us I am ever as becomes me,

SIR, Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, W. Temple*
I sent my Packet open as long as i(...) was possible, in a place where the
times ar(...) so exact; and just at this instant, the States Resolution is
brought me in Dutch, with a message, that the Commissioners will come to morrow
or next day, to confer with me upon it* It Is long, and I am not Dutchman enough
to understand it well, nor have time to get it Translated, so as you will have
it at full by the next.



LETTER XXXVIII. Hague, June 18. S. N. 69.
SIR,
I have since my last, received the Ratification of the Guaranty, with the
Paper concerning the Swedish demands in a Letter from you, which came to me by
my Wife; with a large Testimony she has given me, of the favor and assistance
she received from you, in the pursuit of her business, f^r which I make you my
acknowledgments; and should do it with more circumstance, but that I see you
are willing to have me in your debt, and I am desirous to come out of it, by
some better way.

I shall observe the Directions I receive concerning the Swedish pretentions,
when they come again in play, which they have not done lately, Monsieur
Marshall having been above ten days out of Town, in hopes to hear of the first
payment arriving from Spain, before his return; for upon that performance, the
rest of our Negotiations in that business will very much depend, which makes me
sorry to see nothing yet effected in it, for I doubt the Sw^des within a little
time, will grow weary of being entertained only with the cheap hopes and
promises given them for a Month or two by the Spanish Ambassador.

I have likewise received lately one from you of June 1st, with large
reflections upon the ill returns of the States in both the Affairs of the East
Indies and Surinam, and shall take the freedom you give me, of making use of
those discourses to Monsieur de Wit, to which purpose they are now
Translating. In the mean time I had not neglected discoursing with Monsieur Van
Benninghen upon both those Subjects, though he will hardly allow that of
Surinam, to be worth speaking of, I suppose, because neither the Town of
Amsterdam, nor the Province of Holland, are concerned in it. For the other, I
pressed him upon the necessity of the general Article, with all the Warmth and
Arguments I could possibly draw, from the considerations of the present
conjuncture. He fell to the old defenses, the danger of new and greater
disputes upon the interpretation of any general Article, the consequences such
an agreement with us, might have to open their Trade to all the rest of their
Allies, the offers of Redress in all particulars that could happen, whenever
we could give the instances. Upon all which, I took him at the advantage, and
told him none of all those three considerations could be alleged against the
particular satisfaction we demanded in the business of Macassar, having a
particular instance, wherein we were aggrieved, and the redress whereof, could
admit no danger of interpretations, nor draw consequences to any other Nation,
since no other had any Trade established there. He defended himself with
Arguments, Monsicur de Wit had used, of this Treaty for sole commerce being
the sole fruits of a long and dangerous War, and of vast expense, of every King
or Government having power to dispose of their own commodities, as Sweden might
contract to sell them all their Copper, or Portugal all their Salt; and that
the Article of Breda, does not oblige us to comprehend one another in all such
particular Contracts, concerning Commerce, but in those of Alliance and
Defense: That if they made a War purposely to destroy our Trade, it ought to be
disowned and redrest; but if upon injuries from an Indian King, they were
forced to a War, and they succeeded to have a Conquest in their power, they
might use it as they pleased. I told him, all this ended in a Declaration, that
they could neither give us our General Article for the future, nor particular
redress for what was past, which was too much at a time, or between those that
intend long to be friends; and pressed him so home, that at last he interrupted
me, and asked me brusquement, whether, if they would restore us to our Trade at
Macassar, I would conclude the Treaty: For though it would lose all the fruits of
their Victory; yet they could tell what that would cost, but what a general
Article might import, no body could compute. He said further, that if this
would content us, he would endeavor it. I told him I had Commission to ask no
less then that Restitution, and the general Article too, but when they could
resolve what to propose to me, I would transmit it to his Majesty. He promised
to consider of it, and desired we might have a joint Conference with Monsieur
de Wit upon it, at his return to Town, which is this day expected. He
concluded, that though he could not promise for the rest, yet he would assure
me of his Endeavors, and that he hoped, his journey into England was reserved
for some greater occasion. In the mean time, I thought it necessary to acquaint
you with this overture, and know your Reflections upon it. I confess, I could
not but be inwardly pleased with it, because it looked like something, in stead
of nothing, because a redress of this kind, may bea^ a construction to imply
all others as due hereafter, in cases of the like nature; but chiefly, because
in one of your Letters, you mentioned this business of Macassar, as of more
importance than what injuries we could apprehend by Forts and Passages: And
though I cannot yet reckon upon any thing certain from this Overture, yet I
count it some advantage to have divided my Enemies. For Monsieur de Wit, that
stands firmly upon the Justice of their Treaty of Macassar, as an acquisition
of War with that King, declares he will endeavor the composure of some general
Article, though he is in pain how to restrain it from possibility of
Interpretations; and Monsieur Van Benninghen, who ever declared the most
against this last, yet offers to endeavor the Restitution at Macassar. If this
be thought worthy his Majesty's Reflections, it may be considered how far it
would extend toward our Satisfaction, to have such an Article for Restoring
our Trade at Macassar, inserted in the very Treaty of Commerce, with some such
Introduction; Que pour saire voir les intentions mutuelles de Pune et de Pautre
Nation d^^'empieter pas sur le commerce Pun de Pautre, en quelque quartier des
Indes qu' il soit Establi, ou sous aucun pretexte de Traitez, avec auc^n Roys
ou Gouvernements, ^y d' empescher le commerce Pun de Pautre avec quelques
Nations qui ^e sont pas dans Po^^upation de Pautre compagn^e, il est accord,
etc. And if we can give Instances of any particular Fort, by which we have been
of late years aggrieved, contrary to the usual practice, the Redress in that,
may at the same time be insisted on, and to the words, Sous aucun pretexte de
traittez, ny des Forts, may be added. And such a pursuit would I suppose walk
upon a firmer foot, then the other of a general Article, which they say is in
the Air, while it is not grounded upon particular instances; and therefore so
apprehended among them, that I very much doubt succeeding in it, to any other
effect, then the pretenses of quarrelling with them, when we find occasion.

But these are sudden and undigested notions of mine, which I leave to your
riper Considerations, and offer them only out of an impatient desire, I have of
finding some issue out of this Affair, which has mortified me so long, by not
being able to effect his Majesty's desire, and is particularly unlucky to me,
in being forced to represent all the Reasons they can here raise against it, by
my Letters into England, wherein I take no care of enlarging upon those
Arguments I use here to maintain it; since it would be a Repetition of what I
have chiefly been furnished with out of England; and I know this makes it look,
as if in my Letters I pleaded their Cause, and not our own. But till they have
a Minister in England, I know not how to help it.

I doubt the Zealanders have a mind, Monsieur Bor^^l should have the honor of
Negotiating the Affair of Surinam, rather than I: However, I desire to know
whether his Majesty resolves I shall put in another Memorial to the States,
upon their last Answer, and upon what particulars I shall Positively insist;
for that you mention at large in your* last, of Major Bannisters Person, or of
his Majesty's sending a Ship purposely for the Transportation of the
Inhabitants, has been yet mentioned only in our private Discourses, and not o^^
public papers; and you will I hope, make that use of the failing laid to my
charge, in the Merchants paper of demands, to judge it necessary that my Orders
should be distinct. I am ever,

SIR, Your most Faithful, Humble Servant. W. Temple.

LETTER XXXIX. Hague, June 21. S. N. 69.
SIR,
I have this day received one from you of the 8th current, and shall as you
give me leave, make the best use I can of it here, and you need not fear that
the Dutch Ministers want being Entertained by me, in the same Style you have
used in both your last Letters, and in some others before. I had yesterday a
large Conference with Monsieur de Wit, concerning the East India Business,
wherein, though he endeavored to maintain, they had no obligation in Justice,
to restore our Trade at Macassar, yet he said, he was very glad that Monsieur
Van Benninghen had made me such an overture, and though he feared much, he
would find difficulty in making it good; yet he assured me, he should have all
his help in it. After all we could say of both sides, I desired him to take
these two Maxims with him, as those that would never fail him in all his
Negotiations with us: First, that the good or ill quarter we had with them in
the East Indies, would ever have a great influence upon our Alliances, and good
or ill intelligence with them in Europe, since we overmatch them here, as much
as they did us in the Indies, and so must necessarily balance one by the
other. And to make this good the second Maxim I gave him, was, that how luckily
soever they had escaped the danger of our last War, yet whenever a King of
England should fall in frankly with the current humor of his People, for the
understanding and managing any War, wherein both should take their Honor and
Interest to be equally concerned, there was nothing which our Crown was not
capable of, atchieving, since the true strength of all Kingdoms and States,
consisted in the number of good and warlike Bodies of Men, that are their
Native Subjects; in which I believed no King in Christendom could equal his
Majesty, considering the number and natural courage of the Subjects in his
several Kingdoms, hesides the general Riches of England, whenever they meet an
occasion that would make them willing to open their purses, to any degree near
what all their Neighbors were forced to do every day. Monsieur de Wit
acknowledged both these to be true, and upon the last, said, he believed France
had more Men than we, but we had more good Men then they, and upon that
Subject, he fell upon extolling the bravery of our Nation by many Examples, and
to a degree, that no English Man could have said more: And for the other point,
he said we might be sure by our being so much stronger here then they were,
that we should never want fair quarter with them in the Indies; but he hoped we
would not press them upon things that they could not grant, without endangering
the ruin of all their Establishments, or their Alliance with us. To say Truth
upon all Discourses of this kind, or the necessity of their preserving our
Alliance in this conjuncture, both Monsieur de Wit, and the rest of their
Ministers ever yielded all I can say: But on the other side, what they think is
reason, they hold they must perish* with it, and that when a Nation once yields
that point in their Negotiations with any other, they must ever after treat
rather as a Province, then as an equal State. And therefore I doubt the fault
is in me, that have not yet been able to make them acknowledge, that we have
reason in what we demand, though I am not yet out of hopes, to bring our
East India business to something, as far as I can ground by Monsieur de Wit,
and Van Benninghen's last Discourses. And to that purpose, I resolve next week
to make one step more than I have yet done, by a Journey to Amsterdam, which
they both advise me to; and I hear those of that Town, have a good while
expected it, as it seems other Ambassadors have used to make them a visit in
less time; and then I shall confer with the Directors all together, and the
chief of the Company besides, and know what I am to trust to.

The day before yesterday, I conferred with the Pensionary of Zealand, who drew
up the States last Answer about Surinam, and read him that part of your former
long Letter which concerned that matter. He pretended to hope, when his Majesty
had seen their Answer, he would be better satisfied, but I soon beat him from
that post, and pursued it so far, as to read him the last words of your
Discourse, upon both the Subjects of the Marine and Surinam, concerning the ill
consequences they were like to have, and that such as were friends to our
Alliance, would not be long able to resist them. He answered me very gravely;
First for our warranting my Lord Willoughby's Actions by the 7th Article, he
would reason no more upon it, if the 6th* Article would not convince us by
those words [shall be restored, bona fide, in the same state and condition
wherein they shall be found to be at the time, when* ever it shall be known in
those places, that the Peace is made.] He alleged likewise, the words in the
7th Article, [taken or gotten in Places and Coasts far distant after the Peace
is concluded, and before it be notified unto those places,] and said, my Lord
Willoughby's Actions were not only after he knew of the Peace, but after he had
received orders from his Majesty, for restoring that Colony according to the
Articles of the Peace. He ended, that though in compliance to his Majesty, they
had given the last Answer; yet they could never allow the English at Surinam,
to be his Majesty's Subjects, as I called them, after that Colony was delivered
to them, according to the Articles of Breda, [with plenary right of Sovereignty
and Propriety] Et que si sa Majeste estoit resolve de prendre c^lle petite
affair si ^aut, Il ^alloit avoir patience.

I had several times resolved, never any more to write you back any of the
Reasons used here against the demands I propose, and Arguments I use to make
them good; because I have long sound, that it is taken by many in England, to
be a pleading of their Cause; and therefore I thought never to send you any
thing in this kind, but what they gave you in writing: Yet I have Transgressed
again for this time, because in your last, you seem to desire to know, what
reply they make against my Lord Willoughby's being justified by the Treaty of
Breda, which I had omitted hitherto to acquaint you with, because it was not
directly a thing under my hands, though I have ever observed, that the States
General, as well as those of Zealand were as unsatisfied as could be, with all
that part of the Kings last Answer to Monsieur Boreel, which concerned my Lord
Willoughby. Besides I consider, that though it be the part of a good Courtier
to offer nothing to his Prince, but what is like to please him; yet perhaps
it is the part of a good Minister upon all Disputes, to be faithful in relating
the Reasons that are given him, and thereby to lay all fair for a judgment to
be made, that so his Majesty may be sure to ground his Resolutions upon clear
and evident Reason, which is of infinite advantage to any Cause. If the King
would have me do otherwise, I can much easier obey him, and perhaps much better
for,

SIR, Your most Faithful, Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XL. Hague, June 25. N. S. 69.
SIR,
IT is sit to give you some respite this Post from the frequent troubles you
have, of late received upon the Subject of the Marine and Surinam, I attend his
Majesty's Orders upon the last, and shall perform them. If we must fall out
with the Dutch, we can never do it in more nor in better company; for I know
not whether we are more dissatisfied with them at this time, then France and
Spain, and Sweden, and the Bishops of Collen and Munster, the two last for
particular Affairs, wherein as far as I can see, the Dutch use them something
hardly, and might have spared it in this conjuncture. Sweden, for refusing to
secure any part of their Subsidies, and Spain for pressing them to secure the
whole by a Aypotheque of the upper quarter of Gelderland. But these and several
other Re^entments of the two last, are suppressed by their public Interests and
Engagements: What those of the Bishop of Munster will be, I know not, nor what
credit is to be given to the noise he makes. I hear the States will this week
fall into the consideration of giving him some satisfaction about the Tussle of
the Countess of Benthem, and the Duties levied by them upon his Boats of
Provisions passing through the Princess of Ostrizes Country, which I am sure
you have heard of some Months since, in the common papers of Occuriences, and
which are the only pretenses he can have for breaking a Peace made at our
Coast, and warranted by almost all the Princes of the Empire. Yet it is agreed,
the Bishop has so far proceeded in his Levies of late, that he is able to bring
13 or 14 thousand Men into the Field, though the greatest part is of his own
peasants. However, these Alarms have not yet prevailed with the States, to make
the Recruits so long spoken of, nor will, I believe, unless the danger grows
nearer.

The Letters this Post from Madrid, bring no very good account of the Disorders
between the Queen and Don John, but say, the last was resolved to come to
Madrid in a few days, if all was not accorded, so as by next Post, some issue
is expected.

From Poland we are assured, that Senate has been forced by the Equestrian
Order, to pass a Deeree for Exclusion of the Prince of Conde, and with so much
heat, that one Person who had the confidence to speak for him, escaped very
hardly with his Life; so as the Candidates are ^ow but two, and the last
Letters from Warsaw, pretended not to judge which way the balance inclines, but
seem to apprehend, least the Assembly may fall into some great Disorders, and
break up without any Election.

I received Letters this Morning from the Baron Bonstetten, who assures me of
the Cantons having been much satisfied with the Communication of my Letters to
him, Qu' a la diete de Seigniors a Baden, Ils l^y donneront une responce, ^t
qu' ils sont tous a s^its incliner a tesmoigner leurs respects a sa Majeste en
tout sort des rencontres, which is all his Letter brings me, referring me for
other particulars, to the correspondent given him here by Monsieur de Wit, who
tells me, that he assures them very positively, the Cantons of Baden, Berne,
Lucerne, Solerne, and two more, are disposed to enter into the Tripple
Alliance, and that a Spanish Envoy was arrived there with Money, to invite the
seven lesser Cantons: So that upon the whole, he gives great hopes of that
strength being added to the Alliance, which if it should happen, would so
surround France on all sides, that I suppose they might thereby be induced to
leave the World some time in quiet.

I hold my Resolutions of going to Amsterdam, and making my attempt there
toward the issue of our Marine Affairs, but would be very glad, first to see
your* thoughts upon the overture made by Monsieur Van Benninghen concerning
Macassar. I am always as becomes me,

SIR, Your most Faithful, Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XLI. Hague, July 5. S. N. 69*
SIR,
HAving not been able to return from Amsterdam, so quietly nor so speedily as I
went, by reason of the undeniable invitations I received from the Towns of
Harlem and Leyden; I am returned only in time, to acknowledge a Letter I met of
yours here the 18th past, with an enclosed paper of Arguments, in both the
points of the East Indies and Surinam, which I shall not fail to make the best
use of I can.

I have had reason to believe, from my Reception in the several Towns, and
Conversation with their chief Magistrates, that they all understand their
interest in our Alliances, as they ought, and value it as it deserves, having
had it upon all occasions, expressed to me by them all equally in their
Discourses: But in other Demonstrations, more by the Town of Harlem, (who are
the most averse to the Princes interest) then the rest; and whose meeting me
with all the Militia of their Town in great Gallantry, and with great expense
of powder, as I hear, was taken ill by the other Towns, as an excess they ought
not to have made upon any Princes Arrival, without having it first concerted by
the States of Holland. I thank God, the trouble of this Journey is is well
over, by which the chief thing I have learnt, is, that when they are Drunk, and
when they are Sober, they seem still of a mind, in what concerns us and our
Alliance.

I left them at Amsterdam, in the same mind you are in your Letter, that it is
time to make an end of this Marine business, and Monsieur Van Benniaghen
assured me, that upon his coming to Town here next week, he would to his utmost
endeavor it, and that in the business of Macassar, we should have
Satisfaction. For the General Article, I can yet Discover no disposition to it,
unless it should be with such Restrictions, as I doubt will not answer our
Merchants ends; as for Example, in that of Trading with Nations not in
Subjection, they say it is a thing of so common Right, that we have no reason to
demand any particular Article, but if such a thing be adjusted, it must be with
a Clause, that it shall not be adjudged to prejudice any Rights, that one or
other may have acquired by their Arms, or by Treaties with any Princes or
People in those parts. You can best judge, whether this be what our Merchants
mean. For my part, I am very confident that these here mean no such thing, as
to endeavor our exclusion from the Trade of the Indies, nor to deny us the
Redress of any particular injuries we can complain of; and that if we desired
Orders to their Officers in the Indies to make no Innovations, which may be to
our prejudice, but to carry all matters there that concerns us, in the most
friendly manner that has been used between the Nations, we should not be denied
them, though they are so stanch upon this General Article; believing it will be
made the ground of future demands, which we will not now specify: And all this
Opinion of mine, is not raised by the professions they make, nor by Monsieur
Van Benninghen's protesting, they are so far from doing us injuries, that they
tremble at the very thoughts of it, and a great deal more of that kind; but it
comes from my belief, that they are a State which very well understands their
own Interests, and knows they can never take any good measures, but with us;
and that if necessity drives them to any other, they are such as must fail, and
ruin them at last. I am always,

SIR, Your most Obedient, Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XLII. Hague, July 9. S. N. 69.
My Lord,
I ask your Lordships pardon, for not acknowledging by the last Post, one of
June 18, which was then newly come to my hands, with an enclosed for the Prince
of Tuscany, which I find was very welcome to him, by one I received yesterday
from Monsieur Castilioni.

We have now some reason to believe, the 200 Dollars from Spain will at length
appear; for besides the assurance given me of it by the Spanish Agent at
Amsterdam, and since by the Ambassador here, I have had one Coymans a Merchant
with me, who is the chief of the Partners that have contracted in Spain, for
remitting that Money; and who assures me, that he had News by the last Spanish
Post, of the Contracts being perfected by his Correspondent there, with the
Spanish Ministers, and that they were Negotiating likewise with them, for
remitting the two following Terms as they should grow due; and he says we are
not like to attend the Arrival of the Plate, which is to be Imbarkt at Cadiz,
for all that, is to run upon the Merchants hazard, who by the Contract, are
upon Receipt of the value there, to draw Bills upon these of Amsterdam, payable
at Sight. So as I hope there will soon be an end of this long business.

As for the Concert, subsequent to the Guaranty, I hope it is in such a
posture, as his Majesty will be pleased with; for upon my last Conference with
the Swedish Minister, since my last return from Amsterdam, we agreed, that we
would neither of us begin the motion of it any further; that if I were pressed to
it either by Spain or Sweden, I should say, his Majesty was content to enter
into it, when ever the Crown of Sweden were so too; that if by either of the
said parties, the Swedish Ministers shall be Solicited, they shall Answer,
that they are ready to enter into it, when ever either Spain or Holland shall
propose the ways of assuring the Monthly Subsidies designed them, in case of a
War breaking out, for as for those spoken of in time of Peace, I think the
pretense will cease.

I send your Lordship enclosed, all the fruits of my troublesome Journey to
Amsterdam, and of my Conferences since with Monsieur de Wit, and Van
Benninghen: For having absolutely declared, that the Restitution of our Trade
at Macassar, would not serve turn, without a General Article; they at length
consented there should be one, which they pretend is pursuant to the meaning
expressed by our Ministers, though not by our Merchants, which is, that nothing
desired, should tend to the breaking the former Usages and Establishments, but
only to prevent new injuries, especially since we have given them no other
particular Instances, as they say, of our Complaints, besides this of Macassar.
The enclosed form of all the additional Articles, is what they will consent to.
The last about Trade with free Nations, goes in Latin, to avoid the Translation
which the other must undergo upon perfecting the Treaty: They pretend the
latter part of the Article, which says, Illibata maneant quae in usu
commerciorum, armorum jure aut pactorum vi acquisita sunt, secures us in any
place where our Trade is already Established, from Injuries either by Treaties
or Forts. With all this, I have not expressed any Satisfaction, further then my
promises of Transmitting all for his Majesty's Judgment and Resolution: I only
struck out the word they much insisted upon, after Gentibus liberis, which
were, Non dependentibus, as capable of any Interpretation, and so have left the
Definition of gentes liberae, as strict as we our selves desired it. I
understood likewise by our Conference, and their Proposition yesterday; that
the words before mentioned should run; Illibata maneant quae usu commerciorum,
armorum, etc. and not in usu; as they have put it in the enclosed, which comes
but just now to my hands; and I think it would be stronger for us, to have that
preserved untoucht, which we have acquired, usu commerciorum, as well as
armorum jure, or pactorum vi. If you can content your Merchants with the
Treaty, as it runs here, you may have it perfected, and your Trade at Macassar
and factories restored, which I think I may say considently, though Monsieur de
Wit, and Van Benninghen, only promise their endeavors in it, and would make
us believe, it is something very extraordinary they do for his Majesty's
Satisfaction, that those of the East India Company would sooner part with a
Million of Money, then yield the 2d Article about defining a Besieged place;
which they say, will end all further Conquests of theirs in the Indies, since
they cannot Besiege them by Land, and they may be relieved by Sea. They say
besides, that the Restitution of Macassar, will be such a President for Redress
of any Injuries that we can ever receive, and justly complain of, that it
imports much more then any General Article could have done without it; of all
which, I leave the Judgment before you.

Letters this day from the Baron de Bonstetten, give great appearance of the
Switzers Aversion to engage in the French Interest, and assure the Spanish
Ministers, of their being provided with Money, which together with their
Inclinations, he thinks, may make some change in their Counsels, to the
advantage of those ends proposed by the Tripple Alliance.

We hear France is very ill satisfied with the late Revolution in Poland, and
with Don John's growing so powerful in their Neighborhood. Having none of Mr.
Secretary's now to answer, with the Debt I was in to your Lordship, has excused
his trouble this Post, and been the occasion of drawing it upon your Lordship,
from,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful, and most Humble Servant. VV. Temple*

LETTER XLIII. Hague, July 19. S. N. 69.
SIR,
THE contrary Winds have kept yours of the 26th past, some days longer upon the
way, then is usual in this Season; but I shall not fail to Morrow, to deliver
his Majesty's Letter to the States, which is, as you observe, in a Style which
shows that the King demands nothing but his Right, and seeks no occasions of
unkindness, or weakening his Alliance with this State, as some were apt to
believe. Monsieur de Wit seemed satisfied in a great measure, with the last
paper you sent me over, of Replies to their Arguments upon the business of
Surinam, and says, the difficulty in Colonel Willoughby's case, must be cleared
by matter of Fact; for if the Slaves he took away, were only such as belonged
to his own Person, he allows he had right to do it; but not if they belonged to
any of the Works upon the Colony, of which in that case, he says, they were
apart, and so ought to be left in the State it was found at the notice of the
Peace. I am extreme glad, his Majesty has made so fair and distinct a Demand by
way of Letter, which takes it off from my hands, though I shall not omit all my
endeavors among the Ministers, to procure a good Answer to it; which the
Satisfaction offered, in case of any breach of Articles by Colonel Willoughby,
should methinks very much advance.

I am glad to find you are of the Opinion, that their restoring us to Macassar,
will signify something toward defending us from any future injuries by
Treaties or Forts; and this I can assure you, that though Monsieur de Wit
desends the Action upon its being done in time of War, and thereby would make
the Restitution pass rather for an Act of Friendship and Compliance, then of
Justice; yet I have not heard him, or any else among them, offer to justify
any such Action, that should be done in time of Peace; and where we had a Trade
established by preceding Contracts. And by all I can observe here, I do not
believe, we are likely to be much troubled about any Accidents likely to happen
upon their future Conquests in those parts, for all the prudent Men among them,
confess they have more already in their hands, then they can manage with so
small a Stock of Men, as their Government consists of, which will be ever a
hinderance to any great Enlargements by Conquest or Colonies, in any part of
the World. Besides, the Trade of the East India is now grown so large, and so
open, that it is almost impossible those Commodities should not grow to be
arrant Drugs, in five or six years time! For the Riches of the Trade formerly
grew by the dearness, and that by the scarcity of the Commodities brought from
thence: Whereas now the Dutch Company, as I am assured, have left behind them
in their Stores, full as much as they have brought away this year; and yet it is
a question among the Merchants, whether they have not brought enough to glut
the Market, while besides us and Portugal, now of late Sweden, Denmark, and
Hamburgh, as well as France, are falling into the Trade. At least I was assured
at Amsterdam, that the East India Actions (as the several Shares are called)
fell twenty in the hundred, even after the News of their Fleets being safe, and
near their Arrival. But these are only my Conjectures, from the lights I can
gather in various Conversation, and ought not to hinder us in the pursuit of
our Rights, or prevention of any injuries we have reason to apprehend. I sent
my Lord Arlington last Post, the Result of their late Conferences with me upon
this matter, in the Restitution of Macassar, and the projects of a General
Article, upon which I can proceed no further, till I receive new Directions
from you.

I hope the matters of the Tripple Alliance, will prove firm by the sudden
payment of the Swedish Subsidies; but by my last Conference with the Spanish
Ambassador, and Monsieur Mareschall, I fear I shall be pressed again upon the
point of the concert. For the Spanish Ambassador offers an Act for securing 30
M. of Crowns a Month to the Swedes during a War, if it breaks out; and the
Swedish Ministers I find, expect from us and Holland, a promise of paying them
the other 30 M. in that case, whilst Spain engages, (as they are content) to
Reimburse us. What Holland will resolve to do in this case, without a
Hypotheque, as they have hitherto insisted, I know not yet; If they refuse, I
am not like to be pressed upon any answer; but if they should consent, it will be
necessary for me to know his Majesty's pleasure. So soon as this matter ends,
Monsieur Mareschall has orders to go to the Prince of Lunenburgh, to make them
an Invitation from the Swedish Crown, conformable to that which has already
been made them by his Majesty, and this State, which shows the Disposition of
that Crown, to be both steady and forward toward the ends of our Alliance; and
I think his Majesty may be confident in this present Conjuncture, they will
keep close to the measures that shall be taken by him in the Public
Concernments of Christendom. I am always,

SIR, Your most Faithful, Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER* XLIV. Hague, July 23. S. N. 69.
SIR,
I am sorry to find by yours of July 6th, as well as by a latter from my Lord
Arlington, that all my endeavors toward an issue in the East India business,
are like to be never the nearer it; For I very much doubt, if the words you
mention, which they put in for security against our grounding Innovations, in
the course of that Trasick upon this Article, (though we have not yet pretended
it, as I remember) should be left out, it would but increase their Suspicions,
and leave the matter where it was. But I think the best will be, rather to make
a new Project, the fairest our Merchants can afford; and such an one, as can
leave nothing that is past in dispute: But if we find any Grievances already
practiced, besides Macassar, to Name them, and demand Redress. This I think
will be better, then to accept their Article, and strike out those words (for
the reason aforementioned) though they often argue, that the desire coming
wholly from us, and no Nation pretending right to force another to a new
Treaty, the wording of the Article ought to be allowed them.

I wish some of our East India Merchants had been at our Conferences; for I
will be bound to say, this thing has been debated to the very Grave, and
nothing left that can be said in it, though we pretend on either side, not to
be understood aright in it, what we would have. But that you may once for all,
know what they go upon here, to the end of grounding your Proposition the
better; I will tell you; First, that they are firmly persuaded, our Merchants
chief aim in this Article, is to give occasions of entering into new disputes
with them, when they shall see a good Conjuncture, even upon things established
by long use, and mutual practice in the Indies; and against which, they will
not now put in their Exceptions, and Complaints. And therefore I do not think
they will ever admit an Article, which shall be understood to alter the present
state of things there, (since they offer, if there be any occasion, to do that
upon our Complaints and Instances in the particulars) but only to prevent
Innovations for the future, contrary to what has been, or is now practiced by
mutual consent or allowance. As for Example, they will not admit of an Article,
which shall import freedom of Commerce with all free Nations, unlimited by the
use Established, and the Treaties acquired, unless first we tell them, what
those Nations are which we count free, and where notwithstanding we are by the
Dutch, forbidden to Trade; for they say, the nature of Subjection is so
various, especially in those Countries, that upon such an Article, we may
hereafter pretend to Trade in many places, where we never thought or offered at
it before. And the same in point of Forts and Passes too.

That which Monsieur Van Benninghen went upon, for a foundation in the offer of
this Article; was, first that we desired no Innovation in the Ancient usual and
mutual practice of Commerce in the Indies, but rather the hindering any such
Innovations, that may be offered by them. Secondly, That we pretended not by it
a Reddress of Injuries, already offered against such practice, but a prevention
of them for the future, and of the jealousies we had conceived of their
intentions. And this they reckon upon, because they have from the beginning,
ever desired instances of our Grievances, to the end they might redress the
particulars, and understand the general aim; but we have not thought fit to
give them any besides that of Macassar, in which they are ready to do us
reason. They ground it besides, upon the several Discourses I have held them,
upon those two points, wherein I am sure I have never gone farther, then what I
received from my Lord Keeper, my Lord Arlington or your self, in your Letters
that I have by me. And upon this Subject, I confess it is new to me, what you
say in your last; that to put in that Clause, Illibat ^ maneant quae in usu
commercii, armorum vi, aut pactorum jure acquisita sunt, would confirm upon us,
not only all the injuries we have complained of by Forts and Passes, but even
of Treaties too; and that of Macassar, which they offer to Abrogate. Now I must
confess, I remember not any of those particular injuries we have complained of,
or desired Redress in, besides that of Macassar. But very well, that after my
pressing several times for such instances, the Merchants sent me a large paper,
with very many Recapitulations of what had been, and of what might be, to which
the Dutch replied, that they only raked into former times and actions that had
been debated, and ended in former Treaties, and desired to know of us, which of
those instances we thought appliable to the present question: To which I
received an Answer, that what we desired, was more for prevention, than
remedies: And in short, have not been furnished with other particular Instances,
than of Cochin and Cananor, which the Dutch say was wholly of a different
nature, and regulated by the Article, that defines a besieged place.

And now you have all before you, that I can think to put you in mind off, I
should be glad to receive, as I said before, the fairest Proposition our
Merchants can afford of their own (for I am sure it will never be ended by any
from hence) and if I fail of their consent here to it, I think it will be time
for me to despair of it; and I am very glad that upon that Subject, you talk of
bringing it to a meeting of Commissioners, which is all the way I know will be
left, besides breaking it off unkindly; the effects of which I doubt not, but
both sides understand, and will cast up before they come to it. I must Rectify
one thing, which I think you have not right understood me in; which is, that by
such an Article as they propose, we should buy the Abrogation of their Treaty
at Macassar too dear, establishing at the same time, a right of doing the same
against us for ever. For the Article cannot be understood to establish future
Treaties, but only the Past. Nor do the Dutch impose the Article, as a price of
what we demand at Macassar, but are willing to Re-establish us there, without
any such Article at all, but finishing the Treaty upon those already agreed to.

The illness of the King of Spain is again much spoken off here, though not
owned by the Spanish Ambassadors. The Zealanders having sent the Ratification
of the last Agreement with their Province, the Prince expects very shortly, to
enter into the Council of State. The Swedish Subsidies are every day expected,
and I believe will not fail in a very little time. I shall fail at no time of
being,

SIR, Your most Obedient, Humble Servant. W. Temple.

LETTER XLV. Hague, July 30. S* N. 69.
SIR,
THis last Post brought me yours of the 13th, with his Majesty's pleasure
concerning the Guaranty, and Concert of Forces; which you will find by my late
Letters, to have perfectly agreed with all I had before Transacted in those
matters. Spain has the good luck here at this time, that though we see none of
their Money, yet we believe it sure; and thereupon the Swedish Ministers seem
better contented, than we had reason to expect, after so long delays. For the
concert, I suppose it must sleep a while, till some noise from France awake it;
for Spain seems not at all inclined to treat with the Dutch, about the
Engagement of the places in Geldre, for securing the Money to be paid to the
Swedes, and the Dutch without such security, will not engage in any kind, to
advance any part of the Swedish Subsidies, unless it be jointly with his
Majesty.

I have spoken this very day with Monsieur de Wit, about the business of
Surinam; who tells me, the Kings last Letter was put into Commissioners hands,
who have not yet made their Report upon it, by reason of the States of Holland
sitting till within these two or three days In the mean time he desires much to
see the Answer, you promise to his last Paper, which I find they think here,
grounded upon unanswerable Reasons; and therefore finding this business drawn
into slow Expostulations, I have cast about for another way of ending it, by
entering into new Discourses about our buying that Colony of the Zealanders;
which I mentioned to my Lord Keeper several Months since, and had then commands
from his Lordship, not to let the Overture fall; But the hand it was then in,
gave me no encouragement to pursue it; and I had some hopes the matter in
dispute, would come to some issue between us. Since the heat and difficulty of
our Debates, I have put another upon the proposal, who tells me this day, he
has had Letters from the principal Persons in that Province, to make him
confident of a good disposition toward it there, in case his Majesty did think
fit, and will come to any reasonable Terms: But before I proceeded any further
in this matter, I thought sit to acquaint you with it, that I might know your
thoughts upon it, and direct my self by them: In the mean time this private
Overture shall not hinder my pursuit of the public satisfaction we demand,
with all the earnestness I can, though I see nothing yet to make me confident
of Success, in the manner and time we expect.

I attend your Proposals on the Marine Treaty, and am still of Opinion, that
they will go very far here to satisfy us in an Article which will cut off
Disputes, by deciding things particularly described; but will never be brought
to conclude one, which by general words may draw on new Disputes or
Pretentions, and break into their present Establishments, and course of
Trafick; before we have made them understand by instances, what the cases are,
we find our selves aggrieved in. I am always as becomes me,

SIR, Your most Faithful, Humble Servant, W. Temple.

LETTER XLVI. Hague, Aug. 7. S. N. 69.
SIR,
I was extreme glad to find by yours of the 20th past, that you understood so
perfectly, what I had represented to you of their intentions here as to the
Marine Article; that is, the General Article to secure us from all injuries by
any new practices to disturb our Trade, and for any present injuries we lie
under, they will relieve us upon our instances in particular, as now in that of
Macassar; and so in any other, wherein we shall have the Justice on our side,
which was so directly my meaning, and theirs as I understood it, that I have
repeated it in your own words; and am pretty confident, if you keep close to
that Method, we shall yet see this business come to an issue: Though Monsieur
de Wit wishes often, the words last sent from the Town of Amsterdam, might be
accepted; because he says, they are so jealous of our implicit meaning* and
reach at something that may make a general Breach upon their past
Establishments, that every new word, gives them new and unnecessary
Reflections, at least in his Opinion; for he often says, that he is confident
he should have ended this business with me in two hours.

I cannot yet make any further step in the business of Surinam, the State
reserving their Final considerations upon it, in answer to his Majesty's last
Letter, till the Deputies of Zealands Arrival, which was expected ten days
since; but has been hindered by the Tumult happened in the Town of Terveer,
upon occasion of their protecting L'abadie, a true Fanatic Preacher, against
the positive Orders of the States for his Banishment, having gathered a
Congregation of 5 or 600 People in that Island, who are it seems more at his
Devotion, then at the States: But we look for the Deputies every day, and then
I shall press this matter to a sudden issue, one way or other. In the mean time
Monsieur de Wit desires to see the Answers promised to his last Writing, not
he says, that they shall make any difficulty to perform the Articles given to
the Colony, as they understand to be the Genuine sense of them; but because he
thinks the reasons in those Papers so clear, that his Majesty will accept of
what they do upon his instances in it, as a Respect and Compliance to his
Majesty, and not as a thing of Right, which they owe to any other, but those
which are now their own Subjects.

He was with me on Sunday, upon a message of formal Thanks from the States to
me, for the good issue I had brought the Portugal Treaty to, which is now
Signed; and he said, would have hardly ever been brought to an end, without the
peremptory Sentence I gave in it: I told him, I was glad I could do my Friends
business here, but sorry I could not do my own; and that ever since I came last
over, considering what had past between Spain and Sweden, I was just like a man
that could get Children abroad, and none at home, and took that occasion, to
fall into all the complaints, that could be of my hard fortune: That having
finished a Treaty of the greatest Importance with them in five days before, I
could not end any one business with them now, in ten Months. He comforted me
all he could, with the assurance of the States doing all that was possible for
his Majesty's satisfaction, even beyond Reason, where the prejudices and
consequences were not too great, I wish I see the proofs of it.

I have at present the consolation, to see the other Ambassadors more
unsatisfied than I am, for the Spanish is in a Rage, and I doubt with some
reason, at their having seized in Zealand 8 or 900 pounds, which the Constable
sent thither the other day, to be laid out in the Equipage of three Spanish Men
of War, which had been brought in thither by way of Reprizal, for some Merchant
Ships pretended to have been seized in Spain: And besides, he is very angry
that they will not yet here understand the French Consiscation of the Spanish
Subjects Estates within their quarters, to be a contravention of the Peace.

The French Ambassador is unsatisfied in the difficulties made here upon the
French Settlement of the Post through Flanders, which are come to that pass,
that for a fortnight past, no Letters come or go between this and France, but
by Express. The truth is, what has past in this matter, makes a very pleasant
Story. Monsieur Lovois makes a late agreement with Count Taxis for carrying all
French Letters by Lisle, in stead of Brussels, and those in this Country by
French Posts, and twice a week, without taking any notice of these People in
the matter, till all was done, and then sends a Monsieur hither, who told the
Ministers, that Monseigneur de Louvois l'avoit envoye pour voir Messieurs les
Estates, et leur dire l'accord qu' il avoit fait avec le Comte Taxis; and how
they should receive no manner of prejudice by it, etc. The States referred it to
Monsieur Van Benninghen, with some other Commissioners, who were pursued every
day, for three or four days together, by this Envoy, with the necessity of
dispatching him immediately, Car Monseigneur de Louvois l'avoit ordon^e de
fair tout l' expedition possible, while Monsieur Van Benninghen told him, they
had sent to inform themselves in this business, of the Merchants, and such
other things. But at last being at no rest, when he pressed for an Answer, he
asked him, Monsieur, Est ti la premiere fois que vous avez este en Hollande? the
Frenchman said, yes, Et bien, dit Mr. V. Benninghen, C'est un fort beau pais,
et les estrangers viennent touts les jours le voir par curiosite: Nos villes
sont belles et assez pres l^une de l'autre; Vous ferez bien de vous promener
huit ou dix jours; ^car en ce temps vous les verrez toutes, et nous se rons
peut estre informez en vostre affair. The Frenchman made a short Leg, and went
out, and told all his Friends, Que Monsieur V. Benninghen, l'avoit envoye
promener* and so he would be gone; and if they would have their Letters, they
should send for them, and so went his way.

Monsieur de Wit finding the Amsterdam Merchants much unsatisfied with this
new Order of Monsieur Lovois in the Packets, and resolved among other things,
against having their Letters twice a week, sent to know of them, who would be
most prejudiced by the interruption of the Posts, the Merchants of these
Countries, or those of Paris? they answered those of Paris: Upon which he
advised them, de tenir firm, and so the matter lies without any correspondence
going. I tell you this Story, for want of something better, and likewise
because it gives you quelques traits of the Negotiations with these People, and
of the way of their two chief Ministers. I kiss your hands, and am,

SIR, Your most Obedient, Humble Servant, VV. Temple.

LETTER XLVII. Hague, April 14th, N. S. 1679.
I understand that Mr. d'Avaux, has again by a late Memorial, pressed the
Bishop of Liege's concern in the Magistracy of Mastreicht; but I do not hear
that the States have yet given him any Answer.

I find that the Imperial and Danish Ministers here, are inclined to believe,
that the French Equipage is designed against England, and that, from
information which they both have, but particularly the latter; that the Fleet
is Victuall'd but for six Weeks, which is too little for an Expedition into the
Baltic, and that the Ships are of the greater Rates, and such as cannot enter
into Kattegat. They make an Argument besides, of the Garrisons which came out
of the evacuated Spanish Towns, being all disposed about Dunkirk and Graveline,
and suppose the French King's Journey that way, finding no preparations made
for it in Alsatia, or the Neighboring parts.

The Elector of Brandenburgh having sent some Privateers into the Elbe, to
satisfy himself for quarters assigned him upon Hamburg, of which the D. of
Zell having had the benefit, has undertaken to discharge them. That D. has
written to the States, to complain, that whereas he has by their Example and
Desire of the public quiet, made his Peace, and included the Town of Hamburg
in it; their Subjects notwithstanding taking Foreign Commissions, disturb the
Commerce of that Town, which he desires they will give effectual orders to
prevent. I hear that the Bishop of Munster by his Treaty with Sweden, is to
retain Wildshausen, till the Swedes have paid him 100000 Rixdollars in the
Hamburg Bank, and the possession besides, of all other places to be restored,
till the Swedes are able to put sufficient Garrisons into them.

The Princess of Orange having had a sit of her Ague on Wednesday, but much
gentler then the former ones, was well and cheerful all yesterday, and this
morning; but toward one this Afternoon, the cold fit came upon her again: But
having not lasted above a quarter of an hour, and with little shaking, she was
fallen a sleep with the beginning of the hot fit. Their R. Highnesses are
expected here this night, or too morrow, upon* a visit to the Princess. The
Prince is also expected to morrow.

Monsieur Odijke arrived last night at this place.

The Marshall d'Estrades returned on Wednesday from Amsterdam, toward
Nimmegen. Some give out here, that the design of his Journey was to make a
Match for his Grandson, with a very rich Fortune, Daughter to a Merchant there.

LETTER XLVIII. Hague, April 11th, N. S. 1679.
SIR,
I am here to acknowledge several successive favors from you, the last being
of the 28th past; but I must withal let you know, that the Superscription both
of that, and another before of the 14th, was misplaced to me, the Letters being
designed to Monsieur Chaumont, who I suppose, has those you intended for me,
which I shall claim of him, and send him his for them. I cannot but luy to
heart, the unhappy constitution of Affairs in England, and should be extremely
glad, if you could think fit to give me your Opinion, whether the matter of my
Lord Treasurers', to Mr. Mountague, be the chief ground of the offense taken by
the Commons against him. Here are Reports, I know not what to make of, that his
Royal Highness is designing to remove from Brassels to Breda. I have nothing of
it from Sir R. Bulstrode, or other hands (from which I have Letters) about his
Highness. Whatever his usage be, or is like to prove, We believe the D. of
Villa Hermosa's stay at Ghent, is for the return of an Express he has sent to
Madrid for instructions, which will determine it. I am with Truth and Respect,

SIR, Your most Humble, and Faithful Servant, R. Meredith.

LETTER XLIX. Nimeguen, Feb. 1st. S. N. 1677.
MY last Letters from England tell me, that it has been confidently reported
at my Lord Treasurer's Table, that I am dead; which Report I observe, unluckily
to happen about the end of a quarter; and it is much, that it should be so long
before they are in the right, when I consider my great Age, my little Health,
my being put unnecessarily upon a long Winter's Journey, into a very cold
Country, where I have been separated from my Baggage, during the greatest part
of a very hard Winter, by the Ice; and at last cannot cover my Head under a
1000 l. by the year: To all which, I may truly add, that I have spent 7000 l.
in this Employment of my own Money's, or rather my Wives and Childrens. And to
complete all, when Sir Ellis Leighton was convicted of Misdemeanors, and would
have cast some of his faults upon me: The Malice of some Men to me have been so
deep, or their Capacities so shallow, as to believe, or pretend to believe a
Criminal in his own Case, to the prejudice of an innocent Man. I hear likewise,
that his Majesty is informed, that he (Sir Ellis Leighton) has made bargains
in France in my Name, and with my Knowledge, then which nothing is more false,
and does touch me in a very tender part: And now I leave it to your
consideration, whether there be much need of poison or poignards, to dispatch a
poor old Man thus handled. I had almost forgot to tell you, that I have been
forced to pawn my Plate for 500 l. and do owe little less in this Town; so that
if my Lord Treasurer would dispatch my extraordinaries, and my 5th quarter, he
would do nothing contrary to his Majesty's Honor and Service, in my poor
Opinion: I humbly beseech you to do me the favor, to mind his Lordship of it;
and to pardon this Trouble, from him that is with much deference and respect,

Honored Sir, Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, J. Berkley.

FINIS.

