AN INTRODUCTION TO THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND.

BY Sir WILLIAM TEMPLE BARONET.

Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine tangit
Humanos animos --
LONDON, Printed for Richard Simpson at the Three Trouts, and Ralph Simpson at
the Harp in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1695.

THE PREFACE.
I Have often complained, that so ancient and noble a Nation as ours, so
renowned by the Fame of their Arms and Exploits abroad, so applauded and
envied, for their wise and happy Institutions at home, so flourishing in Arts
and Learning, and so adorned by excellent Writers in other Kinds, should not
yet have produced one good or approved general History of England. That of
France has been composed with great Industry, by des Serres, with Judgment and
Candor by Mezeray. That of Spain with great Diligence and eloquent Style, by
Mariana. That of the Empire, with much Pains and good Order, as well as
Learning, by Pedro de Mexia, but ours have been written by such mean and vulgar
Authors, so tedious in their Relations, or rather Collections, so injudicious
in the Choice of what was fit to be told or to be let alone, with so little
Order, and in so wretched a Style; that as it is a Shame to be ignorant in the
Affairs of our own Country, so it is hardly worth the Time or Pains to be
informed, since for that End a Man must read over a Library rather than a Book,
and after all, must be content to forget more than he remembers.

It Is true, some Parcels or short Periods of our History have been left us by
Persons of great Worth and Learning, much honored or esteemed in their Times;
as, Part of Edward the fourth and Richard the third by Sir Thomas Moor; Henry
the soventh by Sir Francis Bacon; Henry the eighth by the Lord Herbert; Edward
the sixth by Sir John Haywood; and Queen Elizabeth by Mr. Camden. There are
besides these, many voluminous Authors of ancient Times, in Latin, and of
modern in English, with some Foreigners, as Froissart and Polidore Virgil; out
of all which might be framed a full and just Body of our general History, if
collected with Pains and Care, and digested with good Order; for the Architect
is only wanting, and not the Materials for such a Building.

I will confess, I had it in my Thoughts at one Time of my Life, and the most
proper for such a Work, to make an Abridgment of our English Story, having
observed that Mezeray's Abrege of his own, was more esteemed, and much more
read than his larger Volume; but those Thoughts were soon diverted by other
Employments, wherein I had the Hopes, as well as the Intentions of doing some
greater Sevices to my Country. I have since endeavored to engage some of my
Friends in the same Design, whom I thought capable of atchieving it, but have
not prevailed; some pretending Modesty, and others too much valuing Ease.

Therefore to invite and encourage some worthy Spirit, and true Lover of our
Country to pursue this Attempt; I have consented to the publishing of this
Introduction to the History of England, wherein I have traced a short Account
of this Island, the Names, the Inhabitants, and Constitutions thereof, from the
first Originals, as far as I could find any Ground of probable Story, or of
fair Conjecture, since Philosophers tell us, that none can be said to know
things well, who does not know them in their Beginnings. I have further deduced
it, through the great and memorable Changes of Names, People, Customs, and Laws
that passed here, until the End of the first Norman Reign, which made the last
and great Period of this Kingdom, leaving the Successions and Constitutions
since that Time, so fixed and Established as to have lasted for the Space of
above six hundred Years, withont any considerable Alteration from so long a
Course of Time, or such Variety of Events as have since arrived in the World.

I have hereby beaten through all the rough and dark Ways of this Journey, the
rest lies fair and easy through a plain and open Country, and I should think
my self happy to see it well pursued by some abler Hand, for the Honor of our
Nation, and the Satisfaction of our own as well as foreign Readers, who shall
be curious to know our Story. I wish it may be performed with the same good
Intentions, and with much better Success, than this small Endeavor of mine.

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND.
BRitain was by the Ancients accounted the greatest Island of the known World,
and for ought is yet certain, may be so still, notwithstanding the later
Discoveries of Madagascar and Iapan, which are by some brought into
Competition. It extends from North to South about ten Degrees, and about two
hundred Miles in the Breadth of its most extended Angles. It was anciently
called Albion, which seems to have been softened from Alpion, the word Alp in
some of the Original Western Languages, signifying generally very high Lands or
Hills, as this Isle appears to those who approach it from the Continent. But of
those Times there is no Certainty remains in Story, more than that it was so
called, and very little known to the rest of the World.

By the Romans, and some time before Caesar, it was called Britannia; concerning
which Name very much Debate, and no Agreement has been among the modern Learned
of our Country, or of others. After raking into all the Rubbish of those
Authors; That which seems to me most probable, is, that the Strangers who came
over into this Island upon the score of Traffic, from the Coasts of Gaul or
Germany, called the Inhabitants by one common Name of Briths, given them from
the Custom among them of painting their naked Bodies and small Shields with an
azure Blew, which by them was called Brith, and distinguished them from
Strangers who came among them: From this Name of the Inhabitants, the Romans
upon their Invasions, Conquests, and Colonies established in Gaul, which
brought them first acquainted with this Island, called it Britannia, by giving
a Latin termination to a barbarous Name, and the same which appears to have
been usual with them, by the Appellations of many other Countries, that fell
under their Commerce or Conquests, as Mauritania, Lusitania, Aquitania, and
several others commonly known. The curious may observe this Care of the Romans,
in giving their own Terminations to many barbarous Countries, and forming easy
and pleasant Sounds out of the harshest, and most offensive, to such elegant
Tongues and Ears as theirs: I shall instance only in three, among many more,
that are obvious to such as please themselves with these Speculations. The
Province of Britain in France was called among the Natives Al Mor, which
signisied Ad mare, or near the Sea; from this the Romans called it Armorica.
The Isle between the Branches of the Rhine, which divide for some distance
before they fall into the Sea, was called by the Old Germans Vat awe, which
signifies fat or fruitful Earth; and from this was framed the Latin word
Batavia. The North-East part of Scotland was by the Natives called Call Dun,
which signifies a Hill of Hazel, with which it was covered; from whence the
Romans gave it the Name of Caledonia: All which have lasted in their Language
to this Day.

The Britains were little known abroad, before the first Entrance of the Romans
into their Isle, or the Preparations and Enquiries they made in order to that
Expedition: Their Coasts only opposite to Gaul and Belgium, were frequented by
Merchants from thence, who came thereby acquainted with them, but little with
the inland Provinces: And these were the Men from whom Caesar drew his best
Intelligence concerning the Country he ntended to Invade.

All that we find related of them by any credible Witnesses or Authority,
before the Romans entered, is, That the whole Country was filled with infinite
numbers of People, mightily abounding in all sorts of Cattle or Beasts, both
Wild and Tame; Their Houses poorly Built, and scattered all over the Country,
without Observance of Order or Distance, by which Villages are composed: But
the Britains were placed as every Man liked, and at smaller or greater
Distances, as they were invited by the Fertility of Soil, or the Convenience of
Wood or of Water. They lived most upon Milk, or Flesh which they got by
Hunting; Little upon Corn, which was not in much Esteem or Plenty among them.
What Clothes they wore to cover any Parts of their Bodies, were usually of the
Skins of Beasts; but much of their Body, as Arms, Legs, and Thighs, was left
naked, and in many of them, All; What was naked, was painted with Blew. This
was universal among them, whether esteemed an Adornment, or of Terror to their
Adversaries, or to distinguish them from all their Neighbors that came among
them, as Friends or as Enemies.

Their Towns were most upon their Coasts, and founded for the Advantage of
Havens, and the Recourse of Strangers from the Continent, to Buy and Sell, or
Exchange Wares with those of the Island. These Inhabitants were much more
Civilized than those of the inland Country, by the Commerce and Frequentation
of other Nations, especially the Gauls, who had long before been Civilized by
the Roman Colonies. The Commodities exported out of the Isle, were chiefly
Hydes and Tin; which last was peculiar to this Country, and in much Use abroad,
both in nearer and remoter Regions, where this Island was chiefly known by the
Product of this Commodity, conveyed among them at so great Distances, and so
much in Request. Some Silver they had, but not in common Use, as having few
Mines, and little Knowledge how to improve them, either in the Digging or
Refining: Pearls they had too, and frequently found among them, but neither
clear, nor colored like those of the Orient, and therefore in low esteem among
the Romans: But little Iron, and that used either for Arms, or for Rings, which
was a sort of Money current among them: The rest was of Brass, which was
brought from abroad, and employed only for this Use.

Their Language, Customs, and Religion were generally the same with those of
the Gauls, before the Roman Conquests in that Province, which were much earlier
than in Britain: This affinity made them frequently assist the Gauls upon the
Coasts, in their Wars against the Romans, and gave the first Occasion of Cesars
invading Britain for Revenge and Safety, as well as Conquest and Glory.

Their Government was like that of the ancient Gauls, of several small Nations
under several petty Princes; which seem the Original Governments of the World,
and deduced from the natural Force and Right of Paternal Dominion; Such were
the Hords among the Goths, the Clans in Scotland, and Septs in Ireland. Whether
these small British Principalities descended by Succession, or were elected by
the Advantages of Age, Wisdom, or Valor in the Families of the Prince, is not
recorded. But upon great or common Dangers, the chief Commander of all their
Forces, was chosen by common Consent in general Assemblies; as Caesar relates of
Cassivelaunus against his Invasion. The same was done upon their Revolts
against the Roman Colonies, under Caractacus and Voadicea; For among them,
Women were admitted to their Principalities and general Commands, by the Right
of Succession, Nobility of Birth, or Eminence of other Qualities.

Their Forces consisted chiefly in their Foot, and yet they could draw great
numbers of Horse into the Field upon great Occasions; they likewise used
Chariots in Fight; which with short Scythes fastened to the ends of the
Axle-trees, gave cruel Wounds, great Terror, made fierce Charges upon the Ranks
of their Enemies, and were of much Force to Break, or to Disorder them. Their
common Arms were small Shields, but very large Swords, which expressed more
Desire of Wounding their Enemies, than Defending themselves. They were esteemed
a very brave and fierce People, till their Bodies came to be softened, and their
Courages debased by the Luxury as well as Servitude, which the Romans
introduced among them.

In their Religion and their Laws they were wholly governed by their Druids, as
were the ancient Gauls, who are said to have been furnished with the chiefest
and most learned of theirs, out of Britain, esteemed the Nursery of the ancient
Druids, so renowned in Story: These were the only Persons, of any sort of
Learning in these Nations, which was derived by long Tradition among them,
consisted in the Observation of the Heavens, Knowledge of the Stars and their
Courses, and thereby the Presages of many Events, or at least Seasons wherein
the Vulgar is chiefly concerned. The rest was their Doctrines of Religion,
Forms of Divine Worship, and Instructions in Morality, which consisted in
Justice and Fortitude. Their Lives were simple and innocent, in Woods, Caves;
and hollow Trees: Their Food of Acorns, Berries, or other Maste; their Drink,
Water: Which made them respected and admired, not only for knowing more than
other Men, but for despising what all others valued and pursued, and by their
great Virtue and Temperance they were suffered patiently to reprove and correct
the Vices and Crimes, from which themselves were free. All this together gave
them such Authority and Veneration among the People, that they were not only
the Priests, but the Judges too, throughout the Nation. No Laws were instituted
by Princes or common Assemblies, without the Proposal or Approbation of the
Druids; No Person was punished by Bonds, Strokes, or Death, without the
Judgment and Sentence of the Druids: From a Belief, that Men would never submit
to the Loss of their Liberties, or their Lives, unless they believed it was
inflicted upon them by a Divine Authority.

One Custom there was among the Britains which seems peculiar to themselves,
and not found in the Stories of any other Nations, either Civil or Barbarous,
which was a Society of Wives among certain numbers, and by common consent.
Every Man married a single Woman, who was always after and alone esteemed his
Wife: But it was usual for five or six, ten or twelve, or more, either Brothers
or Friends, as they could agree, to have all their Wives in common: Encounters
happened among them as they were invited by Desire, or favored by Opportunity.
Every Woman's Children were attributed to him that had married her; but all had
a share in the Care and Defense of the whole Society, since no Man knew which
were his own. Though this Custom be alleged as a Testimony how savage or
barbarous a People the Britains were, yet I know not why it should appear more
extravagant than the community of Women in some other Countries; the
deflowering of Virgins by the Priest the first Night of their Marriage; the
unlimited number of Wives and Concubines; not to mention the Marriage of
Sisters among the ancient Egyptians and Athenians; and the borrowing and
lending of Wives among the Romans. On the other side it may be alleged for some
excuse of these our Ancestors, that by such a Custom they avoided the common
mischiefs of Jealousy, the injuries of Adultery, the Confinement of single
Marriages, the Luxury and Expense of many Wives or Concubines, and the
partiality of Parents in the Education of all their own Children: All which are
Considerations that have fallen under the Care of many famous Lawgivers. But
the best excuse was made upon this occasion by a British Woman (in the time of
Severus) who being grown familiar with Iulia Augusta, and other chief Ladies of
that Court, and having observed what passed there behind the Curtain, was one
day reproached for this Custom of the Britains, as Infamous in the Women, as
well as Barbarous in the Men. She answered coldly, we do that openly with the
best of our Men, which you do privately with the worst of yours. However it be,
such were the People and the Customs of Britain, when the Romans first invaded
their Island under the Ensigns of Julius Caesar. This famous Roman Leader then
Governor of Gaul, after having subdued all that Province, and the bordering
parts of Germany, was the first we read of with any certainty, that entered
Britain with Foreign Arms. His Forces were composed of Germans, Batavians, and
Gauls, besides the best of his Old Roman Legions: Yet in two Expeditions he
made into this Island, he rather increased the Glory than the Dominion of Rome;
and gave Britain the Honor of being the last Triumph of that mighty Republic,
which had before subdued and reduced into Provinces so many Kingdoms and
Commonwealths in Europe, Asia and Africa.

The Britains with their naked Troops made a Brave Opposition against this
Veterane Army, in many fierce encounters with mutual Losses; and various
Successes; till Dissension entering among the several Princes, some of them
jealous of Cassivelaunus, or his Greatness, fled over to Caesar, submitted to
the Romans, and desired their Protection. Others followed their Example, till
Cassivelaunus weakened by these Desertions, resolved likewise to make the best
Terms he could for himself and the rest; he sends to Caesar, acknowledges the
Roman State, agrees upon a certain Tribute, and delivers Hostages. And here
began the Fate of Britain, to make way for Foreign Conquests by their Divisions
at home.

The Romans were pleased with the Name of a New Conquest, and glad to end an
Adventure with some Honor, which they found was not further to be pursued,
without long Time and much Danger; and having discovered rather than subdued
the Southern Parts only of the Island, returned into Gaul with their whole
Forces, and left the Britains to their own Customs, Laws, and Governments.

Caesar being esteemed the best Writer, as well as the greatest Captain of his
Age, or perhaps of any other; has with his own Pen left us the best Account,
not only of this Enterprise, but of this Island too, till then, little known to
the rest of the World.

Those Tales we have of what passed there before his time, of Brute and his
Trojans, of many Adventures and Successions, are covered with the Rust of Time,
or involved in the Vanity of Fables, or pretended Traditions; which seem to all
Men obscure or uncertain, but to me, forged at Pleasure, by the Wit or Folly of
their first Authors, and not to be regarded.

From the first Entrance of Cesar's Triumphant Arms, we have some constant
Light in the Story of Britain, tho often very weak and uncertain, from the
Obscurity of those Barbarous Nations, who invaded the Northern Parts of the
Island; and from the Ignorance of those Illiterate Ages, that passed from the
Decay to the Restoration of the Greek and Roman Languages and Learning, in the
Western Parts of Europe.

As the Roman Conquests advanced in this Island during the Reigns of so many
Emperors, the bravest of the Natives, who could not endure that Subjection,
retired into the Mountainous and Rocky Parts of Wales and Cornwall, where they
preserved their Liberty some time longer, but fell at last, with the rest, into
the common Servitude. But the greatest numbers, and of the hardest Bodies as
well as Courage, among the Britains, after many brave Attempts for Defense of
their Country and Liberty, and many Defeats by the invincible Romans, still
retired Northward from the Encroachments of the Conqueror, till they were at
last beaten out into the rough and savage Parts, beyond the two Fryths, where
the Romans afterward built a Wall. These native Britains were by them called
Picts, from the Custom they still retained of Painting their Bodies and their
Shields. And this I take for the most probable Account of the Nation so termed
by the Romans (for among themselves they were called Albins) though much Pains
and Invention has been employed by many Authors, to make them a Foreign Race of
People, who, from they know not what Country, and at they know not what Time,
invaded and possessed Caledonia, or the Northern Parts of Scotland.

It Is more difficult to find out the Original of the Scots, or the Time of
their Entrance upon those North-west Regions; but as far as can be gathered out
of the Dust or Rubbish of such barbarous Times and Writings, and what remains
still of known Appellations and Events, it seems probable, that vast numbers of
a savage People, called Scyths, at some certain time, began and achieved the
Conquest of the Northern Parts both of Britain and Ireland, and by an easy
Change of the word, were called Scots, and from them, those two Countries were
called Scotia major, and Scotia minor. Whether the Scots landed first in
Ireland or Scotland, I leave disputed and undetermined among their Authors: But
it seems agreed, that both those Countries were for some Course of Time, styled
Scotiae, and that both the Northwest Parts of Scotland as well as Ireland, were
called Ierne. I am apt to conjecture, that when these Scots seated themselves
in those Parts of Scotland, they divided themselves into two Races or Nations,
whereof those who inhabited the North-East Parts, called themselves
Albin-Scots, the Name of the Natives there, being then Albins, and the rest who
possessed the North-west Parts were called Iren-Scots, from a River of that
Country, which gave it the Name of Ierne; and this Name was communicated to all
the rest of that Race, who conquered and possessed the North of Ireland, which
from them was styled by the Saxons Iren-land, and by Abbreviation, Ireland. And
the Original Name seems to have belonged rather to those Parts of Scotland than
Ireland, since it is given us by the ancientest Latin Verse that mentions it,
with the Epithet of Glacialis Ierne, which agrees little with the Clymate of
Ireland.

That these fierce Invaders were Scythians or Scyths (which was their Vulgar
Termination) is probably conjectured, if not ascertained, not only from their
Name, but from the Seat of that Continent, which is nearest to the North of
Scotland: This is Norway, and is the utmost Western Province of that vast
Northern Region which extends from thence to the farthest Bounds of Tartary
upon the Eastern Ocean, and was by the Ancients comprehended in that general
Appellation of Scythia, as well as divided into several other Barbarous Names
and Countries. Besides, it is both usual and rational, that such great
Transmigrations of People should be made from a worse to a better Clymate or
Soil, rather than to a worse, which makes this probable, to have proceeded from
Norway, than from lower and more fertile parts of Germany, and the Island which
is the nearest part of Land to that Continent of Norway, retains still the Name
of Schetland, as the first point which is reported to have been touched by the
Scots, or Scyths, in this Navigation.

Another Argument may be drawn from several Customs still remaining among the
Old Northern Irish, which are recorded to have been anciently among some of the
Scythian Nations, removing their Houses or Creats, from one place to another
according to the Seasons: Burning of their Corn instead of Beating or Treading
in other Countries: Eating Blood they drew from living Cattle; Feeding
generally upon Milk, and using little other Husbandry, besides the Pasture and
Breed of Cattle. To this is added, that the Mantle or Plad, seems to have been
the Garment in use among the Western Scythians, as they continue still among
the Northern Irish, and the Highland Scots.

For their Language, it must be confessed, there is not left the least Trace by
which we may seek out the Original of this Nation; for it is neither known, nor
recorded to have been used any where else in the World, besides Ireland, the
High-lands of Scotland, and the Isle of Man, and must be allowed to be an
Original Language, without any Affinity to the Old British, or any other upon
the Continent, and perhaps with less mixture, than any other of those Original
Languages yet remaining in any parts of Europe. The Conjecture raised of its
having come from Spain, because some Spanish words are observed in it, appears
too light to be regarded, when those very words are of the modern Spanish,
which is a Language not above seven or eight Hundred Years Old, and compounded
chiefly out of Old Roman and Gothic, with a later intrusion of the Saracen
among them: And yet I know no better ground than this, for the other Tradition
of Ireland having been anciently planted from Spain, and esteem the few Spanish
words to have been introduced only by Traffic of the South-west parts of
Ireland to Spain.

It seems probable, that from what part soever of the Continent this Nation
Sailed upon this Adventure, they were driven away by the force or fear of some
other Invaders, and in so great numbers, that the Natives remaining, neither
preserved any where their Name or Language, but were either destroyed by the
Conquerors, or blended into the Mass of the new Nations, who seated themselves
in their Country, as we find the Old British to have been in England, by the
Conquests and Inundations of the Saxons.

The time of this Expedition is yet less in view, nor does Buchanan, or any
other Author that I know of, pretend to tell, or so much as conjecture further,
than upon a supposition of the Scots coming first out of Ireland, without
alleging any Authority for that neither. I know no way of making any guesses
at a matter so obscure, without recourse to the Runick Learning and Stories, by
which we find that the Asiatick Scythians, under the Names of Getes or Goths,
and the Conduct of Odin their Captain, (their Lawgiver at first, and
afterward one of their Gods) are esteemed to have begun their Expedition into
the North-west parts of Europe, about the time that the Roman Arms began first
to make a great noise, and give great fears in Asia, which was in the Reigns of
Antiochus first, and then of Mithridates. How long the Arms of Odin and his
Successors, were employed in the Conquest and Settlement of that vast Kingdom,
which contained all the Tracts of Country surrounding the Baltic Sea, is not
agreed upon in these Runick Stories; but it is necessary, Norway must have been
the last they possessed in their Western Progress, and I am apt to think, the
Scyths may have been driven by them, to seek nearer Seats in our Islands; and
that it is probable, to have been some time of the first Century. Whenever it
was, it seems more agreed, that after the first Entrance of the Scots into
Caledonia, they subdued much of the Country, mingled with the the rest of the
Native Picts, continued long to infest the Frontier Parts of the Roman Colonies
in Britain, with great fierceness, and many various Events; and would possibly
have made much greater noise and impressions upon the Romans, if their greater
Numbers had not been drawn another way, by so great a Drain as that of Ireland,
which they totally conquered, and long possessed.

This is the best Account I have been ever able to give my self of these
ancient Times and Events in the Northern Parts of our Islands, being a matter
that has employed so many unskilful Pens, in so much idle Trash, and worthless
Stuff, as they have left upon it; but all involved in such groundless
Traditions and vanity of Fables, so obscured by the length of Time, and
darkness of unlearned Ages, or covered over with such gross Forgeries, made at
Pleasure by their first Inventers, that I know few ancient Authors upon this
subject, worth the pains of Perusal, and of dividing or refining so little
Gold, out of so much course Oar, or from so much Dross. And I have the rather
made this Excursion, because I have met with nothing in Story more Obscure, and
often observed with wonder, that we should know less of Ireland, than of any
other Country in Europe. For, besides its having been anciently planted by the
Scots, and taken their Name, and then after several Centuries been subdued, and
much of it planted by the Danes; we know nothing certain of the Affairs or
Revolutions of that Island, till the English began their Conquests there, under
the Ensigns of Henry the Second. For the Danish Establishments there, we
neither know the Time nor the manner they either began or ended, though many
Monuments still remain of the Towns and Castles they Built, and many Records
among some Families in Denmark, of the Lands and Possessions they long held and
enjoyed in Ireland.

I shall now return to that part of our Island which was more properly by the
Romans termed Britannia, was Conquered by the Victorious Arms, and reduced into
a Province by the wise Institutions of that renowned Nation; and having once
found the end of the Thread, it will be easy to wind off the Bottom; and being
a Subject treated by so many Authors, and pretty well agreed, I shall trouble
my self no further, than to continue the Thread as it leads through the several
Revolutions that have happened in this noble Island, till the last Norman
Period, by which the present Succession and Government seem to have been
Established, and has ever since continued.

The Roman Arms entered Britain under the first and most renowned of their
Emperors, which was Julius Caesar: But it was not a Quarry worth such an Eagle,
and so left by him, to be pursued by the Lieutenants of the succeeding Emperors.

The fecond Expedition into Britain was made by Claudius, under the Conduct of
Plautius, and pursued under Ostorius, and other Roman Commanders, with great
Successes. The Southern Coasts, with most of the inland Parts thereunto
adjacent, were wholly subdued and secured by Fortifying Camps, Building
Castles, and Planting many Colonies. The rest seemed at a Gaze, and to promise
Submissions at the first, rather than any Disturbances, to the Progress of the
Roman Arms. Till provoked by the Oppression of some of the Pretors, and their
corrupt Officers; The Britains toward the North, made head under Caractacus,
and continued for nine years, not only a brave Defense, but threatened some
fatal Dangers to the Roman Colonies, till in a decisive Battle, by the
advantage of armed and disciplined Veteran Soldiers, against loose Troops of
naked Men; The Britains were totally vanquished, Caractacus taken Prisoner, and
sent to make a part of a famous British Triumph at Rome. Yet one strong
Endeavor more was made for their Liberty, in the time of Nero; when Paulinus
going with the best part of his Army to subdue the Isle of Anglesey; The
Britains presuming upon so great a Distance between the Governor and his
Colonies, made a general Insurrection under Voadicea, fell upon the Romans in
all Places, took their Castles, destroyed the chief Seats of their Power at
London and Verulam, and pursued their Advantages with such Slaughter and
Revenge, that above seventy Thousand Romans, or their Auxiliaries, were killed
by the Fury of this general Revolt: Yet Paulinus returning with his Army,
encountered the British Forces in a set Battle, overthrew their whole Powers,
pursued his Victory, with the Slaughter of eighty Thousand; forced Voadicea to
Poison her self in Despair: And here ended, not only the British Liberties, but
their very Hopes too, or any considerable Attempts ever to recover them.

Under Vespatian and Domitian, Julius Agricola first discovered it to be an
Island, Sailing round it with his Fleets, and extended and pacified the Bounds
of his Province to the Neck of Land between the two Fryths about Sterling and
Glasco; and returning, applied himself to the Arts of Peace and Civil
Institutions, brought in the Use of the Roman Laws and Customs, Habits and
Arms, Language and Manners, Baths and Feasts, Studies and Learning: By all
which he pretended to soften the Minds, and change the very Natures of a
barbarous People, very difficult to be subdued by other means, how violent
soever. This wise Council pursued by his Successors in the Government,
succeeded so well, that the Romans had little trouble afterward in Britain,
besides the Defense of their Province upon the Northern Borders.

After these Establishments, the Romans called all that part of the Island
lying Northward from the two Fryths, Caledonia; leaving the Name of Britannia
to the rest which was reduced to their Obedience, and from that time remained a
Roman Province. To defend it from the Irruptions of these fierce and numerous
People on the North side, Agricola began, and in some manner finished, a Wall
or Vallum, upon that narrow space of Land that lies between the two Fryths or
Bays of the Eastern and Western Seas; upon which Glasco and Sterling are
seated. He fortified this Pass between the two Points, with Towers and
Ramparts, to make it defensible against those barbarous Nations who inhabited
the Northern side of that Country which the Romans esteemed not worth the
Conquering, and provided only for Security of the rest of the Island. Many
Ruins of this Vallum were lately, and for ought I know, may be still remaining;
and among the rest, a small round Tower built of Stone, but so exactly Cut, as
every one to Joint into another, with admirable Art and Firmness, though
without any use of Mortar or Iron. And this was esteemed to have been a Temple
of Terminus, and Built there as the utmost Bounds of the Roman Province. This
was afterward repaired and stronger fortified by Adrian and Severus: Nor is it
indeed agreed by Authors which of them began or finished it, and whether the
last made not another Vallum between the two Seas more Southward, and of a much
greater Length: But I think the first more probable. However, this was a
Defense intended and achieved by the Romans, against those bold and brave
Remainders of the Northern Britains assisted by the Scots, who yet frequently
invaded and infested the Province, during the time the Romans held this Island,
which was till the Reign of Honorius, and for the space of about four hundred
and sixty Years.

Upon the Divisions in the Roman Empire, which was grown a Prey to their
Armies, and commonly disposed by their inconstant Humors; The Pretenders often
fought their Battles, and decided their Quarrels in Gallia, as well several of
the Commanders there who arrived at the Empire, as several others who fell in
the pursuit of that fatal Purple, and left only the Name of Tyrants behind them
in the Stories of that Age. For the assistance of these Factions, the British
Legions were at several Times and Occasions drawn away into Gaul, and with them
great Numbers of the bravest of the British Youth, who were affectionate to the
Roman Government, and instructed in their Language, Manners, and Discipline of
their Arms. As the Roman Forces decreased in Britain, the Picts and Scots still
the more boldly infested the Northern Parts, crossing the Fryths, and hovering
about the Coasts in little Boats of Wicker, covered with Leather, filled all,
where they came, with Spoil and Slaughter, till repelled by what remained of
the Roman Forces, they retired still into their Northern Nest, watching for the
next occasion of Invasion, and Revenge upon the Neighboring Britains, whenever
the Romans were drawn away into remoter Parts of the Island. These Enterprises
were often repeated, and as often as repressed, for some time, till in the
Reign of the second Valentinian upon the mighty Inundations of those barbarous
Northern Nations, which under the Names of Goths and Vandals invaded the Roman
Empire with infinite Numbers, Fury, and Danger to Rome it self, all the Roman
Legions were at last drawn out of Britain, with most of the Britains that were
fit for Military Service, to relieve the Emperor, who was pursued by the Goths
into Piedmont, and there besieged in a strong Passage or Town he pretended to
Defend.

The Romans taking their last Leave of this Province here, left the Britains to
their own Government, and Choice of their own Kings and Leaders, with the best
Instructions for the Exercise of their Arms and Discipline, and the Repairs and
Defense of the Wall or Rampart they had raised against their Northern Foes. But
these, finding the whole Country deserted by the Roman Bands, exhausted of
their own bravest Youth, and weakened by their new Divisions, began to pour in
greater Numbers than ever into the Northern Parts, and ravaged all before them,
with greater Rage and Fury. The poor Britains sent over their miserable Epistle
for Relief (still upon Record) to the renowned Aetius, who had by several
famous Successes, for a time, repelled the Violence of the Gothic Arms; which
was addressed in these words: To Aetius thrice Consul; The Groans of the
Britains; and told him, after other lamentable Complaints; That the barbarous
People drove them to the Sea, and the Sea back to the barbarous People; between
which, they had only left the Choice of these two Deaths, either to be killed
by the one, or drowned by the other. But having no Hopes given them by the
Roman General, of any Succors from that Side, they began to consider what
other Nation they might call over to their Relief. The Saxons were one Branch
of those Gothic Nations, which swarming from the Northern Hive, had under the
Conduct of Odin, possessed themselves anciently of all those mighty Tracts of
Land that surround the Baltic Sea. A Branch of these, under the Name of Suevi,
(from whom the Baltic was of old called Mare Suevicum) had some time before
Cesars Wars in Gaul, invaded and subdued very large extended Territories in
Germany from the Coast of the North-west Ocean to the South-eastern Parts,
whereof Suabia still retains the Memory and the Name. These Suevi or Suabi were
for their Strength and Valor grown so Formidable to all the German Nations
they had Conquered, and forced to seek new Seats; That those upon the Rhine,
sending Ambassadors to Caesar, told him, They would neither seek War with the
Romans, nor avoid it; That they esteemed themselves as Valiant as any other
Nation, excepting only the Suevi, for whom the very immortal Gods were not a
Match. These Suevi became afterward divided into two several Nations, and by
Limits agreed between them. Those toward the South-east of Germany were called
Francs, from their great Love of Liberty, and their Valor in preserving it,
and never submitting to the Roman Subjection, as many other German Nations had
done; These upon the fatal Decline of that Empire, invaded Gaul under the
leading of Pharamond, and under the succeeding Kings of his Race, conquered the
whole Province, and established that noble and ancient Kingdom of France.

The other Branch of the Suevi, possessed themselves of all those Tracts of
Land in Germany that lie between the Elve and the lower Rhine, had extended
their Seats all over the Coasts of the North-west Sea, and from thence
exercised their Arms and fierce Courages, in all sorts of Spoils and Pyracies,
not only upon Merchants or Traders at Sea, but upon the Maritime Coasts of
Britain, opposite to those Countries about the Mouth of the Rhine, or thereunto
adjacent. These fierce People were called Saxons, from a Weapon generally used
among them, and made like a Sithe with the Edge reversed, which in in their
Language were termed Seaxes.

To these Vortigern, chosen King by the deserted and afflicted Britains, made
Address for Aid against the Picts and Scots, who had now made Inroads as far as
Trent. Their desires of Relief, and offers of Seats in Britain, were soon
accepted and granted by the Saxons, who under the Conduct of Hengist and Horsa,
of the Race of Odin, came over with great Numbers, to the Assistance of the
Britains, in the year 450. They joined with the Natives at first, as Friends
and Allies, had the Isle of Thanet assigned them at their Landing, and upon
occasion of greater numbers, the County of Kent for their Colony and
Habitation. They marched against the Picts and Scots, and in Conjunction with
the British Arms, overthrew their Forces, in several Battles or Encounters with
those cruel Ravagers, and beat them back into the most Northern Parts of the
Province. After this, by Consent of the Britains, Hengist and Horsa sent for
their two Sons or near Kinsmen, to come over with a new Army of Saxons by Sea,
into those Northern Parts; who seated their Colony about Northumberland, upon
pretense of guarding that Frontier against the Picts and Scots, and their
Incursions upon the Britains, which they did with great Bravery and Successes,
and thereby left those Nations, contented or forced, to bound their Territories
with those rough and mountainous Countries that lie between the two Seas, near
the River Tweed, and which ever since continued, as the Borders between the two
Kingdoms of England and Scotland, into which, the Island came afterward to be
divided.

The Province, now delivered and secured from their ancient Foes, Dissentions
began to arise between the Britains and their new Allies; The Saxons, valuing
too high the assistance they had given, and the Britains perhaps too low what
they had received, till the first allured by so fair a Prey, and the fertile
Soil of so sweet a Country, inviting still greater numbers from the Continent,
established two Saxon Kingdoms, one in the Southern, and the other in the
Northern Parts; and from both these sides invaded the Britains, who for some
time defended themselves and their Liberties, with various Successes, and with
the greater hatred and distinction, the Saxons being all Pagans, and the
British generally Christians; which Religion seems to have been planted here in
the first Century, but to have taken Root, and spread chiefly under Constantius,
who was long Governor of the Roman Province here, a great favourer of
Christianity, and Father of Constantine the Great.

In the time of these first Wars between the Saxons and Britains, Ambrosius
reigned over the last, and either as General of his Armies, or his Successor in
the Kingdom, Arthur, so famous in the Traditions, or rather in the Romances of
succeeding Ages, and who is said to have gained twelve Battles over the Saxons,
and to have left the Britains in the middle of the Province, for some time to
secure from these fierce Enemies, till Peace and Luxury had again softened them,
and by new Dissentions among themselves, exposed their whole Province to become
an easy Prey to so fierce and numerous Invaders. The time of King Arthur's
Reign or Atchievments (if any such there were) must have been between the Years
460 and 500. But this whole Story is left so uncertain or obscure by those poor
Writers, who have pretended to leave the Tales, rather than the History of
those times behind them, that it remains in doubt, whether to consider them as
a part of the Story of that, or the Fables of succeeding Ages. Whatever there
was of plain Stuff, the Embroidery of it, with the Knights of the Round Table,
their Orders and their Chivalry, and the rest of that kind, seems to have been
introduced by that Vein of the Spanish Romances, which many Ages after filled
the World with so much of that idle Trash, and chose for the Subject of them,
the Adventures and Successes of the first Christian pretended Heroes, who
renowned such fictitious Names, by extravagant Actions or Adventures against
the Pagans or the Saracens, either in Spain or other parts of Europe and Asia.
And among these, it is probable those Writers found room for the many Legends of
the British Arthur, and his Romantic Adventures against the Heathen Saxons.

After the Year 500, for one Century or thereabouts, the Saxon Forces were
employed in subduing the midland Parts of Britain, interjacent between their
two first Established Colonies or Kingdoms in the South or Kent, and in the
North, or about Northumberland; and to furnish Men for such Atchievments, and
the new Plantation of so great Tracts of Country, after the Conquest and
Devastation of the Old, mighty numbers of the Saxon Race came over into Britain
in several Expeditions, and Landing at several Places; That which is recorded
to have made sudden and easy way for their final Conquests, was a Treaty they
entered into with the Britains, where upon a Parley mediated between them,
Three Hundred of the Chief on each side, agreed to meet and conclude the Treaty
in a great Plain: In the midst of Talk and Drink, which had part in this
Commerce, the Saxons provoking maliciously, and the Britains innocently
resenting, fell to quarrel; first in Words, and at last to Blows: When the
Saxons upon a Sign agreed between them, drew out short Swords they had
concealed under their upper Garments, fell upon the unarmed Britains, slew
their whole number in the Field, who being the best and bravest of their
Nation, left the rest exposed, without Heart or Head, to the Fury and Progress
of the Saxon Arms. These heartned with Success, and proud of so great
Possessions and Territories, invited and allured still greater Numbers of their
own from abroad, who being of several Branches, and from several Coasts,
arrived here under several Names; among whom the Angles from Schonen and
Iutland, swarmed over in such numbers, that they gave a new Name at length, to
this Province, which from them was called Angle-land, and for easier sound
England.

The Saxons pursued their Invasion with Courage and Fierceness, equal to the
Multitudes of their Nation, that swarmed over into this Island, and with such
an uninterrupted Course of Fortune and Victories, after the year 500. that by
the end of the next Century, they had subdued the whole Body of the Province,
and established in it seven several Kingdoms, which were by the Writers of
those Times, styled the Heptarchy of the Saxons. They had expelled the Britains
out of the fairest and best of their ancient Possessions, and driven their
greatest numbers, who escaped the Conqueror's Fury, into Wales and Cornwall,
Countries mountainous and barren, encompassed on three sides by the Sea, and
toward the Land, of difficult Access. Some great Colonies of them, wholly
abandoned their Native Country to their fierce Invaders, sailed over into the
North-west Parts of France, where possessing new Seats, they gave a new
Appellation to that Peninsula, which preserves still the Name and Memory of
Britain there, though about this time, almost worn out at home.

This is the Account commonly given of the British Colonies first establishing
themselves in that Canton of Gaul; But there is another given by some learned
Persons of their own, and drawn, as they say, either from ancient Archives or
Traditions among them, and which to me seems the most probable. When upon the
Roman Wars in Gaul, among several Pretenders to the Empire, great numbers of
the Britains, as well as Roman Forces in that Island, were drawn over to assist
the contending Parties. It Is said that very great Multitudes of the British
having followed the unfortunate side, retired as fast as they could to that
part of the Seacoast nearest to their Isle, and most likely to furnish them
with Ships for their Transportation: But, that the miseries of their Native
Country, from the furious Inroads of the Picts and Scots, so discouraged their
Return, that by Consent of the Gauls their Friends, they established themselves
in the furthest North-west Parts of that Province, which has since that time,
retained their Language and their Name. And this agrees with the Legend of King
Arthur, who is said to have been a young Prince or Leader, sent from the
Britains in France, to assist their Countrymen here against the Saxons.
Whatever the Beginnings of this Colony were, or at what time, it is at least
agreed to have been much augmented by the Resort of so many Britains, as sought
Refuge there from the Saxon Cruelty.

The weak and poor Remainders of the old Britains, who were scattered among the
Saxons in England, were wholly spoiled of their Lands and Goods, which were
fallen under the Mercy of the Conquerors, who sharing them all among
themselves, left the remaining Britains in a Condition of downright Servitude.
Used them for Tilling Ground, Feeding Cattle, and other Servile Works, in House
or Field, sometimes Farming out certain parts of Land to them, at certain Rents
or Profits, but held always at the Will and Pleasure of the Landlord. The
Children that were born of these miserable People, belonged to the Lord of the
Soil, like the rest of the Stock or Cattle upon it, and thus began Villenage in
England, which lasted till the time or end of Henry the Seventh's Reign.

Soon after the year 600. the Saxons in England having ended their old Quarrel
with the Britains, began new ones among themselves; and according to the usual
Circle of human Affairs, War ended in Peace, Peace in Plenty and Luxury, these
in Pride; and Pride in Contention, till the Circle ended in new Wars. The Saxon
Princes, of the seven Kingdoms they had erected in Britain, fell into
Emulations of one another Greatness, Disputes about the Bounds of their
several Principalities, or about Successions or Usurpations, pretended or
exercised in one or other of them; These were followed by formal Wars among
them, the stronger swallowing up the weaker, and these having recourse to their
Neighbors, for defense against encroaching Power. Many fierce Encounters,
Sieges, Battles, Spoils, and Devastations of Country, succeeded in the progress
and decision of these mutual Injuries and Invasions between the Saxon Kings,
for above Two Hundred Years; but the account of them is very poorly given us,
with little order or agreement of Times or Actions, by the few and mean Authors
of those barbarous and illiterate Ages, and perhaps the rough course of those
lawless Times and Actions, would have been too ignoble a Subject for a good
Historian.

About the Year 8, o. after many various Events and Revolutions between the
several Races of the Heptarchy, Ecbert descended from the West Saxon Kings,
having inherited most of the Successions from the Prowess and Exploits of his
Ancestors, and acquired others by his own, became the first sole King or
Monarch of England, as it now was distinguished from the Principality of Wales,
possessed by the old Britains, and from that part of the Island to the North of
Tweed, possessed by the Picts and Scots, and by the Saxons styled by one common
Name of Scotland.

This famous Adventure of the Saxons in England, was achieved by the Force and
Confluence of such Multitudes from the Coasts of Germany, which lie between the
Belgic and Baltic Shores, that some Parts of their Native Countries were left
almost dispeopled, to fill again by new Swarms from the great Northern Hive,
and the Number of Saxons and Angles, Iutes, and other Nations that came over,
were not only sufficient to Conquer and Wast this whole Province, but even to
Plant and People it soon again, with numerous and new Inhabitants. So as by
them, succeeded in this Island, not only a Change of Government, as by the
Roman Arms; but a Change of the very People or Nation, that inhabited or
possessed the Lands of this whole Province: This induced a Change likewise of
Names, of Language, of Customs, of Laws, of Arms, of Discipline, of
Possessions, of Titles, of Religion, and even of the whole Face of Nature,
through this whole Kingdom. So as we may justly date the Original of all these
amongst us, as well as our Nation it self, from these our Saxon Ancestors:
Britain which was before a Roman Province, was now grown a Saxon Kingdom; and
instead of its former Name was called England: The Language which was either
Latin or British, was now grown wholly Saxon or English: The Land that was
before divided into Roman Colonies or Governments, was so now into Shires, with
Names given to them by the Saxons, as they first possessed, or afterward
thought fit to distinguish them.

The Habits in Peace, and Arms in War, the Titles of Officers in both, as well
as of great Counselors to their Kings, or great Proprietors of Lands, came to
be all according to the Saxon Forms and Usage. The Laws of this Country which
before were Roman, changed now into Old Saxon Customs or Constitutions. Their
Princes or Leaders of their several Nations, became Konings or Kings of the
Territories, they had subdued. They reserved part of the Lands to themselves
for their Revenue, and shared the rest among their chief Commanders, by great
Divisions, and among their Soldiers by smaller shares. The first, who had the
great Divisions, were called Earls or Barons, those of the smaller were
Knights; and the smallest of all were Freemen, who possessed some Proportions
of free Lands, and were thereby distinguished from the Villens, that held
nothing but at the Will of the Landlord.

In this universal Transformation, Religion it self had a share, like all the
rest, and received new Forms and Orders, with the new Inhabitants, whilst all
that was Roman or British, expired together in this Country: The Britains began
early to receive the Christian Faith; and as is reported from some of the
Disciples themselves: And this was so propagated among them, that when the
Romans left the Province, they were generally Christians, and had their Priests
and Bishops from the ancient and Apostolic Institution. The Saxons were a sort
of Idolatrous Pagans, that worshipped several Gods peculiar to themselves,
among whom Woden, Thor, and Frea were the chief, which left their Memory still
preserved by the common names of three days in the Week: This Religious Worship
they introduced with them and continued long in England, till they subdued the
Britains, reduced it under their Heptarchy of Saxons Kings, persecuted the
British Christians, and drove them with their Religion, into Wales, where they
continued under their Primitive Priests and Bishops, who with their Monks, were
all under the Surintendance of one Archpriest or Bishop of Carleon or Chester,
the Bound of the British Principality. About the year 600. or soon after, Pope
Boniface sent Austin the Monk to Preach the Gospel in England to the Heathen
Saxons, who landing at Dover, was received with Humanity by Ethelbert King of
the South- Saxons; and being admitted with four or five of his Companions, as
well-meaning Men, to teach and explain the Doctrine and Mysteries of
Christianity, among these ignorant and barbarous People, they so well
succeeded, that they converted at first, great numbers of the common sort, and
at length the King himself, whose example gave easy way for introducing the
Christian Faith into his whole Kingdom, which from thence spread into all the
Countries subject to the Saxon Heptarchy. Thus Religion came to be Established
in England, under the Rites and Forms and Authority of the Roman Church; by
which Austin was instituted chief Bishop in England, and seated by the Saxon
King at Canterbury. But his Jurisdiction though admitted in all the Saxon
Territories, was not received by the British Priests or People in Wales, though
endeavored by many missions from Austin and his Successors, and even by Wars
and Persecutions of the Saxons, upon the Old British Christians, at the
instigation of the New Romish Priests, in one of which near Carleon, Twelve
Hundred of the poor British Monks are said to have been slaughtered, while they
were apart in the Field at their Prayers for the success of the British Army.

With this Account of a new face and state of Persons and of Things both
Natural, Civil, and Religious, established in England, I return to the Period I
left, of the Saxon Heptarchy, which being extinguished by long and various
Revolutions among themselves, made way for the Reign of Ecbert, the first sole
King or Monarch of England about the year 830.

It might have been reasonably expected, that a wise and fortunate Prince, at
the Head of so great a Dominion, and so brave and numerous a People, as the
English after the Expulsion of the Picts and Scots out of his Country into the
rough Northern Parts, and of the Britains into the North-west Corners of the
Island, should not only have enjoyed the Fruits of Peace and Quiet, but left
much Felicity as well as greatness, to many succeeding Generations, both of
Prince and People. Yet such is the instability of Human Affairs, and the
weakness of their best Conjectures, That Ecbert was hardly warm in his united
Throne, when both he and his Subjects began to be alarmed and perplexed at the
approach of new and unknown Enemies; and this Island exposed to New Invasions.

About this time, a mighty Swarm of the Old Northern Hive, who had possessed
the Seats about the Baltic (almost deserted by such numbers of Goths, Vandals
and Saxons, as had issued out of them some Centuries before) began, under the
Names of Danes and Normans, to infest at first the Sea, and at length the Lands
of the Belgic, Gallick, and British Shores, filling all where they came, with
Slaughters, Spoils, and Devastations. The Normans first overrun the Belgic
Provinces upon the Mouth of the Rhine, and gave them new Names of Holland and
Zealand to those parts adjacent to the Sea: Afterward they sailed with mighty
Numbers into the Mouth of the Sean, and with great fierceness subdued that
Northern part of France, which from them first received, and ever since
retained the Name of Normandy, and became the State of a great Norman Duke, and
his Successors for several Generations.

In the mean time, the Danes began their Inroads and furious Invasions upon the
Coasts of England, with mighty numbers of Ships, full of fierce and barbarous
People, sometimes entering the Thames, sometimes the Humber, other times
Coasting as far as Exeter, Landing wherever they found the Shores unguarded,
filling all with Ravage, Slaughter, Spoil, and Devastations of the Country;
where they found any strong Opposition, retiring to their Ships, sailing home
laden with Spoil; and by such encouragements, giving Life to new Expeditions
the next Season of the Year. The bravest Blood of the English had been
exhausted in their own Civil Wars, during the Contentions of the Heptarchy;
since those ended, the rest were grown slothful with Peace and with Luxury,
softened with new Devotions of their Priests and their Monks, with Pennances,
and Pilgrimages, and great numbers running into Cloisters, and grown as unequal
a Match now for the Danes, as the British had been for the Saxons before. Yet
this Century passed not without many various Successes between the two Nations;
many Victories and many Defeats on both sides, so that twelve Battles are said
to have been Fought between them in one Year. The Danes divided their Force
into several Camps, removed them from one part of the Country to another, as
they were forced by necessity of Provisions, or invited by hopes of new Spoils,
or the weakness and divisions of the English: At length, fortified Posts and
Passages, built Castles for defense of Borders, one against the other, which
gave the beginning to those numerous Forts and Castles that were scattered over
the whole Country, and lasted so long, as to remain many of them, to this very
Age. The English sometimes repulsed these Invasions, sometimes purchased the
Safety of their Provinces by great Sums of Money, which occasioned great
Exactions of their Kings upon the People, and that great Discontents; While the
Danes increasing still, by new Supplies of Numbers and Force, began to mingle
among the Inhabitants of those parts they had subdued, made Truces and
Treaties, and thereupon grew to live more peaceably under the Laws and
Government of the English Kings. Alfred, to prevent the danger of New
Invasions, began to Build Ships for the Defense of his Coasts, and Edgar a
Prince of great Wisdom and Felicity in his Reign, applying all his thoughts to
the increase and greatness of his Naval Forces, as the true strength and safety
of his Kingdom, raised them to that height both of Numbers and Force, and
disposed them with that Order, for the Guard of the Seas round the whole
Island, as proved not only sufficient to secure his own Coasts from any new
Invasions, but the Seas themselves from the Rovers and Spoilers of those
Northern Nations, who had so long infested them: So that all Traders were glad
to come under his Protection. Which gave a rise to that Right, so long claimed
by the Crown of England to the Dominion of the Seas, about the year 960.

But these provisions for the safety of the Kingdom, began to decline with the
Life of Edgar, and neglected in the succeeding Reigns, made way for new
Expeditions of the Danes, who exacted new Tribute from the Kings, and Spoils
from the Subjects, till Ethelred compounding with them for his own Safety, and
their peaceable living in England, and fortifying himself by an Alliance with
Richard Duke of Normandy, laid a design for the general Massacre of the Danes,
spread abroad and living peaceably throughout the Realm, which was carried on
with that secrecy and concurrence of all the English, that it was executed upon
one day, and the whole Nation of the Danes massacred in England about the year
1002.

This cruel and perfidious Massacre, of so many Thousands, instead of ending
the long miseries of this Kingdom from the Violences, Invasions and Intrusions
of the Danes, made way for new and greater Calamities than before: For Swane
King of Denmark, exasperated by the Slaughter of his Nation here, and among
them of his own Sister, and animated by the Successes of so many private
Expeditions; soon after landed with great Forces, formed several Camps of Danes
in several parts of England, filled all with Spoil and Slaughter, forced
Ethelred to fly for Relief into Normandy; and though he returned again, yet
being a weak and cruel Prince, and thereby ill beloved, and ill obeyed by his
Subjects, he never recovered Strength enough to oppose the Forces and Numbers
of the Danes, to whom many of the English Nobles, as well as Commoners, had in
his absence submitted.

Swane died before he could atchieve this Adventure, but left his Son Canute in
a Course of such prosperous Fortunes, and the English so broken or divided,
that coming out of Denmark with new Forces in two hundred Ships, he reduced
Edmund Son of Ethelred, first to a Division of the whole Kingdom between them,
and after his untimely Death, was by the whole Nobility of the Realm
acknowledged and received for King of England. This fierce Prince cut off some
of the Royal Line, and forced others into Exile, Reigned long, and left the
Crown for two Successions to his Danish Race, who all swore to Govern the Realm
by the Laws which had been established, or rather digested by Edward the First,
and Edgar, out of the Old Saxon Customs and Constitutions. But Hardecaute, last
of the Danish Kings dying suddenly at a Feast in the year 1042. left the Race
so hated, by the Imposition and Exaction of several Tributes upon his People,
that Edward surnamed the Confessor, and Grandson to Edgar, coming out of
Normandy, where he had been long protected, found an easy accession to the
Crown, by the general Concurrence, both of Nobles and People, and with great
Applause restored the Saxon Race in the year 1043.

Thus expired, not only the Dominion, but all Attempts or Invasions of the
Danes in England; which though continued and often renewed, with mighty
Numbers, for above two hundred years, yet left no change of Laws, Customs,
Language, or Religion, nor other Traces of their Establishments here, besides
the many Castles they built, and many Families they left behind them, who after
the Accession of Edward the Confessor to the Crown, wholly submitting to his
Government, and peaceably inhabiting, came to incorporate and make a part of
the English Nation without any distinction.

Edward the Confessor Reigned long, reduced the Laws of Edward, Alfred, and
Edgar's Reigns into more Form and Order, and governed by them. His Wars were
successful both in Scotland and Wales, though managed by his Leaders, and
without his presence. But being a Prince of a soft and easy Nature, he gave
way to the growing Power and Arrogance of Earl Godwin, and his Sons, who had
been the chief Instruments of advancing him to the Throne, upon the Condition
of Marrying Earl Godwin's Daughter. After he was settled in the Kingdom, either
upon gratitude and inclination to the People and Customs of a Country where he
had lived long, and been well received when he was banished from his own: He
invited many of his Norman Friends into England, employed them in his greatest
Offices either of Church or State, and upon some quarrels between them and the
English, expressed too much partiality to the Normans: This gave Godwin and his
Son Harold, occasion or pretense of raising and heading great Discontents of
the English against the Norman Favorites, and at last Insurrections against the
King; who soft in his Nature, devout in his temper, and now declined in his
Age, endeavored rather to appease these troubles by Articles than by Arms, and
thereby left Harold too powerful for a Subject, and aspiring to the Crown.
Edward had no Children; and though he seemed desirous to leave the Crown to his
Nephew, yet distrusting his weakness to defend it against so powerful a Rival,
it does not appear, or is not agreed among Authors, whether he made any
disposition of it at his Death or no, or whether any such at least, as was
afterward pretended.

Harald alleged, that he was appointed by Edward the Confessor to succeed him,
was believed by some, and allowed by more, who followed his Power rather than
his Right, and was immediately after the King's Death, elected or admitted to
the Crown.

His first trouble was from his own Brother, who being the Elder, had obtained
assistance from Norway, to set up a Title or Pretense to the Kingdom, though he
could have no other, but that his Brother had usurped it. Harald having marched
into the North, overthrown his Brother and his Army of Strangers or
Discontents, with great slaughter at Stamford, was suddenly recalled by a more
dangerous and fatal Storm from the South. For William Duke of Normandy surnamed
the Conqueror, was landed at Hastings with a mighty Army of stout Norman
Soldiers, to pursue a Right he pretended to the Succession of the Crown after
the Death of Edward. What this was, is but obscurely proved or defended. But
the pretext was, that Edward had by Testament left him Successor of the Crown;
and that Harald while he was last in Normandy, had likewise assured him of his
Assistance to advance him to the Kingdom upon the Death of the King; and the
Duke therefore sent to put him in mind of that Engagement. But Harald was in
possession, and admitted neither of these Claims, resolved to defend well what
he had gotten ill, since the apparent Right was in Edgar Atheling descended
from the true Saxon Race, and from a Brother of Edward the Confessor. To decide
these Disputes, between the two powerful Pretenders (while the just Right lay
unregarded for want of Force to support it) a fierce and bloody Battle was
Fought near Hastings, which continued for a whole day, with great Bravery and
Slaughter on both sides; but ended with the Death of Harald, most of the
bravest Captains, and above Sixty Thousand Soldiers of the English Nation, who
resolved to defend a Domestic Usurper against a Foreign Invader; and by the
loss of their Lives, made easy way for the undisputed Succession of William
the Conqueror, to the Crown of England about the year 1066. or as some account,
1068.

This Norman Prince was Natural Son of Robert the Sixth Duke of Normandy, by
Arlette, a very Beautiful Virgin of Falaize, with whom he fell in Love, as she
stood gazing at her Door, whilst he passed through that Town: So that he was
the Issue of a sudden and strong Inclination, like a noble Plant, raised in a
hot Bed, which gave it such Force and Vigor, as made it prosper and grow to so
great a Height: Nor is it unlikely that the ancient Heroes derived themselves
from some Gods, to cover the Misfortunes or Follies, the Rapes or Loves of some
fair Maidens, or else the Passions of some frail Wives, who loved a Gallant
better than a Husband: And the force of such Encounters, might have Part in the
Constitution of a young Hero, and give a Natural Vigor, Spirit, and Luster to
the Children, from the Flames wherein they were conceived. It Is certain this
young Conqueror owed his Greatness to his Birth, and his Fortunes to his
personal Merit, from the strength of his Temper and vigor of his Mind: For he
had a Body of Iron, as well as a Heart of Steel; Yet his Intellectuals were at
least equal to his other natural Advantages, and he appears as Wise in his
politic Institutions, as he was Bold in his Enterprises, or Brave and
Fortunate in the Atchievment of his great Adventures.

His Father Robert growing Old, fell into a Fit of Devotion, frequent enough in
that Age; which made him resolve upon a Visit to the holy Sepulcher: His Nobles
used all Arguments they could to dissuade him, but chiefly from the want of
lawful Issue, and the Competition like to arise upon his Death, between several
great Pretenders, which might prove dangerous to his Country, and perhaps fatal
to the Norman State. But he persisted in the Design of his Journey, and told
them he had a young Son, that he believed certainly to be his own, and of whose
Person and Disposition he had great Hopes, and therefore resolved to leave him
his Successor in the Duchy; recommended him to their Care and Loyalty, and
appointed the King of France to be his Guardian, and the Duke of Britain his
Governor, who was one of the fairest Pretenders to the Succession of that
Duchy, after the failing of Robert's Line; An unusual Strain or Testimony of
the good Faith and Meaning of that Age, where Honor was so much more in
Request than Interest, that such a Prince could trust a Son of reproached Birth
and disputed Right, to a powerful Neighbor, the likeliest to Invade him, and
to a Pretender that stood the fairest to contest his Title.

The Prince was not above Nine or Ten Years Old, when Duke Robert caused his
Nobles and Chief Norman Subjects, to Swear Fealty to him, and afterward
carried him to do Homage to Henry the First, King of France, for the Duchy of
Normandy, according to the Custom of the former Dukes, since their first
Accords with that. Crown, after their Conquests and Establishments in that Part
of France, which was before called Neustry, and took the Name of Normandy from
those fierce Invaders: These coming from the Coasts of Norway in two several
Expeditions, with mighty Numbers of a Brave, but Barbarous People, had about
Two Hundred Years before, first ravaged the Coasts of Holland and Flanders,
then entered the Mouth of the Sein, subjected the Country by unresisted Arms,
then taking the City of Rouen, Capital of that Province, upon Composition, and
made Inroads from thence into the Isle of France, and near Paris it self, with
such Fury and Success, that the King of France embroiled then at home, thought
fit to tame these Lions, rather than longer to oppose them, and threw them,
that noble and fruitful Morsel of Normandy, to assuage their Hunger, yielding
it up wholly to their Leader Roll, upon Conditions of his turning Christian,
and his holding that Duchy from the Crown of France, for him and his
Successors.

After these Ceremonies were past of the Homages received in Normandy, and
given in France; the old Duke Robert, delivered his young Son himself into the
Hands and Tutelage of the French King, upon the Confidence of great Services he
had formerly done him, in Disputes about the Crown; and immediately after these
Transactions, began his Voyage into Asia, where he lived not long, and left his
Son to be the Founder of his own Fortunes, rather than Heir of his Fathers;
which he found exposed to all sorts of Dangers from the tenderness of his Age,
the reproach of his Birth, a suspected Guardian, a disputed Title, and a
distracted State.

After the News of Duke Robert's Decease, the Nobles of Normandy by him
entrusted with the Government during his Sons Minority, found themselves soon
involved in many Difficulties, by the open Factions of some Nobles, who envied
their Greatness; and by the private Practices of others, who being derived from
some of the former Dukes, resolved to set up their Pretenses to the Succession,
but masqued their Designs at first, and herded with the common Discontents,
against the present Administration. The Governors, faithful to the Trust
reposed in them by the Father, and the Fealty they had sworn to the Son,
esteemed the Presence of the young Prince necessary to support their Authority
and his Title, and thereupon prevailed with the King of France, to send him
into Normandy; which he did accordingly, with great Honor to himself, and
Kindness to the young Duke, as well as Satisfaction to all his Loyal Subjects;
but to the Disappointment of those, who pretended their Discontents rather
against the Governors, than the Succession.

No Prince ever came so early into the Cares and Thorns of a Crown, nor felt
them longer, engaged in Difficulties and Toils, in Hardships and Dangers; His
Life exposed to the Arms of Enemies, the Plots of Assassins: His Reign
embroiled by the Revolts of his Subjects, the Invasions of his Neighbors; and
his whole Life, though very long, spent in the necessary and dangerous Defense
of his own Title and Dominion, or in the ambitious Designs of acquiring
greater: Yet none ever surmounted all with more Constancy of Mind, Prudence of
Conduct, and Felicity of Fortune; By all which, he seems born to have been
rather a great Prince, than a happy Man.

His first Contests and Dangers, arose from the declared Competition of the
Pretenders to the Succession of the Duchy, who favored by the Defects of his
Birth, and grounding their Title upon their own legitimate Descent; found so
many Followers at home, and such Assistance from some neighboring Princes,
that agreeing together against the present Possessor, though disputing among
themselves upon their own Rights, they raised great Forces, and constrained the
young Duke to appear, not only at the Head of his Counsels, but of his Armies
too, by that time he was full seventeen Years old.

These civil Wars continued long with many various Successes, bloody
Encounters, defeating and recruiting of Troops, surprising, sacking, besieging,
relieving of Towns, and wasting of Countries, till at last, the Duke by his
Vigilance, Prudence, Courage, and Industry, subdued totally, not only the
Forces but the Hearts of all his Competitors and Enemies at home, and forced
them to quit both Normandy and France, and seek new Fortunes or at least
Protection in Italy, under the Banners and Service of those Northern Princes,
who had first by assisting their Friends, and then pursuing their own fortunes,
made themselves Masters of Apulia, Calabria, and Sicily. So great was the
Prowess and Conduct of those brave Norman Adventurers, that from Pruhans, as
the French called them, because they could not stay at home, but left their own
Country to seek Room in foreign and distant Regions, they became Possessors and
Sovereigns, in less than two hundred Years, of one noble Duchy in France, a
great Kingdom in the best Parts of Italy, and a greater yet, and more renowned
in the British Isle, and thereby exchanged the savage Woods and barren
Mountains of Norway, for three of the fruitfullest, fairest, and most pleasant
Countries in the Western Parts of Europe, and which had been observed both
before and since, to produce the bravest Bodies and Courages of any Provinces
among their Neighbor Nations.

The Defeats and final Overthrow of Competitors at home, gave Duke William no
long Quiet, for another appeared from abroad, more dangerous than any of the
former: This was Martel Earl of Anjou, that was not only a Prince of great
Possessions, but yet more formidable, by the Alliance and Assistance of the
King of France, who jealous of the Norman Greatness, thought it both wise and
just to prevent its further Growth, and abate a Neighbor's Power, before it
grew too high, and perhaps out of his Reach, by the Conduct, Ambition, and
Fortune of such an aspiring Prince.

To this end, and upon small Pretenses (which never fail a strong Invader) he
encouraged, if not set on foot the Earl of Anjou's Pretensions to the Duchy of
Normandy, gave him first his Countenance and Assistance, to justfie his Claim
and pursue it by Arms, but by degrees, engaged in an open and declared War
against the Duke; this he prosecuted with much Passion and Violence, employing
in it not only all the Forces he could raise, but his own Person to command
them, attended by many, the chief Nobles of his Kingdom, and many great Persons
of his Allies.

Duke William lost nothing of his Temper or Courage upon the Approaches of so
great a Storm, but prepared first for his Defense, till flesht with Success in
many Encounters, and trusting to the Bravery and Affections of his Army, though
much inferior to the French, he brought the Quarrel to the Decision of two
fierce Battles in two pitched Fields: The first ended in an entire Victory on
the Duke's side, with the Slaughter of three Parts of his Enemies, amounting to
above thirty thousand Men: This Loss however rather enraged than discouraged
the King of France, who gave himself or his Enemies no Quiet, till he engaged
the Normans in a second Battle, with greater Forces and Rage on both sides, but
with the same Success the former had ended. In this Field the King of France
lost the Flower of his Army, the greatest part of his Nobles, and hardly
escaped himself in Person. But that little availed this unfortunate Prince, who
was so sensible of the Loss, and as he thought, dishonor received by so
unequal a Match, that he had not the Heart to survive it long, but died of
Grief, and thereby gave an end to this War, and left Duke William a calm and
peaceable Reign, till he disturbed his own and his Neighbors Quiet, by new and
greater Adventures. But to discover their Causes, and judge better of the
Events, we must have recourse to the Accidents of the former Reigns, both in
England and Normandy, and the great Commerce and Intelligences that were
thereby grown, for many years past, between these two Courts and Nations.

Edward, for his Piety, surnamed the Confessor, the last King of the Saxon Race
in England, had by the Persecution of his Enemies under the Reign of
Harde-Cnute the Dane, been forced to leave England, and seek shelter in
Normandy, where he was kindly received, nobly entertained by the Duke, lived
long there with many English; who adhered to his Right, followed his Fortunes,
and shared in the Causes and Reliefs of his Banishment; some found Employments,
others Alliances, All, favor and kind reception in Normandy. These mutual good
Offices, produced so much kindness between the Givers and Receivers, that it is
by some Writers reported, King Edward during his Residence in the Norman Court,
promised Duke Robert, that in case he recovered the Kingdom of England, and
died without Issue, He would leave him the Crown. The first happening, and
Edward restored by the Power of Earl Godwin, or rather the general Discontents
of the English against the Danish Race and Government; It Is certain, King
Edward after his Restoration, or rather first Accession to the Crown, ever
appeared more favorable and partial to the Normans, than was well resented by
his English Subjects in general; but Earl Godwin and his Son Harold were so
offended, that they made it the Cause or Pretense of a dangerous Insurrection,
and were forced upon the ill Success thereof, to leave the Kingdom, and fly
into Flanders, though after restored and received by the King, rather by Force
than any free and willing Consent.

Duke William after the end of his Wars with France, had turned his Thoughts to
the common Arts and Entertainments of Peace, regulating the Abuses of his
State, and the Disorders introduced by a long Course of Wars and Violence,
adorning his Palaces and Houses of Pleasure, building Churches and Abbeys, and
endowing them with great Bounty and Piety: After which he made a Journey into
England, where he was received and entertained by King Edward, with the same
Kindness himself had found in the Norman Court; for which, like a good Prince,
he was much pleased to make this Return of Gratitude as well as Justice. In
this Visit, it is said by some Authors, that the Duke gained so far upon the
Esteem and Kindness of the King, that he then renewed to the Son in England,
the promise he had formerly made the Father in Normandy, of leaving him the
Crown by Testament, in case he died without Issue.

Some time after the Duke's return, Harold Son to Earl Godwin, and Heir of his
great Possessions and Dependances in England, was forced by a Storm (as he at
least pretended) upon the Coasts of Normandy; and to refresh himself after the
Toils and Dangers of his Sea Voyage, went first to the Norman Court, and after
some stay there, to that of France; and was in both entertained like a Person,
known to be of so great Consideration and Power in England. But his last Visit
at Paris was thought designed only to cover the true Intention of his first in
Normandy; Where he engaged to assist that Duke with all his Friends and Force
in his Claim to the Crown of England upon King Edward's Death; which happening
not long after, William claimed the Crown by virtue of a Testament from that
King, and of an Engagement from Harold: But he on the contrary, denied any such
Testament from the deceased Prince, alleged an Appointment made by him at his
Death for Harold to succeed him, disowned any Promise made in Favor of the
Duke, and making the best use of the Credit and Authority gained by his Father
and himself, in a crasie and diseased State, during the soft Reign, of a weak
though pious King; Harold set up bodly for himself, without any respect of
Right, beyond the Peoples submission (interpreted for their Consent) and was
Elected King, by those Nobles and Commons of his Friends, or indifferent
Persons, who assembled at his Coronation, leaving to Edgar Atheling an
undoubted, but yet unregarded Right of Succession; and to William, a disputed
Plea, from the alleged Testament of the deceased King.

The Duke, fond of those ambitious Hopes he had framed early, and nourished
long, and spighted at the perfidious dealing of Harold toward him, and his
Insolence toward the English Nation, in seizing the Crown and Government,
against all Justice, or so much as Pretense of Right (which is commonly made
use of to cover the most lawless Actions) assembles his Estates of Normandy,
exposes to them his Claim to England, the Wrong done him by Harold, his
Resolutions of prosecuting both with his utmost Power: The Glory as well as
Justice of the Enterprise; The hopes of Success from his own Right, and the
hatred in England of the Usurper, as well as the Friends and Intelligences he
had in that Kingdom; The greatness of Spoils and Possessions, by the Conquest
of his Enemies, and the Share he intended his Friends and Followers, according
to each Man's Merit, and Contribution toward the Advancement of his Designs.

Though the generality of the Normans in this Assembly, were not at first very
much moved by these Discourses, as either doubting the Right or Success of so
hazardous an Adventure; yet they could not discourage what they were unwilling
to promote, since they found the Prince had it so much at Heart; who prevailed
with several of the greatest Bishops and Nobles of Normandy, to make him a
voluntary Offer of what Moneys, Men, and Ships, they would each of them furnish
toward this Enterprise, as well as of their own Personal Attendance upon him,
in so noble and just a Design.

This free and magnanimous Offer of the greatest among them, in some Degree
spirited not only the rest of the Assembly, but had much Influence upon the
People in general, who grew Confident of the Success: from the Greatness and
Boldness of the Undertakers, so as they fell into Emulation, who should Engage
soonest, and Contribute furthest upon this Occasion.

The Duke, assisted to his Expectation by his Subjects, began to practice upon
the Hopes and Ambition of his Neighbors, who weary of the long Quiet they had
lived in at home, since the Part they had taken in the French and Norman Wars,
begun to grow fond of some new Action, and to look out for new Adventures.

The Duke had gained and deserved so high Esteem and general Reputation by the
wise Conduct of his Government, both in Peace and in War, by his Justice and
Bounty, his Valor and his Clemency, that he was renowned, not only among his
Subjects and his Neighbors, but in the remoter Regions of Germany and Italy;
and found a Concurrence in this Design, from many Princes his Friends, and some
who had been his greatest Enemies; He was favored and assisted with Money or
with Soldiers, by the Dukes of Britain and of Brabant, the Counts of Bologne
and Flanders, and his ancient Competitor the Earl of Anjou: By many Princes of
France, the most considered in that Court, as the Duke of Orleans, Earls of
Poitou and Maine, excited by the Honor of the Enterprise, or Fame of the
Leader, at a time when the Infancy of their King gave them no hopes of Action
at home, and left that Crown unconcerned in what passed abroad. The Emperor
sent some choice Troops, and experienced Commanders to serve in this
Expedition; and the Pope, induced by the Fame of this Duke's great Virtues, and
Piety in the whole Course of his Reign, which had now lasted above Forty years,
sent him a Banner he had blessed with several Relics; and thereby was
esteemed, according to the Devotion of those Times, to have justified his
Title, and even sanctified his Arms.

With all these Advantages this brave Duke began and finished his mighty
Preparations, by a general Concurrence of his own Nobles and Subjects, and a
Confluence of most of the bold adventurous Spirits in his Neighbor Provinces,
led by the Desires of Glory or of Gains; The Princes, trusted his Faith and his
Promises which he had never forfeited: The Knights and Soldiers, relied upon
his Valor and his Fortune, which had never failed in the long and happy course
of his Reign.

What the Number was of the Army he brought over into England, is not
distinctly related, or well agreed; but must be concluded to have been very
great, by that of the Ships wherein they were imbarqued, which were between
Eight and Nine Hundred: Besides, they were all chosen and brave Troops,
excellently Disciplined, Commanded by gallant Officers, strongly united by the
Love of their Prince, and encouraged by the common hatred of Harold his Enemy,
both at home and abroad: A known Usurper, cruel in his Nature, of Danish
Extraction, and thereby ungrateful to the English; a Hater of his own Blood,
and who had never triumphed but over his own Brother; and by a bloody Victory
at Stamford, had lost the bravest of his Troops, as he had done before the
Hearts of his Subjects.

The Duke Landed his Army at Hastings in Sussex, about the beginning of October;
and expecting a general Submission of the English to his Right and Title
(pretended from the Testament of Edward the Confessor) or the Desertion of
Harold (as an Usurper) by his own Army; He made at first no show of invading a
Hostile Country, but rather of encamping in his own. Forbidding all injuries
to any of the Inhabitants; and all Spoil of the Country about him: And so
continued with his whole Army, in a quiet and peaceable manner for about a
Fortnight, either to refresh his Troops, or to expect how his Claim to the
Crown, and Arrival upon it, would be received in England.

But after this Time expired, he was soon roused by the Approach of Harold, who
returned from the Defeat of his Brother, and his Danish Assistants, with all
the Forces he had employed in that Expedition, and all he could invite or
collect out of the Country as he passed. The first were standing Troops,
Numerous and Brave, which he kept for the defense of his Person and Title,
knowing they were both generally hated in England. The last were ill
disciplined, and worse affected, and served only to increase the number of his
Army, which was very great.

Upon approach of his Enemies he sent Spies into the Norman Camp, who were
taken, and courteously used by the Duke; carried through all his Troops, showed
their Discipline and Disposal, and sent back with Rewards. At their return they
told Harold, that the Normans looked rather like an Army of Priests than of
Soldiers, by their great Silence and Order in their Camp, as well as by their
Faces being all shaved.

It Is said the Duke before the Battle, sent an Offer to Harold, to decide the
Quarrel between them by single Combat, and thereby spare their Subjects Blood:
Which Harold refused, and said he would leave it to God to determine. Upon
which, his Brother desired him, that he would not be present at the Battle,
because he had formerly Sworn to Duke William to assist his Title upon King
Edward's Death; and rather leave it to them, who had a juster Cause; and should
Fight only for Defense of their Country, and without Breach of Oath. But the
Courage of Harold was more than his Conscience, and so both parts disposed
their Armies for a pitched Battle next Morning: After the English had passed
the Night in Songs and Feasting, and the Normans in much Devotion.

The Fight began with great Fury, and equal Bravery as well as Order on both
sides. The English were cruelly gauled by thick Showers of Arrows from the
Norman long Bows, before the Battle joined; which was a Weapon then unused in
England, and thereby the more surprising, by Wounds coming from Enemies so far
out of reach, and not suddenly to be revenged. But when they came up to close
Fight, the Normans were hewed down by the English Bills, which of all Weapons
gives the most ghastly and deplorable Wounds. Besides, their Points were so
strong and so close together that no Charges of the Norman Horse could break
the English Ranks, though the Duke assaulted them so often, and with so great
Bravery, that he had three Horses killed under him in the Attempt. But finding
them continue firm. He at length by a Signal, caused a sudden Flight to be
feigned by his Normans that were most advanced: Upon which, the English easily
deceived by their own Courage as well as Hopes, began such an eager Pursuit, as
by it they dissolved their Ranks that had been otherwise impenetrable. Upon
this Incident, before expected, and soon discovered by the Duke, and upon
another Signal given, the Normans returned with greater Fury than before; broke
into the disordered Body of the English; routed and pursued them to a rising
Ground, where their broken Forces made a Stand, fell again into Order, and
encouraged by the Speeches, but more by the brave Example of Harold, they
renewed the Fight, and made a mighty Slaughter of the Normans, as they
endeavored to force them against the disadvantage of the Hill which they
defended.

The Fierceness and Obstinacy of this memorable Battle, was often renewed by
the Courage of the Leaders* wherever that of the Soldiers began to faint;
till the Normans leaving the Assault of the Hill, too obstinately defended, and
keeping a little distance, fell again to their Arrows, with one of which,
Harold was shot quite through the Head, and fell to the Ground: And by his
Death gave the Victory and the Field to the Normans, which had hitherto
continued doubtful on both sides; and seemed thus far to have been Fought with
equal Courage and with equal Loss. But the Flight of the English upon Harold's
Fall, soon determined it, and was followed by a long and bloody pursuit of the
Normans, which continued till Night; and left mighty Numbers of the English
slain in their Flight, that had been safe in the Battle; and the rest of them
wholly dispersed, though covered by the Night: So different are the effects of
Courage and of Fear, and so Just the Rewards of both; the first, which seeks
dangers, often avoids them; the other, often runs into them, by endeavoring to
escape them: Much greater numbers falling in all Battles, by the pursuit of
those that fly, than by the Slaughter of those that Fight.

Nothing seems to show the greatness of England, so much at this time, as that
Harold should be able to assemble so mighty an Army, to oppose this Invasion:
And find above Threescore Thousand Men, Brave enough, not only to Fight, but to
lose their Lives in his defense: For so many are agreed to have been slain of
the English at this Battle of Hastings; where he lost his Crown and his Life
together, and left the Field with the Kingdom, to this brave Norman Conqueror.
This was the Man, These the Forces, and such the Circumstances that contributed
to so famous an Enterprise, by which the Fate of England was determined, in or
about the Year 1066.

The Duke after this famous Victory, resolved not to lose the Fruits and
Advantages he had thereby gained, (which is often done) for want of Speed or
Vigor in the Prosecution, wherein Celerity is sometimes of more Consequence
than Force. Therefore, after the Pursuit of his broken Enemies, and a short
Refreshment of his own Army; He began immediately his March toward London,
where was all the Strength then left in the Kingdom, believing if he could be
Master of the Head, the rest of the Body would follow, without more Struggle or
Resistance.

In his March, he is said to have exercised much Cruelty, toward all he found
in Arms, with great Rigor and Oppression upon the other Inhabitants, and Spoil
of the Countries where he passed, till entering into a Woody Part of Kent, and
advancing with his Vanguard before the rest of his Army; he found himself
almost environed with mighty Numbers of the Kentish Men, who had concealed
themselves in the Wood by carrying every Man a great Bough of a Tree, like a
Shield in his Hand. But when they saw the Norman Troops, and the Duke at the
Head of them, within their Danger, they began on a sudden to march like a
moving Wood, till approaching their Enemies, they threw down their Boughs, and
discovered on all Sides a Multitude of brave armed Men, ready to charge the
Normans that stood surprised and amazed at the Strangeness of the Sight, which
appeared as if a Wood had been, by some Enchantment, transformed into an Army:
But the Kentish Men approaching, made a Halt, and sent the Abbot of St.
Austins, to tell the Duke, that all the Men of that Province were there
assembled to defend their Country and their Liberties, or to sell their Lives
as dear as they could; that if he would swear to preserve them in those ancient
Laws and Customs, under which they and their Ancestors had so long lived; they
were all ready to lay down their Arms, and become his Subjects; if not, he must
prepare to fight with Men that had resolved to lose their Lives rather than
their Liberties and Laws. The Duke finding he was too far advanced to join the
Body of his Army before he engaged, and unwilling to venture all his Fortunes
and Hopes against such numerous Bands as these appeared, and of so desperate
Men, granted to all the Inhabitants of the Province of Kent, the Preservation
and free Enjoyment of all their ancient Laws and Customs under the Saxon
Reigns; swore the Observance of his Grant, received their Homage, and so
pursued his March. This is represented as a forced Prelude to a subsequent
voluntary Act of this Prince, whereby he made or confirmed the same Concession,
in general to all the rest of the Kingdom. And though this Adventure of the
Kentish Men be not recorded with great Evidence of Truth or Agreement of
Circumstances or of Time (for some Writers place it before his first Arrival at
London, others after, and upon an Expedition to reduce the Castle of Dover) yet
it is related by so many Authors, and is so generally received by vulgar
Tradition, that it seems not to be omitted: But when, or however it happened,
or whether at all or no, is not material to the History of this Prince, or to
the following Actions or Institutions of his Reign.

In the City of London, besides the great Numbers and Riches of the
Inhabitants, were retired most of the great Nobles of the Kingdom, both
Ecclesiastical and Secular, who had not been engaged in Action of either Side,
and attended, what would be the Issue of this strong and violent Convulsion of
the State. Upon Decision of the last Battle, they all consulted together with
the Citizens, what was best to be advised and done for their common Interest
and Safety, as well as of the whole Kingdom, which was like to run their Fate,
by following their Example: Many of the secular Nobles were for collecting what
Forces they could, and making a stand, either in the Field or in the Town, and
thereby trying their Fortunes, or at the worst making Conditions, for they
could not bear, that their great Possessions and Lands should lie at the Mercy
of a Prince, whose Will might be as boundless as his Power, and who had so
great a Train, to be rewarded at their Cost, and by the Spoils, if he pleased
of the whole Kingdom.

The Citizens feared the hostile Entrance of an incensed Army, upon a weak
Resistance, and the sudden Loss of their Possessions, which consisting chiefly
in Movables, might be seized in a Day, and dissipated, past any Recovery by
the very Grace of the Prince, or succeeding Composition between him and the
rest of the Kingdom: They thought no Forces could be collected, either in Time
upon so sudden an Approach, or with Strength enough to make Opposition in a
Body that had lost so much Blood, and without a Head to command them, or upon
any Treaty to manage their common Interests to the best Advantage, and so they
were disposed to submit to what they esteemed the Fate of the Kingdom: The
Archbishops, Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy were a sort of State apart,
within the State it self, having a Jurisdiction independent (as they pretended,
and were usually allowed in that Age) upon the secular Power; they held their
Lands and Possessions in the Kingdom, by another Tenure than the Laiety
pretended, and feared not to lose them under any Prince that was a Christian,
which made them more indifferent of what Race, or by what Title he held the
Crown, and so more easy to fall in with the Stream of any Changes or new
Revolutions: Besides, they were possessed with the Fame of this Prince's Piety,
and the Opinion of his Right having been determined by the Pope's approving and
assisting it with his Benediction: They thought, as well as the Citizens, that
this Torrent was not to be resisted, that a faint and fruitless Opposition
would but exasperate the Duke, and make him (...) continue as well as begin his
Reign, like a Conqueror, and therefore esteemed the wisest Part, was to
acknowledge his Right, and thereby tempt or persuade him into a safer and easier
Form of Government, both for himself and his Subjects, as a just and lawful
King.

The Clergy was in very great Authority at this Time, and among all sorts of
People in the Kingdom, having enjoyed and exercised it here, during the whole
Course of the Saxon Reigns after those Kings became Christians in this Island;
nor could any other Authority rise so high, and spread so far, as growing from
so many Roots: They were allowed to be the Guides and Instructors of Mankind in
all spiritual Worship and Divine Service, and even the Dispencers of those
Graces and Forfeitures upon which depended the Rewards or Punishments of a
future State; which being greater and longer than those of this Life, gave them
more Influence upon the Minds of Men, than any secular Jurisdiction that can
extend no further: They had mighty Possessions in Lands throughout the Kingdom,
as well as other Riches, from the Bounty of pious Princes, of devout and
innocent People, and from many others, who thought to expiate Crimes, or cover
ill Lives by these kinds of Donation to the Church. These Possessions were
esteemed sacred, and, as much went into this Stock every Age, so nothing ever
went out; and all the Lands in the Kingdom might in the Course of Ages, have
held of the Church; if this Current had not been stopped by the Statute of
Mortmain in the Time of Edward the first. It Is recorded, that of sixty two
thousand Knights Fees that were reckoned in England during the Reign of this
first Norman King, there were in that of King John twenty eight thousand in the
Hands of the Church. This gave the Clergy (by the Dependances of those that
held under them in so great Numbers) a secular Power annexed to their
Ecclesiastical Authority: They had besides, all the little Learning which was
in those ignorant Ages, and passes for Wisdom among those who want both, gives
a Faculty, at least of discoursing, though perhaps not of judging better than
others, and gains more Attention, and easier Applause from vulgar Auditors:
Lastly, they were united more than any other State upon one common Bottom, and
in pursuit of one common Interest, which was always pretended to be the
Greatness of the holy Church, but indeed was their own, and the Honors, Power,
and Riches of the Churchmen, rather than of the Church. By these
Circumstances, and the Advantage of such a complicated Strength, the Clergy
came to such an Authority, that they were Arbiters, if not of all Affairs, at
least of all Contests in the Kingdom, and turned the Balance which way soever
they fell in, were still applied to by the weaker, and often by the unjuster
Side; had the chief Sway, and were the chiefest Instruments in all those many
Revolutions of State, irregular Successions, and even Usurpations of the Crown
that happened between the Time of the Conquest, and the Reign of Henry the
third; which may easily be observed and cannot easily be wondered at by all who
read the Story of those Reigns, and consider what has been said upon this
Subject, important enough to excuse this Digression.

But to return to our Conqueror, upon his March to London, and the
Consultations there how to receive him. The Opinions and Councils of the
Bishops and Ecclesiastics easily prevailed, and seem to have had more Reason,
as well as Authority, than the rest: So it was unanimously resolved, not only
to submit to a Power they could not oppose, but to acknowledge a Title they
would not dispute. The Duke, upon his Approach to the City, was received with
open Gates and open Arms, at least without the Appearance of any Reluctance or
Discontent, any more than of Resistance: He claimed the Crown at his Arrival,
by the Testament of King Edward the Confessor, without any mention of Conquest,
which was infinitely grateful to all the Nobles and Commons of the Realm,
whether it was a Strain of his own Prudence and good natural Sense, or a
Persuasion of those English, who had either assisted or invited his Invasion,
or Apprehension of so great and brave a People, if offended by the Name of
Conquest, and irritated by the Dangers or Fears of a lawless Arbitrary Power,
to which they had not yet their Hearts or Strength broken enough, easily to
submit.

He was crowned King at Westminster by the Archbishop of York, who with
Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, had been the great Promoters of those
Councils, by which he entered upon so peaceable a Beginning of his Reign. At his
Coronation he took the Oath, usual in the Times, both of the Saxon and Danish
Kings, which was, To protect and defend the Church, to observe the Laws of the
Realm, and to govern his People justly: After which he caused Fealty to be
sworn to him by all the Bishops, Barons, and Nobles, with the Magistrates of
the City, who had assisted or attended at his Coronation, and thereupon found
himself on a sudden settled in a calm and quiet Possession of a Crown he had so
long aspired to, and so lately won by one single, though violent Blow.

This King was about two and Fifty Years old upon his Accession to this Crown,
and is perhaps the only Instance found in Story, either before or since, in
this Island or the rest of the World, that began and achieved any great and
famous Enterprise after that Age: Whether the Decline of Nature leaves not
Vigor enough for such Designs or Actions; or Fortune, like her Sex, have no
Kindness left for old Men, how much soever she favored them when they were
young: But the Talents of Age, which are Prudence and Moderation, learnt best
in the School of Experience, and seldom joined if consistent with the warm
Passions of Youth, were now as necessary to this Prince, for the Conservation
of his Kingdom, as his long industrious Application and bold Execution had been
for acquiring it, and how much he excelled in these Qualities will be seen by
the Sequel of his Reign.

He considered very wisely, that though he had gained the Crown by the
Assistance of foreign Forces, and by the Decision of Arms, yet these might not
always be so prosperous, if too often tried, and the Number or Strength of his
Foreigners, bore no Proportion to those of so brave and populous a Nation, if
they should unite on any Bottom of common Discontents, of Dangers, or of Fears,
and that the Safety and Peace of his new acquired Dominion could be preserved
only by the general Satisfaction and Security of his English Subjects: And this
was his first Care, and was the best provided for by the two first Actions of
his Reign; one was, That as he had claimed the Crown, only from the Testament
of King Edward, and wholly avoided that odious Name of Conquest, so he
expressed upon all Occasions, his Resolution to govern the Kingdom as a legal
Prince, and leave the ancient Laws and Liberties of the English Nation, as they
had before enjoyed them: The other was, that as he drew no Blood but what was
spilt in the Field, so he seized only the Lands and Estates of those who had
been in Arms against him, before his Accession to the Crown or after that Time,
by any Revolt or new Oppositions.

This wise Counsel made a clear and sudden Distinction between those English
that were to feel any ill Effects by this late Revolution, and the rest who
were left out of Danger, and in the same State they enjoyed under the Race of
their former lawful Kings, and so but little sensible of the Change: The
forfeited Estates and Lands were indeed seized with great Severity, but the
greatest Part of the Proprietors were silent in the Grave, having been slain in
the Battle of Hastings, and Pursuit of that Victory, those who remained alive,
being at once despoiled of all their Possessions, were broken in their Hearts,
maimed in their Interest among their Neighbors, and being but few throughout
the Kingdom, in Comparison of those that were safe, their Losses or Complaints
were little regarded by the rest, but like wounded Deer, were deserted, and
even avoided by the Herd.

Upon the Coronation of the King at London, with the Concurrence of Nobles and
People in that City, and his Care in publishing throughout the several
Countries; these two Resolutions concerning the Safety of their Properties and
Laws: All the Inhabitants of both the adjacent and remoter Counties, and of
what Degree soever, not only with universal Consent, submitted to his
Government as to a Decree of Heaven, but most of them began to express, or al
least pretend a common Joy at the Fate of the late Usurper, and the prosperous
Fortunes of the present King.

His next Care was the Satisfaction of those many and brave Adventurers and
Soldiers, who had followed him in this Expedition, which he endeavored to make
with Justice to his Promises, and to their several Merits, as far as the
forfeited Lands and Revenues would reach, or any Treasures or Debts he found
here belonging to the Crown: The Lands of the English Barons who had opposed
him, he divided among the Norman Barons that had attended him; those of the
Commoners among the Soldiers, what Offices were vacant, he supplied with such
as he had not Lands or Money to reward; such of the Normans as he could not
clear Accounts with at present by any of these Ways, he distributed into the
rich and numerous Abbeys of the Kingdom, to be there entertained till new
Employments should fall, or new Forfeitures or new Supplies should come into
the King's Coffers by the large Revenues of the Crown, or the wise Management
of his Treasures, which had always been a Virtue of this Prince, and exercised
in his lower Fortunes, as far as could agree with the Bounty of his Nature,
toward those who deserved it by their Merits or their Services.

The Provision he made for so many poor Normans, by disposing them among the
rich Monasteries to share in their Plenty, seemed at least a temporary
Imposition upon the Clergy, and a Breach of those Immunities they had enjoyed
in the Saxon Reign: For though one chief End of the large Donations made by so
many Princes and pious Subjects to the Church, was intended for charitable
Uses, by Relief of the Poor, and the hospitable Entertainment of Passengers,
Pilgrims, and Strangers, yet this Use was left voluntary, and at the Choice of
those who possessed these Revenues: The Normans sent among them were indeed
Strangers and Poor, but yet the most charitable Monks had little Mind to
relieve them, or if they had, were not willing to receive them within their
Convents, to be, not only Sharers of their Provisions, but Observers of their
Actions; however, they complied at present, with the Desires of the King, or
the Necessity of the Times, yet they generally took it ill of the King, and for
a Diminution of those Immunities, or of that Favor they had enjoyed under
former Reigns: Some thought he had an envious Eye at the vast Riches of the
Clergy; others, that he was jealous of their Power, and suspected their
Affections to his Person and Government, and apprehended as easy a Change
among them, upon the Approach of any new Revolution as they had showed upon the
last, in his own Favor. That for these Reasons he had dispersed his Normans as
so many Guards, or at least as so many Spies among them: Whetever it was, it is
certain this Action bred the first Unkindness of the Clergy toward this King,
and being followed by two other Strains of the same Nature (which will be
observed in their Time) left an Imposition upon him Memory, of Hardship,
Cruelty, Oppression, or Exaction, which he deserved as little as other Princes,
that have a fairer Character in Story and common Opinion. For the Monks having
been the only Writers remaining of those Times, as well as some succeeding
Reigns, have left a Tincture of their Passions upon the Actions of the first
Kings of this Norman Race, and painted their Virtues and Vices in fairer or
fouler Colors, according to the Ideas they had framed of them and their
several Dispositions or Actions in Favor or Prejudice of the Church, that is,
of Ecclesiastical Persons or Privileges: Such an Authority have the Pens of
learned Writers, always claimed and possessed, as to pass the definitive
Sentence upon the Memories of the greatest Princes in the vulgar Opinion of
Posterity. Nor is it evident whether the invidious Name of Conqueror which this
King had so carefully avoided, were entailed upon him by the Flattery of his
Friends or the Malice of his Enemies, among whom, the Monkish Writers seem to
have been the chief and most inveterate.

Whatever Motions were raised upon this Occasion in the Minds of the Clergy,
none appeared in the rest of the Body of the Realm, or Mass of the People, most
were satisfied because they either liked their new King, or hated the last
Usurper; some were indifferent to both, while their Estates and Liberties were
out of Danger, and such who were displeased with either, disguised their
Resentment, or were not taken notice of in the Crowd. All conspired to make so
great a Calm succeed in the Kingdom, as is usual after a great Storm is over;
That the King having passed some Months here in the Cares and for the
Settlement of his new Dominions in England, made a Journey to visit his old in
Normandy about the beginning of the Summer, having been crowned at Westminster
on Christmas Day.

Whether this was undertaken upon any Necessity of his Affairs on that side, or
to settle them so as not to interrupt him here, where he intended to reside, is
not known; or whether he took a Pleasure and a Pride to show both his Subjects
and his Neighbors Princes, how secure he esteemed himself in his new acquired
Dominions; but it looks like a Strain of his usual Boldness and fearless
Temper, and succeeded well, like the rest of his Counsels and Resolutions; yet
was not this Journey undertaken without Prudence and Caution, in the Choice of
those Hands with whom he left the Government in his Absence, and of those
Persons he engaged to accompany him in the Voyage. He committed the Rule of the
Kingdom to his Brother Odon Bishop of Bayeux, and to Fitz Aubar his near
Kinsman, whom he had lately made Earl of Hereford, He took with him into
Normandy, Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, who though a great Instrument in
his easy and peaceable Admission to the Crown, yet had been discontented at
his Coronation, which had been perfomed by the Archbishop of York, upon
Pretense of some Fault or Question about the other's Investiture; with him he
took several other Bishops; the Earls Edwin and Morchar, two Persons of great
Power and Dependances, with many other English Noblemen, of whose Faith or
Affections he was the least confident; and besides these, he took with him a
greater and much more considerable Hostage for the Quiet of England, though
under Color of honoring him, or being honored by his Company; This was Edgar,
surnamed Atheling, Nephew to Edward the Confessor, and designed by him for
Successor, as was divulged among those of his Subjects, that neither favored
the Right or Pretensions of Harold, or the Norman Duke. He had many
Disadvantages to balance and weigh down his Right which was undisputed, as his
foreign Birth and Breeding, which was in Hungary during his Father's Exile
under the Reign of Hardy-Cnute; The Persecution and Hatred of his Grandmother
Emma, a Woman celebrated in her Time, for the Suspicion and clearing of her
Chastity by the Saxon Trial of Fire Ordeal, but who having married Hardy-Cnute
after the Death of her first Husband, had ever after more Inclination to the
Danish than the Saxon Race: Bedsies, Edgar, though of so good and virtuous
Dispositions as made him be styled England's Darling, yet they were such as
seemed to become an excellent private Person rather than a Prince, or at least
to have adorned an easy and peaceful Possession of a Crown, rather than to
force his Way to a legal Right through the Difficulties and Opposition of two
powerful Pretenders. However, an undisputed Right (which they say never dies)
had left him so many Friends in the Kingdom, that the King thought it not safe
to leave him behind, upon his going into Normandy, nor wise to tempt either him
or his new English Subjects with such an Opportunity of raising any Commotions
upon so fair a Pretense.

Besides these Cautions, he took with him most of his French Adventurers into
Normandy, finding they were not very agreeable here, either to the English or
to the Normans, and pretending he was not able to clear his Accounts with all
that assisted him, out of the Revenues or Forfeitures here, and that he would
find out Ways of satisfying them, either in Normandy, or by his Credit and
Recommendations to other Princes, where his own Bounty or Abilities could not
reach.

During his Stay in Normandy, which was no less than the whole Summer, his new
Government in England continued quiet and peaceable, though one Erick, called
the Forester, endeavored to disturb it, by calling in some loose Forces of the
Welsh, his Neighbors, into Herefordshire; but he was soon suppressed, and they
easily forced back into their own Mountains by the Vigilance of the Governors,
and the Vigor of those Forces he had left here, disposed with such Order, into
the several Countries, as to give Way or Time to no growing Dangers that should
arise in any one Corner or from any single Discontent, while the general Humor
of the People was calm, and either satisfied with the Change, or at a Gaze how
this new World was like to end. So that the King, after having settled his
Affairs in Normandy to his Mind, returned before Winter to enjoy the Fruits of
so many Dangers and Toils as his Life had been engaged in, resolving to spend
the remainder of it in England, as the nobler Scene and greater Dominion, and
to cultivate with Care, an Acquisition, he had gained himself with much Hazard
and Pains, and with greater Glory.

The King at his Return into England, finding his new Dominion had continued
calm and peaceable under the Authority of his Brother and Council, had Reason
to believe it would be easily preserved so, under his own. For, as the Absence
of an ill Prince seldom fails of raising Disquiets and Commotions among the
People in a Government which is obeyed only from Fear; so nothing contributes
more to the Satisfaction and Obedience of Subjects, than the Presence of a good
King, and this is the Reason why all distant Provinces, governed by Commissions
or subordinate Authorities are so subject to frequent Seditions and Revolts,
how lawfully soever they are inherited, or how well soever they are established
after any new Conquest or Acquisition; the Force and Influence of Authority
growing still weaker by the Change of Hands and Distance of Place: This
disposed the new King to the Resolution he took at this time, of making England
the Seat of his Person, as well as Empire, and governing Normandy by his
Lieutenants, thereby forcing the common Affections of Birth, or Education and
Custom, to yield and comply with Reasons of State, and preferring a foreign to
his natural Soil, though perhaps seated in a better Climate, and at that time
more adorned and civilized by the Commerce of France, and other Countries upon
the Continent.

With this Resolution, and in this Security, he applied himself at his Return
to the Arts of Peace, and the Orders of his State, wherein he as well excelled
as in those of War, and was framed, not only for a great Prince but for a good,
to which he was inclined by the Bounty and Clemency of his natural Dispositions
by the Strength and Soundness of his Judgment, and by the Experience of his
Age: His first Care was to provide for the due Administration and Execution of
Laws and Justice, throughout his Realm, and the next was to introduce Order
into the common Course of his Revenue, and manage it with so great Proportion
of his Expense to his Receipts, as might neither leave the Crown in
Necessities, nor the Subjects in Fears of new or lawless Exactions and
Oppressions; Justice being the very Foundation of Government, as Treasure is
said to be the Sinew of War.

For the first; As he had sworn at his Coronation, to govern by the Laws of the
Realm; so he continued the ancient Customs and Liberties of the People that
were called the common Law of the Kingdom, which he caused to be in Substance
observed, both in what concerned the Crown and the Subject, though he
introduced several new Forms in the Administration or Execution of them:
Besides the ancient Laws or Customs that concerned the Descent of private
Inheritances, or the Penalties upon several Crimes; There were two fundamental
Laws of the Saxon or English Kingdom; The Trial by Juries of twelve Men,
wherein consisted the chief Safety of Men's Properties and Lives: And the
Borough Law, which was the greatest Security that had been invented by the
Wisdom of our Saxon Ancestors, for the Peace and Order of the Realm. The first,
I know, is by some Authors mentioned as having been introduced by this Norman
King out of the Laws of that Country: But I think it evident to have been an
Institution very ancient among the Saxons, and to have been derived and
observed, during the whole Succession of the English Kings, and even in the
Danish Reigns, without any Interruption. Nor does there want some Traces or
Appearance of it, from the very Institutions of Odin, the first great Leader of
the Asiatick Goths or Getae into Europe, and the Founder of that mighty
Kingdom, round the Baltic Sea, from whence all the Gothic Governments in
these Northwest Parts of the World were derived by the spreading Conquests of
those Northern Races.

It Is recorded, that upon the beginning of his Expedition, he ordained a
Council of twelve Men, who should judge and decide all Matters that came in
Question, and there being then no other Laws established among those vast
Numbers of rough People, going to seek out new Conquests, and thereby Seats to
inhabit: It is probable these twelve Men judged all Cases upon Evidence or
matter of fact, and then gave their Sentence and appointed Penalties according
to what they esteemed most agreeable to Justice and Equity, so as the twelve
Men were at first both Jurors and Judges: Their Judgments in Causes both real
and criminal being generally approved as just and equitable grew into President
to succeeding Judges, and being received by general Submission, introduced the
Custom of certain Sentences being pronounced in certain Causes and certain
Punishments being usually inflicted upon certain Crimes. In Process of Time and
Multiplicity of Business, the matter of Fact continued to be tried by twelve
Men, but the Adjudgment of the Punishment, and the Sentence thereupon came to
be given by one or two or more Persons chosen out of such as were best versed
in the Knowledge of what had been usual in former Judgments upon like Cases,
and as the first Part was left to the Equals or Neighbors of the Persons
accused (as most likely to do Justice to one of their own Rank or Acquaintance)
so the other was committed to Persons of Learning or Knowledge in the ancient
Customs, Records or Traditions of what had long passed in the Course of Justice
among that Nation: Thus we find it evident that in the Saxon Reigns in England,
Causes were adjudged by the Aldermen and Bishop of the several Shires, with the
Assistance of twelve Men of the same County, who are (...) said to have been
Judges or Assistants to the two first, by such as affirm or pretend this manner
of Trial, to have been drawn by the Conqueror himself out of Normandy, who is
thereby said to have introduced in this, as well as some other Forms, the
Norman Laws into the common Law of England. It Is true, that the same Custom or
Trial was used in Normandy before the Conquest, and it is most probable that
neither the English received it from the Normans, nor these from the English;
but that both Nation deriving their Original from those ancient Goths, agreed
in several Customs or Institutions, deduced from their common Ancestors, which
made this Trial by Juries continue uninterrupted in England, not only by the
Normans, but by the Danes also, who were but another Swarm of that great
Northern Hive. It Is true, the Terms of Jury and Verdict were introduced by the
Normans with many others, in the Style and Practice of our Laws, but the Trials
by twelve Men with that essential Circumstance of their unanimous Agreement,
was not only used among the Saxons and Normans, but is known to have been as
ancient in Sweden, as any Records or Traditions of that Kingdom, which was the
first Seat of the Gothic Dominions in the Northwest Parts of Europe, and it
still remains in some Provinces of that Country. However, King William caused
this to be observed as the common Law of the Kingdom, and thereby gave great
and universal Satisfaction to the Body of the People, both English and Normans.

The Borough Law had been likewise anciently established among the Saxons,
whereby every Shire was divided into so many Hundreds or Buroughs, consisting
at first of one hundred Families therein usually inhabiting; every Hundred into
so many Tithings consisting of ten Families. If any Person committed or were
accused of any Crime, the Tithing to which he belonged was bound to produce him
to Justice before the Court of the Hundred or County: If he fled, they were to
swear they were not Accomplices of the Fact, and that they would procure the
Criminal whenever they could find him, if this failed, in a certain time they
would discover all the Goods he was possessed of within their Tithing, to
satisfy the Damage done to a Subject, or a Fine to the King upon such an
Offense: If neither Person nor Estate appeared, then the Tithing was answerable
to a certain Proportion, and if that were not sufficient, then it was laid upon
the Hundred: By this means it became every Man's Interest as well as Duty, to
prevent all Crimes and Misdemeanors among their Neighbors, and to discover the
Criminals, since they were otherwise to share in the Penalty, and as the rest
of the Tithing was bound for the Behavior of every Freeman among them, so every
Lord or Master was bound to answer in the same manner for their Servants.

I know not whether any Constitution of Government, either ancient or modern,
ever invented and instituted any Law or Order, of greater Wisdom, or of greater
Force to preserve the Peace and Safety of any State, and of equal Utility to
the Prince and People, making Virtue and Innocence of Life so necessary, by the
easy Apprehension or Discovery, and certain Punishment of Offenders. This Law
the King caused likewise to be severely observed during his Reign, finding
therein his own Interest as well as his Peoples, and the great Security of his
new settled Government.

He confirmed all Men's Properties, Inheritances, and Successions, invading
none, either for his own Benefit, or Reward of his Norman Forces, or Friends,
excepting the Possessions of such as had opposed his Claim to the Crown, which
he pretended to be a lawful Right, as derived from the Testament of Edward the
Confessor, and thereby was made a Pretense of legal Forfeiture in all that
resisted him: But this Blow to so many Estates and Families was given at once,
and no more renewed: On the contrary, Justice was administered equally to the
English Men, upon the Injuries of the Normans, who presume upon the King's
Favor, in Prejudice of Right, and of those Laws he had confirmed or
established. Whereof one memorable Instance remains upon Record, even in those
Writers who were most severe upon the Actions and Memory of this Prince: It was
an Action between Warren a Norman, and Sherburn an English Man: The first, by
Virtue of a Grant from the King had entered upon the Lands of the other, who
came into Court, and pleaded, That he had never bore Arms against the King, nor
opposed his Title or Accession to the Crown, but had lived always peaceably
upon his own Lands, and so was liable to no Forfeiture by the common Law, but
was further secured by the King's Declaration, immediately after his coming to
the Crown: Upon which Plea a just Sentence was given in favor of Sherburn, his
Lands restored, and Warren the Norman cast and condemned to the Costs of the
Suit.

He appointed Justices to preserve the Peace, and administer Justice in every
County, pursuant to that which was used in the Saxon Reigns. For the Pleas of
the Crown, and those of greater Moment between the Subjects, he created Judges
of the most learned and able he could find, and ordained four Terms each Year
consisting of a certain Number of Days, wherein Justice should be duly
administered, and all Suits heard in such Places as the King should appoint and
find most convenient. Besides these Orders he instituted the Courts of Chancery
and Exchequer, the first for tempering the Rigor of Laws according to the
Dictates of Conscience and Equity; and the other for determining all Actions
concerning the Revenues of the Crown, and punishing Exactions or irregular
Proceedings in the Officers who levied or received them as well as Defaults or
Delays in those from whom it was due.

For Taxes or Impositions unusual, it does not appear, that he levied any
excepting one of Six Shillings upon each Plow-land throughout the Kingdom, nor
is it well agreed, at what Time or upon what Occasion this was raised, whether
by consent of a general Assembly, or by his own Regal Authority: By this indeed
he imposed Danegelt upon the Invasion of the Danes, which happened once or
twice in this Reign, though with little Progress or Success.

This Tax was first raised by Ethelreld upon the first Enterprise of the Danes
upon England, and afterward used by several of his Successors upon the like
Danger, sometimes to repulse them by Force and Arms, sometimes to evade them by
Bargains and Money, wherewith they compounded for the present Dangers, but
invited others to come by such mean Defenses.

This Tax grew odious to the People whenever it was raised upon any other
Pretense than a Danish Invasion, and though it was sometimes levied, yet very
seldom and cautiously, by some few of the Saxon Kings, and but once or twice by
this Norman Prince, and then most probably upon the true natural Occasions,
which had given it the first Original: Thus, I suppose, it is confounded with
the Tax before mentioned, and without applying it to the Danish Invasions, by
some Writers, who seem to take all Occasions of defaming the Actions and Memory
of this King, and to avoid all just Excuses of any that were ill resented: And
this proceeded from the ill Talent of the Monkish Writers, who measured the
Virtues and Vices of Princes, by the Opinion of their Favor or Disaffection to
the Clergy, whom they accounted or styled the Church, though this general
Appellation is known to comprehend not only such Persons as were anciently
chosen to administer the Offices of divine Worship, but also all believing
Christians that composed such Assemblies, to whom those Offices were
administered: Of this the King seemed to be sensible, for though he was a Prince
of known and great Piety, and so approved by the several Popes during his
Reign; yet he appeared very little favorable, if not something hard to the
Ecclesiastics of this Kingdom, and perhaps something bold with their
Privileges so long enjoyed under the devout Saxon Kings.

For the rest, he contented himself with the usual Revenues of the Crown; and
by his great Order and Management, as well as Moderation in his constant
Expense, gained much Ease to the Crown, and Satisfaction to his People.

The chief and ancient Branches of the Crown Revenue consisted of, First, the
Lands of old reserved as a Provision for the King's Household, and so reckoned
as Crown Lands: These at first yielded only certain Quantities of Provisions,
as Beefs, Sheep, Wheat, Hay, Oats, according to the Nature of the Lands, the
Tenures by which they held, and the Quantity of Provisions found necessary for
the King's Household; What Overplus remained, was compounded for and paid in
Money, according to Rates usual and agreed. The next was a Duty reserved
anciently out of every Knight's Fee, which at first was constantly paid as a
Quit-rent, but being small, came in time to be neglected by the Kings, that
contented themselves with the Military Attendance of the Knights in their Wars,
and with levying sometimes a greater Duty upon great or urgent Occasions, under
the Name of Escuage, which was burthensom and odious till the Proportions and
Occasions came to be ascertained. Those Authors, who will make the Conqueror
to have broken or changed the Laws of England, and introduced those of
Normandy, pretend this Duty of Escuage with the Tenures of Knights Service and
Baronage, to have come over in this Reign, as well as the Trial by Juries: But
as enough has been said to clear the last, so it needs no Proof, that these
with the other Feudal Laws, were all brought into Europe by the ancient Goths,
and by them settled in all the Provinces which they conquered of the Roman
Empire, and among the rest, by the Saxons in England, as well as by the Franks
in Gaul, and the Normans in Normandy; where the use of their States or general
Assemblies were likewise of the same Original.

The last common Branch of the King's Revenue consisted of Forfeitures, both of
Lands and Goods, in Cases of Treason, and Fines or some known mulctuary
Punishments upon other Crimes, which were distinctly prescribed in the Saxon
Laws, even for Manslaughter and Murder it self; the Rigor of those Times not
extending to Blood, except in those Cases where the common Safety of the
Kingdom was concerned, by the danger of the King.

By all these Orders and Institutions, and the Clemency as well as Justice,
wherewith they were administered; the King how new soever his Reign, how
disputed his Title, and how disagreeable his Person by a foreign Birth, yet so
far gained the general Affections and Satisfaction of the Commoners of the
Realm, who ask nothing but Security in their Estates and Properties, that no
Commotions afterward raised by the Nobles and Clergy against his Government,
though in Favor of a better Right and Title, were ever supported by the
Commons, who compose the Mass and Bulk of a Nation, and whose general good or
ill Humor, Satisfaction or Discontent will ever have the most forcible
Influence for the Preservation or Ruin of any State.

Besides the good and profitable Institutions and Orders of this King, already
mentioned, so generally approved, and so grateful to the Commonalty of the
Realm, there were others of a different Nature, and which had a contrary Effect
by distasting and disobliging many of the chief Nobility, and most or all of
the Clergy, though some were so cautious as not to lose their Dignities or
Revenues by expressing their Resentments.

The Offenses taken by these last, were, first, the abrogating or surceasing
the Judiciary Power, exercised by the Bishops during the Saxon Times in each
County, where Justice was administered, and the Bishop with the Alderman or Earl
of each Shire, sat as Judges in those Courts, which increased, not only their
Authority, but their Revenues too, by a Share they had with the King in all
Fines raised from the Issue of Causes there determined: But all this was
abolished by the King's Institution of Justiciaries, to administer Justice upon
all Pleas of the Crown, and others among Subjects at four Terms of the Year.

This gave particular Offense to the Bishops, but another to the whole Clergy;
for whereas before they held all their Land by Franc Almonage, and subject to
no Duties or Impositions, but such as they laid upon themselves in their
Ecclesiastical Assemblies: This Prince finding above a third Part of the Lands
of the Kingdom in Possession of the Clergy, and the Forces of the Crown, which
consisted in Knights Service, lessened in Proportion by their Immunity. He
reduced all their Lands to the common Tenure of Knights Fees and Baronage, and
thereby subjected them to the Attendance upon the King in his Wars, and to
other Services anciently due, and sometimes raised upon all Lands that held in
fee from the Crown. This Innovation touched not only the Bishops, but all the
Abbots throughout the Kingdom, many of whom were endowed with so great Lands
and Revenues, that in Right thereof they were upon the regular Constitutions of
Parliaments, allowed Session with the Bishops as Barons in the House of Lords.

The whole Clergy exclaimed against this new Institution, not only as an
Indignity and Injustice, but as an Impiety too, and Violation of the sacred
Rights of the holy Church, but their Complaints were without Redress, though
not without ill Consequence.

The Discontents among many of the great Nobles arose chiefly from two
Occasion; The first was the Rigor of the Forest Laws, and of their Execution;
And the other was, the King's too apparent Partiality to his Normans.

To know the Ground or Pretense of these Forest Laws, it will be necessary to
run up to their Original. In the first Seisures and Distributions made of the
British Lands by the conquering Saxons, besides those reserved to the Kings, or
divided among the People, and held by the Tenures, either of Knights Service or
of Book-land as it was termed among the Saxons, and thereby distinguished from
that of Villenage. There were many great Tracts of barren, wild, or woody
Lands, left undisposed, and in a manner waste, so great Numbers of British
Inhabitants having been extinguished by the Wars, or retired into Wales,
Cornwall, Britanny, and Scotland, and the new Saxons not content to share among
them, any Lands, but such as were fruitful and fit to be cultivated: These were
enclosed or improved as well as inhabited by the new Proprietors, and the
others left wast as well as undisposed to any certain Owners: The whole Country
was, as has been observed, very full of all Sorts of wild Game in the Time of
the Britains, who lived at large, without any Enclosures, little Property, and
subsisted much upon Hunting, Fishing and Fowling, which they had all in common.
Upon the enclosing or cultivating of the fruitful Lands by the Saxons, the wild
Beasts naturally afraid of Neighbors, whom they found to be all Enemies, fled
into the wild, woody, and desolate Tracts of Land, where they found Shelter,
and fed, though hardly, yet out of common Sight and Noise: And hereby all those
Parts became replenished with all Sorts of Game, especially with Red and
Fallow-Deer, and made all those several Extents of Ground, which were
afterward called Forests.

The Saxon Kings esteemed these to belong to the Crown, by their Right to all
Possessions that have no certain Owner, and by their never having been disposed
upon the first Divisions of Land in the Saxon Kingdoms, nor afterward by any
Grants of the Crown. This Right was not disputed, nor any Use of it made,
further than for the King's Pleasure, which yet was not by them restrained from
the Nobles or Knights that were Borderers upon the Forests, who were so
moderate in those more simple Ages, as to commit no Excesses or destroy the
Game, which it was their Interest to preserve both for their Sport and the
Quarry, and for some use made of it for common Pasturage among all the
bordering Neighbors.

William the Conqueror not only seized upon all these Forests as Part of his
own Demesns, but made a very large one in Hampshire, besides those he found, by
laying wast, and leaving uninhabited great Extents of Land which he pretended
to be fallen to the Crown, by ancient Succession or by new Forfeitures; and
this he called the new Forest, which Name after so long a Course of Ages, it
still retains.

In all these Forests he pretended an absolute Right and Dominion, and in
Pursuance thereof instituted new and arbitrary Laws of his own, unused and
unknown before in this Kingdom, and very different from the Moderation of the
Saxon Government. He confined all hunting or fowling in these Forests to
himself, or such as should have Right to it by his Concessions or Permissions.
He imposed Fines upon all Trespasses committed in them according to his own
Pleasure, and which seemed much to exceed the Fault or Value of the thing.
These he caused to be levied with great Rigor and Exaction, and thereby
debarred not only his Commoners, but his Nobles too, from a Liberty they had
before always enjoyed, Though he took care not to provoke the Commoners, by
leaving Pasturage free for such of the Neighbors who lived most upon their
Stock, and thereby took no greeat Offense at the Restraint from their Sport
which they had not Time from their Labor much to follow; yet the Nobles and
Knights, who valued their Sports more than common Gains, and made use of their
Riches but for Increase of their Pleasures; resented this Restraint as a
sensible Injury, as an Invasion of their Liberties, and even as an Affectation
of an Arbitrary Power in this Particular, and from the Exercise whereof he was
only restrained, by the Regards of his Safety and Interest, in others of more
Moment and Consequence: The great Nobles resented it yet further, as an
Indignity by levelling their Privileges with the Liberties of the Commoners,
from whom they esteemed themselves distinguished by the usual Regards and
Respects paid them from the Princes in their Degree, as well as from the
People. Nor does it appear whether this violent Institution of the Forest Laws
proceeded from his passionate Love of hunting (the only Pleasure to which this
Prince was addicted) or from his Avarice, by so many Fines to increase his
Treasure, or from a Desire of being absolute and arbitrary in one Part of his
Government, which he found he could not be with any Safety in the rest.

For his Partiality to the Normans, though it was disguised, or at least not
evident in the common Forms of his Justice, which run a free and even Course,
yet it was easily discovered in that of his Graces and Favor; the Civil
Offices, Ecclesiastical Benefices, Places of most Trust about his Person, and
in his Realm, were conferred generally upon his Normans, and besides these
Advantages and those of the Forfeitures that fell upon his Entrance; they
appeared to have his Countenance, his Conversation, his Confidence, so that
whatsoever the English possessed of the Kingdom, the Normans alone seemed to
possess the King.

This might have been more excusable if the English had considered the King as
much as themselves, and many of his Circumstances as well as their own: They
were Strangers to him, or but new Acquaintance; they differed in Language, in
Manners, in Customs; they had very lately differed in Interest, and from
Enemies in War, were indeed now become Subjects, but rather as to a Conqueror
than a lawful Prince: The Normans spoke his Native Tongue, were trained up in
the same Customs, acquainted with his Person from his Youth, had attended him
in his Court, followed him in his Wars, at Home and Abroad, and thought it but
just they should share in his Fortunes as they had in his Dangers.

However, many of the great aspiring Spirits among the English Nobles could not
bear this Partiality of the Kings: They thought the Normans ought to be
provided of Rewards or Honors in Normandy, but those of England should be
conferred upon English: Besides, they resented the common Testimonies of his
Inclination to the Normans, as much as they could have done Injuries to
themselves, like generous Lovers, who are more jealous and spited to see their
Rivals gain the Inclination of their Mistress, than the Possession, and had
rather they should have her Body than her Heart.

Upon all these Causes the Discontents of many chief English Nobles and
Prelates were grown to such a Height, swelling more within, the more they were
suppressed; that they wanted only a fair Occasion to draw them to a Head and
make them break out with Violence, and much Pain and Danger to the State.

This furnished them, either by Fortune or Design, in the third, fourth, or
fifth Year of the Conqueror's Reign; for the Authors are neither distinct, nor
agreed in assigning the Causes or the Times of this King's Actions in War, or
Institutions in Peace, by which their true Nature, and that of the Prince would
have been best discovered; whereas they content themselves to display their
Eloquence, or vent their Passions by relating general or particular Events,
what was done, and what was suffered in his Reign; by which some of the Norman
Writers endeavonr to represent him as a God, and some of the English like a
Devil, and both unjustly.

Edgar Atheling was Nephew to Edward the Confessor, and the undisputed as well
as undoubted Heir of the Kingdom from the Saxon Race: It was generally thought
that he had likewise been designed by King Edward, a just and pious Prince, to
succeed him in the Throne, and that his Declaration pretended by Harold, or
Testament by the Duke of Normandy, were fictitious, or at least neither of them
evident from any clear and undoubted Writings or Testimonies. Edgar was besides
from the Bounty of his Nature, the Excellence of his Temper, the Prerogative of
his Birth, and the Compassion of his unjust Fortunes, much and generally
beloved and esteemed among all the English both Nobles and Commons, yet he
neither opposed Harold's Usurpation, nor the Normans Conquest, whether for want
of Spirit to attempt so great an Adventure, or upon Prudence, not to oppose
such Powers, as he found unresistable, and in which so many Circumstances had
conspired, choosing rather to content himself with the Shades of a private
Condition, out of Danger and Envy, or at least to attend some future Occasions
that might open a more probable Way to his Hopes and his Fortunes.

He was at London among many other Nobles, when the famous and decisive Battle
was fought at Hastings, and the News brought of the Duke's Victory, and of
Harold's Death: Those of the Nobles, who were for opposing the Conqueror, were
for declaring Edgar Atheling King; the Citizens of London were at first
disposed to the same Resolution; but the Bishops and Clergy who had the
greatest Sway among both those Orders, prevailed in this general Council for a
general Submission to the Fate of the Kingdom.

In Pursuance of this Resolution, Edgar Atheling with Stigand, and Alred
Archbishops of Canterbury and York, Edwin and Morchar, two of the greatest
English Lords, the rest of the Nobles and Bishops who had attended the
Victorious Duke upon his Way to London, was well received by him, and treated
with Bounty as well as Humanity, so that the young Prince, attended frequently
at Court, accompanied the King into Normandy, returned with him into England,
and lived there for some time like one who had forgot his Birth and his Title,
though they were by the English well remembered: But at length, either weary of
Rest, or roused by other Spirits more unquiet than his own, he resolved, or at
least pretended to make a Journey into Hungary, where he was born during his
Father's Exile, had lived long and was much beloved: He embarked for Flanders
with his two Sisters, Margaret and Christine, but forced by a Storm and
contrary Winds, or allured by fairer Hopes he was driven upon the Coasts of
Scotland, the first was given out, but the last suspected, from the Event of
this Voyage. He was received by Malcolm, the King, with great Kindness, and
Compassion of his Disasters both at Sea and Land, was resorted to by all the
Nobles and Gentlemen who had sheltered themselves in that Kingdom, upon Hate or
Fear of the Conquest in England, and was by them acknowledged and honored as
the true lawful Heir of that Crown: Soon after his Arrival, the King of
Scotland, enflamed either with the Beauty of the young Lady, or with the Hopes
of her Brother's Fortunes, or upon former Concert with the English Nobles,
residing in Scotland, and Intelligence with others, discontented in England,
married the Lady Margaret, eldest Sister of Edgar, and thereby became newly
engaged in the Interests and Family of this noble but unfortunate Prince.

The Fame of this Adventure was no sooner divulged in England, than it raised a
great, though different Motion in the Minds of all Men there, who were either
well or ill affected to the new King, filling one Party with new Hopes' and the
other with new Fears, and reasonably enough in both, from all common
Appearances. Many Persons of great Note and Authority in England, repaired
immediately upon it into Scotland, some by easy Passages out of the Northern
Counties, and others out of the remoter Parts of the Realm, by more difficult
Escapes, either by Sea or Land. Among these were the Earls, Edwin, Morchar,
Hereward, Seward, Gospatrick, Men of great Estates and Power, as was believed
in England, with many other Nobles and Gentlemen: But that which seemed yet of
greater Influence and Authority, was the Repair of Stigand Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Alred of York, with diverse other Bishops and Prelates, who
having been the chief Instruments in making Way for the easy Accession of Duke
William to the Crown, and for the general Submission of the English to his
Reign, were presumed now likely to prove of as great Moment and Importance for
the Restoration and Support of a just English Title in Edgar, as they had been
for the Admission and Establishment of one disputed and foreign, of the Norman
Dukes: Besides, the Clergy being accounted the wise and learned Men of that
Age, were esteemed most likely to judge best of the Rights, and best to foresee
the Events in Disputes of the Crown, and unlikely to embark themselves in a
Bottom unsound, upon either the Regards of Justice or Success.

Edgar, exalted with such a Concourse of Nobles out of England, and the Hopes
they gave him of a greater from the People there, when he should appear among
them, resolved to lay claim to that Crown, and with stronger Arguments than
those of a bare Title or Right of Succession, how just soever: For the Scotch
King had now assisted him with a great Army, being induced to engage openly in
his Quarrel, not only by the Charms of his Wife, or Compassion of her Brothers
hard Fortune, but by Reasons of State as well as of Justice and Affection; he
feared the dangerous Neighborhood of so powerful, aspiring and fortunate a
Prince, and apprehended his Ambition would not cease with the Conquest of
England, but extend it to that of Scotland too, and reducing the whole Island
of Britain under one Dominion, for which it seemed by Nature to have been
framed; he thought it both wise and necessary to give some Stop to this growing
Power, before it became too well settled at home, and thereby prepared for new
Enterprises abroad, and that it was better carrying a War into England, than
expecting it in Scotland. He was glad of so fair an Occasion to justify his
Quarrel, and by advancing the Fortunes of Edgar to secure his own; he had taken
Measures with Swayn King of Denmark, to enter the Humber with a powerful Navy,
whilst he with his Army entered the Northern Provinces by Land, and with the
Sons of Harold, at the same Time to invade the West by the Assistance of Forces
to be furnished by Drone King of Ireland, to whom they had fled upon the Norman
Victory. He presumed upon great Insurrections among the English in Favor of
Edgar, and by the Authority of the Nobles his Associates, who had represented
the common Discontents in England to be as great as their own.

These Hopes were not ill grounded, nor the Designs ill laid; for the Danish
Fleet was ready to sail, and the Sons of Harold with their Irish Forces, landed
and raised a Commotion in the West, at the same Time that Edgar with those out
of Scotland, invaded the North, where he found at first no Opposition, but
instead of Enemies, met with many Friends prepared to receive him, and increase
his Strength: He made himself Master of Northumberland, Cumberland, and the
Bishopric of Durham, by the Defeat of Robert Count of Mortain, who was there
slain, with seven hundred Normans. From thence he marched without Resistance as
far as York, which was defended by a strong Garrison of Norman Soldiers. He
besieged this City, the Capital and Defense of all the Northern Counties, and
assaulted it with that Fury, that he carried the Town by Storm, where all the
Normans were put to the Sword by the Rage and Revenge of the English Nobles in
his Army, many in the Heat of the Assault, and the rest, after they were entered
and found no more Resistance. After this Success, Edgar remained some time at
York to refresh his Army, after so long a March, and so warm an Action, which
had cost him the Lives of many brave Men, and the Wounds of many more. Besides,
he expected here to see his Army soon increased by the Repair of many Friends
and Discontents out of the Southern Provinces of England, and by the Arrival of
the Danish Fleet in the Humber, according to the Concert before agreed, and for
which he knew all had been prepared.

King William thus surrounded with Dangers from the West and North, and with
Jealousies of his new Subjects, of whose Affections he had yet made no Trial,
further than some few Years Submission to his Government, was yet undaunted at
the News of all these Attempts, nor any ways distracted by such various either
Dangers or Fears. He applied himself to those which were nearest by sending the
Forces he had ready, immediately into the West, under experienced Commanders,
and prepared a greater Army both of English and Normans, to march himself into
the North, after the Commotions in the West should be appeased: This happened
to be easier and sooner than he expected; for the Attempt of Harold's Sons with
their Irish Forces, proved weak and faint, though successful in the first
Encounter, wherein Ednoth, a brave Commander on the King's side was slain, with
several of his Followers, but the Sons of Harold being defeated in a second
Engagement, and failing of any considerable Recourse or Insurrection of the
English there, (upon which they had grounded their chief Hopes) much
disappointed and thereby discouraged, were easily broken by the brave Norman
Troops, and forced to return with the Remainder of their Irish Forces into
Ireland.

King William upon the happy End of this Adventure, after the best Orders taken
for the Security of the Southern Parts, in his Absence, marched at the Head of
a brave Army in the North, engaged the Forces of Edgar in a set Battle, and by
the Valor of his Troops, the Discipline and Order of his Army, and his own
excellent Conduct, defeated entirely the united Strength of his Enemies, sieged
and took again the City of York, defended by Waltheof, Son to the Earl Syward,
a young Gentleman of great Valor, and much admired in this Action, being said
to have stood firm at a Breach made in the Wall, and with his Sword to have cut
of the Heads of many Normans, as they pressed to enter, and could do it but one
by one, by the Narrowness of the Breach, so bravely defended.

After this Defeat, and the Surrender of York, Edgar retired into Scotland with
those of his Dependants, who were most desperate and impatient of the Norman
Conquest. The rest of the English Nobles, who had escaped the Battle, submitted
themselves to the King, and came in upon public Faith, took a new Oath of
Allegiance, and were thereupon all pardoned, and many restored, not only to
their Estates, but to Favor with the King, who had found Erick the Forrester,
that had first rebelled against him after his Coronation, express great
Fidelity, after his Pardon obtained, and perform good Service in this Northern
Expedition. He made Gospatrick Earl of Northumberland, and employed him against
the Dangers and Incursions he apprehended from the Scotch. He was so charmed
with the Valor and Constancy that Waltheof had showed in the Defense of York
(though so much to his Cost and the Loss of so many Normans by his Sword) that
he resolved to gain him at what Rate soever he valued himself, showing the
Nobleness of his own Courage and Virtue, by loving and honoring them in his
Enemies. He married this young Gentleman to Judith his Niece, gave him great
Possessions, besides those to which he was Heir, and used him with much
Confidence, which was for some time returned with Service and with Faith.

Most of the other Nobles that came in upon Pardon of their Lives, he despoiled
of their Estates and Offices, and bestowed them upon his Norman Friends and
Followers,; some he kept Prisoners, whom he thought most dangerous, as the
Archbishops of Canterbury and York, and Edwin, a Man of the greatest Power and
Dependences, whose Earldom and great Possessions in Yorkshire were given to
Alain Earl of Britain, as were those of several others at the same time, to
others of his Kindred or Friends. In the room of Stigand he made Lanfranc
Archbishop of Canterbury, an Italian born, but an Abbot in Normandy, a Person
of great Wisdom and Temper, as well as Learning: Thomas, his Chaplain, he made
Archbishop of York, and obtained the Approbation of the Pope, for their
Succession in those Sees (during the Lives of the other two) upon
Representation of other Crimes, or at least Vices, besides their Rebellion
against a King, whose Title had been confirmed by the Pope, as well as
encouraged.

It Is not agreed at what Time the Danish Fleet arrived upon the Coasts, but
it is certain they entered Humber with about two hundred Sail, some write that
they returned again without making any Attempt upon the Shore; that their
Commanders were enriched with great presents from the King, and their Soldiers
supplied with Provisions, and all treated rather like Friends than Enemies;
whether their Arrival out of Time, made them despair of any Success, and
whether that were occasioned by cross Winds at Sea, or cross Purposes in the
Danish Court, is not well known: For William the Conqueror, after he was seated
in the Throne, feared no Insult from abroad but by Danish Powers, and
Pretensions they had still upon England, and the Preparations (as was divulged
abroad) of Swain their King, for invading it with a Navy of a thousand Ships.
Hereupon he endeavored to ward this Blow, by slight rather than Force,
thinking his Safety on that side, better purchased with Treasure than with
Blood. He practiced private Intelligences in the Danish Court, and by Force of
Presents and Pensions, gained to his Devotion some Persons of Credit, and among
the rest, Adelbert Archbishop of Hamburg, a Man of great Authority in those
Parts, and whose Advices were much used and esteemed by the Danish King. It was
believed the Artifices and Practices of these Men eluded the first great Design
of a mighty Invasion, changed it into an Assistance of the discontented here,
with smaller Forces, delayed them till the Time was past, and disposed their
Commanders to return without Action, and their Master to receive their Excuses
with Approbation, or at least with Impunity.

Yet there are other Writers who say, the Danes landed in England, made great
Spoils, joined Prince Edgar's Forces, wintered in this Kingdom, and returned in
the Spring, by the King's private Practices and Rewards among the Commanders as
well as Bounty to the Soldiers.

The King after having established his Affairs in the North, returned
triumphant to London, where the first Action he performed was to take a new
personal Oath, before Lanfranc the new Archbishop, and all the Lords then
present in that City; to observe the ancient Laws of the Realm established by
the Kings of England his Predecessors, and particularly those of Edward the
Confessor.

This Action of the Kings was the more applauded, and the better accepted by
the English, because it was unconstrained by any Necessity of his Affairs, or
Appearance of any new Dangers, against which he might have Reason to provide.
And it is certain, his Oath taken at his Coronation, of preserving the ancient
Laws of the Realm, had been the chief Occasion of his Safety in the late and
dangerous Convulsion of the State, together with the ill chosen Time of the
Scotch Invasion, and the Revolt of the Lords in Favor of Edgar. For if such
Attempts had been made soon after the Conquest, while the Minds of the People
were generally in Motion, and in Fear of what might succeed to the Danger of
their Properties, and their ancient Liberties, upon that new Revolution, his
Throne had not been only shaken, but in evident Danger of being overthrown by
such a violent Concussion. But the People having lived quietly some Years,
under the Protection of their ancient Laws, and in an equal Course of known and
common Justice, grew indifferent to the Change which had been made in the
Rights or Succession of the Crown, or to any new one that might succeed.
Besides, though they were well affected to Edgar, yet they disliked the Company
with which he came attended, and hated the Entrance of a Scotch Army into
England, more than they loved Edgar. They thought if he succeeded, the Dominion
would fall under the Scotch, whilst he only retained the Name; and if they must
be governed by Strangers, the best was to have those they were already used to,
and so feared least. The common Subjects of a Kingdom are not so apt to trouble
themselves about the Rights and Possession of a Crown as about their own, and
seldom engage in the Quarrels of the first, but upon some general and strong
Apprehensions, that the last are in Danger. So the Discontents and
Insurrections of the Nobles in England, though encouraged and supported by
foreign Forces, yet failed of Success against this new King and his
Government, because they were not followed by any general Commotion or
Sublevation of the People, which left all safe and quiet in the Southern Parts,
and main Body of the Kingdom, whilst he marched with his Army against his
Enemies in the North: Nor is the Safety of a Prince so firm and well
established upon any other Bottom, as the general Safety, and thereby
Satisfaction of the common People, which make the Bulk and Strength of all
great Kingdoms, whenever they conspire and unite in any common Passion or
Interest. For the Nobles, without them* are but like an Army of Officers
without Soldiers, and make only a vain Show or weak Noise, unless raised and
increased by the Voice of the People, which for this Reason is in a common
Latin Proverb called the Voice of God.

No Prince ever made greater or happier Experience of this Truth than William
the Conqueror, both in the Events of the last and formidable Dangers, which he
so easily surmounted, and in the whole Course of his subsequent Reign, which
was infested by many new Troubles, either in England or in Normandy, that would
have proved fatal to him, if he had been distracted by the common Discontents
or Insurections of his English Subjects; for his present Calm was not of long
Continuance, the Clouds soon gathered again and threatened another Storm, and
from the same Winds, by which the last had been raised.

Malcolm, King of Scotland still persisted in the Envy and Fear of his
neighboring Power and Greatness, still esteemed it his own Interest to join
with those of Edgar and his Dependants in England; and thereby weaken the
Force, or disturb the Quiet of the Norman Government in England, before it
should by the Favor of Time, and calm Seasons, take too deep Root, to be
afterward shaken. He raised a greater Army than before, with which he
threatened again to invade England, and led them himself, though still in Favor
only of Edgar's Title and Advancement to the Crown. He entered into new
Practices with several of the English Nobles who had followed him, though
unfortunately in the last Expedition, and were resolved to repair their former
Losses by venturing greater, rather than give over the Game. Nor could the
Hopes of the discontented English ever die while the Root was alive, and they
were fomented by the Malice, and encouraged by the Forces of so powerful a
Neighbor, joined with so just Pretensions as those of Edgar were generally
esteemed.

When the Preparations in Scotland, and Intelligences in England were ripe for
Execution, the Earl Edwin made his Escape, and fled toward the North, but was
by the Way murdered by some of his own Retinue. The Earls Morchar and Hereward,
who were already upon the Wing, for the same Flight, discouraged by this
Misadventure, durst not pursue it, but yet already engaged too far to make a
Retreat, they made Way to possess themselves of the Isle of Ely, fortified
there the best they could, and hoped the Scotch Invasion would divert the
King's Forces from attempting them before Winter, and that the Season and
Situation together would there cover them for some Time.

On the contrary, the Scotch King was discouraged from beginning his March, by
the News of these Disasters among his Confederates in England, and chose rather
to send the Bishop of Durham and Earl Syward out of Scotland to relieve and
animate those Lords, retired to the Isle of Ely than to enter England without
Hopes of their making some Diversion. But the King, who never feared or
slighted any Dangers, and knew they were like Diseases, to be taken in time,
marched immediately with his Forces to the Isle of Ely, beset it upon one side
with a great Number of flat bottom Boats, and on another, made a Bridge of two
Miles long, with incredible Diligence and Labor, and with such Speed, as both
surprised and terrified his Enemies within. So as despairing of further
Resistance, they all submitted to the King's Mercy, except Hereward, who with
some few Followers escaped through the Fens, and through many Dangers arrived
safe in Scotland. The rest of the Lords were sent Prisoners to several Parts of
the Kingdom, where some remained during the King's Life, and others dyed
bebefore him, with whom they could not be content to live.

The King, after this small Adventure so happily achieved, and the present
Peace of his Kingdom restored, yet considering the Root of all his Dangers was
in Scotland, and unwilling to take up present Quiet and Safety, at too great an
Interest of Dangers to come, resolved to march into Scotland with a powerful
Army, and endeavor to secure himself on that Side, either by a Peace or
Victory. He first sent Roger a Norman, then Gospatrick Earl of Northumberland,
with Part of his Forces into the North to oppose the Scotch Army that was
already entered those Provinces, with great Spoils and Ravages of the Country,
and to keep them at a Bay till the King came up with the rest of his Army. In
the mean time he assembled his Forces at York, with the best Choice of Men and
Officers, and such Numbers as he judged necessary for such an Expedition,
composed of English and Normans, whose Emulation he encouraged, with Promises
of Reward, and Hopes of establishing their common Safety by the Success of this
Enterprise. From York to Durham he met with many Hardships and Difficulties
from the Wants of his Army, in a Country which had been so lately wasted by the
Scotch Forces and his own, and with which he was then contented to prevent
another Invasion. But having surmounted all by his own Care, and the Patience
of his Men from the Example of their Leaders, he marched near the Borders
without any Opposition, though common Fame had made him expect the Scotch would
give him Battle in England, and not the Trouble of so long a March.

But Malcolm their King, now destitute of Hopes or Assistances from any
foreign Confederates, or any Insurrections in England, after the late
Disasters of the discontented Lords, began to cool the Heats of his Blood, and
instead of further invading England, changed his Counsels, and resolved only
upon a defensive War. At the News of King William's Entrance into the Northern
Provinces, he quitted Northumberland, and with good Order retreated back to the
Borders, and there encamped his Army to the best Advantage, without making any
further Incursions into the English Territories, either to secure his
Provisions, or not to provoke his Enemies, and render all Terms of
Reconcilement desperate, or not to endanger his Retreat in Case of any Disaster.

The King of England approaching the Borders, and thereby the Scotch Army
thought fit likewise to encamp his own, both to refresh his Soldiers, harassed
by so long and difficult a March, as also to discover the Forces of the Enemy,
observe their Countenance, their Order, and their Motions, and thereby judge of
their Designs, and direct his own to the best Advantage: So that for some Days
the two Armies stood at a Bay, seeming both prepared for a fierce Encounter,
and yet both content to delay it, from a mutual Respect they had for one
another Forces and Dispositions. They were indeed not much unequal in Numbers,
nor in the Bravery and Order of their Troops; both Kings were valiant and wise,
having been trained up in Arms, inured to Dangers, and much embroiled at home
in the Beginning of their Reigns. They were now animated to a Battle, by their
own Courage as well as their Soldiers, but yet both considered the Event, in
the Uncertainty and the Consequence; the Loss of a Battle might prove the Loss
of a Crown, and the Fortune of one Day determine the Fate of a Kigdom, and they
knew very well, that whoever fights a Battle, with what Number and Forces, what
Provisions and Orders or Appearances soever of Success, yet at the best runs a
Venture, and leaves much at the Mercy of Fortune, from Accidents not to be
foreseen by any Prudence, or governed by any Conduct or Skill. These
Reflections began to dispose both Kings to the Thoughts of ending their Quarrel
by a Peace rather than a Battle, and though both had the same Inclination, yt
each of them was unwilling first to discover it, least it might be interpreted
to proceed from Apprehensions of Weakness or Fears, and thereby dishearten
their own Soldiers, or encourage their Enemies. The Scotch at length began the
Overture, which was received by King William, with a Show of Indifference, but
with a concealed Joy, and the more reasonable, as having the greater Stake, the
less to win, and the more to lose by the Issue of a Battle. The first Parley
was followed by a Treaty, and this, after some Debate, by a Peace, concluded as
between equal Forces, so upon equal Conditions; each King to content himself
with the ancient Bounds of their several Kingdoms, whereof the Borders were
agreed. Neither to invade one another Dominions, nor to assist the Enemies, or
receive and protect the Rebels of each other; Prisoners in the last or this War
to be on both sides released, and Subjects who desired to return, to be on both
sides restored to their Country and Possessions.

Edgar, the Principal or most appearing Cause of the War, was included and
provided for in this Treaty, to return into England, make his Submission to the
King, renounce any further Claim to the Crown, and thereupon, not only to be
restored to his own Possessions, with his Friends and Followers, but to be
provided of a large and honorable Maintenance from the King during his Life.
And thus this Storm, which threatened both Kingdoms, with such fatal Dangers,
and long* Consequences, was of a sudden blown over; a general Calm restored in
the whole Island of Britain, and the two Kings returned to enjoy the Fruits of
a Peace, to which they had both contributed, by their equal Temper and
Prudence, as well as by their equal Preparations for a War.

Soon after the King's Return, Edgar repaired into England, where he was very
favorably received, and all Conditions of the Treaty performed, and ever after
observed with great Faith and Sincereness on both Parts. He had his Provisions
and Revenues (agreed by the Treaty) fairly established; but being desirous to
go to the Wars of the Holy Land, which was the common Humor of idle or devout
Princes in that Age: He was furnished by the King with great Sums of Money, to
prepare and maintain a noble Equipage for that Journey. He there gained much
Honor and Esteem, after which, returning into England, he passed the rest of
his whole Life in the Ease and Security of a large but private Fortune; and
perhaps happier than he might have done in the Contests and Dangers of
Ambition, however they might have succeeded. A rare Example of Moderation in
Prince Edgar, and of Magnanimity as well as Justice and Clemency in this King,
and very different from several of his Successors, who defamed their Reigns by
the Death of innocent Princes, for having only been born to just Rights of the
Crown, without any appearing Means or Attempts to pursue them, or endanger the
Possessors; thereby staining their Memories, with the Blots both of Cruelty and
Fear. For as Clemency is produced by Magnanimity and Fearlessness of Dangers,
so is Cruelty by Cowardice and Fear, and argues not only a Depravedness of
Nature, but also a Meanness of Courage, and Imbecility of Mind; for which
reason it is both hated by all that are within its Reach and Danger, and
despised by all that are without.

The King, upon his Return, began again to apply himself to the Arts of Peace,
which consist chiefly in the preventing of future, as those of War, in the
surmounting of present Dangers. And as nothing raises the Power of a Crown so
much as weak and private Conspiracies against it, rashly undertaken by some few
Discontents, unsupported by any general Defections of the People, faintly
pursued, and ending without Success; so this Prince found his Throne and
Authority more firmly established in all Appearance, by the happy Issue of the
two late Wars, and the unfortunate Events of his revolted Nobles: And now
esteemed himself more at Liberty from those Regards of his English Subjects and
their Laws, which his unsettled State had made necessary upon his first
Accession to the Crown? He was provoked by the Rebellions of so many of the
greatest English Nobles after their Fealty sworn to him: He was persuaded of
the general Disaffection of the rest* and that the late Insurrections would
have been found much deeper rooted and farther spread, if they had been
attended with any Success. He thought the English Lords and Bishops had too
great Dependence of their Tenants and Vassals upon them, and had themselves too
little upon the Prince: Since they esteemed themselves neither bound to attend
him in the Wars unless they pleased, nor to furnish the Expenses unless by
their own Consent in their general Assemblies; nor was he satisfied to have
them judge of his Necessities, whom he thought likeliest to increase them or at
least to desire them. He believed the English in general would, as long as they
retained the Saxon Laws and Forms of Government, ever be affected to the Race
of their Saxon Kings: And for this Reason he was thought to have encouraged the
Voyage of Edgar for the Holy Land, by so large Supplies of Treasure, under
Pretense of that Prince's Honor, but from true Intentions of his own Safety.
Besides, he found his Treasures exhausted by the great Charges of his two last
Expeditions, and the just Rewards he had promised both his Normans and those of
the English, who had well and faithfully served in them. Though he had once or
twice (for it is left in doubt) levied the Tax of Dane-gelt upon the Threats of
a Danish Invasion, and by an ancient Prerogative of the Saxon Kings, pretended
or exercised upon that Occasion; yet he found it was not raised without great
Murmur and Reluctance of the People as well as the Nobles, who pretended to
ancient Liberties, of paying no Taxes imposed without the Consent of their
general Assemblies, which began in this King's or his Son's Time, first to be
styled Parliaments, according to the Norman Phrase, whereas they had by the
Saxons been called Gemoots, and by their Latin Writers, Common Councils or
general Assemblies of the Kingdom, though how composed is left uncertain, and
has raised much Argument and Dispute.

All these Considerations either moved or augmented at this Time, a Design or
Inclination of this King to change the whole Frame of the English Government,
to abolish their ancient Laws and Customs, and introduce those of Normandy, by
which he thought he should be more absolute, and too powerful to be again
disturbed by any Insurrection at home, or any Invasions from his Enemies abroad.

So soon as he had digested and began to discover this Resolution, it is not to
be imagined what a universal Discontent, and indeed Consternation it raised
among all his English Subjects, who under so great a King, attended by his
victorious Norman Forces, reckoned upon no other Safety, but from the
Preservation of their ancient Laws, whereof he had hitherto assured them.
Whereupon the whole People, sad and aggrieved, as well as the Nobles, in an
humble Manner, but with universal Agreement tendered an earnest Petition to the
King. Beseeching him, in Regard of his Oath made at the Coronation, and by the
Soul of St. Edward, from whom he had the Crown and Kingdom, under whose Laws
they were born and bred, that he would not change them, and deliver them up to
new and strange Laws which they understood not.

Upon this humble, but earnest Application of the whole English Nation, united
in their Desires upon this Occasion; the King, before he resolved, thought at
least it was of Weight to deserve the best Deliberation, and thereupon fell
into serious Consultations upon it with his Council, whom he found much divided
in their Debates. The Normans among them were for his executing with Vigor what
he had determined, for abolishing wholly the English Laws, introducing the
Norman, and maintaining his Crown and Government, by the same means he had
gained them, which was by Force and Arms. They were encouraged in this Opinion
by presuming it agreed with the Kings Inclination, and were confirmed by the
pressing Arguments and Advices of his Brother Odon, Bishop of Bayeux, a Man of
a violent Nature, arbitrary Humor and Will; who in the Time of the King's
Absence, and his being left Vicegerent, had exercised many Oppressions and
cruel Exactions upon the People, and had raised more Clamor and Hatred against
the King's Government, than any Councils or Actions of his own.

This ambitious Prelate aspiring at the Papacy upon the next Election, and
despairing to obtain it by any other Means than the Force of Money, neglected
or refrained no Ways of heaping up Treasure, thought none so sure of increasing
his own as by advancing the King's, by an absolute Power over the Persons and
Purses of his Subjects.

The English of the King's Council were of a different Opinion, but being
Parties in the Case, had been little considered without the Support of Lanfranc
Archbishop of Canterbury, who being born an Italian, was impartial to English
and Normans, esteemed much by both, and more by the King. He was a Man of sound
natural Sense and universal Goodness, of general Knowledge, known Virtue, long
Experience, and approved Wisdom; free and disinteressed, and in all Councils
considering the King more than himself, and his true Service and Welfare of the
Crown more than his Humor or his Inclination. The King ever advised with him
in all the weighty Affairs of his Reign, allowed his Liberty and encouraged it,
knowing him to be not only wise and good, but faithful to his Interests, and
affectionate to his Person. Happy in the Choice or Fortune of such a
Counselor, and more in the Disposition of hearing and weighing such Advises as
were never so different from his own Opinions or Inclinations. Nor is any thing
more dangerous for a Prince than to consult only with Persons that he thinks
are of his own Mind, or will be so when they know it, nor more pernicious in a
Counselor than to give only such Advices as he thinks most agreeable to him
that asks or receives them.

Lanfranc, upon this great and weighty Occasion, represented to the King, how
much his Safety depended upon the general Satisfaction of his Subjects. That of
these the English were much the greater Part, both in Strength and Numbers,
that no People could be easy under any Laws, but such wherein they were born
and bred: That all Innovations were odious, but none could be more so than
this, as appeared by so universal Agreement of the English, in their Petition.
That the Humility and Calmness of it was more dangerous than if any thing had
been done in hot Blood, and the Refusal would be the more resented. That the
Laws and Constitutions of this Realm had been digested by the wisest Councils,
and confirmed by a long Succession of their Kings. That under them the Saxons
had been good and loyal Subjects, and their Kings, who ruled by these Laws,
never troubled with any Seditions or Insurrections of their People. That
besides Reason and Experience, Religion was concerned in this Resolution, since
the King had already twice sworn solemnly, to observe them, so as a Change of
them now would be taxed not only of Injustice, but Impiety. That nothing was of
so much Moment to a Prince as Reputation, and none more than that of being a
Religious Observer of his Word and Promise, but especially of his Oaths,
without which he could never be trusted by his Subjects or his Neighbors.

The King heard and weighed all their Reasons, and by them formed his own
Judgment, which he ever trusted in the last Resort. Upon mature Deliberation,
as the Case required, he at length resolved, not only to continue the Laws and
Customs of the Realm, but to give the People new, and more evident Assurances
of this resolution, in pursuance whereof he granted and confirmed them by a
public and open Charter, and thereby purchased the Hearts, as well as
Satisfaction of his English Subjects, whereof he reaped the Fruits, in his
succeeding Troubles in Normandy, and his Wars with France.

Yet he could not refrain showing the Kindness he retained for his own Country
and Language, introducing by Connivance or by Countenance, several Norman
Customs, and endeavoring to introduce that Language to be general in the
Kingdom. To this End he caused many Schools to be set up for teaching that
Tongue which was a Bastard French, not well understood by the French
themselves, and not at all by the English. He caused the Laws of the Kingdom,
which had been anciently written in Saxon, and by Edward the Confessor
published also in Latin, to be now translated into Norman. He ordered all Pleas
in the several Courts to be made in the same Language, and all Petitions
presented the King, and all Business of Court to be likewise in Norman. This
introduced new Terms, new Forms of Pleading and of Process, new Names of
Offices and of Courts, and with them all the litigious Customs and Subtelties
of the Norman Pleas and Conveyances (who were a witty but contentious People)
instead of the old English Simplicity in their common Suits, Pleas, or
Conveyances, which were plain, brief; without Perplexities, made with good
meaning, kept with good Faith, and so followed by little Contention, and that
determined by speedy Justice, and Decision of Monthly Courts in every County.

Among the Saxons it was usual to grant Lands and Houses by bare Words, and
with the Delivery of some trivial Gift, as an Horn, a Sword, an Arrow, a
Helmet, and yet the simple Honesty of those Times and People left such Grants
little subject to any Disputes or Contentions. But the Conqueror reduced all
Grants to Writing, to Signature, and to Witnesses, which brought in Cavils, and
Actions grounded upon Punctilious Errors in Writing, Mistakes in Expression,
which in much writing must sometimes happen, either by Have, Weakness, or
perhaps by Fraud of Conveyancers, and with Design to leave matter of
Contentions, by which they subsist as Physicians by Diseases.

Notwithstanding all these Arts of the Prince, and Industry of his Ministers to
introduce the Norman Language in England, yet all was frustrated by the
Overbalance of Numbers in the Nations, in Proportion to the Strangers, and
assisted by a general Avertion in the English to change their Language, which
they thought would be succeeded by that of their Laws and Liberties: So that in
this very Reign, instead of the English speaking Norman, the Normans began
generally by Force of Intermarriages, ordinary Commerce and Conversation, to
use the English Tongue, which has ever since continued and composed, the main
Body of our Language, though changed like others, by Mixture of many new Words
and Phrases, not only introduced by this great Revolution, but by the Uses and
Accidents of each succeeding Age.

It seems very remarkable, and very different what happened in Scotland about
this Time, and upon this Subject, for upon the great Recourse of English Nobles
and Gentlemen into Scotland seeking Refuge from the first Dangers and and
Terrors of the Norman Conquest; and afterward of many more who fled there in
Pursuit of Edgar's Pretensions, and joined with the Scots in two Invasions of
England; but chiefly upon Malcolm's fond Affection of his English Wife, Sister
to Prince Edgar, his Learning and commonly using or favoring her Language, the
usual Compliance and Conformity of Courtiers to the Customs of their Prince,
and the general Humor of Kindness in the Scots, at that time to the Person or
Rights of Edgar, and to all his Adherents, that lost their own Country to
follow his Fortunes; the English Language grew in this King's Reign to be
generally spoken, not only in the Court of Scotland, but in several Counties
thereunto adjacent, and among most of the Nobles in remoter Provinces, and so
it has ever since remained, as have many English Families in those Parts,
habituated, and with Time naturalized among them; and the ancient barbarous
Scotch Tongue has been left current, only in the more Northern or Northwest and
mountainous Parts of that Kingdom, and in the Islands that seeem to have been
first and most entirely possessed by the Scyths or Scots, who so long ago
invaded and conquered the Northern Parts of Britain and Ireland.

The contrary of this unusual Change in Language, appears to have succeeded in
England, since in a little time nothing remained of the Norman Language in
common Use, besides the Translation of our common Law, which though deduced
from the ancient Saxon Streams, yet the Sound, and Forms, and Practice came to
be Norman, like Rivers which still run from their original Sources, but yet
often change their Taste, from the Soils through which they take their Course,
and sometimes from Accidents of great Inundations, which for the present change
them, but leave them to return to their natural Streams. A singular and
instructive Example, how strange a Difference there is in the Compliance of a
Nation, with the Humor of a Prince they love, or of one they fear.

Besides these Changes in the Language of our Laws, and the Forms of Pleas
which were generally disaffected by the English Subjects; this Norman King,
either upon Pretense of Justice and Piety, or else of Necessity and Safety,
abolished several ancient Saxon Institutions, and made several new, which how
reasonable or how useful soever, yet bred ill Blood among the Nobles and Clergy
of England, though the People contented themselves with the Continuance of
their ancient Laws, and thought all they did or suffered for the King's
Service, well rewarded, while they might preserve what they called the Laws of
Edward the Confessor: And the King was so wise as often to renew his Oath, to
maintain them for the general Satisfaction of the People.

For the rest, he took all Jurisdiction and Judgment in civil Causes wholly out
of the Hands of the Bishops, where it had been placed in the whole Saxon
Succession, after their Conversion to Christianity. And restrained the Clergy
to the Exercise and Administration of their Ecclesiastical Power. He
endeavored to abolish two ancient Forms of Trial used among the Saxons with
great Reverence, even during their Christian Worship, though they were but
Remainders of their old Pagan Superstition, but so rooted in the Opinion of the
People, as not to be dispossessed by new Reason or Religion; These were the
Trials Ordeal, and of Camp-fight. The first was either by Fire or by Water, and
used only in Criminal Cases, where the Accusation was strong, the Suspicions
great, but no Proofs evident. In that of Fire the Person accused was brought
into an open Place upon even Ground, several Plowshares heated red hot were
laid before them, at unequal Distances, over which they were to walk blindfold,
and if they escaped any Harm were adjudged innocent; if their Feet were burned
by treading upon the hot Irons, they were condemned as guilty. In the other of
Water the accused were thrown into the Water, if they sunk immediately they
were esteemed innocent; and guilty if they swam, either because it seemed
against the Nature of heavy Bodies, or that the clear Element would not receive
them, but rejected them as polluted Persons. The first Trial was for those of
better Condition, and the other for those of inferior, and both were chiefly
used upon Accusations of Unchastity, of Poisoning or of Sorcery.

These Trials, though grounded upon no Reason, yet were thought approved by
long Experience, and the rather I suppose, because any sncceeding Proofs of
Innocence were as difficult to find, as any precedent Evidence of Guilt. And
they were commonly called the Judgments of God, and performed with solemn
Oraisons, and other Ceremonies that amused or rather enchanted the ignorant
People into an Opinion of their being sacred as well as just.

The Trials of Camp-fight were performed by single Combat, in Lists appointed
for that Purpose, between the Accuser and Accused, and were usual in Actions
both real and criminal, where no evident Proof of Fact appeared from Witnesses
or other Circumstances: The Victor was acquitted, and the Vanquished, if not
killed upon the Field, was condemned. These were performed with great
Solemnities, and either in Presence of the King who granted the Combat, or of
certain Judges, by him appointed for that particular Case: Both these Sorts of
Trials this King abolished as unchristian and unjust, and reduced all Causes to
the Judgment of Equals or of a Jury of twelve Neighbors, and by legal Forms:
Yet the last was some few times used in succeeding Reigns.

In the Beginnings of his Reign the Kingdom had been much infested by Outlaws
and by Robbers, and many Normans were secretly murdered by the Hatred of the
English, as they passed alone upon the Ways or the Fields, especially in the
Night. To remedy this last Mischief, he imposed a heavy Fine upon the Hundred
where the Body of any Norman should be found slain, whether any Discovery were
made or no of the Author or Accomplices of the Fact. For all Rapes and Robberies,
he caused them to be punished so severely by cruel Mutilations of Members, and
Hardships of Labor, as left them miserable Spectacles or Warnings of their
Crimes, during the rest of their Lives. By the Rigor of these Courses, and
cutting off the chief Cause of such Offenses which grow from Idleness and
Expenses; he reduced the whole Realm to such Security, that it is recorded in
his Time, how a fair Maiden with a Purse of Gold in her Hand, might have
traveled through the Realm without any Danger offered to her Honor or her
Money.

Besides, to prevent any Crimes that might be committed by Favor or
Encouragement of the Night. He ordered a Bell to be rung in each Parish at
eight a Clock in the Winter, and nine in the Summer, after which every Man was
to cover his Fire, and stir no more abroad that Night: And this was for that
Reason called the Corfew or Couvrefew Bell.

For the Safety of his State he erected several Castles in many Places most
convenient of the Kingdom, among which was the Tower of London, and New Castle
upon Tyne (either built or by this King much enlarged) and garrisoned them by
Norman or English Soldiers, but all such as he most trusted, and who were ready
in Arms upon all Occasions. Yet these Forts were looked upon by the English as
unnecessary in the Times of Peace, and as Bridles upon the Liberties of the
People, rather than Preventions of Dangers of the Crown.

After these Institutions he applied himself to the Increase, Order and
Establishment of his Revenue, and having (as he believed) satisfied the People
in general, by the Confirmation of their ancient and beloved Laws; he thought
he might be bolder with the Clergy whom he knew to be generally his Enemies,
and whose Clamours he the less feared, from his own known Piety, in frequenting
Divine Worship, in building and endowing several Monasteries, in Presents to
many Churches both in England and Normandy, but especially in great Treasures
which he sent frequently to Rome. Therefore, upon Pretense of his Enemies in
the two last Revolts (and such as were designed to be their Accomplices) having
conveyed their Plate, Money, and Jewels into the several Monasteries throughout
the Kingdom; he caused all the rich Abbeys to be searched, their Money, Plate,
and Jewels which were not necessary or of common Use in Divine Service, to be
seized; and thereby brought at once a mighty Treasure into his Coffers, but an
inveterate Hatred of the Clergy upon his Person and Reign; and this was the
last of those Actions that by the envenomed Pens of the Monkish Writers of that
Age, left such a Charge upon the Memory of this Prince, by the Imputation of
Cruelty, Oppression, Violence, Exaction, and the Breach or Change of Laws of
the Kingdom either Human or Divine, though the same Authors little consider how
ill this agrees with the high Characters they themselves give of his Personal
Qualities and Virtues. Nor is it probable that so vicious Actions should
proceed from so virtuous Dispositions, or that so noble and excellent Qualities
of any Prince should be esteemed by the present Age, or celebrated to
Posterity, which had been accompanied by cruel, infamous or depraved Actions
during his Life.

Having with these Spoils of the Clergy, as well as by the many Forfeitures of
the revolted Nobles, replenished his Coffers for the present, he extended the
Care of his Revenue, not only to what might arrive in his own Life, but also in
the Times of succeeding Kings. To this End he sent Commissioners into all the
several Counties of the whole Realm, who took an exact Survey, and described in
a Censual Roll or Book, all the Lands, Titles and Tenures throughout the whole
Kingdom. In this were distinctly set down, not only every Barony, each Knight's
Fee, every Plow-land, but also what Owners, by what Tenures, at what Rents or
Duties they held, and what Stock they were possessed of, and how many Villans
upon their respective Estates. All Lands that held anciently of the Crown, or
were by this King disposed upon Forfeitures, he subjected to the usual Tenures
of Baronies or Knight's Fees, reserving in all the Dominion in chief to
himself, some Quitrents or Fines upon Death and Alienation, and likewise the
Custody of all Heirs of such Lands as were left under Age, and the Disposal of
their Fortunes, besides what was assigned for their Maintenance till they came
to Years of disposing their Estates and themselves.

This Book was composed after two old Examples of the same kind, in the Times
of Ethelbert and Alfred, and was laid up as sacred in the Church of Winchester,
and for that Reason as graver Authors say, was called Liber Domus Dei, and by
Abbreviation, Domesday Book. The vulgar Account is, that the Name was derived
from the Nature, and so called because every Man was to receive his Doom by
that Book, upon any Dispute about the Value, Tenure, Payments, or Services of
his Lands, upon Collection of the King's ordinary Revenue, or the raising of
any extraordinary Taxes or Impositions. And to make a President for the future,
or to satisfy the great Expenses the King had been at, for the compiling this
great Roll of the Kingdom, six Shillings was raised upon every Plow-land, which
made the Design of it less agreeable to the People, though every Man's Right
thereby received a new Evidence, and no Injustice was complained of, in the
Digestion of so difficult a Work, and of so various a Nature. By this means the
King came to an easy and exact Knowledge of his whole constant Revenue, and so
proportioned it to his Expenses, and the necessary Cares of having always a
Fond or Reserve of present Treasure in his Coffers; that after this Time we
never find him plunged in any Difficulties, for want of Money to supply many
great Occasions that ensued in his Reign, nor tempted to impose any Taxes upon
his Subjects, or other Duties than what were common and known, and paid without
Pressure or Discontent among the Commonalty of the Realm; so as after all these
Institutions, he passed several Years in great Tranquillity at home, as well as
Honor from all his Neighbor Princes.

About the thirteenth Year of his Reign, he went into Normandy, leaving his
Brother Odon, Bishop of Bayeux, and created Earl of Kent, his Vicegerent in
England; and little apprehending any Storm after so long a Fit of fair weather,
or that He had left any ill Blood behind him, that was like to gather to a
Head; with such an Inflammation, and so dangerous Symptoms, as soon after
appeared. But no Condition of Human Life is ever perfectly secure, nor any
Force of Greatness or of Prudence, beyond the Reach of Envy, and the Blows of
Fortune. Princes as well as private Men, are often in most Danger at those
Times, and in those Parts, they think themselves the safest, as strong Towers
are sometimes taken on those sides that are thought impregnable, and so left
undefended or little regarded. This conquering King esteemed himself now at
Ease, for the remainder of his Life, and not only safe in his own Strength, but
the Satisfaction of his Subjects. The English he had pleased in general, by the
Preservation of their ancient Laws; the bravest and warmest Blood of their
Nobles was drawn in the Battle of Hastings, or the Wars with Scotland; their
Power was weakened by so many Confiscations, and the Retreat of many more into
Scotland and Ireland. The Normans were strong and numerous in England, and were
his own by Birth and by Interest; the Balance of these two Parties seemed the
Safety of the whole, and it was not to be imagined, that both should combine in
any Danger to the Crown. Besides, there was left no Pretension of any better
Right or Title than his own, since Edgar had laid down his, not only in Show,
but with firm Resolutions never to resume them.

But many of the English Nobles still hated the Name of a Conquest, resented
the Change of Forms and Language in their Laws, the Introduction of any new
Customs, but especially the Rigor of the Forest Laws, which they knew to be
arbitrary, and esteemed not only a restraint of their innocent Liberties, but
an Indignity in particular to themselves. Some of the chief Norman Lords, who
had obtained great Possessions by the King's Bounty, and the Confiscations of
the English being now invested in their Lands and their Titles, began to grow
fond of their Laws, as the safest Tenure, and though they had gained their
great Estates by the Favor of the King, yet they were not willing to hold them
at his Pleasure, and so joined with the English Nobles in the Complaints of too
great Power, exercised by the King, and the Jealousies of greater yet designed,
to the Prejudice of the ancient Constitutions of the Kingdom, and Diminution of
the Authority or Dependances of the Nobles. Some of both Nations, and equally
ambitious Spirits, who had been most favored and advanced by the King, yet
valuing their own Merits too high, or their Rewards too low, thought they had
nothing, because they had not all they pretended, esteemed the King's Favor or
Bounty to any others, as Injury to themselves, and were as unsatisfied with
what they had gained, as others with what they had lost.

These Dispositions floating at first in the Minds of several great Nobles,
both English and Norman, and enflamed by such of the Ecclesiastics, who had
Credit in the great Families of both Nations, grew at length to downright
Conspiracy, of dispossessing the King of his Crown, and introducing the Danes,
who were allied to many great Lords in England, and were esteemed by the
Normans of the same Race with their Ancestors. The chief of this Conspiracy
were the Earls of Norfolk and Suffolk, of greatest Power among the English
Nobility; Fitz-Auber, a Norman, of near Kindred to the King, and who had
assisted him with forty Ships, upon his English Expedition, and been
recompensed with mighty Possessions in England, and created Earl of Hereford.
The Earl Waltheof, who had been pardoned his Revolt, upon the Scotch Invasion,
married to the King's Niece, and ever since intimately trusted, as well as
favored by the King. These entered secretly into Intelligence with Swain, King
of Denmark, and with Harold's Sons, who were still refuged in Ireland: The
first engaged to invade the Northern Parts with a Navy of three hundred Sail,
the last, by the Assistance of Drone King of Ireland, to attempt the Western
Coasts with sixty Ships, and the discontented Lords to make a strong
Insurrection in some of the Northern Provinces, upon Approach of the Danish
Fleet, which was concerted to be soon after the Kings intended Journey into
Normandy.

These Measures were laid with such Caution, and pursued with such Secrecy,
that all was ready to be executed, before the King in Normandy, or his
Ministers in England, had either Notice or Suspicion of any such Dangers or
Designs. Fitz-Auber had asked the King's Leave some Months before his Norman
Journey, to marry his Sister to the Earl of Norfolk, and pretended some small
Discontent at his Refusal. Not long after his Departure, he declared the
Marriage, and the Day appointed to consummate it in Norfolk with great
Solemnity, and the Recourse of the nearest Relations, and most intimate Friends
on both sides, among whom were the Earl Waltheof and Eustace Earl of Bologne,
who came over on Purpose, to assist at the Consultations here designed. At this
meeting all was agreed in what Parts of the Kingdom, under what Leaders the
several Insurrections should be made, upon what Pretenses, and the Time
appointed to be when the Danish Fleet should appear upon the Coast.

But some Delays intervening, which are fatal to all Conspiracies that are
trusted into many Hands, this was discovered some Days before the Danes
arrived, but by whom of the Accomplices is left uncertain, though some write
that it was by Earl Waltheof, upon the Conscience of so great an Ingratitude to
the King.

After the full and particular Discovery of the whole Plot, and all the chief
Conspirators; Odon the Vicegerent, with the Assistance and Advice of the
King's Council, immediately dispatched away several Parties of the King's best
Troops, into the several Parts where the Insurrections were intended to begin,
seized upon many of the Conspirators, before others had Notice of the
Discovery, broke the rest before they could draw to a Head; took Earl Waltheof
and Fitz-Auber Prisoners, who were beheaded upon this Occasion, and many others
imprisoned. Whether this Execution was by the King's Command out of Normandy,
or by the Rigor of his Brother Odon, and upon Pretense of Necessity in so
dangerous a Conjuncture, is not recorded; but it is agreed, that these two were
the only Nobles that were executed in England during the Reign of William the
Conqueror, notwithstanding so many Revolts, and so much Power to punish and
revenge them; which serves to make up that Character of Clemency of Nature,
that is allowed this Prince, among his other Virtues, even by those Writers who
are severest upon his Memory.

Both the Danes and the Irish Fleets were upon the English Coasts, when they
first received the News of their Cenfederates Discovery and Disasters, upon
which they returned to Denmark and to Ireland, and after this Time the Danes
never again attempted any Invasion upon England, nor was this Conqueror any
more infested or disturbed by any of his English Subjects, during the rest of
his Reign, finding the Conspiracy wholly suppressed, and the Kingdom in perfect
Tranquillity upon his Return, which he had yet hastened out of Normandy, upon
the Intelligence of his Danger in England, and Ignorance how deep it was
rooted, or where it might end.

Nor was it easy to conjecture, since it was believed by wise Men in that Age,
that the Weakness and ill Success of this Conspiracy proceeded chiefly from the
Want of some popular Pretension, that might have raised a Commotion of the
People in Favor of the Lords, and that if this had been designed in Defense of
Edgar's known Rights to the Crown, and spirited by that Prince at the Head of
so many English and Norman Lords, as were engaged in it, the Throne had been
endangered by this last Shake. But the unfortunate Prince Edgar had made his
first Pretensions too late, and his last Submissions too soon; and the Danish
Title was hated by the Commons of England, though favored by many of the
Nobles, and thereby wanted the Foundation, proper and necessary to raise any
firm Building. Thus the Infelicity of some Princes may be occasioned only by
ill timing their Councils, when to attempt, and when to desist, in the justest
Endeavors; and the Greatness of others may be raised and preserved by
unforeseen Accidents, where the greatest Reach of Foresight and Conduct might
have failed. For had Edgar been at Liberty to pursue his Rights, upon this
Conjunction of the English and Norman Nobility, he might probably have gained
the Crown; and had not some of the chief Accomplices discovered the Conspiracy,
the Conqueror might as probably have lost it.

However these Fortunes came to attend him, thus far of his Reign, yet here the
Curtain may be drawn over the happy Scenes of this Prince's Life, for the next
that must open, will represent him in the Decline of his Age, imbroiled in
Domestic Quarrels, which could neither end in Glory nor in Gains, assaulted by
his own Children, opposed by his Native Subjects, forced to use Strangers to
reduce them to Duty and Obedience, after two dangerous Revolts, and when these
Troubles were appeased, after much Anguish of Mind, and many Dangers, engaged
by a trivial Accident, and without any Design in a foreign War with a powerful
Prince, which though pursued with his usual Vigor and Fortune, it first cost
him his Health, and at last his Life.

William the Conqueror had by his Wife Matild, Daugter to Baldwin, Count of
Flanders, four Sons, Robert, Richard, William, and Henry, besides several
Daughters. Richard was a Prince of the greatest Hopes, but unfortunately killed
by a Stag, while he was hunting in the new Forest; his untimely Fall was much
lamented by the King, but less by the People, who interpreted it as a Judgment
upon him for the mighty Wastes he had made to extend the Bounds of that Forest,
and for the Rigor and Oppression of the Forest Laws. The other three survived
their Father, but with very different Fortunes as well as Merits, and very
unequally distributed.

The King, before his Expedition into England, had promised his eldest Son
Robert the Dukedom of Normandy, in case he conquered the Kingdom he then
pretended, this Promise was made before the King of France, and challenged by
Robert after the King's first Establishment upon the English Throne. But the
King, though he denied not the Promise he had made, yet long delayed the
Performance, upon Pretense of his unsettled State in England, from the
Discontents of his Nobles and the Scotch Invasions, which made it necessary for
him to keep Normandy as a Retreat upon any great Misfortune, or Revolution in
England. Duke Robert seemed content with these Reasons, whilst they were
justified by the Appearances of any Dangers in England, but perceiving they
were ceased, and yet the Delays continued, he grew at length impatient, and
about the fourteenth Year of the King's Reign assumed the Government of
Normandy, as sovereign, and in his own Right, caused the Barons to swear Fealty
to him, as to the Duke, and not as his Father's Lieutenant, and was received
and obeyed by the Normans, who grew weary of a subordinate Government, and
thought they deserved the Presence of their Prince among them, which they had
enjoyed since the first Establishment of their Possessions in France.

Besides, Robert was generally beloved, as a Prince courteous, generous, and
brave, though withal, ambitious, unquiet, and uncertain, yet these
Dispositions, both of Prince and People, had not alone induced him to engage in
so bold a Resolution, with such a Breach of his Duty and his Trust, without the
Practices and Instigations of the King of France, who grown jealous of King
William's Greatness, and envious of his Felicity, found no better way of
lessening both, than to kindle this Fire in his own House, and thereby the most
sensibly to disquiet his Mind, as well as to disjoynt his State, and divide his
Power. He therefore, not only encouraged Robert, but combined with him in this
Attempt, and engaged to support him with his Forces, if his Father disputed
longer, the Justice of his Claim.

The King, though at first discomposed at the News of this Insolence in his
Son, yet believing it had no deeper Root, but what would soon wither or be cut
off, by his Presence in Normandy, gathered immediately what Forces he could
raise, and with an Army of his English Subjects, sailed over now to invade
Normandy, as he had done before to invade England with his Normans. A strange
Revolution, to befall one Prince, in so short a Period of Time, and which made
as great a Change in his Dispositions as his Fortunes; for the great Alacrity
and Faithfulness which the English expressed toward him in this Expedition,
gained so far upon his Affections and Confidence, that in the rest of his Reign
and his succeeding Wars, he seemed to place his chief Trust in the Courage and
Loyalty of his English Subjects.

Duke Robert, informed of his Father's Preparations, neglected not his own, and
though surprised at the Suddenness of his Arrival, to which the Winds had
conspired, he could not oppose his Landing; yet soon after he was in the Field
at the Head of a brave Norman Army, and of two thousand Men at Arms which the
King of France had sent to his Assistance. With these Forces he marched against
the King, fell upon his Vanguard, and by the Success of an Ambush he had laid
in an advantageous Pass; he broke them, killed some, and put the rest to
Flight; then he advanced against the main Body, where the King commanded, and
by an unnatural Chance, he charged his old Father with such Fury, that by the
Stroke of his Lance, he wounded him in the Arm, and overthrew him to the
Ground. The King calling out upon his Fall, his Son immediately knew his Voice,
and stung upon the sudden, with the Conscience of his Crime and his Duty, he
leaped from his Horse, raised his Father up from the Ground, fell down upon his
Knees, begged Pardon of his Offense, with Offers upon it, to return to his Duty
and Obedience. The King moved by the same Force of Nature, received his
Submissions, forgave him, and embracing him, ended an Adventure in Tears of
Joy, which had begun in Blood. The Armies were as easily reconciled as their
Leaders, and all together marched to Rouen, where the King was received with
all Demonstrations of Joy, and the Duke compliplimented upon his happy
Reconcilement with his Father, nor were those the last in this Crowd of
Rejoycers, who had been the chief in promoting the Quarrel between them.

The King made no long Stay in Normandy, dissembling the Knowledge or
Resentment of what Part the French King had played in this Affair, but after
having re-established the Quiet and Order of the Province, returned with his
whole Forces into England, left his Son in the Government of Normandy, trusting
to his Duty, and the Loyalty of his Subject there, as if nothing had passed to
give him the least Suspicions of either. A true Strain of the noble and
fearless Nature of this Prince, who was rather made to surmount all Dangers he
encountered, by brave Actions and judicious Councils, than either to invite or
anticipate his Misfortunes, by Distrust and vain Apprehensions, which are but
the Distractions of weak and timorous Minds.

Yet this Sincereness and Confidence of the King had not the Return they
deserved, for Duke Robert having once tasted the Sovereign Power, could not
long digest any Dependence upon another Will, and lying still open to the
Practices of France, upon his Levity and Ambition, relapsed the next Year into
his former Distemper, and assumed again the Sovereignty of Normandy, and as
Duke thereof in his own Right, which was again acknowledged and obeyed by the
Normans.

The King upon the News of this second Defection in his Son and his Subjects,
fell into great Passion, and in it is said to have cursed his Son, and the Hour
wherein he begat him, but soon returning to himself, with his usual Judgment
and Composure of Mind, gave present Orders for preparing a much greater Army
and Navy, than he had used in last Years Expedition; and though both were
shattered by great Storms, he met with at Sea, yet upon his Arrival in
Normandy, either the Fame of his Forces, or the Lightness of his Son's
Dispositions, or Remorse of his Duty, prevailed with Duke Robert, to offer
again his Submissions, and Obedience to his Commands. The King again received
them, pardoned both his Son and his revolted Subjects, but forced now to more
Caution than he had used before, after having settled once more, the Peace and
Quiet of Normandy, and placed the Government in safer Hands, he took his Son
with him into England, and employed him in the hard rough Wars of Scotland
against Malcolm, who upon the King's Absence and Confidence of being long
detained by the Norman Revolt, and Diversion of France, had taken Occasion to
pass the Borders with an Army, and ravage the Northern Provinces of England.

Though Duke Robert gained no great Honor by this Expedition, yet the King
gained his End: For the Scotch disheartened by his unexpected Return, and more
by his perfect Reconcilement with his Son, returned home, upon the Approach of
the English Army, and renewed the Peace which lasted the rest of the two Kings
Lives.

About the same time, incensed against the Welsh, for many Inroads and Spoils
upon the Frontier Counties; he sent an Army against them, subdued the plain and
accessible Parts of their Country, drove them to the fast Holds of their
Mountains, forced them to sue for Peace, which he granted upon Homage done him
by their Prince, and upon Hostages given for Performance of the other
Conditions.

This fortunate and victorious King seemed now to have passed all the
tempestuous Seasons of his Life, and secure of Repose for what remained, which
was necessary, or most agreeable to the great Decline of his Age. He was at
Peace with all his Neighbors, obeyed and honored by his Subjects, feared by
his Enemies, and the Troubles of his Family were wholly appeased, so that it
was hard for any Man to conjecture from what Side any new Storm should arise.
But the Decrees of Heaven are wrapped up in the Clouds, and the Events of
future things, hidden in the Dark, from the Eyes of Mortal Men. The wisest
Councils may be discomposed by the smallest Accidents, and the securest Peace
of States and Kingdoms may be disturbed by the lightest Passions as well as the
deep Designs of those who govern them: For though the wise Reflections of the
best Historians, as well as the common Reasonings of private Men, are apt to
ascribe the Actions and Councils of Princes to Interests or Reasons of State,
yet whoever can trace them to their true Spring, will be often forced to derive
them from the same Passions and personal Dispositions which govern the Affairs
of private Lives, as will be evident in the Sequel of this King's Reign.

The Normans were desirous to have a Prince of their Race reside among them;
the King was unwilling to venture again, the ill Consequences of his Son
Robert's Ambition or Inconstancy, and therefore sent him over into Normandy,
but joined in Commission with his youngest Son Henry, whose Duty and Affection
he most relied on, both to observe the Actions, and temper the Levity of his
eldest Brother.

These two Princes agreed better than is usual to Associates in Power, and
governing the Province with Moderation and Prudence, reduced Affairs there to
such Order and Tranquillity, that having little Business at home, they went to
seek some Diversion abroad, and made a Visit to the King of France then at
Constance, who received them with great Honor and Kindness, and as was
thought, not without Design of renewing old Practices with Duke Robert, to his
Father's Prejudice: Whatever Affairs might busy the Thoughts of that King and
the Duke, those of Lewis the young Dauphin, and Prince Henry were taken up with
the common Entertainments of Youth and of Leisure, Love, Hunting, Play, and
other such Divertisements, wherein the Similitude of Age and of Customs made
them constant Companions. It happened one Evening, that the Dauphin playing at
Chess at the Prince's Lodging, lost a great many Games, and much Money to
Prince Henry, and grew thereupon first into ill Humor, and at length into ill
Language, which being returned by the Prince, the Dauphin fell into Passion,
called him Son of a Bastard, and threw some of the Chessmen at his Head: Upon
which Prince Henry enraged, took up the Chess-board, and struck the Dauphin
with such Fury on the Head, that he laid him bleeding on the Ground, and had
killed him if his Brother Robert had not retained him, and made him sensible
how much more it concerned him to make his Escape than pursue his Revenge, and
thereupon they went down immediately, took Horse, and by the Help of their
Speed, or their own good Fortune, got safe to Pontoise before they could be
reached by the French that pursued them,

The King of France, exasperated by this Accident and Indignity to his Son,
which revived an inveterate Malice or Envy he had against King William, first
demanded Satisfaction, but at the same time prepared for Revenge, both by
raising an Army to invade Normandy, and taking private Measures with Duke
Robert, to divest his Brother Henry of his Share in the Government, and leave
the Dominion of that Duchy to the Duke according to his former Pretensions,
grounded upon his Father's Promise, wherein the King of France, as a Witness,
still pretended to be concerned.

The King of England seeing the War inevitable, enters upon it with his usual
Vigor, and with incredible Celerity transporting a brave English Army, invades
France, and takes several Towns in Poictou, whilst the French took the City of
Vernon, by which Hostilities on both sides, the first War began between England
and France, which seemed afterward to have been entailed upon the Posterity
and Successors of these two Princes, for so many Generations, to have drawn
more noble Blood, and been attended with more memorable Achievements than any
other National Quarrel we read of, in any ancient or modern Story.

King William, after taking of several Towns, and spoiling much Country in
Poictou and Xantonge, returned to Rouen, where, by the Benignity of his own
Nature, and Levity of his Son's, he was the third time reconciled to Duke
Robert, and thereby disappointed those Hopes, the King of France had conceived,
from his Practices with that Prince (and, as some write, with his Brother Henry
too) and defeated his Pretext of assisting his Right in the Dominion of
Normandy.

But Philip bent upon this War, by other Incentives, than those which appeared
from the Favor of Duke Robert's Pretensions, or Revenge of the Dauphin's
Injury, and moved, both with the Jealousy of the King's Greatness, and the
Envy of his Glory and Felicity, resolved to prosecute obstinately the Quarrel
he had rashly begun, and not esteeming the sudden though violent Motions of a
youthful Heat between the two Princes, a Ground sufficient to bear the Weight
of a formal and declared War; upon the News and Spite of Duke Robert's
Reconciliation with his Father, he sent to the King to demand Homage of him
both for Normandy and England: King William answered that he was ready to do
him the Homage accustomed for Normandy, but would do him none for England,
which he held only of God and his Sword. The French King hereupon declared open
War against him, which was begun and pursued with great Heats and Animosities
on both sides, with equal Forces, but unequal Fortune; which favored either
the Justice of the King's Cause, the Valor of his Troops, or the Conduct of
their Leader upon all Encounters.

He marched into France, took Nantes and burnt it, with many Villages about it,
saying, That to destroy the Wasps, their Nests must be burnt. In the Heat of
this Action, and by that of the Fires, which he too near approached, he fell
into a Distemper which forced him to retire his Army, and return to Rouen,
where he lay sick for some time, with ill Symptoms, that gave his Friends
Apprehension, and Hopes to his Enemies. During the Expectation of this Event,
both sides were quiet, by a sort of tacit and voluntary Truce between them. The
King of France talking of his Sickness, and mocking at the Corpulency to which
he was grown of late Years, said, King William was gone only to lay his great
Belly at Rouen, and that he doubted he must be at Charge to set up Lights at
his uprising. The King of England being told this Scoff, sent King Philip Word,
That he was ready to sit up after his lying in, and that when he was churched,
he would save him the Charge of setting up Lights, and come himself, and light
a thousand Fires in France.

No Injuries are so sensible to Mankind in general, as those of Scorn, and no
Quarrels pursued between Princes, with so much Sharpness and Violence, as those
which arise from personal Animosities or private Passions, to which they are
subject like other Mortal Men. The King recovered, gathers the greatest Forces
he could raise, both of English and Normans, marches into the Isle of France,
with Fire and Spoil, wherever he came, approaches within Sight of Paris,
where that King was retired. There King William sent him word that he was up
and abroad, and would be glad to see him abroad too.

But the French King resolved to let this Fury pass, and appeared not in the
Field, which was left to the Mercy and Ravage of his Enemies. The King, riding
about to observe his Advantages, and give his Orders, and straining his Horse
to leap a Ditch in his Way, bruised the Bottom of his Belly against the Pommel
of his Saddle, with such a Weight, and so much Pain, as gave him a Relapse of
his Illness so lately recovered, forced him to march his Army back into
Normandy, and to go himself to Rouen. Here his Bruise turned to a Rupture, and
his Sickness increasing with the Anguish of his Wound, gave too soon and true
Apprehensions of his Danger: Yet he languished for some time, which he made use
of to do many Acts of great Charity, and give other Testimonies of Piety and
Resignation to the Will of God, as well as to dispose the Succession and
Affairs of his State; leaving by his Testament the Duchy of Normandy to his
eldest Son Robert, the Kingdom of England to William his second Son, and all
his Treasures, which were very great, to Henry his third. After this he ended
his Life in the full Career of Fortune and Victory, which attended him to his
Grave, through the long Course of more than threescore Years Reign. For he
began that in Normandy about ten Years old, and continued it above forty Years
before his English Expedition, after which he reigned above twenty Years in
England, and died in or about the seventy second Year of his Age, and the Year
of our Lord 1087.

Several Writers show their ill Talent to this Prince, in making particular
Remarks, how his Corpse was immediately forsaken by all his Friends and
Followers, as soon as he expired; how the Monks of an Abbey he had founded,
were thereby induced to come of Charity, and take the care of his Body and his
Burial, which he had ordered to be at Caen in Normandy, and in a Church he had
there built. How the Ground that was opened to receive him was claimed at that
instant, by a Knight of the Country, who alleged it had belonged to his
Ancestors and himself, and was violently or unjusty seized from them by the
King, so that his Funeral was fain to be deferred till an Agreement was made,
and the Value of the Ground paid to the Claimer, with other invidious
Circumstances, which may argue the Ingratitude, Avarice, or other Vices of his
Servants or Subjects then living, but not defame the Memory, or obscure the
Glory of the Dead.

Thus ended all that was Mortal of this noble King, and this renowned
Conqueror; for his Fame will never die, but remain for ever in the most lasting
Records of Time, and Monuments of Glory, among the Princes most celebrated for
their brave Achievements in War, their wise Institutions in Peace, the Length
and Prosperity of their Lives and their Reigns. In all which he must with
Justice be confessed not to have been equalled by many, if indeed by any we
read of in Story.

I have made no mention of any great Councils or Assemblies held in this King's
Reign, because I find no clear Evidence of the Nature or Constitution, the
Times or the Occasions of them, whether like those used in the Saxon Reigns, or
like the Parliaments in Normandy, or whether that Style was introduced here, in
this King's Time or that of his Sons who succeeded him. It appears, that he
often assembled the Nobles and Barons of the Realm; but whether upon the
Solemnity of some great Festivals, or some Occasions of more Importance, either
for the Honor of his Court, or Consultation of his Affairs, I find not so well
recorded, nor so easy to determine as some will have it. It is agreed only
that there were two general Assemblies of the Clergy; one about the sixth Year
of his Reign, upon a Controversy between the Archbishops of Canterbury and
York about the Primacy, which was therein determined in favor of the first:
The other about erecting some new Bishoprics, or translating their Sees from
some decayed and smaller Towns, to others grown in that Age more populous and
opulent. The Lichfield Chronicle also relates how in the fourth Year of his
Reign he summoned out of every County, the Nobles, the Wise Men, and such as
were learned in their own Law; that he might from them learn what were their
ancient Laws and Customs. After which the Laws of St. Edward were conserved,
and by him confirmed throughout the whole Kingdom.

I have not been so particular as other Writers, in the Names of Places or of
Persons, or Distinction of Years; because in such Antiquity of Times and
Variety of Authors, I find them very hard to be ascertained. Besides, the
Disagreement among Writers is so great, in assigning the Years to the several
Actions of this Prince, that so important an Affair, as that of framing the
Doomesday Book, is by some referred to the eighth, by others to the thirteenth,
and by some to the nineteenth Year of his Reign: And many others are left in
the same Uncertainty.

I have likewise omitted the Accounts and Remarks wherein some Writers have
busied their Pens, of strange Comets, Inclemencies of Seasons, raging Diseases,
or deplorable Fires, that are said to have happened in this Age and Kingdom,
and are represented by some as Judgments of God upon this King's Reign. Because
I rather esteem them Accidents of Time or Chance, such as happen in one Part or
other of the World, perhaps every Age, at some Periods of time, or from some
Influence of Stars, or by the conspiring of some natural or casual
Circumstanstances; and neither argue the Virtues or Vices of Princes, nor serve
for Example or Instruction to Posterity, which are the great Ends of History,
and ought to be the chief Care of all Historians.

For this Reason, as well as to comply with common Custom, it may not be
improper or unnecessary to end the wise, politic, and prosperous Reign with
the just Character of this renowned Prince. Since all great Actions in the
World, and Revolutions of States may be truly derived, from the Genius of the
Persons, that conduct and govern them, so as by comparing both together, and
observing the Causes as well as Events; it may be easy to discern, by what
Personal Qualities and Dispositions of Princes, the happy and glorious
Successes of their own Fortunes, with the Greatness and Felicity of their
States, are generally achieved; for, to attribute such great Events to Time or
to Chance, were to destroy the Examples, and confound the Consequences of all
Virtues and Vices among Men.

William, surnamed the Conqueror, was of the tallest Stature among those common
in his Age and Country; his Size large, and his Body strong built, but well
proportioned: His Strength such, as few of his Court could draw his Bow: His
Health was great and constant, which made him very active in his Business and
his Pleasures, till about the Decline of his Age he grew something corpulent;
from all which, I suppose came the Story in some Norman Writers* that he was
eight Foot high, or the Size of Hercules.

As he was of goodly Personage, so his Face was lovely, but of a Masculine
Beauty, the Loins being strong rather than delicate; his Eyes were quick and
lively, but when moved something fierce; his Complexion Sanguine, his
Countenance very pleasant, when he was gay and familiar; when he was serious
something severe.

His Pastimes were chiefly hunting and feasting; in the first he spent much
Time, used great Exercise, and yet much Moderation of Diet. In his Feasts,
which were designed for Magnificence or Conversation, to know or to be known
among his Nobles, and not for Luxury; he was courteous, affable, familiar, and
often pleasant, and which made him the more so to his Company, was easy at
those Times in granting Suits and Pardons

It is by all agreed, that he was chaste and temperate, which, with a happy
Constitution, and much Exercise, preserved not only his Health but Vigor to the
last Decline of his Age.

He was of sound natural Sense, and showed it not only in his own Conduct and
Reasoning upon all great Occasions, but also in the Choice of his Ministers and
Friends, wherein no Prince was happier or wiser than he.

He talked little, never vaunted, observed much, was very secret, and used only
Lanfranc Archbishop of Canterbury, with an universal Confidence, both as a
Counselor and a Friend, to whom he was ever meek and gentle, though to others
something austere, as if this Conqueror had been himself subdued by the Wisdom
and Virtue of that excellent Man.

In his Purposes he was steady but not obstinate, and though constant to his
Ends, yet appliable to Occasions, as appeared by his favoring and trusting the
Normans in his Troubles of England, and the English in those of Normandy; and
was either very wise or very happy in the Arts of gaining Enemies and retaining
Friends, having never lost but one, which was Fitz-Auber.

He was a Prince deep in his Designs, bold in his Enterprises, firm in his
Prosecution, excelling in the Order and Discipline of his Armies, and choice in
his Officers both of his Army and his State. But admirable in Expedition and
Dispatch of Civil as well as Military Affairs, never deferring till to Morrow,
what should be done to Day.

Above all, he was careful and prudent in the Management of his Treasure, and
finding a Temper between the Bounty of his own Nature, and the Necessity of his
Affairs, proportioning always the Expenses of his Gifts, his Buildings, his
Enterprises, to the Treasure he was master of for defraying them, designing
nothing out of his Compass, and thereby compassing all he seemed to design.

He was religious in frequenting Divine Service, giving much Alms, building
Abbeys, and endowing them, sending Presents of Crosses of Gold, rich Vestures
and Plate to many other Churches, and much Treasure to Rome.

He was a great Lover of Learning, and though he despised the loose, ignorant
Saxon Clergy he found in England, yet he took Care and Pleasure to fill
Ecclesiastical Dignities here with Persons of great Worth and Learning from
abroad, as Lanfranc, Durand, Anselm, with many more.

He was a Lover of Virtue in others, and Hater of Vice, for being naturally
very kind to his half Brother Odon Bishop of Bayeux, having made him Earl of
Kent, given him great Revenues, entrusted him in his Absence with the
Government of the Realm, yet finding him a Man of incurable Ambition, Avarice,
Cruelty, Oppression, and Profaneness, he at length wholly disgraced him, and
kept him in Prison during all the rest of his Reign; which seems to have been a
just Punishment of his Crimes, and Sacrifice to the English, he had cruelly
oppressed in the King's Absence, rather than a greediness of his Treasures, as
some envious Writers would make it appear.

Yet by the Consent of them all, and the most partial or malicious to his
Memory, as well as others; He is agreed to have been a Prince of great
Strength, Wisdom, Courage, Clemency, Magnificence, Wit, Courtesy, Charity,
Temperance, and Piety. This short Character, and by all agreed, is enough to
vindicate the Memory of this noble Prince and famous Conqueror, from the
Aspersions or Detractions of several malicious or partial Authors, who have
more unfaithfully represented his Reign, than any other Period of our English
History.

Having taken a full View of this King in his Actions and his Person, it
remains only that we consider the Consequences that both of them had, upon the
Condition of this Kingdom, which will be best discovered by the Survey of what
it lost, what it preserved, and what it gained by this famous Conquest.

England thereby must be confessed to have lost; first, very great Numbers of
brave English Men, who fell in the Battle of Hastings, and in two Wars
afterward by the Revolt of the Nobles, and Invasion of the Scots in Favor of
Edgar Atheling. Likewise many Nobles and Gentlemen who disdaining all
Subjection to a foreign and conquering Power, retired into Scotland, Ireland,
Denmark, and after the Extinction of their Hopes, by the Suppression of all
Endeavors in Favor of Edgar's Right, never returned, but left their Families
habituated in those Countries, choosing, if they must live under a foreign
Dominion, to do it rather abroad than at home.

In the next Place, England lost the true Line of their ancient Saxon Kings,
who were a Race of just, good, and pious Princes, governed by such known Laws,
and with such Moderation, and were so beloved of their People, as makes it
observed by Writers that no popular Insurrection ever happened in any of the
Saxon Reigns.

Lastly, England by the Conquest lost in a great Measure, the old Plainness and
Simplicity of the Saxon Times and Customs of Life, who were generally a People
of good Meaning, plain Dealing, contended with their own, little coveting or
imitating their Neighbors, and living frugally upon the Product of their own
fruitful Soil: For the Profusion of Meats at our English Tables came in with
the Danes, and the Luxury of them was introduced first by the Normans, and
after increased by the more frequent Use of Wines, upon the Accession of
Guienne to this Crown.

What we preserved is remarkable in three Particulars not usual upon great
Conquests; for, first, we preserved our Name, which was lost by the Saxon
Invasions, but that of England then (succeeding the other of Britain) has ever
since continued.

Next; we preserved our Language, or the old English Tongue, which has made the
Body and Substance of what still remains, though much enlarged and polished,
since those Times, by the transplanting many Words out of foreign Languages,
especially Latin and French.

In the last Place, we preserved our Forms of Government, our Laws and
Institutions, which have been so much celebrated by ancient Writers, and have
been so obstinately defended by our Ancestors, and are by Chancellor Fortescue,
who writ in the Time of Henry the Sixth, averred to have been preserved through
the five several Governments in this Island; of Normans, Danes, Saxons, Romans,
and Britains, and so to have continued for a longer Course of Time, than those
of Rome or Venice, or any other Nation known in Story. But this I doubt is not
so easily proved as affirmed, though it may be with more Certainty of the three
first, which is sufficient to illustrate the Antiquity of our Constitutions,
without Recourse to strained or uncertain Allegations.

For what we gained by our Loss in this Conquest, though it seems a
Contradiction, yet it may be observed in many more Particulars than the other
two.

First, England grew much greater both in Dominion and Power abroad, and also
in Dignity and State at home, by the Accession of so much Territory upon the
Continent. For though the Normans by the Conquest gained much of the English
Lands and Riches, yet England gained Normandy which by it became a Province to
this Crown.

Next it gained greater Strength by the great Numbers of Normans and French,
that came over with the Conqueror, and after his Establishment here; and
incorporated with the English Nation, joining with them in the same Language,
Laws, and Interests.

Then we gained much by the great Increase of our Naval Power, and Multitude of
Ships, wherein Normandy then abounded, by the Advantage of more and better
Havens, than in later Ages.

This, with the perpetual Intercourse between England and Normandy, and other
Parts of the Continent, gave us a mighty Increase of Trade and Commerce, and
thereby of Treasure to the Crown and Kingdom, which appeared first in so great
a Mass, as was left by the Conqueror to Prince Henry his younger Son.

England, by the Conquest, gained likewise a natural Right to the Dominion of
the narrow Seas, which had been before acquired only by the great Naval Power
of Edgar and other Saxon Kings. But the Dominion of narrow Seas, seems
naturally to belong, like that of Rivers, to those who possess the Banks or
Coasts on both sides: And so to have strengthened the former Title, by so long
a Coast, as that of Normandy of one side, and of England on the other side of
the Channel.

Besides, by this Conquest we gained more Learning, more Civility, more
Refinement of Language, Customs, and Manners, from the great Resort of other
Strangers, as well as Mixture of French and Normans.

And lastly, we gained all our Consideration abroad, by carrying our Arms so
often and so gloriously, as well as extending our Dominions into foreign
Countries; so that whereas our Saxon Kings were little known abroad, further
than by the Fame of their Devotion and Piety, or their Journeys, Gifts, and
Oblations, made to Rome, after the Conquest, the Crown of England grew first to
be feared by our Neighbors, to have constant Intercourse with other foreign
Princes, to take Part and be considered, in all the Affairs of Christendom, and
by the following Accessions of Anjou and Guien, came in a short time to be
esteemed without Controversy, while they possessed those Dominions, the
greatest Power of any Kingdom then in Christendom, as appears by so many
glorious Adventures, and Successes of their Arms in France, Spain, Brittany,
Flanders, Sicily, and the Holy Land.

From all these happy Circumstances of this Famous Conquest, all the succeding
Kings of England seem justly to have done this Conqueror the Honor of dating
from him, the first great Period of their Reigns, by which those of the Saxons
and other preceding Dominions or Governments here, are left us in Story, but
like so many antique, broken, or defaced Pictures, which may still represent
something of the Customs and Fashions of those Ages, though little of the true
Lines, Proportions, or Resemblance. But all that has succeeded, since this
King's Reign, though not drawn by any one skilful Hand, or by the Life, yet is
represented in so clear a Light, as leaves very little, either obscure or
uncertain, in the History of our Kingdom, or the Succession of our Kings.

FINIS.
Books Printed for and sold by Richard Simpson at the Three Trouts, and Ralph
Simpson at the Harp in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MIscellanea; the second Part, in Four Essays. I. Upon Ancient and Modern
Learning. II. Upon the Gardens of Epicurus. III. Upon Heroic Virtue. IV. Upon
Poetry. By Sir William Temple Baronet. In Octavo.

The Young Man's Duty. A Discourse showing the Necessity of seeking the Lord
betimes; as also the Danger and Unreasonableness in trusting to a late or
Deathbed Repentance. Designed especially for Young Persons, before they are
debauched by evil Company and evil Habits. The sixth Edition. By Richard Lord
Bishop of Bath and Wells.

The Life of Monsieur Des Carts, containing the History of his Philosophy and
Works: As also the most remarkable things that befell him during the whole
Course of his Life. Translated from the French, by S. R.

Naval Speculations and Maritime Politics, being a modest and brief Discourse
of the Royal Navy of England: Of its Economy and Government, and a Project for
an everlasting Seminary of Seamen, by a Royal Maritime Hospital, with a Project
for a Royal Fishery, also necessary Measures in the present War with France,
etc. By Henry Maydman.

An Account of several new Inventions and Improvements now necessary for
England, in a Discourse by way of Letter to the Earl of Marlborough, relating
to building of our English Shipping, planting of Oaken Timber in the Forests,
apportioning of public Taxes, The Conservacy of all our Royal Rivers, in
particular that of the Thames, the Surveys of the Thames, etc. Herewith is also
published at large the Proceedings relating to the Mill'd-Lead-sheathing, and
the Excellency and Cheapness of Mill'd-Lead in preference to cast Sheet-Lead
for all other Purposes whatsoever. Also a Treatise of Naval Philosophy, written
by Sir William Petty. The whole is submitted to the Consideration of our
English Patriots in Parliament assembled;


