A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL of Her Late MAJESTY QUEEN MARY Of Ever
Blessed Memory IN THE ABBEY CHURCH in WESTMINSTER. Upon March 5, 1695.

By his Grace THOMAS Lord Archbishop of CANTERBVRY.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer
to His most Excellent Majesty, 1695.

Die Jovis 7. Martii, 1695.
It is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled,
that his Grace the Lord Archbishop of Centerbury be, and he is hereby desired
to Print and Publish his Sermon Preached in the Abbey-Church in Westminster, at
the Funeral of Her late Majesty Queen MARY of Blessed Memory.

Matthew. Johnson, Cler Parliamentor.

ECCLES. vii. 14. Former Part. In the Day of the Prosperity be joyful, but in
the Day of Adversity consider. God, also has set one over against the other.
--
PRosperity, which carries the Affections outward and discovers them in Joy,
is, by no means, a fit Subject to to entertain you with in the House of
Mourning.

But Adversity, which causes the Mind to retire, and to consider, is, without
peradventure an Argument in Season.

And, a Fourfold Consideration, in this day of our Adversity, seems very proper.

I. The Greatness of our Loss. II. The Principal Cause of it. III. The Degrees
of Good, which God has tempered with this sore Evil, for the rendering of it
the more supportable. He has set the one over against the other. IV. The Duty
which, upon this whole matter, is required of us, to the end that our
Affliction having had its due Effect, we, who, at present sow in Tears, may
hereafter reap in Joy.
1. The first Consideration is, the Greatness of our Loss: This will appear*

1. From the Excellency of the Person whom God has taken from us,

2. From some Circumstances of Time by which that loss is further enhaunced.

1. The Greatness of our Loss appears from the Exellency of that Person whom
the Goodness, and justice of God (toward Her Goodness, but Justice toward us)
has taken away.

This is a very copious Subject; and the difficulty consists not in finding out
matter, but in keeping a measure in speaking. To that, therefore, I shall have
especial regard.

Now, the Excellency of the Person may be represented to you, 1. In Her
intellectual Accomplishments; 2. In Her Graces and Virtues.


1. This incomparable Princess was endowed with more than common
Accomplishments of Mind, whether we have respect either to Her Knowledge, or
Her Wisdom.


Toward Her Knowledge Nature has done a great deal, Education and
Conversation of the best kind, more still, and most of all the Grace of God.

Her Understanding was clear and steady, and there was a great Compass and
Comprehension in it. It reached both to the greater Things of Religion, and the
lesser of Economy. It was perpetually fed and improved by Reading, by hearing
Books read, by Discoursing, by Meditation.

Her Books were many and well chosen; much delighted in, and therefore well
studied, and well remembered, For Her Majesty's Memory was Great, and it was
properly exercised by Books of History. One I may name which She much valued,
and often took into Her hands Father Paul 's Celebrated History of the Couneil
of Trent.

But the Holy Scriptures were the Oracles which she chiefly consulted. In them
if any thing occurred which was not at first so well understood it was, by Her,
noted down, as a Subject for after-thoughts, and to be cleared by them, or by
some Comment, or some Person of especial Ability.

Neither was Her Wisdom and Prudence inferior to Her Knowledge; and of this
there are many Instances out of which I shall select a few.

1. Her Wisdom showed it self in the governing of Her Knowledge She troubled
not Her self or others with such curious Questions which the Prudent neither
ask, nor think themselves concerned to answer. Neither was She wrought up to
any Biggotory in unnecessary Opinions: She was most Conversant in Books of
Practical Divinity, of which some of the latest used by Her, were certain
Sermons, and some Discourses concerning Happiness Death and Judgment. She knew
good things in order to the doing of them.

It is true, She read many Volumnes of Controversies betwixt the Reformed and
those of the Church of Rome; but it was for the sake of necessary Defense not
of vexatious Dispute.

2. Her Wisdom was made known by the wonderful Art she had attained to, for the
governing of Time, upon which all managements do much depend. Her hours were so
adjusted to the several Affairs of Her own and others, that notwithstanding the
multiplicity of them, She found a season for every thing, and frequently a Time
for dispatching many things together. Dressing did not wholly prevent Reading,
or Hearing, or Working; and nothing prevented the Service of that God, who
gives all time, and expects an Account of it. It was well understood by this
wise Princess, that in the Current of time, Affairs meet at last with a stop;
if by dispatch some of them are not taken out of the way, but all are suffered
to float down together.

3. Her Wisdom shined very gloriously in Her Administration of Public Affairs,
for which She has received deservedly the Public Thanks, having conducted them
with Wisdom and Temper and unwearied Application; Application, which was made a
Jest in a late Age, and the want of which is a Lamentation in this. It was an
Obeservation of some who were in circumstances to make it, that when secret
Difficulties occurred, this wise Princess had a due sense of them, and together
with that, such a Command of her Passions, that there appeared few signs of
Trouble, none of Dejectedness in her Countenance; least either the Friends of
the Government should be disheartened, or its Enemies encouraged. Add to all
this, that the Wisdom of this Princess was that true Wisdom which chooses the
best things in the first place; the Honor of God before the Pomp of Life; the
Salvation of the Soul before the gaining of the World. This Wisdom is justified
by the genuine Effects of it; of which the

Second part of Her Character consists

Her Graces and Virtues; which may be laid before you under these Three great
Branches of the Christian Life, Piety, Charity, and Humility.


1. She was a Princess Eminent for Piety; Piety which is necessary for all, but
still more necessary in Her Station, it being the readiest way for those who
are to govern the People, to be, first, themselves obedient to God.

Her Private Devotions were extraordinary. And tho She shut out the World, yet
in her high Circumstances, Her very Retirements could not pass wholly
unobserved. And it has at last been understood that Her Exercises of Devotion
which were known, were not the half of those which were then not known. If all
were as diligent in examining and noting down the Condition of their Souls, and
comparing the former and the present Estate of them, Heaven would in some
measure be upon Earth.

In Public, how pious an Observer of the Lords day was this Religious
Princess; how constant at Prayers, at the Blessed Communion, at Sermons; and at
all of them how Reverend, how Attentive? Insomuch, that those who gave
themselves any Diversion from their own Duties, to observe the manner in which
She performed Hers, found her intent upon them; and no further drawn off, than
by a solemn Look to check any Interruption which might sometimes happen. So
Judicious and Devout a Saint, the degenerate Church of Rome can by no means
show us; the Zeal of their most pious Recluses, being from the very Rules of
their several Orders, embased with Superstition, whilst in Hers appeared no
allay of it.

2. The genuine Fruit of the true Devotion of this Princess, was Christian
Charity, without which the longest and loudest Prayers are but Pharasaical
pretenses. For he who loves God, loves his brother also. Her Charity was as
great as Her Power, and as discreet as it was great. The distressed French, and
Scots, and Irish, and the Needy at home, were daily refreshed by it.

It extended to Persons of Condition who were fallen into decay, and to a very
great number of meaner People, and especially (as I am well assured) to the
Wives and Widows of inferior Soldiers and Seamen. Her Charity was generous and
unconstrained. When it was ready, nothing was denied which was fit to be asked.
It could not be extorted by the Unworthy, and by the Worthy it needed not.

In granting Charities. there appeared in Her Countenance an Air of
Satisfaction; and when Supplies were not at hand, it was a Grief to deny, but
the mannner of it was obliging; whilst many others almost as often as they gave
a denial, create a Enemy.

If God had thought us worthy of Her Life, She had done more public and
lasting Charities, and particularly in an Hospital for Seamen at Greenwich, in
which the Wisdom and Goodness of the King concurred with Hers whilst She was
alive; and which at this time His Majesty is going on with, for the
Encouragment of Navigation, which I take to be the English Nerve both of War
and Peace.

3. As this Excellent Princess added to Her Knowledge Wisdom and to her Wisdom,
Piety, and to Piety, Charity; so to all these, She gave Ornament by Humility,
which according to St. Peter, 1 Pet. 5.5.
is the Clothing, [(...)] the Girdle or Badge of a Servant of Christ. The
Haughty and Over-bearing are absurd enough when they have Power, Jul. Poll.
(...) l. 4. c. 18.
but when they have it not, they are perfectly ridiculous. In this Princess,
Authority, Majesty, and Humility met together. That dwelt in Her to such a
degree, that in Her Presensce, or within Her hearing, the speaking of this,
which I have said, or any thing like this, would have been exceedingly
offensive. But the Justice of Nations gives those praises to the merit of Good
Princess, which their own Modesty would not bear. An ordinary instance may
suffice for the showing her Averseness not only to Flattery but to Praise. Of a
Book addressed to Her, She said She had read it, and liked it well, but much
the better, because the Espistle was a bare Dedication.

This Grace of Humility did eminently discover it self, when at any time Her
public Administration was to cease. It was laid down with the like
unconcernedness, as one uses when he puts off his Garments, and goes to Rest.

It is true, this Grace was accompanied with a remarkable Smoothness of
Demeanor; but it was not such as the Artificial use; It was the Effect of an
excellent Spirit, and not of worldly Craft.

It was, also, attended with familiarity, but with such a good sort of it as
bred rather Veneration than Contempt; and increased the Love and Duty even to
her servants, though she treated them as her Children: It procured that
Regularity and Good Order, and Diligence in her greater Family, which, in
Private ones, is so much to be desird.

Such Accomplishments as these, are, usually, increased by Fame but diminished
by Presence, which discovers those Imperfections that, at a distance, are not
discerned. But, here the more this Queen was understood, the more she was
admired; and those who knew her best, could not but most esteem her.

After this excellent Princess had been very well known for several Years in a
neighboring Country, she was so extremely valued, that her removal from it was
lamented as a Death, and occasioned a Deep and Universal Sorrow.

Concerning Her forementioned Graces and Virtues, they may upon many Accounts,
be still further recommended.

They were not blemished by Vanity or Affection: Had that been so, she would
scarce have made such a Profession as this a little before her Death. I know
(said She) what loose People think of those who pretend to Religion: They think
it is all Hypocrisy: Let them think what they will, I may now say, and I thank
God I can say it, I have not affected to appear what I was not.

Further; Her Virtues were the early Fruits of the Grace of God; whilst Fear
and Impotency are the ordinary Causes of the shows of Piety in aged Sinners.

They dwelt in a Person seated in that high Estate which is subject to many and
violent Temptations.

They were practiced in conjunction with one another. They were the agreeable
parts of an uniform life.

They were sincere and unpolluted; and it could not be said of this Princess^
that She had great Virtues and no less Vices.

There was Devotion without Enthusiasm, and Charity without Vainglory, and
Humility without that Censoriousness which tramples upon the Pride of others
with a greater Pride of its own.

They had their Influence upon her in her several Stations and Capacities. She
was a wise and good Queen an incomparable Wife, and One who (I Am well assured)
had all the Duty in the world for other Relations, which after long and
laborious consideration, she judged consistent with her obligatIons to God and
her Country. She was likewise, one of the great Supports of Gods Church
established among us, and not without due temper toward the Scrupulous; a
Patroness of Religion and Learning, a Mistress whose service was a Pleasure; a
True and Certain Friend; and a Christian mild and Merciful to her Enemies.
Marvel not that she had some; the Son of God himself was not without them.

In fine, there was in her Life a perpetual Course of Christian Practice. She
was not distempered with fits of unsubstantial Piety, which are suddenly
raised, and as suddenly vanish. The Spring was in the Judgment and the Heart,
and from thence the Exercises of Holy living were regular and constant.

O! how good, how happy a Life was this? what a glorious Scene was it, not of
vain Pleasure, and soft and unprofitable Ease, but of true Usefulness and
Comfort? how reasonable were her very Diversions; such as Building, and
Gardening, and contriving, and improving, and adorning, and adjusting every
thing thereunto belonging? How does her Life upbraid theirs, who are at the end
of their Race, before they have set a few wise Steps? Lord, teach us so to
husband our Time that we may apply our Hearts unto Wisdom.

To have lost a very Wise and Virtuous Friend, though of Private Condition, had
been no small Calamity, but here we lament the Death of a Public person, who
was as Public a Good and that has made our Loss so much the heavier.

There are also,

Secondly, Some Circumstances of Time which farther show the greatness of it.

Great is our Loss of a most Pious Queen in an Atheistical and Profane Age, the
Seeds of which Impiety have been sowing for some years, and now seem to spring
up in greater plenty than ever. Great is our Loss of a most Charitable Queen,
in an Age which takes up the Reverse of our Lord's Saying, and declares that it
is more blessed to receive than give; of a most Humble Queen at a time when
Pride would bring all to such a Level, as is the Parent of Confusion.

Again, Great is our Loss with respect to this Iuncture, a time of foreign War,
and domestic Discontent reigning in those whose Resentments are stronger than
their Reasons. A Person is taken away who was a Partner in all the Joys, and
Griefs, and Fortunes of the King; one who could Administer, with the entire
Confidence of all the People, and without the Competition of the Great.

Likewise, Great was our Loss by the Death of a matchless Queen as taken away
in the midst of her Days, and in less than half the common standard of Human
Life. It is certain, All Princes are Mortal; Dust they are, and to Dust they
shall return: But yet Good Princes are the especial care of Providence, which
often preserves them by striking a Terror into the Desperate themselves; whilst
Tyrants, who have not God before their Eyes, and observe not how he rules by
the Eternal Laws of Equity, do seldom die an unbloody death. Moreover, this
Princess, being a Person of the nicest Modesty, and most regular Life, and free
from those uneasy andvexatious Passions, which wear out Nature before its
Time; we had entertained hopes that, under the Shadow of her Protection, we
might have sat down many Years with safety and delight. But Man's Expectation
is often very vain, and it is as often disappointed; and when it is so. That
causes Grief. And there is a double Grief which it ought to awaken at this
time; a Grief for our Loss, and a greater one for, That which is a,

II. Second Consideration, the principal, Occasion of it. Natural Causes had
their share in this Evil, but it was the Immortality, the Sin of the Nation
which hastened it as a Judgment. A Sparrow falls not to the ground without
God's Providence, much less a Crowned Head. God has guided and ordered this
Affair as he does all things, most suitable to his own Justice. He is
Righteous, but we have been Wicked: He showed what a mighty Blessing he had for
a People, if they would become reformed; but we were not sufficiently sensible,
nor thankful. Their Majesty's Letters for Reformation were early issued out,
but how few had a just regard to them? The Light shone, and we followed not its
direction, and God has removed one Branch of it; let us sin no more lest (which
God avert) those which remain be extinguished also.

As yet we may be happy, if we will amend; for God has showed us by several
Tokens, that he has not yet given us up to Destruction. He has afficted us, but
in judgment he has remembered Mercy. And, which is,

III. A third Consideration, in this Day of our Trouble: He has tempered
Prosperity with Adversity, to make the latter the more supportable; He has set
the One over against the other. And thus much the following Remarks will prove.

The King's Life is (blessed be God) preserved, and his Health re-established;
and is still pursuing the great Design of securing the Liberties of Europe.

He was Present in this Kingdom when our Loss happened, for the keeping us from
that Instability which this Accident might have procured.

He still more endeared himself to his People, by that Tenderness which he
expressed upon this most sorrowful Occasion. That went as far as Decence would
permit, and gave us an Instance of such true Greatness of Mind as is made up of
Courage and Humanity.

The good Union of the Royal Family in this Realm, confuted the Surmizes of
Evil minded Men, and disappointed their Devices.

The Great Council of the Nation was sitting at this Time, and came to a speedy
and seasonable Resolution for the Support of the King and his Government.

The Season admitted of little of such Actions as might disturb Affairs abroad.

And at the same Time that Foreign Countries had the sad News of the Queens
Death they reciv'd Tidings of the Loyalty of the Kingdom.

These several Things, by the Conduct of God's wise Providence, have wrought
together for Good.

And there is one Thing more to be considered under this Head; that seeing God
had determined this Good Queen must die, the Christian Manner in which She went
out of the World, is, in some sort, an Alleviation of the Grief of those whom
She has lef behind Her; who have indeed Reason more than enough to mourn, but
yet not as Persons without Hope.

Some few Days before the Feast of our Lord's Nativity, She found her Self
Indisposed. That, where it was known, was (I hope) some Check to the Liberties
of such who mispend that most Solemn Festival in very improper Mirth.

I will not say that of this Affliction She had any formal Presage: But yet
there was something which looked like an immediate Preparation for it. I mean
her choosing to hear read more than once, a little before it, the last Sermon of
a Good and Learned Man now with God, upon this Subject, Job 2, 10. What! shall
we receive Good from the Hand of God, and shall we not receive Evil?

This Indisposition speedily grew up into a dangerous Distemper. As soon as
that was understood, the earliest Care of this Charitable Mistress was for the
removing of such immediate Servants as might, by distance, be preserved in
Health.

Soon after this, She fixed the Times of Prayers in that Chamber to which her
Sickness had confined her.

On that very Day She Showed how sensible She was of Death, and how little she
feared it. She required him who officiated there, to add that Collect in the
Communion of the Sick, in which are these Words -- That whenever the Soul
shall depart from the Body, it may be without Spot presented unto thee. I will
(said She) have this Collect read twice every Day. All have need to be put in
mind of Death, and Princes as much as any Body else.

On Monday, the Flattering Disease occasioned from Hopes, though they were but
faint ones.

On the next Day, the Festival of Christ's Birth, those Hopes were raised into
a kind of Assurance; and there was Joy, great Joy seen in the Countenances of
all good People, and heard from their Mouths; and, I believe, it was very warm
in their Hearts. But alas! we saw what a few Hours could bring forth. That Joy
endured but for a Day; and that Day was closed with a very Dismal Night. The
Disease showed it self in various Forms, and small Hopes of Life were now left.
Then it was that he who performed the Holy Offices believed himself obliged to
acquaint the Good Queen with the Apprehensions all had of an unlikelyhood at
least of Her recovery. She received the Tidings with a Courage agreeable to the
Strength of Her Faith. Loath She was to terrify those about Her; but for her
self She seemed neither to fear Death, nor to covet Life. There appeared not
the least sign of Regret for the leaving of those Temporal Greatnesses which
make so many of High Estate unwilling to die.

It was (you may imagine) high Satisfaction, to hear Her say a great many most
Christian Things, and this amongst them; I believe I shall now soon die, and I
thank God, I have from my Youth learned a true Doctrine that Repentance is not
to be put of to a Deathbed.

That Day she called for Prayers a third Time, fearing She had slept a little
when they were the second Time read; for She thought a Duty was not performed,
if it was not minded.

On Thursday She prepared Her self for the blessed Communion, to which She had
been no Stranger from the fifteenth Year of Her Age. She was much concerned
that She found Her Self in so dozing a Condition; (So She expressed it). To
that She added, Others had need to pray for me, seeing I am so little able to
pray for my Self. However, She stirred up her Attention, and prayed to God for
his asistance, and God heard her, for from thenceforth to the end of the Office
She had the perfect Command of her Understanding, and was intent upon the Great
Work She was going about: and so intent that when a Second Portion of a certain
Draught was offered Her, She refuss'd it, saying, I have but a little Time to
live and I would spend it a better way.

The Holy Elements being ready, and several Bishops coming to be Communicants,
she repeated piously and distinctly, but with a low voice, (for such her
Weakness had then made it) all parts of the Holy Office which were proper for
her, and received with all the Signs of a strong Faith and fervent Devotion,
the blessed Pledges of Gods Favor, and thanked him with a joyful Heart that
she was not deprived of the Opportunity. She owned also that God had been Good
to Her beyond her Expectation, though in a circumstance of smaller Importance;
She having without any Indecence or Difficulty taken down That Bread, when it
had not been so easy for her some for time to swallow any other.

That Afternoon She called for Prayers somewhat earlier than the time
apppointed time, because She feared (that was Her Reason) that She should not
long be so well composed. And so it came to pass: for every minute after this,
'twas plain Death made nearer and nearer approaches. However, this true
Christian kept her Mind as fixed as posibly she could upon the best things; and
there were read, by her direction, several Psalms of David, and also a Chapter
of a Pious Book concerning Trust in God. Toward the latter end of it, her
Apprehension began to fail, yet not so much but that she could say a devout
Amen to that Prayer, in which her Pious Soul was recomended to that God who
gave it.

During all this time, there appeared nothing of Impatience, nothing of
Frowardness, nothing of Anger; there was heard nothing of murmuring, nothing of
impertinence, nothing of ill sound, and scarce a number of disjointed words.

In all these Afflictions the King was greatly Afflicted; how sensibly, and yet
how becomingly, many saw; but few have Skill enough to describe it: I Am
satisfied I have not. At last, The Helps of A^t, and Prayers and Tears not
prevailing, a quarter before One on Friday morning, after two or three small
struglings of Nature, and without such Agonies as in such cases are common,
having (like David) served her own Generation by the Will of God, she fell on
sleep, Acts. 13.36.

Thus piously, thus resignedly, thus calmly departed this Wise, and Great, and
Good Princess, who could never have learned the Art of Dying so well, if she
had not first well understood and duly practiced, the Art of Living so.

What becomes Us, who are left behind in this troublesome World, is the IV
Fourth and last Consideration; And I will detain you with it but a very little
Time.

Our Duty is manifold; Toward GOD, the King, the Memory of the Queen, (the
Blessed Queen!) and our own selves.

Toward GOD, our Duty is, to give Him the Glory, Thankfully to commemorate the
Excellencies of his Grace, which shined in the Queen: for by his Grace she was
what she was; to give Thanks to him for enjoying so wonderful a Blessing thus
long, without any murmuring because He was not pleased to continue it longer to
us; to own his Justice, to tremble at his Judgments, to remove the Causes of
them, our grievous Sins, and with frequent and earnest Supplication, to cry to
Heaven, and say, Spare thy People, Good Lord! spare them, and be not angry with
us for ever.

Toward the King; our Duty is, to pray to God to double his Blessings upon
him, and to endeavor our selves to support him by the steddiest Loyalty.

Toward the Memory of the Queen, our Duty is, to mourn solemnly and deeply,
(so much even Foreign Nations have done) and yet to temper our Sorrow with the
strong Hopes we have of her Everlasting Felicity; To speak Good of her, to
observe and extol the mighty power of her Piety, which conquered so many
Hearts; so to commend her Virtues, as not to let them cool in our Practice,
but, as far as we can and may, to follow her Example, who lived more (that is,
to more purpose) in three and thirty years, than very many do in Seventy.

To conclude our Duty toward our selves is, to weep, not so much for her as
for our selves, and for our provoking Iniquities which have drawn down this
Calamity upon us, and speedily to amend our Lives; and in order to that, to
think daily of Death, and not to suffer the Splendour of any Thing, that is
Great, nor the Conceit of any Thing, that Good in us, to divert us from the
Consideration of our Mortality.

Seeing the most Wise, Pious, Charitable, Humble Queen is taken away in the
flour of her Age; how foolish, how wicked is the wilful Forgetfulness of Death
in the Dissolute, the Bloody, the Sick, the Aged, the Decrepid, nay, even in
the Young and Healthful!

Let us consider we are Mortal, (which we must do if we have any Thought that
way at all) and let us carry that Thought forward to all the Purposes of the
holy living. For, when a Man dies, to concern is not how great or how rich he
has been, (all that is come to an end) but how good a Life he hasled.

May God give us all Grace to live as this Blessed Princess did, that we may
dye like her; that we may fight the good fight, and finish our course by all
the Exercises of our Holy Religion, and keep the Faith inviolate, to the last
minute of our days, that from thenceforth, there may be laid up for as a Crown
of Life, by our Lord Jesus the righteous Judge of all Men;

To whom, with the Father, and holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory world
without end Amen.

FINIS

