A FRIENDLY DEBATE BETWEEN A Roman Catholic AND A PROTESTANT, Concerning the
Doctrine of TRANSUBSTANTIATION; WHEREIN The said Doctrine is utterly Confuted,
and Antichrist is clearly and fully Described; and his inevitable Destruction
predicted: With a Challenge to all the Romish Doctors, that Preach and Teach
the said Doctrine, to Answer it.

LICENSED, September 24. 1688.

LONDON: (...)

A FRIENDLY DEBATE BETWEEN A Roman Catholic AND A PROTESTANT, CONCERNING THE
Doctrine of TRANSUBSTANTIATION, etc.
PRotestant. Sir, Do you believe that there is a Real Change wrought upon the
Elements of Bread and Wine, after they are Consecrated by the Priest in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, into the Substantial, Material, Living Body and
Blood of Christ, which makes up his Real Person, to wit, of Body, Soul and
Divinity?


Roman Catholic. Yes Sir, I do believe that the Elements are Transubstantiated
into the very living person of Christ, to wit, of Body, Soul and Divinity; that
is, into the very same Body which he assumed before he died; the same Body in
which he suffered and died upon the Cross, without the Gates of Jerusalem; the
same Body that laid in the Grave three days; and the very same Body in which he
ascended up into Glory, and is sat down at the right hand of God in Glory.


Prot. I must confess, Sir, according to the genuine sense of your Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, it must be so, or else it is a mere sham and mockery: For
if the Elements be Transubstantiated into the very Body, Soul and Divinity of
Christ, and then be offered up a sacrifice propitiatory and sufficient for the
sins of the living and the dead, then Christ must be alive, or else you do
offer a dead sacrifice. But I do utterly deny it; and therefore, Sir, I (...).


Romans Yes, Sir, I will prove it by Scripture, from our Savior Christ's own
words, and also from the words of the Apostle St. Paul.


Prot. Pray, Sir, let me hear that.


Romans First of all I shall prove it from our Savior Christ himself, by the
words of Institution, when he Instituted this Ordinance of the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, Luke 22.19, 20. And as they were cating, Jesus took bread and
blessed it, and brake it and gave it to the Disciples, and said, Take, eat,
this is my Body: Likewise the cup, after supper, saying This cup is the
new testament in my blood. Matt. 26.26, 27, 28. And as they were eating, Jesus
took bread and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the Disciples and said,
Take, eat, this is my body; And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it
to them; for this ^^ my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for
the remission of sins. And in John 6.52, 53, 54 I am the living bread which
came down from heaven if any man eat of this bread he shall live for every And
the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I wi^^ give for the life of the
world. Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye eat
th^^ flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have (...) life in you:
Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks m^ blood, has eternal life, and I will
raise him up at the last day. Thus, you see, I have clearly (...) (...) That it
is Christ's Real Body and Blood that we do eat and drink in the Sacrament of
the Eucharist.

And secondly, I shall prove this Doctrine from the Apostle St. Paul's words
also, in the 1 Cor. 11.24.25. where he says, Take, Eat this is my Body which
is broken for you. After the same manner also he took the Cup when he had
supped, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood. Thus you see I have
proved this Doctrine of Transubstantiation by Scripture, and I could also prove
it by Councils and Decrees, and Canons, and Traditions of our Fathers, and the
like. And besides all that has been said, it is an Article of the faith of our
Church which is infallible, and cannot err. And we are bound to believe as the
Church believes, and commands us to believe. And therefore this Doctrine must
be infallibly true?


Prot. Sir, is this all that you have to say to prove this Doctrine of your
Infallible Church.


Romans Yes Sir, and I think it is a sufficient proof of it too.


Prot. Why then, I pray Sir, Give me leave to answer you as well as I can from
Scripture, and from Reason also.


Romans Yes, Sir, with all my Heart.


Prot. Why first of all, Sir, in the first place give me leave to tell ye, you
have not taken the whole verses or sentence in some of these Scriptures which
you have quoted; you have gone away with part of a Text, even so far as will
serve your turn, which is a very dangerous thing, for it is no less than to
clip the King of Heavens Coin, which is Spiritual High Treason, which is the
worst of Treason, and is punishable with no less than all the Curses of the
Book of the Holy Word of God, without true Repentance, Rev. 22.18, 19. Deuteronomy.
4.2. Prove. 30.6.

Sir, you know Satan when he tempted our Blessed Savior Christ, he quoted part
of a Text of Scripture to serve his own turn, Matthew. 4.5, 6. Then the Devil
takes him up into the holy City, and sets him on a pinnacle of the Temple,
and says unto him, If thou be the Son of God cast thy self down, for it is
written, He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands
they shall bear thee up lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.
It Is written, says Satan, quoting Psalm. 91.11, 12. for he shall give his
Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways; they shall bear thee up
in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone: The Devil leaves out
that part of the Text, (to wit) He shall keep thee in all thy ways.

Sir, you do own and believe these Scriptures which you have quoted to be
understood literally and properly, and not Mystically and Spiritually, but
according to the plain letter of them?


Romans Yes, Sir, I do, for the Text is plain and clear.


Prot. Now, Sir, I will answer you from the words of our Savior Christ in the
same Chapters, and in some of the same verses which you have quoted, and also
from the words of the Apostle Paul in that same Chapter which you have made use
of, and also in many other places of the Holy Scriptures, whereby you shall see
by God's assistance this Doctrine of yours overthrown and utterly confuted;
therefore let us bring it to the Touchstone of Gods Word; To the Law and to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no
light in them, Isa. 8.20.

1. First of all, By the words of our Blessed and only Mediator and Redeemer,
in Luke 22.19, 20. And he took Bread and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave it
unto them, saying, This is my Body which is broken for you: so far you go; but
you leave out and omit; this do in Remembrance of me; likewise also the Cup
after Supper, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood which is shed
for you. Mat. 26.26, 27. And as they were cating, Jesus took Bread and blessed
it, and brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and said, Take; Eat, this is my
Body; and he took the Cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink
ye all of it. Here, pray Sir, observe by the way, that it is said, that Christ
took Bread and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the Disciples; what is
to be understood by this word [it]? why it was it Bread; for had it been
Christ's Real, Corporeal, Substantial Body, it should have been more properer
thus, He took the Bread and blessed him, and brake him, and gave him to the
Disciples. And he took the Cup and gave Thanks, and gave it to them, saying,
Drink ye all of it. Now if your Doctrine were true, then it should have been,
After Christ had given Thanks, he gave him to them, saying, Drink ye all of
him, and not drink ye all of it, that is, all the Congregation, both Minister
and People that are Christ's true Disciples, must all partake of the Cup, or
Wine in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. But by what Authority your Priests
are so uncharitable as to deny the Lay People the Cup, I know not, when as our
Savior Christ commands expressly, that all his Disciples must drink of it, that
is of the Wine in the Cup, and not of his Material Blood that was then running
in his Humane veins; and the Cup may rather be taken for the Blood of Christ
than the Wine, if it be to be understood literally, because the Cup only is
mentioned, and not the Wine, for it is said, This Cup is the New Testament in
my Blood which is shed for you.

Christ himself did partake of this Holy Ordinance at the same time when he did
institute it, The same night in which he was betrayed. But now if your Doctrine
be true, then Christ did eat his own Substantial Body, and drink his own
Material Blood; and yet was visible with his Disciples before their Eyes,
without any alteration in the least. It is said, His Blood is shed for many for
the remission of sins. And yet then at that time Christ had not actually and
properly shed his Blood, but virtually in the Decree of God he had done it
before the foundation of the world; for all those that ever were saved before
Christ came in the flesh, and for all that ever should be saved after he came
in the flesh, down throughout all Ages to the end of the world, 1 Pet. 1.20.
Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was
manifested in these last times for you. Revel. 13.8. And all that dwell upon
the earth shall worship him whose names are not written in the Book of Life of
the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. Act. 2.23. Him being delivered
by the determinate counsel and foreknowledg of God, ye have taken, and by
wicked hands have Crucified and slain.

This Ordinance of the Lord's Supper is to be kept up and practiced in the
Churches of God, for a Remembrance of Christ's Death and Passion, from them
words of our Savior, which words you omit and leave out, namely, Do this in
Remembrance of me, as will yet further appear by and by from the Apostle St.
Paul's words when he celebrated this Holy Ordinance of the Lord's Supper in the
Church of Corinth.

But again, from our Savior's words which you do take and interpret as if
spoken literally, whereon you lay so much stress, and make it serve for a
foundation to build this Doctrine of Transubstantiation upon, which was spoken
before the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper was Instituted by our Savior himself
in Joh. 6.51, 53, 54. I am the living Bread which came down from Heaven; if any
man eat of this Bread he shall live for ever. And the Bread that I will give is
my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. Then Jesus said unto
them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Whosoever eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, has Eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.
Here you see it is, Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, etc. How so?
what is the meaning of that word of our Savior Christ, viz. Whosoever eats, etc?
why this refers to what Christ had been speaking before in the same Chapter,
which leads to this Discourse of Eating his flesh, and drinking his blood, in
setting out the usefulness and excellency of the Grace of Faith, and the
absolute necessity of it, verse. 35, 40, 47, 48. here you shall see that this,
Whosoever eats Christ's flesh, and drinks his blood, is this, viz. Whosoever
believes in Christ, and rests upon him alone for Spiritual life here, and
Eternal life in Glory hereafter. Pray mark the words of our Savior, And Jesus
said unto them, I am the bread of life, he that comes to me shall never
hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst: And this is the will of
him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son and believes on him, may
have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Verily, verily,
I say unto you, he that believes on me hat^ everlasting life. I am (that)
bread of life. What bread of life? Why that bread which by faith in his
Righteousness and Merits alone justifies and acquits the soul from the guilt
and pollution of sin, without any works or righteousness of ours in
conjunction, or i^ competition with Christ's; for he will have no Rival he will
have all the honor of saving a sinner t^ himself; for he is made the only
Spiritual bread o^ flesh, for the new creature to live upon; and it is
nourished and strengthened thereby, even as our natural bodies are fed and
nourished, and strengthened by our natural food, Joh. 3.16. For God so loved
t^^ world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whose ever believes in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life. It is not said here, whosoever
eats the material flesh of Christ shall be saved; but whosoever believes on
Christ shall have Everlasting li^^ Our Lord Jesus Christ is the only Spiritual
bread for every believing soul to live and feed upon Spiritually by the mouth
of faith. But you will say Here is a plain Text of Scripture for your Doctrine
viz. This is the Bread which comes down from Heaven, that a man may eat
thereof and not did I am the living bread which came down from Heaven, (...)
any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever, and t^^ bread that I will
give is my flesh, which I will give f^^ the life of the world; that is, that
all Believers shou^^ live Spiritually by the blessed fruits and effects whi^^
is produced by Christ's taking flesh upon him. T^^ Jews they were offended at
this Mystical Spiritual Doctrine of Christ, because it was not given (...) them
to believe; the Jews therefore strove amo^ themselves, saying, How can this man
give us his f^^ to eat? as indeed well they might, if it had b^ to be
understood literally and properly, as they ^^nally and vainly through unbelief
did conceive (...) imagine that the words was spoken: Then Jesus (...) unto
them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except you the flesh of the Son of Man,
and drink his blood, ye (...) no life in you. And in verse. 60. there Christ's
D^^ples were stumbled and offended at this Doctrine saying of his, Many
therefore of his Disciples where had heard this, said, This is an hard saying,
who can h^^

But now I pray, Sir, mind strictly the wo^^ our Savior, and you shall hear
how plainly clearly he himself has expounded and unfolded his own meaning unto
us, of this eating his (...) and drinking his blood, in the 61, 62, 63. (...)
When Jesus knew in himself that his Disciples mur^^ at it, he said unto them,
Does this offend you? wh^^ if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend up where he
(...) fore? it is the spirit that quickens, the flesh p^^ nothing; the words
that I speak unto you, they are and they are life.

As if our Blessed Lord and Savior should said, Do you think that I intend by
(...) that I have spoken unto you, to cut and carve out ^he flesh of my real,
substantial, and finite body, and give it unto you to eat? And likewise broach
^^y material blood, and let that out of my ^eins, and give it unto you to
drink? for if I should ^o so, it would not quicken you unto spiritual life, ^^
must be my Spirit that must do that, and not my ^esh; for the flesh profits
nothing. But besides ^^l that, with what body must I suffer in, and die ^^
redeem the World in? And with what body ^^all I arise in from the dead? And
with what body ^^all I ascend up into glory in, where I was before, ^amely,
where I was before ever I assumed this marial, finite body, made of material
flesh and blood? ^ Act. 1.9. there is his Ascension; and in Heb. 10.5. there
^his Body which God the Father prepared for him.

And again, if Christ's substantial body be eaten, ^^d his real material blood
be drunken literally in (...) Sacrament of the Eucharist, then consequential^^
must Christ's sinless, spotless, holy body see corruption, which is
Diametrically contrary to the ^^ly Word of God, both in the Old Testament and
(...) New, Psalm. 16.10, 11. For thou will not leave my (...) in hell, neither
wilt thu suffer thine holy One to see corruption. Acts 2.26, 27, 31. Therefore
did my heart ^^^yce, and my tongue was glad: moreover also my flesh (...) rest
in hope, Because thou will not leave my soul in (...) neither will thou suffer
thine holy One to see cor^^^ion. He seeing this before, spoke of the
resurrection Christ, that his soul was not left in hell, neither his (...) did
see corruption. Now, Sir, if this Doctrine yours, of Transubstantiation, in
your sense, be (...), why then Christ, the Holy one of God, whose ^^less nature
was without the least Tincture of (...) or any kind of inclination thereunto,
must see ^^^ption, ay, and must be turned into corruption (...) yea, and that
into the very worst sort of ma^^l corruption, namely, into Man's Excrements,
unto Man's Dung; and, that, as often as the (...) says the Mass; For I pray
you what does be^^^e of what we do eat and drink? Is it not turned corruption?
Ay, and the Body that eats it too, (...) be turned into Corruption. Meat is for
the (...), and the Belly for Meat; but both are for ^^^ption or Destruction.
And pray mind what ^aviour says of what we do eat, in Matt. 15.17. ^^t ye yet
understand, that whatsoever enters in at ^outh, goes into the belly, and is
cast into the ^^^ht? I could be larger here, as well as in most ^^e rest of
these points, but I must consult bre^^or, as I hope, a public good; and leave
the (...) to expatiate upon it in his own mind, tho^ resolved to write the most
part of the Scrip^^^^ that I have occasion to quote, at length; and ^^eatest
reason for it is this, because that it may ^^entially fall into the hands of
some, perhaps, (...) keep one, or look into it; and for their sakes I do not
repent my labor, that this may put them upon getting the holy Bible, and
looking into it, to see if these things be so or no, Acts 17.11. These were
more noble than those in Thessulonica, in that they received the word with all
readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily whether those things were
so. The Holy Scriptures are able to make persons wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy
3.15. which is the greatest wisdom of all. John 5.39. Search the Scriptures,
for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify of
me. Christ expressly commands us to search the Scriptures: But your Church
expressly forbids it. Who shall we obey, Christ who is Infallible, or your
Church which pretends to be so?

Again, Our Savior Christ has but one humane body, and that is a finite body,
Heb. 4.15. For we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities: but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet
without sin. And therefore our Savior's Body was not to see corruption,
because it never did see sin, so as to be tainted in the least measure with it;
and therefore Christ could never have died, had it not been for the sins of his
people; because the wages of sin is death. And if Christ will take Believers
sins upon him, he must take the wages also that was due unto them: And
therefore it is said, that he tasted death for every man; that is, for every
man that ever did, or that ever should believe in him: But because his sin was
by imputation, and not inherent in his nature, as ours is, but only by
imputation; therefore tho he tasted death for every man, and by that took the
curse or sting that is in death, away, for all Believers, yet his holy Body did
not see corruption; Death could not hold him, because there was no sin in him;
but it was upon him by imputation; as Sinners are made righteous, even so
Christ was made a sinner; for as Sinners are made righteous by the
Righteousness of Christ imputed unto them, so Christ was made a Sinner by
imputing our sins unto him; but not by Contamination or Pollution, but as a
Surety; for if Christ had had no more sin upon him, than he had in him, he
could never have died; it had been impossible; for it would have been
inconsistent with the Justice of God, Isa. 53.5, 6, 10. But he was wounded for
our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have
gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid on
him the iniquity of us all; yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put
him to grief; when thou shall make his soul an offering for sin. But this of
our Savior Christ's giving his flesh to eat, and his blood to drink, must be
understood Symbolically and Sacramentally by Faith, it is the sign of Christ's
(...) had not Christ taken humane flesh upon him, and died for sinners, the
whole species of the humane race had perished and been lost as all the fallen
Angels were, and not one soul had ever been saved; and so his flesh and blood
became meat and drink unto us, to live upon him by faith alone, who do share in
all these benefits and blessings which came by Christ's taking flesh and blood
upon him; and is not such a wonderful great mercy as this is, worthy of a holy
thankful remembrance? which is the principal end and design of Christ in his
Instituting of this Ordinance, and ought to be ours in partaking of it; for if
our Savior Christ had given us his material flesh to eat, and his real blood
to drink, it would have availed us nothing. And thus are the words of our
Savior to be understood in that 6. Joh. in retort to the carnal conception of
the unbelieving Jews, as well as to his unbelieving Disciples which dreamed
even as you do of the Roman Catholic faith, that Christ spoke of giving them
his real substantial body to eat, and his real blood to drink; said the Jews,
How can this man give us his flesh to eat? and said the Disciples, This is an
hard saying, who can bear it? But mind narrowly our Savior's own words, viz.
It is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing; the words that I
speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life. It is the Spirit that
begets faith in every true Believer; and that quickens the new Creature or
Babe of Grace, after it is begotten and born of God in its first quicknings or
formation, and in its after-quicknings, for it is of the seed Royal of Heaven,
Psalm. 89.29. and it is conveyed unto us through Jesus Christ by his holy
Spirit, and so we come to be made alive to God, and are Children of the most
High, for God is the Father of Spirits, and the only Spiritual Father of all
that believe in Jesus Christ, his only Son from all Eternity by Generation, for
all the rest of Gods Sons of humane race are his Sons by Adoption and
Regeneration; and all this is effected and brought about through the agency and
aid of the Holy and ever Blessed and Eternal Spirit; and therefore that which
is thus begotten and born of God, must be Spiritual; for as Adam begot a Son in
his own likeness, who was himself of the Earth, and Earthly; so God begets all
his Children in his own likeness, who are all Spiritual and Heavenly Children;
they have all of them the Image of their Father stamped upon them, which is
Grace and Holiness; the more holy, the more like unto God they are, who is
Essentially holy; and theefore the food which this spiritual man lives upon,
must be Spiritual, Heavenly food; he lives upon God in Christ, and feeds upon
God in Christ by faith; for all our springs are in him. Now for any persons to
imagine that a spiritual being can live and subsist upon carnal material food,
is but a vain imagination; (...) less flesh, and his blood without the least
tincture of sin, yet notwithstanding all that, it is food beneath the new
Creature to live upon; for by Christ's taking flesh upon him, he made himself
lower than the Angels, as he was man, Heb. 2.7. Thou made him a little lower
than the Angels, thou crownedst him with Glory and Honor, and did set him
over the works of thy hands. But as Christ was God, so he is higher than the
Heavens; yea the Heavens are unclean in his sight; and all the food which the
new creature does live upon, is all treasured up in Christ; he is the great
Lord Treasurer of Heaven and Earth; h^^ is the Dispencer of all Grace; for it
has pleased the Father, that in him all fullness shall dwell: And in him are
hid all the treasures of Wisdom and Grace; there it is placed by God the
Father; there it is laid up for all his children, for them to come and fetch by
faith and prayer, all whatsoever they stand in need of; and we all receive from
Christ's fullness, and grace for grace. Psalm. 84.11. For the Lord God is a Sun
and a Shield; the Lord wi^^ give Grace and Glory, no good thing will he
withhold from them that live uprightly. There it is Treasurer up in Christ, who
is the only Infallible head of the true Ancient Catholic Apostolical Church,
to distribute and give forth unto all his members as ^^ sees to be needful and
necessary for them, both Spiritual and Temporal Blessings and Mercies. Alas how
can a Spiritual being subsist upon carnal substantial food? it is utterly
incoherent and inconsistent, as our Savior Christ said in another case (...)
cure Thomas a Didimus's unbelief, viz. A spirit has (...) flesh and bones as ye
see me have. Now if your Transubstantiated Christ could convince us after the
manner as our Savior convinced Thomas a Didim^^ your Doctrine might obtain
some credit amo^^ those sort of people that are not debarred of the (...) of
their sense and reason, as yours are. But Believe have not a carnal body to be
fed in this sense, (...) that is fed with the meat that perishes, but the fed
with that meat which endures to everlast life. A Cow may as well and better
live upon^ bare Sea-Rocks, and feed upon Oysters or Cockles a Fish live out of
the water upon the dry land, (...) feed upon hay or straw, as for the new
Creature, Spiritual man, to live upon material substantial (...) and blood. And
our Savior Christ himself has us consequentially, in effect, that his flesh
would fit us nothing if he should give it unto us to ea^^

Again, in the next place this eating of Ch^^^ flesh, and drinking his blood,
is no more to b^^^ derstood literally and properly, than the Doctrine
Regeneration was, which our Savior Christ (...) red unto old Nicodemus; and if
you observe it gently, you will find that our Savior Christ (...) pounded it
much after the same manner as (...) done this of eating his flesh (...) blood,
and gives the like check to the understanding of the one carnally and
literally, as he does to the other. And pray take notice, that our Savior
Christ is the only infallible Judge and Interpreter of the holy Scriptures, as
well as he is the Infallible Head of the Church; for who can give a better
interpretation or Exposition of the Law, than the Lawmakers can? therefore no
person can understand or give a right Interpretation of the Holy Scriptures,
but them to whom Christ gives this gift, and that is to many thousands, to some
more, and some less; some have a higher measure than others; it is given to
every believer, which is a spiritual man, to know the mystery of Gods will in
the Salvation of poor sinners; for says Christ, It is given to you to know the
mystery of the Kingdom, but unto them it is not. God hides these things from
the wise and prudent, and reveals them unto babes, says Christ. 1 Cor. 2.14,
15. But the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they
are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. But he that is spiritual, judges all things. Here you
see who is the chief Judge of the Scriptures, and who are Missionaries, or whom
he has Commissionated so ^o do, not any one single person above the rest. But
^o return to what we are upon, Joh. 3.3, 4. Jesus ^nswered and said unto him,
Verily, verily, I say unto ^^ee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the
^^ingdom of God. Nicodemus says unto him, How can (...) man be born again when
he is old? can he enter the second time into his mothers womb, and be born?
This is ^^st as the unbelieving Jews, that said, How can this ^^an give us his
flesh to eat? And old Nicodemus notwithstanding he was a great Rabbi and Ruler
in Israel, yet he had like to have gone away under as ^^eat a mistake about the
Doctrine of Regeneration, (...) you Romanist have done of this mystical saying
of ^^r Savior Christ's, in that he has said, Take, Eat, ^^is is my Body; and
of giving his flesh to eat, and ^^s blood to drink.

Now pray observe how nearly alike our Savior Christ interprets and expounds
this Doctrine of Re^^neration unto Nicodemus in the 5th and 6th. verses, ^^sus
answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except man be born of water, and of
the spirit, he cannot en^^ into the Kingdom of God; that which is born of the
(...) is flesh, and that which is born of the spirit is spirit. ^^w see the 6.
Joh. 63. and compare them toge^^r, It is the spirit that quickens, the flesh
profits ^^hing; the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, (...) they
are life. Here you see all the carnal fleshly ^^^eption or Transubstantiated
fancy utterly over^^wn and knocked in the head in these words of ^^aviour
Christ, as well as that also of Nicodemus's ^^al conception of the Doctrine of
Regeneration. (...) understood mystically and Spiri^^^ (...) eaten by faith, in
every Ordinance of God in Religious worship, and especially in the Ordinance of
the Lord's Supper; for faith is the mouth of the new creature, the great grace
of faith is the souls Nurse, but it feeds upon Christ, and lives upon Christ,
which is this spiritual Bread which came down from Heaven, that a man may eat
thereof and not die. And so likewise our Savior gives the like interpretation
of the graces of the Spirit in the Believer, much after the same manner; which
are compared to rivers of living water in Joh. 7.37, 38, 39. In the last day,
that great day of the Feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, if any man thirst,
let him come unto me and drink. And pray mind what the drink is that Christ
gives him, He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living water. But pray mind what Exposition our
Blessed Redeemer gives in the following verses, But this spoke he of the
Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive. You see this drinking
here is by faith in Christ, and the liquor which they drink, is spiritual
liquor, it is the water of life.

Now if these Scriptures are to be understood literally and properly, then you
must understand the Contexts, and the Coherence of them literally and properly
also; for Christ does not, as I remember, speak a whole sentence, wherein one
part wholly contains spiritual matter, and the other part wholly contains a
literal and proper meaning in it; tho one whole sentence may have both a
mystical and literal meaning in it: Now pray mind in Joh. 6.35, 50. And Jesus
said unto them, I am the bread of life; he that comes to me, shall never
hunger; and he that believes in me, shall never thirst. Now is not here the
very same reason to believe that we shall never be corporally a hungry, nor a
thirst again, as there is for us to believe that that is material bread or
flesh that Christ spoke of in the same verse? Again this is the bread which
comes down from Heaven, that a man may eat thereof and not die. Now is not
here as much reason to believe and understand this literally and properly, as
there is for any of the other to be understood so? and if the rest be to be
understood so, then they that eat Christ's flesh, and drink his blood, shall
never die a natural death.

Again, if this Doctrine in Joh. 6. be to be understood literally and properly,
then must the Doctrine of Regeneration be understood so, in Joh. 3. And if so,
then none should ever see the Kingdom of God, nor enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, and be saved, but them, and them only that crept into their mothers
womb, and were born again, literally and properly, as old Nicodemus ignorantly
imagined. There is every whit as much reason to believe this, as there is to
believe your Doctrine of Transubstantiation. Pray mind the Interrogation of
Nicodemus, and that of the Jews, how like they are the one to the other: (...)
is old, etc. Secondly, the Jews they said, How can this man give us his flesh
to eat? Now if these Scriptures in Joh. 3. and in Joh. 6. are to be taken, and
the sense of them expounded literally in the plain letter of the word, then
must this of Joh. 7.38. be understood so in like manner, where it is said that
rivers of living water shall flow out of the Believers belly; and we might as
rationally expect that Scullers should ply the Ferry at every believers belly
in these rivers of living water; and also that every believer has crept into
his mothers womb, and been born again, as to believe that the Bread and Wine in
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper after Consecration is Transubstantiated into
the Body, Soul, and Divinity of our Savior Christ, which is into his very
person. But what will become of all those poor souls whose mothers are dead
before they are or were converted, that have never a mothers womb to creep
into? for I will assure you that the one is as true as the other, let who will
deny or contradict it. And thus you do hear how our Savior Christ has
expounded his own meaning, who spoke as never man spoke like him, he has given
a clear interpretation of these mystical Scriptures before mentioned, that this
eating of his flesh, and drinking of his blood, is to be understood
Symbolically, Spiritually, and Sacramentally, by faith, to Commemorate the
great love of God in the Transaction of man's Redemption by the Death and
Sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ. But thus much for the words of our Savior
Christ for the present.

But secondly, in the second place, let us hear the full of what the Apostle
Paul says unto this Doctrine also, for give me leave to tell ye, Sir, that you
have quoted but part of the Apostle's words, you have curtailed his words also
in the 1 Cor. 11.23, 25, 26. For I have received of the Lord that which also I
deliver unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed,
took bread, and when he had given thanks he brake it, and said, Take this my
body. Thus far you go, Take, Eat this my body; what Body was that? why it was
Christ's Sacramental Body, namely the Bread and Wine, which are the Signs of
his Body, which prefigures out unto us his real material Body, which was
Crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem; it is to Commemorate the Death and
Sufferings of Christ, and all the Benefits and Blessings which did flow forth
unto poor lost and undone fallen man, for all that ever did believe, or that
ever should believe in him, and expect eternal life and salvation upon the
account of his Righteousness and Merits alone, through the aid and agency of
the Eternal blessed and holy Spirit, and all this comes flowing unto us from
that Blessed fountain of all the Christians Mercies, namely the Eternal love of
God the Father, which was the efficient or first moving cause of all. And as
the Glorious Trinity had all a hand in making man, so they all have a hand in
redeeming man.

But again, this is that Body which was evidently set forth Crucified before
the Galatians eyes, Gal. 3.1. It was the Representation of Christ's Crucified
Body in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper among the Galatians, and not the Real
Crucifixion of his Substantial Body without the Gates of Jerusalem. And this is
that Body which the Apostle says, Take, Eat, this my body, that was his
Sacramental body, or the sign of his body. In the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, that was crucified and nothing else; and this is that body which all
true believers in the Sacrament do discern and partake of, and eat now in the
Churches of Christ, and all this is done by faith in a holy Reverential
Remembrance of Christ, to show forth his Death till he come.

After the same manner also he took the Cup when he had supped, saying, This
Cup is the New Testament in my blood, this do ye, as often as ye drink it, in
remembrance: Which latter words you always omit, and take no notice at all of
them; which words carry great weight in them, if you would but be so kind unto
your own souls as to adhere unto them; for says the Apostle, As often as ye
eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords Death till he come.
This Ordinance was Instituted by our Savior Christ himself, the same night in
which he was betrayed. And at that time Christ did partake of i^ with his
Disciples; so that if your Doctrine o^ Transubstantiation be true, then Christ
must make his body at that time, and eat himself, body, soul^ and Divinity; and
so he had two bodies, one to ea^ with, and the other to be eaten; or otherwise
h^ must give the same body which he was then in unto his Disciples to eat and
to drink; nay, that (...) not all, for he must eat his own body, and yet (...)
visible at the Table with them at the same time nay, that is not all, for he
must eat all his Disciple or Members, and also all his Members that parta^^ of
this Ordinance must eat him; for every true believer is in Christ, and Christ
is in them; nay, the is not all, for every true believer when he partake^ of
this Ordinance according to your Doctrine, m^ not only eat Christ carnally, but
he must also (...) his own self. Nay that is not all, for he must (...) the
Church too, for all is in Christ, and Christ is God. I in them, says our
Savior, and thou in (...) that they may be one as thou art one. And in the 1
(...) 10.16, 17. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it (...) the communion
of the blood of Christ? the bread which break, is it not the communion of the
body of Christ (...) we being many are one bread, and one body, for we (...)
all partakers of that one bread. Here the Church called bread, and it is called
body also, as our (...) viour Christ is in the Sacrament, and at the Sacrament
also in (...) once more, Every individual person that partaketh of this
Ordinance, must eat the body of Christ singly and entirely, or else they divide
Christ, and so eat but a part of a Christ, as you Laics do; for you have but a
very dry lifeless Christ that has not one drop of blood in his veins; so that,
so many partakers, so many Christ's there must be, which must be a jolly company
of them indeed. But Christ as he was God, did make or prepare his own material
body, Heb. 10. but whither will these Absurdities hurry us? I could name many
more that this Doctrine affords us, some of which will necessarily and
consequentially fall in my way in the remaining part of my Discourse.

Secondly, Again in the next place, this Ordinance is to be kept up and
celebrated during Christ's absence, until some eminent and glorious appearance
of his in his Churches, which appearance I humbly conceive, under correction,
will ^ender this Ordinance useless, by the Apostle's words, viz. Ye do show the
Lords Death till he come; that is, until Christ come. I do not remember that I
tread that Christ after he Instituted this Ordinance, did ever partake of it
himself, nor his Disciples neither during Christ's personal presence with them,
until after his Ascension.

And this Ordinance does also show unto the world ^he great undertaking of
Christ, who trod the Winepress of God's wrath alone, and of the people there
was none with him; he bore the wrath of God for sin that was due unto sinners,
that poor sinners might be made partakers of the love and grace of God; he was
made a curse for sinners, Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of
the Law, being made a curse for us, for it is written, Cursed is every ^ne that
hangs on a tree. He bore the curse to purchase the blessing of Eternal life
and Salvation, for all that believe in him. And this is that which will
mightily aggravate the condemnation of the wicked world at the day of Judgment;
That light is come unto the world, and men love darkness rather than ^ight,
because their deeds are evil; they hear of Christ, but will not come and
believe in him, nor reign up the conduct and government of their souls unto
him; and this Ordinance of the Lord's Supper (...) to quicken and strengthen the
believers graces, and (...) show forth the transcendent wisdom and grace of ^od
in contriving and bringing to pass this blessed ^ork of man's Redemption by his
only begotten ^n Jesus Christ.

This holy Ordinance may be compared, with ^^ly reverence, unto a tender
hearted loving Husband that is just taking his leave of his dearly be^^ed Wife,
and going some long voyage by Sea, or ^^he tedious journey by Land: And at his
departure when he takes his leave of his wife, he says (...) long time from
thee, therefore I will leave this Diamond Ring, or this precious Jewel with
thee, as a Token of my entire love and affections unto thee, for thee to
remember me during my absence, until I return unto thee again. But when he
returns, his Wife has no need of the Ring or Jewel to remember him by,
because he himself is now personally present with her; why even so our Lord
Jesus Christ, our Head and Husband, just the very night in which he was
betrayed, leaves this Ordinance, this precious Jewel with his Spouse the
Church, as a Love-token for to remember him by, during his absence, while he is
personally sitting at the right hand of God the Father; as you may observe from
them words of our Savior, Do this in remembrance of me. The true Catholic
Apostolic Church is Christ's Spouse, Cant. 5.1. I am come into my Garden, my
Sistor, my Spouse; and Christ is the Church's Husband, Isa. 54.5. For thy maker
is thy Husband, the Lord of Hosts is his name; and thy Redeemer the Holy One of
Isael, the God of the whole Earth shall he be called.

But if this Doctrine of Transubstantiation in your sense be true, viz. that
the Bread and Wine is Transubstantiated into the very person of Christ, namely
into Body, Soul and Divinity, which makes up the complete person of Christ as
much now, as he was before and after his Death and Resurrection, and as much as
he will be at the great day of Judgment, for he will be then in Body, Soul and
Divinity; but there will not be one soul that will even dare to stand by and
own this strange Doctrine in that day, any otherwise than to abhor it, and to
be ashamed of it. And Christ is in Body, Soul and Divinity, now at the right
hand of God in Glory.

But if this Doctrine of yours be true, That Christ is Personally and
Corporeally present, every time that the Priest says the Mass: Then first in
the first place, It will consequentially follow, that either the Priest makes
a new Christ every time the Mass is said, and so we have one Christ personally
in Heaven, and they have thousands of Christ's personally upon Earth. Or
Secondly, They fetch down Christ materially, personally, from the right hand of
God the Father: And if so, then in the third place, Christ has no time at all
in Heaven with the Father, (I call it time in Heaven, for distinction sake) to
intercede and plead as an Advocate and Mediator with God the Father for
sinners, all his time would be taken up and spent in attending upon the Priests
every time they say Mass, in all those many remote places round the Globe
almost, which takes in their Mass-hours, perhaps, all the four and twenty
Hours, being upon several Horrizons. Fourthly, If this Doctrine be true, then
Christ is come, and then this Ordinance ceases to be, as I conceive, and there
needs no such thing to remember him by, or to show (...) swade him to stay when
he is come in your Mass; for according to your Doctrine, there is a complete
Christ that comes in the Mass, every time it is said; for when Christ does
come from the right hand of God to judge the quick and the dead, as you your
selves do confess, and own in your own Creed, to my own certain knowledge; which
I shall have occasion to speak more of by and by; for Christ will come then in
no other manner, as to his person, than in Body, Soul and Divinity; if he went
to Heaven so, he will come again so; as you may see Act. 1.11. Ye men of
Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? this same Jesus which is taken up
from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into
Heaven. Now if Christ be thus come, then I humbly conceive, this Ordinance
should be at an end; for when once the substance is come, then the shadows must
flee away and cease to be; for what need the children of the Bride-chamber
mourn when the Bridegroom shall come again to them, and be with them for ever?
for what need a man have any thing to put him in mind, or to remember a friend
that is always present with him, and is always before his eyes? -- Why when
Christ does come, his people shall see him eye to eye, Isa. 52.8. and Rev. 1.7.
Behold he comes in the Clouds, and every eye shall see him. And they also
which pierced him, that shall be both Jews and Gentiles, Zech. 12.10.

Again thirdly, the same Apostle says, That Christ was to be offered up but
once; and he gives this as one reason of it, viz. for says he, If he had been
offered up often, then must he have suffered often since the foundation of the
world. And the Apostle Peter, whom some do count Prince of the Apostles, says,
That Christ suffered once, 1 Pet. 3.18. For Christ also has once suffered for
sin, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God; being put to death
in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit. Mark ye, it was the humane flesh or
body of Christ that suffered and died, and not his Godhead, for that is not
capable of suffering. -- I pray, Sir, observe these following Scriptures, and
believe them, Heb. 9.25, 26, 28. For Christ is not entered into the holy place
made without hands, which are the forerunners of the true; but into Heaven it
self, now to appear in the presence of God for us; nor yet that he should offer
himself often, as the high Priests entered into the holy place every year, with
the blood of others; for then must he often have suffered since the foundation
of the world: But now in the end of the world has appeared to put away sin by
the sacrifice of himself: So Christ was once offered to bear the sin of many;
and unto them that look for him, shall he appear the second time without sin
unto Salvation. Here you see Christ was ordained and appointed to be offered up
but once, and that was a sufficient sacrifice for sin, in the wisdom and
account of God: but you (...) once offering up himself, was not a sufficient
Sacrifice for the sins of his people; and therefore you (...) offer up Christ
often, even as often as the Mass said, as a Sacrifice sufficient and
propitiatory for t^^ sin of the living and the dead; which is to prof^^ that
you do know God, but in works you deny h^^ at the highest rate that ever can be
imagined by a^^ that ever called themselves Christians; for you s^^ it clearly
proved, that as often as Christ is offe^^ up, so often must he suffer; and if
it be so, w^^ then how many millions of times must Christ ha^^ suffered by your
Priests, since this opinion has be^^ broacht in the world among you, that the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is a Sacrifice, and the you do offer up Christ in
the Mass in Body, Soul a^^ Divinity, a Sacrifice sufficient and propitiatory
f^^ the sins of the living and the dead? and is not the to say plainly, that
Christ's Sacrifice of himself, w^^ not a sufficient and propitiatory Sacrifice
for the sin of his people? nothing can speak bolder and plain^^ than this does.

Again fourthly, Let us hear furthermore wh^^ the Apostle St. Paul says, who
himself lived (...) Rome, which is more than I can understand th^^ ever the
Prince of the Apostles did; I cannot sa^^ that St. Paul never dreamed of this
newfound Doctrine of yours; but yet this I am sure, in the fi^^ place, that he
never taught any such kind of Doctrine there: And secondly, That he did see in
his da^^ by a Prophetic Spirit, that there would be such (...) Doctrine
brought after his time; which I sh^^ prove anon. But to our purpose before us,
Heb. (...) 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Then said he, Lo, I come to do (...) will, O God;
He takes away the first, that he may establish the second. By the which will
ye are sancti^^ through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once (...)
all. And every Priest stands daily ministering, offing oftentimes the same
sacrifice, which can never (...) away sin. But this man, after he had effered
one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down at the right ha^^ God, expecting till
his enemies be made his foot^^. But why is it said, that Christ is expecting
till (...) enemies be made his footstool? Why, Christ repects it, because God
the Father has determined (...) promised it, in Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said
unto my L^^ sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies footstool.
This does unavoidably lead me to a digr^^ on; therefore, Sir, I must beg leave
of you, for (...) present, to pursue this digression: But I will certainly meet
you again anon, upon the same Top^^ and discourse out the point with you.

In the first place, God the Father has said (...) Christ, his only Son, Sit
thou at my right hand, (...) I make thine enemies thy footstool. God the F^^
(...) of all his Enemies? why, it must be infallibly him that opposes Christ
most. And, pray, who is that? Why, It is the Man of sin, Antichrist: His very
Titles, as well as his Characters and Practices signify the same. It is he
that is gotten into the Temple of God, and claims a power and sovereignty over
Kings and Rulers, and over Men's souls and Consciences: But he is but a Usurper,
for he exalts himself unto that Power and Dominion; for it is a power that
properly and peculiarly belongs unto Jesus Christ, for it is he that is King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and the only Ruler of Princes, Rev. 19.16. Rev.
17.14. 1 Timothy 6.15. Prove. 8.15, 16. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree
justice; by one Princes Rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth.
Here you see, whose right it is to Rule over Kings, and Princes, and Judges of
the Earth; Ay, and Christ is to have this power restored unto him again,
because God the Father has promised it unto him: And also it is his right, in
Ezck. 21.27. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more,
until he come whose right it is, and I will give it him. Rev. 17.16, 17. And
the ten horns which thou saw upon the beast, these shall hate the whore, and
shall make her desolate and naked, and shall cather flesh, and burn her with
fire; for God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will. I am apt to think
that this is Antichrist's will which they fulfill, and to agree and give their
Kingdom to the Beast, until the Word of God shall be fulfilled, Dan. 8.25. He
shall stand up against the Prince of Princes; but he shall be broken without
hands, Isa. 47.8, 9, 10, 11. Rev. 18.7, 8. And that which is to antecede, or go
before the destruction of Antichrist to usher it in upon him, you have in Rev.
16.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Here is already, or will be suddenly, a threefold
division among them, and strange unusual thunder, and lightning, and fire, and
great hail of that magnitude, that it will be sufficient to knock down an Ox;
and great earthquakes both literal and metaphorical. But you will ask me, who
this Antichrist, the Man of sin, is? why, my answer in the genral is this, That
the Apostle Paul has described him, and set several infallible marks upon him,
that he may easily be distinguished from all other persons in the World; he is
the head of the many Antichrists which did Apostatize from the true Gospel,
Worship, Doctrine and Discipline; he is the chief head and promoter of all
wickedness, and therefore called, the Man of sin, by way of Eminency, as you
may see in that famous descriminating Chapter, 2 Thessalonians. 2.2, 3, 4. Here the
Apostle brings it in by way of caution to the Christians of that day, and in
the spirit of Prophecy also, viz. that ye be not soon shaken in mind, or
troubled neither by Spirit, nor by Word, nor by Letter, as (...) that the (...)
Christ is at hand; Pray has had his day; for as Antichrist has sat upon
Christ's Throne, viz. the Temple of God, and made his people his footstool,
which is indeed to make Christ his footstool; for what is done to his people is
done to himself: As you may see in the Case of this Apostle Paul, when he was a
Persecutor, Acts 9. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Who art thou, Lord? I
am Jesus whom thou persecutest. Why, so Christ will depose the man of sin, and
take the Throne himself, and make Antichrist his footstool; for if Antichrist
will exalt himself above all that is called God, and sit in the seat of God
himself, then he must be abased and made Christ's footstool: For the Word of
God says, He that exalts himself shall be abased: And therefore Antichrist
must be made Christ's footstool; for Christ in his day of Exaltation will
debase this Usurper, and tread him under his feet. But to return to what I was
upon, let no man deceive you by any means, for that shall not come, except
there come a falling away first, and that Man of sin be revealed, the Son of
Perdition. The Apostle gives him the same Name or Title here, as our Savior
has given Judas, who betrayed him, Joh. 17.12. And the Apostle has a great deal
of reason for giving Antichrist this Title; for as Judas, under the pretense of
the greatest friendship, proved our Savior's greatest enemy; why, so does
Antichrist; and as Judas had a hand in crucifying Christ's real Body, so has
Antichrist in crucifying of Christ's mystical Body, the Catholic, Apostolical
Church. Pray mind how the Apostle has laid down the Prophecy, wherein he gives
the infallible Marks and Characters of Antichrist, First, there was to be a
falling away, that is, the Apostatizing from the true Doctrine of Faith, 1 Timothy
4.1, 2. Secondly, The man of sin must be revealed; That is, he must appear
visible in the Church, or Temple of God, in his Colors. Thirdly, here is his
practices when he is thus revealed, viz. he opposes and exalts himself above
all that is called God, or that is worshipped; That is, above all the Civil
Magistracy, and above all the Ministry, both which Orders of Men are called
Gods in Scripture, Psalm. 82. Joh. 10.34, 35. and there is a Civil Worship or
Reverence that is due unto them both, above all other men. But this is not all,
but he exalts himself above God himself, and places himself in the room of
Christ, so that he, as God, sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that
he is God; and he opposes and deposes all power that stands in the way of
his exalting himself, both Ecclesiastical and Civil; and he exalted himself, by
taking to himself that power which belongs only to God, viz. the Sovereignty
over all Kings, Princes and Rulers, which either his Sword or Deceit can
Conquer, Dan. 8.25. And through his policy also he shall cause craft to prosper
in and by peace shall destroy many: That is, those which adhere unto his
Doctrine, and are reconciled unto him as their Head, and so are at peace with
him; by which peace their Souls will be destroyed, for it is a peace with
Satan; and therefore judge what kind of fruit that peace must produce. Lastly,
He Exalts himself above all true Worship and Worshippers, which is above all
Churches, and over men's Souls and Consciences, Rev. 18.13. And he assumes to
himself one of God's Glorious Attributes, namely his Holiness; for none is
essentially Holy, nor Holiness, but God: So that he, as God, sits in the
Temple of God; That is, where none but Christ ought to sit: And this is his
standing up against the Prince of Princes; but he shall be broken without
hands, says Daniel 8.25. He shall be destroyed by the brightness of Christ's
coming, says St. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. Therefore evil shall come upon thee, thou
shall not know from whence it comes; and mischief shall fall upon him, he
shall not be able to put it off: and it shall come suddenly, says the Propher,
Isa. 47. When God begins, he will soon make an end: and her plagues shall come
in one day, says John, Rev. 18. that may be in one year which is at hand, I
doubt not.

Now whosoever is found under these marks and indelible characters which are
here given, and what I shall yet find out and and add, That is the Man of Sin,
be he who he will that claims this universal power, both Spiritual and
Temporal, Rev. 17.18. And the woman which thou saw, is that great City which
reigns over the kings of the earth. And who this Woman is, and what she does
or has done, you may see in the same Chapter, Verse. 5, 6. And upon her
forehead was a name written, Mystery Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots,
and Abominations of the Earth. And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of
the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I
wondered with great admiration.

But why is he called the Man of Sin by the Apostle Paul, and called a Woman by
St. John, in the Revelations? The Reason why he is called the Man of Sin, I
humbly conceive, respects him as a single person, and a temporal Prince, with
all his temporal power and cruelty, Dan. 7.7. And the Reason of her being
called Woman, is that which respects her Ecclesiastical Power, as Head of the
Church, in conjunction with the Body, so she is a Woman; And as he is
Antichrist, the Man of Sin, so he is Head and Husband to this Woman, their
Church, which is made up of the many Antichrists. As our Savior Christ is
called the Man Christ Jesus, and the Holy One, who alone is Head and Husband to
the true Catholic, Apostolic Church of God; for both the false, Antichristian
Church, whereof the Man of Sin is Head, and also the true and pure Church of
God, whereof Christ is Head, are pre^^^^ (...) Woman; the false, Antichristian
Church, is (...) presented unto us as a Whorish woman, a Strum (...) Rev. 17.1,
2. But the true Church is represent unto us as a Chaste Virgin, and a Clean
Church without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.27. -- And (...) an illustrious,
beautiful Woman richly cloth^^ Rev. 12.1. Psalm. 45.13, 14 Cant. 6.10. But (...)
false Church, this Whorish woman has deser^^ Christ who was her Head and
Husband, before (...) played the Harlot with many Lovers, by forsake her
Husbands bed, the pure Worship and Ordnances of God, and is become guilty of
spiritual ^^nication and adultery, Rev. 17.4, 5. and there (...) Christ has
deserted her, and cast her off, and gi^^ her a Bill of Divorce; and so the Text
tells (...) that this Woman is in the Wilderness, Rev. 17.(...) And we have
this Antichristian Church, or Wom^^ prophesied of also in Zech. 5.7, 8. And
behold, the was lift up a talent of lead: and this a woman that (...) teth in
the midst of the ephah. And he said, Th^^ Wickedness. Here is Antichrist, the
Man of Sin, (...) the Church or Temple of God; and my Rea^^ why I look upon it
to be so, is this, Because (...) the Destruction of this Woman, namely Wicked^^
which you have in the latter part of the 8th V^^ Then upon this comes forth
two women, w^^ the wind in their wings, Verse 9. which are (...) two Churches
of both Jews and Gentiles, which (...) to be after the destruction of
Antichrist, and (...) conversion of the Jews; the one is the Jews, (...) will
then be formed into a Gospel Church, and (...) other the Church of the
Gentiles; and this Win^^ their Wings, I take to be their Gospel Doctrine and it
signifies their spirituality and their s^f^^ the Wings are God's Attributes;
for then they (...) be built up and established, and set upon her (...) Base,
Verse 10.11. Then these two Women, (...) the two Churches of the Jews and
Gentiles, sha^^ beautiful and glorious in the eyes of all pe^^ Zech. 14.20, 21.
So thus you see the Reason (...) the Apostle St. Paul called Antichrist a Man
(...) why St. John called her a Woman, The one re^^ him as a Prince in his
temporal power, and (...) other respects him as head of the Church, (...)
spiritual power; for it is both one and the (...) person, tho successively and
conjunctively th^^ all the Reign of Antichrist.

But there are some persons in the World (...) would fain have this the
Antichrist, to be the (...) Turk, and that for this reason; because it is (...)
1 John 4.1, 2, 3. Hereby know ye the spirit of every spirit that confesses
that Jesus Christ is (...) the flesh, is of God. And every spirit that
confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not (...) and this is
that spirit of Antichrist, whereof you^ heard that it should come, and even now
already (...) (...) How did they come to (...) this? ^ur Savior Christ told
them and us so, in Matt. 24.^, 25, 26. And also the Apostle Paul, by the Spirit
(...) Christ, gave a very clear description of him, in These. 2.7. For the
mystery of iniquity does already ^^rk. That was the Man of Sin, Antichrist, --
^^s way was a preparing, and paving for him, to ^t into the Church, or Temple
of God, even then (...) his time. But some people will say, and them ^^ly
perhaps that are the persons principally concerned, That this cannot be meant
of us, because ^^e do confess that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh: ^ut pray
give me leave to tell you, that there is ^^ore in this than a bare verbal
confession, that Je^^s Christ is come in the flesh; pray mind what the apostle
says to this, Romans 10.9, 10. That if thou ^^^lt confess with thy mouth, the
Lord Jesus, and shall ^^^eve in thine heart that God has raised him from the
^^^d, thou shall be saved: For with the heart man believes ^^^o righteousness,
and with the mouth confession is made ^^^o salvation. This sort of Faith leads
the Soul (...) of his own Righteousness in point of merit, or Justification,
and leads him to the Righteousness ^^d Merits of Christ alone for Justifiction;
for let ^^em confess never so often with their mouth, that ^^us Christ is come
in the flesh, if they do not believe in their hearts that his Righteousness and
Me^^^ alone is sufficient to justify and acquit them ^^^m sin, and render them
acceptable unto God, (...) will join their own Righteousness and Works ^^^h
that of Christ's, it will avail them nothing: (...) the same Apostle says,
That by the deeds of the (...) shall no flesh be justified; for by grace are ye
saved though faith, and that not of your selves: For it is (...) gift of God,
not of works, lest any man should (...). The proper work and office of the
Tongue, is confess from the heart, That Salvation comes (...) Christ's
Righteousness and Merits alone, which (...) wrought out in his Rising from the
dead, by ^^ich he was justified, and acquitted from all the (...) which lay
upon him when he hung on the ^^ss; he was put to Death in the Flesh, but
Justice in the Spirit.

But if a bare verbal Confession of Jesus Christ ^^^g come in the flesh, be
sufficient to make a (...) a true Christian, then no doubt but Judas was a good
Christian, and was saved, although (...) Scripture calls him Son of Perdition,
A lost Son. ^^on by external profession of the Christian Reli^^^, but lost for
his Treason and Rebellion; as it (...) call the Man of Sin, Antichrist: For no
doubt Judas, as he was an Apostle and a Preacher of ^^^st, tho a great
Hypocrite and Traitor, yet he (...) often confess, that Jesus Christ was come
in the (...) Nay, all the Protestants that ever were Hang^^ burned for
Heretics, confessed, that Jesus (...) it was come in the flesh: And therefore
if this (...) come in the flesh, does acquit them that hanged and burned them,
from being the Antichrist; why, then it does also acquit them that were Hanged
and Burned, from being Heretics; for Antichrist is the greatest Heretic that
ever was in the World, and all Heretics are Antichrists; but not them that are
commonly called Heretics, but them that call them so, that put darkness for
light. And thus you see clearly, that they condemn themselves of being guilty
of the Blood of the Martyrs, by their own Argument, which they vainly use to
clear themselves from being Antichrist.

Again, Thirdly, If a bare verbal Confession of Jesus Christ being come in the
flesh, be sufficient to interest them in the great privilege of true
Christianity, then may the Devils themselves come in for a share of this kind
of Christianity, and great Privilege; for they went a great way beyond this, of
a bare Confession that Jesus Christ was come in the Flesh; for they owned, and
confessed him to be the Son of God, and worshipped him, as Christ told the
Devil, when he tempted him, Luke 8.28. When he saw Jesus, he cried out, and
fell down before him, and with a loud voice, said, What have I to do with thee,
Jesus thou Son of God, most high? I beseech thee torment me not. Luke 4.41. And
Devils also came out of many, crying out, and saying, Thou art Christ the Son
of God; and he rebuking them, suffered them not to speak, for they knew that he
was Christ. And the Apostle James 2.19. Thou believe that there is one God,
thou do well: the Devils also believe and tremble. Alas, it is not a notional
confession of the Head only, of Jesus Christ in the Flesh, in words only, that
will make a Man a true Christian, and entitle him unto all those glorious
privileges which does arise therefrom; for people may confess that Jesus Christ
is come in the Flesh, in words, and yet at the same time deny it in works,
Titus 1.16. They profess that they know God, but in works they deny him, being
abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. 2 Pet. 2.1. But
there were false Prophets among the people, even as there shall be false
teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying
the Lord that bought them, and bringing upon themselves swift destruction. Jud.
4. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained
to this condemnation; ungodly men, turning the grace of God into
lasciviousness: denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. This is a
denying Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh Doctrinally.

Again, This Man of Sin is one that pretends to the Apostolical Office, and
working of Miracles and Wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. Even him whose coming is after
the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders: Who is this
him that comes? Why, it was Antichrist the Man of Sin, as you may (...) if he
that comes, Who is this he that comes? Why, it is even the same again with
him that comes, viz. The Man of Sin, the Antichrist. And what does he do after
he comes? Pray mark: For if he that comes, preaches another Jesus whom we
have not preached, and if ye receive another Spirit which ye have not received,
or another Gospel which ye have not accepted, ye might well bear with him. Here
the Apostle Prophesied of another Jesus, that is, of a false transubstantiated
Christ, as I humbly conceive, which he saw by the inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, would come into the Gospel Church or Temple of God, which caused God to
turn it into a Desert: And these are the same false Christ's which our Savior
does forewarn us, and commands us not to go out after them; That is, that we
should not believe in them. Matt. 24.23, 24, 25, 26. And there was Signs and
Wonders to attend these false Christ's which our Savior spoke of; insomuch,
that if it were possible, they should deceive the very Elect: But they are but
lying Wonders, and false Signs, as the Apostle declares, they are made up of
deceit. But here the Apostle Paul spoke of another Spirit, which St. John
calls the spirit of Antichrist, 1 John 4.3. Rev. 16.13, 14. This is the same
spirit by which they do work their pretended Miracles, Signs and Lying Wonders;
and this is another Gospel, which is, their Canons and Councils, Decrees and
Prescriptions, and unscriptural Traditions of old Fathers; and so they did cast
off the true and pure Gospel of God, and do not adhere unto it to this day; and
place these Scriptures of their own invention in the room of it, and cry them
up to be Canonical, and Infallible: And this is that, another Gospel, namely, A
false Antichristian Gospel, stuffed with nothing but Errors and Heresy. And
pray observe what the Apostle says, by way of caution, concerning this kind of
Gospel, and them that Teach it, Gal. 1.8, 9. But tho we, or an Angel from
heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which we have preached unto
you, let him be accursed. As we said before, so say I now again, if any man
preach any other Gospel unto you, than that ye have received, let him be
accursed. The Apostle spoke by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, prophetically
and clearly of what was to come into the Temple of God, when the Man of Sin
should be revealed. And in the 13, 14, 15. verses of that 2 Cor. 11. he gives a
clear character of those persons that should be guilty in assisting to bring in
and preach up another Jesus, and another Spirit, and another Gospel, into the
Temple of God, viz. such are false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming
themselves into the Apostles of Christ; and no marvel, for Satan himself is
transformed into an Angel of light, therefore it is no great thing if his Mi^^^
(...) righteousness, whose end shall be according to the works; they are for
works of Merits, and in (...) end they shall have as much salvation as they
have earned by them, these you see are the Devils Minsters, and they are acted
and influenced by his spirit, Rev. 16.13, 14. And I saw three unclean spirit
like Frogs, come out of the mouth of the Dragon, and o^ of the mouth of the
Beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet: for they are the spirits of
Devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth, and Acts
20.28, 29, 30. Take heed therefore unto your selves and to all the flock, over
the which the holy Ghost have made you overseers, to feed the Church of God,
which (...) has purchased with his own blood. For I know th^^ that after my
departing, shall grievous Wolves enter (...) among you, not sparing the flock.
Also of your o^^ selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away
disciples after them. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. No^ the spirit speaks expressly, that
in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing
spirits, and doctrines of devils, speaking lies in hypocrisies having their
consciences seared with a hot iron, forbidding to marry, and commanding to
abstain from meats which God has created to be received with thanksgiving of
them which believe and know the truth. Now what Sect, or sort of persons are
there to be found among Christians, that do forbid Men, that are in spiritual
Orders, to Marry? or if they are Married, that do forbid them to take that
Office or Place upon them? And these are the person here intended by the Holy
Ghost, which sent the Apostle an express from Heaven, with the foreknowledg of
it.

The Apostle Peter, who some call the Prince of the Apostles, was a married
man, for we read (...) a miracle that our Savior Christ wrought to cu^ his
wives mother of a Fever, Mat. 8.14, 15. a^^ several of the other Apostles were
married me^ 1 Cor. 9.5. And the same Apostle, namely Paul, sa^^ in the 1 Cor.
7.9. It is better to marry than to bur^ viz. than to burn in lusts here, and in
Hell he after to all Eterniy for Fornication and Adultery it is better for them
to be married seven times to ^ven wives successively in Gods way and holy
Ordnance, than it is for them to borrow or make be with their neighbors wife
once.

And then as for commanding to abstain fr^^ Meats at certain times and seasons,
that is univer^^ and reaches to all; and the same Apostle sai^ That we may eat
whatsoever is sold in the Shambles, ^ing no questions for conscience sake, 1
Cor. 10.25. (...) does not say eat whatsoever is sold in the Fish-mar^ tho he
did not prohibit that; and all those am^^ Christians that are thus guilty which
are fo^^ ^^der this Character, are those th^^ (...) Man of Sin the (...) theirs
from Christ their Head; for tho they confess that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh in words, yet in works they deny it.

Again, the Turk never professed the Christian Religion, nor owned the true
Gospel of God, and the pure Instituted Worship of Jesus Christ, and afterward
Apostatized from it, and rejected and despised the Faith and Truth of the
Gospel, and fit in the Temple of God, and usurp a power over all Christian
Kings, and Princes, and Rulers, and over all Worship and Worshippers, and sit
in the room of Christ in his Temple, and give Laws to men's Consciences, as this
Man of Sin does, and as the many Antichrists do. Nor did the Turk broach, nor
bring in strange and monstrous Doctrines of Devils into the Church or Temple of
God; for mind the Apostle, Act. 20.30. Also of your own selves shall men arise;
this could not be Turks, for they were Christians; and what shall these do?
speaking perversethings to draw away Disciples after them. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. Now
the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from
the faith, giving heed ^o sedning spirits, and Doctrines of Devils, etc. Now
can you think this to be meant of the Turks? It is spoken of persons that
profess the name of Christ, that do call themselves Christians.

Here we see was Prophesied that in the latter times, that is in the time of
Antichrist's power and ^eign, some, (not all) should depart from the Faith;
that is, they should Apostatize from the very Doctrine of the true Christian
Faith, they would disown the true Doctrine of Faith, they would depart from the
very fundamental Doctrine of Justification, and Sanctification and Salvation,
by the Righteousness, Merits and Spirit of Christ alone; and look to be saved
by their own righteousness, and Meritorious works, in conjunction with Christ's
Righteousness and Merits; when it is said in Act. 4.12. Neither is there
Salvation in any other, for there is none other name under heaven given among
men, whereby we must be saved: and in Romans 10.3, 4. For they being ignorant of
Gods Righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have
not submitted themselves unto the Righteousness of God, for Christ is the End
of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes; for by the deeds of
the Law shall no flesh be justified. And they departed from the Faith of one
Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. And they have
made to themselves many Mediators.

And they have departed from the Faith of one intercessor in Heaven, and have
made to themselves many Intercessors; when as it is said in Romans 8.33, 34. Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect, it is ^^d that justifies; who
is he that condemns, it is (...) that is risen again, who is (...) ^^cession
for us; he is our Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2.1, 2, 3.

And lastly, they depart from all other fundamental Doctrines of true
Gospel Worship and Discipline, and in all these departings they depart from God
himself, who is the chief Good, and ought to be the last End, and by this they
fall into all mischief and Heresy; being drawn away and seduced by these
seducing spirits, who are false Teachers, to give up the sole conduct and
government of their souls unto them that have their own Consciences seared with
an hot Iron, who feed them with Doctrines of Devils or Demons; they teach or
speak lies in hypocrisy. And here the Apostle lays down their forbidding to
marry, and commanding to abstain from Meats, to be part of these Lies; For,
says he, Speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their conscience seared with a
hot Iron, forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God
has created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe, and know
the Truth. (Mark) they pervert the very End and Design of God in the Creation
of these things; God has created them to be made use of in his own way and
ordinance, the one in Chastity, and the other in Temperance. Not but that a
Minister or any others are left to their liberty, whether they will marry or
not; but they ought not to be imposed on by others; but in this case they are a
law to themselves; neither does this destroy a holy fasting or abstinency, when
it is done heartily and sincerely, according to God's own appointment and
prescription in his Holy Word; but it wholly destroys all Impositions that are
irregular; and also it destroys all Pharisaical, Hypocritical Meritorious
Fasting and Penance.

But you will say, How can this forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain
from Meats, be part of those Lies and Doctrines of Devils which they speak in
Hypocrisy?

First, in forbidding to marry, they enjoin the penalty of Damnation; and
pretend that if any persons in Spiritual Orders do marry, they do not only
forfeit the said Office, but do also incur the guilt of damnation, and they
will yet sooner absolve them of the guilt of Fornication or Adultery, as they
pretend, than of that offense. Now this is Diametrically contrary to the Holy
Scriptures, which is the whole Faith and Truth, which they are departed from;
and therefore, it must needs be a lie, for the word of Truth says plainly,
That it is better to marry than to burn, 1 Cor. 7.9.

Secondly, They do command all to abstain from Meats, and make the ignorant
people believe that they shall be damned if they eat flesh on certain times and
seasons which they have prohibited, without a dispensation from the Church,
which is the (...)

Now the word of Truth says, Whatsoever is sold in the Shambles, that eat,
asking no questions for Conscience sake. And further it is said, If any of them
that believe not, bid you to a Feast, and ye be disposed to go, whatsoever is
set before you, eat, asking no questions for conscience sake. Here you see the
Man of Sin commands one thing, and the holy God by his servant Paul
commands another; therefore this must be a lie, because God is a God of
Truth, and cannot lie; and the same Apostle says, Let God be true, and every
man a lier, Romans 3.4. But the Man of Sin is a lier, and is departed from the
Faith, and the Truth is not in him. Thus you see how they do impose upon the
easy credulous ignorant people, and make them believe that if they do disobey
the Canons or Commands of their Church, they do incur the penalty of damnation;
because say they, our Church is infallible, and cannot err. And therefore you
must believe as the Church believes, or as she commands ye to believe, which is
to assume that Power and Prerogative which peculiarly and properly belongs
unto God, viz. to make them a willing people in the day of his power, Psalm.
110.3. Why even so Antichrist by force or fraud makes them an ignorant willing
people in the day of his Dragooning power, by the permission of God. But here
lies the great difference; whereas God when he does come by his Spirit, by the
Omnipotent power of Grace to work upon the souls of sinners to make them a
willing people, he also makes them a wise and understanding people, Psalm
119.130. The entrance of thy words gives light, it gives understanding to the
simple. God works first upon the Understanding, and then upon the Will, and
by that he enlightens the Mind in the knowledge of Christ, and then the Will is
sanctified and changed, and so of an unwilling people they are made willing:
But Antichrist when he exerts and puts forth his power to proselyte a soul, he
works first upon the Understanding, and then upon the Will also; but it is to
put out the common light of the Understanding in Spiritual things, and wholly
depraveth the Will, and resigns it up to the will of Antichrist, and then
leads the Mind wholly into the dark, that they may not discern their deceit,
nor see the true way to come to the knowledge of Christ; and therefore they take
away and rob them of the Key of Knowledge, namely the Holy Scriptures, which is
the Rule of Life and Faith, that every man ought to walk by and believe,
because it is the revealed Will of God.

But say they, our Church is infallible, and cannot err; that is, she is so
good and so holy, that there needs no amendment nor reformation in her; which
if it were true, would be a higher degree of perfection than ever any Church of
Christ has yet (...) and the Apostles time. We read of Seven Churches at one
time in Rev. 2. and Rev. 3. but we find they had all of them their failings,
there was neither Infallibility nor Supremacy to be found among them, tho
notwithstanding it is true the Gospel true Catholic, Apostolical Church, is
perfect and infallible; but not in nor of her self, but she is so in Christ her
Infallible Head, for there her perfection lies, Ephesians. 5.26, 27. That he might
sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that he might
present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any
such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish. Therefore this
Doctrine of Infallibility of theirs must also be another Lie, which they speak
or teach in Hypocrisy; for the Scripture says in Jam. 3.2. In many things we
offend all. And in Eccles. 7.20. For there is not a just man upon earth, that
does good and sins not. Therefore the Man of Sin cannot be infallible, although
in conjunction with all these many Antichrists and false Prophets which do
belong unto him. And pray mind what another Servant of God says, tho acted by
the same spirit as Paul was, 1 John 2.18, 19. Little children, it is the last
time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many
Antichrists, whereby ye know that it is the last time. And here follows their
Apostatizing from the true Church and Worship of God, They went out from us,
but they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have
continued with us; but they went out that they might be made manifest that they
were not all of us. Pray observe, it was these many Antichrists that went out
from the Church of Christ, and made the first rent or schism. But the true
Church of Christ kept her standing, tho perhaps not so visible in some
Centuries or Ages, because she fled into the Wilderness, into her place
prepared by God for her, and was hid there, after the Dragon by the permissive
will of God, got into the Temple of God which is called Heaven, in his Son
Antichrist; for as God is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, so o^ the
contrary the Dragon is Antichrist's Father, Re^ 12.1, 2, 3, 6. After this great
fight in Heaven which was persecution of the Church, is the W^ man or Church of
Christ fled into the Wilderne^ where she has a place prepared by God that the
should feed her there 1260 days, which is all the reign of Antichrist. And the
Antichristian Church that woman is in the Wilderness also, Rev. 17.3. B^ as the
true Church is in the Wilderness in mere to her, because she is in her place
which God d^ prepare for her, to hide her in from the Dragon the cast out
floods of wrath and malice after her; (...) the false Antichristian Church is
in the Wilderness in judgment to her, for she is bewildered and I (...) there.
These many (...) did not go first from them, for she kept close to Christ's
Standard in all Ages, They followed the Lamb whithersoever he went; and did not
flinch nor run from their Colors; but these Antichrists deserted the service
of Christ, and run from their Colors to Satan the Enemy.

And now to clench this Nail that is driven into the head of Antichrist the Man
of Sin, pray look into the same Chapter where he is described and prophesied
of, and observe strictly what is the cause that produced this dreadful effect,
namely what was it that provoked God to bring this tremendous judgment upon
them; and there you shall find that it is charged upon them by way of
prediction for their despising and departing from the Faith, 1 Timothy 4.1. which
is from the whole Doctrine of Faith, namely the Gospel of God, 2 These. 2.9, 10,
11, 12. Even him whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power and
signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness in
them that perish, because they receive not the love of the truth that they
might be saved. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions that
they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned who believe not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. They please themselves with the
conceit of being saved by their own righteousness, which is unrighteousness in
competition with the Righteousness of Christ for Justification; they departed
from the very Doctrine of Faith, the means of Grace and Salvation, which is the
Spiritual food under Christ for the souls of true Christian Believers to live
upon, Psalm. 19.8, 9, 10. -- Now that person must needs perish and die that
refuses and despises his natural food, and will not feed upon it, but pretend
to live upon the wind; why even so it is with a respect to Spiritual food, that
soul or souls must needs perish and be damned, that reject and refuse the means
of Grace and Salvation: Because, says the Apostle, they received not the love
of the truth that they might be saved; and for this cause God shall send them
strong delusions that they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned.
That is, the whole of their Faith, Doctrine, Discipline and Worship, is one
great lie; as the whole of the true Gospel-Faith, Doctrine, Discipline, and
Worship, is called the Truth in the same Chapter, in opposition this great Lie.
So that the whole of their Spiritual opinion is only a heap of lies and deceit
wrapped up and incorporated together; And therefore called by the Holy Ghost, a
strong delusion, and a lie. It is a Delusion full of Delusions, or a Lie full
of Lies. The Apostle by the Holy Ghost prophesied clearly what a dreadful
Judgment God would inflict upon all them that would be thus horribly guilty;
For this cause God shall send them strong Delusions; first, hence we may
observe that God did not proceed in (...) we may observe, that this Judgment
did not come of it self, but God sent it. Thirdly, God sent them the Truth, but
they did not receive it in the love of it. Fourthly, you may observe that it
was not an ordinary weak puny Judgment or Delusion that God sent, which should
not be able or strong enough to do the work; no, but it was a strong delusion
that should overcome them. Fifthly, you may observe that this strong Delusion
was not then come, because that the Man of Sin was not yet revealed. Sixthly,
the cause of it was then commencing, for the Mystery of Iniquity did then begin
to work. Seventhly, hence we may observe, that they themselves did choose these
Delusions, which was their great sin, by which they provoked God to give them
up unto them; and so God in his Justice made their sin their punishment; for it
is said, The Backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways. Eighthly,
we may observe, that although this Mystery of Iniquity did begin to work even then
in the Apostles day, yet it was not to come to that full measure and degree of
iniquity which it was to come unto, until after his death, that was not until
the Man of Sin should be revealed, Act. 20.29, 30. Ninthly and lastly, it is to
be observed, that the cause of God's sending this strong delusion unto them,
was for their abandoning and casting off the Gospel of God, which tendered Life
and Salvation by Christ's Righteousness unto them; and following after lying
vanities; it was that which provoked God to inflict this sore judgment upon
them, so that they have eyes and see not, and ears and hear not; which may very
aptly refer to this, viz. that these persons have as great natural Gifts and
Endowments as other persons have; namely, Sense, Reason, and Understanding,
with all the Intellectuals and Faculties that belong unto men as men; but they
are not suffered to make use of them upon Spiritual objects or occasions;
neither will they suffer themselves to make use of them in that way and manner
as would most glorify God, and tend to the Salvation of their own souls; their
Consciences are seared with a hot Iron, they have quite lost all Spiritual
feeling; for tho Senses, Reason, Understanding, and all the Faculties do their
work and office, yet none of them are to be believed: And who are blinder than
those that will not see? They are just like the Images which they do bow down
unto, and pray before, if not worship them. And they have no better Spiritual
use of them than a condemned Malefactor has of the temporal use of his legs,
which only serve to carry him to the place of execution. Nay, give me leave to
tell ye, that they have no more use of their Senses; Reason and Understanding,
in Spiritual things, than these very Images have which they adore, of natural
Senses, Reason and Understanding. (...) least, for look into Psalm. 115.4, 5, 6,
7, 8. Their Idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands; they have
mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they see not; they have ears
but they hear not; noses have they but they smell not; they have hands but they
handle not; feet have they but they walk not; neither speak they through the
throat. Pray mark the winding up, They that make them are like unto them; so is
every one that trusts in them: First, they have mouths, but they must not
preach the pure Doctrine of the Gospel of God therewith. 2. They have eyes, but
they must not see the way to Life and Salvation by the Righteousness and Merits
of Jesus Christ alone with them. 3. They have ears, but they hear not: That is,
they must not, nor will not hear the Preaching of the Gospel with them. 4. They
have Noses: But they must not smell any savor in the holy ways and pure
worship of God with them them. 5. They have hands, but they must not believe
them, when they tell them that the Bread or Wafer is but Bread, and is not
flesh, nor a material body. 6. They have feet: But they must not walk to the
House of God with them, but they will walk to the Idols Temple with them. 7.
And lastly, They have Throats: but they must not pray nor speak unto God
through them in a right manner, according to his will and mind; but they pray
with them unto Saints departed, and preach up the Infallibility of the Church,
and the Doctrine of Implicit Faith, with and to it. And thus they come to have
eyes and see not, and ears and hear not, and so are like unto the Images they
make and pray to, and before, and by this means the holy Bible comes to be a
sealed Book unto them, Isa. 29.10, 11, 12. And now I leave any one to judge
whether this Man of Sin that sits in the Temple of God, and exalts himself
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, can be the great Turk; or
whether it can be meant of any sort of Protestants whatsoever, for they do not
assume any such universal power and dominion, or Sovereignty over Kings and
Rulers, Kingdoms and Nations, and over men's souls and consciences. But if the
Turk be not Antichrist, the Man of Sin, nor the Protestants, then pray who is
Antichrist? my answer is this, viz. I will name no body, but I will refer ye to
the Scriptural Characters that I have observed, and let it be compared to some
men's Office and Offices, and to their Faith, Doctrine, Worship, Discipline,
Manners and Practices in the world; and they shall answer for me, and tell you
plainly who Antichrist the Man of Sin is, for the Holy Ghost in the Sacred
Scriptures have drawn his Effigies or Picture so clear and conspicuous, that
any man of Gospel-sense, or that has but the use of natural reason, may wink
with both eyes, and tell who the Antichrist is, and where he sits; for indeed
the Holy Scriptures have written his name in his forehead, so that we may read
the very Scriptures that relate unto him, in his Office, Doctrines, Worship,
Discipline, Practice and Manners, as clear and as plain as we may read his
Office, Doctrines, Worship, Discipline, Practice and Manners by and in the Holy
Scriptures, Rev. 17.5, 6. with which Scripture I shall conclude this
Digression, viz. And upon her forehead was a name written, Mystery, Babylon the
Great, the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth. And I saw the
woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs
of Jesus. Now he that runs may read who this Man of Sin the Antichrist is,
if he be not wilfully blind, if they will but give themselves leave to adhere
to sense and reason. I have made a tedious digression, by which I have gone a
little out of my way, but it was to meet with Antichrist the Man of Sin, and
his Adherents, which are all out in the Wilderness with the Woman, or deserted
Church, and Idolatrous worship which does belong unto him, and does attend upon
him. God awaken the Kings of the Earth, and open their eyes that they also may
see and know who this the Antichrist is, Rev. 17.16, 17, 18. that he may ride
them no longer.

But now, my Dear Friend, although I have taken a very long turn with
Antichrist, yet I remember my promise unto you, viz. That I would meet you
again upon our old Topic or Point of Doctrine that we were discoursing upon,
before I met with Antichrist, the Man of Sin, namely the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, for I have not done with that as yet; for I have more
considerations to offer against it, for the confuting of it; the first shall be
this: viz. Christ says, in Rev. 1.18. I am he that lives and was dead; and
behold I am alive for evermore. Pray mistake not, for as Christ was God, so he
could not die; for his Godhead could not suffer, nor die. But as he was Man,
and surety for all sinners that ever did, or that ever should believe in him,
so he died; and as he was ordained and appointed by God the Father so to do, in
the Confederal Covenant between the Father and the Son, Zech. 16.13. Now, I
pray, Sir, How can you Romanists eat and drink Christ personally and
substantially, in his Body, Soul and Divinity; but that Christ at the same time
must of necessity suffer and die? And then how many Millions of times must
Christ have suffered and died by your hands, according to this Doctrine of
yours, since you first brought it into the World? For the Apostle says
plainly, That if Christ be offered up often, that then he must suffer often;
which clearly infers, that as often as he is offered up, so often he suffers;
and he also says, that Christ died but once, Romans 6.10. For in that he died,
he died but once; but in that he lives, he lives unto God. And, I pray, Sir,
do you Roman Catholics look into your own Creed, and there you will (...) of
the Articles of your Faith, that Christ suffered once under Pontius Pilate, and
was Buried, and Descended into Hell, and Rose again from the Dead the third
Day, and is Ascended up into Heaven, and is sat down at the Right hand of God,
from whence he shall come to Judge the Quick and the Dead. Which is very true,
I do own it to be so. And the Holy Scriptures say clearly and positively, That
Christ is ascended up into Heaven, and is sat down at the Right hand of God,
and there he is to sit until God has made his enemies his footstool: And
Antichrist the Man of Sin, is the greatest enemy that our Savior Christ has
upon Earth, whom Christ will consume with the spirit or rod of his mouth, and
destroy by the brightness of his coming. Tho Antichrist have usurped Christ's
Throne for a long time, in the Temple of God, and Reigned and Ruled over the
Souls and Consciences of men, which is Christ's peculiar Prerogative, yet the
time is at hand that he shall be made his footstool; this was spoken
Prophetically by David, of what was to be in the last times, at the period of
Antichrist's Reign, Psalm. 110.1. And our Savior himself gives it further
Sanction, in Matt. 22.44. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right
hand, till I have made thine enemies thy footstool. Mark 12.36. Luke 20.42, 43.
Hence we may observe, That from Christ's state of Humiliation and Ascension
into Glory, until he comes again in Triumph, in his state of Exaltation; all
that time that Christ sits at the right hand of God the Father, by God's
permissive will, his enemies were to be uppermost in the World; first the
Heathen Emperors, and after them, then Antichrist the Man of Sin, he got into
the Temple of God, and his Reign there was to be One thousand two hundred and
sixty days, which is so many years, Ezekiel. 4.6. until Christ comes again and
makes him his footstool. But whether he will come personally, as some are of
opinion he will, or otherwise, I will not determine; but I will leave the
Reader to the Scriptures, Acts 1.9, 10, 11. And when he had spoken these
things, while they beheld, he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of
their sight. And while they looked steadfastly toward heaven as he went up,
behold two men stood by them in white apparel, which also said, Ye men of
Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? This same Jesus which is taken up
from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into
heaven. Rev. 20.4. Rev. 1.7. Job 19.25, 26, 27. Now, Does Christ so come in
your Mass? But now if Christ be in person, sitting at the right hand of God the
Father, in Glory, as you see clearly proved by the Holy Word of God he is, and
that he is not to come from thence until his enemies be made his footstool;
and that when he does come from thence, he is to come in like manner as he
ascended (...) shall (...) him so come, and that his Body is a finite Body; Why
if this be so, then Christ cannot be personally and corporeally present in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, in so many thousand places at once, as the Mass is
or may be said, and yet at the same time to be personally and corporeally at
the right hand of God the Father in Glory, making intercession with him for
poor Sinners; Tho Christ, as God, is in all places both in Heaven and Earth,
and excluded from no place: But yet as he is the only Mediator between God and
Man, so he is fixed in Heaven at the right hand of God, until his enemies
measure of iniquity be full, and then they shall all be made his footstool. He
is entered into Heaven as the forerunner, for his people; he entered into Heaven
it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us as an Advocate: He is the
first fruits of the resurrection of the dead. So that this Doctrine of Christ's
Personal and Corporeal Presence in the Sacrament, does even contradict and
destroy your own Faith or Creed, as well as it does overthrow the whole current
of the Holy and Sacred Scriptures. As for the former, I will appeal, even unto
you your own selves who are Romanists, that do say, and pretend to own and
believe your own Creed, whether it be not so or no? And as for the latter, I
will appeal unto all sorts of Christians whatsoever, that do own and believe
the Holy Scriptures to be the revealed word and will of God, whether it be not
so or no? And also I will appeal to their own Sense and Reason.

Again secondly, Let us hear further what the Apostle says, for more light
into this dark matter; in 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4. Brethren, I would not that ye
should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all
passed through the sea: And were all baptized unto Moses (who was a type of
Christ) And were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea: And did
all eat the same spiritual meat: And did all drink the same spiritual drink:
For they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was
Christ. These were all true Believers in Christ, which were among the Children
of Israel in Moses's days, and all of them did live by Faith upon Christ, and
they all fed upon the same spiritual food then, as we do now under the Gospel,
this is that hidden Manna, Rev. 2.17. This is that meat which God gives his
Children to eat, which the World knows nothing of. By Faith, Moses forsook
Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the King; for he endured, as seeing him who is
Invisible. That was by an eye of Faith, Moses saw Christ in his day, that could
not be seen by an eye of sense; through Faith he kept the Passover and
sprinkling of Blood, lest he that destroyed the first born, should touch them;
by Faith, they passed through the Red Sea, as by dry (...) Christ under the
Mosaical Law, is wholly ascribed unto Faith; and that it was Spiritual meat and
drink, and the very same meat and drink that Believers do live upon spiritually
now, under the dispensation of the Gospel; hence you may observe, that Christ
was as much materially and corporeally eaten and drank, before ever he had
assumed humane nature, or had a real material body to eat, and blood to drink,
as ever he has been at any time since, that he has taken humane nature upon
him; for if Christ be really Transubstantiated into his very person consisting
of Body, Soul and Divinity, and so eaten, now under the Gospel, since he had a
Body, why, then it will necessarily and consequentially follow, that Christ was
corporeally and substantially eaten in Body, Soul and Divinity, before ever he
had a Body to be eaten; for you see it clearly proved from the Apostle's words,
that the believing Israelites did eat the same spiritual meat, and did all
drink the same spiritual drink then, as true Believers do now under the Gospel;
for the Text says plainly, that they did all eat of the same spiritual meat,
and did all drink of the same spiritual drink; for they drank of that spiritual
Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ. The Children of Israel might
as well have Transubstantiated a Rock into the real Body and Blood of Christ,
and so eaten and dranken that instead of Christ, or for Christ, which is to eat
Stones instead of the Bread of Life; as for you to imagine, or pretend to eat
and drink Christ corporeally and personally in the Sacrament of the Eucharist:
For I will assure ye that there is as good Reason, and as clear a Warrant and
Authority, either from Scripture or Reason, to believe the one, as there is to
believe the other; for our Savior Christ was spiritual meat and spiritual
drink under the Mosaical Law, and he is the same and no other now under the
Gospel: Their feeding upon Christ, and enjoying communion and fellowship with
Christ, under the Law, was Spiritual and by Faith; why, even so it is the same,
and no more, nor no less now, nor in all foregoing Ages under the Gospel.
Christ is to be received and eaten by Faith, and in spiritual love also now, as
he was then, of which I shall give you a farther proof by and by.

Again thirdly, Pray, Sir, observe strictly what the same Apostle says, in 1
Cor. 10.20, 21. But I say, the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they
sacrifice to Devils, and not to God. I would not that ye should have fellowship
with Devils: Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils; ye
cannot be partakers of the Lord's Table, and of the Table of Devils.

The Apostle spoke this cautionarily, by way of reproof to some persons,
perhaps, in that day, that might be somewhat guilty thereof because he (...)
told them of Thessalonica, that the mystery of iniquity did begin to work in
that day, 2 Thessalonians. 2. (...) For the mystery of iniquity does already work. T^^
Man of Sin, Antichrist, was a beginning to cre^^ into the Church, the Temple of
God, even the^^ as you may see in Verse 3, 4. And also the Apostle by a
Prophetic Spirit, did speak concerning some that would pretend to be
Christians, that would thus horribly profane the Sacrament of the Lord Supper,
which is there called the Cup of the Lord and the Table of the Lord, and that,
by making (...) Sacrifice of that holy Ordinance, which was instituted
principally, to remember the great Sacrifi^^ that was offered up for Sin,
namely, the Lord Jes^^ Christ, who was offered up once for all, a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God. And it is the e^press command of
Christ, viz. Do this in remembrance of me.

Now these Gentiles here, which the Apostle do^^ arraign as guilty, that do
thus profane the Cup (...) the Lord, and the Table of the Lord, cou^^ not be
meant of the Heathen, Idolatrous Gentil^^ which never professed, nor owned the
name (...) Christ, and therefore they never made use of the Ordinance; but this
was Prophesied of Idolatro^^ Gentiles, pretended Christians, that do own t^^
Ordinance, tho not in A Right manner, for th^^ make a Sacrifice of it: And they
do also own (...) name of Christ in words, tho in works of me^^ and by works of
supererogation they deny hi^^ Secondly, Neither could this be spoken of t^^
Jews which do offer Sacrifices, because the Apo^^^ says they were Gentiles,
that should come into (...) Church or Temple of God, and offer up this ki^^^ of
Sacrifice upon the Table of the Lord, whi^^ they make an Altar of; which Error
of sacrifici^^ or Mystery of Iniquity, might be part of t^^ which began to work
in the Apostles days, wh^^ were a forerunner of Antichrist, the Man of S^^^ for
the Passover, and all the Sacrifices under (...) Mosaical Law, were all but
Types and Shadows (...) Christ's coming in the Flesh, and dying in the F^^ for
sinners, they were all but signs and figure^ remember Christ by, and Christ was
spiritually (...) joyed under them, and eaten and dranken in t^^ by Faith, as
the Apostle asserts, which has been (...) ready proved, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4.
Why, (...) so the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was i^^^tuted by our Savior
Christ, the Night in which (...) was betrayed, to keep up a holy, thankful
remembrance of Christ's being come in the flesh, and ^^ing in the flesh, in the
room of poor fallen (...) that lay polluted in his Blood, in sin and mi^^^ out
in the open field, and none to pity nor (...) him, neither was he capable to
help himself; (...) that which was worst of all, he did not, nor (...) not
desire any help, Ezekiel. 16.3, 4, 5, 6. The (...) ^eas an Amorite, and thy mother
an Hittite. And as for ^hy nativity, in the day thou wast born, thy navel was
not ^ut, neither wast thou washed in water to supple thee: ^hou wast not salted
at all, nor swadled at all. This is Man in a natural lapsed state and
condition. None ^e pitted thee, to do any of these unto thee, to have
compassion upon thee, but thou wast cast into the open field, (...) the
loathing of thy person in the day that thou wast ^^rn. And when I passed by
thee, and saw thee polluted (...) thine own blood, I said unto thee when thou
wast in thy ^^ood, Live: yea, I said unto thee, when thou wast in ^^^y blood,
Live. This was the case and condition of ^ankind after the fall, and is of
every particular individual person before the work of Regeneration ^^sseth upon
his Soul, by the mighty powerful ^^eration of the Holy Ghost, out of which
state ^^d condition there was no Redemption, but by ^^rist's offering up
himself a Sacrifice to satisfy ^^^vine Justice, and so to make up the breach
that (...) had made between God and Man, and reconcile (...) and Man together:
And this great and only ^^crifice we are in special manner to commemorate (...)
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, from them ^^^rds of our Savior Christ, Do
this in remembrance ^^^one.

Why, even so the Passover, and all the Sacrifices under the Ceremonial Law,
were instituted and ^^^^^inted by God, for a Remembrance, that Christ (...) to
come in the flesh, and die in the flesh to re^^^^^ fallen Man: And here I will
show you the (...) over and the Sacrifice both joined together in (...)
Antitype, or that which they signified unto us; (...) also the sanctifying,
purging nature and virtue, ^^^^^ysical operation of it, in 1 Cor. 5.7. Purge
out ^^^^^fore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as (...) unleavened.
For even Christ our passover is sacri^^^^ for us.

^^d as there was a Remembrance of Sin in the ^^^^^fices, to show what an evil
and dangerous thing (...) and how contrary it is to the holy Nature of (...)
why, even so there is a remembrance of sin (...) Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, to show (...) an evil there is in sin, and also how contrary (...) the
Holy Nature of God.

(...) Sacrifice under the Law, and the Sacrament (...) the Gospel, are like
two great Looking-(...) in which Believers saw the deformity of (...) in which
they also see the great Love of (...) poor sinful Dust and Ashes. In the Glass
under (...), they saw that Christ was to come and be of^^^^^ for sin; and in
our great Glass under the (...), we see that Christ has come, and has
^^^^^ered up for sin. -- Sin is such a heinous, ^^^^voking thing, that nothing
short of the (...) precious Blood of Christ, the spotless (...) God, could
appease, or extinguish the (...) God that was kindled against sinners, and
expel the guilt, and expiate sin, and satisfy the Justice of God, and justify
and atone them to God, and purchase Eternal Life and Salvation for them, at the
price of his own precious Blood, and copious Righteousness, and Alsufficient
Merits. And he made up the Breach that sin did make between sinful man, and
that God, who is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, with any approbation
thereunto; For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord: And Christ received the wages that was due unto
us sinning men; and poor sinners receive the gift of God that was purchased by
him: For although God gives it, yet Christ purchases it. All the Sacrifices
under the Law of Moses, no, nor all the good works, nor pretended sacrifices
under the Gospel, they all cannot take away, nor expiate the least vain sinful
thought; for all our Righteousnesses are all but filthy Rags. Tho it is true,
we shall not be saved without Good Works, and right Gospel Sacrifices, yet we
shall never be saved by, nor for them; for Christ says, Luke 17.10. So
likewise ye, when ye shall have done all these things which are commanded you,
say, We are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to do.
Ephesians. 2.8, 9. For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your
selves; for it is the gift of God: No, for Faith it self is not of our selves,
for it is the Gift of God. Not of works, lest any man should boast. For if Man
were to be saved by, and for his own works, he would be proud, and make his
boast of it: For there is not a prouder person upon Earth, in the account of
God, than a Pharisaical, self-conceited righteous person is. Pray see what is
said of him, in Prove. 30.12, 13. There is a generation that are pure in their
own eyes, and yet is not washed from their filthiness. There is a generation, O
how lofty are their eyes! and their eyelids are lifted up. And in Isa. 65.3,
5. A people that provoked me to anger continually to my face, that sacrifices
in gardens, and burns Incense upon Altars of brick. The Prophet here
prophesied of a Generation of pretended Christians, Ay, and of such as do look
upon themselves to be the only, Infallible holy Christians, and that are
Sacrificers in Gospel times. Pray mind what he says of them, as follows,
Which say, stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am more holier than
thou. It must needs be so, when they count themselves the only Christians, and
all other to be Heretics. But see how God accepts these persons and their
Sacrifices, that are our Gospel Sacrificers, viz. These are a smoke in my nose,
a fire that burns all the day. And no person is pure in his own eyes, but the
self-righteous person. And I pray hear further what is said by our Savior
Christ of such a person, Luke 18.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Two men went up into the
temple to pray the (...) a Pharisee, and the other a Publican; the Pharisee
stood and prayed thus with himself, God, I thank thee, that I am not as other
men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican. I fast
twice in the week, (It may be that was on Wednesdays and Fridays) I give tithes
of all that I possess. (He thought himself Cock-sure of Heaven, and did not so
much as dream of stopping at Purgatory by the way: But see what it all came to
at last,) And the Publican standing afar off, would not so much as lift up his
eyes unto heaven, but snote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a
sinner. I tell you, this man went down to his house justified rather than the
other: for every one that exalts himself shall be abased, and he that
humbles himself shall be exalted. I say again, That all the Sacrifices under
the Law, could not take away, nor expiate sin, for they were but figures of
Christ the great and only Sacrifice, that was to be offered up in due time, to
take away sin from the ungodly, and make them holy.

Pray, Sir, observe with me these following Scriptures for further
illumination, Heb. 8.4, 5, 6, 7. For if he were on earth (That is, Christ) he
should not be a priest, seeing that there are priests that offer gifts
according to the law, which serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly
things. Mind, These Sacrifices were but examples and shadows, when they were in
force, and according to God's appointment, before Christ abolished them, of
Heavenly things that was to come, that was the fruit, and effect, or product of
the heavenly things that were transacted between God the Father and Christ his
Son, in his Eternal Council with the Holy Ghost, which proceeds from the Father
and the Son, in order to Man's Redemption. As Moses was admonished of God, when
he was about to make the Iabernacle; for see, says he, that thou make all
things according to the pattern showed to thee in the Mount: But now has
obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is the mediator of a
better covenant, which was established upon better promises: For if that first
covenant had been faultless, then should no place have been sought for the
second. Heb. 7.19. I do believe the Apostle Paul, in Heb. 8.4. spoke Ironically
of those Priests that were so ignorant then, Ay, and that do now offer up
material Sacrifices, both of Jews and Gentiles, in Gospel times; for it does
signify that Christ is not come in the flesh, but that he is yet to come and
die; which is a downright denying that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, in
Works: For, says the Apostle, if he were on earth, he should not be a priest,
seeing that there are priests that offer gifts according to the law. If he,
that is Christ, the only high Priest, were on Earth, he should not be a Priest,
because these Priests that offer Sacrifice under the Gospel are all Invaders
and Usurpers of Christ's Priestly (...) under the Mosaical Law, were all but
Types and Shadows of Christ, of his Coming and Dying; for Christ is the High
Priest, and Priest of the most High God, Heb. 7.15, 16, 17, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
For this Melchisedec King of Salem, Priest of the most High God, who met
Abraham returning from the slaughter of the Kings, and blessed him. And it is
yet far more evident, for that after the similitude of Melchisedec there
arises another Priest, who is made not after the Law of carnal commandment,
but after the power of an endless life; for he testifies, Thou art a Priest
for ever after the order of Melchisedec; and they truly were many Priests,
because they were not suffered to continue by reason of death; but this man
because he continues ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood; wherefore he is
able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever lives to make Intercession for them; for such an high Priest became us
who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than
the heavens, who needs not daily as those high Priests, to offer up
sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the peoples; for this he did
Once when he offered up himself. Here you see is the durable Priesthood, Rev.
8.3, 4. there Christ is the Golden Altar on which all our Gospel-sacrifices of
Prayers and Thanksgiving, must be offered up to God; or else neither the person
nor the offering will ever be accepted by the Lord. And look into 1 Cor. 5.7.
and there you have the Sacrifice. Thus you see clearly made out unto you, that
Christ is the only Priest, Altar and Sacrifice, of which all these Priests, and
Altars, and Sacrifices, and the Passover, under the Law, were Types and
Figures; and therefore the Apostle did as it were expose and ridicule, or even
laugh to see the ignorance of those Priests that do offer Sacrifices under the
Gospel Dispensation, for a remembrance of Christ's yet coming to die for sin;
for that is the signification of all those material Sacrifices, when as Christ
was then come, and had suffered, and was gone to Glory; this is more tolerable
in the Jews who do not believe that Christ the Messiah is come than it is for
any that profess themselves Christians and believe that Christ is already come;
for the Jews do not believe that the Messiah is come, and therefore they keep
up their Sacrifices and Offerings, the they have lost the very sense and
meaning of them and the End and Design of God in his first ordaining and
appointing of them; but for any that pretend to be Christians, and yet to offer
up these kin^ of material Sacrifices, and yet do own that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh; why I do say, that the they do confess in words that Jesus Christ
is come in the flesh, yet in these Sacrifices they do plain^^ deny it, for it
is a turning back again to the Jewi^^ Law; for these Sacrifices say plainly,
that Jesus Christ is not yet come in the flesh, because his (...) in the flesh
put an end to that Ordinance as well as to the Passover, and all other carnal
Ordinances, and Ceremonial Rites, when he had finished the work which God the
Father gave him to do. Again, another Scripture for Illumination is that in
Heb. 9.8, 9, 12. The Holy Ghost there signifying that the way into the holiest
of all was not yet made manifest, while the first Tabernacle was yet standing;
for that first Tabernacle was the Ceremonial Law, of Types and Shadows, and
material Sacrifices; for Christ is the way into the holiest of all; who was not
then come nor manifested in the flesh, when these Sacrifices were in force, 1 John 1.1, 2. That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we
have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled
of the word of life; for the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear
witness, and show unto you that eternal life which was with the Father, and
manifested unto us. What was this manifestation? why it was Christ, when he
came in the flesh, as you may see, 1 Timothy 3.16. And without controversy great
is the mystery of Godliness, God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the
spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world,
received up into Glory. Christ was justified by God the Father, and acquitted
from all the sins of his people when he had suffered and died, and rose again.

But Christ was not so manifested then under the Law when this Covenant was
standing which was not faultless, and all these Sacrifices in force and being;
which was a figure for the time then present, in which were offered both Gifts
and Sacrifices, that could not make him that did the service perfect, as
pertaining to Conscience, Heb. 7.19. for ^he Law made nothing perfect, but the
bringing in of a better hope did, etc.

Here you see all these Sacrifices and Services under the Law were all
imperfect, they could not ^each the Conscience to purge and sanctify that;
neither could they purify nor cleanse the heart; ^hey were all but Figures and
Types of that which ^as to come, which was of the Lord Jesus Christ, ^he great
and only Sacrifice, who was to come, and ^e offered up; who is said to be our
Passover, and is ^^crificed for us. And it is moreover said, Neither by ^he
blood of Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling ^^e unclean, sanctifies
to the purifying of the flesh. No, nothing but the Blood of Christ the Lamb of
God ^^n cleanse a soul from the guilt and pollution of (...), Joh. 1.29. The
next day John sees Jesus coming ^^to him, and says, Behold the Lamb of God,
which ^^keth away the sin of the world.

Again, Fourthly and lastly, one Scripture more ^^t the utter overthrowing of
all pretended material ^^crifices short of Christ and his Righteousness and
(...), to expunge and expiate sin and guilt, and sanctify the soul, and
present it unto the Father without spot or wrinkle, like himself, fully
justified and acquitted from all the demands of Justice, and wholly discharged
from the Law; for Christ's being justified was his peoples Justification, which
the Law could not do in that it was weak; for all the Sacrifices under the Law,
when they were in force, could not take away sin; and Sacrifices under the
Gospel cannot do it; for these material Sacrifices of yours, themselves are an
abomination in the sight of God, and are as smoke in his nose, Isa. 65. For
there never was but one real Propitiatory, and sufficient Sacrifice for all the
sins of Gods people both under the Law, and under the Gospel, and that was
Christ, who was offered up a living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God,
and that but once, as I have already proved from the holy Scripture, Heb. 10.1,
3, 4, 5, 6, 11. For the Law having a shadow of good things to come, and not the
very image of the things, can never with those Sacrifices which they offered
year by year continually, make the comers thereunto perfect. But in these
Sacrifices there is a remembrance again made of sin, but our Savior Christ the
great Sacrifice perfects for ever them which are sanctified; there comes all
the Believers perfection in at that door, and no where else; For it is not
possible that the blood of Bulls and of Goats should take away sins. In
Burnt-offerings and sacrifices for sin thou have had no pleasure. O no; for in
these material, Ceremonial Sacrifices, there was much sin and imperfection, and
therefore God could take no pleasure in them. And every priest stands daily
ministering, and offering oftentimes the same sacrifices, which can never take
away sin. 12. But this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, for
ever sat down on the right hand of God, from henceforth expecting till his
enemies be made his footstool.

So that here you see again, That these Sacrifices and Offerings, before Christ
came in the flesh, were but for a Remembrance of Sin, and of Christ's coming in
the flesh, and dying in the flesh, and rising again to redeem fallen lost
sinners; For whilst we were sinners, Christ died for the ungodly. And the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, after Christ's coming in the flesh, and dying
in the flesh, and rising again from the dead for our justification, is for a
Remembrance that Christ is come in the flesh, and has suffered, and died in the
room and place of fallen sinners to expiate the guilt, and to wash away the
filth and pollution of sin, and to atone us to God, who was the Just and the
Holy One. He who knew no sin, became sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God through him. Christ is come, and has died in the flesh,
and is justified in the spirit, by which justification of his, all true
Believers come to be justified freely, and pardoned fully. Romans 33.34. Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of demneth? It is Christ that died, yea,
rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also
makes intercession for us. This word also signifies, that there is some other
Intercessor. Why look into v. 26. and there you will see, that the Holy Ghost
makes intercession for the Believer; and in the Believer, the spirit indicts
all our Prayers in us, if we pray in a right manner, Rev. 1.5. And from Jesus
Christ who is the faithful witness, and the first begotten of the dead, and the
prince of the kings of the earth: Ay, and that Antichrist shall know in a
little time: It draws on a-pace toward a period of his Reign. Unto him that
loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood. This is the only
Purgatory for sinners, there is no Purge to be had for Sin any where else; and
all that ever were purged and saved from the days of Adam, until Christ came in
the flesh, were saved upon the account of Christ's coming and dying in the
flesh, to make satisfaction to the Justice of God for their sins, as he was
their surety of that better Covenant, or Days-man, to fulfill all Righteousness
for them that believe.

With Holy Reverence be it spoken, it is thus: All they that were saved before
Christ came in the flesh, and died in his estate of humiliation, were saved
upon Christ's Word and Credit, upon the account of that Confederal Covenant
that was made, in order to Man's Redemption, between God the Father and God the
Son from all Eternity, That Christ in due time would come into the World, and
take up humane nature, and stand in the room of poor sinners, and lay down his
Life for poor lapsed undone Man, and to purchase Grace and Holiness for us
here, and Eternal Life and Salvation for us hereafter with himself in Glory. It
is Comparatively, as if there should be a Covenant made between two persons,
for such and such parcels of Merchandise, or for such a parcel of Land, and the
purchaser does bargain and agree for the said Merchandise or Land wholly upon
Credit, and enters into Covenant or Bonds, according to their agreement, to pay
him, that he purchased the said Premises of, so much Moneys, at such a time as
they do agree upon, punctually; Now upon this Consideration and Contract, he
gives the Purchaser as ample and peaceable possession, and quiet enjoyment of
it, as if he had paid him every penny of the Money down upon the Nail: And he
reaps all the benefit of it, until the time does come, in the which he does
actually and punctually pay him his Money according to Contract. Why, even so
it was with a respect to Christ, in that Confederal Covenant between himself
and God the Father, in relation to every Believer that was saved before Christ
came in the flesh, and actually laid down his life for them, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19,
20. Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as
silver and gold, from your vain conversation, received by tradition from your
fathers; But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish,
and without spot: Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the
world, but was manifest in these last times for you.

2. And secondly, All those that should be saved after Christ came in the
flesh, and actually paid the price of Redemption, by laying down his Life, by
which he purchased all them that ever should be saved for time then to come, to
the end of the World. Now, this is like a Man that purchases all the Wine that
such a Vineyard shall produce for so long time; or like a Crop of Corn that a
Man purchases as soon as the Seed is sown, and pays down every Farthing of
his Money long before ever he receives any of the Wine or Corn: Every true
Believer throughout all Ages, from Adam to the end of the World, are the
purchase of Christ, Acts 20.28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to
all the flock, over the which the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed
the Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood. Job 19.25. For I
know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon
the earth: This was spoken about One thousand six hundred years before ever
Christ was born, or took flesh upon him. Thus you see that Christ is the only
Sacrifice that is sufficient and propitiatory for the sins of all true
Believers, both under the Law and under the Gospel; for they are all of them
purchased at the price of his precious Blood alone: And none else beside him is
the Sacrifice for sin; and his Blood is the only Purgatory for sinners, and no
other; for we are redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb
without blemish, and without spot.

Now dear Sir, Pray be pleased to take the Candle of the Lord, and look about
all Christendom, and see and consider well with your self, who there be, and
what Sect or sort of persons are there to be found among them that are called
Christians, or do but own the name of Christ, that do make a Sacrifice of the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and they are the persons that are here intended
by the Holy Apostle, who spoke as he was moved and inspired by the Holy Ghost;
for he could see by the Infallible Spirit of God, even in that day, -- That a
certain Sect or sort of people would come up upon the Stage of Christendom, or
into the Temple of God, that would forbid Marriage to pretended Religious
Orders of Men and Women, tho the Holy Scripture says plainly and literally,
that it is better to Marry than to Burn. -- And the same Apostle saw by the
same Spirit, That the same sort of people that forbid Marriage, would further
reject the Scripture, by commanding all persons whatsoever to abstain from
Flesh: The Apostle had an Expres^ sent him from (...) tidings, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2,
3. But the Apostle tells us, we may eat whatsoever is sold in the Shambles (to
wit, Butchers meat) asking no questions for Conscience sake. And the Apostle
did see by the same Infallible Spirit clearly and spontaneously, that a sort of
Idolatrous Gentiles, which are only nominal Christians, would come into the
Church or Temple of God, that would make a Sacrifice of the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, in that Scripture which I quoted before, to wit, 1 Cor. 10.20,
21. But I say, that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice
unto devils, and not unto God: and I would not that ye should have fellowship
with devils. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils; ye
cannot be partakers of the Lord's Table, and of the Table of Devils. Now, Sir,
the Protestants do not make a Sacrifice of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper,
they do not look upon the Elements of Bread and Wine to be Transubstantiated
into the real person of Christ, namely, of Body, Soul and Divinity, after their
Blessing or Consecrating of them, and so offer him up as a Sacrifice, as you of
the Roman Community do own, and pretend to believe; and that the Elements are
miraculously turned into the real, substantial Body of Christ, viz. Body, Soul,
and Divinity, and then offer him up as a Sacrifice sufficient and propitiatory
for the sins of the living and the dead.

But here will appear two Sacrifices, you will see by and by, in this one, --
The Apostle says, that it is a Sacrificing unto Devils, and not to God, and
they that are guilty of this practice have fellowship with Devils in it, and
not with God; for says he, Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of
Devils; ye cannot be partaker of the Lord's Table, and of the table of Devils.
Thus you do hear what the Apostle says; it is not my word, but his, which he
spoke by Divine Inspiration: They offer up sacrifices unto Devils.

But here, I say, are two Sacrifices, as you may observe, in this one:

The first is this, whereas the Priest does pretend to offer up a Sacrifice
sufficient and propitiatory for the sins of the living and the dead, why here
the Apostle tells us plainly, that this is to offer a Sacrifice unto the
Devil, and not unto God: So that it is clear, that they do offer a Sacrifice
unto the Devil, under a specious pretense of sacrificing unto God.

And the second Sacrifice that springs out of this one Sacrifice, is this, viz.
The poor Lay People do really offer up their Senses, Reason, Understanding, and
Faith, and all that should be dear unto them, both as Christians and Men, in
Sacrifice to the Priest; and they are no longer Masters of their own Senses,
Reason, Understanding, Soul and Conscience, for (...) another. They have eyes
and see not, they have cars and hear not; they are fallen under that heavy
Judgment which the Gospel Prophet predicted, and also our Savior Christ
himself, Isa. 29.10, 11, 12. For the Lord has poured out upon you, the spirit
of deep sleep, and has closed your eyes: the prophets, and your rulers, the
seers has he covered. And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of
a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read
this, I pray thee: and he says, I cannot, for it is sealed. And the book is
delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he
says, I am not learned. Matt. 13.14, 15. And in them is fulfilled the
prophecy of Esaias, which says, By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not
understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive: For this peoples
heart is waxed gross, and their cars are dull of hearing, and their eyes they
have closed, lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be converted,
and I should heal them. I do believe that this Prophecy does principally refer
to the Jews, and took place upon them first, for rejecting and disbelieving
Christ the true Messiah; but those Christians that have contracted the same
guilt as they did, to reject the Gospel of Christ, they do make themselves
guilty of the same sin with the Jews, and by that means have lain themselves in
the bed of unbelief with them, and are both Sacrificers now in Gospel times,
which is to deny that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh; so they lay themselves
under the same Judgment with the Jews; for one and the same cause, produces
one and the same effects at one time as well as at another, without preventing
Mercy: But the Apostle Paul speaks clearly of a sort of Christians, that would
cast off and reject the Gospel of God, for which God did bring the like
judgment upon them, in 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12. And for this cause God shall send
them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie: That they all might be
damned who believe not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. God
punishes them by their own very sins, and makes it a judgment unto them, as he
did by the Jews, and they are under much what the same judgment with the Jews;
for the first did choose Delusions and Lies, and then God gave them up unto
them, just as God gave the Jews to a hard heart and a blind mind, and they are
all laid in the grave of unbelief and prejudice, against Christ the true
Messiah, and therefore they are Sacrificing, and Sacrificing still, now under
the Gospel: Why, so God has given up these sacrificing Christians, and so these
Apostates or Backsliders in heart come to be filled with their own ways. -- And
you must certainly give your selves up to strong Delusions, or else you would
never abuse and disbelieve the Holy Scriptures as you do, which is the revealed
Will of (...) and walk by; so that the people have no more use of the Gospel
than the Jews that do not believe that Christ is yet come in the flesh; so that
you are as ignorant with a respect to any saving experiemental knowledge of
Christ's being come in the flesh, as the very Jews are; for while you profess
to know him in word, you deny him in works, namely in sacrifices, and other
carnal Ordinances; and were not your Consciences seared with a hot Iron, you
would never disbelieve your own senses and reason, and understandings as you
do, for you must not believe your own eyes that tell you that the Bread or
Wafer after Consecration, as it is called, is still Bread, and the Wine is Wine
still without any alteration. Nor you must not believe your own hands that give
the same account of it unto you; nor you must not believe your own mouth that
tells you, that it is Bread and not Flesh. But the Priest, by what authority
I know not, will not suffer the Lay-peoples mouths to make a judgment upon the
Wine, whether it be Wine or Blood, tho Christ has given a particular and an
express command for it; as in them words of our Savior's, Drink ye all of it,
Mat. 26.27. Mark 14.23. And they all drank of it. But this is your misery, you
must believe as the Church believes, or as the Priest commands ye to believe;
you must not believe Christ, nor his Apostles, nor his Gospel, nor your own
senses, reason and understanding, none of these are to be believed, but all is
fast locked up in unbelief, and the Priest carries the Key of your Knowledge at
his Girdle; and thus you do see clearly, and spontaneously proved, that you are
the persons which the Apostle Paul prophesied of, that do make a Sacrifice of
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, when as there is no material Sacrifices of
this kind to be offered up in this manner; for Christ at his coming, and dying,
and rising again, put an end to all that kind of worship, Col. 2.14, 15, 16,
18, 20, 21, 22, 23. Heb. 9.9, 10, 11, 12.

But yet notwithstanding give me leave to tell ye, that we have our
Gospel-Sacrifices, but they are all Spiritual, viz. The sacrifice of a broken
heart, and of an humble contrite spirit; and the sacrifice of prayer, and of
thanksgiving, and every part of holy worshipping of God in spirit and in truth;
these are the Sacrifices that are accepted and well-pleasing unto God, when we
offer up our selves in them; when all is offered up unto God upon the Golden
Altar the Lord Jesus Christ, and mixed with his Merits, and both the person and
the offering covered with his Robe of Righteousness, the only Garment of
Salvation, Rev. 8.3, 4. And another Angel came and stood at the Altar, having a
Golden Censer, and there was given to him much Incense that he should offer it
with the prayers of all Saints upon the Golden Altar, (...) cense which came
with the prayers of the Saints, ascended up before God out of the Angels hand.
This is the Angel of the Covenant, the Lord Jesus Christ, who presents our
persons and petitions unto God the Father for us, if they be indicted in us by
God the Holy Ghost, Romans 8.26, 27. Likewise the spirit also helps our
infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the
spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings which cannot be
uttered. And he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the
spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints according to the will of
God. And the person must be clothed with Christ's Robe of Righteousness, Isa.
61.10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God,
for he has clothed me with the garments of Salvation, he has covered me with
the Robe of Righteousness, as a Bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and
as a Bride adorneth her self with her Jewels. This is the Wedding Garment that
every soul has on that is married to Christ; and hence you may observe flows
all the Saints joy and comfort, from their being justified by the righteousness
of Christ.

But if this be so as you see clearly proved that it is, then what a miserable
condition must all these poor souls be in, that hope for and expect Eternal
life and Salvation upon no better ground nor foundation than their own
meritorious works of righteousness, and boast of their works of Supererogation,
which will all prove Physicians of no value, and will prove miserable
Comforters in the End; they are but sparks of their own kindling, Isa. 50.11.
Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that compass your selves about with sparks;
walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled; this
shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow.

Thus you do see what a vast difference there is between your Sacrifices, and
the Protestants Gospel-Sacrifices, the one is an abomination, and abhorred by
the Lord: The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord; but the
prayer of the upright is his delight: And the true Gospel-sacrifices are
accepted with the Lord in and through Christ, if offered up upon the Golden
Altar of his Righteousness and Merits; then they are God's delight.

Now in the next place I shall offer unto you a few modest and solid Reasons,
together with some Arguments to confute this gross error, and strong delusion
that you, poor souls, are involved in.

In the first place, if this Doctrine of yours be true, why then so far it
renders Faith useless, and destroys it; for if our Savior Christ be personally
and substantially come again, and is thus present with his people, why then the
use of that part o^ Faith is at an end. As for instance, before our Savior
Christ came in the flesh, it was the duty of a (...) God's (...) come in the
flesh, because God had promised that he should so come, Genesis 3.15.

But after our Savior Christ did come in the flesh, why then that part of
Faith was at an end; for after that, whoever looked for his coming in that
nature, did not exercise Faith, but it was a great sin, for it was the product
of unbelief, which was a very great Judgment, and it is the very Grave wherein
the poor scattered Jews have lain dead and buried ever since; and unbelief and
prejudice against Christ, is the Gravestone also that lies upon them, and
keeps them down. Our Savior told them, If ye believe not that I am he, ye
shall die in your sins. -- But now the proper work and office of Faith is to
see him that is invisible, Heb. 11.27. By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing
the wrath of the King, for he endured as seeing him who is invisible; that was
Christ. But how can that be? it seems to be a contradiction in it self; what,
to see him which cannot be seen! why it must be understood thus, that Moses did
see Christ by an eye of Faith, who could not be seen by an eye of sense, a
bodily eye. And thus Abraham the Father of the Faithful did see Christ before
ever he came in the flesh: Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he
saw it and was glad. And thus all true Believers do see and discern the Lord's
Body at the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; and he is to be discerned no
otherwise there. And Stephen the Martyr he saw Christ in Heaven after he was
ascended, Act. 7.55. But he being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly
into Heaven, and saw the Glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of
God. But how did Stephen see him? why it was by an eye of faith, he being full
of the Holy Ghost: Ay, that soul can never miss of seeing Christ at any time,
or in any place, that is full of the Holy Ghost; and Stephen's confessing this,
made his Enemies mad, insomuch that they run upon him and murdered him; for
they perhaps thought that they could see as far as he could, and yet they could
see no such sight: But the natural man receives not the things of the spirit
of God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. Our Savior Christ can no more be
seen now personally and substantially by a bodily eye of sense, while he is at
the right hand of God, than he could be seen in Moses's or Abraham's days,
which was before ever he had a substantial Body to be seen; neither ever shall
he be so seen until he comes down from Heaven in that manner as he was seen to
go up into Heaven, Act. 1.10, 11. Nor until he appears the second time
without sin unto Salvation. -- Without sin! why, does not the Scripture ^ell us
that he was without sin before, namely at his ^^rst coming? why yes, it does
so, and it is very true, ^^at is, thus he was without sin, with a respect to
(...) ^uilt or pollution, or any inclination to (...) sin in himself; for he
was a Lamb without spot or blemish; the Lamb for Sacrifice did Type out unto us
the sinless spotless nature of Christ. -- But when Christ came first in the
flesh, he appeared then in his state of Humiliation in the form of a servant,
with all the sins of all the people of God upon him, of all that ever were
saved and gotten safe into Glory, and of all that ever should be saved from
Adam to the end of the world, all the sins of his people past, present, and to
come; viz. of them that were dead and gone, and of them that were then living,
and of them that were then unborn, all concentred upon Christ, but not in him;
they all met upon Christ's shoulders, Isa. 53.5, 6. But he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquity, the chastisement of our peace
was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone
astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid upon
him the iniquity of us all. Therefore it is said, God was manifested in the
flesh. Then indeed Christ was seen with bodily eyes, for he was manifested in
the flesh, justified in the spirit, after Christ had suffered and died, and
rose again from the dead; when he had paid the debt to God which he stood
engaged unto him for, as a surety for sinners; when the Law was fulfilled, and
the Justice of God fully satisfied, and the wrath of God wholly appeased, then
Christ must needs be justified, and by his being justified all his people for
whom he died, were all justified. It was just as if a rich man were surety for
a poor indigent man that was deeply in debt, and was not able to pay one
farthing; why the Creditors take no notice of the poor Debtor, but fall upon
the rich man that is his surety, and arrest him, and cast him into prison, upon
which the rich man pays all the poor man's debts, and then he comes forth,
having fully discharged the debt, he and the poor Debtor are both fully
discharged, the Prison could hold him no longer, so that both the Surety and
the Debtor are justified and acquitted, the Law cannot take hold neither of the
Surety nor the Debtor again, for that is fulfilled; why even so comparatively
it was with a respect to Christ and poor sinners, he was bound for poor
sinners, and the Justice of God past by them, and seized upon Christ, and
arrested him, and cast him into prison, Isa. 53.8, 9. He was taken from prison,
and from judgment, etc. Which I take to be the prison of the Grave, for death
could not hold him, but he paid every farthing of all the debt for all them for
whom he died; and when he had discharged the debt for poor sinners, then he
himself was fully discharged and justified, and all his people in him; and in
this sense every believer is without sin, that is, they are free from the
reigning condemning power of sin, tho not from the in-being of sin, Romans 8.1.
And so is to be understood that 1. Joh. 2.9. Whosoever is born of God (...)
sin, for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of
God. But to return to the case in hand, etc. But Christ has never been seen by
any mortal eye in this world since he Ascended up into Glory; by which you may
see that this Doctrine of Christ's being Corporeally present in the Sacrament,
destroys the use and exercise of Faith in that Ordinance, which is to see him
by the eye of Faith, who is at the right hand of God, and is invisible, which
is to discern the Lords Body, which cannot be seen by a carnal bodily eye of
sense, as you pretend to see him in your Sacrament.

Secondly, If this Doctrine of Transubstantiation in your Churches sense be
true, (to wit) That the Priest does convert the Bread and Wine into the real
person of Christ, namely of Body, Soul and Divinity; then this must needs be a
very great and wonderful Miracle, that must necessarily and consequentially
follow.

Therefore before we go any further, let us inquire a little into the nature
and tendency of Miracles, and of their use and end, namely of those Miracles
which we do find in Holy Writ, for I am persuaded it will be worth our while;
and let us see if there be any kind of correspondency, or the least coherence
between this Transubstantiated Miracle, and them holy, true and real Miracles.

And the first Miracle that I will begin with shall be that of Moses, when he
turned his Rod into a Serpent; why the people that were present saw that it was
a Serpent; and when his Rod swallowed up the Magicians Rods, which they by
their Enchantments had turned into Serpents, the people saw that it was so, and
their senses and reason was satisfied of the reality of the thing, Exodus 7.9,
10, 11, 12.

Secondly, When Moses smote with his Rod upon the Sea, and the Sea divided and
made a way for the Children of Israel to pass through as on dry land, the
people of God saw it, ay and the Egpptians saw it too, to their utter
destruction, Exodus 14.16, 17, 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, etc.

Thirdly, When Moses smote upon the Rock with his Rod, and the water gushed
out, Exodus 17.5, 6. the people saw this Miracle, it was not done in
Hugger-mugger, for they drank of it, and highly commended it for sweet water,
comparing it to Honey, in Scripture; why their senses, and reason, and
understanding was satisfied that it was a real Miracle, it did not destroy
their Intellectuals, as your miracle does, nor captivate their senses and
reason.

Fourthly, A fourth miracle was that of the Prophet Elijah's raising the widows
Son that was dead, to life again, in 1 King 17.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. the woman
saw that her son was really dead before, and she also saw that her son was
really alive after the Prophet had raised him, her senses and reason, etc. were
(...) of Instances more in the Old Testament, but these shall suffice me, and I
hope the Reader also.

Secondly, I shall give you some Instances out of the New Testament.

First, of the Miracles which our Savior Christ himself wrought.

And secondly, of some of the Miracles which the Apostles wrought.

First, of some of the Miracles which our Savior Christ himself wrought when
he was at the Wedding at Cana, he turned water into Wine; the people saw that
it was Water before, and they both saw and tasted that it was really Wine after
Christ had wrought the Miracle; for the Governor or Steward of the Feast
highly commended it to be far better Wine than any they had drank on before, of
that which was of the real blood of the Grape, Joh. 2.9, 10, 23. Here was sense
and reason, etc. all satisfied of the reality of the Miracle.

Secondly, The second Miracle that I shall mention, shall be that of his Curing
the Apostle Peter's Wives Mother of a Fever; and you do style St. Peter Prince
of the Apostles, yet a Married Man, Mat. 8.14, 15. And when Jesus was come into
Peter's house, he saw his wives mother laid, and sick of a Fever, and he
touched her hand, and the Fever left her, and she arose and ministered unto
them. The Woman felt the effects of the Miracle, and the people saw it, and
were all satisfied.

A third Miracle of Christ's, was his opening the eyes of him that was born
blind; his Parents and his Neighbors knew that he was born blind, and they saw
perfectly and clearly that his Eyes were opened, and that he had received his
sight, Joh 9.18, 19, 20, 21. But the Jews did not believe concerning him, that
he had been born blind, and received his sight; and they asked them, saying, Is
this your Son which ye say was born blind? how then does he now see? His
Parents answered them, and said, We know that this is our Son, and that he was
born blind; but by what means he now sees, we know not, or who has opened his
Eyes, we know not, he is of age, ask him, he shall speak for himself. They knew
that he was born blind; and they knew also that his Eyes were miraculously
opened, and were well assured and satisfied of the reality of the thing.

Fourthly, A fourth Miracle was that of his raising Lazarus from the dead; his
Sisters and Friends had buried him before Christ came, insomuch that his Sister
concluded that he stunk, Joh. 11.39, 41, 42, 43, 44. Jesus said, Take ye away
the stone: Martha the Sister of him that was dead, says unto him, Lord, by
this time he stinketh; for he has been dead four days. Then they took away the
stone from the place where the dead was laid, and Jesus lift up his eyes, and
said, Father, I thank thee, that thou have heard me^ and I know that thou
hear me always: but (...) the people which stand by, that they may believe
that thou have sent me. Mark ye, our Savior Christ was for fatisfying the
people, the standers by, to convince them of the reality of the Miracle, and
also to let them know by what power and authority he did it. And when he thus
had spoken, he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth. And he that was
dead came forth hound hand and soot with grave-clothes, and his face was bound
about with a napkin. Jesus says unto them, Loose him, and let him go. v. 45.
Then many of the Jews which came to Mary, and had seen the things which Jesus
did, believed on him. Here you see the people that were there, all saw this
great and wonderful Miracle, and all their senses that were proper to be
exercised on that occasion, were fully satisfied, and their reason was not sent
empty nor blindfold away, nor with a Padlock clapped upon it, as your miracle of
Transubstantiation always does unto them that believe it.

The fifth and last Miracle that I shall now mention of our Savior's, shall be
the Miracle of Miracles, which was his rising from the dead, and his Miraculous
Appearance unto his Disciples, which is the Crowning miracle of all which he
wrought, tho not the last, Luke 24.36, 37, 38, 39, 40. And as they thus spoke,
Jesus himself slood in the midst of them, and says unto them, Peace be unto
you: But they were terrifed and affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a
spirit. What made them thus afraid? Why it was Christ's Miraculous coming into
the room through the Doors, as we may say, and stood in the midst of them, the
Doors being all shut fast for fear of the Jews. And he said unto them, why are
ye troubled, and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? behold my hands and my
feet, that it is I my self; handle me and see, for a spirit has not fiesh and
bones, as ye see me have. And when he had thus spoken, he showed them his hands
and his feet. Joh. 20.19, 20, 24, 25, 26. Then the same day at evening, being
the first day of the week, when the Doors were shut where the Disciples were
assembled for fear of ^he Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and says
unto them, Peace be with ye. This made them so terribly afraid, because Christ
came in personally among them, notwithstanding the Doors being fast ^hut. And
when he had so said, he showed unto them his ^ands and his side; then were the
Disciples glad when ^hey saw the Lord. That was, when our Savior had ^atisfied
their senses and reason, and their understanding, that it was he himself, and
not another. ^ow if you could satisfy any body of the reality of ^our Christ,
that is Transubstantiated; or if that christ himself would satisfy people of
the truth of (...) as our true Savior Christ did, it would be some^^ing. But
Thomas a Didimus being absent this first ^^y that Christ appeared, he mist
sight of him, verse. ^^, 25, 26. But Thomas, one of the Twelve, called Didi^^^
(...) not with them when Jesus came.

The other Disciples therefore said unto him, We have seen the Lord: But he
said unto them, Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put
my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will
not believe. And after eight days, again his Disciples were within, and Thomas
with them; then came Jesus, the Doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and
said, Peace be unto you; then said he to Thomas, Reach hither thy fingers, and
behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side, and be
not faithless, but believing.

If you of the Roman Catholics that are Lay-persons were but as incredulous
about your Doctrine of Transubstantiation as Thomas a Didimus was of Christ's
Resurrection, I know not how the Priests would do to satisfy you; but here you
see that our Savior Christ did satisfy all his Disciples, for he satisfied
their senses and reason, and all the scruples that did arise in them, and he
did not send their understandings empty away, nor hoodwinkt; here was seeing,
hearing, and feeling, fully satisfied, and reason and understanding sent full
fraighted or laden away, and no room left for the least doubt or scruple to be
made of the truth and reality of those Miracles.

But your Transubstantiated Miracle, is so far from satisfying any persons
Senses, Reason and Understanding, whether Romanist or others, that will but be
true to their Intellectuals, that it both betrayeth and destroys Sense,
Reason and Understanding; for ye must not believe one of them noble faculties,
if you believe your Miracle, which is quite contrary to the very nature of
Miracles. -- Pray mind our Savior Christ, he comparatively did stoop down and
condescend to Thomas's unbelief; but it was to destroy it: And this he did by
satisfying his Senses, Reason, and Understanding also, John 20.24, 25, 26, 27.
Now, if your Priests could do so, then it were something like; but because they
cannot do it, it is not only nothing, but it is that which is insinitely worse
than nothing, it is a very dangerous, pernicious Doctrine, for it is a strong
Delusion, and it is one of Antichrist, the Man of Sin's Lying Wonders; for they
that pretend to work this Miracle, do despise and contemn the Holy Scriptures,
as you may see in that same Chapter, where Antichrist the Man of Sin is
described: For these are two of his Characters, viz. Lying Wonders, and
Disowning the Gospel. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10, 11, 12. Even him whose coming is after
the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders: That is, he
claims all power both spiritual and temporal, which either his craft or his
cruelty can reach, Dan. 8.24, 25. And his power shall be mighty, but not by his
own power: and he shall destroy wonderfully, and shall prosper and practice,
and shall destroy the mighty and the holy people. And through his policy he
shall cause crast to proster in his band and (...) shall magnify himself in his
heart, and by peace shall destroy many: he shall also stand up against the
prince of princes; but he shall be broken without hands. Rev. 17.14, 16, 17.
The Apostle says, that he should come with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness in them that perish, because they received not the love of the
truth that they might be saved: And for this cause God shall send them strong
delusions that they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned who
believe not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. It is a most
dreadful judgment, you see, that you poor souls do lie under, who do believe
this Doctrine: The Lord in Mercy open your eyes, and thoroughly convince your
Consciences of the evil and danger of it, before it be too late, while the door
of Mercy stands open; for it is as great a Judgment as that which the Jews
lies under; for as your sins and theirs is much alike, so are the judgments
which both the one and the other lies under; the Jews they deny Christ openly,
and you deny him privately; you do confess that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, in words, but in works you deny him.

3. Thirdly and lastly, The Apostles, whenever they wrought Miracles, the
people saw that they were Miracles, Acts 8.6, 7. And the people with one accord
gave good heed unto these things which Philip spoke, hearing and seeing the
Miracles which he did. For unclean spirits, crying with loud voices, came out
of many that were possessed with them: and many taken with palsies, and that
were lame, were healed. And their very enemies did see the Miracles which they
wrought, and were forced to confess and own it; as you may see, in Acts 4.16.
Saying, What shall we do to these men? for that indeed a notable miracle has
been done, it is manifest to all them that dwell in Jerusalem, and we cannot
deny it. And the Apostles did raise the dead also, and the people, both good
and bad, did hear and see the Miracles which they wrought, and were all
satisfied with the reality of them, or else it could be no Miracle. There was
never any Miracle wrought that ever I read of, in the Sacred Scriptures, as I
can remember, either by the Prophets who were inspired by the Holy Chost before
Christ came in the flesh, or by our Savior Christ himself, or by any of his
Apostles, that ever destroyed men's Senses and Reason, and put out the very
light of their Understanding; but the Miracles which they all wrought, brought
their own clear and undeniable evidence along with them: They have, as we may
say, spoken clearly and fully for themselves, they need no tricky, nor force,
nor cunning artisices to create a belief in the people, of the real truth of
them; but all the people that saw them, have always been satisfied that it was
a real thing.

Tho it is true, the wicked enemies many times (...) believing Jews did of our
blessed Lord and Savior's casting out Devils, when they said that he cast out
Devils by Beclzebub the Prince of Devils, Matt. 12.24. But when the pharisees
heard it, they said, this fellow does not cast out devils, but by Beelzebub the
prince of the devils. They blasphemously and boldly did assert, that Christ the
Eternal Son of God did derive his Power and Authority to work Miracles by, from
the Devil, when as Christ himself is the Omnipotence God, the Second person in
the most Glorious Trinity. Rev. 1.8. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
the ending, says the Lord, which is, which was, and which is to come, the
Almighty. John 8.58. Jesus says unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you,
Before Abraham was, I am. Prove. 8.23, 30. I was set up from everlasting, from
the beginning, or ever the carth was. Then I was by him, as one brought up with
him: and I was daily his delight, rejeycing always before him. And likewise
concerning that wonderful Miracle of Christ rising from the dead, How did they
porsuade and bribe the Soldiers that watched the Sepulcher, to tell the
Governor, that while they slept, his Disciples came by night and stole him
away? Matt. 28.11, 12, 13.

But now this Transubstantiated Miracle of yours does not, nor cannot satisfy
any Man's Senses or Reason, unless it be with Ignorance: I dare be bold to say,
and appeal to all men, that no Romanist himself can have his Sense and Reason
satisfied as to the truth of it; for it cannot be, it is impossible. All that
can be said, is this, their unbelief has overcome and captivated their Sense
and Reason, and so they do lay a force upon it, and suspend the following of
the dictates of it; as our Savior Christ says, Mark 4.12. That seeing, they
may see, and not perceive; and hearing, they may hear, and not understand. They
may force their Tongues, and so extort a Confession, that the Bread, or Wafer
in the Sacrament, is the Real Body and Substantial Flesh of Christ; but the Eye
says, Tongue thou lie at the same time; for the Eye sees no change upon the
Accidents, but they remains still as they were before; which if there were such
a change wrought upon them, then the Elements would cease to be, and quite
disappear, but he sees the Elements still remaining as they were: But implicit
Faith and Unbelief has so blinded his spiritual Eyes, that he must not believe
his own corporeal Eyes; by which means be cannot, or will not perceive the
deceit: And their hearts being so hardened through the deceitfulness of sin,
that they will not exercise their thoughts about it; and their hearts are so
beclouded, or veiled over with their false Doctrine, that although they hear
better things with their Ears, yet-they must not believe them, because they are
bound to believe as their Church commands them to believe: And the Hand that
(...) Mouth that can taste nothing but Bread, or the Wafer, the Mouth cannot
taste one bit or morsel of Flesh. or feel the least Bone or Gristle in it. And
as for the Wine that is really turned into blood, they must take the Priests
word for that, and pawn the Salvation of their Souls for the truth of it too.
But tho they do blind themselves in this nature, yet their Senses and Reason do
their Office, tho they will not hearken unto them, nor give the least credit
unto what they inform them.

And Christ and the Apostle tells them, that it is Bread after Consecration,
and that the Cup is a Cup in which the Wine is, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. And their own
Senses and Reason tell them that it is so; but they will not believe Christ,
nor the Apostles, no nor their own Eyes, Nose, Hands nor Mouth; but they will
believe as the Church believes, or believe the Priest before them all, although
they have neither their own Senses, Reason, nor Understanding on their side,
nor the Holy Scriptures on their side, which is the revealed will of God, and
ought to be the Rule for every Christian to live and walk by. But, Sir, your
own sense, and reason, and understanding, and the Sacred Scriptures, are all
against you, and this is the main reason why your Priests will not permit nor
allow the use of the Gospel Light, that holy and Sacred Touchstone, to the
people, for if they did, it would discover all their spiritual coin to be but
dross and counterfeit, and it would never pass among the people, Joh. 3.20. For
every one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to the light lest
his deeds should be reproved. They first put out the light of the Gospel, and
then they bring them to resign up their senses, and reason, and understanding,
and conscience, and souls and all, unto the conduct of the Priests or Church.
And when they have them thus in the dark, why then they lead them which way
they please, for he is no longer acted nor guided by his own reason or
understanding, nor by the holy Scriptures, but by the Priests: O Sirs, look to
the Word of God, Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony; if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. O precious
souls, do not deceive your selves, I beseech you, by sollowing these blind
Guides, but take our blessed Redeemer's advice and counsel in Mat. 15.14. Let
them alone, that is as much as to say, do not follow them, they be blind
leaders of the blind, and if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the
ditch. And the Prophet Isaiah says in Isa. 9.16. For the leaders of this
people cause them to err, and they that are lead of them ^re destroyed.

Again secondly, if it be so that your Priests do, by virtue of their
Consecration, convert the Bread and Wine into the real substantial person of
Christ, (...) wit, of Body, Soul and Divinity, why then it (...) follow that
Christ must be as complete, substantial and entire, lacking nothing of all
these blessed personal perfections, as he was when he was here personally upon
Earth, before he ascended up into Glory; for this must be the inevitable and
necessary consequence of it, for even so it must be, or else it is but a mere
fantastical imaginary Sham-Christ, and is of the number of those sort of false
Christ's which our Savior Christ bids us beware of, which are out in the desert
among the false Prophets, Matt. 24.23, 24, 25, 26. Then if any man shall say
unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there, believe it not; for there shall arise
false Christ's and false Prophets. This was prophesied by our Savior Christ,
that when Antichrist, the Man of Sin, did, or should arise, that then these
false Christ's and false Prophets should arise in great numbers with him, and
shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible) they
shall deceive the very elect. Behold, I have told you before. Wherefore if they
shall say unto you, Behold he is in the desert, go not forth; behold, he is in
the secret chambers, believe it not. And Antichrist was to arise, and come with
all Power, and Signs, and Lying Wonders, says the Apostle, which is the same
character which our Savior gives of him.

This desert where these false Christ's are, I take it to be a Church or People,
professing the name of Christ in words, but deny him in works; being
abominable, disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate, Titus 1.16. They
are a Company of Deserters, that have deserted Christ, and run from the true
Christian Colors; for you see they are a sort of nominal Christians, that do
own Christ's Name, but they do follow another Jesus, as I have already showed
from the Apostles words, 2 Cor. 11.4. They are a people that have deserted
Christ's Standard, who himself is Generalissimo of all the Christian spiritual
Soldiers, or Army.

But these false Prophets and others, are those that are gone over to
Antichrist, who is Head and Generalissimo of all the many Antichrists and
Apostates.

Now that our Savior Christ prophesied here of Antichrist's rising, it
appears to me to be as clear as the Sun that shines in the firmament;
because the Apostle has laid down the very same Character of Antichrist, and
his Disciples and false Prophets, as our Savior had done before; for our
Redeemer says, that there should arise false Christ's, and false Prophets,
which should show great signs and wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible)
they should deceive the very elect. And the Apostle says, that the Man of sin,
Antichrist, should come after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs,
and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that
perish. Our Savior says, consequentially, Signs, and Wonders, and Deceit. And
the Apostle also says, Signs. Wonders and Deceit. If it were passible they
shall deceive the very elect, says our Savior, that is, by their great Signs,
and Lying Wonders, They shall come with all deceivableness of unrighteousness
in them that perish, says the Apostle. And then here follows their desertion
of the Standard of Christ their General; Because they received not the love of
the truth, that they might be saved. Here they first desert God, and then God
deserts them, as you may see in those following words of the Apostle, as I have
already proved: And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that
they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned who believe not the
truth: That is, those who believe not the Gospel of God in opposition to this
lie, but had pleasure in unrighteousness: Surely then this must needs be a
dreadful desert, when a Church or people desert and leave God, -- And God does
cast off them, and desert and leave them; this I humbly conceive to be the
meaning of our Savior Christ, in Matt. 24. which does agree, and suit so well
with that of the Apostle Paul's description of Antichrist the Man of Sin; this
is that desert where these swarms of false Christ's and false Prophets are and
do reside, it is a deserted false worship. And hear again what is said in 1
John 2.18, 19. with which Scripture I shall close this Head, and so go on
toward the finishing of this Discourse; Little children, it is the last time:
and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many
Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time. There be the false
Prophets which Christ tells us should arise, and show great signs and wonders
to deceive the credulous people. And here follows their Apostatizing or
Desertion, to wit, They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they
had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us: But they went out,
that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us. Thus you see
that this Doctrine of yours is not true; and your Tronsubstantiated Christ is
but a false Christ, and of the number of those Christ's that are out in the
Desert,

Now, I pray, Sir, do not take it amiss that I deal thus plainly with you; nor
do not think much of my repeating over some things that have been mentioned
under former Heads; for you know in a trial at Law among Men, you have often
one and the same thing repeated over and over, by the Witnesses and others,
etc. Ay, and we have it so in Scripture also in many places, and in many cases;
and I will give you one which relates unto this our Trial, or Discourse, Gal.
1.6, 7, 8, 9. I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you
into the grace of Christ, unto another gospel: Which is not another; but there
be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ. But tho we,
or an angel frem heaven, preach any other gospel unto you, than that which we
have preached unto you, let him be accursed. As we said before, so say I now
again, If any man preach a^ other gospel unto you, than that ye have received,
(...) him be accursed. And what the Apostle says, (...) say I, and let all
good men say Amen to it.

3. Thirdly, If this Doctrine of yours be tru^^ then after Consecration, as you
call it, there would appear all the lineaments of a Man, visibly to a^ the
spectators, with all the faculties of a Man; for (...) was Christ when he was
here upon Earth personall^ in Body, Soul and Divinity, before he laid dow^ his
Life, and after he took it up again, viz. after he arose again from the dead.
Luke 24.39. Beho^^ my hands and my feet, that it is I my self; handle (...) and
see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see (...) have. If this
Doctrine of yours be really tru^ why then it would necessarily follow, that all
the spectators, as well as the partakers, would be satisfied that it is so, and
not an imaginary fancy for such is the nature of Miracles, as you see ha^^ been
clearly proved by several instances both from Scripture and Reason, which do
witness the trut^ of it.

4. Fourthly, If this Doctrine of Transubstantiation in your sense be true,
viz. That Christ is i^^ tire in his person, with all the lineaments and
facu^ties of Man, after Consecrating the Elements in the Sacraments; then, Sir,
I would fain know what (...) the Reason that he does not speak, or what should
hinder or impede Christ from speaking personally and vocally now, as well as he
did to his Disciple after he arose from the dead, when they were under doubts
and fears whether it was he or no; when he said unto them, Why are ye troubled?
and why (...) thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and m^^ feet, that
it is I my self; handle me and see, for a spir^^ has not flesh and bones as ye
see me have. And whe^^ he had thus spoken, he showed them his hands an^^ his
feet: And if yours be a Real Christ, he cou^^ speak now as well as he did then,
or as he will wh^ he comes to Judge the World, when he will c^^ for
Antichrist, the Man of Sin, who is his great^ enemy, and call for all the false
Prophets and Dis^ples that do belong unto him, to give an acco^^ for all their
Idolatry and Cruelty, and will then (...) unto them all, But those mine enemies
that would (...) that I should reign over them, bring hither, and (...) them
before me, Luke 19.27. Now, if you cou^^ prove by clear and undeniable
evidence, that ev^^ this Transubstantiated Christ of yours did speak (...) any
person, at any time or times, and gave a^^ directions among persons about
matters and for^^ of Worship in Churches, seeing there is so mu^^ difference in
the World about it, then the might be something said unto it, in vindication of
it; But seeing that no such thing can (...) proved, there is no Authority at
all to give the l^^^ countenance or credit unto that (...) that obtrudes such a
silent, mute sort of Christ upon the people, that is altogether speechless, and
also ^^uitless unto those that expect to receive any benefit ^^y him.

5. Fifthly and lastly, After all that has been said, (...) will Challenge any
of all your Priests, that pretend ^o have this Infallible knack of working this
Mira^le or Change upon the Wafer or bit of Bread, and ^he Cup of Wine, To take
a Consecrated, Transubstantiated Wafer, or bit of Bread, and likewise the
^onsecrated Cup of Wine; and let the Wafer be put among a parcel of Wafers of
the very same make, that are not Consecrated nor Transubstantiated, and ^kewise
let the Cup of Wine be put among other ^ups of Wine that are not Consecrated,
and let but ^ome other person, that will be but faithful and honest ^ix them
together, and take good notice to himself which it is that is Consecrated, and
shift the Wine ^to another Cup, and unless the Priest have any ^rivate mark
upon the Wafer, or any private notice ^iven him which is the Wine, the Priest
himself ^at Consecrated them, shall not know which it is, ^or discern any
difference that there is between the ^^ne and the other, between the
consecrated and the ^nconsecrated, neither in color, bigness, nor by ^eight;
it shall not weigh one dram more after ^onsecration than it did before. And is
not this a ^ry strange thing, think ye, that there should be ^^ch a great
Change as this is, wrought upon the Ele^ents, viz. from a little Wafer and Cup
of Wine, ^^to the real Body, Soul and Divinity of Christ, and ^^t that it
should not be known, nor discerned in ^^e least, from the rest of the Wafers
and Wine, ^ither by sight nor by weight, nor by any the least ^eration to be
discerned or discovered upon the Ac^dents, when as they pretend to
Transubstantiate it ^^to the very person of Christ, composed and made (...) of
Body, Soul and Divinity; and then they of^^ him up a Sacrifice sufficient and
propitiatory for ^^e sins of the living and the dead.

But in the next place, I shall produce you two ^^ry great Miracies which this
Doctrine of Tran^^stantiation does afford us, which is essentially in (...)
very Bowels or Womb of it.

1. And the first is this, namely, That it is no less ^^n a very prodigious
Miracle, and amazing Won^^, that ever any persons whom God has endew^^ with
Senses, Reason, Understanding, and all o^^^ Faculties and Intellectuals proper
to Man, and ^^s great a measure, as to any other men whatsoever, should yet
suffer themselves to be so ^^^ribly imposed upon, and expose, or rather aban^^^
all that is dear unto them, to follow a false ^^^ist, which is to depart from
the true one, to be^^^ such a piece of Ridiculous, nonsensical Do^^^ne, which
Travelleth with Contradictions, and (...) forth nothing but monstrous
Absurdities: Surely persons must sacrifice all the rational part of humanity,
or at least postpone it, before ever they can be brought or persuaded to assent
and consent unto any such kind of Doctrine: They must wholly unman themselves.
And is not this a very great Miracle, think ye?

2. Secondly, The second Miracle which this Doctrine does afford us, is almost
as great as the former, namely this, that the Priests should ever have the
boldness to make such an invasion upon men's senses, reason and understanding!
and have the confidence to impose such horrible absurdities and rediculous
nonsense upon the people, that is so full of contradictions in it self, and
made of a strong delusion, that is contrary to the Holy Scripture, and contrary
to your own Creed, and contrary to Sense and Reason, and contrary to the very
Nature of Miracles! for although Miracles are above Sense and Reason, yet such is
the nature of them, that the first thing they do, after they are brought forth,
is to see that men's Senses, and Reason, and Understanding are satisfied with
the reallity of it, or else it can be no Miracle: For how can a person admire
and wonder at a thing that is common, which he sees no change in, nor
alteration upon? Tho it is true, God's end and design in working of Miracles
was infinitely higher; for it was for the confirmation and establishing the
Churches for the Ages that were to come, and for the good of God's people, and
for the greater aggravation of the condemnation of Christ's enemies. But yet
still the people saw these Miracles when they were wrought, and were satisfied
with the truth and reallity of them; and many were convinced and converted by
them, John 11.42, 43, 44, 45. -- Now if a Man should tell me, that he is flying
in the Air, when I see him go along the street upon the ground, as I my self
do, why this begets no manner of wonder in me, except it should be at the Man's
Impudence, and for his lying, ridiculous Nonsense: But if a Man did really fly
in the Air, and I saw him do it, that would be a Miracle, ay although he should
tell me that he was then walking in the Street. Now in such Cases as these are,
Seeing is always to be preferred before Believing; So that this Doctrine of
yours is but a mere fancy, a dream, or rather indeed, as the Apostle phrases
it, A strong delusion, and lying wonder, 2 Thessalonians. 2.

In the last place, our Savior Christ called it Bread, after he had blessed
it; and called the Wine, Cup, after he had given thanks; and the Apostle called
it Bread and Cup after Consecration or Blessing of them, when he did exhibit
them unto the People, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. The cup of blessing which we bless, is
it not the communion of the blood of Christ? the bread which we break, is it
not the communion of the body of Christ? For me being many, are one bread (...)
one body, for we are all partakers of that one bread. Believers have Communion
with a Crucified Savior in this Ordinance, by Faith in him, and Love to him.

And our Savior Christ and the Apostles, gave both the Bread and the Wine unto
all the Members that did partake, as well to the Lay People, as to the
Ecclesiastics, without any the least Exception, in them words of our Savior's
command, Drink ye all of it; and you will hear that it is called Bread, and
breaking of Bread, in several places of the Sacred Scripture, Acts 2.42. And
they continued steadfast in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in
breaking of bread, and in prayers. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. The cup of blessing which
we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we
break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? For we being many are one
bread, and one body; for we are all partakers of that one bread, that is,
Christ the Bread of Life. Here it is said, Communion with the Blood, and with
the Bread; that is thus, Believers have Communion with a crucified Redeemer,
and Communion and Fellowship one with another, in that Holy Ordinance of the
Lords Supper. As you may see in the same Chapter, 20, 21. verses, all those
that make a Sacrifice of the Ordinance of the Lords Supper, have fellowship
with Devils. But in the 17 verse, there the true Gospel Church is called Bread,
and so is Christ her Head also; both the Head, and the Body, which is the
Church, are called Bread. And in Acts 20.7. And upon the first day of the week,
when the Disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready
to depart on the morrow. Thus you see it was called Bread, and not Flesh, both
in the first Institution of the Ordinance by our Savior Christ himself; and
likewise by the Apostles at the Celebration of this Holy Ordinance among the
Disciples.

Therefore this eating of Christ's Body, and drinking his Blood, is to be
understood no otherwise than our Savior Christ intended and appointed it,
which was Spiritual and Sacramental, for to commemorate his death and
sufferings, and all the blessed fruits and effects that do flow therefrom into
the souls of Believers.

There is a feeding upon Christ in every Spiritual Gospel-Ordinance of God in
Religious Worship and Discipline by Faith; the Gospel Ordinances are a feast of
fat things full of marrow, of wine from the lees well refined, as the Prophet
Isaiah calls it; and on them the souls of Believers do feed and feast with, and
upon the Lord Jesus Christ. And this feeding upon Christ's Body, and drinking
his Blood in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, as well as in all other
Ordinances of the Gospel aforesaid, is to be done by faith, as I have already
proved; for every believing soul does live upon Christ by faith, who is (...)
of Scriptures to prove the veracity or truth of the same; and here following I
shall lay down some fe^^ Scriptures instead of many which do import an^^
clearly manifest the same; and I will begin wit^^ Joh. 8.24. I said therefore
unto you, that ye shall die (...) your sins; for if ye believe not that I am
he, ye shall d^^^ in your sins. 1 John 3.23. And this is his Comman^ment, that
we should believe on the name of his Son Jes^^ Christ. Here is God the Father's
command for i^^ Christ does not say, If you do not eat me, Body Soul and
Divinity, ye shall die; but if you do n^^ believe that I am he, ye shall die in
your sins, because ye believed not that I am he, because ye d^^ not obey me,
nor my Father's command; as if ou^^ Savior should have said, Romans 10.9, 10.
That (...) thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and sha^^ believe
in thine heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved; for
with the heart ma^^ believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession
is made unto Salvation, Act. 16.30, 31. When the sturdy Jailer was convinced,
he said, Sirs, Wha^ must I do to be saved? The Apostles did not tell him that
he must go and eat Christ's substantial Body: No, but they told him, that he
must believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and he should be saved, and his house,
Joh. 12.46. I am come a light into the world, tha^ whosoever believes on me
should not abide in darkness Joh. 17.3. And this is Life Eternal, that they
might know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou has^ sent. How must
they know God and Christ, so a^ they might have Eternal Life? why only by
believing in him, Joh. 20.21. But these are written, that ye might believe that
Jesus ss the Christ the Son of God and believing ye might have life through his
name. Joh. 3.16, 17, 36. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. For God se^^ not his Son into the world to condemn the world,
but tha^ the world through him might be saved. He that believet^ on the Son,
has eternal life; and he that believes n^^ the Son, shall not see life, but
the wrath of God abide^ on him. Joh. 5.24. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
(...) that believes on him that sent me, has everlasting lif^ and shall not
come into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life, Joh. 6.29. Jesus
answered and fa^^ unto them, This is the work of God, that ye believe (...) him
whom he has sent.

Thus you see, dear Sir, that I have answered yo^ fully and clearly; and I have
faithfully prove from the Holy Bible, which is my only Library: and also I have
proved from Reason, (for God dea^eth with us as Rational Creatures) that our
Savior Christ is to be eaten and drunken by faith, and i^ love, Spiritually
and Sacramentally in that Ho^^ Ordinance of the Lord's Supper; for it is a Lov^
feast, in remembrance of the greatest love that (...) gave his only begotten
Son to die for it; and this love of Christ that was stronger than death, we are
^o commemorate in that Ordinance, by feeding by ^aith upon a Crucified Savior,
and not to eat him Corporeally and Substantially in his Person, as you of the
Roman Catholic Persuasion do vainly pretend to believe and imagine; the Lord
inlighten your minds in the true Knowledge of Christ, and sanctify your
understandings, and change your wills, and make you willing in the day of his
power; for this is a very dangerous gross Error, and such a one as cannot be
paralleled, but in the case of the poor blind Jews; for by this Doctrine of
Personal Priests, and Material Altars and Sacrifices, you do put your selves
back from under the Gospel dispensation, and lay your selves under the Mosaical
Law; and the consequence of it is this, it is inevitably and clearly a
downright denying Jesus Christ being come in the Flesh. Pray Sir, Consider
what I have said; and so my dear Friend, fare ye well, until we meet at the Day
of Judgment.

But methinks, I hear some Persons carp and deny the Veracity or Truth of the
Scriptures, which we Protestants do own and profess to be the revealed Will and
Word of God. I had thought to have gone no further, but this lays me under a
Necessity and irresistible Obligation to Answer this black and grim Objection,
which seems to have waylaid me all this while; or at least, I am jealous that
it has, or may be so; and therefore to prevent the worst, I shall by the
assisting Power of God, give an Answer unto it.

In the first place, It may be supposed that some Persons, especially them
which find themselves the Persons mostly concerned in this Discourse; namely,
those which teach the poor ignorant People this kind of Doctrine, will be so
bold and hardy, as to object against the Veracity or Truth of the Holy
Scriptures, and say, perhaps, That they were Invented and made by some Apostate
Heretic, (or some other Person) for so it is, and must be; that either the
Scriptures which we that are Protestants do own and believe to be the revealed
Will and Word of God, are not true; or else their Religion and Scriptures must
be false; for theirs and ours cannot both be ^rue, because they are directly
contrary one to the other, so as nothing can be more; Light and Darkness cannot
be more, for indeed it is Spiritual ^ight and Darkness.

Secondly, If the Holy Scriptures be but the Inven^on of Men, that is to say,
mere Human Invention; ^^en it will necessarily follow, That it was either ^^d
Men or good Men that did invent them, one (...) these two sorts of Men it must
be, that cannot be ^^nied; for there can be no Neutrality in this case; ^^^y
that are not for Christ, are against him.

(...), By the Omnipotent Power and Grace of (...) that God, that made and
indicted the Holy Scriptures which we Protestants do profess and own, and also
believe, I shall prove the Sacred Scriptures to be the revealed Will and Word
of God, and not a Humane Invention, and that by Arguments drawn and deducted
from Reason. And also, I shall draw a Parallel between the Holy Scriptures
which we Protestants profess and own, and the Scriptures which Antichrist does
profess and own, which is that another Gospel which I have spoken unto you of,
in Gal. 1.8, 9.

1. In the first place, I do positively assert, That the Holy Scriptures which
we profess, could not be invented and made by a Heretic, because it damns
Heresy, and so consequently Heretics, to Hell and Damnation, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2.
But there were false Prophets among the People; even as there shall be false
Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies, denying the
Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. And many
shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of truth shall be
evil spoken of. Now would any Heretic write Destruction and Damnation, and
such bitter things against himself, think you? No sure; therefore it could not
be a Heretic that made and invented the Holy Scriptures. Ay, but it may be
objected that he may be a Heretic, and not know it; why it is very true, a
Person may be a Heretic and not know it; nay, I do believe that it is so with
all Heretics; nay, I do believe that the greatest Heretics in the World, do
count themselves the best Christians; nay, the only Christians, and all others
Heretics, Isa. 65.3, 4, 5. Rev. 3.9. -- But yet notwithstanding in this
respect he could not be a Heretic, but he must know it; for what is Heresy,
but Error and Falsehood about Spiritual things; it is a mis-guided Judgment; and
could any Man have such Gifts and Parts, as to invent the Scriptures, that must
not certainly know that what he writ at the same time, were lies and falsehood;
and what he writ in the Name of God, and for God's Word, was but his own? It is
impossible that ever he could be a Heretic in this Sense, but that he must
know it; and surely he would never have written so severely against Heresy and
false Doctrine; therefore the Scriptures which we profess, must not be the Word
of Man.

2. Secondly, It could not be an Apostate of any sort that writ the Holy
Scriptures, or that invented them; for see what it says of such, Heb. 6.4, 5,
6. For it is impossible for these who were once enlightened, and have tasted of
the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted
the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come; If they shall fall
away, to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves
the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame, Now would any kind of
Apostate, either from you to us, or from us to you, or to nothing at all, which
is better than that which some People profess, ever write so severely against
his own Practice, and exclude himself from Heaven and Happiness for ever?
Therefore it could not be an Apostate that made and invented the Scriptures.

3. Thirdly, It could not be a Hypocrite that invented the Scriptures which we
profess and own, because it denounces Woe and Damnation to such, Matthew. 23.13,
14. Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye shut up the kingdom
of Heaven against men: for ye neither go in your selves, neither suffer ye
them, which are entering, to go in. Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites; for ye devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayers;
therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation. Now can it be imagined that
ever either Heretic or Apostate, or Hypocrite, would write thus dreadfully
against themselves, when as these three sorts of Men, especially, in all Ages
have been the greatest Sticklers against, and Opposers of the Holy Scriptures;
and also the most violent Persecutors of them who are, or have been the
strictest Professors of it?

4. Fourthly, It could not be a Coveteous and Proud Person, or a Griping
Usurer, that made or invented the Scriptures, because it speaks against them,
as much as it does against them that make Images, and bow down unto them, and
worship them, which God has positively forbid, Exodus 20. For a covetous
Person, the Scripture has particularly Branded with that black-Pitch-Mark of
Hell, namely Idolatry, in these words, viz. Beware of Covetousness, which is
Idolatry. And our Savior has told us, that it is a very difficult thing for a
rich Man, who trusts in his Riches, to get to Heaven, and be saved. And it is
said, that God resists the Proud, and beholds them afar off; and the Usurer
is much spoken against in the Holy Scriptures; therefore it could be neither of
these bad Men that made or invented the Holy Scriptures, because they would
never have written so severely against themselves, for it is contrary to Nature.

5. Fifthly, It could not be a Whoremonger, nor an Adulterer, for the Scripture
says, That Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge.

6. Sixthly, It could not be a Thief, or a Murderer, nor an Unrighteous Person,
nor a Lier, nor a Fornicator, nor an Extortioner, nor a Reviler, nor a
Conjuring Sorcerer, nor an Effeminate Person, nor an Abuser of himself with
Mankind, neither could it be a Drunkard, or a Glutton. It could not possibly be
any of all these sorts of bad Men, that made or invented the Scriptures,
because they would never have denounced such heavy Judgments against themselves
for all these Sins which are against the very Light of Nature, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.

7. Seventhly, It could not be any of these two Bed-Rolls of Sinners, that made
or invented the Holy Scriptures, which you have discovered by the Apostle Paul,
in Romans 1.26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. and in 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Surely
these Sinners would never have pronounced such a dreadful Sentence against
themselves.

8. Eighthly, It could not be a Persecutor, that made or invented the
Scripture, for it has set a Cain-like mark upon him, viz. the vilest and
basest of Men, Acts 17.5. But the Jews who believed not, moved with envy, took
unto them certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and
set all the city in an uproar, and assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to
bring them out to the people. And our Savior Christ calls them, A generation
of vipers and scrpents, Matthew. 23.31, 32, 34, 35. Surely then, if Persecutors
had made or invented the Scriptures, they would never have written thus against
themselves.

9. Ninthly, It could not be a Sabbath-breaker, or one that profaneth the Lords
Day, that made or invented the Scriptures, because the Scriptures are very
strict for the due observing the Sabbath, or for keeping a Day unto the Lord;
and there is severe Penalties prescribed and made, to be inflicted upon the
Tranfgressors of that Holy Law of God.

10. Tenthly, It could not be an Atheist that made and invented the Scriptures,
because it discovers the glorious Attributes of the Divine Being, and his Works
of Creation and Providence, and denounces Hell and Damnation against all
Atheists; therefore it could not possibly be an Atheist that made and invented
the Holy Scriptures.

11. Eleventhly and Lastly, to name no more bad Men; It could not be any Person
made and invented the Scriptures, that was an Idolater, that invents and makes
to himself any graven images, or the likeness of any thing that is in heaven
above, or in the earth beneath, or in the sea, or in the waters under the
earth, Exodus 20.4, 5. That bow down to them, and say their Prayers before them,
and perhaps pay Divine Adoration unto them. Read what the Scripture says of
these, Psalm. 115.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Psalm. 97.7. Isa. 40.18, 19, 20. To whom will ye
liken God? or what likeness will ye compare unto him? The workman melts a
graven image, and the goldsmith spreads it over with gold, and casts silver
chains. He that is so impoverished that he has no oblation, chooses a tree
that will not rot; he seeks unto him a cunning workman, to prepare a graven
image that shall not be moved. Isa. 44.16, 17. He burns part thereof in the
fire: with part thereof he eats flesh: he rosteth roast, and is satisfied yea,
he warmeth himself, and says, Aha, I am warm, I have seen the fire. And the
residue thereof he makes a god, even his graven image: he falls dewn unto
(...) and worshippeth it, and prays unto it, and says, Deliver me, for thou
art my god. Now certainly, it could be none of these sorts of Persons that made
or invented the Holy Scriptures, which we Protestants do own and believe to be
the eternal, unalterable Word and Law of God.

Object. But it may be some may say, Yes, it might be such a Person that made
the Scriptures; for we do not make these Images for any other end or design,
than to put us in mind of God, and our Duty toward him, and that they are the
Laymens Books, to teach and instruct them.

Pray give me leave to put a Case unto you. Now suppose for Argument sake, to
illustrate the matter, that the King's Majesty in Concurrence with his two
Houses of Parliament, the Great Council of the Land, should make a Law for some
Reason of State, that it should be no less than High Treason for any of his
Subjects to make his Image, or to have his Picture, or the Likeness of any
thing that does belong to him, in Imitation of it; and Issue out his
Proclamation, straightly and strictly forbidding all his Subjects attempting
the doing it, upon Pain of the inevitable escaping the severest Punishment,
which properly belongs unto those that are Guilty of High Treason. But yet,
notwithstanding this severe Prohibition of the King, there should be some
Persons would be so daring and bold, as to presume to do it out of a pretended,
but blind Zeal of Loyalty; and not rest satisfied in, nor with their own
Treason and Rebellion, but they would force others of his Subjects to do so
likewise, or else they would knock them in the head, or burn them, because they
were truly Loyal, and kept to the Kings Laws in this Case made and provided.

Pray, which of these two forts of Persons are the best, and the most Loyallest
Subjects, think you? I know you will say, those that obeyed the Kings Laws; for
as it is in Spiritual things, so in this, Obedience (...) better than
Sacrifice. Why, the Law of the King of Heaven, who is King of Kings, and
Lawgiver to all his Creatures, viz. the Great Charter of Heaven, is, that we
shall not make, nor have, nor bow down to, nor worship any sort of Images, ^or
the likeness of any of the things in Heaven, or ^n Earth, or in the Sea, or in
the Waters under the Earth. Whatever some People think of it, I will ^ssure
them from the Word of a Jealous God, it is ^^o less than Spiritual High
Treason, and punishable by the Great Charter of Heaven, with no less ^han Hell
and Damnation, without unfeigned Re^entance, and a thorough Reformation, Deuteronomy.
5.^, 9. Thou shall not make thee any graven image, or any ^^keness of any thing
that is in heaven above, or that is (...) the earth beneath, or that is in the
waters beneath (...) earth. Thou shall not bow down thy self unto them, (...)
serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous (...) God. Therefore it could
be none of these sort of bad Men, nor no other bad Men whatsoever, that had any
hand, in the least, in making or inventing the Scriptures, which we that are
Protestants of all sorts, do own and believe to be the Word of God.

2. Secondly, In the second place, neither could it be good Men that made and
invented the Scriptures of their own Brain. First, It could not be them which
count themselves Good: Nor, Secondly, Could it be them whom God by his Grace
has made Good.

1. First it could not be a Moral Honest Good Man, that made and invented the
Scriptures, who counts himself so; for he will tell you, That he shall go to
Heaven, and be saved, because he deals uprightly and justly with all men, and
pays every one their own, and does wrong to no man, and I do as I would be
done by; which is all very good in its place; and let me tell you, that it is
so good, that there is no going to Heaven without it; but yet let me tell thee
also, Tho thou do give Man his due, yet if thou do not give God his due, it
will all avail thee nothing in Point of Justification and Salvation: But what
is it to give God his due? Why the sole Conduct and Government of thy Soul, all
thou art, and all thou have, must be resigned up to God from whence thou did
receive it; thou must forsake all, whenever God in his Providence calls thee to
it, and deny thy self, and follow Christ the Lamb of God whithersoever he
goes. Will you see a full Scripture for proof of this? Why you shall, Matthew.
19.18, 19, 20, 21. Jesus said, Thou shall do no murder; thou shall not commit
Adultery; thou shall not steal; thou shall not bear false witness; honor thy
father and thy mother; and, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. The
young man says unto him, All these things have I kept from my youth up; What
lack I yet? Jesus said unto him, If thou will be perfect, go and sell that thou
have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in Heaven, and come
and follow me. Moral Honesty will not do, unless we follow Christ by Faith, and
in Love. Therefore it could not be a Moral Honest Man that made or invented the
Scriptures, because they are quite against him; and surely if the Moral Good
Man had made them, he would have made his way wide enough for himself to go to
Heaven, and be saved by his Morality.

2. Secondly, There is another sort of Persons that count themselves so good,
that they think there is none like them, but that they are the only good men in
the world, Isa. 65. Rev. 3.9. -- And these are a whipping sort of Good Men, the
Pharisaical self-righteous Men, that are so zealous in their way to make up a
Righteousness of their own, to be justified and saved by, that they will whip
themselves; (...) and hang and burn their neighbors for God's sake; and this
sort of men in all Ages have justified themselves, and condemned all others.
Pray hear what our Savior Christ says of these, Luke 18.10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Two men went up into the Temple to pray, the one a Pharisee, and the other a
Publican. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, God, I thank thee,
that I am not as other men are. -- Our Savior Christ has told us, that
Publicans and Harlots shall go to Heaven before a self-righteous Man shall. And
in Prove. 30.12, 13. There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes, and
yet are not washed from their filthiness. There is a generation, O how lofty
are their eyes! and their eyelids are lifted up. Thus you see that it could
not be a Self-righteous Man which counts himself a good Man, that made and
invented the Scripture; that makes up a righteousness of his own, part of works
of Mercy, and part of works of Cruelty; who are for Meritorious works, and
works of Supererogation; that think to climb up to Heaven by that Rope of Sand;
for if such a Man had made the Scriptures, he would never have written such
bitter things against himself, and left himself in the hopelessest condition of
all sorts of men in the whole World, of ever being saved, without a change of
that principle.

3. But Thirdly and Lastly, Might it not be a good Man that had the Grace of
God in his heart, and the fear of God before his eyes, that might invent and
compose the Scriptures? To this I answer in the negative; No, it is impossible
that it could be: Tho, it is true, there is nothing in the Holy Scriptures that
is against him for his goodness, as there is nothing in them that does indulge
a wicked Man in his wickedness. And therefore you will say, that a good Man was
the likeliest of all men to have made and invented the Scriptures. But yet
notwithstanding give me leave to tell ye, that a good Man could not, nor dare
not invent the holy Scriptures, for it is utterly inconsistent with his
goodness; for can he be a good Man, and yet at the same time be a deceitful
Man? For he would be the inventer of an evil thing, if it were invented by Man,
for it would be a Lie; because instead of being the Word of God, it would be
the word of Man: But you see this cannot possibly be; for it would be to do
evil, that good might come of it, which the Scriptures does down-rightly forbid.

But you will say, If neither bad men, nor good men made and invented the
Scriptures, Then pray, who were they made and invented by?

To this I answer, the Word of God tells us all plainly in these following
Scriptures, who it was that made the Holy Scriptures, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. Knowing
this first, that no prophecy is of any private interpretation (...) man: that
is, Man did not invent them; but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by
the holy Ghost. 2 Timothy 3.16. All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and
is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness. Rev. 1.1. The Revelations of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto
him, to show unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass; and he
sent and signified it by his Angel unto his servant John. And in Heb. 1.1, 2.
God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in time past unto the
fathers, by the prophets, Has in these last days spoken to us by his son, whom
he has appointed heir of all things; by whom he also made the worlds. John
1.14. And the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory,
the glory as of the only begotten of the father, full of grace and truth.
Christ is the essential Word of God, and all godly men have the Spirit of
Christ dwelling and abiding in them; and that is the reason that good men in
all Ages have put such a value upon the Holy Scriptures, and would suffer any
thing, rather than part with the Holy Scriptures: David prized them above his
appointed food; and the Martyrs prized them above their Lives, which made them
go joyfully to Prisons, to the Gibbet, to the Flames; and this made them
rejoice at the place of Execution, and clap their hands in the Flames, which
struck terror to their Adversaries. And what made them do this? Why, next unto
the holy Ghost, it was because they knew that the Holy Scriptures were true,
and that their Redeemer that was revealed in them, ever lives, and did make
satisfaction and intercession to God the Father for them: Ay, and he was with
them and in them at the Gibbet, and in the very Flames, as he was with the
three Worthies of old, in the fiery Furnace, Dan. 3.25. He answered, and said,
Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no
hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the son of God. I hope by this time,
you are not only persuaded, that the Scriptures that we Protestants do profess
and own, were not the invention of Man; but also you are satisfied of the
veracity, or truth of them, That they are not invented by men of any sort, but
are indeed, and in truth, the Holy Word of God.

But lest you should be yet staggering or stumbling, for further corroboration,
I will add Eight Arguments, and I will draw a parallel between our Scripture,
which we Protestants do profess and believe to be the Word of God, and the
Scriptures of Antichrist.

1. First of all, my first Argument shall be this, If the Holy Bible does not
give the least indulgence or countenance to any kind of Sin and Iniquity
whatsoever, then the Scriptures must be the revealed Will and Word of God: But
the Holy (...) we Protestants of all sorts, do own and believe to be the Word
of God, does not give the least Indulgence or Countenance unto any kind of Sin
or Iniquity: Therefore the Holy Scriptures must be the Word of God, and not the
Invention of men.

Secondly, If the Scriptures were not made by bad men, nor invented by Good
men, then it must be infallibly the word of the true and living God. But you
see clearly proved that the Scriptures were not made by bad men, nor invented
by good men; therefore they must be the Word of the living and true God, and
made by him without the help of man.

3. Thirdly, If the Scriptures do not in the least degree, discourage and
discountenance Grace and Holiness, but is the promoter of it; then the
Scriptures must be the Holy Word of God. But the Scriptures do not in the least
degree discourage or discountenance Grace and Holiness, but do promote it in
the hearts of Believers; Therefore the Holy Scriptures must be the infallible
Word of God, not the word of Man, nor of Man's making or inventing.

4. Fourthly, If the Scriptures teach all Goodness and Virtue, Moral and
Divine, both for Body and Soul, and Detect and Condemn all manner of Evil,
which is hurtful to Body and Soul, both temporal and spiritual Evils, and gives
righteous Rules to Men to walk by, and shows them what is Good, and how they
should demean themselves in every Relation, Station and Condition, from the
Prince upon the Throne, unto him that grindeth at the Mill; and teaches the
Prince how to Rule and Govern in Righteousness and Peace; and teaches the
People how to be governed in the fear of the Lord, and to obey them that have
the Rule over them, not for Wrath, but for Conscience Sake, and all for the
Good and Weal both of Prince and People. Then, surely the Scriptures must be
the Word of God, and not the Word of Men. But the Holy Scriptures which we
Protestants do own and believe to be the word of God, do teach all Goodness and
Virtue, Moral and Divine, both for Body and Soul, and Detect and Condemn all
manner of Evil, which is hurtful to Body and Soul, both temporal and spiritual
Evils, and gives righteous Rules to Men to live and walk by, and shows them
what is Good, and how they should demean themselves in every Relation, Station
and Condition, from the Prince upon the Throne, unto him that grindeth at the
Mill; and teaches the Prince how to Rule and Govern in Righteousness and
Peace: and teaches the People how to be governed in the fear of the Lord, and
to obey them which have the Rule over them, not for Wrath, but for
Conscience Sake, and all for the Good and Weal, both (...) which we Protestants
of all sorts do profess and believe, must be the Word of God, and not the Word
of Men, nor of Men's Invention.

5. Fifthly, If the Scriptures had been invented by any sort of sinful men
whatsoever, then certainly that sinful man would have made provision for the
flesh, and given Indulgence to his own sin and lusts; for it is natural for
every one to be kind to themselves, and to cherish that which they love.

But the Holy Scriptures do no not give the least Indulgence or Countenance
unto any one particular Sin or Immorality in the whole Book of God, from the
first of Genesis unto the last of Revelations; but the whole Current of the
Scriptures is bent against it.

Therefore the Scriptures were not the Invention of man, but must be the Word
of God.

6. Sixthly, If the Scriptures in all Ages have been the Object of wicked and
ungodly men's rage and malice, which have caused them to persecute those persons
to the very Death, that have been the strictest Professors of it, then it could
not be wicked men that made and invented the Scriptures.

But the Holy Scriptures in all Ages have been the Object of wicked and ungodly
men's Rage and Malice, which have caused them to persecute those persons to the
very Death, that have been the strictest Professors of it.

Therefore it could not be wicked and ungodly men that made or invented the
Holy Scriptures; But it must be the Word of God.

7. Seventhly, If wicked men had made and invented the Scriptures, Satan having
the Government and Conduct of them, and they being acted and influenced and led
by his Spirit, as a Good man is acted and influenced, and led by the Holy
Ghost; for Satan rules in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience; for he
is their Father, John 8.44. Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of
your father ye will do; he was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in
the truth; when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own; for he is a liar,
and the father of it. Now, I say, if the Children of the Devil had made the
Scriptures, they would have been tender and favorable unto their Father's
Kingdom and Interest, and have given some Countenance unto it, and not have
made the whole bent and stream of the Scriptures against it, and afford no
manner of Indulgence to themselves, who are the Devil's Subjects or Vassals, or
rather his Bondslaves indeed, nor no manner of Relief or Support to his
Kingdom; But are made against all Heresy and all other Iniquity, which is that
wherein the strength of the Devil's Kingdom lies; then surely the Holy
Scriptures must be the Word of God, and not (...)

But the Holy Scriptures which we Protestants do own and believe to be the Word
of God, are against all Heresy and all other Iniquity whatsoever, which is
that wherein the strength of their father's Dominion lies, and does afford no
manner of relief nor support to the Devils Kingdom, nor no kind of countenance
to his subjects or children. But the whole bent and stream of the Scripture is
against his Kingdom, subjects and children, therefore the Holy Scriptures could
not be invented or made by any of them, but it must be the infallible true word
of the everlasting God, who cannot lie nor deny himself; and it was indicted by
his Holy Spirit, and written by holy men of God as they were moved and inspired
by the Holy Ghost.

Eighthly and Lastly, If it be not in the Power of a Good Man to give the
Reward that comes by Grace, of Eternal Life and Salvation, which is the full
Fruition and Enjoyment of God for ever in Glory, which is promised in Scripture
unto all them who believe and obey it; Nor to execute the threatenings of Hell
and Damnation, by punishing all those with eternal torment which the Holy
Scriptures have denounced against all them that transgress by their
disobedience unto it, because it would be to promise that which he was no way
in the least measure or degree capable to perform or make good, and threaten
that which he has not a power to execute.

Then it could not be a good man that made or invented the Scriptures.

But it is not in the power of a good man to give the reward that comes by
Grace of Eternal Life and Salvation, Tit. 1.2. which is the full fruition and
enjoyment of God for ever in Gloty, which is promised in Scripture unto all
them who believe and obey it, nor to execute the threatenings of Hell and
Damnation, by punishing all those with eternal torment, which the Holy
Scriptures has denounced against all them that transgress, by their
disobedience unto it, 1 Pet. 4.17, 18. Because it would be to promise that
which he knew in his own Conscience that he was no way in the least measure or
degree capable to perform or make good, and to threaten to inflict that
punishment which was not in his power to execute; and so he would have been a
liar and an impostor, which is quite contrary to the Principle of a good man,
and it is utterly inconsistent with his Goodness.

Therefore it could not be a good man that made or invented the Sacred
Scriptures, because this power is peculiar and wholly in the hands of God, and
therefore it must be the word of God. The Apostle St. Paul says, But I
certify you, brethren, that the Gospel which was preached by me, is not after
man, for I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ.

Thus you see clearly proved, That the Holy Scriptures were not made nor
invented by either good men or bad men. Therefore it must be undoubtedly the
Infallible Word of the True and Ever-living God, and not a humane Invention.

Now I shall close up this Discourse in drawing a Parallel between some part of
the Holy Scriptures of Christ, and the Scriptures of Antichrist, which is that
another Gospel, as the Apostle called it in 2 Cor. 11.4. and Gal. 18.9. And I
shall Answer another Objection with Three Arguments, and so finish the whole.

1. First the Gospel of Christ teaches Love Peace, Meekness, Humility, and
lowliness of mind, Col. 3.15. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.

But the Gospel of Antichrist teaches men Hatred, Variance, Pride, Malice, and
Haughtiness of Spirit.

2. Secondly, The Gospel of Christ teaches men to do good for evil.

But the Gospel of Antichrist teaches men to do evil for good; for if they
know that a man does but endeavor to convince them of their Errors and
Heresy, which is the greatest and best good that any man can do for a Person,
they will Burn or Hang him, or clap him up in the Inquisition for a Heretic,
if it lies in their Power, which is to do the greatest evil for the greatest
good.

3. Thirdly, The Gospel of Christ teaches men to do to others as they would be
done by themselves, Matthew. 12.

But the Scripture of Antichrist teaches men to do by others as they would not
be done by themselves.

4. Fourthly, The Gospel of Christ teaches men to pray for their Enemies that
persecute them, Matthew. 5.44.

But the Gospel of Anrichrist teaches them account them their Enemies that
pray for them, and (...) persecute them.

5. Fifthly, The Gospel of Christ teaches (...) to love our neighbors as our
selves.

But the Gospel of Antichrist teaches them (...) betray and murder their
neighbors for Heretics if they be not of their Persuasion.

6. Sixthly, The Gospel of Christ teaches (...) Ministers of Jesus Christ to
compel people to con^^^ unto Christ, and believe in him, for Life and
Salvation, by peaceable suasive Arguments, drawn and deduced from the Holy
Scriptures.

But the Gospel of Antichrist teaches his Ministers to compel Persons to come
unto him, a (...) embrace his Religion and Worship, by the forcible Arguments
of Dragoons and Inquisitions.

7. Seventhly, The Gospel of Christ teaches (...) That God is a spirit, and
they that worship him, (...) worship him in spirit and in truth. John (...)

But Antichrist's Gospel teaches, That God is an Old Man sitting in Heaven,
and must be worship^ed carnally and falsely by Images, etc.

8. Eighthly, The Gospel of God teaches Men Wisdom and Understanding, 2 Timothy
3.15. And that from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able
to make thee wise unto Salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus. Psalm.
119.130. The entrance of thy words gives light, it gives understanding to the
^imple.

But the Gospel of Antichrist makes men of Understanding simple, and teaches
that Ignorance ^s the mother of Devotion; but I will assure you it ^s not
fatherless, for it has a Father too; for if Ignorance be the Mother of it, then
the Devil must be the Father of it, John 8.44.

9. Ninthly, the Gospel of Christ teaches men and women to be better than
their own natural Dispositions, and corrupt Inclinations, which is the great
Doctrine of Christianity, nameiy, Self-denial, which is the Excellency of the
Christian Religion above all other pretended Religions in the world, if
performed in a right manner, and to a right end; it is this that makes a man
more excellent than his neighbor, for it teaches a man to deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly and righteously; (...)
teaches a man to deny sinful-self, and righteous-self too, which is a higher
Attainment than the denying of sinful-self; for many Persons can ^eny
sinful-self, that cannot deny righteous-self; for it is one of the hardest
duties that is incumbent upon a Christian, to deny righteous-self; which is ^o
do good works, and discharge every Duty as carefully and as consciously, as if
he should be justified and saved by and for so doing; and when he has done all,
to cast them behind his back, as if he had done nothing, and look unto the
Righteousness, and the Blood, and Merits of Christ alone for ^ustification,
Sanctification, and Salvation, and ^ount all that ye have done, to be but
silthy Rags; ^his is to deny righteous-self, Isa. 64.6. But we are all as an
unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as ^^lthy rags. Joh. 17.10. So
likewise ye when ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you,
say ^e are unprefitable servants, we have done that which ^as our duty to do.
So that we cannot merit ought (...) the hands of God, by doing that which is
our Duty to do, for it is a contradiction in it self; ^^r if it be Duty, then
it is not Merit; but if it be Merit, then it is not Duty; for when we have ^one
all we can do, it cannot justify nor acquit a ^oul of the least vain sinful
thought: For our justification before, and in the sight of God, comes (...) by
the Righteousness of Christ our Redeemer ^^nne, without the help of any
Copertner or (...)

But the Gospel of Antichrist teaches men and women to be worse than their own
natural dispositions and corrupt inclinations, and indulgeth them in all manner
of ungodliness and worldly Lusts; it lets loose the Reins to the will of the
Flesh, and is a spur to iniquity, and teaches men that they shall be
justified, and saved by, and for their good Works, joined with the
Righteousness and Merits of Christ; therefore neither that Gospel, nor that
Religion which it teaches; can be true, or of God: therefore it must be of
Satan, 2 Cor. 11.3, 4. Gal. 1.8, 9. Rev. 22.18, 19.

Tenthly, The Gospel of Christ teaches men to confess their sins to God, and
to one another, and to pray one for another unto God, and beg of him to pardon
us in the Blood of Christ, and that God would give the Grace of Faith and
unfeigned Repentance unto us, that we may hate sin, and forsake all our sins;
and here you may see what true Repentance is in all the parts of it, laid down
by the Apostle St. Paul, in 2 Cor. 7.10, 11. For godly sorrow works
repentance to salvation, not to be repented of; but the sorrow of the world
works death. For behold, this self-same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly
sort, what carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of your selves,
yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea, what
zeal, yea, what revenge; in all things ye have approved your selves to be clear
in this matter. This is true Gospel Repentance in all the parts of it; this is
Repentance unto Salvation, never to be repented of; they are careful to use the
uttermost power that God has given them in the means of Grace, never to commit
sin more; and they clear themselves by confessing their sins to God, and
forsaking of them; and they take up a holy indignation, and an implacable
hatred against sin, and study how to be revenged upon it, as a Man does upon
his implacable enemy; and he has a vehement desire after Grace and Holiness,
and uses all the means of Grace which God has appointed to that end: And by
their being hearty and sincere in the work, they can approve themselves to God
in this matter, or appeal to God, through Jesus Christ, from their Consciences,
that they are truly penitent, and have the evidence of it in themselves. And it
is said, if we confess our sins, that is, after that manner aforesaid, not a
bare verbal Confession, that God is just to forgive us our sins.

Now you cannot Pray one among another, nor Pray one for another in a right
manner, but you must confess your Sins to God, and to one another; for if you
confess your Sins, and do not pray; or if you do pray, and not confess your
Sins, it is neither a right Gospel-Confession, nor a right Prayer. But if it be
done in a right manner, and to a (...) never miss of a Pardon from God in the
Blood of Christ, because God has promised it, and he will be as good as his
Word, and therefore he is just to forgive us our Sins. -- But if one man can
Pardon another; why, then he can merit Life for himself and another; then we
need not to have Christ pleading with the Father for pardoning Grace for
Sinners; no, nor Christ need not to have died, that vast cost might have been
spared, if Sinners can Pardon one another, and merit Justification and
Savlation one for another.

But this is just like unto a poor Man that is deeply in Debt to the King for
Tribute, and he meets with another Man that is deeper in Debt to the King than
he, and the latter says unto the other, Sir, I suppose you are in the King's
Debt. Yes, Sir, I am. Well, do but Confess to me, how much your Debt is, and
give me a small Fee, and I will pardon you; so he confesses, and he Pardons
him as he pretends. But the poor Man stands still charged in the King's Books,
and then he runs on again further in Debt; and he goes to his old Friend, and
confesses his Debt, and he Pardons him the King's Debt, but he will not forgive
him his own Fees; no Penny, no Paternoster; no, that is a Debt cannot be
forgiven, and so he goes on in Debt again and again, and he pardons him; but
all this while, he has none of the Kings Commission for so doing. But at last,
the King calls both these Debtors to Account; he, that pretended to forgive the
other his Debt to the King, who himself was deeper in Debt to the King, than
the other that he pardoned; and the pardoned man, he pleads that he is
pardoned; who pardoned you? Why, such a one; What had he to do to Pardon you
that, which you do owe unto me? He never had any such Power from me, for he had
more need of a Pardon for himself; did he not owe me enough himself, but must
he take your Debt upon him too? Then the King in a great Fury, causes them both
to be Seized, and clapped up into Prison, and never to come out, until they have
paid the utmost Farthing. So will it be with all them which pretend to Pardon
other Men's Sins, and with them also that rely upon their Pardon, living and
dying in that Condition; it is of no more value than for one Thief or
Highway-man to Pardon another of their bloody Crimes; none can pardon Sin, but
God. Good Men may Judge that such and such Men are pardoned upon their
Confession; or a Church may pronounce in their Cenfure, such a one pardoned,
but none but God can Pardon them, Mark 2.7, 10. Why does this man thus speak
Blasphemies? Who can forgive sins but God, that is, none have the Power to
forgive Sin but God: The Jews were right in their Doctrine, but they were
mistaken in the Person; they took our Savior to be but a mere Man; pray mind
wh^ our Savior says, But that ye may know that the (...) of man has power on
earth to forgive sins, which clearly implies, that none else had that Power b^
himself, and he had it as he was God, 1 John 2.1^. I write unto you, little
Children, because your sins (...) forgiven you, for his Names sake; that is, he
judge and pronounced them pardoned, because he sees the Work of Grace that God
had wrought upon the (...) hearts. Thus you do see in the Gospel of Christ how
Confession of Sins is to be made, so as a Pardon in the Blood of Christ may be
obtained.

But Antichrist's Gospel teaches Men and W^ men to confess their Sins, and
Pay, Whip, or some other Penance, and at the old trade of sinning again.

11. Eleventhly, The Gospel of Christ teaches Men to live peaceably, as much
as in them lie^ with all Men, Romans 12.18.

But Antichrist's Gospel teaches them to liv^ peaceably with none but them of
their own Religion, and to do what possibly in them lies, to destroy and root
all others out of the World.

12. Twelfthly, The Gospel of Christ teaches al^ Men to speak the Truth one to
another, and lie no^ to any Man.

But the Gospel of Antichrist teaches Men to use Mental Reservations and
Deceitful Equivocations which is to speak one thing with the Tongue, and mean
another thing in their Heart; which is to lie upon all occasions to serve their
Ecclesiastical Interest, which is the highest degree of Hyporisy in the World.

13. Thirteenthly, The Gospel of Christ teaches us to know Good from Evil, and
Evil from Good, and Light from Darkness, and Darkness from Light, and it
teaches us to choose the Good, and refuse the Evil.

But this another Gospel, 2 Cor. 11.4. Gal. 1. (...) 9. Namely, the Gospel of
Antichrist teaches Men to call Evil Good, and Good Evil, and p^^ Darkness for
Light, and Light for Darkness Isa. 5.20. They call the Gospel of Christ Heresy,
and Protestant-Professors of it, Heretics. Now, the Gospel is the greatest
Light that ever was in the World, it is the Light (...) Heaven. And Heresy is
the greatest Darkness in (...) World, it is the Darkness of Hell, and they
pla^^ their own Antichristian Gospel, which is Here^^ and thick Darkness, in
the room of the Gospel Light.

14. Fourteenthly, The Gospel of Christ teaches us to believe in him alone,
and to rely upon (...) Righteousness and Merits, for Spiritual Life he (...)
and for Eternal Life and Salvation with him (...)

But the Gospel of Antichrist teaches Men to rely upon their own Righteousness
and Works of Merit; Ay, tho Works of Mischief and Darkness, some of them, and
to expect to be saved by that, in Conjunction with the Righteousness and Merits
of Christ.

15. Fifteenthly and Lastly, To name no more, the Gospel of God teaches us to
do Justice, and to love Mercy, and to walk Humbly with the Lord our God, Mic.
6.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good: and what does the Lord require
of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?

But the Gospel of Antichrist teaches men to do Injustice, and to love and
delight in Cruelty and Persecution, and to walk loftily, and to carry it
proudly toward God and Mun.

Thus I have showed you in part, what a vast difference there is between the
Gospel of Christ, which is that which we Protestants do own and believe to be
the revealed Will and Word of God, and ought to be the only Rule for all People
to Live and Walk by, and especially to Worship God by; and the Gospel of
Antichrist; there is as much difference, as there is between Light and
Darkness; for indeed, it is even so, for the Gospel of Christ is the great
Light in the World, it is the Light of Heaven, above all other Light in the
World; the Light of the Sun, Moon and Stars, is but Darkness compared with this
Light of the Gospel of God, for it is the Light which comes from Heaven. And
the Gospel of Antichrist is the greatest Darkness in the World, it springs from
the utter Darkness of Hell; all other Darkness is Light compared to that.

Now I shall finish this Discourse with three Arguments.

But it may be that some Persons will say, They do own the Scriptures, tho they
do not own some Doctrines which we that are Protestants do own, whom they count
Heretics; and perhaps they may say, That I have acknowledged it in the first
Part of my Book, that they do own the Scriptures; why yes, that is true, they
do own it after a sort; they do by the Holy Scriptures, as Clippers and Coyners
do do by the Kings lawful Standard Money; they take the largest, fairest Money,
and Clip, and File it away, and cover over Copper, and Counterfeit the Kings
Stamp, and shuffle it away for current Coin, among them that cannot discern it
to be so. Why, even so they do by the King of Kings Coin, the Holy and Sacred
Scriptures; they add and diminish as their seeming Interest lies. But here is
what will be their Portion, unless they ^^pent quickly, for the Judge is at the
Door, Rev. (...) the words of the Prophecy of this book, If any man shall add
unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this
book. And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this
prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the
holy City, and from the things which are written in this book. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Prove.
30.6.

1. Now, my first finshing Argument is this, If any Persons deny the
Satisfaction made to the Law and Justice of God, by the Righteousness and
Merits of Jesus Christ, to be wholly and entirely sufficient of it self, to
justify and acquit a Sinner of all his guilt of Sin before God, then these
Persons, tho they pretend to own part of the Scriptures, yet they do deny the
whole Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament, because it is the
Fundamental Doctrine of Man's Salvation in both Testaments, Jam. 2.10. For
whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty
of all. As partial Obedience, is no Obedience; so partial owning the Scripture,
is a denying the Scripture in Fundamentals, which is to deny the whole
Scripture. But there are a sort of Persons that profess themselves to be
Christians, that do deny the Satisfaction made to the Law and Justice of God,
by the Righteousness and Merits of Jesus Christ, to be wholly and entirely
sufficient of it self, to justify and acquit a Sinner of all his guilt of Sin
before God. Therefore these Persons, tho they pretend to be Christians, and own
some part of the Scriptures, yet these very Persons destroy the Essential Being
of true Christianity, and deny the whole Scriptures, both of Old and New
Testament, because there is this Fundamental Doctrine of Man's Salvation in both
Testaments, and a partial owning of Fundamental Doctrines of the Holy
Scriptures, is a total denial of them.

2. Secondly, if any sort of persons, who call themselves Christians, under the
dispensation of the Gospel, do set up, allow, and maintain the Order of
Priesthood, Material Altars, and also Material Sacrifices, then those sort of
Christian do deny that that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, and so they deny
the whole Gospel of God, and are turned back to the Mosaical Law; therefore no
such person or persons that are of this Principle, can, or ought to be Judges
and Interpreters of the Holy Scriptures. 1 Cor. 2.14, 15, 16. But the natural
man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness
unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. But
he that is spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is judged of no man.
For who has known the mind of the Lord, that he man (...) Christ. There is no
more reason for such a Man that is of Antichristian Principles, not excepting
Antichrist himself, to be Judge of the Holy Scriptures, than there is for a
Thief or a Murderer to be his own Judge.

But there are a sort of persons which call themselves Christians now, under
the dispensation of the Gospel. that do set up, allow, and maintain the Order
of Priesthood, material Altars, and also material Sacrifices; therefore these
sort of Christians do deny that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, and so they
deny the whole Gospel of God, and are turned back to the Mosaical Ceremonial
Law, and are not competent Judges, nor Infallible Interpreters of the Holy
Scriptures; but he that is spiritual judges all things.

3. Thirdly and lastly, If any pretended Religion, or Principle, does teach men
and women to be worse than their natural dispositions, and corrupt
inclinations, then that Religion, or Principle, must be both false and
dangerous to themselves and others, and is of the Devil: But the pretended
Religion, and Principles of Antichrist, does teach men and women to be worse
than their natural dispositions and corrupt inclinations; therefore that
Religion, or Principle, must be both false and dangerous unto themselves and
others; and Satan is the founder of that Opinion and Principle.

It may be that you will say, that our Scriptures are not rightly translated,
and especially that passage of Job's Wife, where it is said, that she said,
Curse God, and die; I will not say that every Iota of it is rightly Translated;
but yet this I will say, That all the fundamental Doctrines of the Christian
Faith, which contain matter of Eternal Life and Salvation, by the Righteousness
and Merits of Jesus Christ alone, are rightly Translated; and every true
Believer that has the Grace of God in him, can set to his Seal, and bear
witness unto the Truth of it. There may be some things that are not rightly
Translated, that do not contain matters of Salvation in them; as for instance,
in that of Job's Wife, it is no matter of Salvation to know certainly whether
she said, Curse God and die, or Bless God and die; for as she might speak it,
it might be much at one, as many of the Learned do understand it; no doubt but
that she spoke it Ironically, and so consequently Atheistically, or else Job
would not have replied, Thou speak as one of the foolish women speaks; for
if she ha^ spoken sincerely, then Job had been to blame t^ have given her such
a tart reproof, as to call, o^ count her a Fool; for if she had given him this
advice cordially and sincerely, to Bless God and di^ he ought not to have
rejected it, for it is a great Duty, as well as a great Mercy, for people to
di^ blessing of God, as well as to live so. Now whether Job's Wife was a good
Woman or no, that is (...) question; for if she were a good Woman, she wa^ in a
very carnal frame of heart, even as St. Pet^^ was when he denied his Lord and
Master, or else she would never have spoke after that manner.

Thus, I hope, I have by God's assistance sufficiently proved the Holy
Scriptures, which we Protestants of all sorts do own, and believe to be o^
Divine Authority, by the power and strength o^ Arguments drawn and deduced from
Reason only -- And all other Scriptures of men's inventing to be false and
preposterous, and of Antichrist. And (...) hope I have said enough, if not to
reclaim some o^ those poor Souls that are fallen into their Snare, yet I hope
it will be of use to deter others from following their pernicious Example. And
I hope now I have done, you of this Principle will begin to consider, not how
to be avenged upon the Author, do not count me your enemy for telling you the
truth, for I do neither wish nor mean any hurt unto you in the least, no more
than I do to my own Soul, I will assure you; but do heartily wish and desire
that all men might come up to the true knowledge of Christ, and be saved; and to
love the Truth, as it is in Jesus. I humbly beg, and beseech you for Christ his
sake, and for your own precious immortal Souls sake, seriously to consider o^
these things, so as to exercise your Senses, Reason and Understanding also,
upon what I have here i^ faithfulness to your Souls declared unto you,
especially, that are ensnared in these false Antichristian Doctrines; for it is
a dreadful Judgment for a^^ poor Soul to be led away with false Teachers, Isa.
^.16. and also to be led away with fundament Errors in Judgment about Spiritual
things, where the Soul is concerned; it is as much as your So^^ are worth. And
what has a Man more to l^^ than his Soul? For when that is gone, all is go^^ as
our Savior Christ has said: What shall it pr^ a man, if he should gain the
whole world, and (...) his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for a
soul?


POSTSCRIPT.
NOw Beloved Protestant Friends of all sorts, I would not have any person so
uncharitable, as to destroy, or knock any of those persons on the head that are
of this corrupt Principle, merely for the sake of their Principle, who do
believe this Doctrine of Transubstantiation, nor abuse them in the least, but
let the Tares grow with the Wheat until the great Harvest: I would both advise
and desire all good Christians, to pity, and pray for them; nay, it is my Lord
and Master's command that we should do so, Matt. 5.44. But I say unto you, love
your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and
pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you. O! Sirs, Let us
carry it with all Christian sweetness of Spirit, and tenderness of Affection
toward them, so that, if possible, we may win them by Christian love: Let us
heap Coals of fire upon their heads, and melt them down into oneness of spirit
with us.

And on the other hand, I would never be willing, nor consent to have it in
their power, to make a ^est of this Doctrine, to Burn Protestants for
Heretics, who cannot by any means come up to that degree of this kind of
Faith, as to believe such a complicated pack of Asurdities, before they believe
the Word of God, or their own Sense and Reason.

Now I do here in the last place humbly, yet boldly Challenge, by the Power,
and in the Name of that God, by whose Word and Spirit I have written this, Any,
or all of those persons that teach this Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and
other the like Doctrines suitable to it, that find themselves aggrieved, or
offended at this Christian, friendly Discourse, to give a fair, ample and
satisfactory Answer unto it: But if they cannot Answer it, then if I might
advise them, it should be this, viz. That they would desist, and leave off
Preaching up any such kind of Doctrine among us, which they ^an neither prove,
nor maintain, either by Scripture or Rational Arguments.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 7. Col. 2. l. 21. r. of me; p. 8. col. 2. l. 43. r. and; p. 9. col. 1. l.
43. for without, r. with; p. 11. col. 1. dele and; Ibid. col. 2. l. 19. r. is;
p. 12. col. 2. l. 33. r. being come; p. 13. l. 44. col. 2. dele yet; p. 15.
col. 2. l. 54. r. also, but it is; p. 17. col. 2. l. 49. r. broacht; Ibid. col.
1. l. 29. dele with, and to it; Ibid. l. 32. r. bow; p. 20. col. 1. l. 13. r.
jo now; Ibid. col. 2. l. 14. add, it was not; Ibid. l. 17. r. could not; p. 21.
col. 2. l. 4. r. Heb. 1.7. Ibid. l. 51. dele yet; p. 22. col. 2. l. 8. for and
Sacrifices, r. and therefore Sacrifices; Ibid. l. 43. r. after; p. 23. (...) p.
24. col. 2. l. 44. r. they; p. 29. col. 2. l. 31. add that; p. 31. col. 2. l.
27. r. Sacrament; p. 37.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THis Book is to be Sold at Randall Tailors, and most Booksellers in the City,
Price Sticht 6 d. which is very necessary to be fixed in your Families, and to
be Read often unto your Children and Servants, that they may acquire the
principal Arguments by heart, which will enable them to confute those who creep
up and down to pervert the Truth; and to vindicate the veracity of the Holy
Bible, in which the Universal or Catholic Apostolic Gospel Church is founded
under Christ.


