A DISCOURSE CONCERNING THE Basis and Original OF GOVERNMENT, WITH The Absolute
and Indispensable. NECESSITY of it; Wherein the EXCELLENCY of MONARCHY Above
any other Kind is Evidently Demonstrated. As it was Delivered by way of Charge
to the GRAND JURY, at a Quarter Sessions of the PEACE held at Ipswich in the
County of SUFFOLK.

By F. T. Esquire One of His MAJESTY's Justices of the Peace for the said County.

(...)

Adag: Rabbin: LONDON, Printed by W. G. for Robert Littlebury, and are to be
Sold at (...)

THE Bookseller TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THe Publication of this Discourse, has been much Desired by several sober and
judicious Persons; but such is the Modesty of the AUTHOR, that hitherto he has
had a Reluctance thereunto, until now that by my Importunity I have prevailed
with him to Expose it to Public View for the Satisfaction of others, although
not of himself.

R. L.

Imprimatur,

Tho. Cook Reverend. in Christo Patri and Domino Dom. Gilberto Archiep. Cant.
a Sacris Dom.
Ex Aedibus Lamb. Maii 27. 1667.
Errata.
Page 1. lin. 17. read (...) p. 2. l. 1. for (...), r. (...), p. 6. l. 15. for
more r. better, p. 11. l. 20. r. (...) and (...) p. 18. l. 3. r. (...), p. 19.
l. 28. r. (...) and (...). p. 23. 1. 6. r. Bowels, p. 29. l. 16. r. Serpents
do, p. 31. l. 27. r. (...). p. 4. l. 26. r. (...). p. 7. l. 7. r. (...)

Gentlemen of the Grand Inquest,
BEfore I enter upon the particular Heads of the Enquiry, I shall premise
something in General; lay down certain Theses and Positions, which, being
rightly understood, will much further you in your Proceeding, and facilitate
the Work which lies upon your hands; First, I shall show you the Basis and
Original of Government, and the absolute indispensable necessity, with the
Sacredness of it: Next, I shall show you our Happiness in this Nation, that we
have not only Government, but Monarchy, the best of Governments. To begin with
the first thing propounded; Now Gent. That you may understand the Primitive
Institution of Government, I shall clear it up to you thus; Man, you know, is a
Congregative, a Sociable Creature (...) as it is well expressed by the
learned of the Jews, Moses Ben Maimon in his Moreh Nebochim; Man (says he)
has a Natural Propension, and Inclination to join himself unto Company; And
herein he differs from other Creatures which stand not in need of such Society;
And therefore when God made Man, lest he should be alone, he provided a
Companion that was meet and fit for him, namely one of his own kind, a Woman;
and this is a strong argument of the necessity of this bond of Society, even by
a kind of natural Instinct. Therefore it is, the Philosopher calls man (...) and
(...), a peaceable and a sociable Creature, and tells us, that he which desires
to be alone, must be (...) either a God or a Wild Beast: Methinks the Arabic
words which signify Man, does very fitly express his Nature, (...) and (...)
which are derived from (...) socium esse, associari. Now this Appetite of
Association in Man, did, very probably, instigate and stir him up, not by any
necessity of Cold, (as Vitruvius fondly dreamed;) nor from the admiration of
Eloquence, (as Cicero imagined,) to excogitate and find out some way for the
Conservation of his Species, and that was Order; which is Vinculum Vniversi,
the bond of the World, without which it would drop in pieces as a Beesom
un-bound: Now because Order could not consist without Government, which is the
strong fortress of all Interests; therefore it came to pass that by the common
consent of all, Sovereignty and Supreme Power was delegated, and devolved upon
one or more that should personate the whole Community; and they should have
power to make Laws for the rewarding the good, and punishing the bad, which
might be a means to secure them against all violence and oppression, (...), as
Jamblichus a famous Pythagorean Philosopher says, for Men could not live safe
without a Governor; All which is pointed at, though somewhat darkly, by Plato
in his Dialogue of Policy or Civil Government, where he makes a graphical
Description of the golden Age of the World under Saturn's Reign; who says,
That Men then being naked, lived abroad in the open Air, and were nourished
with the fruits of the Earth which sprung up of their own accord without any
labor of Tillage in great abundance; for the Hook and Sickle in Saturn's hand,
signified the plenty of that time, which they made him the Author of, as
likewise the first Inventor of Agriculture and Husbandry. The Famous Sulmonian
Poet, ( Ovid I mean) speaking of this Age, sings the same Note in these Verses,
-- qui vi ndice nullo
Sponte sua sine lege fidem rectumque colebant,
Contentique cibis nullo cogente creatis
Vivebant --
Then it was (to go on with the Relation) that Men had all things in common,
they were mutual Benefactors one to another, and were free from all injury;
they had as little mind, as cause, to do any wrong; for there was no injustice
in the World at that time, but Men did (as Seneca phrases it) aperto ostio
vivere. Truth, Faith, Peace, Concord, Amity, and Righteousness carried the
whole sway amongst men, and they were without Law, without Order, and without
any Government, save only Theocraty; for God himself, by a singular Providence,
did watch over them, and they were under his immediate Gubernation: Now some
Poets say, that when Jupiter reigned, then began the Silver Age, being worse
than the former, Justice having then taken her flight from Earth to Heaven;
Oppression, Fraud, Violence, Injustice, Sedition, Impiety, Profaneness, (and
what-Vice-not?) was practiced cum licentia; and all things were counted lawful,
save what was lawful: and so by degrees the World grew so bad, that it was
called the Iron-age; a Description whereof Horace gives us in the Sixth Ode of
his Seventh Book Aetas parentum, pejor avis, tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem --
Then it was in this Age, that Government began to be instituted, and Laws were
made for the suppression of Vice and Reformation of Manners: Now it is
probable, That this Theorem and notion of the golden Age, Poets and Ancient
Philosophers received, by Tradition from the Hebrews; as some other opinions of
their Religion: Or else, they might gather it out of the Prophet Daniel. There
the first Empire of the World under the Babylonians, is represented under the
form of a golden Image: but however it is, we must not think it had its
Denomination from the great plenty of Gold, which was in that time; No, Plato
in his Cratylus tells us, That was not the reason, (...), says he, It was not
so, in its own Nature, but is to be taken Tropically or Metaphorically; for
thereby was signified the happy and excellent Condition of Men in that Age. And
Hierocles upon Pythagoras his Verses, speaks to the same purpose in these
words, (...) We call it the golden Age (says he) because it was the best, and
pure Age of Men, taking the difference of Manners from the property of Metals;
so that, under this Mythology, it seems clear to me, that this Truth is
covertly insinuated, that the State of Man in the first Age of the World, was a
State of Innocence and Integrity: He was pure and righteous, not contaminated
with the pollution and defilement of Vices, but was in favor and well accepted
with God. The elegant and complete Volume of the Protoplast Adam, in which was
bound up the whole Species of Man, was such an accurate correct Copy, and so
exactly printed by the Supreme Being, (that (...), as Plato calls God, The
Father and Architect of the World, and all things therein;) that there were no
Errata to be found, no blots at all: But though this Book was put forth in so
fair and legible a Character, and was flourished with many Capital Letters, yet
the Worm of Sin did quickly get into it, and did so fret and corrode it, that
the whole Impression was utterly defaced and spoiled: Man, I say, continued not
long in his happy prosperous Estate; the Sun of his Glory was soon set, and he
was benighted with a sad and disconsolate privation of his Native purity and
perfection; he did not abide in honor, he was but (...) the Son of a Night:
nay, the Psalmist says (...) he did not lodge one Night in Honor, (for so the
Emphasis of the Hebrew Words imports) but he fell from his primitive
righteousness and holiness into the profound Abyss of Sin and Misery, (I join
both these together, because, for the most part, they are Twins of the same
Womb, and, as it was with Jacob and Esau, the one catches the other by the
Heel;) Then it was that all manner of Villainies and Outrages were committed:
Every man became a Wolf and Beast of Prey to another, and the Earth, as the
Scripture Phrase is, was filled with Cruelty, Genesis 6. 11. or, as the Chaldee
paraphrase has it, (...) i. e. rapinis with pillage and robbery, (...) is the
word in the Samaritan Version which signifies Oppression: And (...) in the
Persian Translation, which is Violence; all different words, though much to the
same sense: yea, it is said in another place, The wickedness of Man was great.
And it seems he was so habituated in an evil Course, and in all manner of
Debauchery, that he was grown obdurate and hardened, and so the Arabic
Translation glosses it, when, instead of the Imagination of the thoughts of his
heart, it has this word (...) i. e. pervicacia eorum, their Stiff-neckedness
and obdurateness in Sin. And now you will say it was high time some Course
should be taken for the reducing the World to some better Order, which could
not probably be effected any other way more than by Government; so that the
Sum of all, in one Word, is; That the Corruption of manners was the
generation of Government. So, Gentlemen, I have given you the best Account I
can, (considering the un-beaten Path I tread in) of the Golden Age and the
first Institution of Government: And now I shall proceed to the Second thing I
propounded to speak of, which I shall endeavor to open to you, with as much
perspicuity and plainness as I can.

Aristotle in his Polit. says, That the true reason of Civil Society or a
Commonwealth, consists principally in the Communion of those that live well
and virtuously; and therefore it is necessary that there should be some
Governor and Ruler to adaequate and square Men's Actions for them, according to
rule, which Rule is the Law: (...) (...), as the aforesaid Jamblichus says,
Which Commands those things that are sit to be done, and contrarily forbids
those things which ought by no means to be done; The Heathens had a Conceit
that Phoroneus, whom they feigned to be the first Lawgiver, was likewise the
first-man (...) and (...), as Nonnus calls him; as if all that lived before him
had not been Men for want of Government and Laws. Government, why, it is the
great Atlas, which supports the vast Fabric of the World; you may as well
imagine the Sun can be without a Principle of Light, as the World without
Government and Order, (...), as Gregory Nazianzen has it: Order is the Mother
and Security of the Being of all things that have a Being; were it not for
this, the whole Foundations of the Earth would be out of Course, and the world
would be resolved into its first principles of a miserable (...) and (...) as
the Scripture Phrase is: It Is Government which Organizes, as I may say, and
animates the body of the World; draws it out of its rude and indigested Chaos;
and quickens it into Action and Usefulness. It Is the Sun of the Political
World, without which the World would be as a dark Dungeon; This is that which
refines Men and makes them sit for Converse, who otherwise would be like
irregular Stones in a Building, which are full of roughness and corners, and so
take up more room than they fill, and, till they be polished and made eeven,
others too cannot lie near them; Government is that, which, Orpheus-like tunes
men into a Common-wealth-frame as, he is fabled to do, when by the sweet Melody
of his Harp he drew after him Wild Beasts, Woods, and Mountains; that is, Men
that were wild and savage by Nature became tame and were charmed into
obedience: What a Jewish Author says of the Divine Law, in that Ancient Book
called Zohar, which the Jews believe was writ long before our Savior's Coming,
is true too concerning Political Law; namely, Lex assumpto Corpore venit in
mundum, that the Law assumed a Body when it came into the World; that is, it
was assimilated and made like unto us, it is accommodated and fitted to our
necessities and imperfections; Government is that which sounds a retreat to the
Sons of Rebellion, who otherwise by their desperate wickedness would every
moment (...), Confront God Almighty. Your ranting Beliallists, they are
absolute Antinomians, and wish that all Law and Government were banished out of
the World, that they might sin more freely; this is that which puts a restraint
upon them, in their wicked Courses, and causes them to walk more regularly:
Laws you know have generally in them a double power, Directive and Coercive;
the first sets down the duty, the second appoints the penalty for
nonperformance of the duty. Now it is the latter only which lewd and licentious
men are affected with; the fear of punishment is that which scares them into
some handsome outward Conformity, when as they have no principle of Ingenuity
from within inclining them to it; The penalty I say, of the Law is that which
hales them like a Bear unto the Stake, out of the broad way of destruction,
wherein they were posting apace, into the narrow Street mentioned in the Acts
of the Apostles, called Strait, I mean Goodness and Virtue; Government, it is
the Pruning hook to lop off all the luxuriant excrescencies of Vice, and to
pare away the superfluity of naughtiness: The Sons of Anak Men of Giant-like
Lusts, the mighty Nimrods, that are grown so audacious and incorrigible in
their wicked practices, that like a Titan-brood they even threaten Heaven it
self with an over-daring impudence, and would, if it were in their power,
dethrone God Almighty; were it not for these Manacles of Government and Law
wherewith these unruly persons are tied, they would run up and down, and make
havoc of all good men: yea, these prodigies of Impiety, (Devils incarnate I
may call them) would so rage, and so fearfully terrify and haunt good men,
that, were they not bound down by the strong Cords of the Law, there would be
no place of safety for men in the world, no rest for the soles of their Feet,
no more than there was for that winged Mercury, Noah's Dove I mean, the Emblem
of Innocence, which was sent out by him to make a discovery of the drowned
World, in the time of the Flood: I say, were it not for this Curb of
Government; Murders, Adulteries, Incests, Rapes, Robberies, Perjuries,
Witchcrafts, and Blasphemies; would ride in Triumph up and down in every Town
of the Country, and thorough-out the Kingdom, so as it might be said of them
as of Gad, Behold a Troop comes: yea, all kind of Villainies, Outrages, and
savage Cruelty, would overflow the Nation; and the face of the Earth would be
covered with blood as it was once with water: Were it not for Government, I
say, we should all be a Company of Ismaels, Wild-men; our hands would be
against every man, and every man's hand against us; all the several Counties of
the Kingdom would be but as so many Dens of Wild Beasts; Cruelty would
insolently strut it up and down in every place, with her Writ of Privilege in
her hand: No man's Life, Goods, or Wife, could be secured; What, I pray you, do
you think would become of Propriety, the Guardian and Tutelar-Angel of Commerce
and Traffic, were it not for this Enclosure? Would not all things lie wast and
common? Would not every Man's Lands and Goods become the possession of the
strongest? So that our Patrimony, and all that we enjoy in the World, if we
sold it but for a Mess of Pottage, the price of Esau's Birthright, we should
hardly think we made an ill bargain; And, as St. Augustine says well, Talle
Jura Imperatorum, and quis audet dicere, Mea est illa villa; aut, Meus est iste
servus; aut, Domus haec mea est; Take away Government, and none dare say, These
Lands are mine, this Servant is mine, or I have right to this house; And as for
Women, what think you of them? If they be such as resolve to preserve
inviolably the choice Jewel of their Chastity, who would rather choose to dye
than live an Example of dishonor to the rest of their Sex; What rage and fury
would beastly libidinous men exercise toward such, who, like Lightning would
rend most, where they find most resistance, and would vent their angry passions
upon them in as high a manner as Cruelty could invent; and at last bereave them
of their Lives whom they could not bereave of their Honor. The men of Gibeah
will abuse the Levite's Wife, yea, and professedly too, abuse her to Death. And
what do you think of Life it self, if there were no Government? Would it not be
a Burden to us, for to live? and, to be born, a Misfortune? Life certainly
would be but an empty flat Parenthesis of time, a very Wilderness; we should be
in continual fear of being assassmated, Men would be afraid to abide in their
own houses for fear that ravenous savage Beasts, should come and become
Cutthroats and Cannibals to them; much less durst they venture abroad; or if
they did, What pannick fears would seize upon them; every step they took, how
would they tremble and quake, as if they trod upon Ice, or as if they were
doomed to the old Trial of Ordeel. Our Lives would but, as the Scripture phrase
is, hang before us just as Dumaris his pointed Sword, which hung over his head,
while he was at his Banquet, only by a single hair, so that there would be no
comfort at all in ones Life. And indeed, I know not how there should: for, as
the Spanish Proverb is, Que Quien teme la muerte, no goza la vida, He that
fears Death, does not enjoy his Life: And, in fine, to say no more, Were there
no Government, there would necessarily ensue a general Confusion of all things:
we should be as the Fishes of the Sea, the greater destroying the smaller. And,
as it is said by that Rabbi in Pirke Avoth, (...), Unless there were
Magistracy, one would devour another alive. But I shall not need to dilate
further upon this Subject; The rise and ground of Government, and likewise the
necessity of it, you do, I suppose, fully understand. Blessed be God, we here
in this Nation have Government, and that the best too, which is the next thing,
Gentlemen, that I would make appear to you, as that which may be of use to you,
(...), by way of preparing you, to the main and principal business I aim at:
Now, that Monarchy which is the Established Government among us, is the most
Excellent Government; God, Nature, Art, and Experience, will sufficiently
demonstrate. First, I say, God. He is the sole Monarch of all the World, he is
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, as the Scripture styles him. He rules in
the Kingdom of Men, and gives it to whomsoever he will. Monarchy was the
Government which God made choice of to set up, among his people: First in
Moses, then in the Judges, then in the Kings. In the several Changes of the
Names of the Jewish Government, God still avoided Polyarchy. When Captains, but
one Moses in Temporals, one Aaron in Spirituals: when Judges, but one Othniel:
when Priests, but one Eli: when Prophets, but one Samuel: and, when for their
own ease they joined others in Commission with them, they presently degenerated
and became corrupt; for the Elders of Israel complained that they turned aside
after Lucre, took Bribes, and perverted Judgment. Divine Plato says, God does
(...): Which he meant in this sense; because, The Geometrical proportion was
more agreeable and suitable to Regal Power, because this makes no Confusion of
all-together, but gives unto every one according to his desert and worthiness;
whereas the other, viz. Arithmetical proportion, gives equally unto all,
according to number: and therefore it was, that Lycurgus chased out of
Lacedemon Arithmetical proportion, as a popular thing, turbulent and apt to
make Commotions.

Secondly, Nature shows it: The Image of this Government is to be seen in
Sensitive and Inanimate Creatures: there are in them (...), as the Philosopher
calls them, some faint adumbrations and resemblances of this Polity; as for
Example, There is but one Sun, in the Firmament. Among Birds, the Eagle has
the Supremacy: and therefore, because of his Dominion and Soveraign'ty over
other Birds, you will find in Scripture, Kings are compared with it;
particularly the King of Babylon, is shadowed out under the similitude of a
Great Eagle: Among Beasts, the Lion is Lord Paramount; if you dive into the
Sea, there you will see a King of Fishes; In the Commonwealth of the Bees,
there is one that is the King: In the Microcosm of Man, you may observe the
same thing; Several Members do their homage and service to one Body, the
several Senses of the body are governed by one Mind; and one Reason moderates
all the various and manifold Affections of the mind.

Thirdly, Art, which imitates Nature, does affect this political frame: In a
Family, you know, there is but one Master; in an Army, but one General; in a
Ship, but one Governor: And so, One King amongst the people.

Last of all, Experience does irrefutably evince the truth of this Assertion;
Consult all Authors that are most skilful in Politics, and they will all tell
you that Monarchy does excel all other Governments; To begin with Homer, does
not he say (...). Hear what Aristotle speaks, that Lynceus of all political
Science, (...) Monarchy, says he, is to be preferred as the most Divine
Government; and, to name no more, although I could heap up infinite testimonies
in this kind; take, in the last place, that lofty Athenian Poet Euripides, does
not he sing to the same Tune? (...) Two Governors (says he) cannot stand
together in one Kingdom, for it would be an occasion of Sedition and
Commotion: But why do I spend time in giving you proofs in this kind? when Holy
Writ it self, does so pregnantly conclude the same thing? You read Judge. 21 In
those days there was no King in Israel, and what follows? Every one aid what
was right in his own eyes. Observe the words, for they are very Emphatical; It
is not said, There was no Government in those days, but they wanted Monarchy
the most excellent Government, and this was the cause of all disorder both in
Church and State; for the words, without any streining, will bear that
Construction, viz. Every one did what was right in his own eyes, (...) So the
Arabic Translation renders it, that is, Quod libebat, Every man did what he
list; Mary, (may some say) there was a brave time indeed; that was a great
privilege, For a man to be sui Juris, to act without control; Alas! that which
you call privilege is a great and sad Judgment, as you may see by comparing
this place with the 78 Psalm, where it is said, God gave them their own
desires, speaking of the people of Israel; and what followed? In the 31 Verse,
you shall find, that The Wrath of God came upon them and slew them; Such a
Liberty as this, for a Man to have his full Swinge in a Licentious Course, is
worse than bondage; for, the greatest freedom in the World is to be able to do
nothing but what we should do: Again, the Trial that has been made of other
Governments both abroad and at home, will abundantly commend the excellency of
this above any other: for, Contraria juxta se posita magis eluc^s^unt, is a
Rule in Logic, Contraries do best appear, when most directly opposed. Travel
into the Roman Empire, and you will find it verified there: The Romans when
they shook off their Government by Kings, History testifies, they had so many
Changes, that in the space of 600 years, they tried all forms and kinds of
Government in the world: Of Two, by their Consuls* of Three, by their
Triumvirate; of ten thousand, by their Tribunes: But when they found that the
further off they departed from Monarchy they lost themselves, and were involved
still in greater mischiefs and dissentions, at last they set up One pro una
vice unoque anno. These were their Dictators, and in time they grew to be
Perpetual: which Perpetuity begat Monarchy. But what need we travel so far,
when we here in this Nation, have had such sad and woeful experience of the
truth thereof, in our late miserable confused Anarchy? when that (...), as
Plato calls the unruly Multitude, The many headed Hydra, did reign, shall I
say, or rather rage? when, like the great Leviathan it played his pranks among
us. Truly did, that Glorious Martyr of ever-blessed memory, K. Charles the
first, prophesy concerning this Government, in that incomparable Treatise of
his (...). As it makes a show, says he, to the People to have more eyes to
sorcsee, so they will find it has more mouths too, which must be satisfied;
and, at best, is rather a monstrosity than any thing of perfection beyond that
of right Monarchy; where Counsel may be in many as the Senses, but the supreme
power can be but in one as the Head. But I shall not need to labor in such a
plain thing, which carries its Evidence with it: You have heard, We have
Monarchy the most excellent Government: Now, Gentlemen, give me leave to tell
you, as a further degree of our happiness, That the best kind of Monarchy
obtains in this Kingdom: Bear with me a little, if I be too long in these
things, I shall be very short in the other part of the Charge touching your
Enquiries; But I would fain speak something to this Point, because it may be of
no little use to you and others, to establish them in an obediential frame of
Spirit. For as it is in Religious matters, so it holds in Political too; that
one which is not well grounded in the Fundamentals of polity and government,
will quickly fall away, and become a Rebel to his King; as he that is not well
rooted and instructed in the first Principles and grounds of Religion, will
prove an Apostate, and fall away from the Truth which he prefessed: We have, I
say, absolute Monarchy, and herein we differ from the Lacedemonian-Kings, who
were subject to their Ephori, which had a power above them: No, Oursagrees with
the Persian-Government; for, their King had plenary power in all things, not
subject to be called to account by any person whatsoever: and so is ours, if
you will believe Cambden, a famous Antiquary; who says, That the King of
England, supremam potestatem, and merum imperium habet, He has supreme power
and absolute Command in his Dominions; and So Bracton, a sage profound Lawyer,
in ancient time, speaks to the same purpose, Omnis quidem sub Bege, and ipse
sub nullo, sed tantum sub Deo: So that it is an unquestionable truth, that the
King is subject to no overruling power of man, and that he is free from all
humane Coercion and Restraint, I do the rather insist upon this; because of
those seditious jesuitical Principles, that were infused into the minds of the
Credulous vulgar, in the times of Confusion, by some Ambitious Democratical,
Antimonarchical men; namely, That, Constituens est prius Constituto, Rex
singui^ major, universis minor; that The King is greater than any particular
single man, but less than the whole Body of men in a Nation. What an absurd
Tenet this is, will easily appear if it be duly examined; I would fain know of
these men, whether the King is not bound as much to protect all his Subjects
universally, as to protect any one singly; and are not all then bound no less
universally than singly to honor the Kings Sacred Person, obey his Commands,
and assist and defend him in all dangers? And another new devised State Quirk
they had, to wit, That the King cannot be without the People, but the People
may be without a King; and so conclude hence, The People are more excellent
than the King. If there be any force in this way of arguing, by the same reason
it will follow, that a Flock of Sheep are more Excellent than a Man, because
the Shepherd is found out for the Sheep, and not the Sheep for the Shepherd;
for if there were no Flocks of Sheep, there would be no need of a Shepherd.
What a strange Inconsequence there is in this kind of Argument you may easily
discern. This makes as much to the purpose, as that Parson's argument, who
would undertake to prove the Parish must pave the Church and not he, because it
was written in the Prophet, Paveant illi, Ego non paveo; or, that no man ought
to have the Sign of the King's-Head, Queens-Head, etc. hanging at his Door,
because the Scripture says, There shall be no sign given but the Sign of the
Prophet Jonas: We had need be careful, we be not infected with such Sectarian
Principles, these are dangerous Sophisms that lead the way to Rebellion, and
tend to the Alteration and Subversion of Government; therefore as an Antidote
and Preservative against such poisonous Positions as these, I shall prescribe
you to take the wholesome Advice, which Solomon gives: Fear God, and Honor the
King, and meddle not with them that are given to change: or as the Hebrew has
it (...) that is, with Rebels and Seditious persons, for the word in that
language signifies both the former and latter.

But Gent. that I may come up closer to the business in hand, you have heard
how necessary Government is: and the Excellency of Monarchy above any other
kind, has been fully demonstrated to you. Now you must know, as to the
Exercise of this Government, that it is in the body Politic, as in the Natural
body, every Member has its proper Office and place assigned it; and all the
Members do conspire together for the safety of the whole Body. You Gentlemen,
are called here this day to bear a share in the Executing the Laws of this
Government, in your Capacities; Now as Government cannot consist without Laws,
so neither is Law of any validity or force without Execution, which is the life
thereof: And here I desire to press this point of Execution, because I perceive
there is a great defect in that particular: And I would not only speak to you
Gentlemen, but to my self, and to you ( pace quod fiat vestra) my noble and
worthy Co-adjutators, to whom the sacred Oracles of Justice are committed, that
we may be all stirred up, and quickened to the performing of the Duties of our
several places; It is commonly said in reference to the Preaching of the
Gospel, that Application is the Life of Doctrine. It is so in respect of the
Law too; for all those great Privileges, and rich Commodities, which the Law is
pregnant with, will all prove abortive without this. The Law, I say, has no
strength of it self to bring forth, unless the Magistrate obstetricates, and
puts-to his helping hand by a diligent and serious Application. The Law without
Execution is like a Cloud without Rain, which promises Rain but gives none; The
Law, it is a deep Well of all things necessary for the support of our well
Beeings, but the Magistrates are the Buckets, wherewith the people draw out the
Waters of all their comfortable Enjoyments: As a Magistrate without Law, is a
Workman without his Tools; so the Law without a Magistrate is but a dumb Idol.
He it is that is (...) A Living Law. Aristotle says, (...) As good no Law at
all as not Executed: The whole body of the Law, without the Soul and Vital heat
of Execution to animate and enliven it, is but as a Dead Carcass, and exposed
to Contempt, therefore we must do by the Law, as we read Elisha did with the
Child of the Shunamitish Woman; Holy Writ says, that he lay upon the child,
and put his mouth upon his mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands,
upon his hands, and he stretched himself upon the child, and the flesh of the
Child waxed warm; So we must do by the Law, incumbere legi, stretch our selves,
and lay out our utmost improved abilities upon it, pour into it the Aqua Vitae
of Impartial Justice, which may Cause it to speak and revive, then move it up
and down by a Spirit of activity, and by our nimble diligence, Magistrates are
styled Cods in Scripture, but if they do not use industry and assiduity in the
Execution of the Law, these (...) will be but (...) mere Idol-Gods, and
signify Nothing. The Law of it self is like Mephibosheth, lame, and cannot go,
unless it leans upon the Staff of the Magistrates Authority. Or, it is like the
Pool of Bethesda which we read of in the Gospel, where every diseased person
that is infected with any ulcerous sore, or Contagion of Vice, may be washed
from his filthiness and healed; but first the Angel must stir the water, I mean
the Magistrate, that is the Tutelar Angel of the Law, he must be active and
stirring in putting of it in Execution, or else it will be of no efficacy.
Although we stand up to the Chin in the waters of Privileges contained in the
Law, have never so great a Confluence of them; yet we shall but Tantalize, and
never be able to taste of the fruit thereof, unless the Magistrate plucks it
for us, and hands it out to us. Gentlemen, by what I have said, you may
perceive the necessity of the Laws Execution; and oh that you would be
persuaded to Contribute toward its necessity! Oh that we would all in our
several Spheres resolve to lay out our diligent endeavors, for the effectual
Carrying on of this laudable and excellent work. You may be sure it will quit
Cost, for we shall have plentiful Comings in; it is that which you and we are
called to this day, let us jointly bend our forces this way. It is reported of
the Serpent Amphisbena that it has an head at either end, neither of which can
move without the Consent of the other; and if they strive, they tear the body
in pieces. How true this is, I know not; but I am sure, it is so with us, who
are the Ministers of Justice in reference to the Law; That can never be
practicated and drawn out into use, unless we, that are Commissionated for the
Keeping the Peace, and you Jurymen, and other subordinate Officers of the
Court, in our several Orbs, do concur and conspire for the promoting the ends
thereof: If there should be any Contention among us, so as one should draw this
way, another that way, there would be an Obstruction of the Streams of Justice,
so as they would never run freely to our refreshment: and then that great
Voluminous body of the Law, had as good be torn in pieces, for any benefit we
shall have by it: It will be with us in this Case, as it was with those two
Pitchers floating upon the water, which the States of the United Provinces,
upon some difference between them and our Nation, gave for their Impress with
this Motto, Si collidimur, frangimur, If we once fall a dashing, we shall all
fall in pieces.

Gentlemen, You ought to lead the way in this business, you being the Primum
Mobile in it; you are our Eyes and Ears, and the Countries Mouth, we know
nothing but what you present; and the Country, whose Representatives you are,
rely upon you for the discovery of their Grievances. If things amiss be not
reformed, you may thank your selves for it; if you would have your Diseases
Cured, discover them: You, I say, must lead the way, and not stand off to see
who will begin first (as the fashion of some is); that is a piece of ill-placed
good manners: Even as the Rats in the Fable, they all agreed it was fit the Cat
should have a Bell about her Neck, that they might have warning of their
Enemies Coming; but the Demur was, Who should put it on, and none would do
that. The Ravished Virgin under the Law Deuteronomy. 22. was to Cry out: So your
Office is to Enquire, and to present Offenses; and if you conceal them, your
Silence in this kind is a Crying-Sin. You are so many political Chirurgions,
and your duty is to lance the public Sores of the Country, and to search the
depth of those wounds that the Corrupt manners of Licentious men, have made in
the Body Politic, by the Probe of your Inquisition, and to lay them open; and
therefore, methinks, Your Name is sitly adapted to your Employment, You being
called The Grand Inquest: But, Gentlemen, I shall now deal more particularly
with you, and give you some Directions that you may Steer your Course aright,
in the Business you are Embarked in.

In the first place, You must be Careful to present Nothing but what you know;
for a Rumor or Hearsay, is not a ground sufficient for your Presentment. As
God said in the Destroying of Sodom, so should ye say, I will go down and see.
And again, You ought to Present all you know; you must avoid Partiality, and
not be like the Badger that naturally halts on the one side, unless the Ground
be rising to its advantage; neither Fear should drive you, nor Love draw you,
so as to swerve from Truth and Right. You must deal Impartially with all
Offenders; Spare not any, though never so much your Friends, and make never
such large Proffers to Bribe your Judgment; Admit no Parley with them, but, as
the Poets fable Ulysses to have stopped his Ears at the Enchanting Voices of
the Sirens; So be ye, as the Deaf Adder to such Charmers. Be not Consenting and
Complying with any Offender, lest you bring Guilt upon your selves. It was the
Speech of an Advocate to a Judge in Germany, who was very much aggravating the
fault of a Murderer that had killed Six men: No, my Lord, (says he) he has
killed but one; you are Guilty of the Blood of the other Five, because you let
him escape upon the first Murder, Spare no Malefactor (I say); for Clemency in
that kind will Commence per saltum, and take its Degree at last in Cruelty to
the Innocent Person, according to that Italian Proverb, Perdonando troppo a chi
falla, si fa ingiuria a chi non falla: By pardoning too much the Offender,
there is an Injury offered them who offend not at all. Let not the Bows of your
Compassion yearn toward any obstinate Offender; for there is no more pity to
be taken of such a one, than to see a Goose go barefoot. In this Case you
must, (...) as Hierocles upon Pythagoras Golden Verses has it, Be like the
Physician, who is wont to Cure Malignant Ulcers with Sections and Caustic
Medicaments. The Physicia^ putridis non parcit carnibus. -- non parcit ut
parcat, crudelis est ut misereatur. As St. Hierome says. But, Gentlemen, I
look upon you as Knowing and Conscientious Men, and such as are well acquainted
with the serious Nature of your Employment, and so shall not need to Enlarge
further upon this Momtory Subject: Therefore, I shall now come briefly to the
particular matters of your Enquiry, which I shall rank under two Heads: Namely,
offenses against the Church, and Offenses against the State.

First therefore, To begin with Offenses against the Church; those that Concern
Religion, because the Civil Society is subordinate to the Religious; the
Religious Society, or the Church, being far more Excellent and Worthy than any
Civil Society: for therefore it is, That Men live together in Order, and be
Governed by Magistrates and Laws, to the end they may the better perform Acts
of Religion, (...) as Suidas says, The first thing that is provided for by Law
amongst all Men, is the Worship of God. And, Gent. You cannot be ignorant that
Order is an Essential Ingredient in God's Worship; for, the Welfare and
Happiness of the Church, as well as the State, Consists in Order. The Church is
made up of many persons, and without Order they could not meet together, but
they would justle one another, and there would ^rise many Contentions. One
would say, I am of Paul; another, I am of Apollo; a third, I am of Cephas, that
is, of Peter; for it is Nomen Hebraeo-Syrum, and signifies so: Nay, it may be,
some may be as fondly ridieulous in their Concertations, as those in Luther's
time; when one said, I am of Martin; another, I am of Luther; whereas they did
but divide Martin Luther, for they were both of his Religion. Certainly, The
Eucrasy and good Constitution of the Church, consists in a due Symmetry and
Agreement of all the parts in reference to the whole. But Gentlemen, now that I
am speaking of Order, lest there should be an Ataxy and Confusion in my
Discourse, you are to know, there are two principal Pillars which bear up the
Church, viz. Doctrine and Discipline; Doctrine, that, is as essential to the
Well-Beeing of the Church, as the Foundation is to a Building. Discipline, that
is the Cement of it, for it Cements the lively Stones of the Church, to wit,
Christians, for they are meant by that Allegorical Phrase in St. Peter, and
joins them close together. Order and Discipline are as the Ligaments in the
Natural Body, they knit every Member fast to the Mystical Body of the Church,
by one Uniform way of Worshipping God; therefore you have Uniformity
Emphatically represented under the Notion of Bands in Zechary, because it ties
Christians fast together in Love; thereby we come to serve God with one
consent, as it is phrased in Zephany 3. (...) is the Expression in Hebrew; that
is, with one Shoulder, viz, jointly; It Is a Metaphor taken from Oxen, that draw
equally in the same Wagon. And therefore the Syriack Version, is very
significant, (...) are the words, i. e. pari jugo: This is a Blessed thing
indeed, and becoming the People of God, when they with one Mind and one Mouth
Glorify God. Munster in his Exposition upon that place in Levit. 19. Thou
shall not let thy Cattle gender with a diverse kind; quotes a certain Jew, who
says, that God by this precept shows that he dislikes (...) any heteregeneous
Mixture amongst People in his Worship: But he would have (...) a perfect Unity
and Concord in Professors of the same Religion. For God, as he would not have
the several Species of things to be Mingled and Confounded; so, neither would
he have Men of the same Church, to be Schismatically divided. Doctrine, and
Discipline, are like the Two Pillars which you read of in the first of Kings,
Jachin and Boos, called so from their strength, for both Names signify the
same thing. These, I say, are the Chief Supporters of the Church: But there are
some Persons, That, were they as Powerful as Malignant, would ( Sampsonlike)
pull down these Pillars, although they ruined themselves by it. The Idolatrous
papist, he, labors to undermine the Foundation, The Doctrine of the Church.
The Schismatical Separatist, he pulls with all his might and main, at that of
Order and Discipline: They are both dangerous Enemies to the Church's Peace:
These Foxes (as Luther speaks) are tied together by the Tails, though by their
Heads they seem to be contrary. But, as for the former of these, The Papist:
Some, may happily say, He is no such great Enemy, he is not irreconcilable; for
we have heard, That, there is no such great distance between Us and Rome, but
that we may meet together, shake hands, and become friends. For my part, I am
not of that Faith: and it is not unknown to me, That, many Divines of great
Fame for Learning, are of another opinion; Amongst whom, hear what a Reverend
Father of our Church, Bishop Hall, (...) says, in his Treatise, Entitled, No
Peace with Rome: The Church (says he) is at once one, in respect of the Common
Principles of Faith; and yet in respect of Consequences, and that rabble of
opinions which they have raked together, so opposed, that, nullo Concordiae
glutine aut Unitatis vinculo copulari possint, It cannot by any glue of Concord
(as Cyprian says) nor bond of Unity be Conjoined. And Dr. Worship upon the
same subject expresses himself thus; There is (says he) such an Antipathy
between a Protestant and a Papist, as is between the two Birds, the Siskin and
the Muskin; which will sight eagerly alive, and, being dend, if you mix their
Blood, it will run apart, and dissociate. They are like the two Poles of Heaven
(says another) which stand for ever directly and diametrically apposite.

As for the second sort, The schismatical separatist, under which Sect may be
comprehended Fifth-MonarchyMon, Anabaptists, Brownists, Familists, Quakers, or
any others of the same stamp, by what Names or Titles soever they are notified
and distinguished: These do all strongly oppose the Discipline of the Church;
but now light soever these Men make of it, this is no small Offense, to rend
themselves from the rest of the Body by their Separation. Aquinas affirms,
Schism to be the greatest of all Sins against our Neighbor, and that, not only
in respect of the many Circumstances which attend it, but like wise in respect
of its own Nature, because it is the most contrary to Charity, and the Love of
our Neighbor, for it is, Contra Spirituale bonum multitudinis, Against the
Spiritual good of a Multitude.

And, besides, this is an undoubted Truth, That, we can never gratify the
Devil so much by any thing as by our Dissentions; There is no Music sounds so
melodiously in his Ears, as that which is made up of Discord: he will
tripudiate for Joy, and Dance at such Music: And this also you may be
confident of, viz. That subtle Old Serpent, the mischievous Agent of Darkness,
does no less easily than slily insinuate and wind himself, into such persons,
whose ignorant minds are obnubilated and darkened with Erroneous Principles.
Now, Separation is a fruitful Mother and Nurse of all Errors, and the Source
and Sluice of all Heresies, and it has this Evil evermore accompanying it, That
the Ringleaders thereof, have a strong and vehement Appetite of propagating
their Factious Tenets, and endeavor after nothing more, than to have their
Names and Opinions, serve to the same end as Zisco, when he dyed, appointed for
his Skin: who being Leader of the Taborites, a Faction in Bohemia, commanded,
That a Drum should be made therewith, (as Dubravius says) that something of
Zisco might still be heard to sound in the Ears of his Followers, and their
Enemies.

But, Gentlemen, That you may the better know these Sectarian Persons when you
meet them, give me leave a little to describe them to you. They are the very
Antipodes of Authority, a giddy wild Generation of Men, that are impetuously
carried out, and ravished, as it were, with every Novel-Opinion, and
Narcissus-like, they fall in Love with their own Speculative Shadows, and court
frigid Skeptical Controversies, instead of the (...) The Radical Fundamental
Principles of Religion. The old way of Serving God is loathsome to them, and
they are only taken with new things in Religion, being like unto Materiae
prima, which always desires and seeks after New Forms.

They will Espouse nothing about the Worship of God that is Established by
Authority, but would be left to their own wanton and lascivious Liberty, that
they might embrace their own wild fantastic Inventions, and Enthusiastic
delusions; They are Swelling Bladders, of restless Minds, and as Unstable as
Water; tanquam Figura Sphaerica in Corpore plano, like a Spherical Figure in a
plain Body; Their several ridiculous and fond Conceits, they interpret, to be
the Various Discoveries, and Clear Manifestations of Truth, which spring from
the light within them (as some of them call it); although, indeed, it is
nothing else but an Ignis Ja^uus, which Lucifer, who aspired to be an
Independent-Light, has set up in their blind and ignorant minds, on purpose to
lead them into the Cimmerian Darkness of a Myriad of pernicious Errors.

Gentlemen, by this Character I have given, you may come to know them; and
knowing them, you cannot but look upon them, as great Disturbers of the
Church's Peace; For, this is an Undeniable Truth, That, if once the Hedge of
Ecclesiastical Constitutions be broken down in the Church, The Abaddon or
Apollyon will quickly lay it waste; as appears by Psalm 80. v. 12. 13. why have
thou broken down her Hedges? And mark what follows, The Bore out of the Wood
does waste it, and the Wild Beast of the Field does devour it. But, let such
Hedge-breakers as these, know, that they shall not pass with impunity. For as
it is writ in Eccles. 10. v. 8. Who so breaks an Hedge, a Serpent shall bite
him; that is, as some Expositors say, A sudden and unexpected punishment shall
over-take them: which they gather from that Phrase of the Biting of the
Serpent; for, a Serpent does usually lurk in the hollow place of some Hedge,
and when it is broken down, then they rush forth upon a Man unawares, and
fastening their venomous Teeth upon him, do give him his deadly wound. R.
Solomon interprets the Biting of the Serpent to be, (...) that is, Death coming
upon a Man immediately by the hand of God. What an Havoc these Fanatical
Hedg-breakers made, in the times of the Nefarious Usurping Regicide, you cannot
but be sensible of. The Solemnity of God's Worship in a decent orderly manner
they stigmatized with Superstition, and they affected no other Service of God,
but such as was tumultuarie Compositus; these men, though of ordinary
Vocations, yet, were of extraordinary Callings, for they would have the
Brotherhood and Sisterhood believe, That they had an Especial Call of God to
reform Abuses and Corruptions, (as they termed it) which were crept into the
Worship of God, and therefore out of a great deal of Zeal, abolished the
Service of God, for the Upholding of Religion. Places that were set apart for
God's Worship were so distastful to them, that to show their Dislike shall I
say, or rather their Abhorrency of them, by a strange Antistrophe, they turned
them into Stables, as they did by the stateliest Structure for a Church that
this Land afforded, namely, St. Paul's, which they made a Receptacle for their
Horses; taking more delight, it seems, to behold the silthy Ordure of Beasts,
than the Comely Order of God's Worship in the Beauty of Holiness, as it is
phrased in Psalm 29. v. 2. or as the Aethiopick Translation renders it, (...)
i. e. in Aula Sanct a ejus: So, That by this Beauty of Holiness is meant the
place where God was worshipped, where God's Honor is said to dwell, yet upon
this place, did they cast such foul Contempt as I have told you, to the great
Reproach of Religion. It was such a piece of profane Beastliness, and beastly
Profaness, that I want terms to express it: But I am not ignorant that these
men that are so opposite to the Discipline of our Church, and turn their backs
upon the public Ordinances do pretend tenderness of Conscience, that they
cannot join with us, because there is such a Corrupt mixture of humane
Inventions in the Worship of God.

As for that Common Plea of Conscience, (although I should be loath to Censure
all Persons that use it) neither on the other hand am I so great a
Latitudinarian in Charity, that I can extend it so far, as to believe that all
those who do separate themselves from Public Worship, are led to it out of
such Principles. Some there are that pretend to Scruples, and yet have not one
Dram of Conscience: They that would delude and catch the credulous Vulgar, who
only look to the superficial Appearances of things, whereas (...) is (...) they
need no other Bait than the Name of Conscience; It is a Word of Enchantment, a
kind of Legerdemain to cousen simple people with: but Intelligent persons are
not caught so; they are like the Chiromancer, they will see the Hand to judge
the Heart, and seem to say with him in Plautus, with a little difference, only
Changing Manus into Aures: Oculatae nostrae sunt Aures, credunt quod vident.
What ever fair Shows some Men make of Conscience, as if by their feigned
Strictness and Purity of Life, they meant to be matriculated in Piety, yet if
they be narrowly searched into, (...) as St. Chrysostom says, They would be
found to have a Wolve's heart, under a Sheep's Skin; Their Eyes for the most
part are directed to the North-Star of their own proper Interest, and their
Course is shaped by the Compass of their own private ends; Like unto the
Labourer who lifts up his Arms to Heaven, but strikes his Mattock into the
Ground. Conscience often times is the great Palladium of Sedition and Rebellion,
and all wicked treasonable practices have been Gilded over with that specious
plausible pretense. You remember, I doubt not, how it was with those horrible
Miscreants, those (...) Men of Bloods, (as the Idiom of the Hebrew-Tongue is):
who, when they had divested an Innocent and most Glorious King of His Royal
Robes of Majesty and Power, and covered him with the Rags of Contumely and
Disgrace, at last, they brought him to the Block; But alas! why name I that
Accursed thing, which speaks nothing but Blood and Wounds, and brings forth
naught but (...) Instruments of Death? But name it I must, The Block, I say,
where he was; He was: oh! -- No marvel, Gent. I hesitate thus, for not my
Tongue, no, nor if my Heart were turned to Tongues could it sufficiently
express the Horror of that dismal Spectacle: It being a very dark day, and the
sua not appearing all day.
The Sun, drew Clouds up to hide his Face, as not being able to behold so
pitiful a sight, had you been there where this Bloody and Stupendous Tragedy
was acted: What said I, Tragedy? (nay, (...) what he suffered did exceed any,
the most lamentable and doleful Tragedy.) You might, I say, if you had been
present, have plainly read the Original of Men's Sorrow, in the Copy of their
Countenances; their Lips were hung with Black, as if their Tongues were to
pronounce some Funeral; and the Universal Lamentation that was made for his
departed Royal Presence, did loudly proclaim his present Royal departure: And
yet these men shall I say, or rather Monsters of Men, were so impudent, as they
publicly justified in the Face of Death and Judgment, so horrid and detestable
a Crime, from the Dictates of their private Conscience, and their following of
God, as they termed it. O horrid Blasphemy! Who can hear this and not stand
astonished? If Conscience should be held a sufficient Plea, it would open a Gap
to all manner of Licentiousness; for, why may not such a one that has a
plausible Knack of cheating the common sort of People with the fair Show of
Conscience, under the pretense thereof, make Claim to a Liberty for to run into
Excess and Riot, and to commit all kind of Wickedness with greediness, and
think they are very hardly dealt with, if they be denied it; and therefore it is
no great wonder, that in those times of Anarchical-Confusion, some men, who
were intoxicated with Principles of Libertinisme, should make this Proposition,
viz. That nothing might be Punished with Death but Murder; A thing, that I can
never think of, without Horror and Amazement, that Men should be so loose, and
given over to such a reprobate sense, as to Contend to have Iniquity
established by a Law. It is confessed by most Men that are the strongest
Assertors of Liberty of Conscience, that men, which are guilty of Offenses
against the Second Table, should be restrained by Punishment; and, What
satisfactory rational Account can be given, why the same Care should not be
taken, for the preventing the Breach of the First Table, which has respect
unto those Duties which we owe unto God? Has not Conscience Influence upon
both? Is not Gods Glory concerned in one as well as the other? Or are the
things of God less precious than the things of Men?

But I know, it will be objected, That no Man has Dominion over the Conscience
but God alone, and it is he only that exercises Soveraignity therein. But in
Answer to this, I would fain know, Whether the Supreme Lord, has not delegated
power to some men, and invested them with Authority to Check and Control the
Exorbitant Practices and Expressions of such persons, who break out in things
which manifestly tend to the dishonor of His Name, and the Peace of the
Church: Or otherwise, all Ordinances, Order, and Government, would be trampled
under foot, Religion would be Banished quite out of the Land, and the habitable
World turned into an Hell: And if this were not so, how comes it to pass, that
under the Law, the false Prophet, and the Brother that spoke to the People to
turn them away from the Lord their God, were put to Death? Deuteronomy. 13. And was
not the Blasphemer stoned to Death? Levit. 24. 14. God, you know, many times
Plagued Judah, and at last carried it into Captivity, because of their
tolerating of Error, and Idolatry; and, if you consult Josephus the Jewish
Historian, you will find that the toleration of diverse Sects among them, was
the Procatarctick Cause of their utter Overthrow.

But Gentlemen, You have another sort of Men that can find in their hearts to
come to Church, but they are afraid lest they should be too curious in matters
of God's Worship, and should be thought to Complement with God Almighty, who is
a Spirit, and looks for the heart in such performances: Crassam rusticitatem
pro sanctitate habent, as those did, that St. Jerome complains of in his time,
they think God is best served in a slovenly manner; they deal by God Almighty
as they do by some of their familiar friends, whom they meet with as they are
walking abroad, they do not stop their Course, to give them a formal Salutation
by Crindging, Bowing, and putting off their Hats, but only give them a nod as
they pass along, or happily may mutter out that trite and thredbare Complement
of, Your Servant, in that Transitory posture; So, I say, you shall have them do
with God; when they come into his House to Worship him, they think a careless
Dress or Address of themselves is best becoming, and so serve God hand over
head, as I may say; or as you have it Lev. 26. 21 (...) at all Adventures, for
the Word signifies so, as well as Contrary, which our Translation renders it:
But you shall have these men plead for themselves, and say, that External
Devotion does not suite with these Evangelical times. But were they thoroughly
acquainted with the Gospel, which they so much talk of and so little practice,
they would find that this fond Conceit of theirs is sufficiently Confuted by
our Saviors Practice. Did not he lift up his Eyes to Heaven when he prayed for
Lazarus, and fell on his Face when he prayed in his Agony? St. Paul, as himself
says bowed his Knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: But these men,
when they come into God's House, the Place of His Sacred Presence, you shall
have them presently Clap on their Hats, and sit on their Breeches in Time of
Prayer. What a shame is this? The very Heathens showed more reverence in the
Worshipping of their Idol Gods: for I read in Plutarch, That they adored the
Deity that bears the Name of Honor with the head bare; And how rude those
Sedentary persons are, who cannot find in their hearts, to kneel or stand in
time of Prayer, will sufficiently appear, if you consider, what you read in
Levit. 19. 32. viz. Thou shall rise up before the Hoarie-head; If such Honor
is required to be done to Old Men, then sure it will follow, We should much
more rise up before the Ancient of Days, when we are Worshipping of him*
Religion would lose that Native Veneration that is due to it, if it were not
Accompanied with outward decent gestures of the Body. But methinks, I may
speak to these Men that are so irreverent and profane in their Carriage to God,
in the words of the Prophet Malachy; offer it now unto thy Governor, will he
be pleased with thee, or accept thy Person? No, I warrant you. I durst Appeal
to these persons, Whether they would do the same in their Addresses to any of
us that are in Commission of the Peace? And yet are they thus saucy with God
Almighty, who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, as if they were hail
fellow well met with him. I speak the more vehemently concerning this
Miscarriage, because such persons deserve a severe reproof, and if any such be
here present, I shall only say this to them, which is a certain Truth, although
it be pungens, and not ungens; viz. That the Covering of their Heads, is a
Discovering of their Singularity and Folly, or rather their foolish Singularity.

But Gent. I shall now speak more particularly to the Articles you are to
enquire of, though I shall not spend time in Enumerating of them all, for, I
conceive that to be uunecessary, being ye hear them repeated every Sessions;
and besides, you may find them almost in every Printed Justice of Peace Book; I
shall only therefore name some of the most notorious and principal Offenses.

First, If you know any person, Man or Woman, above the Age of Sixteen years,
not having some lawful Excuse, that do not come to Church or Chapel upon every
Sunday, to hear Divine Service; you are to present the Offense, and the time
how long they have absented themselves. You ought to have an especial care to
discover such, that a Mark may be set upon them as upon Cain, who is said, to
go out from the presence of the Lord, Genesis 4. 16. that is, he turned his Back
upon the Church of God, the Place in which his Parents Worshipped God; called
the Presence of the Lord, because God in an especial manner is present there.
Such straggling Sheep as these, it is necessary the Law, as the Shepherd's Dog,
should take hold of them and bite them, which may be a means to reduce them and
gather them into one Sheepfold.

You are to make Enquiry if any have blasphemed the Name of God by Swearing.

If any shall Profane the Sabbath Day, you are to present such: and there are
two sorts of Persons that are guilty of this Offense; either such as use
unnecessary labor, as Pedlers, Carriers, Hucksters, etc. Let such know, that
if they neglect to sanctify God on that Day, God will be sanctified upon them
by his Justice. He that did but gather Sticks on the Sabbath Day, paid soundly
for it; he heard of his fault, on both his Ears: and, because he rested not
from his labor, on that day, was arrested by a multitude of Stones, which flew
like Bees about him, and rounding him in the Ear, brought the sad message of
Death to him.

Another sort of Men you have, that are so far from the Religious Observation
of the Sabbath, that they make a sport of it, they devote themselves to all
kind of Pleasure and Harmless Recreations, as they very mannerly term Bowling,
Dancing, Wrestling, I had almost said Cards and Dice too: They do indeed, call
the Sabbath a Delight; as the Phrase is in the Prophet Isaiah; but in the same
sense the Jews take it, who spend the day in Mirth and Jollity, put on the
richest and costliest Clothes they have, eat freely of all variety of Dainties,
wherewith their Tables are richly decked; and, in a word, use all things that
make for the delight of the Body. So, these men they are wholly immersed in
Carnal Sensual Pleasures, and make no more use of that day, than the Leviathan
does of the Sea, only to take their pastime therein.

You shall present, etc. -- But I shall say no more concerning Religion and
matters of the Church, but shall come briefly to Offenses against the State:
And herein first, of those that are Committed against the King, and then of
those Committed against the King's People.

First, As to the King, If any one have Conspired against the Life of the
King's or Queens Majesty, or of their Eldest Son and Heir, the very Compassing
and Imagination thereof is High Treason, if it can be proved by any Overt Act.

But all Matters of Treason are only Inquirable here, but not Punishable.

Secondly, If there be any that Revile the King, and speak Contemptuously of
him, or use any Invectives against him or his Government, you are to present
them: This is a greater Offense than People are aware of; St. Peter tells us,
That such as despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities, are in an especial
manner reserved to Judgment. We read in the Epistle of Jude, That Michael the
Archangel, when he Contended with the Devil, did not bring a railing Accusation
against him, he did not revile him, no not in the heat of dispute: But some Men
are so impudently vile as to revile the Gods, I mean Kings, whom Truth himself
calls Gods; for Elohim in Scripture, which is Translated God, is an Equivocal
Word, and is Competible both to Angels and Governors as well as God.

Next, As to those Offenses which concern the King's People, they are of two
sorts; either such as Concern their Life: or Secondly, such as Concern their
Estate and Possessions.

First, As to Life, And the highest Offense against that is Petty Treason,
which is, where one is killed unto whom the Offender did owe Obedience; as, The
Servant to the Master; The Wife to the Husband; The Clerk to the Prelate.

The second Degree, as to Life, is Murder and Homicide. The Spilling of Blood (
Gent.) is an Offense of a Scarlet die, a Crying Sin, and you ought to take
especial Care of finding it out. There are a sort of Ruffians, Roaring Blades,
Gallants, they would Christen themselves, that make nothing of Stabbing and
Killing for every petty Conceived Affront; it may be, for giving the Lie; for
taking the right Hand, or the Wall of them, or not pledging a Carouse or
Health, which is to be drunk by a stated Measure and Proportion, (as those that
make Profession of Skill in the Harmony of Bacchus know full well) but Novum
genus hoc mensurae, ubi nullus est mensurae modus, as St. Basil says, This is
a new kind of Measure, where no Measure is kept: Such fiery hot Spirits as
these, or, as they are commonly called, Sparks, ought to be quenched, lest the
whole Country be set in a Combustion; Bloodshed with them, is held but the
Cognizance of noble Resolution. The Clipping of the King's Coin, is more
odious and dangerous in their Account, than the Destroying of God's Image.

The Second Sort of Offenses against the King's People, are such as Concern
Men's Possessions and Estates. And here you are to Enquire of all Burglaries,
Robberies, Cutting of Purses, and generally of all other Stealths. This Offense
of Stealing is grown so Epidemical, that those Harpies which use it, seem to
plead Prescription for it, and are ready to Count it a lawful Calling. Luther
tells of a Thief at Wittemberg* that had Continued his Stealing Sixty years,
and being apprehended in the Fact, was asked by the Mayor, How it went? He
answered, As I drive, so it goes. Some Persons have Contracted such an Habit
by the frequent Repetition of Thievish Acts, that they never leave their
Stealing till it has brought them to the Gallows; whereas, did they meet with
a Check at first, it might prevent their fatal Overthrow, although it were but
some slight punishment that was Inflicted upon them; as that Conceited one was,
that I have read of, which was after this manner. The Delinquent had a Collar
of Iron clapped close about his Neck, which was riveled so fast with an Iron
Pin, that it could not possibly be taken off, and a little Bell was hanging
thereat, to the end that the ringing thereof, as often as he did stir or move,
might give the People warning to take heed of him.

You shall Enquire, etc.

(...)

Demosth. Orat. pro C^^siph. FINIS.

