The TEXTS examined which Papists cite out of the Bible, TO PROVE The Supremacy
of St. PETER and of the POPE over the whole Church.
IMPRIMATUR.

Guil. Needham.
Febr. 14. 1687.


THE Question to be debated in this Paper is, Whether the Apostle St. Peter was
constituted by Christ himself, to be, in his stead, the Head and supreme
Governor of the whole Church. This we deny, having undeniable Proofs that all
the Apostles were placed by Christ, in equal Power and Authority over his
Church. But the Doctors of the Roman Church affirm this with so much
Confidence, as to say; that to deny it, is not a simple Error, but a pernicious
Heresy. They are the words of Bellarmine L. 1. de Romans Pontif. c. 10, 11.
; who earnestly contends that the Government of the whole Church was committed
to Peter, especially about Matters of Faith.

Which bold Assertion he labors to support three ways.

First, By some places of Holy Scriptures. Secondly, By many Privileges and
Prerogatives of St. Peter. Thirdly, By Testimonies of Greek and Latin Fathers.
I am concerned only in the first of these Ways; in which if this Cause find no
true support, we need not trouble our selves about the other two: which are so
weak, that some ingenuous Persons in their Communion have acknowledged, the
Prerogatives are either feigned at pleasure, or no more to the purpose of his
Supremacy, than the pretended Testimonies of Ancient Fathers, which are against
it.

Now the Scriptures which they alledg for the proof of it, are two places in
the holy Gospels. The one in St. Matthew xvi. 18, 19. the other in St. John
xxi. 17. In the former of these this Supreme Authority, they say, is promised
to St. Peter; in the latter it is conferred.

I begin with the first, Matthew. xvi. 18, 19. And I say unto thee, that thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, etc. And I will give unto
thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall bind o^
Earth, shall be bound in Heaven: and whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth,
shall be loosed in Heaven. The Sense of which words, says Bellarmine, is plain
and obvious: giving us to understand, the Sovereignty over the whole Church to
be here promised unto Peter, in two Metaphors. The one is a Metaphor of a
Foundation and a Building: the other is a Metaphor of Keys. For what a
Foundation is in the Building, that the Head is in the Body, the Governor in
the City, the King in his Kingdom, and the Father of the Family in the House:
and to whom the Keys of a City are delivered, he is appointed the King, or at
least the Governor of that City; to admit and shut out whom he pleases.

Unto which I have this to say, before I give the true Sense of these words:
That to call this a plain and obvious Sense of the words, which is wrapped up in
a couple of Metaphors, is to stumble at the very Threshold; and to contradict
himself in the terms, as they ordinarily speak. For what is metaphorical, is
not plain and obvious; but needs Explanation, by putting it into common words:
Into which if these Metaphors be reduced, we shall find there is no such Sense
contained in them, as is pretended.

I shall explain them distinctly, and begin with the former part of this
Promise, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church: which we
may call the first Proof they bring of St. Peter's being the Monarch of the
Church.

I. Which Sense is so far from being plain and obvious, that having considered
both the words, and all the ancient Expositors upon them, I can find nothing
plainer than these two things: First, That there is no certainty St. Peter is
here meant by the Rock, upon which Christ says he will build his Church: Nor,
Secondly, If he were, that Christ intended by calling him a Rock, to make him
the Lord of his Church.

First, I say there is no Evidence that St. Peter is here meant by the Rock:
but quite contrary, we are led by the general stream of Ancient Interpreters,
to understand by the Rock upon which the Church is built, that Faith concerning
Christ which Peter had newly confessed. There are more than two that thus
expound the words, for one that expounds them otherwise: as may be seen in a
Sermon lately printed on this Subject Sermon on St. Peter's day. 1686.
; which shows also that the other Expositions do not really differ from this;
but even they, who apply these words to St. Peter, had respect (in calling him
the Rock) to his preaching the Doctrine of Christ; and having the honor to be
the first Preacher of it to the Gentiles. Which is all the Privilege that can
be thought to be peculiarly intended to him in these words. For, excepting
this, whatsoever was said to him, was directed to all the Apostles; because
Peter as their Mouth, spoke the Sense of them all, when he said, Thou art
Christ the Son of the Living God; and therefore Christ's Answer was returned to
them all, when he said, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my
Church.

As much as to say, Thou art what thy Name imports, which I have given thee
with respect to this solid Faith thou have now confessed: upon which, as upon a
Rock, I will build my Church by your Ministry; and particularly by thine, who
shall have the Honor to lay the first Stone of it, in the Gentile World. Thus
St. Austin Tract. exxiv. in Joh. Sermon. xiii. de verbis Dom, etc.
expounds the words in many places; where he observes Peter had his Name from
Petra the Rock, viz. That Faith which he confessed, upon which Christ told him
he would build his Church. For he does not say, Thou art Peter, and upon thee
will I build my Church; but upon this Rock: which plainly relates to another
thing, viz. that immovable Foundation, confessed by Peter, that he was Christ
the Son of God. Whence those known words of the same Father, I will build thee
upon me, not me upon thee.

If it were the intention of this Paper to quote Testimonies, I could name a
great multitude, even the ordinary Gloss, which speak to the same purpose. But
it is wholly needless, since the other Exposition which makes St. Peter the
Rock here spoken of, is against the most unanimous consent of the Fathers of
the Church: which they of the Church of Rome are bound to follow both by the
Doctrine of the Council of Trent Sess. iv.
, and by the form of that Oath of Profession of Faith which Pope Pius IV. drew
up and enjoined, according to the Mind of that Council. And yet (so vilely are
some addicted to regard nothing but their Interest) there are those, who, to
make these words sound as if Christ promised to build his Church upon Peter
himself, have not blushed thus to translate them; Thou art Peter, and upon this
PETER will I build my Church. So Dr. Allen would have had the Translation run
in the Rhemish Testament: and so Heart alleges them in his Conference with Dr.
Reynolds Chap. 2. Divis. 1.
. And now lately the Catholic Scripturist translates them after this manner,
(according to the Language which Christ spoke) Thou art a Rock, and upon this
Rock will I build my Church. As if it will be lawful for them to do any thing
(even contradict that very Council, whose Decrees they are sworn to observe)
that they may make the Scripture seem to be on their side. For the Council of
Trent has decreed the old Latin Translation to be authentical, with a
prohibition that no Man dare or presume under any pretense to reject it.
Notwithstanding which here are Men that presume to reform it, and to make a new
Translation of their own Heads, as different from that authentic vulgar
Translation as from ours: for in this ours and that are the same, as every body
may know that understands the Latin Tongue.

This is a Presumption with a Witness, to make their own Translation depart so
far from the Language which Christ spoke, as to put tu es Petrus, instead of tu
es Petra: For so Christ's words should have been translated, if they signified
thou art a Rock, unless they can show us that Petrus, in any Author, is latin
for a Rock. Till this be done, we must say that such Men, contrary to their
Faith solemnly sworn, depart not only from Antiquity, but from themselves.

And when they have done all they can, it will evidently appear, that the
Church was not built by his Hands alone, (tho he began, as I said, and laid the
first Stone among the Gentiles) but by them all, and more especially by St.
Paul, who was called late into this Office, 1 Cor. xv. 10. and iii. 10, 11.
but labored more abundantly than they all; and as a wise Master Builder laid
the Foundation, upon which others built. Which Foundation, he tells us is Jesus
Christ himself: who, he likewise says, is the only Foundation, and that no Man
can lay other Foundation besides him. Which shows this Promise, I am treating
of, had respect to all that had the Office of Apostles; and wholly ruins the
Authority of St. Peter, upon which they would have the Church to be built. For
if Jesus Christ be the only Foundation that can be laid, then Peter cannot be
the Foundation: but only as a Minister of Jesus Christ, who helped to lay the
Foundation, which is Christ himself and his Faith. In which Ministry he was no
more employed than other Apostles; but St. Paul, who came last into this
Ministry, was as wise a Master Builder as himself, and took more Pains than he
or any of the rest: laying the Foundation where neither St. Peter, nor any Body
else had ever been, lest he should build upon another Man's Foundation, as he
tells the Roman Church, Romans xv. 20.

Which words uttterly overthrow their vain distinction of a first, and a
secondary Foundation, whereby they endeavor to elude those words of St. Paul
in the place before-named, 1 Cor. iii. 11. For it appears by this other place
that St. Paul was a secondary or ministerial Foundation, if we may so speak;
that is, speak improperly, meaning thereby one that laid the Foundation. Which
he did as much as St. Peter, or any other Apostle; nay, a great deal more, as
he himself tells us, when he says he labored more abundantly than they all.

In exact speaking, there is no Foundation on which the Church is built but
Christ alone (as St. Paul assures us) in whom all the Building fitly framed
together, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord; Ephesians. ii. 21. But Faith in
Christ, being that whereby we are joined to him, it may be called by the same
Name: and accordingly the Colossians are said to be grounded (...). Col. 1.23.
in the Faith, as upon a Foundation (the Greek word signifies) from which he
would have them not to be moved. And the Apostles (as he there says) being the
Preachers of this Faith, and the Instruments whereby Men were brought to
believe on Christ, and so joined to him as Living Stones, are called by the
Name of Foundation, in the place before-named; Ephesians. ii. 20. Built upon the
Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, etc. But then, it is evident that
Peter alone is not this Foundation, but all the Apostles. For there are XII
Foundations (of this sort) as we read in Rev. xxi. 14. by whose Ministry the
Church was built upon Christ; the sole Foundation (in proper speaking) that was
laid for all to build upon.

Finally, the Apostles understand no such Pre-eminence, as is now pretended, to
be promised to St. Peter in these words; nor did he himself so understand them,
when the Holy Ghost was come upon them to lead them into all Truth. For then
St. Paul could not have said, that he came not a whit behind the very chiefest
Apostles, and that he was behind them in nothing (2 Cor. xi. 5. and xii. 11.)
nor could he have undertaken to correct St. Peter ( Gal. ii. 11, 12, etc.) nor
would St. Peter have born his Censure, if he had known he was the Head of the
Church: but have bidden St. Paul know his distance; and remember that he ought
not to control him, but be controuled by him as his Better.

Secondly; After all this that has been said, to show there is nothing here
promised to Peter, but what belongs to all the Apostles, except only that of
his being employed in laying the first Foundation of Faith among the Gentiles:
It remains that I show there is nothing in the word Rock, which implies any
Superiority of Power and Authority over the rest of his Brethren and the whole
Church; if we should suppose this Promise to have been made to him alone; for
it denotes nothing of Government; but has respect to the support and stability
of that Structure, which is firmly laid upon it. And therefore the ancient
Doctors (as may be seen in the Sermon beforementioned) give other Reasons of
his being called a Rock, and not this; because to him was committed the
Government of the whole Church, especially about Faith. Which is the
Explanation Bellarmine gives of this word, affirming it to be the signification
of this Metaphor: for it is proper to a fundamental Rock to govern and sustain
the whole Edifice. This is perfectly new Language, never heard of in the World
before, that it is proper to a Foundation to govern; for it is altogether
improper, and no body thinks of any such thing, when he reads of a Foundation.
But if it be proper, then all the Apostles were Governors of the whole Church,
as well as he; because they were all Foundations, as was before observed;
having the very same Power given to them by Christ, which, we now suppose, was
here promised to him alone.

Unto which they of the Church of Rome have nothing to reply, but only this
(whch is merely a bold Affirmation, and as absurd as all the rest) they were
indeed all of them the Heads, Governors, and Pastors of the Church universal:
but not after the same manner as Peter was of Bellarm. l. 1. de Pontif. Romans
cap. xi.
. Why so? For they had the highest and most ample Power, as Apostles and
Ambassadors; but Peter also as an ordinary Pastor. As much as to say, They had
indeed the highest Power in the Church, and as large as he, but not so high a
Power as his. Let any Man try, if he can make any other Sense of those words;
that is, find any Sense at all in them. For was this Power of being an ordinary
Pastor, greater than that of the Apostles, or no? If it were greater, then it
is not true which he affirms, that the Apostles had the highest Power Habuerunt
summam Potestatem.
If it were less than the Power of the Apostles, then they were all greater
than he, as he was an ordinary Pastor: and then it is nonsense to say, they so
had a plenitude of Power, as that St. Peter was notwithstanding the Head of
them, and they all depended on him. For he rather depended on them, as an
ordinary Pastor, if that was less than the Power of the Apostleship: and if it
were not, but greater than it; then (as I said) it is false, that the Apostles
had the highest Power.

This is sufficient to show into what Absurdities Men run, when they go about
to maintain a Falsehood; and what wretched shifts they devise to obscure the
clear Truth, which shines in their Eyes: Which when they have done, they walk
as in Darkness, and cannot be persuaded to see or acknowledge their Error. Nay,
one Error grows out of another, and having begun to wrest the Holy Scripture,
they go on to strain it, so far as to extend it to any purpose they have to
serve by it.

For having presumed that Peter, and he alone, is promised to be made the
Governor of the whole Church, by these Words of our Savior, they immediately
presume, without the show of a proof, that the Bishops of Rome succeed him in
this Authority. Which is a very large Step, or rather Leap, from Peter to the
Popes of Rome, between whom there is such a vast distance, that it is
impossible to make out the Claim, to which they pretend from him. For there is
no evidence that St. Peter was Bishop of Rome, but only that he founded that
Church, and settled a Bishop there. For if he was Bishop of Antioch, it was
against all ancient Rules, to leave that, and go to another See. The truth is,
he was properly Bishop of neither; but planted a Church in each: and first at
Antioch, before he came to Rome. And who can think he did not settle one to
take care of that Church of Antioch, when he left it? who may be called his
Successor, as well as he, whom he is supposed to have placed afterward in
Rome. Which two things being allowed, as unquestionable Matters of Fact, there
is no reason can be given why all the Power and Jurisdiction which is claimed
upon the account of Succession, should not devolve by the Right of
Primogeniture, upon the Bishop of Antioch: since it is confessed he first fat
there, and sat there seven Years, which is more than can be proved he did at
Rome, where he was not when St. Paul came thither ( Act. xxviii.) nor when he
first answered before Nero, nor when he was ready to be offered, 2 Timothy iv. 6,
11, 16. nor can any certain time be assigned when he was there, as we are sure
St. Paul was, who is acknowledged to be a Founder of that Church, and had as
much (or rather more) right to leave a Bishop to succeed him there, as St.
Peter; who could transfer to no body, neither there nor any where else, what
was personally vested in him; as all the Privilege here granted him was. Or, if
he was to have any Successor in his supposed Dominion, there were others had a
better Title to it, than the Bishop of Rome; particularly St. John, who it is
certain survived St. Peter. L. 1. de Pont. Romans c. ix.
Therefore all that Bellarmine dare say in this matter is, that the Apostles
being dead, the Apostolical Authority remained in Peter 's Successor alone. For
which he gives us not one word of proof, but only this notorious Falsehood, that
the Roman Bishop alone is called by all, the Apostolical Bishop, and his See
simply the Apostolical See. When all the World knows, Jerusalem,
Constantinople, and diverse other Places are called by the same Name of
Apostolical Sees or Churches; and their Bishops called not only Apostolical,
but Catholic, and said to be Bishops of the Catholic Church. The meaning of
all which is nothing else, but that they held the Catholic Religion and Faith,
Epist. pars 1. ad Franciscum Bonum.
as Launoy most ingenuously confesses, and maintains the Roman Bishops
themselves intended no more, when they subscribed themselves Bishops of the
Catholic Church.

Nay, Bellarmine himself, in the place now named, is constrained to acknowledge,
that the Supreme Ecclesiastical Power was given not only to Peter, but to other
Apostles also. For they might all say that of St. Paul, 2 Cor. xi. 28. My daily
business, the Care of all the Churches. But it was given to Peter as an
ordinary Pastor, who should have perpetual Successors: to others as Delegates,
who should have no Successors. Which is a mere Invention, a pure Figment of his
own brain; without the shadow of a ground for it in the Book of God, or any
ancient Authority; and against his own Confession, that all the Apostles had
the highest Power; which includes all Power both ordinary and extraordinary,
and a Power to appoint their Successors, in the Places they converted.

There have abundance of other things been said by our Writers, to show that
whatsoever may be supposed to have been promised in these Words, the Bishops of
Rome can thence derive no lawful Claim to the like Authority. And yet (as if
there were nothing plainer, than that Christ spoke to the Roman Bishops, when
he said these Words to St. Peter) they have the confidence from hence to
entitle the Pope to the Privilege of Infallibility, as well as to a Supreme
Dominion over the Church. So Bellarmine, who elsewhere alleges these Words, L.
iv. de Romans Pontific. c. 3.
to prove that the chief Bishop (i. e. theirs) when he teaches the whole
Church, in things belonging to Faith, can in no case err. But this depends upon
his former Suppositions, that Peter is the Rock of the Church as its Supreme
Governor; and therefore every one of his Successors in like manner is the
same: which having no Foundation, all his Superstructure upon them falls to the
Ground. And indeed it is so sandy, that honest Men among themselves are ashamed
to build any thing of this nature upon it: Particularly Launnoy who, on set
purpose, demonstrates that Bellarmine neither obeyed the Decree of the Trent
Council, Epist. pars v. Gulielmo Voello.
nor kept the Profession of Faith enjoined by Pius IV. when he drew this
Conclusion of the Popes Infallibility, from these Words, Thou art Peter, etc.
but was guilty of downright Flattery of the Court of Rome; for whose sake he,
in like manner, falfied in the Citations he brings out of the Fathers, to
maintain the same Untruth.

But further than this, the same Writer presses these words, to prove, that
General Councils cannot err, neither in believing, nor teaching L. 2. de Conc.
Author. cap. i.
. Which is as much as to confess that what Christ said to Peter, was intended
to all Bishops: of whom a General Council consists. But here he endeavors to
bring off himself, by this Salvo; if the Council be confirmed by the Pope: as
if they received their Infallibility from him; who turns their doubtful
Opinions into Oracles. Whence it is, that from the very same words, [ Thou art
Peter etc.] he proves the Pope to be above a Council Ib. cap. xv.
; immediately constituted by Christ the Pastor and Head, not only of all
particular Churches, but also of the whole universal Church congregated
together.

If this be to interpret the Scripture, I know not what is setting it upon the
Rack; and stretching it as far as it pleases him who takes it in hand. No
Heretics ever took so great a liberty as this; which, according to their way
of reasoning, makes it necessary to seal up the Bible quite, that no body may
look into it. For if the danger of wresting the holy Scriptures, be a just
cause for denying the liberty of reading them to illiterate people; it ought
not to be granted to the most Learned, who (it appears by this great Cardinal)
are in as much, or more danger of this than any other Men: and so farewell the
study of the Scriptures, which neither Priest nor People must meddle withal.

But, thanks be to God, there is such a thing as Honesty and Integrity still
remaining in the World; which qualifies all Men for the wholesome perusal of
them: and has preserved the minds of some in that Communion so uncorrupted, as
to make them disdain and reject these perverse and arrogant Interpretations, or
Distortions rather, of Holy Scripture. There is one has lately declared his
sense of this Promise to St. Peter, in remarkable words; with which I conclude
this part of my Discourse Du Pin de antiquae Eccles. Discipl. Dissert. iv. cap.
1. sect. 1.
: Supposing Christ to have spoken these words [and upon this Rock] of the
Person of Peter; he meant nothing else thereby, but that Peter should labor
very much in the Edification of the Church; that is, in the Conversion of the
Faithful, and Administration of the Churches. And therefore the most that can
be deduced from hence is, that he should be the first and the chief among those
who were to preach the Gospel: but it cannot from hence be gathered, with
Bellarmine, that the Government of the whole Church was committed to Peter,
especially about Faith.

II. The truth of this will further appear, in the Explication of the next
Words, which expound those of which I have now treated: And I will give unto
thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: and whatsoever thou shall bind on
Earth, it shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth,
shall be loosed in Heaven.

The sense of which is not so plain and obvious, as Bellarmine pretends; but we
agree that they are a plain allusion to the Words of the Prophet Isaiah
concerning Eliakim, Isa. xxii. 23. I will give thee the Keys of the House of
David, i. e. make thee not High Priest, as he grossly mistakes, but Steward of
the Royal Family, to take in and thrust out whom thou shall think fit. Such was
the Power here promised to Peter by our Lord, who says of himself, that he
has the Key of David (Rev. iii. 7.) i. e. of the House or Family of David;
which he alone governs by an absolute Power; but tells Peter he intended to
make him, under himself, his Supreme Lord and Master, such a Steward in the
Church, as Eliakim had been in the Court.

I say, in the Church; for by the Kingdom of Heaven, I think no body now will
dispute, is meant the Family of Christ, or the Christian Church, in a great
many places of the Gospel; and most likely is so to be interpreted here. But if
any body be so minded as to understand by the Kingdom of Heaven, not the
Christian Society here below, but the Company of the Blessed above; let them
consider that the sense will still be the same; because by admission into the
one, and abiding in it, we come to the other. And Baptism is the Key which lets
us into the Church, out of which such as notoriously break their Baptismal Vow,
ought to be shut, by the Censures of the Church; and again received into it
upon their hearty Repentance, by granting them Absolution. Thus the following
Words expound it, and whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, etc.

That binding and loosing are one and the same, with the Power of the Keys, is
acknowledged by the Roman Catechism De Sacrament. Paenitenn. 44.
and by Bellarmine himself, who confesses the plain sense of these Words to be,
that first of all an Authority or Power is promised, defined by Keys; and then
the Actions or Office of this Power is explained by those words, loosing and
binding. So that to loose and to open, to shut and to bind, is altogether the
same thing L. 1. de Pont. Romans cap. xii. verum.
. And we need not further trouble our selves to inquire how far this Power
extends: for it is certain there is nothing here promised, though we suppose it
never so large, which was intended to him alone, but to them all; except that
of opening the door first to let the Gentiles into the Church.

This is apparent from what was said before concerning Christ, speaking to them
all in him, as he spoke for them all, in answer to our Savior's Question
propounded to the whole Company. Which produced this Promise from our Savior,
not to him alone, but to all them in whose Name he spoke. Which is no new
Interpretation, but as old as the Church it self: for the Ancients say with an
unanimous consent, that these Keys were given to the whole Church in the Person
of Peter Du Pin de antiqua Eccles. Disc. dissert. iv. c. 1. Sect. 1.
; as a late Writer in the Roman Communion honestly confesses. St. Austin
particularly, inculcates this an hundred times (as his words are) a proof of
which may be seen in another of his Brethren Jo. Launoy Epist. par. 2. Hadriano
Valantio, p. 14. etc.
, who has made a Collection of xxvi places out of his Works, to show that he
taught this openly, frequently and constantly, in such plain words as may be
understood by themselves, without the help of an Interpreter. I cannot well
forbear to mention one of them, because it affords us many considerable
Remarks: Aug. Enarratio in Psalm. cviii.
As some things (says he) are spoken, which may seem properly to belong to the
Apostle Peter, and yet have not a clear Sense, but when they are referred to
the Church (whereof he is acknowledged to have represented the Person in a
Figure, because of the Primacy he had among the Apostles) as that is, I WILL
GIVE THEE THE KEYS OF THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN, and if there be any like: so JUDAS
sustains, after a certain manner, the Person of the Jews, the Enemies of
Christ, etc.

Here they of the Church of Rome are very forward to catch at these words,
which signify a place of Priority that Peter had among the Apostles (which no
body denies) but are not willing to take any notice of all the rest; which
utterly overthrow that Primacy which they would advance him unto from this
place. For first, he says, some things do but seem to belong to Peter, which in
truth ought to be referred to the Church. And secondly, That their Sense is not
clear or evident, till they be carried beyond him. Among which things, thirdly,
he reckons what our Savior here says, I will give thee the Keys, etc. which
they would now ingross to St. Peter, and have us believe this to be the plain
and obvious sense of Christ's words, which St. Austin says are not plain,
unless we refer them to the Church. Whose Person (fourthly) he says he did bear
or represent, not by virtue of his Place, or any Authority he had above the
rest, but in a Figure, to signify Unity, that is, as the Ancients interpret it.
And it is farther remarkable, (fifthly) that Christ did not promise him the
Primacy, in promising him the Keys, for he had the Primacy (here spoken of)
before; and with respect to that Christ directed to him these words, rather
than any of the rest, because he was already the first, not in Office, but in
Order; and so the fittest Person to be singled out, to represent what Christ
intended. And to convince every one there is no Authoritative Primacy meant in
these words of St. Austin, he adds (sixthly) that Judas sustained the Person of
Christ's Enemies, as Peter did of the Church. Will any body infer from hence,
that Judas had a Jurisdiction over all the wicked, and left it to his
Successors, one of which has now the same? Let them forbear then to make such
Inferences, from what is said of St. Peter's Primacy, which gave him no right
to rule, but only made him stand fairest, being the first, to be chosen to
represent the rest. If any will be still so perverse as to wrangle, because St.
Austin does not mention Judas his Primacy as he does of Peter's; let them learn
more Modesty by knowing that Prosper, one of St. Austin's Scholars, upon the
very same Psalm, says in express terms, that Judas primatum gessit inimicorum
Christi.
Judas carried the Primacy of Christ's Enemies. Which if they will not expound
to signify a supreme Authority to govern Christ's Enemies, let them no longer
interpret St. Peter's Primacy to signify such an Authority over his Friends. He
had none here promised him, is as certain as any thing can be; but the Keys to
commend Unity, were promised him; which were in truth given to all the rest.
This is the ancient Sense, which drew this plain and pertinent Observation from
another honest Writer, in the Roman Communion, Rigaltius in Epist. Firmiliani.
He said to Peter, I will give thee the Keys, but he did not say, I will give
them to thee alone.

Which is justified to be true, by three other Passages in the holy Gospels. In
the first of which, he promises as much to all in the very same words, as he
had done to him. Matthew. xviii. 18. Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall
bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on
Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven: which is the Explication, as you heard
before, of the Power of the Keys, in the same terms, (without the least
difference but what is between the plural number and the singular) wherein it
was delivered to St. Peter. And in the next Chapter he repeats it again, only
in other words, when he says Matthew. xix. 28. Ye shall sit upon XII Thrones,
judging ( i. e. ruling and governing) the XII Tribes of Israel; without any
mention of one Throne, peculiar and higher than the rest, to St. Peter. And
thus far there is no more than a Promise to be met withal in the Gospel, but no
actual grant, no words whereby our Lord makes a conveyance of this Power to
them, till after his Resurrection from the Dead. When he gives out a Commission
to them, as large as can be made; wherein there is nothing peculiar reserved to
St. Peter, but it runs in general terms to them all, John xx. 21, 22, 23. For
he neither says, I send thee, nor breathed upon him alone, saying, Receive
Thou the Holy Ghost: Whosoever Sins thou remittest, etc. But he says to them,
being all save Thomas assembled together, As my Father has sent me, even so
send I you. And when he had said thus, he breathed on them, and said unto them,
Receive ye the Holy Ghost: Whosoever Sins ye remit, they are remitted unto
them; and whosoever Sins ye retain, they are retained. And accordingly, it may
be added, when the Holy Ghost descended (of which this breathing on them was an
Emblem and Pledge) they were all ( Thomas with the rest) with one accord in one
place, and it was imparted to each of them alike, without any mark of
distinction. For we read of no Flame that crowned the Head of St. Peter,
greater and more illustrious than that upon his Brethren: but the Text says,
the Tongues, like as of Fire, were divided, and sat upon every one of them
singly (...).
, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost; Acts ii. 2, 3. The mighty Wind
also, wherein this Flame came (betokening the powerful Inspiration which was
entering into them) filled all the House where they were sitting, and not only
that Corner where St. Peter was placed. And so this Promise was equally
performed in common to them all, as it had been made to them all. Nay, this
very thing is no less than a demonstration, that the Promise was intended to
all, because the Performance was to all.

That here his Promise was performed, is very manifest to those, who are
desirous to understand the Truth: for no other time can be named when it was
performed to Peter; nor any other words found, wherein the thing promised was
conveyed, but these, as my Father sent me, so I send you. And lastly, this is
the sense of the Church, as appears by St. Cyprian in ancient times; who
observes that our Lord, who said to Peter, Thou art Peter, etc. gave to all his
Apostles equal Power Parem Potestatem.
after his Resurrection, when he said, As the living Father sent me, so I send
you, etc. concluding from thence, that all the Apostles were what St. Peter was
Hoc utique erant and caeteri Apostoli quod suit Petrus, pari consortio praediti
and honoris and potestatis, etc. L. de unitate Ecclesiae and Epist. xxiii. ad
Jubianum.
: And by Theophylact in later times, who thus glosses upon Matthew. xvi. 19.
Though our Lord said only to Peter, I WILL GIVE THEE, yet they were given to
all the Apostles. When? at that time when he said, Whosoever Sins ye remit they
are remitted. For the word, I WILL GIVE, denotes the future time, that is,
after the Resurrection.

Then he said to them all, As my Father has sent me, so I send you. Which are
words so large that they contain in them a plenitude of Power; and confute the
conceit of those who say that Christ indeed gave the Power of remitting and
retaining Sins to all the Apostles, but the Power of the Keys to Peter alone.
Whereby if they meant that to Peter it was given to open the Gate first to the
Gentiles, it ought to be allowed to be a true sense; tho we are not certain it
was the thing peculiarly intended by our Savior in these words. But
understanding thereby a distinct Power from that of binding and loosing,
retaining and remitting, (which St. Peter exercised when he let the Gentiles
into the Church) it is certainly false that he gave him such a Power, which he
did not confer upon the rest. For should we suppose binding and loosing to be
distinct from the Power of the Keys, yet this Power of the Keys (be it what it
will) we may be sure is included in these comprehensive words, As my Father
has sent me, so I send you; which were spoken unto them all.

And therefore as the Keys were not promised to him alone; so not to him more
than any other Apostle; but only the use of them first, before any other
Apostle. That Is the most (as I have often said) which can reasonably be
conceived to be peculiarly promised to Peter in these words, that he should
first open the Door of Faith to the Gentiles, as we read he did, Acts x. and as
some think to the Jews also, Acts ii. Tertullian L. de Pudicitiae c. xxi.
seems to be of this mind (and I shall not here dispute it) who mentioning this
place, I will give thee the Keys, etc. thus proceeds; so the Event teaches us;
the Church was first built on him; that is, by him. He first handled the Key.
See what Key; Ye Men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus of Nazareth a Man
approved of God among you, etc. (Acts ii. 22, etc.) He in fine did first by the
Baptism of Christ, unlock the entrance of the Heavenly Kingdom, etc. He bound
Ananias with the Bond of Death; and he absolved the Man lame of his Feet, from
the weakness wherewith he labored. And in the Dispute which arose about the
Obligation of the Law, Peter first of all by the instinct of the Holy Ghost
(having told them how God made choice of him that the Gentiles should hear the
Word from his Mouth) said, And now why tempt ye God, to put a Yoke upon the
Neck of the Disciples, which neither our Fathers nor we were able to bear, etc.
where he plainly makes the Power of the Keys, and binding and loosing to be the
same thing: and from the scope of his Discourse, it appears (as Launoy Epist.
par. ii. Hadriano Vallantio, p. 6.
has observed) that they then believed at Rome that in the Person of Peter the
Keys were given to the Church; that is, says he, the power of binding and
loosing. Which things if the late Catholic Scripturist had known, or would
have been pleased to mind, how could he have had the Confidence to say, that
our Lord spoke these words to Peter to signify, that he was the Head and Chief
in ordinary. For tho the Power of binding and loosing was afterward given to
the other Apostles, yet the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are never in
Scripture said to be given to any but to St. Peter The seventh Point, n. 6.
. By which Keys also he says is signified, the plentitude of highest Power:
For this vain Conceit is contrary to the common Opinion of the ancient Fathers
(whom they are bound by their Profession of Faith and Oath, to follow) contrary
to their greatest Schoolmen, (such as Scotus, Aquinas, Alex. Alensis) who
affirm that the Keys promised to Peter in St. Matthew. xvi. were given to all the
Apostles in St. John xx. contrary also to their own Catechism (as I have shown)
according to which he ought to have instructed his Followers.

The Sum of what has been said is this: 1. The Power which our Lord here
promised to Peter, was not meant to him alone. 2. For he did but represent and
sustain the Person of the Church (as the Ancients speak) to whom this Promise
belongs. 3. And therefore our Lord afterward promises the very same thing, in
the same words to all the Apostles, which he here promises to Peter. 4. And
accordingly when he performed his Promise, he gave this Power to every one of
them equally. 5. But Christ directed this Promise at the first singularly to
him, that he might commend Unity. 6. Or, at the most, he promised him the
Honor, of opening the Door of Faith first unto the Gentiles. 7. From whence we
can only gather that he was the first among the Apostles; but not that he was
promised any Power which the rest had not: for the contrary is apparent. 8. To
all which I must add (repeating briefly what I said upon the foregoing words)
that if we should grant our Savior to have promised some Power to Peter (when
he said, I will give thee the Keys) which the other Apostles had not; it would
prove a personal Prerogative, and cannot be shown to have descended to any
Successor, much less to the Pope of Rome; who, Bellarmine says, is a true
Prince, who has Power to make true Laws to bind the whole Church. And this he
proves from these words, Whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in
Heaven, etc. L. iv. de Romans Pontif. c. xvi.



Concerning which it will be thought too sharp perhaps to say (tho they are the
words of one in the Roman Communion Launoy ubi supra, p. 77.
) simply to relate the words of this Author, is simply to confute them; they
are so very contrary to Truth and Equity. The Reader therefore may be pleased
briefly to consider, what our Lord himself says to all his Apostles, Matthew.
xxiii. 8, 9, 10. which utterly overturns these proud Pretensions. But be not ye
called Rabbi, for one is your Master, even Christ; and ALL YE ARE BRETHREN. And
call no Man your Father upon the Earth; for one is your Father which is in
Heaven. Neither be ye called Masters, for one is your Master, even Christ. The
repetition of one and the same thing so often, in words of the same import,
argues it to be a matter of great moment, which ought to be duly weighed. And
it is this, that no Man, no not any of his Apostles, should take upon him to
prescribe that as a part of Religion, which God our Savior has not prescribed
by his Laws: and that we ought not absolutely to submit to any Man's Dictates,
as Children do to the Will of their Fathers; nor pin our Faith, as we speak,
upon any Man's sleeve; i. e. let it depend entirely upon his Authority: For
this is a submission which is due only to God our Savior, (who in this Sense
of the words) is our only Father, and Master, and Leader; and therefore we
cannot, without the highest injury to him, own any one else to be such, nor
give them these Names; but as they teach, not their own, but Christ's Doctrine
unto Men. And in this Office all the Apostles were equal, and no one of them
could claim an Authority over the rest of his Brethren.

There are many other places wherein we read of one Shepherd, one Lord, one
Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy: from whence we may conclude that
Peter himself had no Power to make, but only to declare the Laws of his and our
Lord and Lawgiver, Jesus Christ. So the words of Christ's Commission run, when
he says, not to him alone, but to them all, Go ye, and disciple all Nations,
etc. teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you,
Matthew. xxviii. 20. Here is their Authority, to publish the Commands of their
Master, not what they pleased to command themselves. Which Peter was so far
from doing, that he went not about the abrogation of the Ceremonial Law, and
the calling of the Gentiles, till he was authorized by an heavenly Vision;
which discovered this Mystery to him, as a part of the Counsel of God, but no
Law, nor so much as a Thought of his own. For being charged afterward by the
Jews for eating with Men uncircumcised, he excuses himself by a long Apology,
wherein he relates how he was commanded to do it by God himself, whom he could
not withstand ( Acts xi. 3, 4, etc.) which was not done like a Lawgiver. Nay,
after this Revelation made to him, he was so weak as to observe this Law, to
the great Offense of the Gentiles; for which he was reprehended by St. Paul,
who had the honor to abrogate the Law of Moses among the Gentiles while St.
Peter (who began that work) was the Minister of the Circumcision: Gal. ii. 7,
10, 11, etc.

Nor does the word [Bind] import a Power to impose Laws, but only to tie Men to
those Laws which are already made. Thus it signifies in that very place, which
Bellarmine alleges to maintain his Sense of the word, viz. to make Laws:
Matthew. xxiii. 4. For they bind heavy Burdens, and grievous to be born, and lay
them on Men's Shoulders, etc. that is, they were rigorous Interpreters of the
Laws of God, which it was their Office to expound, according to the plain sense
and meaning of them, and not according to the Traditions of the Elders, which
had made them intolerable Burdens.

But suppose the word to signify what they please, it will do them no service;
because this Power of Binding was not promised to Peter alone, but to them all,
as has been before proved. And consequently he could do nothing, which they
could not do as much as he; that is, they were all Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the Mysteries of God: All of them like to Eliakim, 1 Cor. iv. 1.
to whom the Key of the House of David is promised, as the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven to Peter. For by that very word which we translate Stewards, or
Dispensers, is that Office (...).
to which Eliakim was advanced in the room of Shebna, expressed by the LXX. in
Isa. xxii. 19, 21. which was not a Supreme Power in the Court, where all the
rest of the Courtiers did not depend on him as their Lord and Prince; but the
Power of a prime Minister in the Royal Family, which he governed not after his
own Will, but the King's. In like manner all the Apostles were Ministers, by
whom Men believed (1 Cor. iii. 5.) Stewards of the heavenly Mysteries, which
they faithfully dispensed (1 Cor. iv. 1, 2.) according to the Will of Christ,
who has the Key of David; that is, is the sole Supreme Governor of the
Church, and gives Rules to it; which the Apostles delivered, but did not ordain
themselves, nor bind upon Men by their own Authority, but by his. For they were
not Authors of the Divine Laws, which they taught, but the Publishers of them,
and equal Publishers of one and the same common Doctrine: Which every Bishop in
the Church has as much Authority to bind upon Men as the Pope: They being all
of the same Merit and Priesthood (as St. Hierom Epist. ad Evagrium.
speaks) all Successors of the Apostles.

There are some other words of St. Hierom (it may not be unfit here to note)
which are usually alleged to prove the contrary, viz. That he thought St.
Peter had some Supremacy of Power over the rest of the Apostolical College;
from whence they hope to derive the like Power unto the Pope over all Bishops:
They are in his first Book against Jovinian, where he says, One among the
twelve was therefore chosen, that an HEAD being constituted, the occasion of
Schism might be removed. But they are unconscionably disingenuous who alledg
this Passage, and do not give us the entire Sentence, but only this Conclusion
of it; which can have no such meaning as they pretend, without making mere
Nonsense of the words foregoing, which are these. But thou say, the Church
was founded upon Peter; tho the very same in another place is done upon all the
Apostles, and they received the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the strength
of the Church is solidly bottomed upon them EQVALLY. And then follows the words
now named, Yet ONE was therefore chosen among the XII, etc. which makes it as
clear as the Sun, that he dreamt of no such HEADSHIP of ONE over all the rest,
as signifies a Supremacy of Power: for what one Text, he says, affirms of
Peter, another affirms of them all; they all receiving the Keys (which is the
highest Power) and the stability of the Church relying upon them equally.

I conclude this part of my Discourse with the Observation of a late Learned
Writer of our Church Dr. Hammond 's Dispatcher dispatched, P. iii. c. 7. Sect.
2. n. 13.
. If any Power or degree of Power was here promised to Peter, more than to the
rest of the Apostles, it must be gathered either from the force of the
Substance of the Promise, or from the Circumstances wherewith it was delivered.

The Substantial part is nothing else but that of a Steward in the Church, set
forth by the Emblem of Keys, and more explicitly declared by the Power of
binding and loosing; which carries in it no intimation of such a thing as a
Supremacy over the whole Church, but only of a ruling Power in some Family;
that is, in that part of the Universal Church where his lot should fall. For
this very thing being presently after promised to all the Apostles, it makes it
evident, there was no Supremacy here promised; for then there must be not one,
but twelve Supremes.

As for the Circumstances, wherein this part and the former of our Savior's
Promise was delivered (which some are pleased to urge as very considerable)
they are of no strength to support so great a weight as they lay upon them. For
first, It is very unreasonable that Circumstances should be thought of greater
force to declare the meaning of this Promise, than the very Substance it self
is. And secondly, All these Circumstances (save only that of his own Name and
his Fathers joined together) are not peculiar to him, but common to others, who
confessed Christ's Divinity, and had it revealed from God, and were blessed,
and designed for Stones in the Fabric of the Church, as well as Peter. And
further, even that Circumstance of calling him Simon Barjona had a visible
reason for it, to distinguish this Simon from Simon Zelotes. So that there is
nothing left but the small Circumstance of calling him by his Name, to be the
grand Foundation of St. Peter's Supremacy.

Can any one be satisfied with such poor Proofs? Which are no better than if we
should argue in this manner, our Lord said to Peter, Follow me, and so he did
to the other eleven, and by this made them his Disciples in common. But had he
said, Simon Barjona, Follow thou me, (as he might very well, if any other Simon
were then present) he alone (according to this way of discoursing) had been
taken into Discipleship, and none after him enjoyed this Honor.

But I have said enough, if not too much, upon these Texts; and must here end
this Paper, for fear of swelling it beyond the intended bulk. The rest shall
soon follow.

ERRATA.
PAge 81. line 21. for will be, read were. P. 83. l. 31. r. understood. P. 85.
l. 10. del. of, l. ult. r. walk on. P. 88. penult. r. falsified. P. 93. l. 29.
del. of before Peter's.
LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Richard Chiswel at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1688.

The Second Part.
The TEXTS examined which Papists cite out of the Bible, TO PROVE The Supremacy
of St. PETER and of the POPE over the whole Church.
IMPRIMATUR.

Guil. Needham.
Febr. 14. 1687.


III.

NOw we are come to the last reserve of the Roman Church, for the support of
this Cause; which lies in those Words of Christ to Peter, John xxi. 15, 16, 17.
Feed my Lambs, and feed my Sheep. They are sensible of the truth of that, which
has been often repeated, that in neither of the former places Christ gave any
thing to Peter; but only promised he would give him such things as are there
mentioned. Now they are hard put to it, to find when he did perform this
Promise; and not find with all, that he performed it to all the Apostles: and
therefore, as I have said, made it to them all. Here is the only Place they
rely upon; here they would fain find, what is no where else to be found,
something peculiarly granted to Peter, which was conferred upon none of the
rest. Read the words, say they, and observe how they are peculiarly spoken to
Peter: So when they had dined, Jesus said to Simon Peter, Simon Son of Jonas,
love thou these me more than these? He says unto him, Yea, Lord, thou
know I love thee. He says unto him, FEED MY LAMBS. He says to him again
the second time, Simon Son of Jonas, love thou me? He says unto him, Yea,
Lord, thou know that I love thee. He says unto him, FEED MY SHEEP. He says
unto him the third time, Simon Son of Jonas, love thou me? Peter was grieved
because he said unto him the third time, Love thou me? And he said unto him,
Lord, thou know all things; thou know that I love thee. Jesus says unto
him, FEED MY SHEEP.

See, say they, with what Solemnity our Lord here speaks to Peter, and to him
alone, calling him three times particularly by his Name and Relation, and
bidding him as often, feed his Lambs or Sheep; whereby he instated him in the
Office he had promised him, and made him, in a particular manner, to be a
Pastor, even the Pastor of the whole Church, with a Supreme Power over it.

First; To which we reply, That having seen and considered all this, we can see
nothing here that looks like a Grant or Commission; nothing given to St. Peter
by these words; which are a plain Charge or Command, requiring him to do his
Office, which was therefore conferred upon him before, together with the rest
of the Apostles, when our Lord said, As my Father has sent me, so I send you,
etc. Receive ye the Holy Ghost, etc.

Secondly; And as here is no Commission, no Conveyance of any thing made to
him, but a bare Precept to do his Duty: So the Duty does not concern him alone,
but belongs to them all as much as him. It is at this time required in a
Precept directed to him alone, that is true: and Bellarmine might have spared
all his Labor to prove, that these words were spoken to Peter alone. They were
so, if we understand thereby that he only by Name, is now admonished of his
Duty; (the reason of which we shall see presently) but the Duty of which he was
admonished was not peculiar to him; and so the words do not belong to him
alone, as appears by many Arguments.

1. From St. Peter himself, who seems to have interpreted the Mind of Christ in
this Speech to him, in his words to the Elders of the Church to whom he wrote;
1 Pet. v. 1. The Elders, which are among you, I exhort, who am, What? the
Monarch of the Church? the Vicar of Christ? Or Pastor of Pastors? The Chief
Apostle? Or Supreme Bishop? No such thing, but (...), your fellow Elder, etc.
Feed the Flock of God which is among you, etc. And from whom did these Elders
receive their Power and Authority? From St. Peter? No such matter, but from the
chief Shepherd or Pastor, from whom he bids them expect their. Reward, ver. 4.

2. In like manner St. Paul gives the very same Charge to the Elders of
Ephesus, to take heed to themselves, and to all the Flock, over which the Holy
Ghost had made them Overseers, to FEED the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own Blood. Acts xx. 28.

3. For Christ, as I said, had given this Power unto all his Apostles, when he
said, As my Father has sent me, so I send you, etc. Joh. xx. 21. What did he
send them to do? but to gather together in one, the Children of God that were
scattered abroad, and to feed his Flock, as He the good Shepherd had done, Joh.
x. 11. and xi. 52. And therefore we may say here of these words, as Rigaltius
does of the former; He said to Peter, Feed my Sheep; but he does not say, do
thou alone feed them. No; it may be further observed, that our Lord in his
Lifetime, sent them all to the lost Sheep of the House of Israel; Matthew. x. 6,
7. And, a little before this, seeing the People scattered abroad as Sheep
having no Shepherd, he bad his Disciples pray that the Lord would send
Laborers among them: not one (who should depute others) but as many as were
needful to gather in his Harvest. Matthew. ix. 36, etc.

4. And therefore thus the ancient Fathers have expounded these words,
particularly the Roman Clergy themselves in their Letter to the Clergy of
Carthage, where admonishing them of their Duty, (in the absence of St. Cyprian
by reason of the then Persecution) they press them with these words to Peter;
Feed my Sheep; which, they tell them, the rest of the Disciples in like manner
did, and accordingly it was now incumbent upon them also Vice Pastoris
custodire gregem.
, in the room of the Pastor to keep the Flock.

This Launoy Epist. Par. ii. ad Raimundum Formentinum, p. 27, etc.
proves is the Exposition of the Church, and most justly condemns Bellarmine
(and such like Flatterers) as failing in his Duty: Which required him to
expound these words according to the Sense of the whole Church, which is
directly against this Exposition, that Christ here gave this Power to Peter
alone. A great many of the ancient Popes of Rome, he there shows, speak
otherwise; and one of their Neighbors, St. Ambrose, expressly declares, that
those Sheep, and that Flock which Christ bad Peter feed, he did not alone
receive, but he both received them with us, and with him we all received them
L. de Sacerd. dignit. c. 2.
. As much as to say, what Christ said to Peter, he spoke in him to all Bishops.
Which is the Sense of St. Austin in a great many places (the same Author shows
Launoy Epist. pars v. Carolo Magistro.
) making Peter here also to have represented the whole Church: so that when it
was said to him, it was said to all, Love thou me? Feed my Sheep De Agone
Christiano cap. 30.
.

5. But what need any further Testimonies? when this Preface is sung not only
in the Feast of St. Peter, but of all the rest of the Apostles and Evangelists
(except St. John) and on their Octaves in the Roman Church at this very day; We
humbly beseech thee, O Lord, the Eternal Pastor, not to forsake thy Flock, but
preserve it with continued Protection, by thy blessed Apostles: That it may be
governed by the same Rulers, which as VICARS of thy Work, thou did bestow
upon it, to be set PASTORS over it. This is sufficient to show that the Roman
Church it self has anciently believed, this Charge was given to all the
Apostles to feed his Flock, and be the chief Pastors of it Praeesse Pastores.
.

What? will some say, was there nothing here peculiarly spoken to Peter? No
Mystery in those words thrice repeated, and specially directed to him by name,
as you cannot but acknowledge? Yes, no doubt; but it is no more than this, that
Peter of all the rest, had lately thrice denied his Master. This might well
have made Peter himself question his Love to Christ; and move our Lord to ask
him whether he still remained as confident as he was before, that he had a
greater Affection to him than any of his Disciples. For so he begins this
Speech, Love thou me more than these? As he had fancied he did, when he said,
tho all Men shall be offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended;
Matthew. xxvi. 33. The vanity of which thoughts he had found by sad Experience,
he alone denying, nay abjuring his Master. In this Peter was singular, and did
more than any of the rest. For which cause more was to be said to him, and more
was to be done by him, than any of them. He was to answer thrice to three
Questions, which were solemnly put to him, that by a threefold Confession, he
might obliterate his threefold denial.

This is all the Mystery which the ancient Christians could find in this solemn
Speech, made with particular Application to Peter, as may be seen in St. Cyril
of Alexandria In John xxi.
, St. Austin Tract. xlvii. in Johan.
, Greg. Nazianzen Tract. xxix.
, and a long train, which I could set down, of other Fathers; which assures us
that this was the common and literal Exposition of these words, and that they
understood no other reason why our Lord addressed himself only to Peter, tho
other Apostles were present, but only this; that he might declare he would have
Peter notwithstanding his denying him thrice, be confident, upon this
profession of Love to him, he was restored to his Favor, and that he would
have him no less than the rest, look upon the care of his Flock as belonging to
him, who had deserved by his shamefully repeated denial of him, to fall from
that Office, more than any other of his Apostles. For tho they all fled, yet
none denied him but Peter alone; and therefore these words were as if our Lord
had said, Tho there be cause enough for me to reject thee, yet because thou
did repent thee of thy Sin, and do now profess thy Love to me, Feed my
Sheep, no less than the rest of my Apostles to whom I have committed the care
of them; which will sufficiently expose the vanity of the Catholic Scripturist
Seventh's Point, n. 7.
, who bids us (against the sense of all Antiquity) to note that our Lord would
not have required greater Love in Peter rather than in any of the rest, nor
have said, Love thou me more than these? if he had not here intended to give
him higher dignity in Pastorship than the rest. Note rather, good Reader, what
has been said, and these words of St. Cyril, who was a better Scripturist, and
more Catholic than this Jesuit. I will not set them down at large, but only
the Conclusion of them, which are very remarkable, and expressly expound this
Passage as I have done. In that Speech of our Lord, FEED MY SHEEP, there was a
kind of renewal (...), etc. L. xii. in Joh. p. 1120.
of the Apostleship formerly bestowed upon him; doing away the Infamy his of
Falls, and blotting out the cowardice of human Infirmity. Where a great Person
of our own has justly remarked that word renewal Bp Andrew Tortura Tort, p. 51.
: He does not say that our Lord augmented his Dignity (which is the new
Doctrine) but that he renewed it, or restored him to it. Which Dignity he had
said (in the beginning of this Discourse) Peter was advanced unto, when our
Lord named him, not praealiis, above others, but cum aliis (...), Cyril. Ib.
, with other Disciples, to be an Apostle; and therefore now did not give him
more than the rest, but only declared he did not take the forfeiture he had
made of that Dignity, but re-instated him in it, together with the rest.

This is undoubtedly the ancient Sense of Christ's Church; to which I know not
what to add for the Explication of these words, unless it be this, that Peter
had, just before this Discourse of our Lord's, begun to express his earnest
desire to recover his Favor; casting himself into the Sea (when the other
Disciples came by the Ship) to get to our Savior; which may be looked upon as
a token of excessive Love to him, and of a more than ordinary desire to enjoy
his Company. From hence a very learned Writer Dr. Jackson Book iii. upon the
Creed, c. 7.
of this Church, thinks our Lord takes occasion to make this Speech to him (but
whether to check or to cherish that desire he dares not determine) the import
of which he gives in this Paraphrase. Thou have made profession of more than
ordinary Love to me, of readiness to lay down thy Life for my sake, tho all
others, even these thy Fellows, should forsake me; and art willing, I see, by
thy present hazard of it, to make good thy former words. But would thou have
me yet to show thee a more excellent way? I have told it thee long since; Thou
art converted, strengthen thy Bretren. SIMON the Son of JONA, if thou desire
to prove thy self a CEPHAS, or testify the sincerity of thy Faith and Love
(which by the Powers of darkness were of late so grievously shaken) FEED MY
LAMBS, FEED MY SHEEP. Yea, seeing thou thrice deniedst the Shepherd of thy
Soul, I say unto thee the third time, FEED MY SHEEP. Let the Memory of thy
fore-passed threefold Sin; also let this my present threefold admonition,
excite thee unto triple diligence in thy Charge to show such pity and
compassion, as I have showed (...) if you do but so contrive it that Peter have
all under his Care, and the Apostles themselves be his Curates.

But they who can be pleased with such Conceits as these, have little Reverence
for the Holy Scriptures; and it is a great Affront unto our Understandings to
offer us mere Imaginations for Reasons; their own Dreams instead of the Divine
Oracles. If it may consist with Christian Sobriety, to make such a nice
distinction between Lambs and Sheep, as to make them imply different things
(any more than the two several words for feed (...) and (...) and (...).
, and for love thou me, are thought to do) it is far more likely that our
Lord intended to signify the Care that ought to be taken of all Christians
suitable to the diversity of their States. Some of which (as a great Man Dr.
Jacks. B. 3. c. vii. Sect. x.
of our own Church speaks) are to be handled tenderly, and cherished like
Lambs; others to be looked unto like elder Sheep, and to be fed with stronger
Meat, but with less personal or assiduous Attendance.

This has some sense in it, which is very useful, and agreeable to all Men's
Thoughts: but if we set our fancies on work, they abound with vain Conceits of
which we can find no end. For if Lambs, and Lambkins, and Sheep only be St.
Peter's Walk, and he the Shepherd, where are the Rams? (as a no less learned
Dr. Collin's EPPHATA. p. 51.
than ingenious Man asks) they are excepted it seems, and Rams, as Turrianus
fancies, are the Apostles, or their Successors, that is, Bishops: or, as
Cardinal Tolet In xv. Joh, Annot. 3.
( Bellarmin's Equal) will have it, they are Kings and Princes: and so these
two, Apostles and Kings are by this Interpretation both shut out; whom
Bellarmine intended by his Device to have shut into Peter's Fold.

But the graver sort of Writers even in the Roman Church, are ashamed of such
Mysteries as these; which they see may be invented at pleasure. Maldonate in
Joh. xxi. 15, etc.
himself (to say nothing of Jansenius) bids those, who subtly enquire, why
Christ calls his Disciples Lambs, rather than Sheep, think again and again what
they do, and take heed lest they expose themselves to the laughter of the
Learned: for the difference is in word, not in sense; save only that the word
Lamb has something in it more soft and tender, and might be used to commend
them the more to Peter's Affection. For this diminutive form of speech is a
sign of very tender and ardent Love, and more moving than any other; as appears
by the common instance of a dying Father, who expresses more of his own
Affection, and works more upon his Friends, if he says, I commend to you the
Care of my little Babes, than if he simply says, I commend the Care of my
Children to you: Whence it is our Savior sometimes used this form, just before
he parted with his Disciples, John xiii. 33. Little Children, yet a little
while I am with you, etc. and his Apostles also, particularly St. John, who
uses it seven times in his first Epistle, to declare the Greatness and
Tenderness of his Love, and to excite the like in others.

That Writer Maldonate.
indeed pursues no less than the other, the pretensions of the Church of Rome
from these words; though he like not this Curiosity: insisting upon Christ's
committing all the Sheep, (i. e. all Christians) to Peter. Which will not do
their business, since they were no otherwise committed to him than they were to
the rest of Christ's Apostles: who had the same Power given them, and were to
take the same Care of all Christ's Flock that he did. Not that every one of
them was to feed or teach all Christians, simply and universally understood;
for that was impossible, and would have made the Labors of the rest useless,
if one were sufficient: but all indefinitely, so that among them none should be
neglected, but instructed by some or other of them. This must necessarily be
the meaning: for otherwise, our Lord bad Peter do that which could not be done
by one Man; or, if it could have been done, would have made all the other
Apostles idle, and left them nothing to do.

No, say they, we do not mean that Peter alone was to preach the Gospel to all
Nations; so he could not feed all; but this sort of feeding must be allowed to
others: but he alone was to rule and govern in chief, to feed by Authority and
Power over all, whereby he was to prescribe what was to be taught and believed.

But this is to return where we were before, to the signification of the Word
Feed; which cannot mean one thing with respect to Peter, and another with
respect to the rest: but signifies the same Power, be it what it will, common
to them all. If this need any further Explication, those Words of our Lord, Go,
and teach all Nations, Matthew. xxviii. 19. Go ye into all the World, and preach
the Gospel unto every Creature, Mark xvi. 15. will satisfy us that Peter had no
peculiar Authority conferred on him, above the other Apostles. For he gave this
Charge to them all, and it was ushered in with a far more magnificent Preface
to it, than when he spoke here particularly to Peter; for he first acquaints
them with his own Supreme Authority, saying, All Power is given unto me in
Heaven and in Earth, and then adds, Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations,
etc. which is a Commission as large as could be given to Men; including in it
all the Power that was necessary for the establishing and governing those
Churches which they should gather unto Christ.

Who can think that they who had this Authority given them, were themselves to
be taught and governed by Peter alone? Nothing could put such a Conceit into
Men's Minds, but an ambitious desire to advance themselves to the highest
Dominion, by raising Peter above all others: Who, it is evident, did not take
themselves to be all inferior to him; nor to be less able to feed him, than he
was to feed them. For St. Paul (who was herein inferior that he was called
late to be an Apostle, as one born out of due time) did take upon him to feed
Peter, and that with his Staff too (if I may so speak) that is, with his
Reproof; and this at Antioch, St. Peter's own Seat: Where it had been very
proper for him one would think, to have stood upon his peculiar Prerogative, if
he had known of any belonging to him.

Which if he could have challenged, we should still be to seek by what right
the Bishop of Rome claims the same Authority that St. Peter had. O says
Boniface the VIIIth Extravagant. L. 1. Tit. 8. de Major. and Obedientia.
, Christ spoke to Peter and to his Successors, when he said, FEED MY SHEEP. But
how does he prove that? Why, we must take his bare word for it, both that he
spoke these words to Peter's Successors, and to them alone, and that the
Bishops of Rome are his sole Successors: All this he delivers as an infallible
Dictator, and it is not good manners to question that the Universal Flock of
Christ is so committed to them, that whether Greeks or others shall say, they
are not committed to Peter and his Successors, they must necessarily confess
they are none of the SHEEP of Christ. But it is worth any bodies while to read
on to the end of that Extravagant where he asserts this: whereby they will be
infallibly satisfied he was no infallible Interpreter, but a gross Perverter of
the Holy Scriptures. For here it is that he proves in the Church there is both
the Spiritual and the Temporal Power, from those Words, Behold here are two
Swords, Luke xxii. 38. and that the Temporal Power is subject to the Spiritual,
because the Powers that are, are ordained of God (Romans xiii. 1.) for they would
not be in order, unless Sword were under Sword, and Spiritual things are
superior to Temporal. For the Prophecy of Jeremy is verified of the Church and
the Ecclesiastical Power, chapter i. 10. Behold, I have set thee this day over the
Nations, and over the Kingdoms, to root up, and pull down, etc. Therefore the
Temporal Power, if it go out of the way, must be judged by the Spiritual; but
the Supreme Spiritual Power, by God alone, not by Man; as the Apostle bears
witness, 1 Cor. ii. 15. He that is Spiritual judges all things, but he himself
is judged of no Man. After all which goodly Interpretation of Holy Scriptures
(more like Pasquill than the Pope) he concludes most pontifically, We declare,
affirm, define and pronounce, that it is altogether necessary to Salvation, for
every humane Creature to be subject to the Pope of Rome.

This is his Conclusion from FEED MY SHEEP, and from other Places of Scripture,
expounded after the very same fashion as he abuses this: Which tho it be very
presumptuous, yet is not too arrogant for him who could entertain such a
monstrous Conceit, as this which we read in one of his Decrees Sexti Decret. L.
1. Tit. vi. cap. xvii. Fundamenta.
. Where he says, Christ made Peter the Chief, that from him, as from a certain
Head, he might diffuse, as it were, his Gifts into the whole Body; for that
having taken him IN CONSORTIVM INDIVIDVAE TRINITATIS, into the Partnership of
the undivided Trinity: He would have him called that which the Lord himself
was, saying, THOU ART PETER, and upon THIS ROCK I will build my Church. Now if
Peter be thus exalted into the Consortship of the Blessed Trinity, and the Pope
have a just claim unto all that belongs to Peter; then is the Pope no less than
OUR LORD GOD, as some of the Canonists have called him; unto whom Boniface
might well conclude all must be subject upon pain of Damnation.

I conclude this whole Discourse with these three Observations; which are
better grounded than their proud Decrees.

First, It is worth considering, that this lofty Structure which they have
erected in the Church of Rome, of the Supremacy of their Bishop, is built
barely upon three Metaphorical Speeches of our Savior unto St. Peter, without
one word or syllable concerning the Bishop of Rome, or any other Successor. One
would have expected that a thing of this mighty moment should have had a
stronger Foundation, and been delivered in plainer words, than upon this Rock,
I will give thee the Keys, and, Feed my Sheep: and that we should have been
told also in downright terms, who should inherit the supreme Power, supposed
to be conferred by these Metaphorical Speeches when he was dead and gone;
especially, if all Christians in the World must necessarily, upon pain of
Damnation, be subject to Peter's Successor.

And yet so it is, this is all, that a Wit of such height as Bellarmine's (who
is wont to scrape up all that any way seems to make for his purpose) durst
venture to alledg out of the Holy Scriptures for the proof of so weighty a
Point.

The Rhemists indeed in their Annotations upon the New Testament, make bold
with two places more, which they apply to this business; but with so little
Reason (not to say so ridiculously) that he had the discretion to let them
alone.

One is in St. Matthew xiv. 29. where, upon the word walked, they have this
wise Note. Peter (says St. Bernard) walking upon the Waters as Christ did,
DECLARED himself the ONLY VICAR of Christ: which should be Ruler not over one
People, but over ALL: For many Waters are many People. And from hence he
deduceth the like Authority and Jurisdiction, to his Successors the Bishops of
Rome.

And a goodly Deduction it is, for which they are mightily beholden to St.
Bernard, who could spy such a notable Declaration of St. Peter's sole
Vicarship, and draw from thence such a fine Argument for the Pope's Authority,
as no ancient Doctor besides himself was able to find in this place. But must
his Fancies pass for substantial Proofs of the Bishop of Rome's Supremacy,
which was raised to a great height in his days? At this rate no body need want
Proofs for the most detestable Heresies, which he shall please to devise, if
such Conceits as these be allowed for Arguments.

And their second Annotation is like to this, of which, for ought I know, they
may have the honor to be the Inventors, without the help of St. Bernard. For
because our Savior, when there were two Ships, went in that which was Simon's
(Luke v. 3.) and thence taught the People, they gravely conclude, that
undoubtedly he taught out of that Ship and not the other, on purpose to signify
the Church resembled by Peter's Ship, and that in it is the Chair of Christ,
and only true preaching. By which, it is evident, they intended the Reader
should understand, that as Peter was Owner of that Ship, so he and his
Successors are Rulers of the whole Church. For upon the following Verses ( ver.
7, 10.) they observe how Peter had so much work, that he was fain to call for
help, and joined those who were in the other Ship as Copartners in the
Preaching of the Gospel. As much as to say, the Work was committed to him
alone, who took in such help as he needed. He was the only Pastor, and all the
rest (as was said before) his Curates. For, they tell us, all this aforesaid
did properly mean, his Travels in the Conversion of the World, and his
Prerogative therein before all Men; as is evident by Christ's special Promise
made to him SEVERALLY and APART in this place, that he should be made the TAKER
OF MEN. What then became of all the rest? Were they to sit still in their Ship
and do nothing? O no, by no means; He gives to other (say these Annotators)
the like Office as to Peter 's Co-operators and Coadjutors.

Before they said that Peter called them and joined them to himself, as
Copartners in the preaching of the Gospel; but now having better, it seems,
bethought themselves, they say Christ appointed them to this Office; yet still
they are but as Peter's Co-operators, and Assistants. He was the Taker of Men,
and converted the World; they only came in to his help, and brought all the
Fish into his Net. Their Ship signified nothing, it was Peter alone that
signified all. Their Ship stands for a mere Cipher; his Ship is the Figure of
the whole Church, where he governs, and they are but helps in Government, mere
Co-adjutors unto him, the great, and indeed, only Bishop over all.

Who can endure such Annotations as these, in which Men play with the Holy
Scriptures as they please, and play with them in so saucy a manner, as to
interpret them directly against the Scriptures. In which the Apostles call
themselves Workers together with Christ (2 Cor. vi. 1.) employed by him to be
his Co-operators, not St. Peter's; who was so far from being the Converter of
the World, that his Travels and Pains were most bestowed in the least part of
it. Which Bellarmine, I suppose, saw well enough, and therefore was so wise, as
not to mention such Allegories. Which may serve to entertain the Fancies of
silly People, but are the just scorn of those that have any measure of
Spiritual Understanding: Who have heard perhaps, that the Fathers sometimes
resembled the Church of Christ to Peter's Ship; but not that they ever dreamed
of making him, and the Bishop of Rome after him, the Governor of the whole
Church, because he was Master of that Ship.

There is nothing more unaccountable than such a Conclusion, unless it be their
pretense to Infallibility, who are mere Triflers when they meddle with the Holy
Scriptures; which is the next thing I would have observed.

Secondly; If the danger of wresting the Scriptures be a good reason why the
common People should not read them, then no body at all should look into them;
for their most learned Priests have wrested them more than the common People.
And that against their Oath, whereby they are bound to interpret Scripture
according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers, who all agree that what was
said to Peter in these three places belonged to all the Apostles; whose
Writings, as the rest of the Scriptures, have by none been more foully abused
than by the Popes of Rome, whose Interpretations and Applications of them,
should they be collected in a Book, would make one of the most shameful pieces
that has been yet extant in the World.

Thirdly; And let the Reader observe once more how ill they of that Church are
agreed about the Interpretation of these three places of Scripture, which are
the Subject of this Discourse.

There are four Interpretations of the first place, Thou art Peter, etc. (as
has been elsewhere observed) which have had great Authors in the Roman
Church, as well as others. Some by Rock understand Peter's FAITH in the
Confession he had newly made (which by the way, Joh. Ekius L. 1. contra Luther
de Petri Primatu, c. 13.
says in the Age before us, no body denied to be the sense, and bids Luther
name the Man that said otherways) Others CHRIST himself, whom Peter had
confessed to be the Son of God; others PETER, and others ALL the APOSTLES;
which last is the Exposition of Paschasius Radbertus, the famous Broacher of
Transubstantiation, whose words are these: L. iv. in Matthaeum.
The Church of God is built not only upon Peter, but upon all the Apostles. Now
they who follow the first and second sense, can find no Prerogative here for
St. Peter above the rest of the Apostles; and they that adhere only to the
third (in opposition to the other, as they now commonly do) are confuted by
those who assert the fourth, that these words were spoken to all the Apostles.

And indeed they are all forced to confess that nothing is here promised, which
is not contained in the next words, And I will give thee the Keys, etc. But
what this is, none of them can certainly tell. For one sort (such as Cajetan)
hold the Keys contain more than binding and loosing; which Bellarmine says is
false; nay a thing never heard of in the Church. And consequently this Power of
binding and loosing being promised to them all ( Matthew. xviii. 18.) the Power
of the Keys was promised to them all; and Christ promising nothing but what he
performed, he gave therefore the highest Power to them all, which is contained
in the Keys.

Here they are at a great loss, and cannot agree how to bring themselves off
from this difficulty, which strips Peter of his Supremacy. Therefore some have
devised the abovenamed Conceit, that Peter alone had the Keys given him as
their Ordinary, and they as his Legates. But this seems too gross unto others,
who acknowledge they all had the Keys immediately from God, as much as Peter, if
they be considered as Apostles, but not if they be considered as Bishops and
Pastors; for these two Offices they fancy they had, the Apostolical and the
Pastoral Dignity; the first immediately from Christ, the other by and under
Peter. But this is in a manner, the same thing in a little finer dress, which
was said before. Therefore others unsatisfied with this, that the Apostles
should receive their Jurisdiction from Peter, have ordered the matter on this
fashion, that Peter might use the Keys alone, but they not without him.

But Sixtus Senensis cannot digest this; and therefore has devised a threefold
Power in Peter, of Apostleship, of Order, and of the Kingdom Biblioth. Sanct.
l. v. Annot. clxix.
. With respect to the first he grants Paul was equal to Peter, because he had
the Office of Preaching the Gospel not from Peter but from God, as much as
Peter himself had. With respect to the second also he acknowledges the truth of
what St. Jerome writes against Jovinian, that all the Apostles equally received
the Keys (let the Catholic Scripturist mind that) and firmly laid the
Foundation of the Church: and of what he says to Evagrius; All Bishops are
equal, because all the Apostles were so. But then with respect to the last,
viz. the Power of the Kingdom, and Authority over all Bishops and Churches,
Peter was Head of all. That is, Peter must some way or other be above all the
rest, but how they do not know.

For Cardinal Baronius Ad An. 34. n. ccv.
will have it that all the Apostles had the use of the Keys equally with Peter,
by the ORDINARY Power of remitting Sins; and by this distinction expounds the
forenamed words of St. Jerome. But his Brother, Cardinal Bellarmine, (being
aware that if Peter had the Keys more than the rest, by an EXTRAORDINARY Power,
his Authority would not descend upon his Successors) says quite contrary, that
the Apostles had the Power of the Keys after an EXTRAORDINARY manner, and Peter
only by an ORDINARY L. 1. de Romans Pont. c. xii.
. Thus what one builds up, his Fellow pulls down. There is a Confusion of
Tongues in this Babel, which they labor to erect. They cannot agree so much as
about the Terms, wherein they deliver this new Doctrine. For it is a pure
Invention, without any Reason, or any Authority for it: but it must be so,
though they know not how, because it is their pleasure.

As all the rest is, which they draw from the last place, Feed my Sheep. In
which they say Christ gave the Power which he had promised: and therefore since
he promised it to all, he gave it to all, if any thing was given here. And yet,
against such clear demonstration, they will have this to be a peculiar Grant to
Peter: no body knows how or why, but because it seems good to them. For this is
so little approved by others, that they fairly grant the ancient Opinion was
(and make it theirs) that these Words were not spoken to Peter in a Personal,
but in a Public Capacity; as he represented all the Apostles. Insomuch that
they can find nothing peculiar to him, in the word FEED, because of that of St.
Austin's De Agone Christ. c. 30.
; When Christ said to Peter, he said to all, Feed my Sheep: nor in the word
SHEEP, because St. Ambrose says (in the Place before named) Those Sheep not
only Peter received; but he received them with us, and we received them with
him. Which things are so evident, that it has brought some in that Communion
to this Conclusion, that out of none of these three Places, nor all of them
together, can be gathered so much as the bare Primacy of St. Peter Du Pin de
antiqua Eccles. Discipl. dissert. iv. P. 311.
, after that manner which Bellarmine collects it: but it must be gathered thus;
that in those places Peter bears the Person of the Church, speaks for the rest
of the Apostles, and is himself spoken unto by Christ in their Name, as the
first and principal.

Behold then the UNITY of which they boast in that Church; and how little
CERTAINTY there is among them, even of the main point of their Faith, and as
Bellarmine Praefatio in L. de Poutifie. Romans
makes bold to call it, the Sum of Christian Religion.

It stands upon such a tottering Foundation, that, finding how little these
Texts in the New Testament avail them, they ransacked the Old, to fetch some
feeble support unto it from thence. And the late Catholic Scripturist fancies
the Old Testament helps them thus far in this Point, that it teaches Seventh
Point. n. 1, 3.
, That among the Priests of the Old Law, one was chosen successively to be the
highest and chief Priest. Commanding all such Causes, as are Ecclesiastical
Causes, to be brought to the Tribunal of the High Priest, and his Sentence to
be obeyed even under pain of Death. And for this he alleges Deuteronomy. xvii. 8.

But this only proves how ignorant such Catholics as he are in the Holy
Scriptures. Where it is impossible for him to find that the High Priests were
chosen successively; for they had that Dignity by Inheritance, in one certain
Family, and not by Election. And as for the Power which he ascribes to them
(though he promises us, in his Preface, to produce loud speaking Texts, for all
the Points we mislike in their Religion) there is not so much as a whisper of
it, in the place he alleges. The words of which he did wisely not to quote,
but only the Chapter and Verse: Which we, that have liberty to read the Bible,
can easily discern, speak loudly against him; and confute that Doctrine which
he would confirm by them. If there arise, says Moses in that Text, a Matter too
hard for thee in Judgment, between Blood and Blood, between Plea and Plea, and
between Stroke and Stroke, being matters of Controversy within thy Gates: then
shall thou arise, and get thee up into the place, which the Lord thy God shall
choose. And thou shall come unto the Priests the Levites, and unto the Judge
that shall be in those days and enquire, and they shall show thee the sentence
of Judgment. And thou shall do according to the Sentence, which they of that
place (which the Lord shall choose) shall show thee, etc.

I need not recite the rest at large, to the end of the 12th Verse: For every
understanding Reader must evidently see, without going further, that he speaks
not a Syllable of the Power of the High Priest, but of the Authority of the
Supreme Tribunal, or Court among the Jews (which consisted of a great number of
Persons) wherein all Controversies, which could not be ended in inferior
Courts, were to be finally determined, without any Appeal.

In which Supreme Court the High Priest was so far from being the Chief, that
he was not so much as admitted to be a Member of it, unless he was a wise Man.

And then, he did not bear an absolute Sway there, but the Sentence was passed
by the whole Council; as appears (not merely from the Jewish Writers, but) from
these repeated Admonitions in the very Body of this Law. THEY shall show thee
the Sentence of Judgment, ver. 9. and thou shall do according to that thing,
which THEY of that Place show thee: and observe to do according to all that
THEY inform thee ( ver. 10.) according to the Sentence of the Law which THEY
shall teach thee; according to the Judgment which THEY shall tell thee: thou
shall not decline from the Sentence which THEY shall show thee ( ver. 11.)
Where he must be blind who does not see six flat Contradictions to the
Assertion of this Catholic Scripturist, in this very place which he produces,
to prove that Moses here sets up the Tribunal of the High Priest, and orders
his Sentence to be obeyed upon pain of Death, in Causes Ecclesiastical.

This was neither his Court, nor were Causes judged by his Sentence, nor is
there one word here of Causes Ecclesiastical: but only of Civil; between Blood
and Blood, Plea and Plea, Stroke and Stroke: unless we suppose the Word we
translate Stroke, relates to the Plague of the Leprosy, which belonged to the
Priests to judge of it: but excluded Men from all Civil as well as Sacred
Society.

And if the utmost be granted that can be supposed [that there is mention here
of something appertaining to Spiritual Causes] yet it must be also allowed by
all Men of sense, that this Text speaks most of Civil Causes: and therefore can
no more prove an absolute Obedience to be due to Spiritual than to Civil
Governors.

All which considered, I do not see but Dr. Reynolds had reason to say, they
might as well call in the help of the first words of Genesis [In the beginning
God created the Heaven and the Earth] as this Verse in Deuteronomy, to support
the Popes Supremacy. For there, as Pope Boniface VIII. very gravely observes
(in the forementioned Extravagant) Moses says, God created the Heavens and the
Earth, in the beginning, not in the beginnings; and therefore he who resists
the Popes Authority, resists the Ordinance of God; unless (with Manichaeus) he
feign two beginnings (or Principles) which is false and heretical.

And by such fine fetches as this Innocent III Decret Greg. L. iv. Tit. 17. c.
13. per venerabilem.
proved his Power over the whole Church from these words in Deuteronomy: But he
did not mince the matter (as this Catholic Scripturist does) but stoutly
affirmed that the Pope may exercise Temporal Jurisdiction, as well as
Spiritual, not only in the Churches Patrimony, but in other Countries also, in
certain Causes. For Deuteronomy being by Interpretation a Second Law, it proves
by the very force of the word, that what is here decreed (in Deuteronomy. xvii. 8.)
ought to be observed in the New Testament. And then the place which the Lord
has chosen, is the Apostolic See, viz. Rome; the Levitical Priests, are his
Brethren the Cardinals; the High Priest or Judge, is the Pope, the Vicar of him
who is a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedec, appointed by God the
Judge of Quick and Dead: the first sort of Judgments between Blood and Blood, is
meant of Criminal and Civil Causes; the last, between Stroke and Stroke, is
meant of Ecclesiastical and Criminal; the middle, between Plea and Plea,
belongs to both Ecclesiastical and Civil; in which if any one contemn the
Sentence of the Apostolic See, he is doomed to die; that is, to be separated
by the Sentence of Excommunication as a dead Man, from the Communion of the
Faithful.

Nothing is more evident than that, according to this Catholic Exposition of
Pope Innocent, the Bishop of Rome is, by the Divine Law, Head of all
Christians, as well in Civil Causes as in Ecclesiastical. This Text in
Deuteronomy proves the one as much as the other: that is, it proves just
nothing, but that the Mystery of Iniquity wrought very high, when such mystical
Senses of Holy Scripture were swallowed glibly, to confirm the chiefest Mystery
of the Romish Faith.

Perhaps the Catholic Scripturist will say, that they now argue from this
place only by a parity of Reason; that there must be but one High Priest among
Christians, because their was no more among the Jews: To which they may have an
Answer, when they prove that Judaea was as big as the whole Christian World.

That Is as hopeful a Task for him to labor in, as any he has undertaken. And
so I take my leave of him till he has finished it; for it will be too tedious
to follow him to his next Text out of the New Testament, Matthew. xxiii. 2. which
he calls an unanswerable Text concerning the High Priests of the old Law. Upon
the Chair of Moses have sitten the Scribes and Pharisees; all therefore
whatsoever they shall say unto you, observe and do it. For no body but himself
can see a Syllable here concerning the High Priests, who did not sit in Moses
his Chair, but were the Successors of Aaron. And besides that, this place
belongs to another Head of their Doctrine, about the Popes Infallibility; of
which if this be a proof, it likewise proves the Infallibility of Annas and
Caiphas, and justifies those that crucified our Blessed Lord and Savior.

THE END.
LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Richard Chiswel at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1688.

ERRATA.
PAge 110. Marg. line 4. for Tract, read Orat. xxix. P. 111. l. 2. r. of his
Falls. Ib. Marg. penult. r. (...). P. 134. l. 20. r. ransack.

