A TESTIMONY AND WARNING Of the Presbytery of EDINBVRGH, Against a late
PETITION, Tending (In the Scope and Design thereof) to the Overturning of the
Ordinances and Truth of CHRIST in this Church. October. 5. Anno Dom. 1659.

Printed in the Year, 1659.

A TESTIMONY and WARNING of the Presbytery of Edinburgh, Against a late
PETITION, tending (in the scope and design thereof) to the Overturning of the
Ordinances and Truth of CHRIST in this Church.
October 5. 1659.
IT cannot but sadly afflict all tenderhearted Christians, and lovers of the
interests of Christ, that the Lord having for diverse years set the beauty of
His Ornament in majesty among us, and afterward having set up His fire in Zion
and His furnace in Jerusalem, to take proof of our proficiency under His
Ordinances, there should so much dross and scum appear among us; that our
outward chastisments should be attended with so many spiritual judgments, and
that the licentiousness of the times has not only loosed the reins to
Atheism, irreligion and profanity in many, and opened the door to Seducers from
without, to break-in upon this Church; but that even from among our selves some
have arisen, speaking perverse things, who have spit in their Mothers face in
the day of rebuke, and made defection from the Doctrine of Christ and His
precious Ordinances, which she in mercy enjoys. As these things (in the holy
and righteous dispensation of God) have bred us no small exercise and grief of
heart in our stations; So it cannot but augment our sorrow, when we find that
distemper not only continuing to be a snare and trial to the Lord's people
under our charge, but that it is upon the growing hand: And that now some men
are not contented to make apostasy themselves, and to do what they can, by
their example and activity in seduction, to ensnare others; But they will also
bend their utmost endeavors to pull down the hedge about the Lord's Vineyard,
and to overturn all settlement of Religion among us, that so a liberty may be
proclaimed, and encouragement held forth, to all who please to run wild (under
a pretense of new light) in all abominations of errors and delusions, until
(if mercy prevent it not) the Lord's Plantation here be turned into an howling
wilderness, and so the way be prepared for Antichrist (who is not asleep in
these times, and whose hand is, not without cause, suspected by the sober godly
in these actings) to make a prey of us, Or the minds of people be so plagued
with Atheism, by reason of their own and others reeling in the matters of God,
that they will prove as capable of an impression of Heathenisme as of
Christianity.

Of these pernicious practices, we have of late met with a sad instance, (which
calls us forth to give our Testimony at this time) in that some, upon designs
best known to themselves, have projected, and (as we have the charity to
believe) ensnared others to join with them in a Petition, for making void and
abolishing all Civil Sanctions establishing the Doctrine, Discipline and
Government of this Church, (the fruits of the many prayers and sad sufferings
of the Godly in this and former ages) that so they may enjoy a vast Toleration
and encouragement in embracing vilest errors, which they are pleased to set
off under the specious names of just Liberties and Gospel-priviledges. This
unnatural practice, proceeding from among our selves, and from some of these
who once pretended to speak of a great blessedness in building up what now
they would destroy, and in enjoying what now they abominate; though we believe
it will not signify much, upon the account of those who prosecute it, with
discerning men who know them, and whom they grieve in this matter; And in that
respect we could very easily have passed it as a matter of little moment: Yet we
could not but tremble to find such a Spirit among us. And as we are called of
God to stand in the gap, in our station, wherever any hazard to Truth and
Religion appears in this Church: So we held our selves more nearly concerned in
this business, seeing it is asserted to be the Petition of some within our
bounds and charge. And though we have hitherto contented our selves with
bearing testimony against their way in our ordinary Ministry, if peradventure
God might be pleased to reclame them from the error of their way; Yet being
informed of the uncessant activity of some of them to have their design
effectuated, we could not satisfy our selves, as having sufficiently exonered
our selves to their consciences, or done our duty to these of our respective
charges, without the superadding of this joint Testimony.

If we should insist to descant upon the Title and Subscribers of that
Petition, we might say many things, which neither would be pleasant to them to
hear, not have we any delight to rake into. While they design themselves well
affected persons, if they mean in reference to piety and Religion, it would be
but little pleasing if we should give the true characters of sundry of them who
are known to us, and within our bounds, what some of them have been in all the
turnings of these late times, and what they yet are; This will (we trust) make
our pains needless as to this purpose, that as it is known, how the body of
the truly godly, Ministers and people, throughout the land, do abominate and
mourn over their way, however they have differed in other things among
themselves; So we are confident, wherever they are known, their piety (whatever
it be) will not be persuasive to commend this course in the esteem of any
discerning godly men. We wish they had given a greater proof of tenderness and
piety, than to assert in that very Title, that they are persons in and about
Edinburgh. For, unless they make most of the corners of this Land to be in and
about it, this will be found a manifest untruth; There being but a few of the
Names we have seen at that Petition within all our bounds, and the most of them
gathered in the Country, many miles from this place. That which we think most
strange in this conveighance, is, That diverse persons, professedly opposite to
the way of the Quakers, whose principles and way have been already laid open to
the world, in their true colors; yet do join with them in signing that
Petition, to which the hands of most of that Sect are gathered through the
Country. This as it gives us cause to believe the truth of what is credibly
informed, of their gathering hands to several Copies of that Petition in
several parts of the Country (some of the Petitioners little knowing with
whom they joined in it) which at last they put together in one paper: So it
gives us to understand what a liberty the designers of that Petition intend,
even no other than what will comprehend these Quakers who join with them, some
of whom have published in print under their hands, not only vile reproaches
against the Ministry of this Church, but gross errors against the truth of
God, as namely (to instance in some particulars) That the godly in this life
are without sin; That the light whereby every man that comes into the world is
enlightened, is not the light of nature, but a perfect light sufficient to save
them who will follow it; yea, Christ himself; That it is not a natural man's
duty to pray; That men are able to fulfill the law of God; and that it is a
Doctrine of Devils to say, God commands men that which they are not able to
perform; That the Scriptures are not the word of God, but the declaration of
the word, and the words.

These and diverse other gross errors about Election and Reprobation,
Universal Redemption, etc. published by some of the Petitioners, do abundantly
clear what a deluge of abominations they plead to be secured in. And albeit
they have endeavored to conveigh their design more closely in their Petition;
Yet their Agents have spoken their mind more fully in their Proviso: wherein
they crave, that none dissenting from the National Profession of the Doctrine
and Church Discipline here established, be debarred or molested, but enjoy
equal protection and encouragment in the exercise of their Church-profession,
provided they profess faith in Jesus Christ, and do not make use of this
liberty to color any licentions practices, and it be not extended to Popery or
Prelacy: and all this notwithstanding any laws made to the contrary. This is
indeed a Toleration as large as any that ever has been pleaded-for by the
wildest of Heretics, and very far from that modesty that has appeared in any
judicious and sober men, though otherwise enclining to moderation in some
differences. Hereby they would cut the sinnews of all coercive power or censure
in matters of Religion, either by the Magistrate, or by the Church, and are not
content to be secured against any Civil restraint to be laid on, unless also
all Civil Sanctions establishing the Reformed Religion and exercise of Church
discipline be abrogated, or made void. They do not content themselves to plead
for Toleration in matters of Church-constitution and Government, but in matters
of Doctrine also, and that in such a latitude, that if they profess faith in
Christ, they must go free; And, what Heretics, how vile soever, will not
profess so much, if they turn not Heathens, Turks, or Jews? All these other
cautions, wherewith former concessions of liberty to dissenters, are guarded
(as, that they must profess faith in the holy Trinity, acknowledge the holy
Scriptures to be the revealed Word of God, that they publish not horrid
Blasphemies, that they revile not the Ministry or their Assemblies, nor disturb
them in the worship of God, etc.) all these are here passed over in a general
of professing faith in Christ, and being free of licentious practices. And we
might very justly enquire of them, upon their principles, why they would
seclude Popery and Prelacie, more than the rest, and that not only considering
how the very body of Popish Doctrine may consist with professing faith in
Christ, as well as other damnable errors; And learned men before us have
demonstrated what a progress Popish opinions have already made under the
color of new lights (if not also by Popish Emissaries their insinuating
themselves among several Sects for that effect) But we would gladly know what
arguments they can bring from the Word of God for secluding those as corrupt
Opinions and Religions, which will not militate as well against other errors,
even owned by some of them. This also may further discover the design of these
Petitioners, and the iniquity of their desires, that they are not contented to
plead for forbearance, or protection only, in their way, but that they, though
never so erroneous, enjoy equal encouragement with the Sound and Orthodox. A
thing condemned even by those who yet in many cases plead for a Toleration, and
most unjust in it self, that those who profess the Truth, should not only
extend pity to spare deluded men, but encourage and maintain them in their
pernicious ways.

We cannot but be confident, that, through the blessing of God, the very
discovery of the iniquity of this course, will break the snare to all those who
are not given up to wantonness of mind, for not receiving the Truth in love,
and are not driving designs to root the true Reformed Religion out of this
Land. And indeed, if men turn not Scepticks and void of all Religion, but do
acknowledge there is truth and error in the world, and that men ought to be
established in the present Truth, and not to reel every day, 2 Pet. 1.12. (for,
how else could men either preach any thing as a truth, or how could they die
with comfort, or suffer for any truth, as not knowing but a new day might
produce new light?) then it must certainly be an iniquity to let men run loose
to do what is right in their own eyes, and to give no less encouragement to
the grossest of Heretics than to the faithful friends of Truth. If Heresy be
a work of the flesh no less than Adultery, Murder, etc. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. If
erroneous Doctrines be damnable in themselves, 2 Pet. 2.1. and no less
prejudicial to the souls of others than a Gangrene in any member is to the
body, 2 Timothy 2.17, 18. And if Seducers by these doctrines be no less dreadful
to the Church than grievous wolves are to flocks, Act. 20.29. It must be great
cruelty, not only to suffer, but to encourage such to run on to their own
perdition, and to seek the perdition of others, provided they hold fast a
general profession of faith in Jesus Christ. If unity in Doctrine and Worship
be a mean of establishing and multiplying the Church; (as the practice of the
Apostles makes clear, who finding the Disciples troubled, and their souls
subverted with disputes and errors brought-in among them, Act. 15.24. do
establish them and contribute to their increase; by their Decree suppressing
the error, Act. 16.4, 5.) And if, upon this account, a Ministry be appointed
to bring the people of God to unity in the truth, and keep them in it, Ephesians.
4.5, 8, 11. with 12, 13, 14. It must he an unquestionable cruelty to seek
encouragement to set up that which cannot but retard the progress of the
Gospel, and frustrate the labors of the Ministry. In the days, wherein God
has promised that he will give his people not only one heart, but one way,
Jer. 32.39. And that not only the Lord, but His Name also, (or Ordinances and
way of profession) shall be one, Zech. 14.9. and wherein Christ has prayed,
that His people may be one, as a special mean to prove the truth of Christian
Religion, Joh. 17.20, 21, 22, 23. They must be very sinfully employed, who in
stead of mourning over, or seeking to repair the too many breaches that already
are, or being sensible of the sad prejudices redounding thereby to the work of
the Gospel, do bestir themselves so actively to multiply them, and to be
encouraged in so doing. And if such a Toleration has produced sad fruits, even
in Churches where Religion is not settled, How much more abominable is it, to
seek it in this Church, which, in the great mercy of God, is settled in
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, to the preservation whereof, both
Nations are engaged by the Oath of God? This certainly is nothing else but to
endeavor to pluck up the hedge planted by God about His Vineyard, and to open
a door to the atheistical and profane under pretense of new lights, publicly
to avow their contempt of all Ordinances and Truths of the Gospel, to the grief
and saddening of all the truly godly.

It is neither necessary nor possible, in this brief Testimony, to descend
particularly into this Controversy, or to condescend upon the many
qualifications necessary for the right stating thereof, or to propound and
vindicate the arguments confirming the truth. These are extant in the learned
Writings of others before us, to be perused by all who desire satisfaction, and
these Petitioners have saved us a labor, in propounding their desires in so
large terms that they seclude nothing that beats the name of Christianity,
except only the names of Popery and Prelacy: Nor will it suffice them that any
should plead for a permission or forbearance to them, unless they be
encouraged and countenanced also. Therefore we shall only give a brief hint of
our principles and grounds in this Truth of God, for the establishing of the
souls of his people.

We are not ignorant what an odium is cast upon us and the Government of Christ
established in this Church, as if it were full of rigidity, and tyrannically
executed by us against all who dissent from us. But as we have been very
sparing to censure any who have made defection from the Doctrine and Government
of this Church; So the world, and the consciences of these who at any time have
been censured, will bear witness for us, that these Censures have been drawn
forth with all meekness and long-suffering, after the use of all previous
means enjoined us by Christ. And as to our principles, we profess we are very
far from that rigor which some would charge upon us, as if we held that every
lesser difference should bring men presently under the lash either of Civil or
Ecclesiastic Censure, and that no difference of opinion can be suffered by us.
We are clear that in many things of common practice in a Church, there may be
an agreement by Accommodation, though difference of judgment remain about the
things themselves. We acknowledge also that men's opinions do not fall under
this Question, so long as they do not spread and divulge them to infect others,
nor endeavor to propagate them by schismatical and scandalous ways: We are
also convinced, that all matters of difference are not of alike weight and
importance, so that men must either renounce their opinions, or else incur
Censure, or be denied protection: We do readily yield that (as we all prophecy
but in part, so) men in a Church may compose debates, by putting an end to
contentions, though they be not all of one judgment; and herein we judge the
Apostle has set the rule before us, 1 Cor. 11.16. We yield also, that as
severest Censures and Punishments are not to be inflicted for every offense; So
a great difference is to be put betwixt active Seducers, and them who in
simplicity are misled. But (judging it needless, in dealing with these
Petitioners, to dip any further in this business) this we hold to be agreeable
to the Word of God, That Christian Magistrates and Church-judicatories, ought
to be so far from conniving at, or encouraging, that they ought in their
respective places, and with that prudence and meekness that becomes,
endeavor to restrain such gross and damnable errors, as are already vented
by some of these Petitioners, and may be comprehended under the general terms
of their desire, and the promoters thereof; and thawhether they err in the
matters of faith, or in what relates to the stan, ding of a visible Church,
which is the pillar upon which truth hangs and which being overturned,
exposes the truth to hazard.

That this duty is incumbent to every Church in reference to her own members,
is most clearly asserted in Scripture, where stopping the mouths of Heretics,
their rejection and excommunication are recommended by precept and example,
Tit. 1.10, 11. and, 3.10. 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. We find Churches censured by Christ
himself for the neglect of Discipline against false Teachers, Rev. 2.14, 20.
and others commended for their zeal in this particular, though found faulty in
other things, Rev. 2.2, 4. And seeing there are no Churches within these
Nations, though of a different Constitution and Government from ours, who do
not claim and exercise a power of Discipline over their own members; we see not
how the like liberty can be denied to this Church over her own members, when
they make defection from her. As for Civil Powers, we are sorry to find, that
however the Scriptures promise them, as Nursing Fathers to the Church; Yet many
now would turn them mere Spectators of the wrongs done to Christ and His truth,
so long as their civil peace is not disturbed, as if they should be Gallio's to
care for none of those things, and as if equal protection and encouragment, of
error as well as truth, were the only duty of Christian Magistrates, which
Histories record to have been the great engine of Julian the Apostate for
overthrowing the Christian Religion. A principle this is contrary to the very
light of nature in the most refined Nations, none of which would admit
Innovations in Religion, though some did otherwise upon politic
considerations, making Religion a slave to their interests. And though they
erred in the application; Yet in that and the like general principles the Lord
leads them as witnesses against His people in their way of serving the true
God, Jer. 2.10, 11. That the Law of Moses was expressly contrary to this
Toleration, is, we suppose, denied by none, and yet the most of these plea's
now urged for it, taken from the fallibility of men, liberty of conscience,
etc. were of as great force then as now. Nor will they persuade conscientious
men that these do not oblige us now, till they make it out that moral
transgressions, (such as these are) punishable then by God's command, must have
a law of immunity and encouragement now, and that what is enjoined in the
fourth Command, is not moral and perpetual, that Parents and Masters in their
families, and Magistrates within their gates, should see to the Sanctification
of the Sabbath, and consequently to the Worship of God publicly performed on
that day. And this we conceive does so much the more strongly conclude, that we
find Law and Practice for this, before the judicial Laws were published; Not
only Abraham commanding his children and household to keep the way of the Lord,
Genesis 18.19. and Jacob suppressing false worship in his family, Genesis 35.2, 3, 4.
But even in Job's time and Country, it was a received Maxim, that Idolatry
(as well as Adultery) was punishable by the Magistrate, Job 31.9, 10, 11. It is
not to any purpose to except, that these Laws of Moses did chiefly strike (if
not only) against gross Idolatry and blasphemies: For neither do we urge that
every error should be punished, nor do we know what height of Blasphemies men
may come unto (as we see by too sad experience) who yet may profess all that
is requited by these Petitioners, in men to be encouraged. And withal, we
find godly Kings of Judah have extended these Laws further than to such gross
abominations: for, godly Josiah did not only cut off the Priests who sacrificed
to Idols on the high places, 2 King. 23.20. but degraded these who sacrificed
there even to the Lord only, 2 King. 23.8, 9. as these differences of high
places may be further cleared, from 2 Chronicles. 14.3, 5. with chap. 15.17. and
chap. 33.17. As for the days of the Gospel, albeit Magistrates were not
Christians when the New Testament was written, yet we find sufficient ground
to clear us yet further, that these Laws given of old by God are still in
force. For, it is fore-prophesied, that the Kings of the earth shall destroy
Antichrist, Revel. 17.16. And why ought they not also suppress other errors,
which are but limbs of Antichristian Doctrine, and the promoters thereof little
Antichrists? 1 Job. 2.18. And we find, that in times when Christian
Magistrates were wanting, it did please the Lord to interpose, in a more
immediate way, for punishing obstinate offenders, whether in the matter of
faith or manners. We find also that the Magistrate's power under the New
Testament, is given him for the punishment of evil doers, Romans 13.3, 4. Now,
Seduction being an evil deed, 2 Job. 10, 11. and the Text speaking indefinitly
of all such, we would take heed of obtruding our distinctions upon it; And that
so much the rather as Christians are to pray for this benefit by Magistrates,
that they may live under them not only in all bonesty, but in all godliness
also, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. which can never be without soundness in Doctrine, and
purity in Worship. And whereas some except, that unbelief and covetousness are
also evil deeds, and yet not punished by the Magistrate; We grant, that
unbelief and covetousness in the heart, do not fall under the cognition of the
Magistrate (as neither is he to cognosce on simple opinions in the mind) Yet,
unbelief professed and propagated, and covetousness put in practice to the
prejudice of others, ought to be punished by him.

We know this truth of God is traduced, as a persecuting of men for their
conscience, and an encroachment upon the liberty purchased them by Christ. But
as we disclaim troubling of men for the simple light of their Consciences, if
it break not forth in doctrine and Practices; So the Scripture has taught us,
that persecution is only a putting men to suffer for righteousness, and not
the restraining of abominable errors. And as we know men's consciences are not
their supreme rule, nor lawless things; So liberty to err and seduce, to vent
lies and father them upon the God of truth, etc. is no part of that liberty
purchased to us by the death of Christ; But it is in effect a captivity and
snare to be entangled therewith, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. and chap. 3.6, 7. and to be
servants to corruption under pretense of liberty, 2 Pet. 2.19. Yea, to father
this upon Christian liberty, favors rankly of that old way of turning the
grace of our God into lasciviousness. We are not insensible, how this truth of
God has been abused and put to the rack by Antichrist and his followers, to
crush the professors of truth: But we have learned, that no truth, though
abused, must be cast away; nor yet because truth is suppressed by the enemies
of the Gospel, must therefore errors be spared by the friends of Christ? We
acknowledge also it is a mercy, if in sad times truth get, were it but a
Toleration; Yet we cannot therefore allow, that error should have so much. Nor
do we look upon it as any convincing argument, to tell us, that were our selves
at the like disadvantage with our Profession, we might be as ready to plead for
a Toleration as others: For, we find Christ and his Apostles, when conveened
before Magistrates, never made use of that defense, That a Toleration in
Religion (be what it will) was due from the Civil Magistrate, but pleaded still
the truth of their Doctrine: And though Paul was frequently under persecution;
yet we find him against Toleration, Gal. 5.11, with 12. Nor was Elijah the
less zealous against false Prophets, 1 King. 18.40. that there was a Jezebel
ready to persecute himself, 1 King. 19.2. And though we be encompassed with
infirmities; yet, in so far as we have obtained mercy, we are ready to say (as
Paul did, Act. 25.11.) That if we followed any error, we refuse not to be
restrained in it, and should count our selves most unhappy if we were
instrumental to propagate any error, and set our selves to overturn a blessed
work of Reformation in the prosecution thereof.

Having thus briefly pointed at the sinfulness of this course, We do in the
fear of the Lord warn all these (especially within our charge) who have an hand
in this matter, to consider from whence they have fallen and to repent; and do
exhort them in the bowels of Christ, that they do examine impartially what
their designs are, upon which they have engaged in this course, so destructive
to their Mother Church, and the Truths of Christ established in her; and that
they forbear to prosecute the pulling down of an hedge, to let in Popery and
Atheism, lest a Serpent bite them. We are not ignorant how pleasing licentious
liberty is to the flesh; yet their consciences will easily tell them, that it
was none of Adam's happiness to have more room out of Paradise than within it,
And that it is no mercy for men to have liberty to do every one what is right
in his own eves, which has been the plague and sad posture of the Church of
God in her declining times. We do likewise exhort all the Lord's people within
our bounds, as to mourn before the Lord in behalf of those who have declined,
and that such abominations should find any to own them among us; So also
rightly to improve such humbling dispensations; That they study sobriety of
mind, the want whereof has miscarried so many; That they receive the love of
the Truth, for the neglect whereof, God is provoked to send strong delusions;
That they converse more in the study of their own sinfulness, and the
sufficiency of Christ, which being still savoury, will keep them from gadding
after novelties in Religion; That they improve Ordinances as becomes, lest
rested-in formality draw on contempt of Ordinances; That they would unite among
themselves in matters of inferior differences, that so they may jointly lay
forth themselves, in their stations, for obstructing the progress of this
deluge, which is ready to swallow up all Religion; And that they employ Christ
much, who is the King and Head of his own Church, that by His own Spirit he
would interpose to stop the current of these Delusions and Defections, that
Truth, and Peace, and Holiness may yet flourish in the midst of us. Even so,
Come, Lord Jesus.

FINIS.

