THE ART OF Chemistry: As it is now Practiced.

Written in French, By P. THIBAVT, Chemist to the French King.

And now Translated into English, BY A Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON: Printed for John Starkey, at the Miter near Temple Bar in Fleetstreet.
1675.

Licensed,

Roger L'Estrange.
The Author's PREFACE.
I Have, Courteous Reader, but two things to say to thee; the first is, To
deliver my Opinion concerning Chemistry; and the other is, To set down my Way
and Method of proceeding in Operations.

Chemistry, as I take it, is a Liberal Art, which, though it have the same
Object, and the same End, as Vulgar Pharmacy, does nevertheless compose it by
Nobler, and more Ingenious Means, and more to the advantage of Physic. In
ancient times, even long before Hippocrates, Physicians neither knew, nor made
use of any more than four ways of preparing their Remedies; for, either they
pressed the Juice out of their Ingredients, or beat them to powder, or they
boiled them, or else they infused them in Water, or some other Liquor, and so
gave them to their Patients. Some Ages after, and particularly since Mesue, and
those other famous Arabians, till the time of Paracelsus, Physicians
continually invented so many new Preparations, and put so many Disguises upon
their Remedies, that they were fain to give over doing of it themselves, and to
assign that care to those whom we now call Apothecaries. But, if we give a
Judicious Curiosity leave to pry into these manifold Disguises, we shall soon
be convinced, that they are indeed nothing but the four first Simple
Preparations, with the addition of Sugar or Honey, and some differences of
Color and Consistency; for the most part heaping great quantities of Simples
one upon another, to the end their Patients might swallow them with less
distaste. Paracelsus and his Followers having particularly wrought upon
Minerals, found out some excellent Remedies; and being encouraged by their rich
Discoveries, they continued them with such eagerness, that in a short time with
Inventions equally ingenious and laborious, they did almost subdue the three
Kingdoms of Vegetables, Animals and Minerals, and came to the possession of
most rich, and hitherto unknown Secrets, insomuch, as one may say, that even
from the beginning of the World, to their times, the Virtues of those excellent
Remedies lay buried in their own Bodies, as in a Grave. This may be clearly
seen in Crude Antimony, of which a pound, either in powder, or in Infusion, or
Decoction, works no other effect in the Body, than if we had swallowed as much
Saw-dust. But, if you know how to open its Body by the Keys of Chemistry, then
for interior Remedies, you shall have an Emetick, a Purgative, a Sudorifick, a
Diaphoretick, a Diuretic, and a Cordial, which you need only give in a
different proportion of so many Grains. And for exterior Applications, you
may, out of the same Antimony, have a Desiccative, a Mundificative, a
Consumptive, or Escarotick, with other rare Remedies, as we shall hereafter set
down at large. If we consider Mercury, they that work in the Mines in Spain,
teach us by their Theft, that more than a pound of it may be taken inwards
without harm; for, a little before they give over working, they swallow a good
quantity of it, which, when they are at liberty, they ease themselves of by
Stool, and so keep it to sell in secret. And this the Overseers having
discovered, do now force every Workman to stay there a considerable time, after
his giving over working, that these Mercurial Thieves may be so forced to leave
their theft behind them. But, if by the virtue of Chemical Dissolvants you open
the body of Quicksilver, it will produce in very small Doses, such various and
wonderful effects, that out of it alone may be had Remedies to answer all the
Indications of Physic. Is there any thing more contemptible than Niter, in the
hands of the Vulgar Pharmacy? But, is there any thing more admirable than the
self-same Niter handled by Chemistry? for with it, we make now a pleasant and
cooling Acid, now a hot and burning Corrosive; sometimes it revives the Emetick
and Purgative virtue of Antimony, sometimes it kills the Emetick, and revives
only the Purgative, and sometimes it destroys both Emetick and Purgative, and
quickens either the Diuretic or Diaphoretick; and in a word, it produces so
many wonderful effects upon all the other Minerals, that we may justly call it
the Universal Agent of Chemistry. Who would think that a quantity of Silver, no
bigger than a Pea, Chymically prepared, were able to heal, by once touching,
any Ulcers of the Mouth? and by two or three touchings, soften and heal the
hardest, and most inveterate Ulcers, and even the Gangrene it self in any part
of the Body, and that incomparably better than any Remedy of the Old Pharmacy.
Would any body believe, that out of Common Salt, which is generally reputed so
prejudicial to those that are subject to the Stone or Gravel, Chemists should
extract a pleasant Spirit, which drives out all Gravel, breaks the Stone in the
Kidneys and Bladder, and dissolves entirely in the palm of the hand a Stone cut
out of a humane Bladder?

I should be tedious in setting out all the other Wonders of this Art, only
this I Will say to prove its excellency, That whereas in its birth, and even in
its growth, when it was either not known at all, or ill known by Physicians,
almost every body had an aversion, and a prejudice against it; now quite
contrary, being highly esteemed, and thoroughly known by the Learned and
Experienced Professors of this Art, it has gained the Reputation of being the
best Instrument of the excellent Cures they perform.

But, if in requital of the kind Reception it now meets withal in the world,
Chemistry has any acknowledgments to pay, it is particularly to Monsieur
Vallot, who having been long the Physician of the greatest Practice in Paris,
is now the Physician of his Most Christian Majesty; in which place, by his
profound Learning, and the excellent choice of Remedies, borrowed, for the most
part, from Chemistry, he still performs wonderful, and most singular Cures. So
famous an Example makes me apt to believe, that if there be any persons
obstinate in their old error against Chemistry, they will by little and little
forsake it; as those have been forced to do, who for a long time stubbornly
opposed the new Discovery of the Vessels that carry the Chyle from the Stomach
to the Heart, without coming at the Liver, only because they had not seen, or
at least not well observed this new conveyance.

Now for my Method, it all runs upon two principles; First, To find out, and
set down solid and pertinent Reasons of all the Circumstances which accompany
our Operations. The Second, to discover the best, easiest, and shortest way of
performing the said Operations. These were no easy things to be found out;
for, the first Chemists happened upon abundance of excellent Secrets, but being
ignorant of the true Reasons of their Discovery; that they might give credit to
their new Science, they made use of the Cabalistique Cloak, of covering all
things with a Mystery. The Modern Professors indeed have given a better
Foundation to their Art, and so good an one, as has shaken that of the old
Philosophy, but withal, either for want of skill, or maliciously they have
encumbred their processes with so many, and such impertinent Circumstances,
lengthening both them and the expenses, that very few, and indeed none, but
very sharp-sighted Physicians have been able to see through the Cloud, and both
receive and communicate the benefit of the light there hidden. This
consideration has moved me in this my Work, to keep within the limits of
Chemistry, neglecting any Speculations beside my purpose; and withal, to
endeavor to free my processes from all those Obscurities, Difficulties and
Protractions, which Experience and Reason have convinced me to be either
superfluous, or prejudicial to them. If I have not executed my design to thy
mind, I must confess, Courteous Reader, that it is much a harder thing to
perform well, than to project.

A TABLE OF The Matters contained in this BOOK.
A
ACids serve to precipitate the dissolution of Minerals Page 55 Advice to the
Artist 99 Alembick open its parts and composition 20 Blind Alembick 21 Alembick
twins, their description ibid. Amber distilled with Spirit of Wine 153 Essence
of Ambergreece 183 Antimony Mineral preferrable to all others for the
Philosophers Stone 101 Is the most malignant of all for the use of Physic
ibid. Antimony diaphoretick 98 What Antimony is best for its preparation ibid.
The way of forming it into Trochisks 100 Observations on the matter of this
Remedy ibid. How to hinder it from being vomitive 101 What it is properly 102
Its Use and Virtues ibid. Antimony revived 263 Antimony, its differences 85 Red
Acid Oil of Antimony 276 Its Use ibid. Aqua fortis dissolves Silver in equal
quantity 127 What effects, if your Silver be mingled with Copper ibid. Aqua
fortis, how made 41 Aqua Regalis, how made 42 Aqua fortis, with purified Niter,
and Alom 233 Arcanum Corallinum, what it is 84 Its Use and Virtues ibid.
Gravelled Ashes what 132
B
BAlsom of Brimstone 182 Its Virtues 183 Balsam of St. John's Wort 178 Its
matter and preparation ibid. Its Virtues ibid. Balneum Maris, what 27 A Glass
Bell, what kind of vessel 24 Benjamin, its preparation into flowers 213 Its
qualities 215 The virtue of the Flowers ibid. The Virginal Milk of Benjamin and
Storax 231 The use of this Milk 232 Bezoard Mineral 110, 276 Its matter and
preparation 111 What it is 112 Its virtues ibid. Bismuth a kind of Marcassit
133 Ought not to be dissolved in Aqua fortis 136 Its preparation 133, 134 The
Magistery of Bismuth, what 137 Is a good Fucus ibid. The Precipitate of Bismuth
277 Its use ibid. Bricks use in Chemistry, their Figure 4 The manner of making
and drying them 5 Box is the Guaiac of Europe 142 Yields much Spirit, and
little Oil 143 Virtues of its Spirit and Oil 143, 144 Butter of Antimony 105
Its different names ibid. Its matter and preparation 106 The Dosis 110 Its
virtues ibid. Butter of Saturn 265 Its virtues 266
C
CAlcination of Lead 202 The use of Calcined Lead 263 Calcination of Venice
Talc 210 The use of calcined Talc 211 Calx of Egg-shells 207 Its Use and
Virtues 209 Calx of Lead 113 Its preparation and virtues 113, 114 Calx of
Mercury 75 Grows yellow by pouring warm water upon it ibid. Calx of
Oyster-shells 305 Calx of Silver, how reduced to a Metallic Nature 126 Camphire
melts into Oil in its dissolution 156 Cauteries, how made, and of what 130, 274
How molded 131 Their use 133 Cinnaber of Antimony 107 Colcothar of Vitriol.
Its virtues 40, 274 Coals serving to the Chemical fire, their conditions 26
Colophone, what 50 Conserve liquid of Roses 171 Conserve of all sorts of
flowers and leaves 169, 170 Coral, its Salt and Magistery 175, 176, 177 Cream
of Saturn, Vid. Butter. Cream of Tartar 225 Its virtues 229 Cream of Steeled
Tartar ibid. Crocus Martis astringent 245 Crocus Martis opening 272 Crystal,
what it is 213 The matter it is made of ibid. Crystal, how prepared to endure a
violent fire 235 Crystals of Mars 243 Their preparation 244 Their color and
virtues 245 Crystal Mineral 255 Its Dosis and Virtues 256 Sweet Crystals of
Saturn 115 Their preparation 115, 116 Crystal of Tartar 225 Crystals of Venus
49 Crystals of Venus 239 Their preparation and virtues 243 Crystal Mineral 55
Remarks 57 Its virtues 60 Purging Cup of Antimony 92
D
DIstillation per discensum 28 Flying Dragon, what 33, 139
E
WHite Eagle, what it is 68 Essence against the Toothache 164 Extracts of
Berries, Leaves, Flowers, etc. how made 193 Extract of Guaiac 141 Its virtues
142 Extract of Hellebore 163 Its virtues 164 Extract of Juniper 192 Its virtues
ibid.
F
Chemical Fire, what to be considered in it 26 Its degrees 29 Circulary Fire 28
Fire of half Suppression and whole Suppression 28 Sand-Fire ibid. Flowers of
Antimony 216 Their virtues 218 Flowers of Brimstone 44 Their preparation 219
Their virtues 221 Chemical Furnaces 6 Their Figure, Division, and Sub-division
ibid. Furnace of Balneum Maris 7 Furnace with a Sand-Fire 9 Furnace with a
naked circulary Fire 10 Furnace with a naked fire and small Reverberatory 12
Furnace with a naked fire and great Reverberatory 13 Furnace with a little
circulatory Fire 15 Furnace with a great circulatory Fire ibid. Furnace with a
circulary Fire of Suppression without chink 15 Furnace with a Fire of
Suppression and chink 16 Furnace with a melting Fire, or a mind Furnace 17
G
GVaiac yields much Oil and Spirit 142 Cup or Goblet of Antimony that purges 92
Gold is not to be calcined alone 237 Its dissolvant 236 Is not potable, but in
its dissolvant 238 Glass Tunnel, its description 24
H
Honey, its Spirit and Tinctures 160
I
INstruments of Chemistry, their number 2, 3 Infernal Stone 125 Its virtues 129
Dies the Beard black ibid.
L
Chemical Laboratory, its definition, it conditions 1, 2 Lamp for Chemical
Operations 27 Laudanum its matter and preparation 193 Its Use and Virtues 196
Lead calcined by Brimstone 113 Lime contains two Salts 131 Liver of Antimony 85
Its virtues and dose 87 Lute Chemical, its composition and use 3, 4
Observations how to Lute well 5
M
MAgistery of Bismuth 133 Its virtues 137 Magistery of Crab's-eyes, Bezoard,
Mother of Pearl, how made 176 Magistery of Coral 174 Its virtues 177 Magistery
of Egg-shells 207 Its virtues 209 Magistery of Jalap, Vid. Rosin. Magistery of
Pearls 201 Is a great Cordial 204 And also a Fucus Magistery of Saturn 115 How
used against sore eyes 121 Magistery of Silver 233 Its use 234 Mars uncalcin'd,
its qualities 123 Matras, its description 22 Milk of Brimstone 198 Its virtues
201 Virginal Milk 121 Milk of Benjamin and Storax 231 Minium, what 118 Mould of
Lattin for the Infernal Stone 128 Moors-head part of the Brass Vesica 19
N
NIter breaks a hot pot 57 Being well purified, is Crystal Mineral 60 Niter
crystallized preserves distilled Waters 168 Niter sulphurated 60 How this Salt
is molded 63 It is a most powerful cooler 65 Cures the Running of the Reins
ibid. Nutritum of Saturn. Vid. Butter.
O
OPeration in a Sea-Bath 27 In a Sand-heat ibid. Acid Oil of Antimony 103 Its
color 104 What it is, and its virtues 105 Oil of Ash 143 Oil of Box ibid. Its
virtues ibid. Oil of Bricks 148 Its virtues 150 Oil of Camphire is made in a
partioular manner 156 Its use and virtues 157 Oil of Cloves stinking 144 Its
virtues 145 Oil of Yolks of Eggs 151 Its virtues 152 Oil of Guaiac 138 Its
virtues 142 Black Oil of Juniper 191 Aromatic Oil of Juniper 187 Its use and
virtues 190 Oil of Jet 145 Oil of Myrrha and other Gums 147, 275 Its virtues
147 Oil of Karabe 153 Oil of Sulphur 43, 44 Oil of Tartar 53 Its virtues 55 Oil
of Turpentine 50 Its virtues 52 Oil of Vitriol 37, 38 Its virtues 40 Oil of
yellow Wax 156 Its virtues 157
P
PEarls dissolved in Spirit of Salt 201 Pills of Turpentine 165 Their use and
virtues 166 Pills everlasting 91 Phlegm of Turpentine 50 Plaster of Saturn 163
Emetick Powder its preparation 109 Red Precipitate of Mercury 80 Its virtues 82
White Precipitate of Mercury 76 Its virtues 79 Precipitate of Jalap. Vid.
Rosin. Precipitate of Bismuth. Vid. Magistery. Precipitate of Brimstone. Vid.
Milk. Precipitate of Silver. Vid. Magistery. Lapis Prunellae 57
R
REeceiver of Stone, how it differs from the earthen ones 23 Receiver of Glass
22 Refrigeratory 19 Regule of Antimony 88 Its preparation 89 Its excellency
ibid. Its virtues 91 Regule of Mars 93 Its preparation ibid. Its virtues 94
Retorts how luted 5, 6 Rosin of Jalap 221 Its virtues 224 Rosin of Scammony
ibid. Its virtues 225
S
OPening Saffron of Mars 124, 273 Other opening Saffron of Mars 125 Both their
virtues ibid. Binding Saffron of Mars 245 Salt of Crystal 211 Its Virtues 213
Salt decrepitated what 31 Salt of Mars 245 Salt of precious Stones, how made
213 Salt of the Sugarcanes 120 Salt of Saturn its use 116 Salt of Tartar its
preparation 53 The use of it 54 Salt of Venus 239 Its Virtues 243 Sal
Antifebrile, or the Salt against Fevers 279 Its use ibid Spirit of Box 143
Spirit of Guaiac 138, 139 Its virtues 142 Burning Spirit of Honey 160 Its
preparation and virtues 160, 161 Aromatic Spirit of Juniper 187 Remarks 188
Spirit of Niter 33 Its virtues 35 Spirit of Niter which has dissolved Mercury,
being distilled, is useful in many Diseases 74 Spirit of Salt how made 30 Its
use and virtues 32 How distinguished from the Spirits of Niter, and Vitriol,
and Sulphur 32 Spirit of Sulphur 43, 273 Its virtues 46 Spirit of Tartar 185
Its preparation and virtues 186 Spirit of Turpentine 50 Spirit and Oil of
Turpentine 277 The Separation from its Oil 51 Its use and virtues ibid. Spirit
of Vitriol, how made 36, 37, 274 Its virtues 40 Spirit of Wine, how made 46 Its
virtues 48 Spirit of Wine Amber'd 153 Its virtues 155 Spirit of Wine
Campheriz'd 157 Aromatic Spirit of all sorts of Woods, Barks, Seeds, Leaves,
Rinds, etc. how drawn 190 Spirit of all sorts of Woods that are not Aromatic
how drawn 143 Sponges in the Vesica, their use 19 Sulphur purifies Niter 60
Sulphur of Antimony is red 104 Golden Diaphoretick Sulphur 94 Its matter and
preparation 94, 95 The effects of the Acid poured upon its Lixivium 95 Its
virtues and dose 97 Corrosive Sublimate 179 Comes from Venice 180 Its virtues
181 Is a poison without Antidote ibid. Sublimate dulcified 65 Its preparation
60 Drugs necessary for its preparation 66 How to know whether it be falsified
69 Its virtues 71
T
TArtar its Tincture 184 Its Spirit and foetid Oil 185 The use of the Tincture
ibid. The virtues of the Spirit and Oil 186 Aromatic Tincture of Cloves 158
The use of the Tincture ibid. Tincture of Roses 197 Their use and virtues ibid.
Treacle of the Germans 193 Turbith Mineral 72 Its virtues and dose 76
Turpentine, the Spirit and Oil of it 277
V
VErdigreece 239, 241 Brass Vesica, what 10, 11 Vessels how luted 6 Double
Vessel 23 Distilled Vinegar 261 Vinegar of Saturn 161 Vitriol is a Vomitive 35
Vitriol of Mars. Vid. Salt.
W
Water of Cinnamon 159 Its virtues ibid. Use of the first and second Water 160
Water distilled from Plants 166, 167 How to know when the distillation is done
167 Lime Water 172 Its virtues 173 How to make the Phagedenick Water 173, 174
Water against the Itch 110 Seawater how made 79 Water of Pearls 204 Pontick
Water 110 Its virtues ibid. Rose Water 169
Chemical Books lately Printed for John Starkey.
BAsilica Chymica and Praxis Chimiatricae, or Royal and Practical Chemistry;
augmented and enlarged by John Hartman. To which is added, his Treatise of
Signatures of Internal Things, or a true and lively Anatomy of the greater and
lesser World. As also, the Practice of Chemistry of John Hartman, M. D.
Augmented and enlarged by his Son, with considerable Additions. All faithfully
Englished, by a Lover of Chemistry. Price bound 10 s.

Medicina Instaurata, or a brief Account of the true Grounds and Principles of
the Art of Physic, with the insufficiency of the vulgar way of preparing
Medicines, and the excellency of such as are made by Chemical Operation. By
Edward Bolnest, Med. Land. in octavo, price bound 1 s.

Aurora Chymica, or a rational way of preparing Animals, Vegetables and
Minerals for a Physical use; by which preparations they are made most
efficacious, safe and pleasant Medicines for the preservation of the life of
man. By Edward Bolnest Med. Reg. Ord. in octavo, price bound 1 s. 6 d.

THE ART OF CHEMISTRY, As it is now Practiced.
Of the Chemical Laboratory.
THE Chemical Laboratory is a place fit to perform the Operations of Chemistry,
which cannot be done without great preparations, experience, industry and skill.

The Chemical Laboratory, requires of it self three Conditions: First, there
must be a Chimney in it for those Processes, where some unpleasant and noisome
smoaks are to be avoided: Secondly, The Room ought to be clear and light, that
one may see distinctly, even to the bottom of the Vessels, the diverse changes
that do happen, and which sometimes, in some choice and important Operations,
ought to be observed with a great deal of care, that one may either augment or
diminish the heat, as necessity shall require. Thirdly, The place ought to be
so capacious, as that in one part may be the Furnaces, in another the Vessels
and Utensils, and in another your Auditors or Spectators; and yet in the middle
there may be room enough left for the Artist to mind his Operations, and bestir
himself.

Of the Chemical Instruments.
THe Chemical Instruments, with which a Laboratory ought to be furnished, are
of two sorts: for some are Principal, the others less-Principal.

The Principal Instruments without which no Operation can be done, are, the
Lute, the Furnaces, the Vessels, and the Fire.

The less-Principal are those that serve sometimes for one Process, sometimes
for another, toward the facilitating of them; and are in great number. But I
propose only Thirty of the most useful: viz. an Iron Ladle, a little Iron Bar,
an Iron Spatula, a great Stick, a Brass Mortar and Pestle, a Marble Mortar,
with a Woodden-pestle; a Plate-dish of White-ware, with a Glass-pestle, two
pair of Scales and Weights; a Marble or Porphyry-stone to grind upon; some
Pack-thread, white and brown Paper, Starch or Glue, a fine Sieve; some old
Linenrags cut out into long slices, some Ashes, some Sand, some Tiles, some
water, a Tin-Mould in form of a Pipe, an Iron-Mould for Pistol-Bullets, a
Copper-Mould for a Goblet, a little Trevet, a Wooden Spoon, a Tin-Tunnel,
Rolls stuffed with Straw or Chaff, or made of Paste-board, a Mould for Bricks, a
Fire-Shovel, a pair of Tongs, and a pair of Bellows. Of these we shall not
treat here particularly, but as occasion shall serve in the Operations where
they shall be employed.

Of the Chemical Lute.
TO make a good Lute for all the purposes of Chemistry, take of Potters-Earth,
of white or yellow Sand, and of Horse-dung, an equal quantity, not an equal
weight; mingle them, and moisten them by little and little with water, first
working them together with your feet upon the ground, then piece by piece
kneading of them exactly with your hands upon a Table, till you have so
incorporated your Ingredients, that they are not distinguishable from one
another; then make them up in form of Bricks, that so you may use them more
neatly; keeping them from Fire and Sun, lest they should be over-dry and hard.
The Potters Earth is made use of because of its unctuosity, which makes the
Lute less brittle; the Sand is employed to bind the Potters Earth from
cracking, and flying, and burning to dust. (And some do use powdered Glass for
the same end.) The Horse-dung is added, because being full of little Straws
well grownd by the Horses Teeth, they do serve for the firmer knitting of the
matter together. (And so some use Calves Hair for that purpose.) Finally, the
Water incorporates these three things together; In the place of which, some use
the Whites of Eggs, which by their sliminess make a stronger conglutination of
all the Ingredients.

This Lute serves for six uses: 1. To make Bricks. 2. To lute and cement the
Bricks of your Furnaces. 3. To fill up the cracks and slits of your Furnaces.
4. To frame little Rounds like Salt-sellers to set the Retorts on. 5. To lute
all Vessels both of Earth and Glass. 6. To repair the cracks of your Vessels.
Now because there is a peculiar industry in well forming the Bricks and
Salt-sellers, or Rounds, and in luting the Vessels; I shall here set it down at
length.

Our Bricks are all of a bigness and proportion, that so our Furnaces may be
the more even and firm, and the easilier built, even without cement: Moreover,
they are almost in the shape of a half Moon, that they may make the Furnace
round; that figure being the fittest to gather and concentrate the heat.
Therefore we form our Bricks in a Woodden-mould either of Box or Guaiac, or
some such hard wood. The piece of wood is a foot long, half a foot broad, and
three inches thick. In its middle there must be a hollow or overture drawn from
a Round made with a Compass; which Overture ought to be eight inches outward,
six inches inwards; three inches large, and three inches thick. Now to make
your Bricks, fill your mould with lute, and with a wooden knife even the
superficies, and so knock out your Brick; and when your mould grows dirty, rub
the sides of it with sand; dry your Bricks in the shade, so they will last
longer; for being thus half-dried, they will bake leasurely in the using of
them, and not be apt to crumble and break, neither will they be so soon
calcined, as if you had dried them by the fire or Sun, or in a Potters Oven.

Our Rounds or Salt-sellers derive their name from their figure, because they
are somewhat like the old-fashioned Salt-sellers. To form them, take of our
Lute a quantity as big as your fist, and rolling it between both hands, reduce
it to the form of a Cylinder two inches high; flat the lower end of it upon a
Table, and then with your fingers sink in the upper part, till it be somewhat
like a Salt-seller that is hollow, and of the breadth of an inch in diameter.

For the luting of your Vessels, the Lute that is employed ought to be softer
than either for Bricks or Rounds, and therefore you will do well to wet it with
some Water. It must not be laid on thicker than the thickness of a
Half-Crown-piece; for if it be, the fire will scarce be able to heat the Water
contained in your Vessels. Observe that sometimes the Matrasses are luted up to
the neck, sometimes half way. Retorts are luted in the same way too; only there
ought to be a little space left near the neck, that one may see through it into
the Vessel in the time of the Operation: Your Vessel being luted, must be dried
at leisure in the Sun or shade, or near a gentle fire; taking care to turn them
equally, so that they be not dried more in one place than in another.

Of the Chemical Furnaces.
OUr Furnaces are round and little: They are round, that they may unite and
concentrate the heat of the fire; they are little, that our Laboratory may not
be encumbered to no purpose, and also that we may give our Vessels a quicker
and more equal fire, and that with less toil and less expense.

We have two sorts of Furnaces: the first are fixed, which are made of different
lays of crooked Bricks, cemented strongly together with our Lute; the others
are moveable, and consist of crooked Bricks laid one upon another without any
lute or cement, and in which you lay the fire, not under your Vessels as in the
first sort of Furnaces, but circularly round about them.

The fixed and cemented Furnaces are five in number; to wit, the Furnace with a
heat of Bulneum maris, or of the vaporous Bath; the Furnace with the heat of
ashes or sand; the Furnace with a naked fire and circular heat; the Furnace
with a naked fire and small Reverberation; and the Furnace with the fire of
great Reverberation. The moveable and not cemented Furnaces are likewise five
in number; viz. the Furnace with a small circulatory fire; the Furnace with a
great circulatory fire; the Furnace with a fire of circulation and suppression
without a gape; the Furnace with a fire of circulation and suppression with a
gape; and the Furnace with a moulting fire, or the wind furnace: All these five
Furnaces are with a naked fire.

The Furnace with the heat of Balneum maris, or the vaporous Bath, is necessary
for the gentle distilling of all sorts of aerie or sulphurous liquors in
glass-bodies, placed in a Cauldron full of water; and withal, it serves to
evaporate and dry, by its gentle heating vapor, all extracts, and salts, in
little earthen glazed dishes, which are set upon the Overtures made in the
cover of the said Kettle or Cauldron; so that the remedies thus dried have no
odor not taste of Empyreume or burning.

For the building of this Furnace, do thus: lay one Round of our Bricks of such
a compass as may be proportionate to the greatness of the Kettle you intend for
your Balneum, leaving an empty place before, four or five inches broad for the
ashes-hole; then lay another entire Round of Bricks, upon which place your
Grate; then upon this lay two Rounds more, leaving before an empty space for
your fire-door, as you did for your ash-hole; and then add four entire Rounds
for your Laboratory, leaving in the upper most of them three little jams or
gaps, each an inch wide to let in the air; viz. one before, above the
fire-door; another behind, over against to this first; and a third on the side,
which shall be opposite to that where the Receiver is placed, lest if there
were one on that side, the flame might sometimes break the Nose of the Limbeck.

Now for your Kettle or Cauldron, it must have a brim of an inch broad, whereby
it may be situated and equally suspended upon the brims of your Furnace,
leaving betwixt it and the Furnace-sides an orbicular space of an inch, to give
the fire play round about it, that so it may heat equally the matter contained
within it.

In the Fabric of this Furnace, as likewise in the structure of the four
following, observe:

1. That you must not forget to put a sufficient quantity of Lute under, above,
and betwixt your Bricks, that they may be strongly cemented together. 2. That
you must not place your Bricks just one upon another; if so, your Furnace will
not be firm and stable, but by the operation of the fire will soon cleave
asunder. Do therefore as expert Brick-layers, and interlace your Bricks one
with another.

The Furnace with the fire, or heat, or sand, or ashes, is useful for the
distillation, and rectification of all sorts of liquors drawn from Vegetals,
Animals, or Minerals, in glass or earthen bodies, glazed with their glass
heads, and also for all infusions, extinctions, tinctures, evaporations, etc.
made in Cucurbits, Matrasses, dishes, pans of glass, or glazed earthen ware.

This is the hardest to be well built of all our Furnaces, and, for the
building of it, do thus; first make a sufficient quantity of Mortar, consisting
of our Lute, Water, and Plaster of Paris in powder; then with little Tiles make
upon a floor, an Oval of one foot in length, and of eight inches in breadth;
cement your Tiles well together with this Mortar, which because of the Plaster
will render your Furnace more firm and durable; raise this first Oval Lay of
Tiles to the height of two inches, leaving a space for your ash-hole; then add
one Lay of our Bricks, not filling up the space left for the ash-hole, because
it must be almost as high as the space to be left for the fire-room; upon this
lay of Bricks, place your Iron-bars for a Grate in the same distance, as they
are set in chafing-dishes, placing one little bar upon the ash-hole door, not
forgetting to bestow good store of Mortar both above, under, and betwixt your
Bricks and Bars: then upon so much of this Furnace as is already built, place
small Tiles, cementing of them together in such an order, as may make this
Furnace acquire a square figure outwardly, which will make it more solid and
firm; and by adding to it a considerable thickness, fit it for the conserving
of an equal heat with a few Coals. Upon this first lay of Bricks, (which have
in the inside an oval figure though the Tiles hanging over on the outside form
a square one) place another Lay of Bricks, leaving a convenient space for the
fire-room, which must be something higher than it is broad: but observe that in
this Oval lay must be employed more Bricks than in the other, because your
Furnace by little and little must acquire a greater circumference toward the
top; then build up with little Tiles and Mortar, your square outside to the
height of your Bricks, so continuing as you build up your Furnace: upon the
top of the fire-room lay a little Iron bar, then add another entire round of
Bricks without any overture, only a little chinck in the backside of your
Furnace over against the fire-room, of two fingers breadth to give the fire
air; and this Circle must be in circumference wider by two inches than the
last; smoothing with mortar the inside of this round; that the fire may be
carried more evenly upwards: this done, place on this last Round a square Iron
plate all of a piece; (or of two pieces if you will, sawdering them well one
upon another) the place must not be thicker than a shilling, that so the fire
may the easilier penetrate and give a moderate heat to the sand; then with our
Mortar raise on the inside a Square of an inch thick, to all the four sides of
the Furnace, to make a place to put your sand in, or ashes if you will: ashes
give not so great a heat as sand: whenever you desire to moderate the heat of
either, you may wet them with a little water.

The Furnace with a naked fire and circular heat, serves to distill Aqua vitae,
spirit of Wine, Aromatic and Balsamic ossences, and also the waters of all
Plants: in the Brass-vessel, called Vesica, with its Helm or Moors head, borded
with a refrigeratory of the same metal, making use also of a long pipe of the
same matter which passes through one or two great Hogs-heads full of water near
the Furnace; and which are in stead of a second and more powerful refrigeratory.

For the building of this Furnace, do thus.

First, take your Brass Vesica, set it upon the ground where you intend to
erect your Furnace, then lay a Round of Bricks well cemented with our Lute, so
that there be half a fingers breadth left betwixt your Vesica and the Bricks,
and an Overture for the ash-hole; then taking out your Vesica, add another
Round of Bricks, leaving still room for the ash-hole; which will be about half
a foot high: upon these two lays place a Grate of diverse little Iron-Bars; then
add an entire Round of Bricks, to which add two more but not entire, leaving a
space empty for the fire-room perpendicularly over the ash-hole; then add one
circle of Bricks entire, without any Overture, upon which place two little
Iron-Bars to uphold the bottom of your Vesica. And in this place is terminated
the height of your fire-room, which is once again as high as your ash-hole.
After this raise by Rounds your Furnace, till you have brought it as high as
the neck of the Vesica; which that you may the better do, place your Vesica
upon its two Bars, and so it will serve for a measure, to the elevation your
Furnace ought to have.

Observe, that this Furnace is not to have any chink on any side whatsoever;
but every where, and particularly in the Laboratory, there ought to be
circularly half a fingers breadth left empty, that so the air compassing the
Vessel, may draw the heat upwards in all the circumference of the Vesica. And
this environing heat carries the Spirits from the bottom of the Vessel to its
neck, from whence they are raised all together to the top of the cover or Moors
head; and if above you stop this empty circumference, your fire will be apt to
go out, if it be not excessive great, which also would be inconvenient, because
it would consume in vain great quantity of fuel.

The Furnace with a naked fire and small reverberatory serves to distill the
Phlegm, the Spirit, and the foetide Oil of Berries, Woods, Barks, and Roots, in
an earthen, or glass Retort well luted, lest it should break in the fire. For
the building of this Furnace, you must first consider of the bigness of the
Retorts, you ordinarily intend to make use of; and make the circuit of your
Furnace so wide, as there may be a fingers breadth left betwixt it and your
Retort. Lay then four or five Rounds of Bricks in the said proportion, leaving
an empty space for your ash-hole and fire-room; they being not to be separated
in this Furnace by a Grate, because else the air coming in at the ash-hole, and
meeting with the fire upon a Grate, would kindle it too violently, and so great
a fire is not requisite for these substances to be distilled. Then add an
entire Round of Bricks, upon which place two Iron bars, upon which you must put
the cover of a Pipkin turned with its hollow part upwards, which must be filled
with sand to receive the bottom of the Retort: then with diverse Rounds of Brick
raise your Furnace to the height of the Retort, or higher; taking care to
leave an overture, or open space, to pass the neck of the Retort; which chink
you must afterward with our Lute repair under the neck of your Retort, to
hinder the flame from passing that way, and endangering the breaking of the
Vessels. Having fitted a Recipient to it, you must lute both their necks
together, very close, to the end that nothing of the spirits exhale and escape
that way in the distillation. Last of all, you must have an earthen Pan of the
capacity of your Furnace, which may cover the top of it, and reverberate the
rising flame upon the Retort; and this Pan must be of glazed earth, else it
would fly in pieces in the heat: besides, it must have a hole in the middle of
its bottom, of the bigness of an Egg, and this to give the fire air, which else
would be stifled, and go out.

The Furnace with a naked fire, and great Reverberatory, serves to distill the
acid and corrosive spirits; the acid, black and corrosive Oils in a glass, or
earthen luted Retort, or in an iron one. To build this Furnace, you must
consider of the bigness of the Retorts you mean to employ, and do as above in
the little Reverberatory-Furnace: then make an ash-hole covered with a Grate,
and a fire-room covered with its two Iron bars; and at last, a Laboratory of
the elevation of the belly of your Retort, as has been said already; only you
must on the top of the Laboratory leave a chink on one side of the ash-hole,
and fire-room, of two Bricks in height, to pass the neck of the Retort. Before
you place your Retort upon the Iron-Bars, you must provide a little earthen
cover with ashes, as has been said in the first Furnace of this kind. Then
place your Retort, and fit to it a large Recipient, which must be also settled
with great care upon a little Joint-stool, and under it must be either Paper,
or Linen, or some soft thing, that it may rest gently and surely upon. Then
with our Lute, fill up the space you left for the neck of the Retort, for the
reason alleged in the precedent Furnace, luting also the conjunction of the
Retort and its Receiver together: this being done, there remains to make a
Reverberatory, which may reflect, and beat back the rising heat, upon the
Retort: and to this effect, lay five Rounds of moveable Bricks, that is,
without Mortar, or Lute; only one upon another, in such a manner as your Rounds
go always in diminishing; so that in the first you employ half a Brick less
than in the last cemented Round; and in the second, a whole Brick less than in
the first moveable Round; and in the third you must employ two Bricks less than
in the second, leaving a hole in this last Round, which you shall fill up with
pieces of Iron, of such a bigness as shall not slip betwixt the space that is
left between the Retort, and the Wall of the Furnace: The reason why I put
Iron, rather than Bricks or Stone, or any other solid thing, is, because at the
end of the Operation you will find an excellent Crocus astringens of Mars, red as
Scarlet, and which will stick to the superficies of all your pieces of Iron.

The Furnace, with a little circulatory fire, or Ignis rotae parvus, serves to
evaporate the dissolutions of Minerals, as also of Animals and Vegetals, by a
gentle ready heat in a Mattress, either luted, or not luted. This Furnace is
made of one only Round of our Bricks, close set together without any Lute or
Mortar: you must place a Round or Salt-seller of Lute in the middle of this
Furnace; and upon this Salt-seller, filled with sand or ashes, place your
Mattress straight, leaving a circumference of two inches between your Mattress,
and the Furnace sides; then put your Coal, ready kindled, into this space,
approaching your fire nearer to the Furnace than to the Mattress.

The Furnace, with a great circulatory fire, serves to sublime all salts drawn
from Metals and Minerals in a luted glass Mattress. This Furnace is made of two
equal Rounds of our Bricks, so set together without Lute, that there is a
little distance betwixt them, to the end that the Air, entering at these small
Overtures, may serve to keep the fire alive: place your Salt-seller, and upon
it your Mattress, then your Coals, as we have said in the precedent Furnace.

The Furnace, with a circulary fire, and of suppression without any chink; is
useful to calcine, and melt down all sorts of Minerals, as also those Animals
and Vegetables that require Calcination, either in a Crucible, or a Pot of
Earth unglazed: To build this Furnace, lay first upon the ground either a large
Salt-seller of our Lute, or two Bricks, and upon them your Crucible or Pot;
then raise diverse Rounds of our Bricks without Lute, till they come two or
three fingers above your Pot, leaving in the first rank an interval of a
fingers breadth betwixt the Bricks, but in the last row they must be joined
very close together: leave also betwixt your Crucible, and the Furnace-sides, a
space of two inches broad, which must be filled with Coals up to the top of the
Furnace: and from thence this fire is called a fire of Suppression, because the
Coals are not only under, but circularly above, and on the sides of the Vessel;
and besides, very often we cover the whole Pot with Coals.

The Furnace, with a fire of Suppression, with a chink, is for the distillation
of Oils, and Spirits, and Phlegms of all sorts of resinous Gums, and Wax, in a
Glass Retort well luted; it is made as the precedent, only there ought to be in
the two last Rounds of Bricks, a chink, gap, or overture for the neck of your
Retort to pass through, which must be set, and compassed with Coals, as has
been said.

Observe, That in placing your Retort, either in this Furnace, or any of the
small or great Reverberatories, there are three things to be taken notice of.
1. That the body of the Retort touch the Bricks of the side, that the Chink is
in such a manner as the whole neck may hang out at the Chink, lest otherwise
the fire should break it. 2. That the neck of your Retort hang downwards, that
the liquor may the easilier run into the Recipient. 3. That the end of the neck
of your Retort enter into the middle of your Recipient, for fear the vapors
received should find some passage, even through their luted conjunction.

The Furnace, with a melting-fire, or the Wind-Furnace, to melt the hardest
bodies; as Gold, Glass, Stones, in a Crucible, or unglazed Earthen pot: and it
is thus made.

Take two Loggs of Wood, or two great Stones, half a foot high; a Barrel
knocked out at the lower end, and having in the other a hole as big as a man's
head, then set this Barrel upon the Stones or Loggs, and having laid a Grate
upon the uppermost hole, cover all this top with our Lute, and Plaster
together; and upon this erect a moveable Furnace, with the fire of suppression,
with our Bricks, as it has been said before. The air coming in, with violence
under the Barrel, does so blow and light the Coals, that it produces a heat
incomparably greater than any other.

Of the Chemical Vessels.
THe Kettle, or Cauldron, serving for the Balneum Maris, or Vaporous Bath. This
Kettle is of the same matter and form as ordinary Kettles are, that is, Brass:
it must have no Bail, but round about it a brim of an inch broad, by which it
is to be suspended, upon the brim of the Furnace; this Kettles cover must
exactly fit it, and have five round holes; whereof the middlemost must be the
biggest, and capable of the bottom of a Glass-Cucurbit, or Body, with its head:
the four other are less, and for little dishes of Earth, or Glass, in which
Extracts, and Salts are to be dried.

The Vesica, or Copper-body, covered with its Moors-head, and bordered with its
Refrigeratory, serving to distill Aqua vitae, Aromatic and Balsamic Essences,
Waters, and Spirits of Plants.

This Vesica ought to be of Copper; not tinned within, and somewhat round
bottomed: it ought not to be thicker than a shilling, of one foot and a half
high, and one foot broad in diameter: in its top it must be a little Unequal,
not in form of a Pear, as they ordinarily make them; and this, that it may
repercute the phlegm of Aqua vitae, and the Essences. From the middle of this
top, rises a neck four inches high, and three in diameter below, but four
inches above; whose use is, to make the Cover of the Vesica enter easily, and
stick faster, and so you see that this Vessel is not unlike a Hogs-bladder; on
one side of the top, rises a little pipe two inches high, and half a finger
wide, by which, with a Tin-tunnel you put in again the first Spirits of Wine
that come a little muddy, because they have carried along with them the smoot
adhering to the conducts of the Alembick: its Cover is of Brass, and consists
of a neck half a foot deep, three inches large at the top and bottom, but four
inches in the middle, because within it must be five or six Spunges, so fastened
with cross-sticks under and over them, as to be kept from falling down into the
Vesica, and from rising up into the head: their use is, to draw to themselves
the aetherial Spirit of the Aqua vitae, or Brandy, and to hinder the phlegm
(which in the middle of the Operation rises with the Spirits) from passing any
farther: for, the Spirit being thin and aerie, easily makes way, where the gross
phlegm cannot; which therefore falls down again into the Vesica: This neck is
terminated in a round Ball, not unlike a humane skull, and is therefore called
the Moors-head, from whose middle is derived a Pipe a foot long, and in
diameter an inch wide, which goes through a Cauldron or Kettle, sawder'd round
about the Moors-head, and which must be of such a proportion, as to contain a
pale of water, which is poured in the Operation, cold, to the end that the
Vapors that are in the Moors-head may be soon condensed, and dissolved into
liquor. This Cauldron is therefore called a Refrigeratory: on one side of the
brim there is a little cock, wherewith to empty the water if it grow too hot,
and when the Operation is ended. The little moveable neck, by which the Pipe
coming from the Moors-head, must be joined with the long Pipe that goes
through the Hogs-heads, ought to be half a foot long: the long Pipe which
passes through the Hogs-heads, must be of Brass, and six foot long, one inch
wide in diameter; by little and little diminishing, as it comes nearer the end:
This Pipe goes through two Hogs-heads, situated close by one another, by four
holes, so made, that the Pipe entering almost at the top of the nearest, runs
down a-slope, to come out at the last hoop of the furthermost; afterward the
circumference of these holes must be strongly luted; then fill with water your
Hogs-heads, which will be another strong Refrigeratory, and by condensing the
Spirits and Vapors in their way, make a copious distillation in a small time.

The open Limbick is made of two different pieces, viz. of a Body or Cucurbit,
and its Head. The Body may be of Glass, Stone, or Earthen glazed ware, or of
Brass: it is always higher than it is broad; broader in its middle than in its
bottom, and broader at the bottom than at the top, and round in all its
breadth, by which description you see that it is not unlike a Gourd. The head
may be of the same matter as the body, and sometimes of Lead; the top of it
rises in form of a point, the bottom is broad and proportioned to the body. In
its lower part, it has a brim inwards, on which the Vapors that rise in it
fall, and gently distill to the Nose of the Pipe, which is of half a foot long,
and conveys the liquors into the Receiver.

These two Vessels, fitted one to another, serve to distill, and rectify in a
sand-fire, per assensum, the waters of Plants, Aqua vitae, Spirit of Wine, the
phlegm Oil, and Spirit of Vegetables and Animals, and to rectify the Phlegm
and Spirit of Minerals. Before you put your Cucurbit into the sand, you must
lute two or three slices of white Paper upon the neck of your body, that so you
may even it, and make it fit for the head, which must fit close: upon these
slices of Paper round about the Glass-body, tie a pack-thread with a loose
knot; then with more Paper lute together the head, and its body over this
pack-thread: the use of which, will be to undo easily these Vessels, one from
another, by drawing the pack-thread, and so breaking the Papers, when the
Operation shall be ended.

If you expect not a considerable quantity of liquor from your matter, then
make use of a small Receiver, which you may hang to the Nose of the Limbick, by
a pack-thread fastened to the little button that is on the top of its head; but,
if it be big, and you hope for much liquor, then place it carefully upon a
little Stool, or upon Bricks laid one upon another.

Blind Limbicks are made of a Cucurbit, and its head, sealed hermetically to
it, of the bigness of ones fist: in the top of the head there is a little hole,
fit to receive the small end of a Tunnel, by which the Liquors are poured into
this Vessel, and in the lower part of the head, there is a nose by which the
Liquors distill. Its use is, to rectify the acid Spirits of Minerals,
Vegetables and Animals, so that nothing be lost, nor exhale from them; and
therefore you must carefully stop the hole, by which you put in your matter,
with a Glass or Cork-stopple.

Twins or Pelicans are two blind Limbicks, whose noses are reciprocally
inserted into the Bodies of one another: they must both have a hole in the top,
for the use mentioned in the other: they serve to fix and circulate the Oils,
and Spirits, with their Salts, of Animals, Vegetables and Minerals.

The Retort is a glass made up of a great belly, or ball, and a long bending
neck, which near the belly is six or eight inches wide, but diminishing, still
grows less, till its end be but wide enough to put your finger in; it serves to
distill by the side of the Furnace, and ordinarily in a naked circulatory fire,
the black Oils, and Spirits of Minerals and Metals, and the stinking Oils of
Vegetables and Animals.

The Iron or Earthen Retort, is like the Glass-one; only the neck is three
inches diameter, near the belly, and two inches in its extremity; to the end,
that gross and heavy ingredients may the easilier be put in: it serves to
distill the Spirit, and stinking Oils of Woods, Barks, Roots and Berries.

The Mattress or Bolt-head is always of Glass, and may be of different sizes: it
consists of a round bowl, unequal in its bottom, with a neck half a foot long,
or thereabouts, according to the bigness of the body; the neck is every where
an inch wide: it serves to sublime Mercury, and diverse Salts.

The Recipient is a Mattress of any bigness, whose neck must be broken off four
fingers breadth, near the belly; to the end that the extremity of the neck of
the Retort may enter into the middle of the body of the Receiver: it serves to
receive Waters, Essences, Oils and Spirits of Animals, Vegetables, Minerals and
Metals.

The way to make a Recipient of a Mattress, is this: Heat the neck in that part
where you intend to cut it off, and when it is very hot, wet it, and so knock
it with a hammer, and it will break there where it has been wet; if it be not
very even, you may with a key even it by little and little.

The Stone, or Earthen Receiver, is of the same figure with the Glass one, only
it has a wider neck to receive the Nose of the Earthen Retort; you may use an
Earthen Pitcher, if you cannot get a fit Receiver, so the neck of the Pitcher
be straight, and the belly big and wide, taking care to lute it close with the
Retort: but these Earthen Receivers are seldom used, except it be to receive
the Spirits, and stinking Oils of Wood, Rinds, Roots, Barks and Berries.

The double Vessel in form of a Mattress, is a Mattress with a long neck, into
which is inserted the neck of another Mattress of the same bulk; in the ball,
though its neck be a little less, and may, if you will, also be shorter, and go
but half way into the first Mattress; you must lute with three or four slices of
Paper the Junction of these two Vessels, that nothing may exhale: it serves to
extract by Infusion in a Sand-heat, all sorts of Tinctures.

The double Vessel, in form of a Cucurbit or Body, is a Cucurbite of Glass, or
Earth, upon whose mouth you place a Cup like your Cupping-Glasses, with the
mouth downwards; it having a little brim, by which it is suspended upon the top
of the Cucurbite: these two Vessels must be close luted together. The best Lute
will be of Flower, or Starch, in form of a hasty Pudding. This Vessel serves to
extract by infusion the tincture of Aromatic Flowers, that so nothing may be
lost of their Spirit, and is fitter than the Pitcher ordinarily used to this
purpose.

The Bell is a great Glass-Vessel, like the Bell Gardiners use to cover Melons
withal. The use of this is, to draw the Spirit and Oil of Sulphur, of Salt
Armoniack, of Antimony, and Mars, or Iron, by covering with it an Earthen Pan;
and if you turn it with the mouth upwards, it serves for precipitations, and
washings or lotions.

The Glass-Tunnel, though it be open at both ends, yet we reckon it among the
Vessels; as well, because sometimes by stopping the little end, it is really
one, and contains Liquors, as because there is something worth observation in
its Fabric or making; it must have a straight long neck: because being used in
the blind Alimbeck, it must reach as far as within the Body, and not spill upon
the inward brim of it; it must not have so large a belly as the Tin-Tunnels,
lest when you separate your distilled Oil from their Phlegm and Spirit, much of
the Oils be lost by sticking to the large sides of your Tunnel. It serves to
separate the Oil from the acid Phlegm distilled with it, which is done by
letting these two Liquors settle in the Tunnel, and then taking away your
finger which stopped it, and giving leave to that Liquor which is lowermost to
run out; which done, stop again the neck of your Tunnel, and let the remainder
of your Liquor run into another Vial. It may be lined with a cornet of brown
Paper, through which are filtrated Lixiviums, Washings, and diverse other
things, and may also stand you in stead of a Tin-Tunnel.

The Crucible is a pot; of which there are of different sizes. It is made of
the same earth as white ware; it is round without a handle very narrow at the
bottom, and wider and wider toward the top: it has a little Sinus or Cavity,
by which the thing melted is poured out: it serves to calcine and melt Minerals
and Metals, especially in a small quantity.

The Camion, is a Pot like an ordinary Chamber Pot with a handle to it. It is
made of Potters Earth, and Sand; and therefore it holds out strongly in the
fire, which your Pots made of ordinary Earth do not, but fly. There are two
sorts of these Pots, some are glazed, or leaded, and these serve to evaporate
and dry; some are unglazed, and they serve to melt and calcine Minerals, and
Metals, and every thing that needs such preparation, especially if you have a
great quantity to prepare, these Camions being bigger than Crucibles.

A Pan is an Earthen Vessel straight-bottom'd, and flat and wide-mouthed. There
are two sorts: Glazed, that serves to evaporate in a naked fire Extracts,
Syrups, Pills, Plasters, etc. and Unglazed ones, which serve to evaporate in a
Bath, or Sand heat, Salts, Crystals, etc. and to wash salt Remedies.

In some of our Operations, we make use of Utensils of the Kitching; as
Frying-Pans, to make the Oil of Eggs; Kettles, and Brass Basins, to congeal the
Crystal Mineral, and make our Cauteriums.

Of the Chemical Fire.
IN the governing of the Chemical fire, there are four things to be considered;
viz. 1. The materials of your fire; 2. The interposition of your fire; 3. The
disposition of your fire; and, 4. The ordering, governing, or regimen of your
degrees of fire.

The Materials are of five sorts; whereof two are common, and the other three
extraordinary, viz. Coal, Wood, a Lamp, the Beams of the Sun, helped by a
Burning-glass, and Horse-dung.

Your Coals must have two conditions to be good; they must be of good Wood, and
of any Wood rather than of Oak, because all Oak-Coals flies, and may break your
Glasses. 2. They must be very dry, that they may make a quick live-fire, and
spare you the labor of blowing; the best Coal is that which is of a middle
size, round, and of a Beech-Tree: the Wood must have the same qualities, for
the same reasons.

The Lamp is a Tin-Box full of Oil, in which swim three or four wicks, or
links: this is set in the Lamp-Furnace; which serves to digest or distill, with
a long and moderate heat, without any obligation of being present at the
operation. Because a Lamp-fire is very seldom used, we have not in the
description of Furnaces made any mention of a Lamp-Furnace, neither will we
here say any more of its figure, and proportions, nor of the Oil that is to be
used; being resolved to set down all these things more particularly in some of
our Operations.

The Sunbeams serve to extract Tinctures; to make long digestions, to Calcine
some Minerals, especially when the said Beams are gathered by a Burning-glass:
which way we shall also describe at length in some of our Operations.

The Horse-dung is used by putting into it Vessels sealed up hermetically, or
close stopped, there to ferment and circulate. We shall also describe this way
in some of our Operations.

The Interposition of the Chemical fire, is of four sorts. 1. When between the
Vessel and the Fire, there is nothing but two Iron-Bars, or a little Round to
set the Vessel on, and this is called working by a naked fire. 2. When between
the fire and the Vessel, there is an Iron-plate, or Brass Kettle, or an Earthen
Pan, full of ashes or sand, into which the Vessel is sunk more or less; and
this is called, Working with a Sand-fire, or of Ashes. 3. When between the fire
and the Vessel, there is a Kettle full of Water, into which your Vessel is set
up to the neck; and this is called, working by a Balneum Maris, or Mariae, that
is, a Sea-Bath, or Mary's Bath. 4. Is when between the fire and the Vessel,
there is a Kettle full of Water, which Kettle is covered, and its Cover has
five holes in it, upon which are placed as many Vessels to receive the Vapor
of the Bath; and this is called Working by a Vaporous Bath.

The disposition of the Chemical fire is of four sorts: 1. Where the fire is
placed only under the Vessels, as is done in the five Furnaces following, viz.
of the great and small Reverberatory of the circulary fire, of the sand fire,
of the Balneum Maris, and Vaporous Bath; and observe, that though in the two
first Furnaces the heat is by Reverberation as strong above as below the
Vessels, yet the fire is only under them. 2. Where the Coals are laid only
round about the Vessel upon the ground; and this is called Ignis rotae, or a
circulary fire. 3. Where the Coals are not only laid round about the Vessel,
but are heaped up to the top of it, and that is called a fire of
half-suppression; but, if you cover even the top of your Vessel with Coals,
then it is a fire of whole-suppression. 4. Where the fire is altogether above
the Vessel, which is also a fire of suppression; and is used in distillations
per descensum, for which Operation we make use of a great Earthen glazed
Tunnel, of a little Iron Plate full of holes, and of a Kettle full of fire:
which way of operating, we will teach more distinctly in some of our Processes.

The Regimen or Degree of the Chemical fire, is also of four sorts: 1. When you
give and continue a small fire, all along the Operation, as is practiced in the
first sublimation of dulcified Mercury. 2. When you give a moderate heat either
at first, for fear of breaking your glasses, or by little and little, when
there is the like danger; and then maintain this heat in such an equality as to
augment and diminish it when it passes the limits of moderation, as it is
practiced in the distillation of the Spirit of Wine; and in a sand-fire, where
you stop your ash-hole door, and almost all your fire-room door; as also the
hindmost Register, that so you may keep your Coals in that heat that they are
in. 3. When you augment the heat by degrees, till you come to the last and
greatest you can procure, and that soon after, that your operation ceases as it
is practiced in the distillation of the Oil of Bricks. And observe here, that
all the activity of the fire is divided into four degrees; a little fire is the
first degree; a moderate is the second degree; a great fire is the third; and a
very great and intense one is the fourth. 4. When you have augmented the fire
by degrees, and are come to the last, which you maintain the space of some
hours, as it is done in the distillation of the black Oil of Vitriol, or
Colcothar.

The Spirit of Salt.
TAke a quantity of Potters-Earth, cut it into slices of the length, breadth
and thickness of a finger, and set them in order upon a Grid-iron; which you
shall set upon red Coals in a hot Oven after the bread is drawn: when they are
dry on one side, turn them on the other; then take them out, and powder them in
a Mortar: and keep this Earth, thus dried and powdered, as well for this
Operation, as for diverse others.

Mingle five parts of this Earth, thus prepared, with one part of common Salt,
beaten to powder, but not decrepitated; with this matter fill a Glass-Retort,
of an ordinary size, which must be luted up to half the neck; set it in a close
Reverberatory, and fit it to a large and capacious Glass-Receiver. Give your
fire by degrees, coming as soon as you can to the last degree, which continue
twenty four hours, or till your Recipient seem cold, though the Retort be
violently hot; from whence you may infer, that your matter has sent out all
its Spirits: out of one pound of Salt by this method, you will draw nine or ten
ounces of Spirits.

Observe, 1. This Earth is given to the Salt as an intermedium to hinder its
fusion: for Salt melts in a great fire, and being once melted, becomes so fix,
as there is no raising of its Spirits to distill them.

Observe, 2. That we rather make use of a Glass, than of an Earthen Retort;
because, the Spirits of Salt being very acid, and something corrosive, might so
penetrate the Earth of the Retort, as to lose something of their virtue, and
dull their activity; therefore you must also keep your Spirit of Salt in Glass,
not in Earthen Vessels.

Observe, 3. That the Salt must not be decrepitated, that is, separated from
its Phlegm, nor the Clay absolutely dried, or heat red in the fire: for it is
necessary, that there should remain some watrish humidity in both: to the end,
that this phlegm coming, first in distillation, may help the acid Spirits, and
be as a Vehicle to them; otherwise, were your fire never so violent, if there
were no Phlegm, you would never obtain any acid Spirits.

Observe, 4. That your Retort must be filled up to the neck, because the
Spirits, in their first rising and separating themselves from their grosser
parts, would, if there were any Vacuum, presently re-impregnate themselves, and
be so fixed, as that no power of fire would be able to raise them again, and
make them Volatile: whereas the Vapors raised, meeting with no empty room in
the Retort, are not able to condense there, but by the fire are forced into the
Recipient; into which they enter in form of a white Vapor, which by little and
little cools, and condenses, and at last dissolves into a Liquor white and
clear as water.

Observe, 5. That that Phlegm which first comes is little in quantity; and if
you will have your Spirit strong and pure, you may deflegmate and rectify it
in a sand-heat.

Its virtue and use is, It resists all corruption taken interiourly, and
outwardly applied; and for this reason in venomous and malign Fevers, we
mingle three or four drops of it with a Cordial Julip: and for a preservation
against the Plague, we put a spoonful of it into a quart of Oxycrate, and so
rub the body all over before a good fire: It whitens the Teeth admirably, being
mingled with a little Water, or some syrup; it is a powerful diuretic against
suppressions of Urine, caused by the oppilation of the conducts through which it
should pass: it drives the Gravel out of the Kidneys and Bladder; and so is
specific to break the Stone of the Kidneys and Bladder; that if you put a
Stone cut out of a humane Bladder, into a quantity of Spirit of Salt, it will
dissolve immediately without fire, or any addition of any thing, though it were
never so hard; it is used to dissolve Gold, and make it Potable: if you do whet
its Virtue, by putting to it a little Salt decrepitated before you put your
Gold in it; alone it dissolves Pearls and Coral.

The marks whereby you may know and distinguish this Spirit from others, are
these; 1. That it is clear and white, drawing to a citrine, transparent color.
2. Being newly made, it is Vaporous, and seizes the nose presently, but without
stink; and being old, it has no odor at all. 3. That upon your tongue it is of
an acid biting faltish taste. 4. It neither corrodes, nor tinges of any color
its cork-stopple.

Spirit of Niter.
MIngle one part of fine and well purified Niter, with four or five parts of
Potters Earth prepared, as in the Chapter of Spirit of Salt; fill with this, a
Glass-Retort well luted up to its neck; place it in a close Reverberatory
Furnace, fitting to it a large and capacious Recipient; give your fire by
degrees, till you come to the highest, which continue twenty four hours. The
Phlegm will come first, and in small quantity, and also with a little Spirit,
which will appear in the Recipient in form of a White Vapor; a little after
the pure Spirit will come, appearing in form of red Vapors, which will make
your Recipient bright, and red as a Ruby. Out of one pound of Niter thus
distilled, you may have four ounces of Spirit.

Obs. 1. That you must be very exact in luting your Retort close with your
Recipient; lest many of your Vapors should exhale: and however, the Artist
must have a care of coming too near at that time; lest the Sulphurous, and
Malign Vapors of the Niter (which our Authors call the flying Dragon) should
offend his Brain, and Nerves, and make him Paralytick, by the fusion and
resolution of the humors of the Brain, which at that time borrowing from the
subtle Nitrous Vapors an extraordinary thinness and penetration, would easily
insinuate themselves into the nerves, and by their abundance, cause a total
Obstruction.

Obs. 2. That we give the Potters Earth to Niter, as we do to Salt, to hinder
its fusion: now Niter is very easily melted, because it is the Body which helps
other Bodies to be so too; by reason of its great thinness, the abundance of
its Sulphurous substance, and its penetration; but when once it has been
melted, it becomes so fix, that, having lost all its Sulphur, it can neither
evaporate, nor be inflamed, though you put it into the fire: Then therefore it
is called Salt of Niter, being fix as Salts; whereas before its fusion, it was
so strangely Volatile, that when you did but put a Coal into it, it presently
was in such a flame, that it was almost quite consumed.

Obs. 3. That for this Operation we make use of very fine purified Niter;
because the purer it is, the less it has of fixed Salt in it, and therefore
yields more Spirits; you may learn in the Chapter of Crystal-Mineral, how Niter
is purified, and that in its purifying, it is divested of its fixed Salt.

Obs. 4. and 5. That the Retort must be of Glass, and filled up to the neck,
for the reasons alleged in the precedent Operation.

Obs. 6. That the Phlegm which comes first in the distillation, is in a very
small quantity, and cannot be separated from the Spirit by rectification;
because this Spirit is so Volatile, that it comes of a sudden conjointly with
the Phlegm, and so the rectification would be unnecessary; the Phlegm being in
so small a proportion to the Spirit, as not to be able to make the last lose
any thing of its activity and energy.

Its Virtues and use: This Spirit is Corrosive, not only applied to Warts,
rotten Flesh, and the Gangreen, but it corrodes and dissolves Mercury, and the
other Metals; it is often to be preferred to Aqua fortis, for these two uses;
or it is not so burning in its action upon the flesh, as Aqua fortis; and it is
much fitter for the dissolutions which are made by it of Mercury, and other
Metals and Minerals, in order to the preparing of some remedy to be taken
inwardly, as well because pure Niter is an acid aperitive, and pure Vitriol is
an acid vometive; as because Niter, being a Sulphurous Salt, drawn from
temperate Animals, and Vitriol, a terrestrious Salt drawn from Minerals, by
their union in the composition of Aqua fortis, is produced a malignous quality.
Nay, it is fitter than Aqua fortis, for the dissolution of Minerals in order to
make Fucuses for the face, because the Spirit of Niter, applied to the skin,
leaves but a little yellow spot, which may be easily taken away; whereas Aqua
fortis leaves a deep orange-spot, so sticking, and adhering, that it can never
be taken out, but with the loss of the skin; from whence we may infer, that a
Fucus prepared with Aqua fortis, should rather black than whiten the skin.

The marks to distinguish this Spirit, are these: 1. That it is of the same
color and transparency as the Spirit of Salt. 2. That it is very vaporous and
stinking, coming near the stinking smell of Aqua fortis. 3. It is too corrosive
and biting, to be tasted upon the Tongue; but, to try its goodness, pour out
some drops upon a Brass halfpenny, and, if it be right, it will presently boil,
and makes the halfpenny stir, it produces a blew color in the said halfpenny.
4. It corrodes, and makes its Linen-stopple look yellow, as Aqua fortis uses to
do; sometimes the Spirits of Vitriol and Sulphur are sophisticated by putting a
little Spirit of Niter, or a little Aqua fortis into common Water, till there
result an acid taste, which is not caustic: but you shall perceive this cheat,
if having rubbed a Paper with the Spirits of Vitriol and Sulphur in one place,
and the Spirit of Niter and common Water in another place, you present the said
Paper to the fire; for then the place rubbed with the Spirits of Vitriol and
Sulphur, will grow black and break; and the place rubbed with Spirit of Niter
in common Water, will only grow yellow, and not break.

The Spirit and black Oil of Vitriol.
TAke an Earthen-pot unglazed, of the Earth they make Crucibles of, fill it up
to the brim with good green Vitriol; set this pot upon a Salt-seller in a great
Circulatory fire: in two hours time, or there abouts, your Vitriol having first
dissolved into a Liquor, will be dried, deflegmated, and at last coagulated
into a grayish lump; then take out your pot, let it cool, and, when cold, put
your matter into a Brass or Iron Mortar, and powder it.

Take a Glass Retort, well luted up to half the neck; fill it with the said
Vitriol, and place it according to Art, in a great Reverberatory fire, fitting
to it a great Receiver. Give your fire by degrees, coming as soon as you can to
the last, which continue till you perceive, in the top and sides of your
Receiver, a kind of black Veins that trickle down to the bottom; these are the
black Oil which begins to distill. Then unlute your Receiver from its Retort,
and separate by inclination, the acid Spirit of Vitriol, which hitherto has
been distilled, and which is of a white and transparent color like Water, and
which entered your Receiver in the form of a white Vapor.

By this time your Vitriol will be calcined into a red color, and brought to
be a Colcothar, which yet retains its black Oil. Which to extract, you must
again fit the Receiver to its Retort without lute; for else, the neck of the
Retort being exceeding hot, would presently break by the approach of the cold,
and moist Lute; continue then your fire, and give it in the highest degree, for
the space of six, or eight hours, till your Receiver be cold, though the fire
be vehement under the Retort, by that you will perceive that the contained matter
has yielded all its black and thick Oil. Let your fire go out: then take out
your Retort, which by the long violence of the fire will seem somewhat sunk and
straightened, and in it will remain a Colcothar, divested of its phlegm, its
Spirit, and its black Oil; but yet containing the fixed Salt of Vitriol, and
therefore is not so sharp and acrimonious as the first Colcothar. It Is out of
this second Colcothar, that you may extract the Caput mortuum of Vitriol, by
making a Lexivium of the said Colcothar, to extract its fixed Salt. Out of one
pound of green Vitriol, you will have nine or ten ounces of Spirit, with its
Phlegm, and half an ounce of black Oil. The acid Spirit of Vitriol contains
much Phlegm, which came first with it; therefore if you desire to have a
purified Spirit, you must evaporate the Phlegm by putting this Spirit
Inflegmated into a Mattress not luted, which set upon a Salt-seller in a small
Circulatory fire, till the whole substance be half diminished, and begin to
look a little yellowish; if you continue this Evaporation any longer, your
Spirit will become blackish, drawing near the color and acidity of your Oil of
Colcothar.

If reciprocally with the said black Oil of Colcothar, you desire to make a
white acid Spirit, do but mingle in a Mattress one dragm of the said Oil with an
ounce of common water; then you shall see that the said Oil will presently go
to the bottom; and will so heat the neck of the Mattress, that you will scarce
be able to hold it in your hand. Mingle them well by agitation, till the water
grow blackish, then through Paper filtrate the said liquor, and there will come
a clear acid Spirit, as yellow as Gold, which will have the same force and
virtue as the common Spirit of Vitriol; the Paper retaining the black and thick
faeces. From whence we may conclude, that this clear Liquor, which we call
Spirit of Vitriol, is nothing but a small portion of the true Spirit mingled
with a great deal of Phlegm, and that this black Liquor which we call Oil, is
indeed a pure Spirit of Vitriol, entirely dephlegmated, but because of its
Sulphurous blackness and thickness, it is improperly called Oil, being
somewhat unctuous to the feeling, though it be not at all inflameable, as all
true Oils are.

Obs. 1. That you must dephlegmate the Vitriol, and powder it well before you
put it into your Retort; else you would not draw off the Spirit, but the Phlegm
alone: for, the matter would coagulate in the bottom of the Vessel into a lump,
which sticking close to the sides of the Retort, would so retain all the
Spirits, that a strong fire of forty hours lasting, would scarce be able to
reduce this mass to powder: therefore it is better to dephlegmate and reduce to
powder your Vitriol, before it be put into the Retort.

Obs. 2. That we give no Intermedium to Vitriol, as we do to Salt and Niter;
because, being a terrestrious Salt, it cannot be melted, and by consequent,
cannot fix and retain its Spirits within its self: so that, provided it be
dephlegmated, the Spirits are easily raised, and distilled by the violence of
the fire.

Obs. 3. That you need not fill your Retort up to the neck with your matter,
because the Spirit of Vitriol, having not so much tenuity as the Spirits of
Salt and Niter, is not in danger of reimpregnating and fixing its self in its
own mass.

Obs. 4. That the Retort must be of Glass, for the reason alleged in the
Spirit of Salt.

Obs. 5. That you choose good Vitriol, not too dry; for it will yield more
Spirit and Oil: therefore that which comes from Germany and the Low Countries,
is better than the Roman Vitriol for this effect.

Its virtue and effects: Both the white Spirit, and the black Oils, are Acids,
which pleasantly and excellently do cool, desopilate, and resist all
corruption: and therefore they are frequently, and with good success, made use
of for the Liver and Kidneys, in burning and Pestilentious Fevers. The dose is
five or six drops of the Spirit, two or three of the Oil, either in Water,
Broth, or White Wine: It serves for the dissolution of Metals; and in Surgery
it is used, either pure, or mingled with a little water or Mel rosatum, to
touch the ulcers of the mouth.

The first and second Colcothar are both an excellent Astringent, given in
violent Diarrhoea's, Dysenteries, and Hepatick Fluxes: or, mingled with some
unguents, it stops bleeding Wounds.

The Marks to distinguish the Oil of Vitriol from other, are these: 1. It is
very black: 2. It is not only acid, but caustic: 3. It is very heavy: 4. It
seizes the nose, with a strong Vapor, when new made; and in all these four
conditions, it is like the Oil of Sulphur.

As for the Spirit, it is known by its pleasant acidity, by its yellowish
color: and because, being old, it yields no smell, no more than Spirit of
Sulphur, neither does it corrode, or make its stopple yellow; the Spirits of
Niter and Aqua fortis, are distinguished from it by their smell; and because
they corrode, and change the color of their stopples: Spirit of Salt is known
from it, because it has a brackish taste, and smells strong when new, being
much more intolerable and unpleasant than Spirit of Vitriol.

Aqua Fortis.
TAke a Glass-Retort luted up to half its neck, put in it equal parts of common
Niter, and green Vitriol, not dephlegmated, but they must be beaten to powder
in an Iron Mortar before: fill but two thirds of your Retort, leaving a third
empty, for else the Vitriol being melted by the Niter, would, it may be, rise,
and run in substance into the Recipient, before the distillation of the Aqua
fortis could be begun.

Set your Retort in a little Reverberatory, or in a little Circulatory fire, (a
great Reverberatory being not so necessary here, because the Niter is of it
self so volatile; and having melted the Vitriol, it makes it likewise capable of
yielding its Spirits without a very violent degree of heat.) Give your fire by
degrees; continuing the first degree, till the phlegm, which will appear in a
white vapor in the Recipient, be distilled; otherwise, if at first you did
give a great heat, the Niter and Vitriol together would boil over your Vessel,
and in their own substance run into the Recipient: When your Recipient begins
to fill with red Vapors, (which is the sign of the Spirit's coming forth)
augment your fire, and cover your Retort with Coals; if it be in a Circulatory
fire, continue this heat till your Recipient begin to lose something of the
brightness of its red color, and till it become cold, though the fire be
vehement under the Retort: then the matter has sent forth all its Spirits, and
you shall find these red Vapors dissolved all into a white clear Liquor, as
water: Out of one pound of common Niter, and as much of green Vitriol
undephlegmated, you may have sixteen ounces of Aqua fortis.

Obs. 1. That though the Spirit of Vitriol cannot be drawn from Vitriol
undephlegmated, yet Aqua fortis may; because being in company with the Niter,
it cannot, after the distillation of its Phlegm, coagulate in a lump, which
might fix and retain its Spirits; the Niter, by its opening Sulphur, keeping
the Vitriol porous and vaporous.

Obs. 2. That Aqua fortis may be very well made with dephlegmated Vitriol, and
fine Niter; and then it is so strong and corrosive, that it is Aqua regalis,
and can dissolve Gold and Silver: but because we do not ordinarily need in
Chemistry so strong a dissolvent, for the frequent dissolutions we make of
Mercury, of Tin, of Bismuth, and of Silver; we are content with Aqua fortis
prepared as has been taught.

Its virtue and use: This is a very caustic burning water; some do touch Warts
and Corns with it: but it is dangerous so to do, and our Chemistry will afford
us gentler and fitter remedies, which I shall set down hereafter. It serves to
dissolve your Metals and Minerals: the Dyers use it, to give a strength and
penetration to their Colors.

The Marks to distinguish it, are, 1. It is yellowish. 2. Stinks very much. 3.
It yellows and corrodes its stopple, and the bladder and pack-thread that are
employed about the stopping of it. 4. If you pour a drop or two of it upon a
Brass-half-peny, it makes it stir, and look green.

The Spirit and black Oil of Sulphur.
TAke a great Stone, or unglazed Earthen Pan, put it into a pound of common
water; in the middle of this Pan, set a little Stone-pot, and upon this Pot,
place a little flat Earthen Cup full of sand: in the mean time, reduce into
powder four pound of Brimstone, and of this put one spoonful into the middle of
the sand, then take a great Coach-wheel Nail, and heat it red hot, and with a
pair of Tongs put the head of it into this Brimstone which is in the sand,
presently the Brimstone will be in a flame: therefore have ready a Glass-Bell
well proportioned to the bigness of your Pan, and with it cover your Pan, as
soon as the Brimstone begins to take fire; and that you may lose nothing of the
Vapor, stop with Linen the junction of the Bell and Pan; from this inflamed
Sulphur will rise an abundance of white Vapors, which will be converted, part
of them into acid Spirits, which being received in the Pan, impregnate the
Water; and part of them into yellow Flowers of Sulphur, which will be found
sticking to the sides of the Bell and Pan, and will form a little skin upon the
superflicies of the Water. After a quarter of an hour, the Vapors being
ceased, and condensed into Spirits and Flowers; break that skin, that the Water
may be at liberty to re-impregnate it self with new Spirits, at a second
flagration; then put another spoonful of Sulphur, inflame it, cover it, and in
a word, do as before, continuing this till all your Brimstone be spent. When
you have done, there remains a muddy acid Water, into which put all those
Flowers of Brimstone, which you find sticking to the sides of your Pan, or
Bell, as likewise those that swim upon the Water; put them all together into a
Mattress of an ordinary size not luted, which set upon a Salt-seller in the
little Circulatory fire; the Phlegm will be evaporated, the Flowers will
dissolve into the Spirit, and the Spirit will wax black; then with a wet clout
take out your Retort, and pour out your Liquor thus hot, into a white Earthen
Basin. The Spirit being cool, you will find in the bottom the Flowers congealed
into a bright yellow lump. By this method in one day, out of four pound of
Sulphur you may draw half an ounce of black Oil; and if you put an ounce of
Water upon one dram of this Oil, mingling them well in a Mattress, and then
filtring them through a course Paper, you may have that which is called the
Spirit, or Acid of Brimstone, of a yellow bright transparent color like Gold.
Or, by another way, do but evaporate the two thirds of your pound of Water,
impregnated with the Spirit of Brimstone, and there will remain four ounces of
a yellow inflegmated Spirit.

Obs. 1. That we put sand into the little Earthen Cup, lest the Brimstone,
inflamed, should break it; which it would do, were it empty.

Obs. 2. That, Water is put into the Pan, that the Spirits may be the better
gathered, without which they would be apt to be consumed to no purpose, in the
superficies and substance of the said Earthen Pan.

Obs. 3. That the Mattress in which the Evaporation is performed, must be
short-neck'd, that the phlegm may the easilier evaporate; therefore let it be
two inches high.

Obs. 4. That we pour the said Spirit hot into a white Basin, and not into a
glazed one, lest it should corrode the Lead of the Vernish, and so be weakened,
and laden with a blackness, which no filtration would be able to take away:
and the reason why we pour out the Liquor hot, is, because if we did let it
cool, the Brimstone would congeal into such a lump, as could never be come by,
without breaking the Mattress.

Obs. 5. That, if by this method there is but little Spirit drawn from such a
quantity of Sulphur, yet by all the other processes you meet with in Authors,
you shall draw less.

Its virtue and use: It cools and purifies the Blood, resists Corruption,
appeases the Burning Fevers. It Is a very good preservative against the Plague,
taking three or four drops of it in a glass of water ever morning. It is most
excellent to touch Venereal Ulcers and Warts; it dissolves Pearls and Corral:
It fixes Mercury; but cannot dissolve him, no more than the other Metals.

The Marks by which it is distinguished, are the same by which Spirit of
Vitriol is known from other Spirits; but all the difficulty is to distinguish
Spirit of Vitriol from Spirit of Sulphur.

Spirit of Wine.
TAke as much good Aqua vitae, as will fill your Vesica or Copper body half
full: set it in a naked Circulatory fire; fit to it its cover or Moors-head,
bordered with its Refrigeratory, having before hand put into the Vesica's long
neck five or six sponges, held up by two sticks set across, and kept from
falling down or rising up: Then to the Moors-head Nose fit the moveable Pipe,
which shall join it with the long Brass Pipe that goes through the two
Hogs-heads of water; then starch on long slices of Paper upon all the
conjunctions of the Pipes; and over the Paper, put cloth-ones, which bind fast
with pack-thread: fit your Receiver of glass to the lower end of the long Brass
Pipe that goes through the Hogs-heads; set your Coals on fire, and add some
wood to them, to make at first a great fire, which may raise and distill your
Spirit quickly. In a very little time, it will come not by drops, but in a
small stream like a Fountain. In all the course of this Operation, there must
be singular care taken that the distillation be equal and moderate, so that as
soon as you perceive white vapors in the Recipient, diminish your fire; either
by throwing ashes on it, or taking a good deal of it away. For these white
Vapors are the Spirits which come in such an abundance, that they have not had
time to condense, neither in the Moors-head, nor in the long Pipe, and
therefore will easily escape out of your Receiver, and so the best of your
Spirit will be lost to no purpose: besides, whenever the Distillation is
performed in too big a stream, though there be no Vapors, yet diminish your
fire. But if it should come drop by drop, then augment the heat; you may take
notice that the first quart that comes, though excellent and pure, yet it is
not clear, but muddy, having contracted a foulness from the sides of the
Vessel; therefore throw it in again with a Tunnel by the little Pipe, which on
purpose is in the top of the Vesica, and presently stop the said Pipe close
with its Wooden stopper; the Spirit that shall from henceforth be distilled,
will be clear and transparent. By this method, out of thirty quarts of good
Aqua vitae, you may draw eighteen quarts of good Spirit of Wine in a day, and
in one only Vesica. You must observe often, all along your Operation, whether
your Spirit be well deflegmated; which try thus: Put as much Gunpowder as you
can take up with your two fore-fingers and your thumb, into a little spoon,
which fill with Spirit of Wine; then fire it with a Match, or lighted Paper:
for if this Spirit take fire and burn blew, till it be consumed, and then fire
the Gunpowder, and that at last there be no mark of any moistness left in the
spoon, you may be sure your Spirit is very pure, and very good.

The last Spirit that comes, is not good, as well because it brings phlegm with
it, as because it smells of the Empyreuma, or burning; and having been long in
the Vesica, is somewhat impregnated with the substance and qualities of the
Copper. Therefore set it aside to be used exteriourly, or in Mechanics; or
else rectify it again with new Brandy. Whenever your perceive that there
comes some muddy whitish drops, which make the clear Spirit which was in the
Receiver change its color, then know that it is time to make an end of the
Operation: for these drops are the phlegm which produces this effect upon the
pure Spirit: for if you put two or three drops of Water into good Spirit of
Wine, it will do the same thing. There will remain in the Vesica twelve quarts
of phlegm muddy and greenish from the Copper; this tincture is to be thrown away.

This Spirit of Wine does also contain in it self something of the Copper:
nevertheless it may be taken safely by the mouth, because that Copper extracted
by this Spirit, is not so dangerous as Verdigreece extracted out of Copper by
Vinegar. Nay, the Copper does contribute much to the preservation of this
Spirit in its force. But, if in a Glass Alembick you will take the pains to
rectify it, and reduce your eighteen quarts to fifteen, then you may without
scruple use it in all manners; and in the bottom of your Cucurbit, there will
remain a green tincture, which is a phlegm impregnated, with the Salt and
Sulphur of Venus, or Copper. Which tincture evaporated, congeals into blew
Crystals; then powdered and dissolved in common Water, filtred, and then
evaporated a second time, will again in a cold Cellar congeal into blew
transparent Crystals of Venus.

Its virtue and use: Spirit of Wine is a powerful Dissolver for all sorts of
Gums and Rosins, as well for the use of Physic, as to make China-Vernish: it
is good for Burnings, Contusions, Gangreens, Palsy, cold Fluxions;
particularly, if it be circulated with Salt of Tartar, it serves to extract
perfectly the tincture of all Barks, Rinds, Woods, Berries, Aromatic,
Balsamic, and Resinous, as also of Opium; to make of them Magisteries,
Extracts, Essences and Syrops.

The Phlegm, Spirit, and Oil of Turpentine.
FIll half the fourth part of a Brass Vesica with clear Venice Turpentine; pour
upon it common Water, till the Vessel be but half full, lest if it were fuller,
the Turpentine should boil up, and run in its own substance into the Receiver.
Fit to the Vesica the Moors-head, bordered with its Refrigeratory, omitting the
sponges in the neck, because the Liquor here is not spiritous enough to pass
through them. Give your fire, and govern your Operation altogether as has been
taught in the Chapter of Spirit of Wine.

The Phlegm, Spirit and Oil, will come altogether; but the Phlegm will sink to
the bottom of your Receiver, whereas the Spirit and Oil will swim above. There
will remain in the Vesica a thick substance called Colophon. Separate your
Phlegm by a Glass-Tunnel, and keep the Spirit and Oil incorporated together.
This Oily Spirit is sold by Druggists in Paris, under the name of Spirit of
Turpentine: they have it from Provence, and afford it us at a much cheaper
rate, than we could make it at Paris.

How to separate entirely the Spirit from the Oil. Fill a Glass-Retort half
full, (your Retort must be luted, only there must be upon the neck a long empty
space left to see into it, that so you may perceive toward the end of the
Operation, of what color your Oil is:) set your Retort upon a Round, in the
little Circulatory fire, and distill your matter, till you have three parts of
Spirit out of it, and that in the bottom of your Retort you see a thick red
Oil, almost of the color of a Pomgranate. Take then your Retort off from the
fire, and pour out this hot Oil into an Earthen Pan of white ware. As for the
Spirit which you have in the Receiver, rectify it again in the same Retort,
and by the same sort of fire, so as to distill three quarters and an half in
Spirit, and the rest remain in form of a thick red Oil: which done, pour out
the said Oil to that which you have already. Then rectify your Spirit again,
doing thus, as long as you can extract any Oil out of it: then your Spirit will
be right and pure, divested of its Oil, and without smell; but it will still
have its force and acrimony.

The Use and Virtues of the Spirit. It Is a powerful Diuretic, and makes the
Gonorrhaea's flow abundantly, by melting and inciding those tough and clammy
humors, which stop the passages of Sperm and Urine: It dissolves the soft
Stones which are not yet strongly petrified: It dissolves all Gums better than
Spirit of Wine, and that without any additional heat, either of Fire or Sun;
Therefore it is used in making the best Vernish: it dissolves with a small heat
Brimstone, and makes a better Balsam of it than that which is made with the
oily Spirit of Turpentine, bought at the Druggists. The Provencals, who are
great Drawers of Essences, use it in all their Operations, either upon Flowers
or Woods, Barks, Leaves or Berries, both Aromatic and Balsamic, because this
Spirit being naturally unctuous, is easily impregnated with the oily Essence of
these Druggs; and because it has no smell of its own, it easily takes the
Aromatic or Balsamic Odor of any of those that are infused in it, and then
distill it in the Vesica, as we do Spirit of Wine. For do not think that their
Essences are pure, and drawn from their Druggs alone: no, they are nothing but
Spirit of Turpentine, impregnated with the Essence of them. So that this Spirit
has a double use; for it extracts the Essence, and multiplies it considerably.

The Virtues and Use of the red Oil: It is a Sovereign Anodynum for the wounds
of nervous parts, because it has lost all its Acrimony, which consisted in its
Spirits.

The Salt of Tartar, of which is made the Oil of Tartar by solution of the Salt.
TAke equal parts of pure Nitar and good Tartar, either white or red; powder
them apart very fine: then mingle them in a glazed earthen Pan; then, with a
red hot Iron, stir all this mass, until the Niter be entirely consumed and
evaporated, which you shall know by the ceasing of flagration or burning. Thus
your Tartar, being perfectly calcined, will afford you a Salt as white as Snow,
and the same in weight with that which you mingled with the Niter at first;
whence you may conclude, that Tartar is all Salt.

The Oil of Tartar is made thus: Set this Salt in a very wet air, such as the
air of a Celler, there it will melt, and dissolve into a white viscous Liquor,
which we call Oil of Tartar by solution, to distinguish it from the black
stinking Oil, which is drawn by distillation in a Retort and open fire:
nevertheless, to speak properly, the name of Oil is not due to either of them,
because they are neither Sulphurous nor inflamable substances. If after you
have made the Salt of Tartar, you are in haste to have the Oil, you may
presently compass your end by throwing eight ounces of common Water upon four
ounces of this Salt of Tartar; for then it will all dissolve into Liquor.

Obs. 1. That you choose good Tartar; for that is all Salt: whereas the grosser
sort of Tartar has much of faeces, and terrestreity in it, which would spoil
this Operation, in which we pretend to dissolve all the Salt into Water.

Obs. 2. That your Niter be well divested of all its fixed Salt, because we
desire here a pure Salt of Tartar, without the mixtion of any other: therefore
your Niter must be entirely volatile, and exhale all in the flagration.

Obs. 3. That they both be well powdered, and mingled together, that so the
Niter penetrating the Tartar, do thoroughly calcine it; and it is for this
reason that we use an equal quantity of Niter: By this method the Tartar is far
better and easilier calcined than by the naked fire, without any Intermedium.

Obs. 4. That we make use here of an earthen glazed Pan, without any fear that
the Niter should corrode the Lead of the Vernish; because its flame is not
retained, but is at liberty to exhale. An unglazed or stone-Pan would be unfit
for the Operation, because it would presently break by the Inflammation of the
Niter.

The Virtues and Use of the Salt: It Is a great Aperitive, Deopilative, and
Diuretic; the dose is from one to two dragms, in some Broth, or any other
appropriated Liquor. The Tartar Vitriolated, because of the grateful acidity
which it borrows from the Vitriol, is much more pleasant to take than this
Salt. This Salt, in the quantity of half a scruple, will extract in a quarter
of an hour the virtue and tincture of half an ounce of Senna, in a glass of
cold water, and at the same time proves a good Corrective to the noisome smell
and taste of the Senna, giving it also the virtue of penetrating into all the
Veins.

The Oil of Tartar is very scouring and drying; and is therefore excellent to
rub all Scabs, Itch, and Tetters; as also to take away Spots, and Sunburns upon
the Hands and Face. It is useful to precipitate the dissolutions of Metals, and
Half-metals, or Marcasites. And pray, by the By, take notice, That all Acids,
as Seawater, distilled Vinegar, Oil of Tartar, Spirit, and black Oil of
Sulphur; and Vitriol, Spirit of Niter, and Aqua fortis, serve to precipitate
the dissolutions of Minerals: but that ordinary common Water, serves to
precipitate the Distillations and Calcinations of Minerals; as also the
Dissolutions of Vegetables made in Spirit of Wine, for the Reasons which
hereafter we shall allege.

Crystal Mineral, or Lapis Prunellae.
TAke a Pot of the same Earth that Crucibles are made of, of the bigness of a
Chamber Pot, and like it in Figure, with a handle; set it upon two Bricks in a
great Circulatory Fire of Suppression: before the Pot be heated, throw into it
as much pure Saltpeter in powder, as will fill it up to the brim; the
Saltpeter will melt; and as soon as it is melted, throw into it a spoonful of
Brimstone in powder, which immediately will take fire, and be consumed: when
the flame ceases, throw in as much more, and so do three or four times. This
Brimstone does not communicate any virtue to the Niter, only serves to purify
it, by precipitating its Faeces to the bottom of the Pot, till it become so
transparent, that after these Projections and Flagrations, you may see the
bottom of the Pot through the melted Niter. This done, pour a little of this
melted Niter into a Brass-tinn'd-Kettle, and presently set your Pot upon the
fire again, having taken away a good part of the Coals round about it; then
stir your Kettle so, as to make the Niter spread it self all over the bottom of
your Vessel; which done, set it in a bigger Vessel full of cold Water, that so
you may hinder the Niter from burning, and adhering too strongly to the bottom
of your Kettle: separate then at last this white Crust, which is as thin and as
brittle as Glass, and as white as Alabaster, and is by some called Crystal
Mineral.

After this, take more melted Niter out of your Pot, pour it into your Kettle,
and do all things as before, continuing till there be nothing left in the Pot
but the Faeces of the Niter, which you may throw away. Then gather all these
thin Crystals together, and put them into a Kettle of Water upon the Fire,
there to dissolve by a gentle ebullition; and if all dissolve not, it is a sign
there is not Water enough. When all is dissolved, take off your Kettle, and
filter this Liquor presently, while it is warm, through a brown Paper, over an
earthen unglaz'd Cucurbite. Then set the said Cucurbite in a Sand-heat, there
to evaporate, till there appear upon the Superficies a thin skin; then take it
off, let it cool; the Niter will crystallize into Needles of a sexangulary
Figure, white, clear, and transparent, as any Rock-Crystal; but as brittle as
Glass, and of a pleasant and grateful acidity. And then it is properly called
Crystal Mineral, because of its resemblance with Crystal. Some call it Lapis
Prunellae; and that is, because it is sharp and sour, like your wild Prunes or
Plums.

Obs. 1. That we make use of a Pot of the same Earth that the Crucibles are
made of, and not of an ordinary earthen-glaz'd Pot, because the Niter being
once melted, would also dissolve the ledding of the Pot; and being incorporated
with it, would lose much of its whiteness.

Obs. 2. That we fill the Pot full up to the brim, that we may make at once a
great quantity of Crystal Mineral; and because the Niter melted will take up
but half the room it did before, being no ways subject to rise and run over.

Obs. 3. That you must beat to powder your Niter; for so, a greater quantity
will be contained in the Pot, and also be easilier melted.

Obs. 4. That you must not stay till your Pot be warm, before you put in your
Niter; because the Pot being very hot, and the phlegm of the Niter coming to be
dissolved first, would be broke infallibly. Therefore put in your Niter at
first; and so by degrees, as your Pot warms, your Niter will be deflegmated:
and yet observe, That if you throw a spoonful of Niter into a pot red-hot, it
will not break, because there is too little phlegm for so much heat.

Obs. 5. That the Niter being hot enough, melts and is deflegmated; it melts by
the means of its phlegm; for it is the phlegm that puts all Salts into fusion.
And whenever Salts are entirely calcined or deflegmated, they cannot be
melted, except they be wet anew by some washings, and then they grow whiter.

Obs. 6. That if while the Niter is deflegmatizing, there chance to fall into
it any small live Coal, then it will all be in a flame, till the Coal be
consumed; and, to extinguish this flame, there is no way but to take out the
said Coal, and to cover the pot.

Obs. 7. That if after the melting of your Niter, and the purifying of it by
the different injections of Brimstone, you do not take off your pot, or take
away some Coals, and the two first rounds of Bricks of your Furnace, that then
your Niter will break the pot, though it were of Iron; and then the fire will
inflame your Niter: which inflamed, will all exhale, and vanish away. The
reason why the pot will be broken, is, because that then the Spirits of the
Niter, being strongly heated, fly out of their body, and so corrode and break
the pot.

Obs. 8. That the Niter does not take fire in the pot; because, that though a
spoonful of Niter cast into a pot red-hot, will presently be in a flame, and
vanish all away in smoke; yet a great quantity of Niter, even after its
deflegmations, cannot be set a-fire, but by a red-hot Coal, unless you use a
fire of Suppression, and so penetrate the pot, as to make it fire the Niter.
And that cannot be done, because in such an Operation, an Earthen or Iron Pot
or Crucible would break, and a Glass one would melt down.

Obs. 9. That the Niter, being melted, is not afterward coagulated into a lump
upon the fire, as Vitriol and Alum use to do; because they are gross
terrestrious Salts, which Niter is not.

Obs. 10. That you must take well purified Niter, that so there be less of
fixed Salt in it: for, the fixed Salt is easily dissolved into Water; and
therefore your Niter being clear of it, will make your Crystals whiter and
drier; if you use ordinary unrefin'd Niter, your Crystals will be apt to
dissolve into Water.

Obs. 11. That the Brimstone takes fire in the melted Niter, and yet inflames
not the Niter; because the oily substance of the Brimstone is dryer than the
Niter, and because that the Niter can scarce ever be well deflegmated: for its
Spirits, by reason of their great thinness, are subject to evaporate, and be
gone with the phlegm; as also, because no Vessel can long contain melted Niter,
without breaking or melting.

Obs. 12. That the Brimstone purifies the Niter, because that the grosser part
of the Brimstone, which has not been a-fire, mingling its self with the melted
Niter, hurries along with it to the bottom all the Faeces of the Niter.

Obs. 13. That Crystal Mineral is nothing but a well-purified Niter, that is
well divested, 1. Of its Phlegm: 2. Of its fixed Salt: 3. Of its black Faeces,
which it had contracted in those Vessels in which Niter is grossly prepared at
first; and so you see, unless you filtrate it, and then crystallize it, it is
not sufficiently purified. When once it has been crystallized, then you may
dissolve it again, and reduce it into a white Crust, which is called Lapis
Prunellae. Now the Crystal Mineral loses its phlegm, by the melting of the Niter
it is divested of; its Smoot by the flagrations of the Brimstone, and by the
filtration; and it loses its fixed Salt by the crystallization.

The Use and Virtues: It cools very much, resists Corruption, and is Diuretic:
It may be taken inwards, from half a scruple to a dram; and in a Clyster,
from two drachms to half an ounce.

The Niter sulphurated, or the nitrous Salt of Sulphur.
TAke four ounces of Flowers of Brimstone, and eight ounces of very fine
purified Niter, reduce them into a very fine Powder separately, and then mingle
them together.

Then pour into a great stone-Pan, a pint of Spirit of Urine, (drawn from fresh
Urine, in a Glass-Alimbeck, and Sand-fire;) in the middle of this Pan set a
little stone-Pot, upon which set also a little Cup of the same Earth.

Then begin to make the flagrations of the said Brimstone and Niter together;
and for this effect, put a spoonful of these two powders mingled together into
the little Cup, then put into them a red-hot Iron, your matter will be
immediately in a flame; therefore cover your Pan with a Glass-Bell, whereby you
may receive the red Vapors of the flaming matter. These Vapors will dissolve
into three different Substances, viz. into Spirits of Niter, and Spirits of
Sulphur, which fall together, and are incorporated with the Spirit of Urine in
the bottom of the Pan; and into nitrous flowers of Brimstone, which will be
found sticking, partly to the sides of the Bell, and partly to the sides of the
Pan, and part of them will be spread in form of a Pellicula, or little skin,
upon the superficies of the Spirit of Urine.

Take notice, That in this first flagration your Cup breaks infallibly, because
it is not lined or fenced with any thing that can hinder the Niter from
exrcising its activity upon it. In a quarter of an hour, or thereabouts, the
Vapors will be passed, and dissolved into the three Substances I have spoken
of; which done, break that little reddish skin upon the superficies of the
Spirit of Urine; to the end, that in the following flagrations, the Spirit of
Urine may be impregnated with the acid Spirits of the Sulphur and Niter, which
could not be, if that skin remained entire: then take away your broken Cup, in
which you will find a whitish Crust left. After the first flagration, powder
this, and put it into a new stone Cup, and it will keep it from breaking, as
the first did. Then put another spoonful of water into this Cup, fire it, and
in a word, observe all the circumstances of the Operation already described,
continuing it till all your Sulphur and Niter be consumed.

This done, take the calcined Faeces of Niter and Brimstone, which remain in
the bottom of your Cup, and reduce them into a fine powder, in an Iron Mortar:
then mingle them, with all that is contained in your Earthen Pan, taking care
to scrape off from the sides, into the Pan, all those Flowers that stick either
to the Bell or Pan: Let this stand, and infuse the space of twelve hours; to
the end, that the acid of the Niter and Sulphur, may entirely dissolve all the
said Faeces and Flowers: filtrate this Dissolution through a brown Paper, over
a glass Pan or Dish, and there will remain in the Paper some gray Faeces of the
Flowers of Sulphur, which you may throw away.

Then begin your second Operation, that is, the deflegmation or evaporation of
your Dissolution; To this purpose, put your Dissolution into a Mattress, which
must not be luted; because toward the end of the Operation, you are to see
what passes in the Vessel: Your Mattress must be shortnecked, to the end the
evaporation may be quicker; and it must not be above three quarters full, lest
the matter should boil and run over, by breaking the Glass. Set your Mattress
upon a Round, in a small Circulatory Fire, hindering all sorts of Coals, either
kindled or not, from coming near your Glass, for fear of breaking it. Continue
a good equal Fire, till you perceive, after a long boiling, a kind of white
scum upon your matter; then lessen the Fire, and let your matter evaporate
gently, till it be of a clear milky color, and cease to boil, and make a noise.

Then augment the heat, that so in a small time you may evaporate the nitrous
red Spirits still remaining: then, if with this augmentation of heat your
matter does not boil, take it off from the fire, and pour it very hot into a
stone-Pan, stirring and turning your Pan so as to make your liquor congeal, and
spread it self all over equally, in the form of a Crust, as white as Alabaster,
but as brittle as Glass.

This second Operation, thus performed, you must begin a third, which is to
mould this Salt into the Figure of Glass-Vials. This third Operation does
indeed add nothing to the virtue of the remedy, but is only an ingenious
beautifying of it, which is thus performed.

Fill little Glass-Vials half full with these white Crusts, place a Vial upon
the ground, and surround it with live Coals, the Salt will presently melt: when
it is melted, take away your Vial, and shake it, that the Salt may stick to the
sides of it, and so take the shape of the Glass; then wet your Vial with cold
Water, and it will break into a thousand pieces, which will nevertheless cleave
to the Salt. These you must loosen with the point of a knife, and when you have
taken away all the bits of Glass, there will remain a Vial of Salt, as white as
Alabaster, and which may be so preserved till you need it.

Obs. 1. That to make the Salt of Brimstone, you must calcine the Brimstone,
and that nothing can calcine it so well as Niter, which, by firing the
Brimstone, raises its volatile part, or Spirits, and leaves in the Cup the Calx
of Brimstone, containing but few Faeces, and a great deal of fixed Salt: and
the Niter being pure, burns all away, and remains not in the said Calx; but,
because here Niter is the Agent, therefore we use here as much again of it as
of Sulphur, which is the Patient. The reddish Flowers of Brimstone are also
calcined by the said Niter.

Obs. 2. That we use here Spirit of Urine, as well because that if there were
no Liquor, the acid Spirits of Niter and Brimstone would be lost in the pores
of the earthen Pan, as because that the said Spirit of Urine is a powerful
Diuretic, and does therefore augment the virtue of our Remedy.

Obs. 3. That the hardest thing in this Operation, is to deflegmate the
dissolution of Brimstone in the Spirit of Sulphur, and there is a great deal of
danger that the Mattress will break toward the end of your Operation, when the
matter rises, and boils high; therefore be diligent, moderate your heat,
Experience makes a good Artist.

Obs. 4. That after you have happily evaporated your Dissolution, that you may
conclude your process, and choose whether you will mould your Salt into the
Figure of Glass-Vials, or no: but pour out your Dissolution into an earthen
Dish, and so keep it.

Obs. 5. That this nitrous Salt of Brimstone, is nothing but the Flowers of
Brimstone, calcined by the Salt of Niter, then impregnated with the Spirits of
Brimstone and Niter, and at last coagulated into a white Salt. If after the
evaporation of the Spirit of Niter, which was incorporated with this Salt, you
take of it, and Sal Ammoniac, equal parts, and sublime them together, you will
have a lovely sublimed Salt, white, and so strong, that it will melt in Paper,
and break a Box, if you put it into it.

Its Use and Virtues: It Is a powerful cooler, and Diuretic, it purifies the
Blood, resists Corruption, is most excellent in Fevers, both continual, and
intermittent; it drives the Gravel of the Kidneys, and cures the Running of the
Reins; the Dose is, from ten to thirty Grains, in Wine, Broth, Syrop, Ptisane,
Distilled Water, or Decoction, answerable to the Indication, and sometimes in a
Purgative Powder, or Bolus.

Dulcified Sublimate.
TAke of good Corrosive Sublimate of Venice, as much as you please, eight
ounces if you will; powder it to a fine Powder, in a white earthen Dish, pretty
deep, and very even, with a glass or earthen Pestle, and be careful to stop
your Nose with a Handkerchief, tied behind your Head, for fear the vapors of
the Sublimate, should make your Head ache, or cause some worse effect. Then put
to it the same weight of Quicksilver, and by trituration, or beating,
incorporate them together: when they are half incorporated, add to them a
spoonful of distilled Vinegar, or rather just as much as is necessary to reduce
your Mass into a wet powder, and not into a paste; if you put too much Vinegar,
you will have the trouble afterward of evaporating it by the fire side, and
then all the purgative virtue of the Mercury will go near to fly away, with the
superfluous humidity of the distilled Vinegar. Put this powder into a small
Mattress, long and straight-necked, and unluted, that you may see to the bottom;
let a good part of the Mattress be empty, that there may be room for the
sublimation, and that it may be performed in a shorter time with a small heat;
pose your Mattress upon a Round, in the small circulary Fire, and presently you
will perceive some humid vapors, which rise from the Vinegar: and when they
cease, then it is a sign that all the Vinegar is evaporated: then stop your
Mattress with a Paper-stopple, the better to keep in the Spirits of the Mercury,
and the Salts of the Sublimate Corrosive: continue your Fire equally, till all
the matter be raised, and sublimed from the bottom of the Vessel; then your
first Sublimation is perfected: therefore take off your Mattress, let it cool,
and then break it below the Sublimate; take out the said Sublimate, which will
be all in a lump, like a Mushrome, and of a Pearl-colour; separating the
Quicksilver, if any, which you shall find swimming on the top, and which has
not been well incorporated with the rest; if there be any spot of blackness
about it, you must also scrape it with a Knife gently; and above all, you must
take out by inclination, that is, by pouring the Quicksilver that will be got,
as high as the orifice of the Mattress; as also, scrape away a kind of greyish
powder, which will be in good quantity in the neck of your Mattress: set aside
this scraping, and this powder, to use it in those Unguents, in which Mercury
is required: because, this black scraping would in a second Sublimation, stain
the whiteness of your Sublimate; and the greyish powder, would communicate a
venomous quality to the remedy, because in it are enclosed the sulphurous
Volatile, yellow Salts, as well of the Mercury, as of the Corrosive Sublimate;
and it is in these Volatile Salts, that consists all the malignity of the
Sublimate.

This done, reduce your Pearl-colour Sublimate into powder, in a stone or
marble Mortar, and put it into a great Mattress, luted from the bottom to half
the belly; so that there be five parts left empty, for the Sublimate to stick
to; set it in the same Furnace, increasing the heat by little and little, and
taking care to keep off from the Mattress all flaming Coals, lest they should
break the Glass: continue this heat, till, when you take off your glass, and
shake it, you perceive that little or nothing falls to the bottom. And take
notice, That it is better that there should remain something, than that all
should be sublimed; else your Sublimate being overheated, would contract a
yellowness. Thus your second Operation is ended, take off your Mattress, let it
cool, and then break it below the Sublimate (which now is called the White
Eagle) it appears in form of a Crown, toward the middle of the Mattress. Take
out your Sublimate, and separate it carefully from all its Faeces, which are a
red Earth, proceeding from the Vitriol, and which sticks to the bottom of the
Sublimate, and also a gray powder, coming from the volatile, and venomous Salts
of the Mercury, and the Sublimate Corrosive: it sticks to the orifice and neck
of the Mattress. Use them both in Unguents, as it has been said if you choose not
rather to revive all the Mercury that is in them, and make it quick again, for
this same, or some other Operation. Keep this Sublimate in a glass Vial of a
large orifice, and put it in, in pretty big morsels; stop it well with a Cork,
and a piece of oiled Bladder over it, for fear it lose at last its purgative
Virtue, by the evaporation of its best volatile, white mercurial Salt.

It is not good to sublime it a third time, lest it lose all its purgative
Virtue; nay, the more you would sublime it now, the blacker it would grow: so
that, after five or six sublimations, it would turn in the bottom of the Glass
into a black lump, without possibility of being sublimed any more.

Obs. 1. That the Corrosive Sublimate ought to be made with Quicksilver, Common
Salt, Vitriol, and Saltpeter: they make it rarely well at Venice, from whence
it is brought to us, and sold three times cheaper than we can afford to make
it. The Hollanders send good quantities of it hither, but it is ordinarily
sophisticated, by the mixtion of white Arsenick, which is very heavy, and but
ten pence a pound; whereas Mercury is worth four or five shillings a pound;
besides, that Arsenick being incorporated with the Sublimate, is a strong
poison. But you will easily perceive this Cheat, if you pour a little Oil of
Tartar, made per deliquium, upon your Corrosive Sublimate: if it be good, and
without mixtion of Arsenick, it will become as yellow as Gold; if there be
Arsenick, it will grow as black as Ink. Besides, the best Sublimate of Venice,
is made into little Grains, as big as Hempseed: but the Sublimate of Holland,
is in great Splinters, as Mineral, Antimony, or Bismuth; and this is, because
the Arsenick cannot be so well incorporated with the said Mercury, as common
Salt, Niter, and Vitriol.

Obs. 2. That we take of Sublimate and Quicksilver equal parts; because, if
there were less Corrosive Sublimate, it could not corrode, and calcine the
Mercury: and if there were more, it would be hard to dulcifie the Mercury: It Is
experience has taught us this proportion.

Obs. 3. That we make use of a Glass, or white Dish, or Pan, with a glass or
marble Pestle, to powder the Corrosive Sublimate: for it would whiten and spoil
a brass or iron Mortar: and because in an earthen-glaz'd dish it would be
black'd by the Lead of the Dish, and in an un-glaz'd one, there would much of
it be lost in the little pores of the Earth: but all these inconveniences are
prevented by making use of a Marble Glass, or Whiteware Dish, which indeed is
but the dreggs of Glass, refined and crystallized.

Obs. 4. That we use distilled Vinegar to incorporate the Quicksilver, with the
Corrosive Sublimate; because, the Vinegar, having a Salt, helps the corrosion
of the Mercury; and therefore furthers more their intimate mixtion, than a
Liquor which had not such a Salt would do; but undistilled Vinegar, and
particularly of Red-wine, is not good, because it would alter the whiteness of
this Remedy. The Spirit of Vitriol is worse, for it would make it black:
spittle would do well enough, but it is dangerous to spit upon the Sublimate,
lest in spitting, some of it should get into the mouth.

Obs. 5. That in the first Sublimation, we give but a gentle circulary Fire,
and do thereby elevate the Sublimate, but a little above the bottom of the
Mattress; because, we do not pretend at this time to any thing, but only to
calcine, and incorporate the Mercury with the Sublimate. But in the second
Sublimation we give a greater Fire, and raise the Sublimate to the middle of
the Mattress; because then we desire to purify exactly our Sublimate from its
Faeces, and by evaporating the malignant venomous volatile Salts, have a fair
crystallized Sublimate.

Obs. 6. That if in the second Sublimation, when all your powder is sublimed,
you do not take your Mattress off from the Fire, it will grow yellow, and
blackish; nay, the more you sublime it, the blacker it will grow; because the
Mercury being divested of the purest part of its Salt, who have left behind a
sulphurous smoot, begins to burn, change color, and at last grow black.

Obs. 7. That the dulcified Sublimate is but crude Mercury; incorporated with,
and calcined by Corrosive Sublimate, then divested of its own, and all the
venomous Salts of the Corrosive Sublimate; but yet furnished with the mildest,
and sweetest parts of them, and by them. The Virtue Purgative of this Remedy,
is, as it were, whited, and sharpened. Now while the Mercury is a calcining,
and purifying by these Salts, it rises more or less, according to the heat, by
its own nature, which is Volatile, and by the means of the Niter, which is
joined with it. And this we call subliming; for the common Salt, and Vitriol,
are hurried away, and carried up by the Mercury and Niter, and by their Nature,
which is not Volatile: they keep the Mercury and Niter from rising so high, as
to run out of the Mattress.

Its Use and Virtues: It purges gently, from one scruple to a dram; and if you
take it four days together, augmenting your Doze, by little and little, from a
scruple to a dram, it fluxes. Its particular Use is, to dissolve all scirrous,
and scorbutic Tumors, both interior and exterior.

Turbith Mineral.
TAke two ounces of Quicksilver, well purified, and three ounces of Spirit of
Niter; put them into a Glass Retort luted to half the neck, leaving a gap to
look through at; place it upon a Round, in a small circulary Furnace, keeping
the neck of your Retort straight, and not leaning on one side, till your
Mercury be dissolved in the Spirit of Niter, which you will easily perceive
through the gap you left, when you luted your Glass. When your Mercury is quite
dissolved, then, to go the shorter way to work, evaporate the Spirit of Niter,
your Retort being in the same posture still: but if you mean to draw off the
said Spirit of Niter, then set your Retort in a distilling posture, and fit to
it a Recipient, continuing your fire in the same degree as before. When the
exsiccation, or drying of your Mercury shall be thus performed, take off your
Vessel, and let it cool; then pour into it an ounce of Oil of Sulphur, upon the
white matter which remains in the bottom, and then set it again upon the same
fire, till all the Oil of Sulphur be likewise evaporated; reiterate three or
four times this cohobation, or rectification, with the same proportion of Oil
of Sulphur: to the end, that at last it may fire the Mercury. This done, break
your vessel, and in the bottom you will find a white lump, which reduce to
powder, and upon this powder pour warm water, which incontinent will become
yellow: reiterate this dulcoration or sweetning, till at last your water come
away as insipid as it was poured on; then separate by inclination the water,
which will not be tinged as the other was, and after dry your matter gently in
a sand heat, and there will remain at last a powder as yellow as Gold: upon
this, pour some spponfuls of Spirit of Wine, and set it on fire, doing thus
three or four times to sweeten your Mercury the more. It will be as yellow and
as bright as Gold, and of no taste, and so fix, that being put into a Crucible,
and melted in a Wine Furnace, it will still keep the consistence of a yellow
powder, without losing but very little of its weight, which is a sign that it
is well fixed.

Obs. 1. That your Mercury for this Operation, must be well purified, because
the intention is to fix it, which could scarce be done, if it were impure, and
mingled with Lead, besides that being designed for a purgative in a very small
Dose, it would scarce answer your intention: you will be able to judge if it be
well purified or no, by putting some of it into a Stone-cup: for, if when you
put a finger into it, it does not hang, and make a long thread, as a syrup would
do, but is short, then it is good. If it be impure, you may purify it by
straining it through the Leather called Chamy; for, the Lead, if there be any,
will remain in the leather; or else distill your Mercury in a Glass Retort
luted, in a fire of suppression, and the Mercury will remain in the bottom of
the Retort.

Obs. 2. That we use Spirit of Niter, and not Aqua fortis, to dissolve the
Mercury, because the said Spirit being less harmful, and corrosive than Aqua
fortis, ought to be employed in all preparations of Remedies that are to be
taken inwardly: besides that, if we had employed Aqua fortis, then the Mercury
must necessarily after its dissolution have become red, as it shall be taught
in the Chapter of the Red Precipitate hereafter: and no other Spirit would be
corrosive enough to dissolve the Mercury but Spirit of Niter.

Obs. 3. That we use a greater quantity of Spirit of Niter, than of Mercury,
because experience teaches us, that the dissolvant must be in greater quantity
to dissolve such a dose of Mercury.

Obs. 4. That the said dissolution requires no other than a small circulary
fire: for, if the heat were greater, the Spirit would evaporate, and be gone,
in stead of doing its work; and for the same reason, we keep the Retort with
its neck upwards, that so, if the Spirit be raised, yet it may fall down again,
and dissolve the Mercury.

Obs. 5. That if you draw off by distillation that said Spirit of Niter, it may
be useful to you in frictions, for the Itch, the Scab, and such like diseases,
having lost its force, which would have consumed proud flesh, excrescences, etc.

Obs. 6. That the Mercury, being dissolved, and calcined Philosophically by the
Spirit of Niter, after the exsiccation and evaporation of the said Spirit, the
Calx of the Mercury is white, because the Niter being also white by nature,
cannot with a small fire color any body that is dissolved in it, but the Aqua
fortis, makes the bodies grow red, because of the Vitriol which is in it.

Obs. 7. That upon the Calx of Mercury, we pour Spirit of Sulphur diverse times,
that so we may entirely fix the said Mercury, because the spirit of Sulphur is
of it self fix, and far from evaporating, when it is put in a Mattress upon the
fire, it fixes part of it into a very pricking sharp Salt: and therefore, this
Spirit has power to fix all Metals. The black Spirit of Vitriol, is not proper
to fix, because it is of its nature volatile, and would evaporate all away, as
for its salt at least; and there would remain nothing but a Caput mortuum: and
observe, by the by, that Mercury passes here through two the noblest Operations
of Chemistry; for first, it is dissolved by the Spirit of Niter, and then
coagulated by the Spirit of Sulphur.

Obs. 8. That by pouring warm water upon this calx, it presently grows yellow,
because the Oil of Sulphur has communicated to it the Sulphurous yellow
color; and the water being actually warm, dissolves and extracts the Salts who
were incorporated in the said Calx.

Obs. 9. That by burning Spirit of Wine over the said Mercury, you dulcifie and
sweeten it, and make its purgative virtue gentler; because, the burning Spirit
of Wine, penetrating the said Mercury, carries away with it, in the burning,
all the Venomous volatile Salt that could be left.

Obs. 10. That Turbith Mineral is nothing but Mercury dissolved, and calcined
by the Spirit of Niter, then fixed by the Spirit of Sulphur, then divested of
the salts of its dissolvants by reiterated lotions, and freed from its
malignous Sulphur by the flagrations of the Spirit of Wine.

Its Use and Virtue: It purges strongly, and often provokes Vomit, from three
to six grains; it cures the Pox without fluxing, because being fixed, it cannot
rise to the mouth, as all other preparations of Mercury that have not been fixed
do. It is nevertheless very violent, because it is not so fixed, but there yet
remains a little un-fixt mercurial Salt, and Sulphur, who are sharpened by the
Spirits of Niter and Brimstone: and indeed, if all of it were fixed, then
nothing of it could be dissolved in the stomach, and so would produce no other
effect, than as much Gold in powder; also, being not altogether Volatile, its
Virtue is less harmful.

The White Precipitate.
TAke of pure Mercury eight ounces, and of Aqua fortis sixteen, put them into
an unluted long necked Mattress, and of such a size, as it be not half full,
lest when the Mercury and Aqua fortis are in dissolution, there should be so
great an ebullition, as to cause the matter to run over: stir a little your
Mattress with your hands, to heat the Aqua fortis, then set your vessel on warm
ashes, to help a little more your Aqua fortis in its action upon the Mercury:
but have a care you give not a greater heat than is necessary for a gentle
ebullition; for, if your Aqua fortis be overheated, and opened, it will tinge
(by the means of its Vitriol) your Mercury in a yellow color: as soon as your
Mercury is entirely dissolved, which may be done in half an hour, pour your
dissolution into an earthen Stone Pan, or glass Bell (the glazed earth being
unfit, because the Aqua fortis would dissolve the Vernish) then pour upon your
matter cold seawater, well filtrated, and impregnated with common Salt
undecrepitated; you may use about a quart of this Water, till your dissolved
Mercury be all precipitated to the bottom of your Vessel, in a white powder.
And take notice, that if you had used common water, you would not have
precipitated your Mercury, but turned your dissolution into a white Liquor,
which would have discharged it self of a white sharp powder: because that
common water, having no salt, cannot fight with the salts of the Aqua fortis;
but if it be impregnated with a contrary salt, there arises a conflict, during
which the Mercury scrapes, and falls to the bottom, leaving behind him a good
part of his salts. This done, separate by Inclination your seawater, and pour
a great quantity of common water upon your matter, to take away the Acrimony,
which the Aqua fortis by its Niter and Vitriol has communicated to the Mercury,
and continue this, till your water come off insipid. Then, having poured off
your last water, filtrate the remainder in a brown, or rather white Paper, to
preserve the color; and dry your Precipitate in the shade: for, if you do it
in the Sun, or by the Fire, it will lose much of its whiteness; when it is very
dry, keep it in a close Vial, well stopped, and covered with an oiled Bladder.

Obs. 1. That though this Remedy be taken inwards, yet we use Aqua fortis, and
not Spirit of Niter; because, Aqua fortis costs less, and is sooner made than
Spirit of Niter; which undoubtedly, without this reason of sparing, would be
much fitter for this Operation: yet, we think that the great Lotions that are
made, do dulcifie it, as if it had been prepared with Spirit of Niter.

Obs. 2. That we take as much again of Aqua fortis as of Niter; as well,
because the dissolvant must be stronger than the thing dissolved, as because
that Experience teaches, that such a Dose of Aqua fortis is necessary to
dissolve the Mercury entirely.

Obs. 3. That the Mattress must be long necked, that the Aqua fortis raised by
the heat, to the middle of the neck, may cool, be condensed, and fall down
again; for, in this Operation, we pretend to nothing, but to dissolve and
calcine Philosophically, and lightly, the Mercury, without penetrating its
Body, and opening it by the Salts of the Aqua fortis, as we mean to do in the
Red Precipitate: and thence it comes, that this Mercury, after its
precipitation, retains its white color, and the nature of Quicksilver.

Obs. 4. That if you pour hot Seawater on your Dissolutions, then you will not
be able to precipitate entirely your Mercury; because, that the salt Seawater,
being sharpened by an actual heat, would penetrate and dissolve a part of the
said Mercury, in stead of precipitating it.

Obs. 5. That to make Seawater, you must not take decrepitated Salt; because,
it would be to no end to take away the phlegm, since you are to put it into
Water; and as for purifying it, filtration will do that.

Obs. 6. That the White Precipitate, is nothing but Mercury opened, and
calcined by the Aqua fortis, and retaining but very little of the Salts of the
said Aqua fortis, the rest being carried away by the dulcorations.

Its Use and Virtue: It is the gentlest of all the Purgatives drawn from
Mercury, though it be dissolved by Aqua fortis; because it has been sweetened by
Lotions: It purges nevertheless more violently than the sweet Sublimate, and
its Dose is less: For, to Children it is from three to six Grains, and for Aged
persons, it is from six to fifteen: It cures the Pox taken interiourly; and
being dissolved with Oil, it may be exteriourly used by Frictions, to cure the
Itch, etc. This Remedy fluxes as easily as the sweet Sublimate; because, the
Mercury being unfix'd in these Preparations, has his wings left him, wherewith
he presently flies upwards, in stead of purging by Stools.

The Red Precipitate of Mercury.
PUt four ounces of good Quicksilver, and six ounces of Aqua fortis into a
Mattress, luted from its bottom to half the belly: set your Mattress on a Round,
in a small circulary Fire; give a gentle heat at first, lest you should cause
too great an ebullition; then increase it, by little and little, till your Aqua
fortis be evaporated; and you will know if your Aqua fortis be evaporated, by
laying upon the mouth of your Mattress a piece of Brass, or any other Metal:
for, if it be not wet, then it is a sign that all the humidity, proceeding from
the Aqua fortis, is evaporated: then increase the Fire, putting live Coals
round about the Glass, as high as the Lute goes, and continue the Fire, till
your Mercury rise upon the brim of the Mattress, in form of a yellow Soot, and
that a piece of yellow Metal set over this vapor, do grow white by rubbing of
it; and that is a sign that the Operation is ended: therefore take off your
Glass with all speed, else your Mercury would all vanish away in this smoke.
Your Mattress being cold, must be broken a little above the matter, and you
shall find in the bottom an Orange-colour lump, the same in weight as the crude
Mercury you used at first: and this is it, which we call a Red Precipitate.

Obs. 1. That if perchance the middle of this lump were of a whitish color,
then that is a sign that the Operation is not perfect; and therefore, you must
reduce it to powder in an Iron Mortar, and reverberate it in a Crucible, with a
Fire of Suppression, till it become right Orange-colour.

Obs. 2. That you must not give the Fire so long, till your lump be red;
because, than your Mercury would lose all its corrosive Salts, and therefore
would be disabled from consuming proud flesh, which is its principal Virtue.

Obs. 3. That we use here Aqua fortis to calcine Mercury, because the Remedy
which we intend is a Topic exterior one, to corrode, and consume all
superfluous fleshly Excrescences; and it is necessary, that it should be in
greater quantity, than the Mercury, to dissolve it entirely. Moreover, calcined
Mercury does not retain its natural whiteness; because, the Vitriol of the Aqua
fortis communicates this tincture, and because that the Fire here, is much more
violent, than that which is used in the preparation of the Remedy, called
Turbith Mineral. The dissolvant being also much more overheated, and
penetrating by the help of the Fire, communicates a sulphurous color.

Obs. 4. That the Precipitate is found to be equal in weight to the Mercury,
that was dissolved; because, though in this Operation it have lost something of
its volatile part, yet it has impregnated it self with some of the Salts of the
Aqua fortis, as much as to make up the weight: and these Salts it will keep,
till it be revived, and made Cuicksilver again.

Obs. 5. That the Red Precipitate of Mercury is a Mercury dissolved, and
calcined by Aqua fortis, and then charged with the sharpest part of the Salts
of the said Aqua fortis.

Its Use and Virtue: It is lightly caustic, and escarotick, or consumptive;
and therefore eats away all proud flesh, and excrescences: and to mollify it a
little, it is mingled with some Unguent; as the Basilicum, etc. It is good to
cleanse Ulcers; it is useful likewise in the preparation of the Arcanum
Corallinum.

Arcanum Corallinum.
PUt as much Red Precipitate as you please into a glass Bell, pour upon it a
good quantity of warm Water, not too hot, for fear of breaking your Vessel; and
do this often, till at last your Water come away sweet and insipid; then having
poured off your last Water, put your Precipitate into a little glass Cucurbite,
and twice as much Spirit of Salt in weight, as there is Precipitate; set your
Cucurbite in a Sand-fire, with its Head and glass Receiver fitted to it, to
draw off by distillation the phlegm of the Spirit of Salt: in the mean time, the
volatile Salt of the common Salt, which composes the Spirit of Salt, will remain
in the bottom, and be incorporated with the Precipitate of Mercury, and so fix
it, as to make it able to endure a reverberatory Fire, without evaporation; on
the top of this Mercury there is a white Crust, which is the grossest part of
the Spirit of Salt that is corporified. Pour upon all this, some cold Water (as
soon as your vessel is cool) to the end you may dissolve this grosser Salt, and
draw it off from the Mercury; reiterating thus your Lotions, till your Water
come off insipid: then put your Mercury (which is of a dark yellow) into a
Crucible, and reverberate it in a small reverberatory Furnace, till it become
as red as Corral: and in this reverberation, the Salts of the common Salt,
which were incorporated in the Mercury, do evaporate, and leave the Mercury in
the same weight it had before its first Lotion: and nevertheless, the Mercury
is fixed by that little of these Salts which it enjoys. This done, put the said
Mercury into a Dish of Earth glazed, and pour upon it good Spirit of Wine, two
or three Fingers deep, which set on fire, till it be consumed, and so reiterate
once more the said Flagration, to the end that the purgative, and vomitive
Virtues of the Mercury, be milder by the evaporation of the volatile, and
venomous part of the said Mercury, and its Salts.

Obs. 1. That we wash the Red Precipitate with lukewarm Water, to the end,
that all the sharp Salts that are in the said Precipitate, be dissolved the
better; and by these reiterated Lotions, it becomes at last as sweet, as if it
had been prepared with Spirit of Niter, in stead of Aqua fortis.

Obs. 2. That the Spirit of Salt, as well as the Spirit of Sulphur, has the
virtue of fixing Mercury; because, the Mercury it self too is naturally fixed;
being therefore opened, and intimately penetrated by the Spirit of Salt, the
said Spirit communicates to it its fixative virtue, and is it self fixed in the
Mercury. And observe, that the Spirit of Salt has un-dyed the Red Precipitate,
and made it of a dark yellow; because the common Salt, being by its nature all
white, and coming to mingle with the Orange-colour, must needs clear it, and
give it this yellow.

Obs. 3. That the Arcanum Corallinum, is nothing but Mercury calcined and
dissolved Philosophically by Aqua fortis, then fixed by Spirit of Salt, and
divested by washings, from the most malignous part of its Salts, and of the
volatilest part of its substance, by reiterated flagrations of Spirit of Wine.

Its Use and Virtue: It purges, and sometimes procures a Vomit, gently opening,
and unstopping at the same time the passages, and dissolving all the hardnesses
of the schirrous parts: alone it cures the Pox, without fluxing, because it is
fixed: The Dose is, from three to six grains.

The Crocus Metallorum, or Liver of Antimony.
TAke of Female Antimony one pound, and half a pound of common impure Niter;
powder them, and mingle them together; in the mean time heat red-hot upon two
Bricks, in a great Fire of Suppression, a large and capacious Crucible, or
Camion: throw into this, with a great Iron Ladle, a quantity of your matter,
and cover presently your Crucible, keeping it covered, till all the smoke
cease: continue this Projection, and Flagration, till all your matter be
consumed. This done, increase the Fire, and stir with a stick your matter
continually, till it be all melted: then take it off from the Fire, and pour it
into a Brass or Iron Mortar, hindering as much as you can the Faeces, which swim
upon the top, from going into the Mortar; this liquor will congeal into a lump,
which, when it is cold, you may break into many pieces, as glistring, and
shining as Steel, or as burned Liver: then, if you powder them, they will
change into a Saffron-colour'd powder, not unlike a diseased bilious Liver: and
thence it is called the Saffron of Metals. As for the Faeces, remaining in the
Crucible, you must throw them away as useless.

Obs. 1. That you must take Female Antimony, as being the worst, and you may
know it, by its long bright white Needles; as also, because it is much more
brittle, than either the Male or Mineral Antimony. The Male is better than the
Female, and is known by its little blue, yellow, green Needles, diversified in
colors like a Rainbow. The Mineral Antimony is worst of all, because, not
having been melted, it has not lost any of its volatile substance, in which
consists all its malignity. It is distinguished easily; for, it is full of the
Rock out of which it is drawn. When you melt Mineral Antimony, the Male goes to
the bottom. In this Operation of the Crocus Metallorum, Female Antimony is good
enough; because, the Remedy resulting from it is none of the best of Chemistry;
you may use the Male if you will, but have a care you do not use the Mineral;
because, being loaded with Earth and Rock, it would not melt with so small a
quantity of Niter.

Obs. 2. That you must take common Niter, not purified, but such as comes from
the first washing; because, it is good enough to put the Antimony in fusion;
and because, its Faeces being to be mingled with the Faeces of the said
Antimony in the melting, it would have been superfluous to have purified the
Niter beforehand; yet, if you will be at the charge, purified Niter will do no
harm, it will rather be better.

Obs. 3. That you must powder your Antimony, and Niter, and mingle them well
together; that so, they may the easilier take fire.

Obs. 4. That you must not use a glazed Pot, or Crucible, lest the enflamed
matter should corrode, and melt the Lead of the Pot.

Obs. 5. That you must not throw your matter into your Crucible, till it be
red-hot, else your Niter would not take fire, and so would not be able to put
your Antimony in fusion.

Obs. 6. That you must not throw all your matter at a time into the Crucible;
for then, the fusion of your Antimony would not be well performed; because, the
Niter by so great a flagration, would exhale, and be gone, before it had melted
the Antimony.

Obs. 7. That after every Projection, you must cover your Crucible very close,
to the end you may keep in the enflamed vapors of the Niter, who by their
circulations, do the better contribute to the melting of the Antimony.

Obs. 8. That after all your matter is consumed, yet you must increase the
fire, because the Antimony is but half melted by the said flagrations: but,
being already opened by the Niter, it soon melts, if the fire be increased: and
in the mean time, you stir it well, that so the Antimonial Liquor may go to the
bottom, and be free from its Faeces; and therefore, we use a stick, and not any
thing of Iron, because the said Liquor would corrode the Iron, as we may
perceive in the Regulus of Mars; where the Antimony dissolves, and eats the
filings of Iron, that are added to it. Besides, you may freely put the said
stick to the bottom of your Crucible, because you do not mean to hinder the
Faeces of the Antimony from going to the bottom; and therefore, both melting
together, descend likewise together, and only the Faeces of the Niter swim on
the top of the melted Antimony.

Obs. 9. That the Liver of Antimony, or Crocus Metallorum, is nothing but
Antimony opened, and melted by Niter, and not divested of its terrestreity, but
full of its malignant purgative, and vomitive Sulphur: therefore, we have used
but half the quantity of Niter, to a double proportion of Antimony, and we have
let it stand no longer upon the Fire, than was necessary to melt it, with the
fixed Salt of the Niter remaining in the Crucible.

Its Use and Virtues: We seldom or never use the Liver of Antimony, till we
have made it Crocus metallorum, by pulverisation. It is a Moderate vomitive,
betwixt violent and gentle, and purges too, at the same time. This powder
serves ordinarily to make the Vinum emeticum, or emetick Wine, by putting one
ounce of it to infuse in a quart of white Wine, Sack, Beer, Cider, etc. the
Dosis of this drink, will be from one to two ounces, to take at the mouth; and
from four to six ounces, in an emollient decoction, in a Clyster, without
dissolving in it any thing else.

The Regule of Antimony.
TAke three pound of male Antimony, one pound and a half of common Niter, one
pound and a half of Tartar, and four ounces of Wood Coals; in the mean time,
heat red hot a great Crucible, in a great circulary fire of suppression, then
throw in your matter by parcels, with an Iron or wooden-ladle, and cover your
Pot, or Crucible, at every time, till the smoke be past; then, when your
Crucible is almost full, increase your fire, and with a stick, stir your matter
from time to time, that so the purest part of the Antimony, may go to the
bottom; but, do not put your stick to the bottom of the pot, lest the Regule,
which is in the bottom, should be mingled with its Faeces that swim on the top;
continue doing thus, till all your matter be melted, which will be in half an
hour or thereabouts. Then, if you have any of your first matter left, for which
there was not room in the Crucible, you may make an end of it, and put it to
this, observing the same circumstances: when all is melted, give a violent fire
for a quarter of an hour; to the end, that the most harmful part of the
Antimony may exhale. After this, take off your Crucible, set it upon a hot
brick, for a cold one would go near to break it, because of its humidity: your
Crucible being cold, break it, with a hammer, and in the bottom you will find
your Regulus congealed in a lump, of the proportion of the bottom of the pot,
as white as silver, very smooth underneath, and sometimes starred above in its
superficies: on the top of this Silvery lump are the grayish Faeces, dry and
spongious, and in good quantity, and marked also with the Star: but when the
Star fails, the Regulus is as good, as if it had not failed; for the Star is
produced, but by a long fusion, which straightning it, does also diminish
something of its purgative, and emetick virtues, by the too great evaporation
of the flowers, and volatile Salt of the said Antimony.

Obs. 1. That you must preserve the Faeces of your Regulus; for out of it you
must draw the Golden Diaphoretick Sulphur, as shall be said hereafter.

Obs. 2. That we use here the Male Antimony as best, because here we aim at a
more excellent remedy, than the Crocus Metallorum.

Obs. 3. That we use here common Niter unpurified, for the reason alleged in
the Chapter of the Liver of Antimony.

Obs. 4. That we here make use of Niter to open and set in fusion the body of
Antimony, though we do also employ the Tartar to hinder a too great ebullition
of the said Antimony, because, the Niter being somewhat busy in calcining the
Tartar, cannot employ all its force upon the Antimony; besides, the Tartar
being not inflameable by its nature, hinders the Niter from causing this
ebullition; and being withal a gentle Salt, it purifies, cleanses, and whitens
the Antimony. Then we use Wood-Coals in powder for the same end, and because
also the Coals being spongious, are apt to draw to themselves, and retain the
Faeces of the Antimony. Now it is very necessary in this Operation, to prevent
the ebullition, lest the Antimony should run over the pot, and be lost, we use
also but one proportion of Niter to two of Antimony, for fear the flagration
should be too quick, and we keep all the matter longer upon the fire than we do
the Crocus metallorum, to give the Regulus time to separate from its Faeces.

Obs. 5. That you must powder, and mingle together the said matters; that you
must not make use of a glazed pot; that you must not put in your matter, till
your pot be red hot: that you must not put it in all at a time, but by little
and little; and that presently after every projection, you must cover the Pot
with its cover: That you must stir your matter with a stick, for the reasons
alleged in our observations upon the Liver of Antimony.

Obs. 6. That the Regulus of Antimony is nothing but an Antimony opened, and
melted by the Niter, somewhat more intimately, than the Liver of Antimony;
because of the addition that is made here of the Tartar and Charcoal; and also,
by reason of the continuation of the fire, which devests it of its
terrestreity, and of a good part of its venomous Sulphur, and flowers: but yet
it is endowed with a great emetick, and purgative virtue. Therefore we have not
used here much Niter; and though the fire has been more violent than in the
Liver of Antimony, yet it has not been strong enough to banish all the vomitive
and purgative virtue, as shall be done in the Diaphoretick Antimony.

The Virtues and Use: It is a milder vomative, and a gentler purgative, than
the Crocus metallorum: and it is used in three different ways. 1. It may be
powdered and infused, and so make a Vinum emeticum, as has been said in the
Crocus metallorum. 2. We make of it eternal Pills. 3. We make Cups of it, in
which Wine infused, becomes purgative, and emetick. 4. It serves also to make
the Diaphoretick, by calcining it with Niter, either in a fire of suppression,
or in the Sunbeams by a burning-glass.

To make the everlasting Pills, you must have a Mould for leaden Bullets, of
the bigness of an ordinary pill: lute, with our Lute, the lower parts, and all
the sides of your Mould, to the end that your melted liquor being thereby kept
in, may be fitly and handsomely shaped into the form of Pills; then take as much
as you please of your Regulus, and put it into an iron melting spoon, with a
long handle: which set, upon a great fire of suppression, or in a wind Furnace:
cover the said spoon with a dry Tyle, not a wet one, lest it should fly, then
pour coals upon your spoon, thus covered, and give a melting fire, till your
matter be red hot, and perfectly melted, and as shining and bright as
quicksilver; then pour gently your matter into your mould, and when it is cold,
take out your Pills, which stick all one to another; separate them; and with a
knife even them so, as they may have no unequal parts, which might hurt the
throat, esophage the Maw, the Guts, or the Fundament.

One of these Pills may serve you for ever, taking it out of the close-stool;
and then making it clean for another time: for one Pill of dragm has the same
effect, as the ordinary dose of Vinum emeticum, and works as well, as if you
took three or four of these Pills at a time.

As for the mould of the Cup, it must be of sand and can serve you but once:
your Cup must be as thick as a Crown piece: you must make your addresses to
those that cast Bells, to make you a mould: you may make one of Brass, but it
will cost you too much, and yet will not do so well as one of sand.

The Regulus of Mars.
TAke two pound of Male Antimony, one pound of Tartar, and as much of Common
Niter, two ounces of Charcoal, and six ounces of filings of steel, or iron,
powder all these, and mingle them well together, and operate in the same
manner, as you did in making the Regulus of Antimony. The Operation done, will
produce you thirteen ounces of Regulus, proceeding from Seven ounces of
Antimony, and six of filings; whereby you may perceive, that the Antimony loses
much of its smooty Sulphur, and its sulphurous malignant flowers.

Obs. 1. That we add here the filings, to the end we may fix the vomative
quality of Antimony, but you must not put above three ounces to each pound of
Antimony, lest it should be so fixed, as to lose its purgative virtue, and
contract the nature of a metal.

Obs. 2. That we employ, not so much Charcoal in this Regulus of Mars, as in
the precedent Regulus of Antimony, in recompense whereof we put the filings,
which produce the same effect.

Obs. 3. That out of the Faeces of this Regulus, is also made the golden
Diaphoretick Sulphur.

Obs. 4. That the Regulus of Mars, is nothing but Antimony perfectly opened by
Niter, and divested of its venomous qualities by a long fusion, though not long
enough, to evaporate, all its purgative Sulphur. Its Emetick virtue is fixed, by
the Addition of Mars.

Its Use and Virtue: It purges gently by stool without provoking to vomit; if
it be infused in white Wine, or if you make of it everlasting Pills, or Cups,
in the same dosis and methods we have described in the Regulus of Antimony. Nay
more, if you powder one pound of it, and tie it up loosely in a coorse linen,
and then let it infuse in a quart of the decoction of sudorifick Woods, and
Roots, you may cure the Pox without fluxing by Mercurial remedies. There is
also made with the Regulus of Antimony, and Niter calcined together, an
excellent Diaphoretick Antimony; but observe, that that which is made, either
with crude Antimony, or with the Regulus of Antimony, provokes vomiting, except
it be very well washed; whereas that which is made with the Regulus of Mars,
never incites to vomit.

The golden Diaphoretick Sulphur.
TAke of the Faeces of Regulus Antimony, or of the Regulus of Mars, and boil
them a quarter of an hour in common water, in a Brass kettle, to make thereof a
dark yellow Lexivium, which filtrate through a brown Paper. Gather together all
your filtrations, and put them into a glass, or stone vessel, but not into a
glazed earthen then one; lest the Salts of your matter, should corrode the
Lead, or Vernish, and so black your powder; then pour upon them two or three
spoonfuls of Vinegar, or Spirit of Niter, Vitriol, or Sulphur, or some other
acid; the stronger it is, the higher will be the color of your Precipitate;
for, these acid Spirits do much more vivifie colors, than Vinegar does. You
will see presently, that your Faeces will curdle, become yellowish, and stink;
your Curd being settled, pour away the Liquor, which you may keep to wash your
Bedsteds withal, to keep them clean from Punaises: then upon your Curds, throw
common Water; and you shall see them precipitate into a powder of a
Saffron-colour. Pour away this first Water, and pour on some more, in great
quantity, that you may at once sweeten your powder, and take away from it its
ill smell, and its emetick virtue; then having poured away this last Water,
filtrate the residue through a brown Paper, in which let it dry at leisure in
the shade.

Obs. 1. That the Faeces of both these Reguluses, do contain a Sulphurous
smoot of Antimony, and a fixed Salt of Niter and Tartar: therefore common Water
is easily impregnated therewith by ebullition.

Obs. 2. That the Acid, which you pour upon the said Lexivium filtrated,
produces three different effects; of which the first is, To separate the
sulphurous and saltish Smoot, from the common Water, and so it appears in
Curds. The second is, To give a gross yellow color to the Curds and Water. The
third is, To make the said Curds and Water stink abominably. It produces the
first effect; because, that the Antimonial Sulphur, dissolved by a saltish and
lexivial dissolvant, remains incorporated with him, till you pour in a little
of a salinous Precipitant; which being of a different nature to the dissolvant,
it happens that these two Salts, thus mingled, begin to whet one another, and
by their action, and re-action, cause an ebullition, evaporation, and
dissipation of the sharpest part of the dissolvant. So that growing weak, he is
forced to let go his hold, and suffer the body he had seized upon, to fall away
to the bottom of the Vessel. The Acid produces the second effect; because all
Acids do enliven, and enlighten colors; now the color of Sulphur is yellow,
from whence it comes, that this Antimonial Sulphur, which in its dissolution
was of a dark yellow, in its precipitation, becomes now of a fine light yellow.
Now all salinous Spirits, do vivifie colors, because, they are of a detergent
nature, and do cleanse, and take away all the greasy, obscure smoot, which did
darken the luster of the natural color, as linen grows white and clean by
bucking. The Acid produces the third effect; because Sulphur, when it is
heated, is naturally stinking; now it is heated by the action of the
Precipitant, and re-action of the Dissolvant: This may be observed in the hot
waters of Mineral Baths, which stink extremely of Sulphur; because a bituminous
and a sulphurous spring, happening to join with a nitrous, and vitriolous
spring, do whet, and heat one another, and so produce the sulphurous smell.

Obs. 3. That if you pour a good quantity of common Water upon these Curds,
that presently they are precipitated into a yellow powder; because, the said
Water dissolves all the Salts that remained in the said Curds; so that then
the Antimonial Sulphur, being free from all ties and bonds, precipitates it
self into a powder of a much livelier color, than that of the Curds: because,
now the Sulphur has thrown off the Salts, and appears under its own natural
color of Sulphur.

Obs. 4. That the golden Diaphoretick Sulphur, is nothing but a fixed Sulphur
of Antimony, drawn from the Faeces of Antimony, opened and melted by Niter:
for, the volatile Sulphur of Antimony is so much the more venomous, as it is
volatile; and that which is least volatile, is violently vomitive and purgative:
but, this being fixed, is only diaphoretick and opening: and for a proof that
the said Diaphoretick Sulphur is but a fixed Sulphur of Antimony, do but let
the said Faeces of the Regulus of Antimony lie two or three days upon the
ground, and there will rise of it self, without any Artifice, a kind of a
yellow Moss all over your Faeces, which is nothing but the true Sulphur of
Antimony purified.

Its Use and Virtue: It is a powerful Diuretic and Diaphoretick, it serves
principally to provoke the Monthly Courses of Women, being taken in the weight
of twenty or thirty Grains, either alone, or with Saffron, Savin, and Seen, of
each ten or twelve Grains, infusing them twelve hours in White Wind, and so
continuing for two or three days together; to the same end, may be received by
a Tunnel, the vapor of the Lexivium of the said Faeces, before their
precipitation into Curds. And take notice here, that if the said Powder have
not been carefully washed and sweetened, that it may chance to purge, and
provoke vomit too.

The Diaphoretick Antimony, or the Diaphoretick Mineral.
TAke one pound of Male Antimony, or of the Regule of Antimony, or of the
Regulus of Mars, and four pound of pure Saltpeter; powder them very fine, and
searce your Antimony through a Silk Sieve; then mingle them together, to the
end the Niter may well inflame the Antimony; in the mean time, set a Camion, or
great Crucible upon a Round, in a great circulatory Fire; when your Crucible is
red-hot, then with a wooden Ladle, throw in a Ladle full of your matter, cover
your Pot to keep in the smoke; which being past, do as at first, and put in
another Ladle full, so continuing, till you have consumed all your matter; then
continue the Fire, taking off the cover from your Crucible, till there come out
no more vapors, which will be in half an hours time; after which, take off
your Crucible: for, if you did let it stand any longer, your matter would
become a red Liquor, which being cold, would settle in a lump, like the Liver
of Antimony, and would have the same Virtues, because the excessive heat would
have opened its body a-fresh: then, take out your matter by Ladle-fulls, with a
Tin Ladle, and throw it as hot as you can, into a great stone Pan, full of cold
Water; and do not throw it in of a sudden, lest some of the matter should
sparkle upon your hands and face; but dip in your Ladle by little and little;
when you have done all your matter, then wash your hands, and with them stir
and break the said matter, precipitated to the bottom, till the Water become as
white as Milk, and your matter as small as you can make it. Separate by
Inclination the said milky Water from its Faeces, who are a fixed Niter,
undissolvable in Water, and which you may throw away: Let this milky Water
stand three or four hours, to the end, that all your white powder may
precipitate to the bottom; then separate by Inclination this Water, which will
be good for the Itch: then pour on more Water, and do so, till it come away
insipid. Having poured off the last Water, there will remain a kind of white
Pap, which put into a Coffin of white Paper, over a glass or earthen Vesica, so
all the Water will run into the Vesica, and there will remain a white lump,
which you must dry leisurely in the shade, upon the bottom of a Sieve. Being
very dry, and in little white brittle pieces, you may keep them so, or powder
them, and put them into a glass Vial, well stopped. If you desire to reduce
this Magistery into Trochishs, you may do thus. When it is yet Pap, put it into
a glass Tunnel, and stop the bottom of it with your finger, till your matter be
settled; then let go your finger, and let your matter drop out, in drops, upon a
Marble, and so it will be formed into Trochisks; dry them in the shade, and not
in the Sun: for, the reverberation of its beams, would alter the white color,
which is the beauty of these Remedies: all Magisteries may be trochiskated in
the same way, and then must be kept in a glass Vial well stopped.

Obs. 1. That in this Composition, we make use of Male Antimony, rather than of
the Female; because, being heavier, it is better; and for the same reason we
use the Regulus of Antimony, and rather the Regulus of Mars, because it is
already more purified of the venomous part of its volatile substance. Now in
this Remedy we do pretend, that all that part of the Antimony which has been
opened by the Niter, is absolutely divested of its purgative and emetick
substance, that is, of all its volatile Salt, and Sulphur: therefore we ought
not to use the Female Antimony, which has more of this volatile substance than
the Male. But the Regulus of Antimony is better; because, as it is divested, as
well of a considerable part of its volatile substance, as of its terrestreity,
it is fitter to be purified, and entirely refined from all its malignous
qualities: and yet the Regulus of Mars is best of all; because, in it the
emetick Virtue is already fixed by Mars, incorporated with the Antimony. You
must also take notice, That they that seek the Philosophers Stone in Antimony,
prefer Mineral Antimony before all others, thinking, that because it has not
been melted, it is impregnated with all its virtue; and therefore ought to be
used also in this Operation: but without diving any further in this Well of
Democritus, I will only say, That for the use of Physic, Mineral Antimony is
the most malignant of all, and it is divested of these ill qualities, only by
long and reiterated fusions and evaporations.

Obs. 2. That we use here very fine Niter, because we are not only to open, and
melt the Antimony (for common Niter would do that) but also so to penetrate the
Antimony, as to cause an evaporation of all its volatile, purgative, and emetick
substance. Now common Niter cannot do this, because, having a terrestrious
substance, and a fixed Salt in it self, it would not be fit to maintain a long
and penetrating fusion.

Obs. 3. That for the same reason we put three times as much Niter upon the
said Dosis of Antimony, and for the same reason we keep the Antimony, and the
Niter upon the Fire half an hour after their Flagration and Projection, till
all the smoke be vanished, and with it, the emetick and purgative qualities,
which the Niter had opened, and set loose in the Antimony: but, if after that,
you continue your Fire, it will produce the same effect in the Antimony, that
the Niter did; that is, it will discover, and bring forth a new emetick, and
purgative virtue, as we see it is done in the Vitrum Antimonii, or glass of
Antimony, and yet not be able to make it evaporate: for, that belongs to Niter
to do: and by this you will perceive, that one must be a good Artist, that
prepares this Remedy well.

Obs. 4. That you must with all the care imaginable, wash, and edulcorate your
Magisterie of Antimony, else in stead of being simply Diaphoretick, and
opening, it would prove vomitive; because, that though the volatile part of your
Niter has carried away with it all the volatile substance of the Antimony, that
it had un-chain'd, and set at liberty, yet the fixed Salt of the said Niter,
remaining in the Antimony, retains some part of the emetick substance;
therefore, it is necessary, by frequent Lotions, to dissolve the said fixed
Salt, and so extract it. And here again, you see the great pains and care that
an Artist is at, in preparing of this Remedy, so excellent, and so much used.

Obs. 5. That the Diaphoretick Antimony, is nothing but an Antimony most
intimately penetrated, and opened by Niter, and all its emetick and purgative
virtues evaporated, and carried away with the said Niter, by a long and great
Fire, and then afterward edulcorated by washing and Lotions.

Its Use and Virtues: It Is a powerful Diaphoretick, and an excellent Diuretic,
apperitive, and desopilative: it is used with good success against all Venereal
Diseases; as old Gonorrhaea's, being mingled with some Venice Turpentine, that
has been brought to the consistence of Colophone, as we shall teach in the
Chapter of the Diuretic Pills. It is very good against the Small Pox, in the
weight of a Five Shillings piece of Gold, in Water, or Syrup of Cinnamon, taking
it three days together, to make the small pox come out, and dry; against all
opilations, and tumors of the Spleen, the Pancreas, and the Mesentery;
incorporating it with the Salt of Tamaris, the Mercurius dulcis, the Crocus
martis apperitivus, and scummed Honey, as it is here frequently practiced with
good success.

The Black and Acid Oil of Antimony.
TAke of Antimony, fine Niter, Brimstone, of each one pound, powder them and
mingle them well together; then fire this mixtion, in the same way, and manner,
and in the same Vessels that we taught to make the Spirit of Sulphur in. There
will rise a vapor, as red as blood, and there will stick to the sides of the
Bell, and of the Pan, and upon the surface of the water, a little skin of the
same color: all your Matter being consumed, take your red flowers and mingle
them with your water, which is already impregnated, with the acid Spirit of
these three Minerals. Put all this into a glass Mattress, unluted, and let it be
but three quarters full. Pose your Mattress on a Round, in a small circulatory
Furnace, continuing a gentle fire, till your flowers melt, and go to the
bottom, and that there appears no Sulphur swimming upon the Liquor, which will
look thick, and of a red dark blackish color: but take care, that the
ebullition be not such, as to run over; or break your Mattress. It Is in this
case, that one must be a good Artist, and acquire by attention, reason, and
experience, a way of Operating surely, and easily. This done, take off your
Mattress, and pour out your liquor very hot into a white earthen Pot. When it is
cool, separate by inclination the black and acid Oil, and you will find in the
bottom of your Pot a congealed lump of yellow reddish Sulphur, keep the said
Oil in a Glass, well stopped, and keep your Sulphur to serve you in the making
of the Salt of Brimstone.

Obs. 1. That Niter is here used to open the body of Antimony, the Brimstone is
employed to fix its emetick quality; and the Brimstone, if it were not joined
with Niter, would not be able to inflame the Antimony: for the Brimstone being
stifled in these vessels, would presently go out, but the Niter once a-fire,
though afterward stifled, yet sets the other combustible bodies that are with
it, a-fire also, till they be consumed.

Obs. 2. That the smoke and flowers of this Matter are red, because of the
Sulphur of the Antimony, which is redder than ordinary Sulphur, and so
communicates its redness to the ordinary Sulphur; it is not the Niter that
gives this color: for, we see that in the Diaphoretick Antimony, it whitens
the Antimony.

Obs. 3. That this Oil of Antimony is of a blackish red, because of the yellow
tincture of Sulphur, mingled with the black tincture of Antimony: and this Oil
is acid, because of the Spirits of Sulphur and Antimony, which both are acid:
for, as for the Spirits of Niter, they are all evaporated with the water, in
which they were, and the Spirits of Sulphur remain to fix those of Antimony.

Obs. 4. That the black and acid Oil of Antimony, is but an acid Spirit of
Antimony, fixed by the Spirit of Sulphur.

Its Use and Virtues: It Is a good diuretic, and desopilative; it purges gently
without provoking vomit: the Dosis is, from three to six drops, in a Glass of a
Laxative decoction, or in some broth.

The Butter of Antimony, of which is made the Mercurius vitae, or the Emetick
powder, or the powder of Algarot, and the Cinnaber of Antimony.
TAke a good corrosive sublimate, and Male Antimony (or rather of the Regulus
of Antimony) of each four ounces, powder them, then mingle them, and put them
into a glass Retort, luted all over, except in one place toward the top, and
then you must leave a gap to look through: fill your Retort quite full, if you
will; for there is no danger of the matters running out of the Retort in
substance; and besides, a gentle fire will presently distill as much of it, as
is desired. Pose your Retort upon a Round, in a small wheel fire, and fit to it
a Glass Receiver, there will presently rise a white vapor, which being
dissolved, will distill in form of a whitish Oil, called the Oil of Antimony,
and which in the Receiver, congeals to a kind of Butter.

Take great care your fire be not too strong, lest your Mercury revived, should
come into the Receiver, and the Cinnaber of Antimony likewise, for that would
render your powder yellow, which ought to be white: give then a moderate heat,
till by the gap left in your Retort, you perceive all your Matter to be melted
into a lump, clear and transparent, like melted Silver; and then you may be
sure, that the Oily substance is distilled, therefore take off your Retort.
This done, warm your Recipient so melt the Butter within it, which pour out
immediately into a small Glass Retort, unluted, and set it in the same Furnace,
with the same degree of heat, fitting a Receiver, and so rectify this oil
once, for to rectify it twice, would be to diminish so much of its virtue,
that in stead of seven grains for a Dose, you would be forced to give fourteen.
But observe, That if in either of these distillations any revived Mercury
should be raised by too great a fire, and so come into the Receiver: then
separate gently, by inclination, the Oil that swims on the top.

This rectification being done, you must warm again your Receiver, so as to
melt the Butter; and when it is melted, pour it presently into a Glass Bell,
full of cold water; the water will become as white as Milk, stir it a little,
and your Butter will precipitate to the bottom, in form of a white powder: as
soon as you perceive that, separate by inclination this first water, which we
call Pontick, that is, Seawater, and is Mineral; for, you must not let this
first water, lie long upon your Precipitate, lest this water should contract an
aciditie, as great as that of Spirit of Vitriol, and so corrode, dissolve, and
diminish a good part of your Precipitate. The Water of this first Lotion, being
poured off, pour on presently as much again, and stir your Bell as you did
before: then separate by inclination, and continue so doing, till your powder
be edulcorated, and your water come away insipid: then filtrate the rest in
white Paper, as has been said in the Chapter of the Diaphoretick Antimony. You
shall have a very white powder, called the Emetick powder of Algarot; which
keep in a glass, close stopped.

Toward the end of the first distillation, in your luted Retort; if you have a
mind to have the Cinnaber of Antimony, give a violent fire of entire
suppression, without any Receiver to your Retort; continue it, till your Retort
be sunk and almost melted. This fire will drive the Mercury to the end, and
middle of the neck of your Retort, and when the Operation is done, it will be
either revived into Quicksilver, or turned into a gray blackish powder; there
will also be driven to the mouth of the Retort, an Antimonial substance, which
at the end of the Operation, will appear in form of a crust, as thick as the
back of a Knife, and which outwardly is of a gray color; but being pared, is
within red, and is called Cinnaber of Antimony. Now in the bottom of this luted
Retort, you will find a congealed lump, which is the rest of your Antimony
revived: For, in this Operation, there rises but a small portion of your
Antimony, to mingle with the corrosive Mercury, and there rises a little more
by the violence of the fire, to make this Cinnaber of Antimony; but the
greatest part remains in the Retort revived. Now to see these three substances
together, after this violent fire, you must take off your Retort, let it cool,
then shake the neck to make the Quicksilver fall out, whether revived, or in a
gray Powder; then break your Retort, to find in the neck the Cinnaber of
Antimony, and in the bottom a lump of the said Antimony, melted and revived to
its first nature. This done, weigh your Butter of Antimony, and your Mercury,
as well that which is revived, as that which is in powder, and you shall see,
that all this will weigh a little more than the Corrosive sublimate, which you
have made use of in this Operation. Weigh likewise the said Cinnaber of
Antimony, and the lump of Antimony revived, and you will see, that all this weighs
a little less than the Antimony, which you have employed in this Operation; and
that shows, that the said Emetick powder comes partly from the Mercury, and
partly from the Antimony.

Obs. 1. That we use here corrosive, not dulcified Mercury; because, the
dulcified having lost its corrosive Salts, would not be able to open the
Antimony, and turn it into Oil: and besides, there would not result out of it
an Emetick, because Mercury does provoke vomit, but by its corrosive Salts.

Obs. 2. That we use here the best Antimony, nay the best Regulus, because,
being well purified and separated from its Sulphur, and its most malignant
salts, there is produced of it a more gentle Emetick; and therefore it is
better and whiter with the Regulus, than with the Male Antimony; but then, you
will have no Cinnaber by augmenting your fire, but only there will stick a
Mercurial Chrystalline Salt to the sides of the Retort.

Obs. 3. That the Emetick powder of Algarot, is nothing but a good quantity of
Mercury, made volatile by a less quantity of Antimony, by the means of the fire,
and the volatile Salts that are in the corrosive sublimate, then divested of the
said Salts, and sweetened by Lotions.

The virtue and use of the powder, is known by its name, which speaks it to be
a vomitive, and that it performs much more gently, than the Crocus metallorum;
because, the Antimony we employ is purer, and in less quantity; and because,
that the great washings have carried away the venomous Salts. Its Dose in
persons grown up, is five Grains; you may give eight in some Conserve, or the
yolk of an Egg, or in any Liquor appropriated.

The Use and Virtues of the Butter of Antimony: It Is a powerful Corrosive, it
eats away Warts, and burns pocky Cancers in a moment: but, if it be applied to
any nervous part, it causes an inflammation for four and twenty hours: it is
excellent for the exfoliation of Bones, and for the Gangrene.

The Use and Virtues of the Pontick water: It is excellent for Ulcers, Itch,
Scabs, the Gangrene; you may use it in stead of Spirit of Vitriol, by mingling
three or four drops in a Julip, in putrid and burning Fevers.

The Use and Virtues of the Cinnaber of Antimony: It is a great Sudorifick in
the Pox. The Dosis is, from eight to fifteen Grains.

Bezoard Mineral.
TAke as much as you will of Butter of Antimony, melt it gently before the
Fire, then pour it into a glass Bell, or Cucurbite, set it in a Chimney, lest
the vapors, which you must raise, should offend you. Pour upon it some Spirit
of Niter, drop by drop, for else the ebullition would be such, and the red
vapors so strong, that the matter would run out of the Vessels, and the
vapors hurt your Brain. Continue this Injection, till the Mercury and
Antimony, which are in form of Butter, be absolutely dissolved by the said
Spirit; which you shall know, by pouring on some new Spirit of Niter: for, if
there be no ebullition, nor smoking, then the dissolution is performed; you
must pour as much Spirit of Niter in weight, as you have used Butter of
Antimony; your dissolution will appear all along of a yellow color. As soon as
it is done, pour upon it, all at once, a quart of Seawater actually cold; this
Precipitant will presently make all your Liquor of a milky color, and will
precipitate your Butter to the bottom, into a very white powder, if you let it
stand ten or twelve hours, to the end your Magistery have more time to
precipitate entirely: then separate by inclination your Seawater, impregnated
with the Spirit of Niter, which was the dissolvant, and pour on common Water,
till it come away sweet and insipid; filter the rest through a white Paper, dry
your powder, and keep it in a glass Vial well stopped.

Obs. 1. That, if instead of Seawater, you had made use of common Water for
your Precipitation, you would have turned your Dissolution into a white Liquor,
but you would never have precipitated your powder; because, that though common
Water does much weaken the dissolvant, yet it does not do it so much as
Seawater, which, because of its Salt, contrary to the Salt of Niter, does
fight with the said Niter, and in the conflict, causes the sharpest, and most
active part of the Niter to evaporate; and so to forsake its hold, as to let
the Butter of Antimony fall, and precipitate to the bottom, in form of a white
powder.

Obs. 2. That, that which we call Seawater, is made thus, Take four ounces of
common Salt, boil it to dissolution in a quart of Water, in a brass Kettle,
then filtrate it through the brown Paper.

Obs. 3. That in the great ebullition and effumation, caused by the Spirit of
Niter, all the emetick and purgative virtue, which was in the said butter of
Antimony, is evaporated, and at last carried away by reiterated Lotions.

Obs. 4. That Bezoard Mineral is nothing else but a Magistery, or Precipitate,
compounded of a good quantity of Mercury, and a small quantity of Antimony,
both being calcined, and opened by the Salts of the corrosive Mercury, then
divested of the said Salts, by the Spirit of Niter, so that there remains in
this Magistery, no other but a Cordial, Bezoardick, Sudorifick virtue.

Its Use and Virtue: It Is an excellent Sudorifick against the Pox, the Scurvy,
all putrid and venomous Feavors. The Dose is, from eight to twelve Grains, in
some Conserve; but observe, that if you mingle it with Conserve of Red Roses,
it becomes immediately green, for the Reasons that we shall allege hereafter.

The Calcination, or Calx of Lead.
TAke Lead, beat it into fine thin plates, and take also of powdered Brimstone
as much, lay them stratum super stratum, in a glazed Pot, which set upon two
Bricks in the Furnace of a great wheel Fire, and half Suppression; there leave
it, till the Brimstone (which of its self, by the heat of the Pot, will take
fire) be quite out, and have a care you do not let it stand longer, for fear of
melting your Lead, and so reducing it to its first metallic consistence;
therefore take off your Pot, and with an Iron Spatula stir your calcined
matter, to hinder it from getting into a lump; then take it out, and powder it
in a Mortar, then searce it in a silken Sieve, till it be reduced to an
impalpable powder.

Obs. 1. That we use brimstone to calcine Lead, because nothing but Brimstone
will take Fire, all alone, and burn a good while; Niter would not take fire all
alone with Lead, and indeed never is inflamable, but when he is joined with
some combustible Body, as Tartar, Antimony, Charcoal, or Brimstone; and if we
did use here Niter, with some of these Bodies, its flame would be too swift to
calcine Lead.

Obs. 2 That we use a vernish'd Pot for this Calcination, because our Calx is
of the same Nature with the Lead of the Pot; and therefore is not in danger of
being spoiled: and besides, the vernish will not be corroded by the Sulphur,
because it is not a dissolvant powerful enough to corrode a glazing, so dried,
and fastened: for, if the Lead which you will calcine, were not beaten into very
thin plates, and Sulphur mingled with it, every where, it would hardly be
calcined.

Obs. 3. That the Calx of Lead thus calcined, is nothing but Lead opened, and
dissolved by the Spirit, and Salt of Sulphur; and the said Lead will remain in
the nature, of a Calx, but as long as there will be some of the Spirit, and
Salt of Sulphur incorporated with it: therefore, if you continue your Fire any
time after the Calcination, you will evaporate this Spirit and Salt, and so
your Lead, divested of them both, will return to its first metallic Nature.

Its Use and Virtues: It serves to dry, and cicatrize old Ulcers, when they are
cleansed before, and almost filled with flesh, by mingling it with some
Unguent, as the Diapompholixa, with Hogs grease, reducing it to the consistence
of a Plaster. Out of it also is drawn the Salt of Saturn, instead of Lytharge,
Ceruse, or Minium.

The sweet Chrystals of Saturn, the sweet Salt of Saturn, not Crystallized.
The Oil of Saturn, the Magistery, or Precipitate of Saturn.

PUt as much distilled Vinegar, as you please, into a glazed earthen Pan, set
it upon a trefoot, making under a Fire of Coals, and dry Wood, till it begin to
simper, and boil slightly; then put into it by little and little, as much as
you please of Lytharge of Gold, or of Silver powdered, stirring it continually
with a wooden Spatula: after it has boiled a little, take off your Pan, and let
your Vinegar which is impregnated with the Lytharge settle a while, then pour
off the said Vinegar, while it is warm: this done, pour more Vinegar upon the
Lytharge, left in the Pan, boil it, stir it, separate it, and then put more,
doing so till all the Lytharge be gone; then filtrate your Dissolutions, while
they are warm, through a Coffin of brown Paper, over a glass Cucurbit, which
set in a Sand-fire, up to the neck in the Sand, and evaporate all your
Filtrations, till they become as red as Blood, and are covered with a little
skin, or Pellicule: then pour them out into little white Dishes, and there let
them cool; when they are cold, you shall see that a great part of the Liquor is
congealed into Crystals, or white Christalline Needles, as sweet as Sugar to
the taste, and as thin as the Needles of Male Antimony: then gently pour out of
these same Dishes a red Oil, with a Sugar of Saturn, left in the bottom
un-crystallized: then take out your Crystals, and keep them in a glass Viol
well stopped with Cork, else they will fall into a Calx; and in another Viol
keep the said Oil of Saturn, wh^^h is nothing but the tincture of Saturn, drawn
by the Vinegar. If by chance, in evaporating your Dissolutions, you were gone
beyond the Pellicule, so as your matter begins to look thick and glutinous,
then there would be no crystallizing of it; and therefore, evaporate it to a
dryness, to make the Salt of Saturn, not crystallized, or make the Magisterie
of Saturn. Which is made thus: Take the said red glutinous Oil of Saturn, or
the Dissolution of Saturn, evaporated to the Pellicule, and pour on three or
four ounces of either of them, three or four spoonfuls of Spirit of Sulphur,
which presently will cause the Dissolution of Suturn to curdle into white
Curds, which by little and little will precipitate to the bottom into a white
powder. This done, pour on common water, to take away the acidity, both of the
Vinegar and Spirit of Sulphur; but pour on Water but once, else all your powder
would be spent in a second Water; because, this powder of Saturn, being half
calcined, is made dissolvable in Water by that little Vinegar, which remains
incorporated with it; separate by Inclination this first Water, and filtrate
the rest through a Coffin of white Paper, or make Trochisks of it, through a
glass Tunnel, as has been taught in the Chapter of the Diaphoretick Antimony.

Obs. 1. That you must take a glazed earthen Pan, not a Stone, or Glass one;
because there is no fear the Vinegar should corrode the Lead of the Vernish:
for having been baked in an Oven, it sticks so fast to the earth, that the
Vinegar cannot corrode it, neither if it did, were it amiss, since it is here
used but for Saturn; a stone one would be unfit, for it would fly, and break,
and that happens to all vessels* of this Ware, except to Retorts; for, there
the fire circulating equally on all sides, hinders its breaking, which is not
the like case in Pans: for, there the bottom only being heated, and the rest
cold, they easily break, because of their great dryness. For, they are made of
one part of a stone powdered, which is as dry, and as brittle as Glass, and of
one part of lean earth, which is not unctuous at all; a Brass Basin would not
be proper; for the distilled Vinegar would spend its force in extracting the
Salt of the Verdigreece, which mingled with that of Saturn, would make it look
green.

Ob. 2. That in this Operation we make use of Lytharge rather than of Ceruse,
or Minium; because, the Lytharge, having passed the fire of Coppel, is a more
Spongeous open body; and therefore more penetrable by the distilled Vinegar,
and so will yield a greater quantity of Salt and Ceruce, which has a closer
body, because it has been opened only by distilled Vinegar, which extracts the
Ceruse from the Lead, and for the Minium, though it be Ceruse, made red in a
Reverberatory fire; yet its body is not so open, as the body of Lytharge;
because, it is so reunited, that it is almost recondensed into its Metallic
nature.

Obs. 3. That before we put the Lytharge into the Vinegar, we make the said
Vinegar boil a little; to the end, it may the easilier penetrate, and dissolve
so much of the Saturn, as it can load it self withal, and we let the said
Lytharge boil but a little time; because, no more is required for the Vinegar
to impregnate it self with Saturn; and if it should stand any longer on the
fire, the evaporation would be begun, which ought not to be, till all your
dissolutions are together.

Obs. 4. That we use here distilled Vinegar for a dissolvant; because, it is
not necessary to have a more powerful corrosive to dissolve Lead, which is a
soft penetrable Metal; yet, simple Vinegar would not be so fit, as the
distilled; as well, because it is not so penetrating, as because it is not
separated from its phlegm: besides, if it were red, it might spoil the white
color of your Crystals, or Magisterie.

Obs. 5. That all your Lytharge is dissolved at last, by reiterated additions
of Vinegar; because, that Lytharge is all Lead, and if there should remain any
part of it un-dissolved, it would be, because you have not poured Vinegar
enough on.

Obs. 6. That you must stir with a Wooden patule, this dissolution of Saturn,
and not with an iron one; because, the iron would black it, whereas your design
is to preserve the whiteness of the Salt, which you are to draw from it; and
iron blacks, as well by its self, as by its Vitriol.

Obs. 7. That all your dissolutions being put together, you must evaporate them
to the consumption of three parts, and till there appear a saltish skin, or
Pellicule upon the surface of the Liquor; else they would not congeal into
Crystals when cold. For, having too much phlegm, that salt Spirit of the
Vinegar, which has dissolved Saturn, remains dissolved its self, in the phlegm:
but, when by a gentle ebullition, and evaporation of the said phlegm, the Salt
Spirit remains alone, then it Chrystalises easily in a cold place, since it
begins to do it already in a hot one, as you see it does by its Pellicule.

Obs. 8 That we pour this dissolution, thus evaporated, into white ware dishes;
because being warm, it would break a stone, or Glass one, and in an earthen
glazed one, the Crystals, because of the glasing, would spoil their whiteness

Obs. 9. That these Crystals are in figure like to needles, and somewhat
triangular. Some are small, and those are in the bottom; others are greater,
and those are upon the brims, and have more of a triangular figure: they are
white, because they are a Calx, or Philosophic calcination of Saturn, made by
a dissolvant, which cannot alter their color; and they are in taste a little
acid, and very sweet, or sugarins, acid, because of the Vinegar: sweet, because
that Lead, being the sweetest of all Metals, has likewise a very sweet Salt,
and thus the Salt of Lead is amongst the Salts of Metals the same, that the
Salt of the Indian Canes is almost the Salts of vegetables.

Obs. 10. That when you pour two or three spoonfuls of Spirit of Sulphur upon
your dissolution, then this acid, being of a contrary nature to the acid of the
Vinegar, fights with it, and weakens it so, as to make it lose its hold, and so
your Lead presently curdles, and is precipitated into a white powder.

Obs. 11 That the Spirit of Sulphur is fitter for this precipitation, than any
other acid, because it makes whiter, sweeter, and more pleasant, not only this,
but all Magisteries. The Spirit of Vitriol blacks; the Oil of Tarter has an
unpleasant taste of Urin; the Spirit of Salt would be apt to fix with this
Magistery; and the Spirit of Niter is too sharp.

Obs. 12: That the Crystals of Saturn are nothing but Lead, dissolved and
calcined Philosophically in distilled Vinegar, then coagulated into Crystals,
by the evaporation of the phlegm, and part of the sharpest Spirits of the
Vinegar, and so yet retaining a good part of the acid of the said Vinegar. And
as for the Magistery, it is likewise Lead dissolved, and calcined by Vinegar,
then evaporated, then precipitated into a white powder, by the Spirit of
Sulphur, or some other acid, and at last, divested by lotions of the acid and
sharp part of the Vinegar, and the said Spirit of Sulphur.

The Use and Virtue of the dissolution of Saturn, before its evaporation into
Crystals, or into the Magistery, is to cool, and appease the pain, and and
hardness of Inflammations; take away redness of the face, and Eresipilae's; the
affected part being washed with lint dipped in it. This mixtion is of a milky
color; and therefore is called Virgina's milk. The Crystals and Magistery have
the same virtue, to cool and appease the pain, take away redness, soften
hardness caused by inflammation, and attenuate and resolve Tumors: for this
purpose, you put five or six grains of them, and as much white Vitriol into a
Glass of Rose water, and Plantin mingled, and then in it we dip a thin slice of
raw Veal, and lay it upon your Eyes inflamed, and full of pain, and redness.
The same water may serve for the redness of the face, and Erisipelas, dipping
in it Linen, and so applying it to the part affected: as for the oil of
Saturn, it may be mingled with some of your cooling unguents, as the Cerat of
Gallen, or the unguentum rosatum, or Populeum, to mollify, soften, and take
away the redness of all inflamed parts; and, if you have not this Oil, you make
use of the Salt of Saturn in its place, for the same end.

The Crocus Martis aperitivus.
TAke of filings of Steel, or Iron, two parts, and of powdered Brimstone one,
mingle them together, and put them into an unglazed Earthen Pot, set it upon
two bricks in a Furnace of Reverberation and Suppression, there let it stand,
till all the flame of your Brimstone be spent, and after that, give the fire
continually for an hour, then take off your pot, break it while it is hot, and
presently put the matter into an iron, or Brass Mortar, and powder it while it
is warm, then spread this powder (which then will be of a color of Violets)
upon a Marble, the air will change the color to brown, then powder it again,
and searce it very fine, and keep it in a glass well stopped.

Obs. 1. That we use Brimstone, to open and calcine the body of Steel, or Iron;
but, that we put half as much Brimstone, as Iron; because, we intend here but a
slight calcination: and the more you put, the stronger will be the calcination,
and your Mars will be the more aperitive, or opening; they are powdered
together, that they may the better penetrate one another.

Obs. 2. That this calcination ought not to be done in an earthen glazed Pot,
lest by the violence of the fire, the Lead of the Vernish should melt, and
mingle with your Steel, by the activity and flagration of your Brimstone.

Obs. 3. That you must powder your calcined Mars, while it is hot: for, when it
is cold, it grows hard, and so would not be so easily reduced to powder. For,
even Mars not calcined, being actually hot, is soft, and malleable; and
therefore, if calcined it is more; but both, when cold, do fall to their
natural hardness.

Obs. 4. That the filings of Steel, or Iron, from black that they were, do
become purple by this half calcination, and pulverisation, being impregnated
with this color, by the Brimstone which naturally makes a blew flame; and at
last this Purple color being exposed to the air, becomes brownish, because the
fine Sulphurous part evaporating, leaves your Mars to its natural color.

Obs. 5. That this Crocus Mortis Aperitivus, or opening Saffron of Mars, is
nothing but the filings of Steel or iron, half calcined, and opened by the
Brimstone. This name of Saffron does not fit it well, except you mean a burnt
saffron; for this powder is not red as Saffron is.

Its Use and Virtues: It has the same Virtues as the aperitive Saffron of Mars
following; and besides, it serves to make the second Saffron of Mars, and also
to make the Christalised Salt of Mars, and the astringent Saffron of Mars.

Another Crocus Martis aperitivus.
TAke the Saffron of Mars, prepared above, put it into a stone Dish or Pan, and
pour upon it Spirit of Vitriol, or of Sulphur, to the height of two fingers
above your matter, letting it imbibe and impregnate it self for three or four
days, then put your matter (which will be in form of Paste) into a great
Crucible, and fill it up to the brim, to the end, the heat may work more upon
it; set this Crucible upon two Bricks, in a reverberatory Furnace, giving at
First and all along for the space of eight hours, the greatest Fire you can;
then take off your Crucible, break it with a Hammer, take out your matter, and
while it is hot, powder it in a Brass or Iron Mortar; then let it cool in the
Air, upon a Marble, and it will become red as Saffron, searce it, and keep it
close, and well stopped.

Obs. 1 That the Spirit of Sulphur, or Vitrial, with which we wet the said
Saffron of Mars, which is already aperitive, serves to open it more, and
calcine it Philosophically, and that the great Fire does it more perfectly.

Obs. 2 That this second aperitive Saffron of Mars, is nothing but Mars opened
by four Keys, viz. By filing and powdering, and then by three calcinations, of
which, the first is done by the flagration of the Brimstone; the second, by the
pouring on of the acid Spirit; and the third, by a Reverberatory Fire of eight
hours. Now it becomes opening, because its Salt is set at liberty by these
Agents.

Its Use and Virtues: It is a powerful desopilative; it serves against the
yellow Jaundice, the Green Sickness, it provokes the Courses of Maids and
Women, and it opens the Spleen, and Mesentery, taken from half a dragm to two,
either in the yolk of an Egg, or in a little Conserve of Roses, or some proper
Syrup.

The Infernal Stone.
Take a little Mattress with a straight long neck, let the belly of it be luted
half way, put into it two parts of Aquafortis, and one of Silver of the
purest, cut or beaten into thin long Plates, so that they may go into the neck
of the Mattress, and be the easilier dissolved by the Aquafortis; fill but one
third part of the belly of your Vessel, set it upon a Round, covered with Sand
in the little Wheel-Fire Furnace, giving a small Fire to help the dissolution
of the Silver, and to consume the Dissolvant, so as after a gentle boiling,
your matter may dry, and change into a black scum, not unlike a Pumice Stone;
then increase your Fire, to melt this scurn half petrified, and continue your
Fire, till the boiling cease, and that there rise no more vapors; which will
be a sign that your matter is in fusion: then without any delay, pour out your
matter into little Brass, or Iron Moulds, prepared on purpose: for, if you
delay the pouring of it out, or if you let it cool in the Mattress, off from the
Fire, your matter will be reduced to a white powder, which is the Calx of the
Moon, that is, of Silver: and this will thus come to pass, by the almost total
consumption of your Aquafortis; and therefore, it is necessary to retain some
of it in the said calcined Silver; to the end, it may keep the consistence of a
Stone: if to this Calx of silver, you give a violent Fire, and add to it half a
spoonful of Borax, it will return to its first metallic Nature, and appear
like Silver in hardness and consistence; because, that the great Fire, and the
Borax together, carry away even the least drop of Aquafortis which did keep
the said Silver in the nature and consistence of a Calx.

Obs. 1. That the Mattress which we use here, must be but little, because we do
not ordinarily prepare much of this at a time; then your Fire being small, the
matter cannot run out, particularly, where you leave two thirds of your Vessel
empty. The Mattress must have a long strait neck, for the greater convenience in
pouring out your matter into its Moulds. This Mattress must also be of a strong
Glass, such as comes from Lorrain; and besides, must be luted in its bottom
half way, lest a naked Fire, drying up the matter, should break the Glass.

Obs. 2. That we use here a double quantity of Aquafortis to the Silver; not
that it is necessary to double the Dose of the Agent, to dissolve the Patient;
but, because we desire to make the greater quantity of this Infernal Stone,
which will be softer and less black; for Silver may be certainly dissolved,
with an equal Dose of Aquafortis: and in this case, the Stone would be harder
and blacker, and in less quantity: It contains not so much Salt, is sooner
consumed, and the Aquafortis has not had time to calcine the Silver thoroughly,
from whence the Calx remains blacker, harder, and heavier; which you will
easily perceive, if you take notice, that the same thing happens in the making
of the ordinary Lime; for, there you shall see some stones, that have not been
well calcined, look black, be hard, heavy, and crumble less, than the others
that have been well calcined.

Obs. 3. That we may make this Infernal Stone of Niter, instead of Aquafortis,
and then it will be whitish, and less caustic, and instead of blacking the
Skin, and Teeth, which it touches, it will only make them look yellow; because,
it is the Vitriol that blacks in the Aquafortis, and whets the corrosive
virtue of Niter; and take notice here, that none of the other acids, and
corrosives can corrode Silver, nor by consequence, serve in this Composition.

Obs. 4. That to make a good Infernal Stone either white, greyish, or black,
you must use Coppel Silver; for, if you make it with Silver, where there is a
mixtion of Copper, your Stone will be green, and soft, will easily melt of it
self; from whence you may conclude, that there is no making of it with Lead, or
Tin, which yet are softer than Brass; and as for Iron, it can never be
dissolved, and brought into a potable Liquor, because of its great dryness and
terrestreity. And as for Gold, you may easily make of it an Infernal Stone, of
the same virtue, by dissolving it in excellent Aquafortis, or in Spirit of
Salt, whet by Salt decrepitated; but then, you would have your Labor for your
pains, for Coppel-Gold, or Leaf-Gold, is too dear. And as for the Marcassites
or half Metals, they are not fit for this Operation, because that their
dissolution evaporated, and reduced to a Calx, cannot keep in consistence of a
Stone, but remains in powder.

Obs. 5. That to give to the Infernal Stone, that firm compact consistence,
which is necessary for it, to be of use, it is not enough to dry your
dissolution, with a moderate heat, to the consistence a scum half petrified,
but you must, when you are gone so far, increase your fire, and melt the said
scum, then in the same instant, pour out your matter: for, if you let it cool
in the Mattress, the rest of the Aquafortis would evaporate in the cooling, and
so there not remaining enough to corporifie the said Calx, it would fall into a
powder, which would be the Calx of the Moon.

Obs. 6. That to make little Moulds of Lattin, you must hold it a little time
over the fire, then it will be maniable and flexible, and not apt to break,
then cut off a piece, and roll it about a stick as thick as a quill, and as
long as your finger, and so tie it close, remembering to turn up the bottom, so
as nothing may go through: then daub it with our Lute, letting it dry; then
when you will use it, take out the stick, and in its place pour your matter,
which will be condensed into petrified Cylenders; which you will easily get
out, by taking away the Lute, and cutting the thread that ties your Mould
together.

Obs. 7. That the Infernal Stone, is nothing but a little Coppel-Silver,
dissolved and calcined Philosophically by Aquafortis, then coagulated by the
evaporation of the greatest part of the said Water; and at last petrified by
the fusion of the said coagulated matter, which has retained enough of the
Aquafortis, to be in the consistence of a Stone.

Its Use and Virtues: It is a gentle and pleasant Escarotick, it consumes by
touching all Warts, proud Flesh, Cancers, Ulcers, and red Spots; if you wet
with a little Water the said Warts and Spots. It appeases the pain of the
Teeth, using it as has been said, upon the part of that Skin, and Cartilage,
that makes the hollow of the Ear: the crumbs of this Stone powdered, and
incorporated with a Suppurative, consume likewise ill Flesh, rotten in Ulcers.
It serves likewise to dye the Beard black, if you put the weight of two or
three grains of it into a spoonful of Water, distilled from the green shells of
Walnuts; then with a pencel, or some such thing, pass it over your hair three
or four times, observing to hold between it and your skin, a little Comb; for
else this Water fails not to black the skin, wherever it touches; and that
because of the Vitriol that is in the Aquafortis: and if sometimes the hair
grow green, it is because there has been dissolved in the Aquafortis Silver,
mingled with Copper, in stead of pure Coppel-Silver.

Cauteries.
PUt a pound of Quicklime into a stone Pan, pour upon it by spoonfuls about
four ounces of common cold Water, not all at once, but by little and little,
that so you may gently, and without smoke, slack it, and so retain a good part
of its volatile and fusible Salts, which will contribute very much to the
fusion of the matter of your Cauteries; and so make them fitter to be molded
into any shape. And besides, it will make them more caustic; for, all volatile
Salts are more caustic than fixed ones. Your Lime being well slack'd, and in
the consistence of paste, pour at once upon it as much Water as will reduce it
to the consistence of thin Pap, and then put to it immediately two pound of
good gravelled Ashes heat red-hot beforehand, for an hour, in a reverberatory
Furnace, and in an unglazed Pot: but, you must put them in by spoonfuls, as hot
as possibly you can, as we have already taught, in the making of the
Diaphoretick Antimony. This done, pour upon this matter, about four quarts of
Water, which is as much as is requisite to dissolve all these Salts, and so let
it stand twelve hours, to the end your Water may be well impregnated; and thus
you will have a Lixivium: which you must separate by Inclination from its
Faeces, into a copper Basin, which by reason of its Vedigreece, will whet your
Cauteries more and more, and make them look bluish. Set this Basin on a gentle
Fire, and evaporate your Lixivium, till it be dry, and have the consistence of
a gray Salt. If then you desire to use them, as they are in a lump, and without
shape, take off your Basin, and take out your Cauteries by pieces, and keep
them in Glass Vials well stopped: if you will have them well shaped, then when
your Lixivium is dried to the consistence of a gray Salt, increase your Fire,
and melt the said Salt, and when it is melted into a blew Liquor, then with an
Iron Spatula red-hot (else the Salts would presently congeal, and stick to it)
take up as much as you please, and let your lump fall by drops, upon a cold
Marble, there they will be shaped like half Beads; when they are cold, take
them off with a knife, and keep them in glass Vials, well stopped with Cork, to
keep the Air from them. Continue this, till you have shaped all your matter,
and that the remaining become black, and dry, upon which, if you pour some of
your Lixivium, which you must have preserved on purpose, it will dissolve, and
be fit to be molded as the rest. At last, if there remain, as there will, some
black dry matter, you may wash your Basin clean, and throw that away.

Obs. 1. That Lime contains two Salts; one fix, and the other Volatile: the fix
is dissolved in the Water which slacks the Lime; the volatile evoporates in the
smoke, and boiling, with this distinction, That if you pour upon it at first
all your Water, and so cause a huge ebullition, and smoking, then all the
volatile Salt flies away; but if you slack it by little and little, pouring only
some spoonfuls at a time, then there being but a gentle ebullition, and gentle
smoke, the volatile Salts are but weakened, and so do dissolve in the Water. Now
when you make Limewater, to serve to the making of the Phagedenick Water;
there it is not necessary to slack your Lime so gently, because it suffices, if
you retain the fixed Salt, that so it may be able to dry and consume putrid
Ulcers; but when you make the Limewater to serve to the making of Cauteries,
then you must strive to keep in the Volatile Salt; because it is the Volatile
Salt, that makes the fixed Salt, of both Lime and Ashes, to be fusible: and
therefore, if you will shape your Cauteries, and make them more Caustic, you
must retain the volatile Salt.

Obs. 2. That gravelled Ashes are a Calx, proceeding from the Calcination of
the Lees of Wine and old pieces of Casks, which ordinarily are of Oak, so that
this Calx contains the Salt of the Lees of Wine, and the Ashes of the said
Casks of Oak: the best sort, is that which is blue, and well dried; and you may
easily perceive, that it is a Vegetable Salt, and indeed nothing but Tartar
calcined, or a Salt of Tartar. Now this Salt is fusible, as it has been said:
besides, we heat it red hot, and throw it into this Lime-pap, there to
dissolve. Heretofore we made use of Ashes of common Wood, of Cabbage, and
Bean-stalks; and we may use it still, but this does as well, and is to be had
easily at Paris.

Obs. 3. That in this Operation, we use no (...) of glazed Earth, lest the
Salts of Lime and Ashes should corrode the Lead, and so dull their point, and
activity, to no purpose, which they are to preserve to cauterize therewith the
places, they are applied to; nay, if you do but evaporate your Cauteries in a
vernish'd Pan, they will lose much of their force.

Obs. 4. That these Cauteries are nothing, but a Salt composed of the fix, and
volatile Salts of Quicklime, and gravelled Ashes; which having been dissolved
in common water, have by evaporation been coagulated in a moderate heat, then
having been melted by a greater heat, have been coagulated by cold upon a
Marble.

Its Use and Virtues: The name shows its caustic escarotick virtues; this kind
of Cautery produces its effect in a small time, and yet gently enough, it is
always dry, if it be kept well stopped in a glass Vial; but, if it be too dry,
it cannot dissolve upon the skin: therefore, while you prepare all things for
its application, put it to soak in a spoonful of water.

The Magistery or Precipitate of Bismuth.
SEt a Cucurbit Glass, Bell, or Head, upon any thing within a Chimney, that so
the infectious vapors may not poison the room, and offend by their stench the
Artist, and Spectators: put into your Vessel four ounces of Bismuth, well
powdered in a Brass Mortar, pour upon it one or two spoonfuls of Spirit of
Nitar, which presently will produce an ebullition, and a stinking infectious
smoke; when they are past, pour on again a like quantity of Spirit of Niter,
which will cause the same effect; continue this till you have spent eight
ounces of Spirit of Niter: if you pour on too much at a time, your ebullition
will be so violent, that all your matter will run over your Vessel, and be
lost, and the smoke will be so thick, that by its stinking red vapors, it will
go near to do you some mischief. When you have thus spent all your Spirit of
Niter; though after the last Projection, all your Bismuth be not dissolved, and
devoured by the said Spirit, nevertheless, separate by inclination, your
dissolution, while it is warm, from that part of the Bismuth, which remains
undissolv'd in the bottom of your Vessel, and you must pour this Dissolution
into a precipitatory Vessel of Glass, or white-ware; and there it will be
congealed into a thousand little transparent white Cristals.

In the mean time, pour by little and little, and at diverse times, some new
Spirit upon the Bismuth left in your vessel, to the end, you may dissolve all
the pure and good Bismuth that is left in this lump; for, there will remain at
last a few black Faeces, which cannot be dissolved. Separate by inclination
this second Dissolution in another Glass, or white-ware Vessel, and there let
it Crystallize as the former: then take all your Crystals, and mingle them
together in a Glass Bell, and there melt them with a gentle heat, and when they
are melted, pour upon them a quart of Seawater actually cold, which will
precipitate them into a white Curd, which Curd, will by little and little
dissolve into a white powder: then separate by inclination this first Water,
pour on more, and so continue till your powder be entirely sweetened; nay, do it
three or four times after that your water comes away insipid; for, if there did
remain the least Acrimony in this powder, it would wrinkle the Face, which it
ought to whiten: filtrate this powder through a white Paper, and let it dry
upon the said Paper in the shade, taking care to cover it, lest the dust should
come at it; and do not dry it by the Fires side, or in the Sunbeams; for then
it would return to brown-blackish color. When it is very dry, put it into a
glass Vial, well stopped, and you have the true Magistery, or precipitate of of
Bismuth.

Obs. That Bismuth is a kind of Marcassite of Silver; and that therefore it is
almost as good as Silver, to make by its calcination a good Fucus, or
Cosmetick: for, it is certain, that the Precipitate of Silver, made in the same
way as this, does much excel the Precipitate of Bismuth.

Obs. 2. That to make the Dissolution of Bismuth in Spirit of Niter, you must
take a Vessel very broad toward the top, and therefore a glass Bell is the
fittest, to the end, that the venomous vapors, that rise out of the matter,
may the sooner and the easilier be gone; therefore in a Mattress, these vapors
being straightened, would re-impregnate themselves, and make your matter yellow,
instead of white. Then your vessel must be Glass, or White-ware; for, in an
earthen glazed Vessel, your powder would grow black, because it would dissolve
the Lead of the Vernish, and a stone, or unglazed one, be less fit, because the
Spirit of Niter might lose, and insinuate it self in the pores of the said
Earth.

Obs. 3. That though Aquafortis can dissolve Bismuth, yet we use it not;
because, by its Vitriol the Calx of the Bismuth would be so blacked, as to be
useless in the design of whitening the skin.

Obs. 4. That your dissolution being poured into a glass, or white ware vessel,
does there congeal into a thousand little white Chrystals, transparent and
saltish, because that the Spirit of Niter being laden with the quantity of a
Metalick body, Christallises as Metals use to do, after their dissolution.
These Crystals are white, because that the Bismuth is as white as Silver, and
they melt by a gentle fire, because they were congealed by cold.

Obs. 5. That Sea water does precipitate dissolved Bismuth in a white curd, and
white powder, because that the Sea Salt which makes the Seawater, being
contrary to the Salt which makes the Spirit of Niter, attakes and fights with
it, and so the Niter being weakened, because, that in this conflict its sharpest
part evaporates away, lets go the Bismuth, which it had seized upon, and
immediately the said Bismuth falls into a white curd and powder. It Is true,
that the common water by moistening the Spirit of Niter, does much weaken it;
but, if in this water there had not been some Sea Salt; the Calx of Bismuth
would never have been well separated from its dissolvant, neither would it have
been precipitated to the bottom of the Vessel.

Obs. 6. That you must dry this Magistery in the shade by little and little,
and not in haste, or by the fire side, or in the Sunbeams, lest it recover its
brown dark color; for the actual heat, either of the Fire, or the Sun, would
revive in it a black burned Sulphur, which sticks to the surface of this
remedy: from whence, Ladies that use it may learn, that they must by a double
reason keep it in the shade, as well to conserve their own natural beauty, as
the artificial beauty which they borrow from this Magistery.

Obs. 7. That the Precipitate or Magistery of Bismuth, is nothing but a Calx of
Bismuth calcined Philosophically by the Spirit of Niter, and then precipitated
by the contrariety of the Seawater, and sweetened by reiterated Lotions.

Its Use and Virtues: It is in Physic an excellent desicative for Ulcers, as
well as the Magistery of Saturn, and it is likewise a most excellent Cosmetick
or Fucus, to make the face and hands white and fair, either by rubbing them
with the powder alone, which insinuates its self into the pores of the skin, or
else by applying a Pomatum made of one dragm of the said precipitate, and two
dragms of Vnguentum Pomatum, which you may prepare if you will, with one ounce
of white Virgin Wax, and four ounces of Oil of sweet Almonds, or Acorns, or of
Beans, or of the four cold seeds.

The Spirit, Oil, and Extract of Guaiacum.
TAke a great Stone Retort; lute it every where up to half its neck, lest it
should break toward the end of the Operation: fill it up to the neck with
Guaiacum, cut either into pieces, or shavings; place it upon the hollow part of
the cover of an Earthen Pot, full of ashes, which must be set upon the two Iron
Bars that are in a small Reverberatory Furnace, lute and stop the gap of the
Furnace which is above the neck of the Retort, till you have made it even with
the top of the Furnace, then fit to the neck of your Retort, a great Glass
Receiver, or an Earthen one, if you will, or a great Pitcher which is easilier
made clean; because you may put your hand into it even to the bottom; lute the
said Recipient to the Retort, cover the Furnace with its top, that is, an
Earthen Pan turned the inside downwards, and with a hole in its middle, big
enough to pass an Egg through, or else with two or three rounds of Bricks, as
has been described in the great Reverberatory Furnace: then put some lighted
Coals into your Furnace, and give your fire by degrees, adding to it after a
little while three or four Faggot-sticks yet have a care you do not over-heat
your Vessel, lest your Receiver break by the violence of the vapors which also
may lose themselves through the luted conjunction of both the Vessels: the true
mark of a fit heat will be, if you can endure to lay your hand a pretty while
upon the Receiver, this distillation is to last eighteen or twenty hours
without interruption; the Spirit, comes first alone, and in a Glass Receiver
appears in the form of white vapors: then the Oil, with the rest of the
Spirits, comes forth in the same form also, and does dissolve into a brown
blackish liquor, which goes to the bottom of the Receiver: for all Spirits, and
all Oils, do distill in forms of white vapors, except Spirit of Niter, and
Aquafortis made with Niter, which therefore are called the flying Dragon, as
well because of their redness, as of their malignity. The mark, that the
distillation is ended, will be, if your Receiver be cold, though there be an
excessive heat in the Furnace; for, that is a sign that there comes nothing
more into the Receiver. When all is cool, then unlute the Receiver, by wetting
the lute with a wet cloth, and pour out your Oil and Spirit of Guaiac
together, into a glass Tunnel, and by one of these two ways, separate the
Spirit from the Oil. First, take a glass Tunnel, which hold with one hand, and
with a finger of the same hand stop its lower orifice, then pour in your
Liquor; the Oil will presently go to the bottom, the Spirit will swim above,
and upon the surface of the Spirit will swim some black drops of Volatile Oil of
Guaiac: Then set a glass Vial under the neck of your Tunnel, and let go half
your finger which stops the said orifice, and so the Oil will pass into your
Viol, and when you see that it is almost all passed, then stop the orifice
again with your finger, and pour the phlegm or Spirit into another Vial. Do thus
by all the spirit, and Oil, you have in your Receiver, but by this way you will
never separate the Oil from the phlegm so well, but there will be some in it
still. Therefore use this second method which will do it entirely and
infallibly.

Take a Coffin of brown Paper, wet it with common water, or with Spirit of
Guaiacum, if you have any, place it upon a Glass Tunnel, and pour into it the
Oil and the spirit together; the Spirit being watrish will pass, and filtrate
through the said Coffin of Paper, and the Oil will remain; which afterward you
may easily convey into another Vial, by breaking the bottom of your Paper
Coffin with a little stick; if you do not wet thoroughly the said Coffin of
Paper before you pour into it the Oil and Spirit, the Oil will stick to the
Paper, and hinder the filtration of the phlegm: If your Oil do not come kindly
out of your Receiver, because it may be it is cold, and so condensed; present
your Receiver to the fire to dissolve; your Oil will be black and stinking, as
the Oil of Jet, and your spirit will be of a brown color. Out of one pound of
Guaiacum, you will draw about one ounce and a half of Oil, and ten ounces of
Spirit: and there will remain about four ounces of Coals in your Retort: you
may kindle this Coal, and burn it to ashes, and of these ashes make a Lixivium,
and out of this Lixivium draw the Salt of Guaiacum, to the same uses and
purposes, as the Oil and Extract.

If you desire to have a Spirit of Guaiacum, purified from the greatest part of
its phlegm, and corrected of its stench, you must rectify it in a stone
Cucurbite, or glazed one, with a glass head in a Sand furnace, the insipid
phlegm will come first, that you may throw away; then the Spirit will come very
acid, which keep, for those uses which we shall speak of anon.

To make the Extract of Guaiacum, put some Oil of Guaiacum, to evaporate and
thicken into the form of an Extract, into a Cup or a Sand-fire or else draw the
tincture of the Oil of Guaiacum, with Spirit of Wine, and so evaporate it to
the consistence of an Extract.

Obs. 1. That for this Distillation, we use a stone Retort, because it is not
necessary to use a glass one, which would be dearer, and the Spirit is not
corrosive enough to corrode this Stone-Metal, as the Spirits of Niter, Salt, or
Vitriol would do; besides, that the necks of your glass Retorts are so narrow,
that the chips of Guaiacum can hardly be got into them.

Obs. 2. That if you use pieces of the heart of the Wood, which are hardest,
and by consequent fuller of Oil, you will obtain more Oil, than from the
shaving; and there is no danger in filling the belly of your Retort with them,
because it is not a body apt to swell and run over.

Obs. 3. That Guaiacum yields a good deal of Oil and Spirit, because it is full
of Sulphur, and Mercury; the Wood yields better than the Bark, and the Wood in
little pieces, yields more than in shavings, or great cuts; for, by their
thickness, they retain more of Sulphur and Mercury. This Oil and Spirit are
very Salt, and therefore the Wood is heavy, for the Salts give the heaviness
to Mixtes. The Oil is black and foetid, because it has been distilled in a
naked Fire, without any intermedium; and it is heavy, because of its Salt; as
also sharp, for the same reason. The Heart of the Wood yields more Oil, than
that part which is near the Bark; which you may perceive by the eye, for the
heart is blackish, and the other is yellowish, like Box, which is the European
Guaiacum.

Its Use and Virtues: The Spirit is somewhat drying and detersive; it is
excellent for Burnings and old Ulcers, washing them with some Lint dipped in
it; besides, if you put five or six drops of it in a bottle of Sudorifick
Decoction, it will work a greater effect, than if there were a great quantity
of Guaiacum in the said Decoction; because, this Spirit has the force of the
Guaiacum, and besides, much more activity, and penetration, by the tenuity of
its Spirituous substance.

The Oil of Guaiacum is very drying, detersive, and cleansing; it therefore
cures rarely well old putrid hard Ulcers, the Gangrene, and the Caries, or Rot
of the Bones. Besides, you may give by the Mouth two or three drops of it in a
spoonful of Cinnamon Water, for a windy, or bilious Colic.

The Extract of Guaiacum is very drying, and Sudorifick, and it is given in
form of Pills, for Veneral Diseases.

The Spirit of Box. The Oil of Ash, etc.
THe Spirit and Oil of the Wood of Box, of the Wood and Bark of Ash, as
likewise of all other Woods, and Aromatic Barks, are drawn in the same way, as
the Spirit and Oil of Guaiacum.

The Wood of Box yields more Spirits a great deal, than the Wood of Guaiacum;
but it yields so inconsiderable a proportion of Oil, that out of four pound of
Wood, you will have but one ounce of Oil, though four pound of Spirit of Phlegm;
because this Wood is fuller of Sulphur than Guaicum, but is not so heavy, nor
so Salt.

Its Spirit has almost the same virtues, as the Spirit of Guaiacum; the Oil
likewise has the same virtues, with the Oil of Guaiacum, but is most
particularly excellent for all Contusions, Ulcers, pain, and rottenness of the
Teeth.

The Wood of Ash, yields about as much Spirit and Oil, as Box; its Bark yields
but little Spirit, and no Oil at all.

Its Spirit is an excellent topical Remedy for deafness, and tingling of the
Ears, because it does incide, and resolve the humors, and flatuosities which
lie in the Meatus auditorius, and in the first concavity of the Ear.

Its Oil is also most excellent for the Rot, or Caries of the Bones, and for
the pain of the Teeth; it appeases the pain of the Kidneys, and Spleen, if the
said parts be anointed with it.

The stinking, or foetide Oil of Cloves.
TAke Cloves, whose tincture has been already extracted by Spirit of Wine, (for
it would be ill Husbandry to use others, and so lose their Aromatic tincture;
particularly, since when, they have yielded their tincture, they are never the
worse for this Operation) put what quantity you please of them, into a glass
Retort, well luted, place it upon a Round hollow earthen Pan, in the Furnace of
a great circulatory Fire, fitting to it a great glass Receiver; give at first a
very strong violent Fire, and continue it till there appear no more vapors in
the Receiver: these vapors are white, and do turn into black caustic,
stinking Oil. Out of one pound of Cloves, you may have about two ounces of Oil,
and eight ounces of Phlegm.

Obs. 1. That we use here a glass Retort luted, because that stone Retorts are
too big for the small quantity of Cloves, which is ordinarily used in this
process.

Obs. 2. That you need not care, if you fill your Retort with Cloves, because
they do not swell no more than Woods, or Barks; you may also fill it half full.

Obs. 3. That Cloves contain much Sulphur, and sharp Salt, from whence it comes
that they yield much Oil, and that very sharp and caustic.

Its Use and Virtues: This Oil being very sharp, and biting, is most excellent
for Ulcers in the Pox, and all other putrid and venomous ones; as also it is
good to exfoliate, or open the superficies of rotten Bones, and for the
Gangrene.

Its Spirit is acid, and very good in Tettars, or Ring-worms.

The Oil of Jet.
TAke some pieces of Jet, put them into a glass Retort well luted, filling it
up to the neck; place it upon a Round hollow earthen Pan, in a circulatory
Fire, and fit to it a great Receiver, which lute well to the neck of the
Retort, give at first a small circulary Fire, then the great circulary Fire,
and then a Fire of Suppression; there will appear in the Receiver, an abundance
of white vapors, which will dissolve into Spirit and Oil. This Operation must
last ten or twelve hours, with a continual Fire, and four pound of Jet in your
Retort: out of one pound, you will have about two ounces of Oil, and ten of
Spirit. Separate by a glass Tunnel the Oil, that goes to the bottom, from the
Spirit, which will swim above, and keep them apart in two glass Vials; upon the
Spirit you will perceive swimming, diverse thick drops of Volatile Oil of Jet,
which you may leave with the said Spirit.

Obs. 1. That we use here a Glass Retort luted for the same reason alleged in
the Chapter of the Oil of Cloves.

Obs. 2. That we fill the Retort without any intermedium, because Jet is a dry
substance, which does not swell, no more than other Woods and Roots.

Obs. 3. That Jet is a Rocky Stone, which is drawn in great quantities out of
some Quarrys near Tholous in France; and this Stone is very bituminous, having
much Sulphur, a good deal of Salt, and very little phlegm; from whence it
proceeds, that it yields a good deal of Oil, moderately sharp, and heavy.

Its Use and Virtues: The Oil is most excellent for the suffocations of the
Matrix; because of its extraordinary ill smell, being much more stinking than
the Oil of Guaiac, or Karabe, it serves also to dissolve all bruises, and
contusions of the feet, proceeding from walking too much, the phlegm has the
same, but less virtue than the Oil.

The Oil of Mirrha and other Gums.
TAke a glass Retort well luted, fill it half full of Mirrha, broken into
lumps, place it in the Furnace of a circulatory fire. Fit to it a great
Receiver of Glass, and give the fire by degrees, there will rise an abundance
of white vapors, which in the Receiver will dissolve into a phlegm, and an Oil:
this Operation will last five or six hours: Out of one pound of Mirrha, you
will have seven or eight ounces of Oil, and five or six of phlegm, separate by a
Glass Tunnel the Oil from the phlegm.

Obs. 1. That we use here a Glass Retort well luted, for the reasons alleged
in the distillation of the stinking Oil of Cloves.

Obs. 2. That we fill the Retort but half full, because that the Myrrha does
swell a little being heated, and so if the Retort were full, might run over in
substance: yet because it is a rosinous dry Gum, it is not necessary to give it
any intermedium.

Obs. 3. That Mirrha is a Gum Rosin, having much Salt, Sulphur, and phlegm,
and therefore yields a good deal of Oil, which is very bitter and heavy, as
also a great deal of phlegm.

Its Use and Virtues: This Oil is very detersive, because of its great
bitterness, and therefore serves to ripen and Suppurate wounds, being mingled
with the ordinary digestive: it hinders the Gangrene, being mingled with the
Aegyptiac, or other like unguent: it stinks extremely, and therefore being
smelt to, helps the suffocations of the Matrix.

The Oils of Mastick, Oblibanum, Storax, Benjamin, and all other Gumms, except
Camphire, are made in the same way and method, and without intermedium, as the
Oil of Myrrha.

The Oil of Bricks, or of the Philosophers.
PUt five pound of powdered Brick into a Glass Retort well luted, then pour
into it one pound of Oil of Olives, either with a Tunnel or a Paper Coffin, in
case the neck of your Retort be so straight, that you cannot pour into it
otherwise without spilling. Do not fill above two parts of your Retort, left
the oil in boiling should run out in its proper substance, and carry the Brick
along with it, before it distill. Place your Retort upon a Round hollow Earthen
Pan, in a circulary fire, and fit to it a Receiver. Give the Fire by little and
little, and have a care you do not put your Coals near the Retort before the
phlegm be entirely distilled off, which you will know when you shall hear that
your matter makes no more noise in the Retort: then increase the fire, and lay
your kindled Coals near the Retort, and at last give a fire of suppression, by
covering your Retort, with kindled live Coals. There will come two Oils, one
red, and the other black and stinking, the distillation ought to be performed
drop by drop, and besides these drops there come fumes, that is a sign that the
fire is too strong, therefore lessen it. This distillation will last four or
five hours: out of one pound of Oil of Olives, and five pound of Bricks, you
will have about four ounces of Oil, and half an ounce of phlegm; separate by a
glass Tunnel, the phlegm that will go to the bottom, from the Oil which swims
upon the top: if you rectify this Oil in a little glass Retort in a sand-fire,
it will become yellowish and less stinking.

Obs. 1. That we use a glass, and not a stone Retort, because the Oil would
penetrate the last, and cannot penetrate the first.

Obs. 2. That we give an intermedium to the Oil of Olives, because it can never
be distilled alone and would sooner break the Retort, than distill: and this
intermedium, is rather powderd Brick then any thing else; because it being a
spongious porous substance, it is sooner imbibed, and then having little phlegm,
because it has been baked, it is fitter for this Operation, where much phlegm
would be prejudicial, and would go near to break the Retort by its combat with
Oil. Some quench pieces of Bricks red hot in Oil, then powder and distill them,
but they have a very small quantity of Oil, and yet they must use a great
Retort, and a great Reverberatory fire.

Obs. 3. That the Oil of Bricks is nothing bu^ Oil of Olives distilled, having
acquired by distillation a Tenuity and Thinness of substance, which makes it
very penetrative, and warming, and also very stinking; the Brick communicates
no virtue to it, and is only an intermedium.

Its Use and Virtues: This Oil is very penetrating, inciding, and resolving,
and therefore is most Sovereign for the pains and swellings that come from cold
humors, as in the Sciatica, and also for contusions and blows.

The Oil of yellow Wax.
TAke five parts of Clay, or powdered Bricks, put them into an Earthen glazed
Pan, and pour upon them one part of yellow Wax, melted: incorporate them well
together, and make little Balls and Cylinders to put easily into a glass Retort
well luted: fill it up to the neck, place it upon a round hollow Earthen Pan,
in a circulary Fire, fit, and lute to it a Receiver, give the fire by degrees,
as in the Oil of Bricks, your matter being once hot, the phlegm begins to boil,
and make a noise and comes out first in form of a white Vapor, then the Oil
also in the same form of white vapors, which are condensed into a very red
stinking Oil, which when cold, congeals into butter as yellow as Gold: This
Operation will last four or five hours. For, a pound of Wax, out of which you
will have fourteen ounces of Oil or Butter, and half an ounce of phlegm. If you
rectify this Oil diverse times in a little glass Retort by a sand fire, it will
become as white, and as clear, as whites of Eggs, and will not stink so much.

Observe, That there are no other observations to be made upon this process,
than what has been already observed in the making of the Oil of Bricks.

Its Use and Virtues are likewise the same; but besides, it is most excellent
for the clefts of the Breasts in women.

The Oil of Yolks of Eggs.
PUt twenty or thirty Eggs into a Kettle of cold water, set your Kettle upon
the fire and boil your Eggs till they be hard, then scale them, and take out
the Yolks; put all these Yolks together into a Drying Pan, which set upon a
Trevet, and make a good flaming fire under the Pan, then, crumble all your
yolks with an Iron Spoon, and so turn them now and then, continue thus doing,
till almost all your yolks be reduced to a black Oil, and that there remains
but a few burnt black Faeces; pour this Oil, into a little Earthen Pot, keeping
with your spoon the Faeces from going in with it; this Oil does not congeal,
because it has been drawn with a great Fire, and you may use it without any
other preparation; but, if you desire to have it clearer, and more penetrating,
then rectify it in a glass Retort in a sand-fire: it will become as yellow, as
Gold, and will congeal like Butter. If you rectify it in a naked fire, it will
not be so yellow, but it will congeal a little, for by both of these
rectifications by a gentle heat, the stinking Sulphur remains in the Retort,
and if was this Sulphur that made it stink, and kept it from congealing, which
is proved by this following experience, which is another way of clarifying the
said Oil, viz. Put the said Oil into a double Mattress, for a month, over a
gentle fire, or in a Lamp Furnace, or ashes, or in Horsedung, the Oil will
clarify its self most perfectly; because its Faeces will go to the bottom; and
then you may easily separate the clarified Oil from its Faeces.

Obs. 1. That if you put your Eggs into the water when it boyles, that they
will scarce be hard enough, and therefore will not be fit to yield their Oil,
beeause they retain while they are not hard, something of a superfluous
humidity, and in the Pan they would crackle and sparkle, and hardly afford any
Oil.

Obs. 2. That this Oil, though when it comes from the Pan, be blackish, has not
nevertheless any ill taste nor smell, but when it is rectified, it becomes
sharp and stinking.

Its Use and Virtues: It is a most excellent Balsamum dr^wn from Volatils; it
is anodyne, astringent, agglutinative, and mundificative; and therefore most
excellent for all burnings and fresh wounds, as also for the cleavings of
women's breasts, and likewise for the descent of the bowels, by anointing the
part, then applying a bandage, or truss.

There is another way of making this Oil, viz, to heat your yolks in the Pan
till they begin to grow red and to burn; then put them into a coorse linen
cloth, Oiled with Oil of Almonds, and so put this cloth under a press, and
press out the Oil, but this Oil has not the force of the other drawn by the
method we have already set down.

The Oil of Karabe, and the Ambred Spirit of Wine.
REduce into a gross powder some yellow Amber, (you may make use of the pieces
which the workmen that work in Amber pare off, and you shall have it cheaper,
than at the Droguists) put four ounces of it in a glass Retort well luted, and
pour upon it eight ounces of Spirit of wine, so as your Retort be not above
half full, set your Retort on a Round hollow earthen Pan, in the circulary
Furnace, and fit to it a good ample glass receiver, which you must not lute to
the Retort, lest the vapors of the spirit of wine, which cannot be contained
in the Receiver, should break it: but be careful in luting the gap of the
furnace, about the neck of the Retort, lest the flame should reach the
Receiver, and there set on fire the vapors of the Spirit of Wine, and from
thence the flame would get into the Retort. If such a thing should happen, the
remedy would be, to stop presently the mouth of the Retort with some Lute, to
choke the flame. Increase your Fire by degrees, and when you perceive that the
Receiver is not very warm, then increase your Fire more, and give a Fire of
Suppression, to the end, you may drive out the Oil of Amber, together with the
Spirit of Wine: continue your Fire, till you perceive no more clouds in your
Receiver, for that is a sign that all the Oil is extracted, and distilled from
the Amber: you will find two ounces of black Oil of Carabe, or Amber, and eight
ounces of Spirit of Wine impregnated, with the red Tincture of the said Karabe,
separate by a glass Tunnel, the Oil from the Spirit.

Obs. 1. That we distill Amber with Spirit of Wine, to the end, we may have the
virtue of the Amber in a higher degree for penetration, and less stinking. It
may be distilled all alone, and without intermedium; because, that though, it
be a bituminous Body, nevertheless, it is so dry, that it does not swell in the
Retort: but, when it is distilled alone, its Oil is as black as Jet, and much
of a worse smell, and cannot become yellow, but by reiterated rectifications.

Obs. 2. That if upon the said Oil of Amber, you put Spirit of Wine, it will
presently be tinged with it, and will have the same virtue as the Spirit of
Wine, that has been distilled with Amber.

Obs. 3. That Amber is a bitumen so oylous, that it is almost all Oil, and
contains but very few faeces: since out of one pound of Amber, you may draw
fourteen ounces of a black Oil; insomuch, that it is nothing but a bituminous
Oil, congealed by a little terrestrial substance.

Its Use and Virtues: The Oil of Amber is very bitter, and stinking, and
therefore excellent in the suffocations of the Matrix; either taken inwardly,
in the quantity of three of four drops in some appropriated water, or else
smelt to, or anointed upon the Temples; it is most excellent in old Wounds, and
particularly of the nervous parts, because of its detersive balsamic virtue.

The Spirit of Wine ambred, or tinged by yellow Amber, is likewise a most
excellent Remedy, taken in the same way, for the suffocations of the Mother,
and for the falling Sickness. It is besides, a most excellent exterior Remedy
for the Palsy, the Sciatica, the Cold Gout, all cold Fluxions, and all bruises
of the Nerves. And this, because of the great tenuity, and penetration of its
substance, and its resolutive, and balsamic virtue: but, when you do rub any
affected part with this Remedy before the Fire, have a care you come not too
near, lest the Fire should catch hold of and burn the party.

The Oil of Camphire.
PUt two ounces of Camphire slightly powdered, into a Mattress of an ordinary
size, and pour upon it four ounces of spirit of Niter, shake your Vessel gently
for half a quarter of an hour, to the end, that this agitation may whet the
Spirit, and make it operate the sooner upon the said Camphire; then let them
stand together, far from the Fire, within two hours the Spirit will dissolve
the Camphire, without any sensible ebullition or smoke, and there will swim
upon the Spirit, a clear transparent Oil. Separate by the glass Tunnel, the
said Spirit which will be at the bottom, and will have lost a good part of its
caustic Acrimony; keep your Oil in a glass Vial well stopped.

Obs. 1. That this Oil of Camphire, is nothing but Camphire dissolved by Spirit
of Niter; for, if you throw a little Water upon this Oil, the Camphire will
presently be coagulated into its first white consistence, and smell, because
that the water by weakening the Spirit of Niter, which kept the Camphire in
dissolution, makes it lose its hold, and so the Camphire precipitates to the
bottom.

Obs. 2. That of all the Gums and Rosins, none but Camphire does melt into Oil
in its dissolution, by Spirit of Niter, which may extract the tincture of the
other Gums, but cannot dissolve them.

Its Use and Virtues: are to exfoliate the Rot of the Bones, by the strong
penetration, and dryness of both the Spirit of Niter, and the Camphire;
therefore is it most excellent wherewith to touch the Nerves, that are bare,
and naked in wounds; for it consumes gently, the sharp humor which falls upon
them, and makes the said wounds most grievous, and by its own ^nodyne, and
mollifying virtue of the Camphire, it takes away a great deal of the pain of
the said Nerves.

The Spirit of Wine Campherised.
PUt as much Camphire as you please into a Mattress, pour upon it Spirit of
Wine, till it be four fingers above your matter; fit to this Mattress another
little one, and so make a double vessel; lute them well together; with slices
of Paper, place your Vessel in a Sand-Furnace, and there let it stand, till the
Camphire be entirely dissolved in the Spirit of Wine: the Spirit will then be
clear, and transparent as before, and the Camphire will have a pleasant smell.
There is nothing to be said about the dissolution of Camphire, by Spirit of
Wine, since Camphire is a kind of Gum-Rosin, and that Spirit of Wine has the
virtue of dissolving all Gums by the homogeneity of its substance, and the
tenuity of its parts.

Its Use and Virtue: It is a most excellent anodynum to appease the Toothache,
by putting a little Cotton dipped in the said Spirit of Wine, to the pained
Tooth, and it is good to help the pains in the Ears, by dipping in it some
black Wool, cut off of the Stones of a black Ram, and so put into the Ear.

The Aromatic tincture of Cloves.
PUt of whole Cloves, what quantity you please, into a Mattress, and pour on
well rectfied Spirit of Wine, to the height of four fingers above your matter,
make a double Vessel, with another small Mattress, fitted to the first, and well
luted together; place this vessel in a Sand-heat, and there let it stand, till
the Spirit of Wine be dyed of a red-blackish color; separate by inclination
this tincture, and keep it in a glass Vial well stopped. Of this tincture, may
be made a Syrup, by putting to it a sufficient quantity of Sugar, and so
boiling of it to the consistence of a Syrup: or you may make of the said
tincture an Extract, by evaporating your tincture to the consistence of an
Extract.

The Use and Virtues of the Tincture, Syrup, and Extract, are, to comfort and
strengthen the Stomach, by consuming cold, superfluous humors, take away the
pains of the Colic; it is excellent against all Faintings of the Heart, and
kills worms in the body. The Dosis is a spoonful of the Tincture, or Syrup, and
a Pill of the Extract, or else you apply Linen dipped in the said Tincture, upon
the Stomach, Belly, and Navel.

Cinnamon Water.
PUt four ounces of whole Cinnamon, not powdered, two pound of White Wind, or
Sack, into a Glass, or Stone Cucurbite, place it in a Sand Furnace, with a
glass Head, and Receiver, there will be distilled a Water very clear, and full
of Spirits, which from time to time you must take, and pour out of your
Receiver, to the end, it be not mingled with the gross phlegm, which will come
at last of a whitish, muddy color.

Obs. 1. That you must not distill Cinnamon Water in a Cucurbite of glazed
Earth, lest the Cinnamon should whet the Spirit of Wine, and make it corrode the
Lead of the Vernish, and so being impregnated with the Saturn, alter its own
virtue.

Obs. 2. That the Water of Cinnamon, is nothing but the purest part of the
Wine, impregnated with the Volatile Aromatic Salt of Cinnamon.

Its Use and Virtues: It is a good Cordial, fortifies the Stomach, facilitates,
and helps the delivery of Women in Childbed; the phlegm of this Water is fitter
to make the Syrup of Cinnamon, than common Water, by infusing in it some new
Cinnamon, and aft^r the straining, dissolve in it a sufficient quantity of
Sugar, and so boil it up to a Syrup. This phlegm contains a little Spirit of
Wine in it, with a little of the Volatile Salt of the first Cinnamon; and so is
fitter to open, penetrate, and extract the substance of new Cinnamon, than
simple common water.

The Spiritus Ardens, or burning Spirit of Honey. The sweet Tincture of Honey.
The stinking, or faecid Oil and Spirit of Honey. The stinking Tincture of Honey.
PUt into a Glass, or Stone, or glazed Earth Cucurbit, one pound of good Honey,
and two pound of white wind; place your Cucurbite in a Sand-Furnace, and set it
half way into the Sand, fitting to it a glass Head and Receiver, give a good
Fire, and continue it till all be distilled, and that you hear nothing boil in
the Body; then there will remain a very black, thick Honey: keep the distilled
Liquor, which will be of two sorts, the first will be clear and transparent,
and in a small quantity, and in this is the burning Spirit of-Honey, and the
Spirit of Wine. The second will be of an Orange color, and more in quantity,
and contains the phlegm of the Wine, with the sulphurous Tincture of the Honey.

Take the Faeces of the said Distillation, put them into a Stone Retort well
luted, and put to them alike quantity of River-pibble-stones calcined; place
your Retort in a Reverberatory Furnace, fit to it a great glass Receiver, and
give your Fire from the first to the last degree, for the space of some hours,
till there come out of the Retort, neither vapor nor liquor; then you will
have in your Receiver, a Spirit, and stinking Oil of Honey; and there will yet
remain some Faeces in your Retort.

If upon these Faeces you pour Spirit of Wine, till it be four or five fingers
above your matter, you may have by digestion in a Mattress, or double Vessel in
a Sand-Furnace, a foetid Tincture of Honey, as red as Claret Wine.

The Use and Virtues of all these Tinctures, Spirits, and Oils, Are to make the
Hair grow stiffer and thicker upon Bald-heads.

The Vinegar of Saturn. The Butter, or Balsamum of Saturn.
Boil some distilled Vinegar in a Brass, or Tin Skillet, or in a glazed Pipkin;
pour it out boiling hot upon Minium, or Seruse, or Lytharge of Gold or Silver,
reduced to powder, or upon calcined Lead; let your matter be in a glazed Pan,
and you must have so much Vinegar, as may be four or five fingers deep over
your matter. Stir it a little with a wooden Spatula (not with an Iron one, for
it would black both your Liquor, and the Salt to be extracted out of it) in an
hours time your distilled Vinegar will become sweet and sugared, and
impregnated with the Salt of Saturn.

To make the Butter, or Balsamum of Saturn; melt one ounce of white Wax, in a
little glazed Pan, then put to it four ounces of Oil of Olives, mingle them
well with a wooden Spatula, pour this mixtion immediately into a Brass Mortar,
and upon it, a glass full of the Vinegar of Saturn, stir them well together
with a Brass Pestle, till the Oil and Wax be both impregnated with the Salt of
Saturn, contained in the said Vinegar, and that all the Composition be thick
and white, as the soft Ointment of white Roses.

Its Use and Virtues: This Vinegar serves to appease inflammations and pains,
being applied outwardly to any part, by Linen dipped in Virgins Milk, made of
one spoonful of this Vinegar, and a glass of Water; it may also be useful in
Injections, in recent and fresh Gonorrhaea's, to appease the violence of the
pain. And observe, That this Vinegar, poured upon any distilled Water, does not
whiten it, nor make it like Milk.

The Butter, or Balsamum of Saturn, serves to cool and appease the ardour of
inflammations, as well of the Stones, as of the Hemorrhoides, and other parts:
as also, it produces the same effect in Erisypelases.

The Plaster of Saturn.
PUt one pound of Oil of Olives into a vernish'd Pan; add to it four ounces of
well powdered Minium, or Mine-Lead, and so boil them together; stirring them
sometimes with an Iron Spatula, till they be reduced to the consistence of a
Plaster, as black as Jet; you may add to it a little Wax to give it a Body.

Its Use and Virtues: It is most excellent in dissolving those fleshly
Excrescences, and Ulcers called Wolfes.

The Extract of Hellebore.
PUt half a pound of the Roots of black Hellebore, cut into little bits, into a
capacious Mattress, pour on Spirit of Wine, four fingers above your matter; fit
to it another little Mattress, to make a double Vessel; place it in a
Sand-Furnace, and there let it stand in digestion three or four days; and let
not the belly of your Mattress be above a quarter-way in the Sand, nor do not
make your fire so great, as to make your Spirit of Wine boil; for, then part of
your Spirits would exhale, and be gone; yet, let there be heat enough to
extract the red Tincture of the Roots. Separate this Tincture by Inclination,
or if there be any Faeces, filtrate it through a Coffin of brown Paper; pour
this Tincture into a glass Body, which set in the same Sand-Furnace, and fit to
it a glass Head and Receiver, and so draw off by Distillation, as much Spirit
of Wine, as you poured on, which will serve you for other uses; then take off
the Head, and evaporate your matter to the consistence of an Extract like Honey.

In the mean time, boil the Roots left in the Mattress in a quantity of common
Water, to make a Decoction, which strain through a course Linen, then clarify
it with Whites, and Shells of Eggs, and evaporate it in a stone, or glazed
earthen Pan, to the consistence of an Extract, which you may mingle with the
precedent, if you think good.

We draw these two Extracts separately, and with different menstruums, because,
that the Spirit of Wine extracts only the gummy rosinous part, and cannot
extract the saltish: and the common Water does quite contrary.

Its Use and Virtues: It purges Melancholy most commonly with a loathing, and
sometimes with vomiting.

An Essence for the Toothache.
PUt of the Spirit of Wine campherized, of the Tincture of Cloves, of the Oil
of Box, of the Oil of Guaiacum, of the black Oil of Sulphur, and if you will,
of the Tincture of Opium, of each an equal part, there will result an oily red
transparent Liquor, which you must keep in a glass Vial well stopped.

Its Use and Virtues: It is a most excellent Remedy to appease the Toothache,
and draw off the sharp humor that falls on the Teeth; you must pour some of it
into a glass, and then dip a little Cotton, of which make a Pellet, as big as a
Pea, and apply it to the Tooth, or in its hollow part, if there be any; there
will presently distill from it a good deal of Water, and the pain will cease.

Turpentine Pills.
PUt four ounces of clear transparent Turpentine of Venice, into a glazed Disn;
pour upon it three times as much water, boil them together with a gentle heat,
till your Turpentine look white, and not yellow, as before; then take out a
little of it upon the point of a Knife, and let fall a drop or two, upon a
pewter Plate; if you see that the drop, when cold, does not stick to your
fingers, then it is boiled enough to make Pills of; so take it off, and pour
cold Water into your Pan, that will precipitate the Turpentine in a white
Paste: take this Paste, and knead it with your hand to wring the Water out, you
may wipe your Turpentine, with some Linen, but you must do it gently, lest
while it is warm, the Linen should stick to it; then add to it one ounce of a
Diaphoretick Antimony, half an ounce of Salt of Sulphur, and as much of Cremor
Tartari, incorporate them together into a lump, which will soon grow hard, but
will easily grow soft again, being handled before the fire. Keep this Mass for
Pills, in a Hogs bladder, well oiled with Sallet Oil.

Its Use and Virtues: These Pills do dry up, and stop Gonorrhaea's when they
have flowed enough, by giving half an ounce for Dosis, for the space of a
fortnight or three weeks. For those that cannot swallow Pills, you must boil
your Turpentine a little more, till it grow so hard upon the Plate, as to be
broken in pieces, powder this in a mortar, and add to it the same Druggs, as
above. The Dosis mentioned will be the same here, and must be dissolved in
white Wine, or in Broth, or in some Decoction, or appropriated Water.

The distilled Water of Plants.
PUt a good Hand-basket full of leaves, (for Example of Plantane) new gathered,
and fresh, into the Brass Vesica, add to them about four quarts of Water, to
the end, the Herb may boil during the distillation, and that in boiling, the
said Water may extract, and be impregnated with the virtue of the plant; yet,
let not your Vesica be above three quarters full, lest the Water in boiling,
should carry the substance, and not the vapors into the Moors-head. You need
not put any sponges into the neck of the Vesica, as you do in the distillation
of the Spirit of Wine, because these sponges would hinder the passage of your
vapors; fit to your Vesica its Moors-head, bordered with its Refrigeratory;
and make use also of the second Refrigeratory, that is, of the two Hogsheads
full of Water, as has been taught in the distillation of Spirit of Wine; this
will further the distillation of your Water very much. Give at first a good
Fire of Coals, and two or three Fagot-sticks, continue this Fire, and moderate
your Distillation so, as to make a little stream of Water come always into your
Receiver, into which it will not fall perpendicularly, as the Spirit of Wine
does, but a little archwise. As soon as with this little stream you perceive
that there come vapors into the Receiver, lessen your Fire, to hinder the loss
of these vapors, which spend themselves in vain. If your Distillation be
performed but slowly, and drop by drop, or in a very little stream, falling
perpendicularly, then increase the Fire, that you may not lose your time by an
unnecessary protraction of the Distillation. From time to time empty your
Receiver, and immediately pour it through a glass Tunnel into a stone Pitcher.

As soon as you perceive, that there comes into your Receiver a muddy Water,
then be sure, that all the good part of your Operation is at an end; because,
this muddy Water proceeds from the burning of the Plants, which begins to send
forth its Spirit, and stinking Oil; therefore give over distilling, put out
your Fire, take out the Grounds of the Herbs left in the bottom, and throw away
the muddy Water that you shall find there with them; after which, begin a new
Distillation with new Herbs, and new Water.

When you have gathered all your Water into stone Pitchers, put into them some
Saltpeter, well purified, and crystallized, half a dragm to every pound of
Water.

Obs. 1. That you must not put your Water into an earthen Vessel unglazed,
because, at last it would lose its self entirely, through the pores of the
Potters-Earth, which is very porous and spongious; therefore, always put it in
Glass, White-ware, or glazed Vessels, or Stone, because that these are very dry
and thick, and there is no danger in glazed Pots, because your Water has no
Acrimony wherewith to corrode the glazing: all the danger is, that the Frost
should break them; for preventing of which inconvenience, you must keep your
Vessels in a warm deep Cellar, or in a Box full of Hay.

Obs. 2. That the refined crystalliz'd Niter which you put in your Water,
serves to preserve it for many years; and that Niter is fitter for this
purpose, than the fixed Salt of the Plant, which would be very tedious to
extract, by drying and burning of the Faeces, then infusing the Ashes, then
filtrating this Lixivium, then evaporating it to the consistence of a Salt.

Obs. 3. That you must presently stop your stone Pitchers with a Cork stopple;
and it is not necessary to expose them to the Sunbeams.

Obs. 4. That to make Rose Water, it is better to put pale Roses well picked,
into a great earthen glazed Pan, and add to them water and common Salt: for
example, upon six pounds of Roses, as many quarts of water, and one pound of
common Salt, and so let them macerate and ferment two or three days, then put
them into the Vesica, and distill them: observe, that during the distillation,
and after it is done, the Rose water does smell but very little of the Roses:
but if you will quicken the smell, it is but setting your Pitchers some days in
the Sun, covered only with a white Paper: then take them, and stop them close
with a cork stopple, and set them up,

Its Use and Virtue: It is the same with the virtue of the Plant it is
distilled from.

The soft Conserve of Leaves and Flowers.
TAke a deep large Pan, set it in such a Furnace as the great Reverberatory
Furnace, throw a handful or two of sand into your Pan; then place in it a stone
Pitcher of a quart, five quarters full of water; fill up your pan with sand, so
as to bury the belly of the pitcher in sand. Then put into the mouth of the
Pitcher, a Glass, or Tin Pipe, as big as your little finger, and a foot long;
being bended in its middle angular-wise; one end of it must be so straight,
that a drop of water may not go through in substance, the other end must be
pretty wide: put the wide end lapt about with a little Linen into your
pitcher, and then make a fire in your Furnace, and cause your water to boil; as
soon as it boyls, there will come out with violence at the little end of the
Pipe a moist burning vapor: which will stream above half a foot beyond the
Pitcher, and yet not a drop of water with it: set under this vapor a pan full
of Leaves or Flowers newly gathered and fresh; having before hand sprinkled
upon them two or three spoonfuls of Spirit, or Phlegm, or Vitriol, or Sulphur;
these Leaves or Flowers will fade by little and little, as they receive this
penetrating vapor. In the mean time, you must turn them continually, till they
become like a thick hasty pudding, which will be in half a quarter of an hour;
then take out these Flowers thus prepared, put in more, continuing so, till you
have prepared all your Leaves and Flowers, then put them all together into an
Earthen Pan, and add to them double their weight of fine Sugar, well powdered
and searced; incorporate them well together with your Spatula; and thus you
will have a very pleasant good conserve, which will keep as long as that which
is made by beating the herbs in a Mortar, keep it in white ware pots.

Obs. 1. That we have filled our Pitcher but three quarters full, to the end,
that the water in boiling, should not come out through the little end of the
Pipe in its own substance, but in Vapor.

Obs. 2. That the Spirit of Vitriol, or Sulphur, with which we sprinkle the
said Leaves, or Flowers, serves for two ends: First, it revives and quickens
their natural color, preserves it, nay, and re-cals it, if it were a decaying;
Secondly, it is as a Salt to these Leaves, or Flowers, to preserve them from
corruption.

Obs. 3. That in all seasons, even in winter, you may by this method make a
soft, or Liquid Conserve of Roses, with dry Roses, whose dying yellowish
color, you may this way revive, and make them of a lovely red. But the
Operation will be somewhat tedious, for it will last an hour, but also the
Conserve will last and keep longer, than if it had been made of fresh Roses.

Obs. 4. That if you take a straight Pipe, half a foot long, and put the wide
end of it into the nose of the cover of the Brass Vesica, which must be half
full of water; then the Sulphur that shall come out of the straight end of the
said Pipe, will do the same effect, as the Engine described already.

Obs. 5. That if you sprinkle the Conserve of Flowers of wild Popies, with Oil
of Tartar, made per deliquium, or by dissolution of its Salt; and then stir the
said conserve, it will become of the color of Violets, like Syrup of Violets,
and if you sprinkle the conserve of Roses with the said Oil of Tartar, and then
stir it; it will become as green as growing grass.

The Lime Water and Phagedenick Water.
TAke four or five pound of Quicklime in stones, and not in powder, and choose
such stones as are very well calcined; put them into a barrel knocked out at
one end, or into a great stone Pot; throw upon it at once two pale fulls of
water, and then stir it with a stick; reiterating the agitation from time to
time: there will be a very great ebullition and smoke, in which the volatile
Salt of the Quicklime will evaporate, in two hours or thereabouts the boiling
will cease, and the Quicklime will fall to the bottom: upon the surface of the
Water there will remain a thin transparent white Ice, which is the essential
Crystallized Salt of the Quicklime; let this water stand for some days,
stirring it from time to time that it may be well impregnated with the Salt of
the Lime; or else at first, you may separate it by inclination from the Lime
that is in the bottom, and then filtrate it through a brown Coffin of Paper,
and so keep it in great Glass, or white Ware Bottels, or Stone ones if you
will; provided they be all well stopped with Cork stopples.

Obs. 1. That here we quench, or slack the Quicklime on a sudden, and all at
once, and so by a great ebullition and evaporation, the volatile Salt of the
Lime is dissipated: for in this remedy we do not need the volatile Salt, as we
do in our Cauteries; it is enough here, that the Water be impregnated with the
fixed Salt of the Quicklime, to be fit to cleanse and dry Ulcers.

Its Use and Virtues: It consumes the superfluous humors in Ulcers; resists
corruption, drys them and cicatrises them. It serves also for mealy Ring-worms,
for the Itch, Scales, and Erisypelases, for Inflammations: but you must have a
care to make it more or less sharp, according to the nature of the distemper,
and the sensibility of the part you intend to apply it to: which to do, you
need only put more or less common water, according as you will have it, more or
less acrimonious: for, the force of this water is in its Salt; which you cannot
sweeten but by increasing the dose of common water, and diminishing that of the
Salt. Therefore it is but trifling to make two or three Lime waters one after
another upon the same Lime.

To make the Phagedenick water; put two pound of the said Quicklime Water into
a Glass Bell, or an Earthen white Ware Pan, and put to it, from half a dragm to
a dragm, of Corrosive Sublimate well powdered, (in an Earthen white Ware Dish
with an Earthen Pestle.) This Water, and the Sublimate, after the first
stirring of them together, will become presently of an Orange color, the
Sublimate will go to the bottom, and is called the Orange-Sublimate. If you
have a desire to make your Phagedenick Water weaker, pour upon it two pounds
more of Lime Water; then the water and the Sublimate will change their Orange
color into a Lemmon: keep this water, together with its Sublimate, in a Glass
Vial well stopped for your use.

Obs. 2. That the Sublimate from white becomes yellow or orange color, when
mixed with the Lime water, because that those Sulphurous Salts, of which the
Corrosive Sublimate is not divested, being to engage with the Salt of the Lime,
are quickened, and so revive their color in the conflict, so much as to
communicate their tincture to the Water and Sublimate.

Its Use and Virtues: In this Water we dip Linen, and apply it to old rotten
Ulcers, full of frothy flesh, to consume the ill flesh; correct the
putrefaction, cleanse and produce better flesh, and at last dry them, and bring
them to cicatrize.

The Magistery of Coral. The Salt of Coral.
TAke as much as you please of red Coral (that which is in little branches is
the best) beat it to a fine powder in a Brass Mortar, and put it into a Glass,
Stone, or VVhite-ware Vessel, pour upon it Spirit of Sulphur two or three
fingers high above your Matter; let them stand together, far from the fire, and
there the Coral will dissolve; while it dissolves, there will be an ebullition
with a little noise, which ceasing, marks to you that the Spirit is laden with
as much of the Coral, as it is able to dissolve; and it has lost its great
acidity and sharpness. Pour off by inclination this dissolution, and put it
into a Vessel apart, then pour new Spirit upon the Faeces, and continue so
doing, till you have dissolved all the Coral. This done, put all your
dissolutions together into a Glass Bell, and pour upon them cold water, in such
quantity, and so often, till at last your water come away without any taste;
filterate that which remains through a Coffin of white Paper, upon which let it
dry, or make Trochisks of it, as has been taught in the Chapter of the
Diaphoretick Antimony.

Obs. 1. That to make your dissolutions you must not take an earthen glazed
Pan, lest your Spirit of Sulphur should spend its force upon the glazing, and
black and spoil your Magistery, nor you must not take a Vessel of potters earth
unglazed, because that this earth being porous, would imbibe and consume the
Spirit in its porosities: now your Stone Vessels are of a thick compact Matter,
and your White-ware is a kind of glass.

Obs. 2. That instead of Spirit of Sulphur you may use Spirit of Vitriol, but
because Vitriol naturally blacks all it comes near, your Magistery will not be
so white; you may also make use of distilled Vinegar, or juice of four Lemmons;
but we do not, because we should need too great a a quantity, and so it would
prove dearer, and your Operation would only be longer, but not better.

Obs. 3. That the Magisteries of Crabs eyes, Pearls, Bezoard, mother of Pearl,
are all made the same way as the Magistery of Coral; yet we shall give a
description of some of them by another method.

Obs. 4. That both the Magistery, and the Salt of Coral, are nothing but a Calx
of Coral; or a Philosophic calcination of it, by the corrosion of the Spirit
of Sulphur: all the difference that is between the Magistery and the Sulphur,
is; that the Magistery is a Calx slackened, washed and sweetened by common
water, and so freed from the acrimony of the Salt of Sulphur, whereas the Salt
of Coral is a Calx, yet impregnated with some rest of Spirit of Sulphur,
incorporated in it by crystallization, or not driven away by the fire in the
drying; from whence it proceeds that the Magistery is infipid, but the Salt of
Coral is acid and biting upon the Tongue, and from thence it has the name of
Salt, though in effect it be no salt: for it is not to be dissolved in water,
and is properly a Stone, salted by the impregnation with the Spirit of Sulphur:
for, if you go about to dissolve it, there will be in the water nothing but
some Spirit of Sulphur, so that if you continue sweetning this Salt, you will
at last make the Magistery of Coral of it.

Its Use and Virtues: The Magistery and Salt of Coral have the same virtues
with pure Coral; but they are exalted, because the body of Coral being opened,
is more penetrating, and so fitter to carry its astringent corroborative
faculty to the remotest parts of the body? yet it is certain, that there where
the design is only to take away the Acrimony of those humors, which do corrode
the Stomach and Intestines; there, I say, ordinary Coral, well powdered, is
better than its Magistery; because, that the Chemical Operation will be
performed in the body with more benefit, by those corrosive sharp humors,
which meeting with the Coral, fall to dissolving of it, and so dull their own
Acrimony, which is the most malignous thing in the body. We see nevertheless by
experience too, that if upon the Magistery of Coral, you pour new Spirit of
Sulphur, or of some other Acid, there will be a more sudden and stronger
ebullition, though it last not so long as in the first dissolution of Coral;
and therefore, the serous sharp Humors of the body, may produce the same
effect upon the Magistery. But the Dissolvant meeting not with so much
resistance in Coral already opened and calcined, as in natural Coral, does not
work with so much force, and therefore dulls not its activity, nor loses so
much of its Acrimony after the dissolution.

The Balsam of Saint John 's Wort compounded, drawn by the Spirit of Wine.
Put into a Mattress five or six ounces of Spirit of Wine, put to it Myrrh,
Aloes, and Sanguis Draconis, all well powdered, of each a dragm; place your
Vessel in a Sand-fire, to make your Gums dissolve; which will be done in two or
three hours time, then add to them as much of the dry Flowers of Saint John's
Wort, as you can take up with your thumb and four fingers; the Spirit of Wine,
though it have dissolved the Gums, will yet extract the Balsamic Tincture of
the said Flowers; next day take off your Vessel out of the Sand, and strain all
your matter through a Linen Cloth, by pressing it while it is warm, then
dissolve in it half an ounce of Venice Turpentine, by setting your matter for
half an hour upon a Sand-fire; thus you will have a red, unctuous, and
mucilaginous Balsam.

Observe, That if you had extracted the Tincture of your Flowers, before the
Tincture of the Gums, the Spirit would have been weakened, because it would not
only have been laden with the oily part of them, but also with the phlegm, and
therefore would not have been able to dissolve the said Gums.

Its Use and Virtues: It is a most excellent Balsam for all green Wounds,
Contusions, and for the Sciatica.

The Corrosive Sublimate.
YOu must have two Pans of Potters-Earth unglaz'd, which must be turned up-side
down, one upon the other, and be so exactly fit, as to make but one Pan in this
situation; and therefore they must have been baked together in a Potters Oven;
in the uppermost, must be a hole big enough to put an Egg into; then take
Quicksilver, and good refined Niter deflegmated, of each a pound, common Salt
well decrepitated, and green Vitriol well calcined into red, of each half a
pound; powder your Salts, and incorporate with them your Quicksilver, by
beating them together in a Marble Mortar, with a Wooden Pestle, and sprinkling
distilled Vinegar upon them, till you have reduced them to a kind of paste; put
this paste by pieces into the Pan, by the hole left in the top, and then stop
it with Lute, so as to leave only a vent of the bigness of a good big Pin;
place your undermost Pan: up to the brim, in the Furnace of the Fire of great
Reverberation; taking care to leave in your Furnace three gaps, to give the
Fire Air, viz. one over against the Fire-room, and one of each side, for else
your Pan being set so deep into the Furnace, would go near to suffocate, and
put out your Fire: give at first a strong Fire, and when you have brought it to
the highest and last degree, continue it twelve hours. While the Operation
lasts, you must have a care to keep open the little vent, that is left in the
Lute; you may therefore, with a Wire, gently open it from time to time, that so
your matter may send forth freely its most fiery vapors, which else would
break your Vessel, and in the breaking spread such a malignity by their
abundance, and sudden eruption, as would go near to infect you. After twelve
hours, let your Fire go out, and when your Pan is cold, break the uppermost
part of it, and you will find a loaf two or three fingers thick, sticking to
the sides of the lowermost part, as white as Snow; icy in its circumference,
and crystalliz'd in its middle.

Obs. 1. That in France we do not make much of this Sublimate, because we can
have it six times cheaper from Venice, where common Salt, Mercury and Vitriol
are very cheap, because they are not far from the Mines, and near the Sea. The
Hollanders do also bring some to Paris, but they sophisticate it commonly with
white Arsenick: We have taught to discern this cheat in the Chapter of the
dulcified Sublimate.

Obs. 2. That the Corrosive Sublimate is nothing but Quicksilver, calcined and
incorporated with Niter, and the Spirits of common Salt, and Vitriol by the
Fire, which sublimes all these Volatils into one lump. The common Salt and
Vitriol remain in the bottom of the lowermost Pan, almost as heavy as when they
were put in, because that they are naturally fixed; the fixed Substance of the
common Salt, and deflegmated Vitriol, serve to hinder the melting of the Niter;
and the Spirits of these two serve to corrode the Mercury, and make it strongly
corrosive, by the conjunction of all these Salts together.

Its Use and Virtues: It Is the strongest Corrosive of all, it serves to make
the dulcified Mercury, the Emetick Powder, the Phagedenick Water, and that
Unguent, which for the violence of its inflaming and burning Operation, is
called, The Devil's Unguent: It is the poison we call Ratsbane, and kills Rats
and Mice by burning their entrals, as if they had live coals in them; producing
the same effect in all Animals, and men too, if they swallow any of it. The
Antidote of it, is not any Theriaca, or Victan, or other Cordial; there is
nothing but Water in abundance, that by humecting and wetting the Salts, is
able to take away their Acrimony, though Oil be very good too; for, Oil and
Grease, because they cannot dissolve, and melt these Salts, make them at least
remain without force upon those parts which are oyled or greased, as we may see
in the operation of Cauteries, applied to a very fat man; for, as soon as they
have corroded the skin, they are fain to stay there, and show their caustic
virtue no further; because they meet with the Panicula Carnosa, or Adiposa,
which stays their action, there is nothing but a waterish humidity, which by
melting of these Salts, gives them leave to work.

The Balsam of Sulphur, drawn by the Oily Spirit of Turpentine.
PUt into a Mattress four ounces of Flowers of Brimstone, or else Brimstone
powdered very fine, and one pound of Spirit of Turpentine, incorporated with
its Oil, such as the Merchants send from Provence to Paris; let your Mattress be
but half full, place it in a Sand-fire, and fit to it another Mattress, and so
make a double Vessel. In this heat the Spirit will begin to simper, and
presently after the Brimstone will melt, and dye the Spirit of a fine color,
as red as a Pomegranate: govern your Fire so, as to hinder your Spirit from
boiling; in one or two hours the Operation will be done. Then take off your
Vessel, and pour out your Dissolution, while it is warm, into a stone Vessel,
or of glazed Earth; in it, the Sulphur, as it grows cold, will go to the
bottom, and congeal in a yellow lump, and the Tincture will remain above; when
your Tincture is cold and clear, by the falling down of the Brimstone, pour it
off by inclination, and keep it in a glass Vial.

Obs. 1. That this Spirit of Turpentine has drawn not only the red Tincture,
but also the ill smell of the Brimstone, so as to lose its own odor.

Obs. 2. That the Brimstone, which you find after the Operation done, weighs
almost as much as when you put it in, having communicated to the Spirit of
Turpentine little besides the color, and smell of Brimstone.

Its Use and Virtues: It is a most excellent Anodinum, and Ripener for the
wounds of the nervous parts, and is very good for pains in the ears, by putting
some drops of it into them.

The Essence of Musk, and Ambergreece, drawn by Spirit of Wine.
PUt into a small Mattress, one dragm of Ambergreece, and half a dragm of Musk,
well powdered before hand; pour upon them five ounces of Spirit of Wine, seal
up your Mattress hermetically, and put it into a little earthen Pan full of
Sand, up to half the belly; set it in the Sun for forty days, in the hottest
time of the year, from eight of the clock in the morning, till seven at night;
keeping behind your Mattress a Tin Leaf, to receive the Sunbeams, and
reverberate them upon the glass. The Musk and Ambergreece will be almost quite
dissolved in the Spirit of Wine, and will dye it of a red color, like a Ruby;
break the neck of your Glass, and pour out your Essence into a glass Vial, well
stopped, and waxed, and above the stopple, put a piece of an oyled bladder.

Obs. 1. That Ambergreece being a kind of Bitumen, and Musk being of an oily
nature, they may easily be dissolved in Spirit of Wine, and communicate to it
their Tincture.

Its Use and Virtues: One drop of this Essence perfumes for ever whatsoever it
touches, that can imbibe it; and is much more pleasant with a double quantity
of Ambergreece, than with equal parts of Musk and Ambergreece, because the
odor of the Ambergreece is sweeter, and that of the Must stronger.

The Tincture of Tartar, or Spirit of Wine clarified.
TAke as much as you please of Tartar calcined to whiteness, properly called
Salt of Tartar, or of Ashes made of burnt Lees of Wine, called Gravelled Ashes;
put either of them into a Crucible, or unglaz'd stone Pot, place it in a
Wind-Furnace, till your matter be blew, like Vitriol of Cyprus, which may be
done in an hours time: take off your Pot, and with a brass Spoon take out your
matter, and powder it while it is hot, in a brass Mortar, and then put it into
a Mattress, which you must stir, and shake in your hand, to the end the heat of
the matter may extend its self equally to all the parts of the Glass, and not
break one by over-heating it. Let your Mattress have two parts empty, pour into
your matter Spirit of Wine, till your Glass be half full; place this Vessel in
a Sand-Furnace, giving an ordinary Fire according to Art; let it stand till the
Spirit of Wine become as red as a Ruby, then pour off by inclination this
Tincture, pour on more Spirit upon the Faeces, and reiterate this as long as
the Faeces will yield any Tincture, there will remain a good quantity of the
said Faeces, which you may re-calcine, and use as other Salt of Tartar; keep
your Tincture.

Observe, That Tartar being a sulphurous and inflameable Salt, may take the
color of blew, and communicate a red Tincture to the Spirit of Wine.

Its Use and Virtues: It is the most powerful and penetrating Desopilative that
is; it produces its effect strongly and gently, so that for the obstructions of
the Spleen, the Pancreas, the Mesentery, and the Mesaraick Veins, there is not
the like remedy amongst Chemists nor Galenists; for, by the Spirit of Wine, it
dissolves all the most tenacious Viscosities in the little Veins, and pores of
the Belly: and by the Salt of Tartar, it carries away all the impurities of the
said parts, so that no Soap can cleanse more than this Tincture. Its use is to
be dissolved from ten to thirty drops, in some Broth, or appropriated Water, to
take every morning fasting for some days.

The Spirit, and foetid Oil of Tartar.
TAke a glass Retort luted up to half its neck, if you do make but a little of
this Remedy, or if you make a great deal, take a Stone one, fill it up to the
neck with good Tartar of Montpellier, either red or white, beaten to a fine
powder: place your Retort upon a Pot-cover full of Ashes, in the small
reverberatory Furnace, if you use but two or three pounds; or in an Earthen
Bowl, in a great circulatory Fire, if you use but half a pound: fit a Receiver,
and give your Fire by degrees; there will soon come forth a white dark vapor,
which will continue all the time of the Operation; the Phlegm comes first, then
the Tartar takes fire in the Retort, and is in a flame, and from the smoke of
this flame, come the Spirit and Oil. Continue your fire, till there come no
more out of the Retort, and till your Receiver be clear, and cold, though the
Fire be violent under the Retort: out of one pound of Tartar, you will draw
about ten ounces of Spirit, with its Phlegm, and two ounces of Oil; in the
Retort will remain four ounces of a black Salt, which you must dissolve in
Water, then filtrate and coagulate to use, as the true Salt of Tartar, being
entirely divested of its Phlegm, Spirit and Oil, and so being a pure Salt; for
the Tartar contains but very little Faeces, or Earth.

Observe, That in this Operation, we perceive that Tartar is a very sulphurous
Salt, since it takes fire in the Retort, and there comes from it a blackish
Oil, stinking, and inflameable, and that the Faeces do remain black, and burnt
in the Retort.

Its Use and Virtues: This Oil is indifferently stinking and caustic; it
serves for Ring-worms, and exfoliation of Bones, or for Farsey in Horses: the
Spirit is acid, when rectified, and is good against the Stone and Gravel.

The Spirit and Aromatic Oil of Juniper Berries.
Put fresh Juniper Berries into a Brass Vesica, till it be half full, fill one
third more of the Vesica with common cold water, let them infuse twenty four
hours in the Vesica, with a gentle fire, to extract afterward the better the
oily Essence of your Berries, having all this while stopped the mouth of your
Vesica with a Linnencloth; take out this cloth, and fit to your Brass body its
Mores-head, bordered with a refrigeratory, and a moveable Pipe, and do as has
been taught in the distillation of the waters of Plants; that which will first
come, will be the Aromatic, Balsamic Essence, or Oil of Juniper Bays,
together with a little phlegm, or inflegmated Spirit; and then the rest of the
phlegm will follow. Out of a peck of Berries, you will not have above two ounces
of Essence, or Oil, all the rest will be phlegm, or Spirit inflegmatized.

Obs. 1. That because we can draw but a very small quantity of Oil or Essence,
not only out of Juniper Berries, but also out of all Balsamic and Aromatic
Leaves, Flowers, Rinds, Barks, Roots, Woods, Berries, and Seeds, therefore we
have found the way of using Spirit of Turpentine, separated by three or four
Rectifications from its red Oil, putting three or four ounces upon every peck
of Berries; to the end that being incorporated with the Essence of Juniper, it
may augment, and increase the quantity of the said Essence, and yet not change
its qualities; but if you should put more than three or four ounces of this
Spirit on a peck of Berries, the smell of the Turpentine would predominate, and
so spoil your Essence: thus the Provensals prepare and multiply their Essences,
and by affording them cheap, make them become common. But I could wish that
they would leave off sophisticating them, and sell them as dear as they stand
them in, and are really worth; particularly, those Essences that are to be
taken inwardly; but the covetousness of those that sell, and the sparing way of
the buyers, will never give way to this.

Observe, That when you have put to your Berries the Spirit of Turpentine well
rectified; the first liquor that comes is the said Spirit impregnated with the
oily Essence of your Juniper Berries.

Obs. 2. That there are two ways to separate the oily Essence from its phlegm.
The first, is by a glass Tunnel or a Coffin of brown Paper wet before hand with
common water; or with the Spirit of your Berries, as it has been said before:
only observe, that most of the Essences do swim upon their phlegm, and
therefore, that in separating them by the glass Tunnel, the first thing that
runs out, must be the phlegm; and by the Coffin, it is also the phlegm that goes
through; the Oil remains; which you draw out by making a hole in your Paper
Coffin toward the bottom, and holding a glass Vial under to receive your Oil.

The second way is, to put into a glass Mattress, with a short neck, all the
phlegm with which the Oil is distilled; and then make a roll of Cotton like the
Wick of a Candle; of which put one end into your Mattress, to make it touch the
said Essence, and let the other end hang into a glass Vial, tied with a
pack-thred to the neck of the Mattress: your Essence will by little and little
imbibe the Cotton, and at last run quite through it, till it come out at the
other end, and fall by drops into your Vial.

Obs. 3. That the Balsamic, and Aromatic Essence, or Oil of Juniper, as of
all other Balsamicks, and Aromaticks, is nothing but the subtlest part of its
Sulphur and Volatile Salt, because of its Sulphur it retains the smell of the
Berries, and the yellow color of their Tincture, and because of its volatile
Salt, it retains the taste, and Acrimony of the said Berries; in these two, the
Salt and Sulphur, consists the excellence of this simple; but, because the Oil
of Juniper has but little Salt, therefore it swims upon its phlegm, and having
been drawn by common water, it has preserved the natural smell, savor, and
tincture of the Berries; and thus it happens to all drogues of this nature:
for, if you distill them in a naked fire without water, there will come from
them a stinking caustic Oil, as we have taught in the Chapter of the
distillation of the stinking Oil of Cloves. But before this stinking Oil, we do
ordinarily draw from Aromatic drogues by the intermedium of water, all their
Essence and Balsamic Oil, which is a kind of Virgin Oil, being the purest part
of them. After its extraction, there remains yet in the Faeces a thick gross
terrestrial saltish Oil, which we draw without intermedium by distillation ad
latus in a glass Retort luted in a naked fire: and because this Oil is drawn
without intermedium in a naked fire, and by the combustion and flagration of
the said Drugs, therefore it is black and stinking, and of an ill taste, and
much more caustic than the Aromatic Oil, which contains less of the Volatile
Salt, the phlegm having shared a good part of the said Salt, with the Oil; but
in the foetid Oil, the Volatile Salt is as it were shut in, and not carried away
by its phlegm, whereof it has very little.

If you rectify your Essence of Juniper in a little glass Retort in a
Sand-fire, there will come off a Spirit, which is the Spirit of Turpentine,
which you had added to it, and there will remain in the Retort a pure Essence
of Juniper as yellow as Gold, and as thick as true Balsam.

Its Use and Virtues: The Essence of Juniper Berries helps the Toothache,
Deafness, the Rot of the Bones, the Colic, and the Gravel. Its phlegm, or
Spirit, serves to prepare the extract of Juniper, as we shall teach hereafter.

The Aromatic Essence of Cloves, Cinnamon, Pepper, Aniseed, Fennel seed,
Rosmary-leaves, Thyme, Marjorum, Savin, Jesmin-Flowers, Orange-Flowers, Orange
and Lemmon Peels, and generally of all Roots, Barks, Rinds, Woods, Berries,
Seeds, Leaves, and Aromatic Flowers, whose oily Tincture may be easily
extracted in water, are drawn the same way as that of Juniper Berries: but
those Woods, Roots, and Barks that are of a thicker and more compact substance,
and which will not easily yield their oily Tincture in water, must be used
without water, in a Retort and naked fire, to extract their Oil, which by
consequent must be black, stinking, and caustic, as the Oil of the Wood, and
Bark of Guiac, etc.

The stinking and black Oil of Juniper.
FIll a Stone or Glass Retort luted, with the Berries of Juniper, that have
already yielded their Aromatic Oil. Place it upon an earthen Bowl full of
ashes, in a small Reverberatory Furnace, there will come abundance of white
Vapors, which in the Receiver will dissolve, some into an acid Spirit, and
some into a Black Oil, stinking, and caustic: Out of a pound of Berries, you
will have about two ounces of this Oil, and twelve of acid Spirit, and if you
use fresh Berries, that have not served, you will have the double of stinking
Oil: separate by a glass Tunnel the Oil from the Spirit.

Its Use and Virtues: The Oil is good for Ring-worms, for the Toothache, the
Rot of the Bones, and all old Ulcers.

The Extract of Juniper.
PUt into the Brass Vesica, or double glass ^^^sel, a peck of Juniper Berries
fresh gather^ and pour upon them distilled water of Junip^^ three or four
fingers high above them: if yo^ have not enough of the said Water, you may
suply your want with common Water. Place yo^^ Vesica in a circulary fire, or in
any of the Reve^beratory Furnaces with a small fire, or if you (...) a double
glass Vessel, set it in a sand Furnace wi^^ a good fire; there let it stand
twenty four hour^ till the tincture be extracted; which pour o^ gently into a
Brass Basin, or into an Earthe^ Pan; place it upon a little Furnace over a
nake^ fire; and make it boil as soon as you can; when it boils, throw into it
five or six whites of Eggs, with the Egg-shells, and so continue to make it
boil, till your whites of Eggs be hard, and laden with the Faeces of the
Tincture, then pour off this clarified Tincture from its dregs, and strain it
through a Linen, or Flannel-strainer; hindering your whites of Eggs from coming
away with the Tincture into the stone Pan you receive it in; then evaporate it
gently in a Sand-Furnace to the consistence of an Extract; a stone Pan is
fitter than a glazed Earthen one, because the stone one is much thinner in the
bottom, and every where, than a glazed one, and may therefore be sooner
penetrated by a sand heat.

Its Use and Virtues: This extract is called the ^ermans Treacle, because that
in Germany they ^se it frequently as we do here Treacle; and it is ^ndeed a
great preservative against the Plague, and a rare Antidote against poisons; it
strengthens the stomach: the dose is from a scruple to two dragms.

All extracts of Berries, Leaves and Flowers, are made the same way.

The Laudanum.
TAke four ounces of good Opium, and if it be soft, cut it into pieces with a
Knife; or if it be dry, powder it in a Mortar, and have a care that the powder
rising do not at last work upon you the same effect that a double Dose of pills
of Opium would do. Put this Opium without any other preparation into a Mattress,
and pour upon it Spirit of Wine, till it be four or five fingers above your
matter, and that your Mattress have a third part empty, lest your menstruum, in
stead of extracting the Tincture, should evaporate and be gone. Place your
Vessel in a sand Furnace, up to half the belly in the sand, fit to it another
little Mattress, and so form a double Vessel; lute them well together with Paper
and Glue, that so nothing may exhale: make a good fire, and let your Vessel
stand a whole day, the next day separate your Tincture from its Faeces, and
pour new Spirit of Wine to them, which also must stand a day, and then be
poured off: then for a third time, put new Spirit of Wine to extract the
remainder of the Tincture, which done, put all your Tinctures together into a
stone Pan. Place this Pan either in a sand Furnace, or in a Balneum Mariae; if
it happen that you are then distilling of Spirit of Wine in the Brass Vesica,
you may place your Pan upon the Moors-head, which may serve in stead of a
Balneum Mariae; evaporate gently your Tinctures to the consistence of an
extract: If you desire to draw off most of your Spirit of Wine, put your
Tinctures at first into a glass Cucurbit, and distill them in a Sand-fire, till
they begin to grow thick; and then pour them into a stone Pan, and evaporate
them, as has been said.

Obs. 1. That all those preparations practiced upon Opium ordinarily, do rather
cleanse it, and purify it from its Faeces, than free it from any venomous
substance, or malignous quality; therefore if you take of that Opium which is
in little even Cakes, neatly environed with Leaves; you may give it without any
other preparation at all, only beat it warm in a Mortar, and so form Pills of
it.

Obs. 2. That in the belief that most have, that the thin Volatile substance of
Opium, is that which causes its malignity, they have studied all ways
imaginable whereby to divest it of this Volatile substance; as by drying it over
the fire, and so causing this Sulphurous subtle substance to evaporate: but
it is not against reason to believe, that in this exsiccation, or drying, the
phlegm alone, which is innocent enough, is the thing exhaled, and that Opium in
its whole substance is of a subtle, Volatile, Narcotick nature, and in that
consists its Malignity.

Obs. 3. That we use Spirit of Wine for a dissolvant, because it draws much
more perfectly this Tincture than any other liquor would, because that Opium is
of a thick, glutinous, juicy nature, and Spirit of Wine is the best Dissolver
of all Gums: besides, the design being to benumb the senses, the Spirit of
Wine, which has the same faculty, is most proper, and being a cordial, is a
rare corrective of that malignity which we suppose in Opium. Some are of
opinion, that distilled Vinegar would be a fitter menstruum, because they
pretend by it to fix a little the Volatile nature of the Opium, and hinder the
fumes which make it to arise to the head. To which I answer, with this
distinction, That if the design be to appease the Headache, and correct
Insomniums, then Laudanum prepared with Spirit of Wine is best; but if it be to
stop a Diarrhaea, or Dysentery, or assuage the pains of the Colic, then
Laudanum prepared with Vinegar is fittest; because the Spirit of Wine carries
one to the Head, and the Vinegar keeps the other down in the Belly: but we must
have one of these menstruums, if we will extract the Tincture of Opium well:
for pure Vinegar smells too much of Vinegar; common Water is not strong enough,
because of the viscosity of the Opium, which requires a penetrating dissolvant.

Obs. 4. That if your Opium be very clean, and without Ordure, it will turn
almost all of it into Tincture, and leave but very few Faeces; and so the
extract of Opium is but a purified Opium, delivered from all mixture of other
things, and divested of some of its own indissolvable terrestreity.

Obs. 5. That in Authors, you meet with an infinite number of descriptions of
Laudanum; and all the variety is produced from nothing, but from a different
mixtion of ingredients; but certainly the best Laudanum is the simplest, and
such as we have described it. Saffron, Pearls, Corral, Treacle, Musk,
Ambergrease, and other ingredients which are added, serving for nothing but to
take up more room, and often are quite opposite and contrary to the design
intended by giving Opium, so far they are from augmenting the virtue of it.

Its Use and Virtues are, to make those sleep that are troubled with continual
waking, and intolerable Insomniums, not to be overcome by ordinary Somniferous
remedies; to assuage great headache, to thicken and soften all sharp humors
flowing to the breast, to stay loosnesses, dysenteries, and help pains in
bilious colicks and dysenteries. But have a care you give not Laudanum while
the body is full, and has not been evacuated sufficiently by Blood-letting,
Clysters, and a moderate diet; nor when there is a copious Fluxion upon the
breast, caused by a thick humor, nor when there is pain and stopping of
breath, nor when the patient is very weak, and has but little natural heat. The
dose is from one grain to two, or three, or four at most, and you must never
give the highest dose, without having given the first and second without
effect; it is ordinarily given in form of a little Pill.

The Tincture of Roses.
PUt into a Brass Pot, or into an earthen glazed Pan, four pound, or two quarts
of water; set it upon a Furnace in a naked fire, till it begin to simper, and
then put into it two or three spoonfuls of Spirit of Sulphur or Vitriol, and
stir it with a wooden Spatula to the bottom, then throw into it a good handful
of red dry Roses of the year you are in, and stir all together again with your
Spatula, and so let them stand till the water begin to boil, then take off your
Vessel, cover it, and when the matter is cold, strain your Tincture through a
Cloth, or a Coffin of brown Paper, it will be as red as a Ruby, and will keep
four or five months without danger of corruption.

Obs. 1. That if you did put your Roses into the water, before the Spirit of
Sulphur, or Vitriol, you would lose your Spirit afterward in the Roses,
without effect, but the water being sharpened first, is fit to extract and
revive the Tincture of the Roses.

Its Use and Virtues: It is a very pleasant cooler, being Cordial, and
strengthening, and most excellent for the Liver, the Kidneys and the Stomach.

The Milk, or Precipitate, or Magistery of Brimstone.
TAke four ounces of Flowers of Brimstone, and sixteen ounces of common Salt
decrepitated and powdered, mingle them well together: which, that you may the
better do, put a spoonful of each at a time upon a Marble stone, and there
grind them to an impalpable powder; wet this powder drop by drop with distilled
Vinegar, till you have reduced all into the consistence of Pap, or hasty
Pudding, then scrape it together with a piece of Horn, and continue doing thus,
till all your matter be grown'd, and thus prepared: in the mean time, boil six
pound or three quarts of common water, in a Brass Kettle, and when the water
boils, throw in all this lump of Matter, and after it has boiled a little, add
to it half an ounce of white Roch-Alom in powder, and stir it with a Wooden
Spatula, keeping your Kettle on the fire, till all be dissolved in the water,
which then will be of reddish muddy color; and this will happen in half an
hours time, then take off the Kettle, let your dissolution cool; in cooling,
the Brimstone will precipitate to the bottom in a whitish color: when it is
all precipitated, pour off gently the Water, which will be impregnated with the
common Salt and Alom: pour common Water upon your whitish Matter to sweeten it,
and do so till the Water come away insipid, and that the Matter be entirely
freed from the Acrimony of the Vinegar, Alom, and common Salt: filtrate that
which remains through a Coffin of white Paper, or through a glass Tunnel, as
has been taught heretofore; and you have the Precipitate or Magistery of
Brimstone.

Obs. 1. That our design being here to open and whiten the body of Brimstone,
we use the Flowers of Brimstone; because, that by reason of their
impalpability, which they have contracted in their sublimation, they are fitter
to be incorporated with common Salt, and to become whiter than common Brimstone
would be, which would be very hard to be powdered so fine, as the flowers of
Brimstone are already.

Obs. 2. That we use common Salt, to open, calcine, and whiten the body of
Brimstone, and we use it decrepitated, and three times as much in quantity as
the flowers of Brimstone, to the end it may do its work the better: for the
furthering of which we also add distilled Vinegar, which quickens the common
Salt, by incorporating it with the Sulphur.

Obs. 3. That for this incorporation we use not a Brass Mortar, because it
might black the powder by the attraction of the Tincture of the Metal, but we
use a Marble and Stone one, where the finest things may be easily made finer,
so that a hair might be broken upon it.

Obs. 4. That Brimstone alone would never dissolve in water, though never so
exactly powdered, because that being exteriourly of a greasy, oleaginous
nature, and its Salt being altogether buried in its own substance, all the ways
of being dissolved are taken away from it. But if you add to it common Salt, by
means of the distilled Vinegar, and the Levigation of it, then all being one
body, it happens that the Salt and Vinegar in their dissolution do engage the
Brimstone to dissolve at the same time; but then it is necessary that your
water should boil some time, to hasten the dissolution of these bodies, and so
the Sulphur being a little opened, and calcined by the common Salt and Vinegar,
does at last afford its Tincture to the said water.

Obs. 5. During the ebullition of the common Salt and Brimstone in the common
water, we add a little Alom to whiten and scowre the Brimstone, for Alom is a
very dry white Salt, and Brimstone quite contrary, is a very oily mucilaginous
one; we do not use Roman Alom, because that it is red, and would communicate
its color to the Magistery of Brimstone, which ought to be white by reason of
the common Salt.

Obs. 6. That the Brimstone is precipitated all alone without any Precipitant,
as soon as the water grows cold, because its dissolution in water was not
perfect, and the strength of the Salts being dulled by the coldness of the
water, they can no longer retain the Brimstone above water.

Obs. 7. That the Precipitate, or Magistery of Brimstone, is but Brimstone
Philosophically calcined by common Salt, and distilled Vinegar, and scoured by
Alom, then sweetened by washings, and so whitened in form of a powder.

Its Use and Virtues: It Is an excellent dryer, or dissicative for all Ulcers,
and therefore is fitter to make the Balsam of Brimstone, either with Spirit of
Turpentine, or with Walnut-Oyl, than ordinary Brimstone, or the Flowers of
Brimstone: It is particularly good against all Ulcers of the Lungs, to ripen
the Fluxions that fall from the Breast, and help the Expectoration of Flegms,
and also to dry away the humors which flow that way. It may be taken either in
a spoonful of Syrup, or in some Conserve, or you powder with it a Toast spread
with fresh Butter, or Oil. The Dosis is, from half a dragm to a dragm. And if
at the same time you will strengthen the Stomach, and gently loosen the Belly,
you add half a dragm of Rhubarb in powder upon your Toast, you may put it into
a spoonful of some pectoral Water; but it is not so easy this way, because, by
its lightness, it swims upon the Water; and that so, in stead of swallowing it,
a good deal will remain in your mouth. You may likewise use it in a Pomatum,
against the Itch and Scabs, because that this Brimstone has acquired not only
a singular whiteness, but has also lost all its ill smell, which makes all the
Unguents and Balsams of Sulphur so stinking and unpleasant: but it would be a
dear Unguent, because you can hardly prepare much of this Magistery at once,
nor without great pains and cost.

The Magistery of Pearls.
TAke one ounce of Oriental Pearls, which are better, and much dearer than the
Occidental; reduce them to a fine powder, in a Brass Mortar, which must be
covered with a Leather Cover, in which is a hole to put your Pestle in; put
this powder into a Glass precipitatory Vessel, and pour to it Spirit of
Sulphur, or distilled Vinegar, or juice of Lemmons, four or five fingers high
above the matter; there will presently be caused a little simpring, or boiling,
which ended, stir your matter with a stick; then suffering it to settle a
little, pour off your Dissolvant, which will be loaded with some part of the
said powder of Pearls, and will be as white as Milk.

Pour more Dissolvant upon the matter left, and do as at first, continuing this
Operation, till all your powder be dissolved; then gather together all your
Dissolutions, in the same precipitatory Vessel, or in another, if you will, and
pour upon them great quantity of common Water diverse times, to sweeten and wash
the said Dissolution, and continue this till the Water have carried away all
the Acrimony of the Dissolvant. After you have poured out the last Water, your
matter will remain like Pap; which put into a paper Coffin, and there let it
dry in the shade upon a Sieve; you will have the Magistery of Pearls, as white
as Snow, in little misshapen pieces, which you may keep as they are, or else
powder them: or if you please, you may at first, before your matter be dry,
form them into Trochisks, as has been taught.

Obs. 1. That we reduce the Pearls to a fine powder, that they may be easilier
dissolved, by a less quantity of Dissolvant; in the powdering of them, the
Mortar is covered, because, that Pearls being small, and round, and hard, would
in beating, be apt to leap out of the Mortar, and be lost, if it were not
covered.

Obs. 2. That we rather use here Spirit of Sulphur, than distilled Vinegar, or
juice of Lemmon; because it dissolves them easilier than either of the other,
insomuch, that one pound of Spirit of Sulphur, will sooner dissolve an ounce of
Pearls, than twelve pound of distilled Vinegar, or juice of Lemmons; besides,
that the Spirit of Sulphur is more cordial and pectoral than either of them.

Obs. 3. That the Spirits of Salt, Niter, and Vitriol, are not proper for this
Operation, because of their too great corrosive faculties, which would go near
to rest in the Magistery, and then we should be obliged to sweeten it so long,
till at last the Water of the Lotion would carry away with it a good part of
the Magistery. We may say as much of the Oil of Tartar, made per deliquium, in
a wet place, or by the dissolution of the Salt of Tartar in common Water;
besides, the Spirit of Vitriol would black the whiteness of the Magistery, and
the Oil of Tartar would make it rough to the feeling.

Obs. 4. That common Water is sufficient to precipitate the said Magistery, and
weaken the Spirit of Sulphur, so as to make it lose its hold: because that the
dissolution of Pearls by the said Spirit, having been performed without the
help of an external heat, and without any great penetration, there is no need
of any strong fight between the Dissolvant, and the Precipitant.

Obs. 5. That the Water of the first sweetning, has a little smell of
Ambergreece, if the dissolution be with the Spirit of Sulphur: for, Pearls
opened by this Spirit, have such a smell.

Its Use and Virtues: This Magistery is a great Cordial against all venomous
Fevers, the Small Pox in Children, the pains of the Spleen; it is likewise
good for Consumptive persons, and against Loathings, and desires to vomit,
caused by sharp serosities. The Dose is from a scruple to a dragm. It is also a
Fucus, being mingled with some proper Pomatum.

Some brag, with ostentation, of a Water of Pearls; but it can be nothing else
but this Magistery, mingled with some Cordial Water, which, if stirred, becomes
as white as Milk; for, as for the true Milk of Pearls, which is the Dissolution
of Pearls in the Spirit of Brimstone, it cannot properly be called Water of
Pearls, because that by reason of its sharpness, it is not potable. The Water
of the first Lotion of your Magistery, is excellent to scour and whiten the
hands.

The Calx of Oyster-shells.
TAke of the uppermost part of Oyster-shells, what quantity you please, wash
them, and cleanse them in warm Water, and let them dry upon a Lettice in the
Sun. Then take six or eight Tiles, made in the form of a half-Circle, of such a
proportion, as that two of them joined together, may fill the inward Round of
the Laboratory of a Reverberatory Furnace, leaving the space of an inch empty
between the sides of the Furnace, and the said Tiles, to give the fire play
round about, and betwixt the said Tiles; for, there must be also in two or
three places of their Circumference, a Brim of an inch deep, to let the flame
in to calcine those matters that shall be set upon them. Place two of these
Tiles upon the Iron Bars of the Laboratory, and upon them place three or four
other rows of Tiles, laden with Oyster-shells, one upon another, so as there
be half a foot left empty of the top of the Laboratory; then cover your
Laboratory with an earthen Pan, turned upside down, in whose bottom is a hole:
give a great Fire at first, with Wood and Coals, and when it is come to the
last degree, continue that twelve hours; the flame passing upon your
Oyster-shells, will calcine them, and reduce them into Calx, as white as Snow,
and so brittle, as to fall into powder if you touch it.

Obs. 1. That we take only the upper part of the Oyster-shells, because that
part is whiter and thinner, and easier to calcine, than the lower part.

Obs. 2. That we wash them in warm Water, before we calcine them, that we may
scour them, and cleanse them from a certain mucilaginous ordure, which in the
calcining would leave a blackness, and spoil the beauty of your Calx. If you
desire to scour your Oyster-shells a better way, after you have washed them in
warm Water, put them into a stone Pan, and pour upon them distilled Vinegar,
one finger high over the matter, and so let them soak one day, then take them
out, and dry them in the Sun, before you calcine them.

Obs. 3. That the Calx of Oyster-shells is very Salt, so that by the same
method that we draw the Salt of Vegetables and Animals, we may likewise draw
this Salt in good quantity; that is, by dissolution in common Water,
filtration, and evaporation of your Lixivium, till it be dry. This Calx is
composed of two substances, viz. of a good deal of white Virginal Earth, and of
a good deal of Salt, both fix and volatile; by means of which, the said
Oyster-shells are naturally heavy.

Its Use and Virtues: This Calx is most excellent for the Gravel, because of
its Salt; it is very opening, and dries up (by means of the two substances it
is composed of) all superfluous humidities of the Body. The Dose is from twenty
to thirty Grains in some Conserve, Preserve, or Syrup.

The Magistery and Calx of Egg-shells.
TAke a good sufficient quantity of the shells of Hens Eggs new-laid, and
clean, wash them in fair Water, and then dry them, as we do Oyster-shells; put
them into a stone Pan, or a glass Bell, and pour upon them Spirit of Vinegar,
that is, distilled Vinegar, separated from its Phlegm, five or six fingers above
the matter; it will presently begin to simper, and will dissolve the
Egg-shells: as soon as it has done, and that by laying your Ear to, you
perceive no more noise, then your Egg-shells are dissolved, and the Dissolvant
is laden with its proportion of the dissolved substance, and has lost its
Acrimony, and sharpness in the combat. This done, stir your matter with a
wooden Spatula, and by this agitation, your Dissolution will be turned into
white Curds. Let it settle, and then pour off this curdled Dissolution into a
stone Glass, or White-ware Vessel; after which, pour on more Vinegar, and do as
at first, till all your matter be dissolved. Having put all your Dissolutions
into one Vessel, pour upon them a great quantity of clear cold Water; stirring
them with a wooden Spatula, the Water will become at first as white as Milk,
and the Magistery will precipitate to the bottom, then the Water will be clear
and sowrish: pour off this Water, and pour on more, till you have entirely
sweetened your Magistery, and that your Water come away insipid: put the
remainder into a Coffin of white Paper, through which, the Water that remains
will filtrate; and you will have remaining the Magistery of Egg-shells, which
you must dry in the shade, upon the bottom of a Sieve.

To make the Simple Calx of Egg-shells; Take a good quantity of the newest, and
cleanest, well washed, and dried, bruise them between your hands, and fill them
with an earthen Pot unglazed; which set in a Potters Oven for nine days, and
you will have a Calx as white as Snow.

Obs. 1. That you must take new and clean Egg-shells, to the end, that being
free from all soiling, and dirt, the Spirit of Vinegar may the easilier corrode
them; for all smoot and ordure in a thing, does dull the action of a
Dissolvant; and if you should calcine them with this ordure upon them, they
would grow black, and spoil your Calx.

Obs. 2. That you must use the Egg-shells of Hens, and not of Ducks, Geese, or
Turkeys, because that Hens Egg-shells are easilier calcined, being thinner, by
reason that a Hen is a more temperate Animal; Waterfowl are hotter, and by
reason of their heat, do concoct, and harden their Egg-shells more than other
Fowl; and from thence comes that you must have a greater quantity of your
Dissolvant, employ more heat, and spend more time to calcine the Eggs of
Waterfowl, than of Hens, whose Egg-shells do also produce a whiter Calx than
any of the others.

Obs. 3. That we use here Spirit of Vinegar deflegmated, to dissolve the said
Egg-shells; for, if it were undeflegmated, it would not be strong enough to
corrode the hardness of the Egg-shells; you might use Spirit of Sulphur, but it
is too dear; and Egg-shells are not so hard, but that they may be dissolved by
a weaker Dissolvant, than Spirit of Sulphur, or Spirit of Niter, which would do
well, and produce a very white Calx: but for Spirit of Vitriol, and Aqua
fortis, they would altogether spoil your Operation, by communicating a
blackness to your Calx, which ought to be extreme white.

Obs. 4. That the Magistery of Egg-shells is nothing but Egg-shells
Philosophically calcined by their dissolution in Spirit of Vinegar, then
precipitated by the cold Water, into a white Calx, and sweetened by reiterated
Lotions, then filtred and dried in the shade. As for the simple Calx of
Egg-shells, it is a calcination of them, made by a strong fire of nine days, so
as to be reduced into a substance, containing much of white Virginal Earth, and
a little Salt. If you wash this Calx, you take from it all its Salt and
sharpness, and there will remain an insipid Virginal Earth, of the nature of
the Magistery.

Its Use and Virtues: It is a good desiccative which dries up Ulcers without
corrosion; therefore it is very good for these Ulcers that affect that Coat of
the Eye, called Cornea: it is also a very good Fucus, for if you rub your hand
and face with it, without mingling it with any Pomatum, it will so insinuate
its self into the pores, as to produce a rare whiteness.

The Calcination of Venice Tale.
TAke four ounces of Venice Talc, which crumble between your fingers; then take
four pound of whole River-pibbles, not of the biggest, nor of the least size,
put into a white Leather Bag, gathered at each end, both your Pibble-stones,
and your Talc, and then shake it, as the Pinmakers do, when they whiten their
Pins: do this for an hour, then take out your Talc, and put it into a Silken
Sieve, and searce it; take that which could not pass through, and put into the
Bag, and so shake it again, as at first; then searce it, and do thus till all
your Talc be reduced to a white impalpable powder, like Meal-dust.

Obs. 1. That we use here a Bag of Sheeps-skin, white and clean, and well
dressed; because that a Bag of black Leather would black your powder; and so
would it do, if it were not very clean, and well dressed; a Linen Bag would
not be fit, because that the finest part of the powder would go through it,
besides the danger of its breaking, or wearing out in this agitation.

Obs. 2. That we use River-pibbles, and not Mountain ones, because that the
River ones are whiter, harder, and smoother than other, and therefore fitter
for this Operation.

Obs. 3. That Venice Talc is improperly said to be calcined by this Operation;
for it is nothing but Talc very well powdered, by this ingenious method, which
reduces it into a finer and whiter substance than could be done by a Pestle in
a Brass Mortar, or by a violent fire, and tedious calcination.

Its Use and Virtues: It is the finest of all Fucuses to apply, without
Pomatum, to the skin, penetrating the pores, and sticking to them by its
unctuosity or oyliness more than any other. It may be useful other ways too.

The Salt of Crystal Venice.
TAke one pound of the transparentest Crystal, put it into a Crucible of a
reasonable size, and set it in a great reverberatory Furnace for eight hours,
till it be melted down; then take off your Crucible, and when it is cold, break
it, and take out your matter, which in a Brass Mortar you must reduce to an
impalpable powder; mingle this powder with its weight of Nitar, well purified
and reduced to powder; put them in a Crucible, which set in the same Furnace,
and cover it with a little earthen cover; continue a reverberatory Fire for six
and thirty hours together, or till the matter yields no more fumes: then take
off your Crucible, and presently break it, and powder your matter in a Brass
Mortar, while it is warm: then throw it by spoonfuls into a Kettle full of
boiling water, and there let it boil, till your Water be half consumed away;
filter the said dissolution, while it is warm, through a coffin of brown Paper:
evaporate your filtration by a good fire, either in the same Kettle, or in an
earthen-glaz'd Pan, till there remain nothing but a powder, as white as flower,
in the bottom of the Vessel; taking care to stir the said powder with an iron
Spatula, lest by so great a fire it should melt again.

Obs. 1. That we take here Venice Crystal, because it is the best.

Obs. 2. That we calcine first the Crystal in a great reverberatory fire, till
it be melted, to the end we may so open it, as to be able to reduce it to an
impalpable powder, and so make it fit to be calcined by the Niter.

Obs. 3. That we calcine a second time the said Crystal with fine Niter, to
open its body better, and so the Niter may communicate to it its fixed Salt,
and that of the body of the Crystal, and of the body of the fixed Salt of
Niter, there result one body, and one Calx.

Obs. 4. That we dissolve this Calx of niter'd Crystal in hot Water, and
afterward we filter it, and then evaporate it to a dry powder, to the end,
that by this dissolution and filtration, the Salt of Niter be whiter.

Obs. 5. That this Salt of Crystal, is nothing but Crystal incorporated with
the fixed Salt of Niter; so that it is more properly a Calx, than a pure Salt.
The Crystal communicates nothing but its Virginal Earth, and the Niter, nothing
but its fixed Salt; and therefore, Crystal containing in its self no Salt at
all, this Remedy ought more properly, to be called Crystal niter'd.

Crystal is a clear transparent Glass, and Glass is a Crystal less clear, and
transparent; the only subject matter of both of them made by Art, is a
congealed Virginal Earth, hardened under the form of Pibble Stones, and
Crystalline River Sand. This matter cannot be melted, and purified, but by the
Salts both of Vegetables and Minerals; and after the fusion, and vitrification
of the said Sand, and Pibble Stones, all the Salt is separated, and comes away
from it, so as there remains not any in either Glass, or Crystal.

Its Use and Virtues: It is a powerful Diuretic, it drives away Gravel, and
breaks the britle Stones of the Kidney; it dryes up Gonorrhaea's.

The Salts of Corals, Pearls, fragment of Rubies, Topaz Stones, Emeralds,
Diamonds, and other precious Stones, are to be prepared in the same way, and
have the same virtues with the Salt of Crystal, by reason of their calcination,
and also the Diuretic and Lithontriptick, or Stone-breaking virtue of the
fixed Salt of Niter.

The Flowers of Benjamin.
TAke as much powdered Benjamin, as you please, put it into a Crucible,
proportioned to the quantity of your matter, so as it Here is the Figure of
your Iron Round.
be but half full: put your Crucible into a Round Iron, that has two branches
on each side, which must be placed upon the second row of Bricks of a
circulatory Furnace, so that your Crucible be suspended in the middle of the
Furnace, and the fire must strike immediately upon it: fit to the top of your
Furnace a great earthen Coffin (glazed or unglaz'd) made like a mould for a
Sugar Loaf; as broad in the bottom as the Furnace, and in its top must be left
a little hole to give the fire air; lute it to the Furnace, give a moderate
fire under the Crucible; the Benjamin will rise presently, and totally in dry
fumes, which will stick to the sides of your Coffin, in form of a white Snow,
or Meal-dust, which will have the odor of your Benjamin, but more exalted and
penetrating, because of its attenuation. At half an hours end, take off your
Coffin, and with a Feather scrape off all the Flowers, which presently shut up
in a Glass Bottle well stopped with Cork, there will remain in the Crucible
nothing but oily black Faeces.

Obs. 1. That we apply the said earthen Coffin to the brim of the Furnace, and
not to the brim of the Crucible, lest the heat striking the outside of the
Coffin, should make the Flowers once sublimed, melt and resolve into their
first nature.

Obs. 2. That we use here an earthen Coffin, and not a Paper one, as most
Chemists do; because, with an earthen one, of the mentioned breadth, we gather
a greater quantity of flowers; besides, an earthen Coffin may always serve,
whereas you must change your Paper one, and in that interval you lose many
vapors that might have been converted into flowers.

Obs. 3. That the flowers of Benjamin are Benjamin its self melted in a
Crucible, then elevated in dry vapors under the form of a white snowy powder,
as the flowers of Sal Ammoniac; for Benjamin is a Rosinous Gum very dry, and
totally volatile, and from thence proceeds, that as soon as it is hot, it rises
in vapors, which being dry, are converted into a very white flower or Snow. In
this Operation Benjamin loses its red color, and acquires a very white one,
because that of what color soever the body that is converted into flowers be,
the flowers still must be white; because, it is their volatile Salt which
predominates over them, and which by consequent must invest them with that
color which is natural to all, and particularly to volatile Salts. The red
color of Benjamin consists in a little gross heavy Sulphur, which cannot be
raised but by the violence of the fire, which is not needful in the sublimation
of the flowers, but only in the distillation of the Oil of Benjamin.

Their Use and Virtues: These flowers are most excellent to ripen old coughs,
and to help out flegms, because that they are all Volatile and Balsamic Salt.

The Flowers of Antimony.
POwder one pound of Crude Antimony, or rather of Regulus; put it to an Earthen
Cucurbit unglazed; place it upon the two Iron Bars that are in the great
Reverberatory Furnace, so that the neck of the Cucurbit be four fingers higher
than the top of the Furnace, Lute your Vessel round about to the Furnace, and
fit to this Cucurbit an Earthen Pot turned upside down, so that the brim of
your Cucurbit enter within the said Pot a little: This Pot must have in its
bottom an hole as big as an Egg. Lute well the conjunction of these two
Vessels, and to the uppermost of them fit another Pot a little less, having
also a hole in its bottom, and then put upon this another, yet less, and having
a hole of the same bigness, and so fit, as that its brim must go into the brim
of the inferior Pot, then fit to this another less still, and having a hole
also, and at last fit another and fifth pot, having a hole of the bigness of
your little finger, and having its brim inserted into the brim of the Pot under
it. They must be thus less and less by degrees, as the Pyramide grows higher,
and have a care that you lute well all the conjunctions of these several Pots.
Give at first a violent fire, and continue it to the highest degree for forty
eight hours, and all the while keep the little uppermost hole well stopped with
some of our Lute; your Antimony will be melted in your Cucurbit, and then it
will rise, and be sublimed in dry vapors, which will stick to the sides of the
said Pots, in the form of flowers, as white as Snow. In the first Pot they are
yellow, in the second red, and in the third white, your Operation having lasted
out the time prescribed, put out your fire, and as soon as your Pots are cold,
unlute them neatly, and with a feather scrape away all the said flowers,
putting white to white, red to red, yellow to yellow.

Obs. 1. That for this Operation the Regulus of Antimony, is fitter than Crude
Antimony, because that the Regulus being already separated from its Faeces, is
all sublimed, and so makes a greater quantity of flowers, both better and
purer: for Crude Antimony contains four times as much Faeces as it does
Regulus, which is the purest part of the Antimony.

Obs. 2. That the Flowers of Antimony are of three colors; the white do
contain nothing of the venomous Sulphur of Antimony, and are therefore
colored, of the color of the Volatile Salt of Antimony: the yellow do contain
a little of the said Sulphur, and are therefore somewhat tinged; but the red do
abound with the said Sulphur, and are therefore highly dyed.

Obs. 3. That we fit diverse Pots one upon another, to receive all these
Flowers, of different colors; the white in the first, the yellow in the
second, and the red in the last: we leave a hole in the uppermost Pot, to give
the vapors a little air, but it is not so big as in the lowermost pots, lest
the finest flower should be lost through so wide a hole.

Obs. 4. That we give at first a great fire, and continue it forty eight hours,
to keep always the Regule or Antimony infusion and effumation, else it would
yield no flowers.

Obs. 5. That you must not use stone pots; for the violence of the fire would
break them; nor Earthen glazed pots of potters earth, because that the glazing
would melt and fix the Antimony; but you must use strong pots of potters earth
unglazed.

Obs. 6. That the Flowers of Antimony are nothing but the Regulus of Antimony,
or the purest part of the Antimony made Volatile, and sublimed into dry vapors,
by the strength of the fire, and so converted into a fine impalpable powder,
called Flowers. The white contain only a part of the body of the Regulus, and a
good deal of the Volatile Salt of Antimony; the yellow contain a part of the
body of the Regulus, and little of the Volatile Salt; and so do the red with a
good deal of the malignant Sulphur of Antimony.

Its Use and Virtues: The white Flowers provoke sweat, and sometimes vomiting,
and are very good against pestilential Fevers; the yellow do provoke vomiting
with violence, and the red much more, and with convulsions; therefore there is
no use of them, only they enter in the composition of the Plaster of
Paracelsus, or of some others, as you shall find in Authors: the dose is, from
three to seven grains.

The Flowers of Brimstone.
PUt a great Earthen glazed Cucurbit into a small Reverberatory Furnace; so
that between it, and the Furnace sides, there be the thickness of a Crown piece
left empty, and the body of your Cucurbit must not be above half sunk into the
Laboratory. Then stop with Lute all the upper circumference left empty, betwixt
the Furnace and your Vessel, leaving only three little holes equally distant
from one another, to give the fire vent. Then line the neck of your Cucurbit
without, with slices of Paper, covered with starch, as if it were to fit a head
to it; and in stead of a head, fit an Earthen glazed pan; not turned upside
down, but having a hole in its bottom, of such a capacity as to receive the
neck of the Cucurbit. Lute them well together with slices of Paper, starched
both above and under the junction of the Pan with the neck of the Cucurbit;
fill this Cucurbit with yellow Brimstone in powder till it be half full, and
then fit to this earthen pan another of the same metal, which must be whole,
and turned upside down upon the first, so as its bottom be half a foot distant
from the neck of the Cucurbit, there must be in the bottom of this second Pan a
little vent hole, of the bigness of the point of a bodkin, to give air to the
vapors of your Brimstone, which else would make your Pan fly about your ears:
give your fire by degrees, and continue a pretty good fire, till there come no
more fumes out of the little hole, which for a pound of Brimstone will happen
in three quarters of an hours time. Then put out your fire, and let your
Vessels cool; when they are cold, separate them one from the other, they will
be lined with a thick crust yellow and light, and which being bruised between
your fingers, is easily reduced to an impalpable powder; scrape off this crust
with a knife, and you have the Flowers of Brimstone, out of each pound you will
have twelves ounces of Flowers by this method.

Obs. 1. That we use here yellow Brimstone, that is in great rowls; because,
that it is the purest and best; separated from its Mineral Earth, and therefore
will yield more, and fairer Flowers; the green, or gray Brimstone, show by
their color that they are not so pure, and by consequent not so fit for this
Operation.

Obs. 2. That we use here a glazed Pan, as well because that Brimstone has not
force enough to corrode the glazing, as because that being glazed, the Pans are
smoother, and so it is easier to scrape off your Flowers: a stone Cucurbit
would break, and you would hardly scrape off all your Flowers in a stone Pan,
whose surface is uneven.

Obs. 3. That a great Reverberatory fire is not necessary in this Operation,
because that the Brimstone is easily melted, and when melted, is easily raised
in Flowers.

Obs. 4. That the Flowers of Brimstone are nothing but Brimstone purified from
its Faeces, and sublimed in dry vapors, by the means of the fire which has
melted it, then converted into impalpable yellow Flowers in the sublimatory
Vessels.

Its Use and Virtues: These Flowers have the same, but a more exalted Virtue
than ordinary Brimstone, because of the Thinness and Tenuity of their
substance; interiourly they are used for the same end, as the Magistery or Milk
of Brimstone, and exteriourly they are used in Unguents for the Itch and Scab,
and for the Farcy in Horses, incorporating it with Oil of Olives and fresh
Butter. But you must be careful to use first general remedies, for Brimstone is
so drying, that it presently dries up, not only the Itch and Scab, but also so
parches the skin, as to make it incapable of receiving the impurities of the
body, and of being transpirable; from which are caused many violent diseases,
if the said impurities be not emptied by general remedies, both before and
after the use of Brimstone.

The Rosin or Magistery of Jalap.
TAke as much Jalap as you please, well cleansed from its ordures, and dried in
the Sun, then powdered and put into a Mattress. Pour upon it good Spirit of
Wine, four or five fingers above your Matter, and let your Mattress have a third
part empty: fit to it another Mattress to make a double vessel, place it in a
sand fire, and there let it stand twelve hours, in which time your spirit will
acquire a Tincture as red as Claret Wine: pour off that, and pour on more
spirit to the Faeces, in twelve hours it will have extracted a new Tincture,
which pour off also. If you will, you may pour on more spirit, but if your
second Tincture be not high colored, it will not be worth your pains, and cost
to pour on more Spirit of Wine: gather together your Tinctures to draw out of
them, and precipitate either the Rosin or the Magistery. If you will be content
to lose your Dissolvant, and so convert all your Tinctures into Rosin, pour
them into a great glass Bell full of cold water, and presently your Tincture
will precipitate to the bottom, in the consistence of a white Rosin, separate
all the liquor that swims above it, and loosen and take away your Rosin, which
did begin to stick to the bottom of the Vessel; put it into a glass, either
whole or in pieces, which being cold, will grow as hard as Rosin or Colophone.

If you will draw off your dissolvant, and change your Tinctures into a
Magistery, put them all into a glass Cucurbit, of such a proportion, as not to
be above half full with them; place it in a Balneum Mariae, and fit to it a
head. Give the fire by degrees, and draw off by distillation about half the
Spirit of Wine to use in other such uses, then pour the remainder, while it is
warm, into a glass Bell, full of cold water; and presently the Tincture of your
dissolvant will be precipitated, not into a Rosin, but into a white Curd, which
by little and little, in half a quarter of an hours time, will be converted
into a white Rosinous powder. Separate by inclination the water, and pour two
or three times cold water upon this powder, to separate it well from its
dissolvant; then filter the remainder through a Coffin of white Paper, and dry
it in the shade, keep this powder or Magistery in a Vial well stopped.

Obs. 1. That we take Jalap very well cleansed from its ordures, that we may
have a fairer Rosin, and more of it, and that it is first dried in the Sun, to
the end that its waterish humidity being gone, it may not dull the action of
the dissolvant, and so it will be able to extract easilier the Resinous
Tincture of Jalap.

Obs. 2. That common cold water precipitates your Tincture into a Rosin, or a
Rosinous powder, because that weakening the Spirit of Wine by its quantity, it
makes it lose its hold, and so let fall to the bottom that substance which it
had seized upon in the dissolving it.

Obs. 3. That the precipitate of Jalap is more properly called a Rosin, than a
Gum; because it would dissolve better in oily liquors, as Rosins do, than in
waterish liquors, as Gums do.

Obs. 4. That when your Tincture is thrown into cold water, before it be
evaporated half away, it then precipitates in consistence of a Rosin, but when
it is evaporated half away, then it is precipitated in consistence of a Curd,
which comes to a Powder.

Obs. 5. That the Rosin or Magistery of Jalap, is nothing but the Rosinous part
of Jalap separated from all the terrestrial part which remains in the Mattress,
and from its volatile Salt, which has been dissolved in the Dissolvant, or in
the Precipitant.

Its Use and Virtue: It purges by stools without procuring Vomit; it has a
gentler way of operating, than pure Jalap taken in substance; because it is
divested of its Volatile Salt, which is its sharpest part. The Dose is, from six
to twelve grains, or thereabouts, in form of Pills or Bolus, with some
Conserve, or some such thing.

The Rosin, or Magistery of Scammony.
TAke good clean Scammony, and powder it, then fasten a leaf upon a little
wooden Square, or Frame, upon the Paper spread your powder, place it over the
vapor of Brimstone, which you must throw from time to time into a Chasingdish
full of Coals, and in the mean time stir continually your powder with a wooden
Spatula, and do not approach it too near the Fire, lest it should melt, and so
become a lump, as before; for, if such a thing should happen, you would not be
able to make the phlegm, and the volatile, and sulphurous malignant salts of the
Scammony to evaporate, which is the thing you aim at. Your Scammony being thus
prepared, you shall extract out of it a Tincture, as red as blood, in a glass
double-Matrass, with Spirit of Wine; of which Tincture make the Rosin or
Magistery, in the same way that you make the Rosin or Magistery of Jalap.

Its Use and Virtues: The Rosin of Scammony, purges gentlier than Scammony in
substance, because it is divested of a great deal of its sulphurous volatile
Salt, by the burning vapor of the Brimstone. The Spirit of Wine, and common
Water have set at liberty, and dissolved the rest of the volatile Salt, and the
terrestrial part, or Faeces, remain in a small quantity in your Mattress. The
Dose is from ten to twenty grains.

The Cremor Tartari.
TAke four pound of white Tartar of Montpellier, in great lumps; wash them well
in common cold Water, and then dry them upon boards in the Sun; this done, beat
them in a brass Mortar, and searce them to a very fine powder. In the mean
time, let there be a pale of Water boiling in a Brass, or Copper Kettle, and
into it throw your Tartar by spoonfuls, and so let it boil for two hours,
stirring it continually with a wooden Spatula; then take off your Kettle from
the fire, and filter your Dissolution while it is warm, through diverse Coffins
of brown Paper; evaporate your filtrations in earthen glazed Pans, over a naked
fire, till by their boiling, there appear a kind of a skin upon the surface of
the said Decoction: then take off your Pans, place them in your Cellar, and in
three or four days there will be congealed to the bottom and sides of your
Pans, great quantity of Crystals as white as Snow, and of a triangular and
square Figure Pour out the Water that remains in your Pans, if it look dirty,
keep it, and boil it again to a consistence of a skin, then congeal it in your
Cellar, and so draw out all the Crystals left in it; dry your Crystals either
in the Sun, or in a dry place; then gather them, and put them into glass Vials
well stopped: and thus you have that which Chemists call Cremor Tartari, or
Crystal of Tartar. Out of one pound of Tartar, you have foor ounces of
Crystals, and twelve of Faeces.

Obs. 1. That for this Operation, we choose Tartar of Montpellier, because, it
is much salter than the Tartar of any other part of France; because, that at
Montpellier they use great Hogsheads, or rather Tuns, that serve twenty or
thirty years, so that there gather to the sides of them, a Tartar three or four
fingers thick, and by consequent very saltish; besides that, the strength of
the Wine of those parts, makes their Tartar better; and at last we choose white
Tartar, because it contains more Salt than the red.

Obs. 2. That we wash well the lumps of Tartar, before we powder them, to the
end, we may cleanse them from a kind of terrestrial dreggs, which remain upon
the said Tartar, in form of a powder: by washing, part of this powder goes to
the bottom, and part of it makes the Water look muddy.

Obs. 3. That we powder and searce it, that we may extract easilier, and more
abundantly, the said Crystal of Tartar.

Obs. 4. That we boil it in a great quantity of Water, and that a good while,
that we may extract all its saltish substance.

Obs. 5. That it is thrown in by spoonfuls, and not altogether, that so the
dissolution of its Salt be the better performed, and sooner; and for the same
reason the Water is not cold, but boiling hot.

Obs. 6. That we stir it continually with a Spatula, else it would remain in
the bottom of the Kettle, in a lump, and so being touched by the Water, but on
one side, it would not so easily dissolve. Now your Spatula must be of Wood,
and not of Iron, lest the blackness of the Iron, by the acidity of the Tartar,
come off, and spoil the beauty of your Crystals.

Obs. 7. That we boil our Tartar with Water, in Brass or Copper Kettles, and in
earthen Pans, because that the Salt of Tartar is not sharp enough to corrode
Brass, Copper, or the glazing of Lead; and therefore, there is no danger it
should be laden, or impregnated with their substance, and particularly, if it
be uncalcin'd Tartar, and dissolved in Water.

Obs. 8. That your Tartar having sufficiently boiled in Water, and the Water
being impregnated with all its Salt, we filter this dissolution through a brown
Paper-coffin, that so we may separate all the terrestrial indissolvable part of
it, which will remain in the Coffin of brown Paper; this filtration is
performed while the Dissolution is warm, that so the Salt may pass with it,
which would go to the bottom, in form of a white powder, if the Dissolution
were cold.

Obs. 9. That to crystallize the Salt of Tartar uncalcin'd, and dissolved in
Water, you must evaporate above half of your Water, till your Salt begin to
coagulate; which you observe, by that little skin, that gathers upon the
surface of your Water; then by taking off your Vessels, and placing them in a
cold place, as the Cellar, the Salt is formed into Crystals, and is freed from
the Water, which kept it in dissolution. If you had continued your evaporation,
till your matter had been dry, there would have remained in the bottom of your
Vessel, a white Salt in powder, but it is much more pleasant, to have it in the
form of Crystals.

Obs. 10. That the Crystal of Tartar, or Cremor Tartari, is nothing but Tartar
scoured, and whitened by Lotion, pulverisation, boiling in the Water,
filtration, evaporation, and coagulation, or crystallization made in the
Cellar. It is composed of two substances; one is saltish, the other is
terrestrial: The first, dissolves in any Water; the second, only in warm Water:
and as soon as the Water is cold the Crystal frees its self from it, and
coagulates in the bottom, in form of a white powder, if there be a good deal of
Water; but, if there be but a small quantity of Water, it coagulates into white
Crystals, sticking to the sides of the Vessel.

Its Use and Virtues: It is a great Aperitive, Desopilative, and Diuretic. It
purges gently sometimes, but its principal effect is always by way of Urine.
The Dose is, from half a dragm, to two, taken inwardly in broth: It is often
mingled with Opiates, and also with purgative Potions; but, then you must
swallow them more than lukewarm, else it would coagulate, and remain in the
bottom of the Cup, or Glass: some also do dissolve of it in Clysters, to the
weight of two dragms, or half an ounce.

The Cremor Tartari Calybeatus, or the Steeled Crystal of Tartar.
TAke four pound of white Tartar of Montpellier, washed, dried, powdered, and
searc'd, as has been said in the precedent Chapter. Mingle with it two ounces
of the Crocus, or Saffron Aperitive of Mars, or Iron; throw this mixtion by
spoonfuls into a Kettle full of boiling Water, stir it continually with a
wooden Spatula, and boil your Water half away; then take off your Kettle,
filtrate the rest while it is warm, put your Filtration into earthen Pans
unglazed, and evaporate it in a gentle fire, to the Pellicule, as you do in the
Salt of Saturn; then set it in a Cellar to congeal, and in three or four days,
there will strike to the bottom, and sides of your Pans, a good many clear
Crystals of a fine green color, round in figure, and a little sharp; separate
by inclination the remainder of the Liquor of the Pans, and evaporate it again,
and set it to crystallize, as the first; set your Crystals in the Sun, by
placing your Pans on one side, that all the Liquor may run from them; when your
Crystals are very dry, loosen them with the point of a Knife, and put them into
Vials to keep: let them be well stopped; for, if the air come at them, they will
dissolve again, or at least grow wet, and lose their color.

Obs. 1. That you must take the Crocus Martis aperitivus, or opening, and not
the astringent; because, that the Astringent is divested of its Salt. Now here
we pretend to the proper Salt of Mars, and to mingle it with the Salt of
Tartar. By this Mixtion the Crystal of Tartar acquires the green, color of the
vitriolick Salt of Mars, and the faculty of dissolving in cold Water. If
instead of the Saffron of Mars, you had added the Salt of Tartar calcined, you
would have made Chrystals of white Tartar dissolvable in cold Water; for,
either of those two Salts of Mars, or calcined Tartar, would prove a Corrective
to the terrestrial and indissolvable substance of the Cremor Tartari.

Obs. 2. That we evaporate the Dissolution of these two Salts by a gentle fire,
that we may keep in their volatile Salts, which by their mixtion, do whet and
attenuate one another, and so are disposed to fly away; which, if they did,
then your Crystals would not so easily crystallize.

Obs. 3. That the Steeled Cremor Tartari, is nothing but the Cremor Tartari
incorporated with the vitriolick Salt of Mars, by their dissolution in Water,
the evaporation to a Pellicule, or skin, and the crystallization in a cold
Cellar.

Its Use and Virtues: It Is a more powerful opener and desopilative, than the
Cremor Tartari: It is most excellent against the Yellow Jaundice, the Green
Sickness, and to provoke the Monthly Courses, if stopped. The Dose is, from
half a dragm to a dragm, in some Broth, or appropriated Water.

The Virginal Milk of Benjamin, and Storax.
TAke of Benjamin and Storax, of each two ounces, reduce them to a fine powder,
and put them into a Mattress, pour on Spirit of Wine, so as the matter be
covered four or five fingers deep, with the said Spirit; let your Vessel stand
in a cool place, for two or three days; in this time the Gums will be
dissolved, and will color the Dissolvant with a red transparent color, like a
Ruby, and withal, will communicate to the Dissolvant their smell most
perfectly: pour off this Tincture, and keep it in a glass Vial for your use:
when you intend to make of it Virginal Milk, put about a spoonful of this
Tincture into a precipitatory Vessel, as a glass Bell, etc. and pour on it,
about a pint of cold Water, your Tincture and Water will be both as white as
Snow, and your Tincture will be incorporated with the Water, without
precipitating to the bottom.

Obs. 1. That the Benjamin and Storax, containing but very little of
terrestrial impurities, do dissolve almost totally in Spirit of Wine, which by
the thinness, penetration, and evenness of its substance, dissolves easily, and
without heat, the said Rosins.

Obs. 2. That the red Tincture is turned as white as Milk, when it is dissolved
in three or four times its quantity of Water; because, that the common Water
does force the Spirit of Wine which was impregnated with these Bodies, to let
go its hold, and so it does to all Dissolvants.

Its Use and Virtues: This Virginal Milk serves to refresh and whiten the skin;
it is excellent against all rednesses, inflammation, and Eresypela's.

The Precipitate, or Magistery of Silver, or Luna.
TAke one ounce of the purest Silver, beaten into Plates as thin as Paper; then
cut it into little bits, and put it into a Mattress with a long neck, pour upon
it three ounces of Aqua fortis, made with Niter and Alom; and so let your
Silver dissolve in it, without heat; pour out your Dissolution into a glass
Bell, and pour upon it a quart of Seawater; the Silver will presently turn
into white Curds; which in a small time, by little and little, will precipitate
into a powder, as white as Snow, and as shining as pieces of Diamonds; separate
by inclination your Seawater, impregnated with the Aqua fortis, and pour on
more cold common Water, so often, till at last it come away without any
saltish taste, which is a sign that your powder is dulcorated; filter the
remainder through a Coffin of white Paper, and let it dry in the shade; you
will have a Calx Precipitate, or Magistery of Luna, most admirably fair, and
white, and glittering; put it into a glass Bottle well stopped, and keep it for
your use.

Obs. 1. That you must take the finest, purest Silver; for, if there were the
least mixtion of Venus, or Copper in it, the Magistery, instead of being white,
would be green, like Vitriol.

Obs. 2. That you must take Aqua fortis, made on purpose with pure Niter, and
Alom; for, the Spirit of Niter alone, would be too sharp, and your Magistery
would hardly be sweetened from all Acrimony, which might, if there remained any,
corrode and spoil the face it is laid upon. As for common Aqua fortis, made
with Niter and Vitriol, it would be worse; not only because it is sharper than
Spirit of Niter, but also, because of its having Vitriol amongst it, which
would make your Magistery black. Alom is much fitter to be added to Niter,
because it has little Acrimony, and great quantity of Phlegm; insomuch, that
Alom is nothing but a part of Virginal saltish Earth, and a great deal of Water
congealed, and crystallized together.

Obs. 3. That Seawater precipitates the Calx of Silver, for the Reasons which
we have said in the Chapter of the Magistery of Bismuth.

Obs. 4. That the Magistery of Silver, or the Moon, is nothing but a
Philosophical calcination of Silver, by the means of Aqua fortis, precipitated
by Seawater, and sweetened by frequent Lotions.

Its Use and Virtues: It is the best of all Fucuses, according to the esteem
and opinion of Ladies; because of the choice of the matter, and of the
Dissolvant; and also, because it is dearer than the others: the great price of
things, serving often to create an esteem for them.

The Tincture of Gold, or Aurum Potabile.
TAke a hollow branch of Crystal, as thick as your finger, and two or three
foot long, thrust it half way into warm Ashes, to heat a little, and so dispose
it to endure a greater heat, without flying; then present it, by little and
little, to the fire of a reverberatory Furnace, then put it quite into the
Furnace, and hold it in the middle of the flame, to make it grow red and soft;
there must be over against the Fire-room-door, a hole, by which another must
put in the end of a little Crystal Twig, made as small as a thread, which he
must heat likewise, and soften, and when it is soft, he must fasten it to the
end of the great branch, which you hold; then let him draw this Rod, or Twig to
himself, and the branch will follow, and stretch like Paste, and you may make
as many Rods, and as small as you please of it.

Having made diverse little Rods of Crystal by this method, you must guild them
one after another with Ducket Gold in Leaves; buy therefore a Book, containing
six and twenty Leaves of Ducket Gold, take one of these Leaves, and spread it
upon a Cushion made of Calves Leather, and with a sharp Knife, cut it into
little slices, of half a fingers breadth, then wet with spittle one end of your
Crystal Rods, and apply it to one of these slices, turning it upon the Cushion,
to make the Gold stick; then continue wetting it a little higher, and apply it
to another slice of Gold, and do so till you have gilded all your Crystal
Rods, one after another, using a little white Cotton, to press your Gold, and
make it stick. This done, put them to dry in an Oven, after the Bread is taken
out; when they are dry, apply another lay of Gold to them, and then dry them;
do thus seven times, so that each Crystal Rod be covered with seven lays of
Gold.

Then powder grossly all of them gilded and dried, and put them into a
Crucible, which set in a VVind-Furnace, give a great fire, and continue it,
till your matter be melted; then take it out, and powder it, it will look
yellow: let your powder be very fine.

Put this powder into a long-necked Mattress, and put to it a dragm of the Salt,
called the Salt Anatron, or the Salt of Glass; it is the fixed Salt which
sticks to the bottom of the Kettles, where Saltpeter is boiled: if you can
come by none of this Salt Anatron, put in common Sea Salt decrepitated, and
pour upon it also Spirit of Salt, well rectified, and divested of its phlegm,
four or five fingers above the matter: this Spirit being whet and sharpened by
the addition of the Salt Anatron, or common Salt, will corrode and dissolve the
said Gold, in three or four hours, without fire, and in this action will lose
its force; so that it will have no Acrimony left, but only a pleasant acidity,
and it will be impregnated with the Tincture of Gold; in the mean tim^, it will
not operate at all upon the Crystal, which will remain in the bottom of your
Vessel, in its own substance, fit for other uses, as we shall teach hereafter.
When you see your Spirit well tinged with the color of Gold, then pour it
off, and put to your matter the like quantity of the Salt Anatron, or of
Sea Salt decrepitated, in its place, and as much rectified Spirit of Salt, to
draw off another Tincture; and do so as long as your Spirit does draw any
Tincture, and till it come away as sharp as it went in. Put your Tinctures
together, they will make a Potable Gold, as yellow as a Topaz, and of no taste.
If you put them into a small glass Body, with a Head of the same, in a
Lamp-fire, and draw off by Distillation half your Dissolvant, there will remain
a Tincture of Gold, more lively, and acid, and also potable.

Obs. 1. That we use Crystal as an intermedium, for Gold, which without any
intermedium, could not be calcined, but would melt: and if it be not calcined,
then it will not dissolve in so gentle a Dissolvant, as Spirit of Salt. Now
there is no intermedium better than Crystal, for all other Metals would melt,
and mingle with Gold; Minerals, besides their metallic qualities, would also
impart to the Gold the Corrosion, and Acrimony of their Salts: but, Crystal
containing but a very little Salt, and a great deal of Earth, it does not
mingle, nor communicate to the Gold any Acrimony, and yet by the dryness of its
substance, it hinders the melting of Gold, and so furthers its calcination.

Obs. 2. That the Gold and Crystal being calcined, are powdered; because, that
so the Gold is easier to be dissolved by so gentle a Dissolvant, as Spirit of
Salt.

Obs. 3. That we use Spirit of Salt to dissolve Gold, already calcined;
because, that though there be more powerful Dissolvants, (as Aqua fortis made
with fine Niter, and deflegmated Vitriol, or Colcothar; as also, Aqua regalis,
which is made with Niter, Vitriol, and Salt Armoniack) yet these Dissolvants
are too corrosive, before and after the dissolution of the Gold to be potable,
and the Spirits of Vitriol, or Sulphur are not sharp enough; so that the Spirit
of Salt alone, has force enough to dissolve Gold, and make it potable after its
dissolution; and yet this Spirit must be rectified too, and whet and sharpened
by the addition of Salt Anatron, or common Salt decrepitated.

Obs. 4. That the Crystal which remains in the Mattress, after the dissolution,
must be well dulcorated, or sweetened, and then may serve for a Dentrifice, or
cleanse Teeth, by wetting a corner of a Towel in common Water, and then putting
it into the said powder, and with it rub your Teeth: or, it may serve to make
the Salt of Crystal, as we have said already.

Obs. 5. That the Gold is potable, but as long as it remains dissolved in the
said Spirit of Salt, and that you must not mingle it with any Liquor
whatsoever; for, if you do, it will precipitate your Gold into a yellow powder;
and so you will lose your Tincture.

Obs. 6. That potable Gold, is nothing but Leaves of Gold calcined with
Crystal, and dissolved in rectified Spirit of Salt.

Its Use and Virtues: It cannot be doubted, but that this Potable Gold has the
virtues of Spirit of Salt, that is, it is excellent against pestilential and
putrid Fevers, to purify the Blood, drive out Gravel, whiten the Teeth; and
also, it may be said to have the virtue of the Water of Pearls, and being thus
prepared, consumes all sharp humors in the Body, as Pearls thus prepared do: so
that it is not without reason, that this Remedy is esteemed as good against
Cancres and venomous Ulcers, and pestilential Fevers. The Dose is, six or
eight drops in some Broth, or appropriated Water: and for the Teeth, you may
put a spoonful of it in two spoonfuls of Rose Water, or Flower of Orange, or
Jasmin. It has likewise the virtue of preserving your Wine in your Cellar for
many years, by putting about half a pound of this Potable Gold into a Hogshead
of Wine; but except it be very rare Wine indeed, and that you desire to have it
of many years, it would cost you more than it would be worth.

The Salt of Vitriol, or the Crystals of Venus.
TAke Verdigreece, or Spanish Green, as much as you please, powder it in a
Brass Mortar, and stop your Nose close, left the venomous vapors should poison
you; put it into an ample Mattress, with a long neck, so that it be three
quarters empty; pour upon it good distilled Vinegar, so that your Mattress be
almost quite full, place it in a Sand-fire, and by fitting to it another
Mattress, make a double Vessel of it, in twelve hours time you will have a blew
Tincture, like true Turquoises; pour off this Tincture into a stone Pan; pour
on more distilled Vinegar upon the Faeces, to extract a new Tincture; and do
this till there remain nothing but brown Faeces in the bottom of your Mattress:
then take a glass Cucurbite, and apply to the bottom of it a leaden, or iron
Ring, tied to it by four pack-threads, which are fastened to a pack-thread tied
about the body of the Cucurbite; put all your Tinctures into this Cucurbite,
which set in a Kettle full of Water, where it cannot swim, nor lean more on one
side than the other, because of the weight it has at the bottom; draw off the
distilled Vinegar, till you see that there is a thin skin begun to be formed
upon your Tincture; then take out your Cucurbite, and set it in a cool place,
as a Cellar: in three or four days there will be in the bottom, and upon the
sides of your Vessel, diverse Crystals of a lovely blew-like Turquoises.

This done, pour off by inclination, all the Water that is not congealed, and
evaporate it in a Cucurbite, in a Balneum Mariae, as has been said already;
reiterating the evaporation, and crystallization of the said Water or Tincture,
till there remain very little of it.

Then put together all your Crystals into another Mattress, pour upon them
distilled Vinegar, enough to dissolve them; you may make use of that Vinegar,
which you drew off from your first Tincture; place your Mattress in a Sand-fire,
and make a double Vessel of it; in three or four hours time, the dissolution of
your Crystals being done, filter it while it is warm through a brown Paper, and
receive your filtration in a stone Pan; there will congeal in this Pan, great
quantities of Crystals, which will change their blew color, into a green one,
like Emeralds, and half transparent. Pour off by inclination the Water that
shall not congeal; then set your Crystals in the Sun, to dry them well, and
when they are well dried, take them out of the Pan, and put them into a glass
Vial, well stopped, to keep for your use.

Obs. 1. That to extract the Salt of Venus or Copper, we use Verdigreece;
because that Verdigreece is nothing but Venus dissolved, extracted, and
calcined Philosophically by the acid Spirit of Wine: Now it is impossible to
extract the Salt of any Body, before it be calcined; and as for Metals, they
cannot be calcined otherwise than Philosophically, that is, by the corrosion of
some acid Spirits; for fire, though never so violent, can but melt them, and
evaporate some part of them.

Obs. 2. That we use here distilled Vinegar, to dissolve Verdigreece, and
extract its Tincture and Salt; because it contains but little of a tartareous
Salt, or Salt of Tartar, which being joined with the Salt of Venus cannot hurt;
but Aqua fortis, Aqua regalis, the Spirit of Niter, Brimstone, or Vitriol,
contain a great deal of corrosive Salt, which would alter the Salt of Venus,
and make it corrosive, being joined with it; for, it cannot crystallize without
them.

Obs. 3. That you must use here glass and stone Vessels, and not of vernish'd,
or glazed Potters Earth; because, that the sharpness of the Verdigreece would
corrode the glazing, and impregnating its self with Lead, would spoil the
brightness of your Crystals; and if your Vessel were unglazed, then the
Verdigreece having, by its dissolution in distilled Vinegar, acquired a
singular sharpness, and penetration, would insinuate, and lose its self in the
pores of the Vessel.

Obs. 4. That we distill, and evaporate the Tincture of Verdigreece, in a gentle
heat of Balneum Mariae, lest in a greater heat, the sulphurous part, and
volatile Salt of Venus should exhale, and be gone, since it is in that
sulphurous part, that consists the greatest virtue of this Remedy, and it is
it, that contributes most to the crystallization.

Obs. 5. That the Crystals of Venus change their blew dark color, into a green
transparent one, by the means of reiterated dissolutions, and crystallizations;
which Operations, do purify these Crystals from their blew terrestreity; and
that the true color of the purified Salt of Venus, is to be as green as an
Emerald.

Obs. 6. That the Crystals of Venus are nothing else, but the Salt of Venus
extracted from the Calx of Venus, which is Verdigreece, by a gentle Dissolvant,
which is distilled Vinegar: then after evaporation of half of the Dissolvant,
crystallized in a cool place.

Its Use and Virtues: It is a powerful Diuretic, and Desiccative, and
therefore most excellent against Gonorrhaea's. Its Dosis is, from three to six
grains, in a Pill of Turpentine, that has been boiled to a consistence of
Colophone, continuing to take of it three days together. There may be also
drawn out of it a Spirit, fit to precipitate all sorts of Dissolutions.

The Crystals, or Salt, or Vitriol of Mars.
TAke five or six pound of the opening Saffron of Mars, called commonly, Crocus
Martis aperitivus, as it has been described in this Book; powder it in a
Mortar, and searce it through a silken Sieve, then throw it by spoonfuls into a
Kettle of ten or twelve quarts of boiling Water, stirring it continually for
two hours together, with a Ladle, or Spatula of Iron, till the Water be half
boiled away; then take off your Kettle, and filtrate your Liquor while it is
warm, through a brown Paper; evaporate your Filtration in a Sand-fire, to the
Pellicule, in stone or glass Vessels, and afterward set them in the Cellar; in
two days there will be a good many green transparent Crystals, sticking to the
sides and bottom of your Pans. Pour off by inclination the Water that is not
congealed, and evaporate it again, and crystallize it: then gather all your
Crystals together, and put them into a glass Vial well stopped. As for the
powder of Mars divested of its Salt, which will remain in your Coffins of brown
Paper after filtration, dry it, and keep it to make the Astringent, or binding
Saffron of Mars.

Obs. 1. That to extract the Salt of Mars, we take the opening Saffron of Mars;
because it is nothing but Mars calcined by the means of Brimstone, and a
Reverberatory fire. Now, it is not possible to have the Salt of Mars, if it
have not been first calcined: and it cannot be calcined by fire alone, which
would only melt it, as it does other Metals; you must therefore calcine it
Philosophically with Brimstone, whose Salt and Spirit corrodes and calcines
Mars.

Obs. 2. That to extract the Salt of the Crocus Martis aperitivus, it is enough
to powder and searce it, and throw it into a great quantity of boiling Water,
which has force enough to draw to it the Salt of the Calx of Mars, or Croous
Martis aperitivus.

Obs. 3. That the Crystals of Mars are of a green transparent color; because
that Mars is drawn out of a vitriolick Earth, which indeed does contain nothing
but pure Vitriol, which by the violence of fire, is changed into a metallic
Body, the hardest and blackest of all Metals; and being opened by the Agents
and Dissolvants of Chemistry, does communicate this color.

Obs. 4. That if you do not keep these Crystals in a Vial well stopped, as soon
as the Air comes to them, they will be covered with a kind of white Meal, which
will spoil their transparency, and greenness; and that Mars being a very dry
Metal, and for this reason, the hardest and less flexible of all the Metals, it
easily dries, and is converted into this white mealy substance.

Obs. 5. That these Crystals of Mars, are nothing but the Salt of Mars,
extracted out of the opening Calx of Mars, by the sweetest of all Dissolvants,
which is common Water, boiling hot, then evaporated, and crystallized.

Its Use and Virtues: It is an opener, or aperitive, much stronger than the
opening Saffron of Mars, because it is the pure Salt of Mars, separated from
its terrestrial indissolvable part; and is therefore excellent against the
Green Sickness, the Yellow Jaundice, and to provoke the Monthly Courses. The
Dose is from a scruple to a dragm in Broth, or some Syrup: you may add to it a
dragm of the Extract of Savin, to augment its virtue.

The Astringent, or binding Saffron of Mars.
TAke the powder of Crocus Martis aperitivus, which remains in the Coffin of
brown Paper; after you have filtred the Dissolution of the said Crocus Martis
aperitivus in common Water, which powder will be then divested of all its Salt
of Mars: fill with it a Pot of Potters Earth unglazed, place this Pot in the
Furnace of the great Reverberatory Fire, and give the Fire for eight and forty
hours; then take off your Pot, and break it, and while it is hot, powder your
matter in a Brass Mortar, and then set it in the air upon a Board, or upon a
Marble Stone; when it is quite cold, searce it through a silk Sieve, and keep
it in wooden, or glass Vessels.

Obs. 1. That though the said powder of Mars be divested of its Salt, yet we
reverberate it a great while, that so all its Salt may evaporate, and the
Remedy be the more Astringent, which is the only intention it is to answer.

Obs. 2. That we use not a glazed Pot, lest in the reverberation the glazing
should melt by the violent heat of the Fire, and mingle with the Mars.

Obs. 3. That we powder the said Mars, while it is warm, that we may powder it
easilier, and make a finer powder of it.

Obs. 4. That we searce it through a Silk Sieve, that so we may make it so
impalpable, as that in passing through the Stomach, it leaves no hard gravelous
substance, that might offend the Coats of the Stomach, or Intestines.

Obs. 5. That the Astringent Saffron of Mars, is nothing but Mars calcined
Philosophically, by Fire and Brimstone, divested of its Salt, by its
dissolution in common Water, then reverberated, powdered, and searsed, to be
reduced to an impalpable powder.

Its Use and Virtues: It is a powerful Astringent inwardly taken; and
exteriourly applied, it stops the Bloody Flux, the Hepatick Flux, and all
Diarrhaea's. Its Dose is, from half a dragm to two, in some Conserve, or
Preserve, or Bolus: It stops likewise bleeding of the Nose, by powdering some
Cotton with this powder, and filling the Nostrils with the Cotton thus powdered.

A Little TREATISE OF CHEMISTRY OR, An Abridgement of the precedent TREATISE.
Of the Hermetick Lute.
TAke of Potters Earth, Sand, and Horsedung, equal quantity of each, and knead
them together with a little Water, or Whites of Eggs, to a soft lump: this
serves to make Bricks in a Mould, to cement your Bricks in the structure of
your Furnaces, to lute your Vessels, and to fill up the holes, chinks, and
cracks of your Furnaces and Vessels.

Of Hermetick Furnaces.
AFurnace to distill, with the Vesica covered with its Refrigeratory, Waters,
Aromatic Essences, and Spirit of Wine; it has an Ash-hole, a Fire-room, and a
Laboratory; the Laboratory must be as high as the Vesica, and half a finger in
its circumference wider than the Vesica; you must put Wood and Coals into the
Fire-room.

A Furnace for a violent Reverberatory Fire, serving to draw the Spirits, and
Oils of Minerals, and Metals, in a glass or stone Retort luted, or in an iron
one: it is like the precedent, only the Laboratory must be of the height of the
Retort; and that there must be a gap to put the neck of the Retort out at, and
must have an inch in circumference, more than the Retort; then in the
Operation, you must add to it three Lays, or Rounds of Bricks, lesser still
toward the top, and fill the holes with pieces of Brick or Iron: Wood and
Coals are the materials of your Fire.

A Furnace for a Circulatory Fire, and of Suppression, serving to distill the
Phlegm, Spirit, and Oil of Seeds, Berries, Woods, Barks, Roots, etc. in a stone
or glass Retort luted: it is built like the precedent, only the Ash-hole, and
Fire-room are not separated from one another, and that you must cover the top
of your Furnace with an earthen Pan, that has a hole in its middle: Wood and
Coals are your fuel.

A furnace for a Wheel Fire, serving to sublime the Salts of Minerals and
Metals, in a Mattress of Glass luted: it is made of two Rounds of Bricks,
without Cement or Lute, leaving a little space between the Bricks. You must put
an earthen Bowl in the middle, to set your Mattress on, and kindled Coals round
about it.

A Furnace for a Circulatory Fire, and of Suppression, serving to calcine and
melt Minerals, and Metals, and to calcine Vegetables and Animals in Crucibles,
or great Pots of the same Earth: It is made of two Rounds of unluted Bricks,
set at a little distance one from the other, that the air may come in; it is
enough to make it two fingers above the Crucible, when set in its earthen Bowl:
you must lay round about as high as the Vessel, kindled Coals.

A Furnace for a Circulary Fire, and of Suppression, serving to distill Oils,
acid Spirits, and Flegms of Gums, Rosins, Wax, in a glass Retort luted. It is
built as the precedent, only there must be a place for the neck of the Retort
to come out at. The same Materials of VVood and Coals for your Fire.

A Furnace to distill in a Balneum Maris, or Mariae, or vaporous Bath, all sorts
of Liquors, to evaporate the Extract of Salts, and for all other Operations. It
is made of diverse Lays of Bricks luted together; there is in it an Ash-hole, a
Fireroom, and a Laboratory, and in the top of the Laboratory three little gaps,
to give a passage to the Flame. You must put your Coals in the Fireroom, and a
Kettle with a brim in your Laboratory.

A Furnace for the Fire of Ashes, or Sand, wet or dry, serving to distill and
rectify all sorts of Liquors, and for Infusion, Digestion, Tinctures,
Evaporation, etc. It is made of an Oval Lay of Tiles, and three other Oval
Lays of crooked Bricks, cemented with our Lute, Plaster of Paris and Water: so
that the Oval Rounds grow wider, as they rise higher, and that there be in one
end of the Oval a double door, for the Ashhole and Fire-room; then building a
square about the said Oval, with broken Tiles and Mortar, add one perfect Round
of Bricks, leaving a little gap over against the Fire-room-door; then apply
your iron plate, and add two or three Rounds of Bricks more to make the
Laboratory; at last, put upon the said iron Plate, Ashes or Sand, an inch thick.

A Wind-Furnace for violent Fusions, is made by building a Furnace of a
Circulary Fire, and Suppression, upon the bottom of a Hogshead; in which
bottom, there is a hole as big as ones head, which is covered with a Grate,
well cemented with Lute and Plaster. The Hogshead must be knocked out at the
lower end, and elevated from the ground about half a foot.

Of Spirit of Wine.
TAke as much Brandy as you please; put it into the Copper Vesica, placed in
its proper Furnace, fit to it its cover, or Moors-head, bordered with its
Refrigeratory, then fit to the nose or pipe of the said cover, and to the pipe
of Copper, that passes through two Hogsheads full of Water, a little moveable
pipe to join them together. Light the Fire in the Furnace that serves to distill
Aromatic Essences, the Spirit will come in a stream.

This Spirit of Wine is not good to be taken inwardly; if it be not rectified
in a glass Cucurbite and Alembick; the first is excellent for burnings, the
second is proper to dissolve Gums and Rofins, to take inwardly, and to draw
their Tinctures and Extracts.

Of Salt of Tartar.
TAke of Tartar and Niter powdered, equal parts, mingle them, and having put
them into a glazed earthen Pan; set fire to them with a red hot Iron, stirring
them continually, till the Niter be consumed, and the Tartar calcined. It is
aperitive and diuretic. The Dose is, from one to two dragms.

The Regulus of Antimony.
MIngle three pound of Male Antimony, with one pound and an half of common
Niter, as much of Tartar, four ounces and an half of powdered Charcoal; put
this mixtion by spoonfuls into a pot heated red-hot, in a Furnace of a
Circulary Fire, and Suppression, till your pot be full; then increase your
fire, stirring your matter from time to time with a stick, which you must not
put to the bottom, till all be melted; then take off your pot, and when it is
cold, break it, you will find in the bottom the Regulus, and the Faeces on the
top. Of it, is made Vinum Emeticum, everlasting Pills, and Cups, and the
Diaphoretick, its Faeces, serves to make the Golden Sulphur Diaphoretick.

Of the Liver of Antimony, of which is made the Crocus Metallorum.
MIngle one pound of Male or Female Antimony, with half a pound of common Niter
powdered, put them by spoonfuls into a Crucible, or pot of the same Earth,
heated red-hot in a Furnace of a Circulary Fire, and Suppression, covering your
pot at each spoonful, then increase your fire, and stir incessantly your
matter, with a stick, till it be in Fusion; take off your pot, and pour into a
Mortar the melted Liquor, retaining the Faeces from going in with it; your
matter being cold, is called, Liver of Antimony; and being powdered, is called,
The Saffron of Metals, or Crocus Metallorum.

Of it, is made the Vinum Emeticum. The Dose is, one ounce in a pint of Wine,
of which take one or two ounces inwardly, and four or five ounces in a Clyster.

The Spirit and Oil of Guaiacum.
FIll up to the neck, a great earthen Retort well luted, with shavings, or
little pieces of the VVood of Guiacum; place it in a small Reverberatory
Furnace, fitting to it a stone Receiver, or a glass one, and covering your
Furnace with an earthen Pan, that has a hole in the bottom; then by a moderate
heat of twelve, sixteen, or twenty hours; you will have the Spirit and Oil
together, which separate either by a glass Tunnel, or by a coffin of brown
Paper, wet with ordinary Water. Of the Ashes or Coals re-calcin'd, you may
make a Lixivium, and extract the Salt.

This Oil is good for old Ulcers, for the Gangrene, and Rot; and two or three
drops in Cinnamon Water is good for the Colic, the Spirit is good for
Burnings, Ulcers, and for the Pox, in a Decoction of Guaiacum.

Crystal Mineral.
THrow fine Niter powdered into a Pot, set in a Furnace of a Circulary Fire,
and Suppression, and let it be quite full at first; being melted, throw into it
four or five times, at each time a spoonful of powdered Brimstone; then pour
out by little and little, your melted Niter, into a Brass Kettle, shaking the
Kettle, and dipping it into cold Water: dissolve your Niter, thus prepared in
warm Water; filter it through a brown Paper, and evaporate it to a Pellicule;
then setting it cool, you will have fair Crystals, which are the true Crystal
Mineral, or Sal Prunellae. It cools, opens, and resists Corruption taken
inwardly, from a scruple to a dragm, and in a Clyster, from a dragm to half an
ounce.

The Spirit and Oil of Box
ARe made as the Spirit and Oil of Guaiacum, only this Wood yields much Spirit,
but little Oil: the Oil is good for the putrefaction, and pain of the Teeth,
for Contusions and Ulcers.

Of the Regulus of Mars.
POwder and mingle two pounds of Male Antimony, with one pound of Tartar, and
one of common Niter, six ounces of filings of Steel, and two ounces of powdered
Charcoal. It is made as the Regulus of Antimony, and there results of it a
Regulus containing seven ounces of Antimony, with the six ounces of filings. It
purges by stool, and vomit, in powder, or in vessel with Wine, and serves to
make an excellent Diaphoretick, which never provokes vomit.

The Spirit of Salt.
TAke one part of common Salt, and five of Potters Earth, dried and powdered,
fill with it a glass Retort well luted, place it in a Furnace of a great
Reverberatory Fire; give the fire by degrees, and continue the last degree for
twenty hours.

Its virtue is Diuretic, it drives away Gravel, and breaks little britle
Stones, whitens the Teeth, and preserves from the Plague, and all Corruption.

Of the Red Precipitate of Mercury.
PUt four ounces of Mercury, and six ounces of Aqua fortis in a Mattress of
glass luted up to half its Body; place it in a Furnace of a moderate Circulary
Fire, till the Aqua fortis be evaporated; then give a Fire of Suppression, till
there rise a yellow vapor upon the brim of the Mattress; then take it off, and
when cold, break your Vessel, and you will find in the bottom a Red
Precipitate, of an Orange color.

Of Spirit of Niter.
PUt one part of fine Niter, to four parts of dried Potters-Earth, fill a glass
Retort well luted, then distill it in a great Reverberatory Fire, and have a
care of its vapors in distilling it.

Its Use and Virtues: Are to dissolve Mercury, Camphire, and Metals, and is
better for interior Remedies than Aqua fortis.

Of Turbith Mineral.
PUt two ounces of Mercury, and three ounces of Spirit of Niter, into a glass
Retort, luted up to half its neck, place it in a Furnace of a Circulary fire,
giving a gentle fire, till the Mercury be dissolved and dried; then take off
your vessel, and let it cool, then pour upon it one ounce of Oil, or Spirit of
Sulphur, and evaporate it by the same fire, reiterating this three or four
times, then burn upon it Spirit of Wine; break your Vessel, and you will have a
white lump: which powder, and wash in warm Water, till the Water come away
insipid. Dry this matter in a Sand-fire, and burn upon it Spirit of Wine, three
or four times, it will make your Mercury as yellow as Gold; then give it a
melting fire, which it will endure very well, without losing any thing, because
of the fixedness it has acquired by the Spirit of Sulphur.

Of the white Precipitate.
PUt eight ounces of Mercury, and one pound of Aqua fortis, into an ample glass
Retort with a long neck, shake your vessel, and heat it a little upon warm
Ashes, till your Mercury be dissolved; then pour your Dissolution into a glass
Bell, and pour upon it a quart of Seawater, to precipitate your Mercury;
separate your Seawater, and sweeten your Precipitate with common Water, then
dry it in a coffin of white Paper. It is used with Pomatum, to rub Ring-worms
withal.

Its internal Use is, To purge in the Pox, from three to eight grains.

Of the golden Diaphoretick Sulphur.
Boil in common Water in a Kettle the Faeces of Regule of Antimony, or Regule
of Mars; filter their Lixivium through a brown Paper, pour two or three
spoonfuls of Vinegar, or of some acid Spirit upon all this Lixivium, it will
curdle, grow yellow, and stink, then pouring Water upon it, precipitate your
Tincture thus curdled, into a powder of the color of Saffron, which you must
edulcorate, or sweeten, to take away the ill smell, then dry it in a coffin of
Paper.

Its Use, is to provoke the Monthly Courses, from eight to twelve grains, by
whetting its virtue with twice or thrice as much of Sena, Saffron, and Savin,
or by receiving the vapor of the Lixivium, in sitting over a Close-stool.

Of the Oil of Eggs.
PUt twenty or thirty Eggs into a Kettle of cold Water, boil it till your Eggs
be hard, take out the hard Yolks, and put them into a Drying Pan, over a
flaming fire, bruise them, and turn them often with an iron Ladle, till they be
almost all turned into Oil, which separate from its Faeces while it is warm;
you may rectify it if you please in a glass Retort, in a Circulary Fire, or
rather in a Sand-fire, which will make it yellow, and incapable of congealing.

Its Use is, That it is a very good Balsam for green Wounds, Burnings,
Ruptures, or falling of the Guts into the Scrotum, and for Wounds in the
Nerves, Ligaments, and Membranes which are uncovered.

Of the Oil and Spirit of Ash-wood.
THey are drawn as the Spirit and Oil of Box, and this wood yields but very
little Oil.

Its Virtue is, For pains in the Kidneys, Spleen Teeth, and for the rotting of
Bones, applied outwardly.

Of distilled Vinegar.
TAke a glass, stone, or glazed earthen Cucurbite, fill it half full with good
Vinegar, place it in a Sand-heat, fitting to it its Head and Receiver; give at
first a great fire, stop the Registers and Doors of your Ash-hole, and
Fire-room, continuing your fire, till you have drawn off, within half a pint,
all the Vinegar you put in; you may rectify it upon its Faeces, and separate
the Phlegm, which will come first, from the acid Spirit, which will come last,
half in half, or thereabouts.

Its Use is, To dissolve Pearls, Corals, Fish-shels, to make of them
Magisteries, and to extract the Salt of Metals.

Oil of Camphire.
PUt into a Mattress or Vial two ounces of Camphire, and four ounces of Spirit
of Niter, shake them together, and let them stand till the Camphire be
dissolved: separate by a glass Tunnel the Oil which will swim upon the Spirit.

Its Use is, To moderate the pains of the Nerves that are naked and uncovered
in a Wound, and to exfoliate rotten Bones.

Of Spirit of Wine campherized.
PUt as much Camphire as you please, into a Mattress, and pour to it as much
Spirit of Wine as shall be three or four fingers above it, fit to it another
Mattress, and make a double Vessel: place it in a Sand-heat, till your Camphire
be dissolved.

The Use is, For the Toothache, and for Deafness, applied to the Tooth in a
little Cotton, and put into the hollow of the Ear, with a little Wool cut off
from the Stones of a black Ram.

Of the Aromatic Tincture of Cloves.
PUt into a Mattress, as many Cloves as you please, and pour upon them Spirit of
Wine, to the height of three or four fingers above the matter; place it in a
Sand-heat, till the Spirit be died of a blackish red: separate your Tincture,
and make of it either an Extract, or a Syrup.

The Use of the Tincture, Is to fortify the Stomach, and Heart; ease the pains
of the Colic, kill Worms taken inwardly, and applied outwardly, inform of an
Epithema.

The calcination of Lead.
TAke Lead beaten into thin plates, and Brimstone powdered, of each equal
parts; make Stratum superstratum in a glazed earthen Pot; place it in a
Circulary Fire, and of Suppression, till your inflamed and burning Sulphur be
consumed; take it off from the fire, and stir it with an Iron Rod, then powder
it, and searce it.

Its Use is, To dry up old Ulcers, and Scabs, being incorporated with Grease,
or Diapompholix, and also from it, is drawn the Sugar of Saturn:

The stinking Oil of Cloves.
PUt of Cloves what quantity you will, into a glass Retort luted, place it in a
Circulary Fire, there will come into the glass Receiver white fumes, which will
congeal into a black Oil, stinking and caustic.

It serves to exfoliate rotten Bones, it cures the Gangrene and pocky Ulcers.

Of the Oil and Butter of Antimony, of which is made the Mercury of Life, or
Emetick Powder, or of Algarot. Of the Cinnaber of Antimony. Of Mercury and
Antimony revived.
PUt Corrosive Sublimate, and Mineral Antimony in Powder, of each four ounces,
into a glass Retort luted, leaving a gap to look in at; place it in a small
Circulary Fire, till all the Oil be distilled into a glass Receiver, and that
you see in the bottom of your Retort, a bright melted lump; then give a fire of
Suppression, till your Retort begin to grow soft, and be half melted: break it,
there will come out of the neck, Mercury half quick and revived, and half in a
blackish powder. In the entry of the neck, you will find a greyish Crust, and
in the bottom a lump of Antimony revived, and made crude again; Then put your
Oil of Antimony, which being congealed, is called Butter of Antimony, into a
little Retort, to be rectified once only in a small Circulary Fire; throw it
into some Water, which being impregnated with the Mercurial Salts, is called
the Philosophical Vinegar; pour off this acid Water, and sweeten your white
powder with other water, till it come away insipid. This powder is called
Mercury of Life.

The use of the Emetick powder, is, To cause vomiting, and to purge gently in
intermittent Fevers, and Dropsies; the Philosophic Water is good for the
Itch, Scabs, Ring-worms, and Lice; the Cinnaber of Antimony is a Sudorifick for
the Pox.

Of the Oil and Tincture of Karabe.
FIll a glass Retort, luted up to the neck, with Karabe powdered, pour upon it
Spirit of Wine, up to the neck too, place it in a Circulary Fire, and fit to it
a large glass Receiver; give your fire by degrees, till you come to a fire of
Suppression, and that there appears no more vapors in the Receiver: separate
the Oil that goes to the bottom, from the Spirit that swims on the top.

The Use of the Tincture of Karabe, is, For the Palsy, the Sciatica, the cold
Gout, all cold Fluxions, and bruises of the Nerves. The Oil is good against the
suffocations of the Mother, and old Wounds.

Of the Oil of Jet.
FIll a Retort of glass, well luted, with Jet in pieces, up to the neck; place
it in a Circulary Fire, and fit to it a glass Receiver, giving the fire by
degrees, as in the Oil of Karabe, and separate the Oil from the Spirit, that
will swim on the top.

The Use of the Oil, is, for the Suffocation, or Fits of the Mother, for all
Contusions and Bruises.

Of the Butter, Cream, or Nutritum of Saturn.
PUt into an earthen glazed Pan, Minium, or Lytharge, or Ceruse, or calcined
Lead, as much as you please; pour upon it boiled distilled Vinegar five or six
fingers above the matter; stir it with a wooden Spatula; an hour after melt an
ounce of white Wax in an earthen glazed Pan, and add to it four ounces of Oil;
pour this mixtion into a Mortar, and upon it a glass full of the said Vinegar
of Saturn, stir it, till it be in a consistence of Butter, or Balsamum.

The Use of this Balsam, is, To cool, and assuage pain, and extinguish
Inflammations; to dissipate and ease the Hemorrhoids.

The Use of the Vinegar of Saturn, being dissolved in a small quantity in
Water, is, To appease Inflammations, and to serve for Injection in
Gonorrhaea's, being mingled with a little Water of Barley.

Of the Oil of Bricks, or the Philosophers Oil.
PUt five parts of powdered Bricks, and one part of Oil of Olives, into a glass
Retort luted, and bigger than needs for so much matter; place it in a Circulary
Fire, which by little and little, you must bring to the highest degree, or Fire
of Suppression; the Phlegm will come first, then a stinking, thick, red Oil,
which being rectified, will become yellow, clearer, and less stinking.

The Use of this Oil, is, For Contusions, the Sciatica, and cold Defluxions.

The Oil of yellow Wax.
POur one part of yellow Wax melted, upon five parts of powdered Bricks, make
with it little Balls, and with them fill a glass Retort, luted up to the neck;
give the same Fire, as in the Oil of Bricks; the Phlegm will come first, then a
red stinking Oil, which will congeal into a yellow Butter, which being
rectified, will become clear, and white, and less stinking. The Use of it, is
the same as of the Oil of Bricks.

Of the Extract of Hellebore.
PUt half a pound of the Roots of black Hellebore, and upon it as much Spirit
of Wine as will cover it three fingers high, into a double Mattress; draw the
Tincture in a Sand-fire, for three or four days, evaporate the said Tincture in
a glass Cucurbite, in a Sand-fire, to a consistence of Honey.

The Use is, To purge Melancholy, it causes Loathing and Vomiting. The Dose is,
from ten grains to a scruple.

Of Aqua fortis.
PUt into a glass Retort common Niter and undeflegmated Vitriol in powder, and
leaving third part of your Vessel empty; distill them in a Fire of
Reverberation, or Suppression, giving it by degrees. A little Phlegm will come
first, then the Spirit in red vapors.

The Use is, To dissolve Minerals and Metals, and to give force, and
penetration to Dyings, or Tinctures.

Of the Infernal Stone.
PUt two parts of Aqua fortis, to one part of Coppel Silver, cut into little
pieces, in a small Mattress half luted; evaporate the Aqua fortis in a Circulary
Fire, till your matter be dry, with a black scum upon it; then give a melting
fire, till there rise no more vapors: then take off your Mattress, and let your
matter cool, or else pour it into little moulds.

The Use is, To consume Warts and proud Flesh, to cure Cancres, the Ulcers of
the Mouth, and the Gangrene, by touching them with this Stone.

Of the burning Spirit of Honey.
PUt one pound of Honey, and a pint of White Wine into a glass Cucurbite, or an
earthen one; distill them in a Sand-fire, till you hear that it boyls no longer,
and that there remains nothing but a black Honey in the bottom.

The Use is, To dye the Beard and Hair.

Of the Arcanum Corallinum.
POur warm Water upon the Red Precipitate of Mercury, till at last your Water
come away insipid, then pour upon it Spirit of Salt, in a glass Cucurbite; dry
it in a Sand-fire, that will fix the Mercury; then sweeten with cold Water the
said Mercury fixed, till the Water come away insipid; then reverberate it in a
Crucible, it will become as red as Coral; then burn upon it Spirit of Wine,
two or three times.

The Use of it is, To purge, and provoke vomiting gently, and cure the Pox. The
Dose is, from three to six grains.

Cinnamon Water.
PUt four ounces of Cinnamon, and a quart of White Wine, into a glass, or stone
Cucurbite, fit to it a Head and Receiver of Glass, distill them in a Sand-fire;
there will come at first a clear Water, and toward the end, a whitish muddy one.

The Use of the first Water, is, To fortify the Stomach, and comfort the
Heart, and to facilitate, and further the delivery of Women in Childbed. The
second Water may serve in the confection of the Syrup of Cinnamon, by infusing
the Cinnamon before you dissolve your Sugar in it.

Of the sweet Sublimate.
TAke of Corrosive Sublimate, and Quicksilver, of each a like quantity, powder
your Sublimate in a white Dish, with a Pestle of VVhite-ware, stopping your
nose close; then add to it the Quicksilver, and when they are half incorporated
together, add a little distilled Vinegar, to make a wet powder; put this
mixtion into an unluted Mattress, with a straight neck, place it in a Circulary
Fire; after the evaporation of the Vinegar, stop the Mattress with a Paper
stopple; continue your fire, till your matter be elevated from the bottom of
the Mattress, take off your Mattress, break it, and take out the Sublimate, which
cleanse every where: powder it, and put it into a greater Mattress, half luted,
to be sublimed a second time in the same fire, which you must increase toward
the end of the Operation, till there remain little or nothing in the bottom of
the Mattress. Take off your Mattress, and break it, and keep this Sublimate in a
glass Vessel well stopped.

Its Use is, To purge gently, from twenty to forty grains, it fluxes in four or
five Doses, one after another.

Of the Salt of Saturn.
PUt as much distilled Vinegar as you please, into a glazed Pan, which set upon
a Trevet over a fire of Wood and Coals, and add to it as much as you please of
powdered Lytharge, stirring it with a wooden Spatula; then, after it has boiled
a little, let it cool, pour off the distilled Vinegar impregnated, and pour on
more; reiterate the boiling, till there remain no Lytharge; filter your
Dissolutions, and evaporate them in a Sandfire, in a glass Cucurbite, till your
matter become as red as Blood: then put it into VVhite-VVare Dishes to congeal
into white Crystals, as sweet as Sugar, and there will remain a red Oil, sweet
also, which has the same virtue as the Salt.

It is a Collyrium for the Eyes in Ophthalmies; it is good to inject in
Gonorrhaea's, and it is excellent for redness of the Face, or Erysipelases, in
Water, or Vnguentum Rosatum.

Of the Diaphoretick Antimony.
TAke one pound of Mineral Antimony, or the Regule of Antimony, or Mars, four
pound of fine Niter, powder them, and mingle them together, and put them in
f^agration and fusion by spoonfuls, in a great Pot of the Crucible Earth,
heated red-hot in a fire of Suppression, covering at each time the Pot;
continue the fire till the vapors cease; then take it off, and with a Lattin
Ladle, pour out the matter gently into an earthen pan full of Water: bruise
between your hands the matter thus quenched. Pour off the white milky
Dissolution, within 2 or 3 hours, pour off the Water of that which is
precipitated to the bottom, and sweeten it, till your water come away insipid;
then filter your Magistery, and dry it in the shade.

The Use of it is, That it is a powerful Diuretic, and Diaphoretick against
Venereal Diseases, the Small Pox, and all long Distempers. The Dose is, from
ten to twenty grains, and more. Boil four ounces of Venice Turpentine into the
consistence of Colophone, in a kettle full of Water, and mingle with it, while
it is warm, an ounce of Diaphoretick Antimony, half an ounce of Niter
sulphurated, and as much Cream of Tartar; form of it Pills, which will be
excellent for old Gonorrhaea's.

Of the binding Saffron of Mars.
PUt two parts of filings of Steel, and one part of powdered Brimstone, all at
once, into a Crucible heated red-hot in a fire of Suppression, till the
Brimstone be consumed, and an hour after, take off your Crucible, and powder
presently your matter; spread this powder, that is now of the color of
Violets, upon Tiles, and it will become brown.

It is good in bloody and Hepatick Fluxes, in the weight of a dragm: It
augments the binding virtue of Plasters.

The opening Saffron of Mars.
SPrinkle the binding Saffron of Mars in a stone pan, with Spirit of Vitriol,
or Brimstone, two fingers above the matter, which in two or three days will be
a kind of paste, with which, fill a large Crucible, and set it in a
Reverberatory Fire for eight hours, then powder it, while warm, and searce it.

The Use: This Saffron is good against the Yellow Jaundice, it provokes the
Monthly Courses, and opens the Spleen, from half a dragm to two.

Of the Spirit of Sulphur.
PLace a stone Cup half full of Sand, upon a little Pot, placed in the middle
of a great earthen Pan, a quarter full of Water; put into it a spoonful of
powdered Brimstone, and with a red Cart-nail set it on fire, put presently a
glass Bell over the Pan, the Brimstone will burn, the Spirit will impregnate
the Water, and the Flowers will produce a little skin; reiterate all that, till
you have thus consumed four pound of Brimstone; then mingle your Flowers, and
your impregnated Water in a Mattress with a short neck, and evaporate in a
Circulary Fire the Phlegm, till your Brimstone be dissolved, and that your
Spirit grows black; pour it all into a stone, or White-ware Vessel, while it is
warm; the Brimstone will be congealed in the bottom, and you shall have half an
ounce of black Oil, or Spirit of Brimstone.

It cools, purifies the Blood, preserves from the Plague, fixes Mercury,
dissolves Pearls and Coral, and cures Cancers, and Warts.

Of the Spirit of Vitriol, and Oil of Colcothar.
FIll a glass Retort, thoroughly luted, with green Vitriol calcined to a gray
color, in a great Crucible in a Circulary Fire, and of Suppression; place it
in a Furnace of great Reverberation, till there appear black spots upon the
Receiver; then pour off your Spirit of Vitriol, which is as clear as Water,
increase your fire, you shall have a black Oil very acid, and there will remain
a Colcothar in the Retort.

The Use of both is, To cool and resist Corruption, against all Distempers of
the Liver, Kidneys, against burning and pestilential Fevers; it serves also,
to dissolve Pearls, Coral, Crabs Eyes, Egg-shells, etc. but it is not strong
enough to dissolve Metals.

Of the Oil of Myrrha.
FIll with Myrrha in pieces, a glass Retort luted; place it in a Circulary
Fire, fitting to it a great Receiver; there will come out a Phlegm, and an Oil,
both together; separate them one from another, with a glass Tunnel.

The Use of the Oil is, Against Fits of the Mother by smelling to it; it
cleanses and ripens Wounds, being mingled with the Digestivum; and hinders the
Gangrene, being mingled with the Egyptiacum.

Of Cauteries.
SLack half a pound of Quicklime in a stone Pan, by pouring Water upon it, by
little and little, till it become like pap; in the mean time, heat in a
Crucible, in a Fire of Suppression, two pounds of gravelled Ashes, and throw
them hot into the said pap, then pour upon it sufficient quantity of Water to
dissolve your Salts; after twelve hours infusing, pour your Lixivium into a
brass Basin, and evaporate it till it be dry: and thus, as it is, you may use
it as people do other Cauteries. If you melt this matter, you may mould
Cauteries upon a Marble.

The Use is, To cauterize; when they are molded, they are dryer, and must be
well wet before their application.

Of the Red acid oil of Antimony.
POwder and mingle fine Niter, Brimstone, and Antimony, of each a pound; set
fire to your matters by little and little, in an earthen pan, under a glass
Bell, as you do the Spirit of Brimstone; then evaporate it in a Mattress of a
short neck, till your Brimstone be melted, and your Niter exhaled, and that
your Oil appears red and thick, taking care that your matter in boiling do not
run over; pour all your matter into a little stone pot, or of White-ware, and
when it is cold, it will congeal into a fair reddish Sulphur.

The Use of the Oil is, To cure by touching the Ulcers and Cancres of the Pox;
it purges without provoking vomit, from eight to eighteen drops.

Of Besoard Mineral.
MElt some butter of Antimony, and pour it into a glass Bell, and add to it,
drop by drop, and at diverse times, Spirit of Niter in equal quantity, for fear
of too great an ebullition; when the smoke and boiling cease, pour to it a pint
of Seawater filtred and cold, there will be produced a white Precipitate;
after twelve hours, pour off this Water, sweeten your Precipitate with common
Water, then filter the remainder through a coffin of Paper, and keep your
powder well stopped.

Its Use is, To be an excellent Sudorifick for malignant Fevers, and the Pox.

The Precipitate of Bismuth.
PUt four ounces of powdered Bismuth into a glass Bell, and pour upon it, by
little and little, eight ounces of Spirit of Niter, having a care of too great
an ebullition, and of the venomous vapors of the said Spirit. The ebullition
being ceased, and the dissolution performed, and cold, it will crystallize.
Pour upon it Seawater, to precipitate the Magistery, pour off your Seawater,
and pour on common Water to sweeten it, filter the remainder through a Paper
coffin, and let it dry in the shade.

The Use is, To dry Ulcers, and to be a Fucus being mingled with Pomatum.

The spirit and oil of Turpentine.
FIll a glass Retort luted with the waterish Spirit of Turpentine, with its
Oil, distill it in a Circulary Fire, till three parts of four come away, which
will be the Spirit, and there will remain in the Retort a thick red Oil;
rectify your Spirit so often, till there remain no Oil in it.

The Oil is a good Anodynum for wounds of the nervous parts; the Spirit is a
good Diuretic, dissolves Gums, extracts Tinctures of Aromatic Plants, and
serves to make the Balsam of Sulphur.

Of the sulphurated Niter, called Sal Antifebrile, or the salt against Fevers.
TAke four ounces of Brimstone, or its Flowers, and mingle them with eight
ounces of fine Niter; fire this mixtion by degrees in an earthen Cup, set in a
stone Pan, in which is a quart of Spirit of Urine, covering the pot with a
Bell; then take the Faeces of the calcined Brimstone, and powder them, and
mingle them with the Spirit of Urine impregnated with the Spirits of Niter and
Sulphur; let them infuse twelve hours in this stone Pot, till they be
dissolved, filter the Dissolution, and evaporate it in a short necked Mattress
in a Circulary Fire, till it come to a white scum; then diminish the Fire, and
evaporate it, till it cease boiling, and have a care that the too much boiling
do not break your Vessel; pour this matter, while warm, into a White-ware Dish,
and it will congeal like Crystal Mineral. To mould it, you must melt it, and
then pour it into a Vial, or melt in the Vial, and then break your Vial by cold
Water, and take away all the Glass with the point of a Knife.

The Use: It Is a powerful Diuretic and cooler, it resists Corruption, it
drives Gravel, cures Fevers, softens Metals. The Dose is, from twenty to
thirty Grains.

FINIS.

