TERRIBLE NEVVES FROM YORK: DECLARING The barbarous Actions of the Cavaliers at
York, in plundering the houses, seizing the goods, and imprisoning the persons
of those Citizens that refuse to contribute money to maintain a War against
the Parliament, having already plundered above twenty Citizens houses, and
imprisoned diverse of the Aldermen, for not contributing money to maintain the
foresaid War. Also how they cruelly threaten to kill diverse godly and
religious Ministers in the said City, if they will not preach as they would
have them.

ALSO The Earl of ESSEX his Instructions to the Counties of Derby,
Northampton, Warwick, and diverse other Counties, to stand upon their guard,
and raise the power of the Counties to withstand the Cavaliers, and prevent the
like miseries and calamities in other parts of this Kingdom.

Printed for Th. Thompson. October 19. 1642.

TERRIBLE NEWS FROM YORK: Wherein is showed the barbarous actions of the
Cavaliers in plundering the houses of the Citizens of York, who refuse to
contribute money toward the maintaining of a war against the Parliament.
Also the Lord General his Instructions to the Counties of Derby, Northampton,
Warwick, and diverse other Counties, for preventing the like miseries in other
places.
THe miseries of this Kingdom are almost grown to a height, the malignant
Party now has begun to plunder the City of York, and have already plundered
above twenty houses in the said City for not contributing toward the designs
of the Cavaliers to maintain a war against the Parliament: diverse Aldermen
that refused are committed, and one Alderman that was entrusted by the Act of
Parliament for gathering up of money for the Parliament, and has a thousand
pound in his hands, has but seven hours given him to consider whether he will
deliver up the money, or be plundered and imprisoned. Moreover they threaten
the best Ministers about the City, that they will be the death of them, unless
they preach as they would have them: they have carried Sir John Bourchier to
York: the Lady Melton being about to send her goods by water toward Hull, had
all her goods, money and plate, to the value of a thousand pound, taken by the
soldiers as they were putting into the Bark; they will suffer none of any
degree whatsoever to depart the city without lending of money.) The ^hi^ft
Cavaliers that bear sway in the City of York are Sir (...) Wortley, Sir
Marmaduke Langdale, Sir John Kay, M. Francis Nevill and others; the Earl of
Cumberland stands for a cipher, they do what they please without his advice.
There is a thousand Foot and three Troops of Horse marched toward Cawood where
M. Hotham is, and Sir Thomas Glemham has an intent to force him thence, so
that if the other Regiments of Foot that the Parliament has appointed for the
securing of that county come not to aid them, M. Hotham must of necessity
retreat to Hull.

Certain Delinquents revenues are to be made stop of: Two pensions of the Duke
of Richmond, one of 2100: l. per annum, another of 1400. l. per an. To the Lord
Willoughby of Eresby, 1000. l. per an. To the Earl of Bristol 2000. l. per an.
To the L. Grandison, 500. l. per an. etc.

The English Fleet lately lying before Galloway, which is the strongest town
they have, except Limbrick, and there laid siege to it: so the Lord of of
Clenrikard came down and conferred with our Lord Forbes, and the Merchants of
the town: they strongly replied, and said, that they were the Kings loyal
subjects, and had not offended in the least thing, but that the soldiers in
the Kings Fort had done them wrong: but had the King sealed to our Commission,
we should have found enough against them, that we might truly have made an
onset upon the town: we were so near the town with our garrison, that we
could hear them plainly call our Parliament rogues, Parliament-dogs, and
Puritan-Dogs: so you may very well conceive what subjects they are. On the
third and fourth day we re-fetcht aboard our soldiers, and the sixth day we
set sail from Gallaway to go to Limbrick, and on the ninth day we arrived in
Limbrick river, and on the two and twentieth day we laid siege to the Knights
of the Elmes Castle, that is to say in English, the Knights of the valley; the
which Castle we played upon two days and two nights with two Demi-Canons: so
the second day we entered the Castle, slaying all we found alive: but when we
came to bury them we found but eighteen or twenty, the rest made an escape
and got into the woods: there came a great army of the Irish within sight of
the Castle; there marched out betwixt four and five hundred, and when they
began to approach, the Irish men fled, and durst not stand: We took in this
Castle a thousand bushels of Wheat, three or four thousand weight of Butter,
besides Barley, Malt and salt Beef: this Castle we took on the three and
tvvcntieth of September with the loss of five men, a Trouper and a Footman in
the pursuit after the first landding, and three other after we came under the
Castle walls, two common soldiers, and the Master of Captain Thompsons ship.

The Lord General has sent Instructions to the counties of Derby, Warwick,
Northampton, and diverse other countries in those parts to raise the power of
the Counties, and stand upon their guard, to secure themselves from the
Cavaliers, who plunder every place where they come without distinction of
persons: for the Cavaliers endeavor to come toward London, and plunder by the
way, hoping that the Lord General cannot remove fast enough to prevent them,
but his Excellency has sent ten Pieces of Ordnance and two thousand men to
stop their passage at Coventry, that they may not pass that way: the counties
of Northampton and Warwick are already in a warlike posture, and furnished to
oppose the Cavaliers.

FINIS.

