A TESTIMONY TO THE Lord's Power AND Blessed Appearance In and Amongst CHILDREN:

Wherein is expressed the great Love of God to them, who, as Young and Tender,
have tasted of his Good WORD and Heavenly LIFE.

Published for the Use of Friends, and to prevent various Reports, that they
may have a true Account in the following Testimonies, given forth by Faithful
Witnesses.

Printed in the Year 1679.

A Testimony to the Everlasting Power of GOD, (which in Ages past has
wonderfully appeared in Sone and Daughters) which has been Despised, Mocked
and Evil spoken of by the Wisdom which is from below, that sees it not, nor can
know it; which heavenly Power has appeared in our Days, and has wrought
wonderfully in and upon the Hearts of many, even to the amazement of many, and
it has met with the same Spirit of Opposition now as formerly calling it
Madness, Witchcraft and Diabolical Delusion. It was prophesied of Old, That the
Lord would work a Work, which some should not believe if it were told them:
This in part has a Remnant seen in these Days, and even of late, as hereafter
is mentioned.
UPon the 4th day of the Month called June 1679. at a Meeting in the Town
called Waltham-Abbey in Essex of the People called Quakers, where was present
about Forty or Fifty Young Boys and Maidens; God's heavenly Power brake forth
in some Maids and Young Girls, it begun with Three or Four at first, broke them
into Tears and M^^ting of Heart, continued so a small time, then it reached two
or three of the Younger Boys, which melted them into Tears; and in a very small
time reached all the Boys and Young Girls, many of them being but about Eight
or Nine and Ten Years old, the Power was so mighty that they were all broken
into Tears, some into Trembling, and at last it reached unto the Elder People,
so that all in the Meeting was broken by the Power into Tears and Melting,
which did continue for about one Hour, until the Meeting was ended: This I was
an Eye and Ear Witness of, and felt God's Power wonderfully, to the gladding of
my Heart, and answering the Breathings of my Soul, which I have many a Time had
in a Travail to the Lord, for the Children, That the Lord might visit them in
their Young Days: after which Meeting I had this Hope and Faith raised up in
my Soul, which to some I did declare, that God had a Work to work with some of
these Children, which he would bring forth e're long. And several signal
Testimonies hereof has the Lord brought forth since, as hereafter appears
from other Eye and Ear Witnesses thereof. And although Men in the Fallen Wisdom
see not, understand not, nor believe that this is from the mighty Power of God,
yet there is a Remnant gathered by this Power, and have Experience of the
Operation thereof, how it has wrought in them, even in some when they were
Young; these are God's Witnesses that this is his Work; yea, it is sealed to
them by his Spirit: And let all the Mockers know, God's Work in our Day will be
too heavy for them; and except they Repent, will be a Stone of stumbling, upon
which they will fall and be broken to pieces; yea, those that slight and
neglect the Day of their Visitation, until it be too late, this same Power they
stumble at, will fall upon them, and Grind them to Powder.

This is from one who Travails and Breaths to the Lord, that his Everlasting
Power may be more and more revealed in the Hearts of the Sons and Daughters of
men, that many may be gathered cut of the Fall, unto Christ Jesus that never
fell; that they may feel themselves growing up in his heavenly Life as living
Members of him the blessed Head, then will they come to understand that these
Things are from the Lord, when the inward Eye and Ear is opened, they will with
me bear their Testimony, That these Things are of the Lord.

G. LAWRY.
The 6th day of the 5th Month 1679.

A Copy of a Letter to A. P.
DEar A. P. etc. I cannot omit but certify somewhat of our last Night's
Exercise in our Meeting, in our Family, how mightily the Power of the Lord
appeared amongst us; first breaking in upon Two Young Lads, and so pass^d
through the rest, with such Dread and Power, that there was an exceeding great
shaking and tenderness amongst them, rather more then on that notable fourth
day; so that it was not without difficulty to bring several of them into
stillness again; but at the last, it being late, they went to Bed, and there
many of them lay Crying, Weeping and Lamenting for two or three Hours together:
Others in a diverse Exercise; some who had been sober, and formerly good
conditioned, meek and gentle, the Power was meek with them, and overcame them
in a most blessed manner; so that they were filled with heavenly Praises,
uttering such words as sweet-conditioned Souls are wont to do when they are
sealed by the Lord's Spirit: Others most bitterly Lamenting their Conditions,
especially one of the aforesaid Lads for about three Hours together in his Bed,
exceeded and cried out for Mercy, so Dreadfully, that I never (as I remember)
heard a more Terrible Exercise from small or great; when I told him, how
patiently his Bedfellow lay besides him; he answered, The reason was, because
he had not been so Wicked as himself had been. If I could but write down the
Speeches of the poor Children, under their various Exercises, I may well say,
it would be as a wonder^ul T^ing, and such a Lesson as many Hearts would be
broken to read; but what shall I say, but admire the Love and Mercy of the Lord
in these Things! C. was blessedly disposed on, and was truly refreshed in his
Soul; and with him and several others, there was a secret inward Harmony from a
feeling Sense of God's pure Visitation; and some more dreadfully seized on, and
broken in upon by the Authority of the Power, so that it was admirable to
behold the variety of the Exercises suitable to the subject, matter, condition
and disposition of every Child.

This is a hint to thee of the matter, who I know dearly loves us, and will be
refreshed at any time to hear of our Welfare. So leaving the rest to W. C. who
was with us in the Meeting, if thou please to enquire of him, with mine and
my Wife's dear Love to thee and thy dear Wife, etc. I rest, thy dearly loving
Brother in the Fellowship of God's Truth

C. TAILOR.
Waltham-Abbey, the 24th of the 4th Month, 1679.

A Copy of a Letter to T. T.
DEar Brother, etc. the 24th of the 4th Month 79. we sitting toward Evening
with the Family and Children, being in all about Fifty, the Lords sweet and
tender-heart-breaking Power was with us in a shower of abundance of Love, Mercy
and Gentleness thorowout, which caused abundance of melting Tears, and great
Soul-gladness, like unto the love and tenderness of a most tender Father, in
Forgiveness and Mercy after Correction and Submission under the same, I mean
especially as to such who had been more stubborn: And the more mild and
gentle-conditioned were under the pure sense of the same Power in pure Love and
sweet tenderness, with an enerease of what had been poured out before at the
other Meetings: So that the whole Meeting and Family at that time was, as I may
truly say, overpowered with Divine comfort, in the sense of Gods pure love;
nothing else from God declared to them, but that they should admire his sweet
Love and Mercy, and how good the Lord was, how gentle, kind, and most tender
over them, together with the great admiring of the same Love, being filled with
it, so that the Heavenly Flame of it drowned all manner of Sorrow at that time,
and conquered all sense of Terror and Judgment, nothing but Love at that time
and Mercy appearing and overcoming all, so that it was wonderful to behold the
great Gravity and Sense of the Children in such an exercise, there being such a
general Heartbreaking Power overpowering them in such a manner with Gods
blessing throughout declared amongst them all. And now I may say, that there is
not one who has been of the worst Temper and Disposition here at present, but
in pleading with them about their conditions in the sense of Gods Truth, have
been broken into a sensible acknowledgment with weeping Eyes, so far has the
most blessed Power of the living God appeared in this place, a Day much groaned
and longed for to see, Glory to the Lord forever: And certainly the living God
will bestow more of his Heavenly Blessings upon us, by the still pouring forth
of his heavenly Spirit, as we are dear and tender before him and of his Glory,
Amen.

So dear Brother, admire with us the excellency of Gods pure love, and Pray
with us, that we all may be kept in the sweet and humble acknowledgment of all
his most tender Mercies: And oh! that we may never give the least occasion,
whereby the Lord may withdraw the sense of such great Love and Mercy from us,
Amen, Amen.

So dear Brother, if I could tell thee I would, how full of sweet Melody my
Soul is at present from the sense of this his pure goodness, and how full of
Joy and Gladness, and Heavenly Praises: Oh! the glorious Heavenly Power of the
Lord God, how, when he pleases, it most wonderfully overcomes the Hearts and
Souls of his beloved and tender Children! Oh dear Brother! feel, feel what my
Soul can admire, but my Tongue far unable to utter, neither lawful for any man
to do, in this Earthly Tabernacle, in which we reach unto thee dearly, and to
thy dear Wife.

And I am thy dear Brother, C. Tailor.


The following Testimonies are from the Teachers of the Children.

A Testimony concerning the Goodness and Mercy of God our Heavenly Father in
Christ Jesus, manifested to the Children of our Family.
IN the sense of the great Love and tender Mercies of the Lord God, who has
often graciously visited and livingly refreshed my Soul in our Evenings or
Family's Meetings. I can and do bear this living and faithful Testimony, that
at a Meeting the 23d of the 4th Month, called June, in the Evening the great
God and Father of Mercy in a special and wonderful manner did abundantly pour
forth of his good and holy Spirit of Life and Grace upon our Spirits through
Jesus Christ our Savior, by which our Souls and Spirits were broken and melted
before him, that Waters did gush out of the Rocks, Springs were opened in dry
places, and the very Depth did utter forth its Voice. I my self was so
overpowered and overcome with this Heavenly Life, Virtue and Power of God, that
I did shake and tremble before him the mighty God of Heaven and Earth, who by
his quick and powerful Voice shakes the Wilderness, and breaks the Cedars of
Lebanon, at whose appearance and look the Earth Trembles, and at whose touch
the Hills Smoke: This his great Love and powerful Operation upon my Heart and
Spirit, being livingly refreshed and comforted by it, did cause my Soul to
magnify the Lord, and my Spirit to rejoice in God my Savior, singing and
making sweet Melody in my Heart to the Lord, because he did so graciously
answer the desire of our Souls, and powerfully break in upon the Hearts and
Spirits of our Children, revealing himself in his great and Almighty Power
among them, in and through which their Hearts were broken, their Spirits
melted, and their Souls humbly bowed before him, as the alone searcher of the
Heart, and tryer of the Reins, making known to every one his state and
condition and bringing to Light the hidden things of Darkness, and Counsels of
the Hearts, which brought Sorrow and Trouble upon them, and caused many of them
to lament and cry out before the Lord. O^! who can appear and stand before the
great Judge of the Quick and Dead, and not tremble at his Word, and not howl
and cry as under the sen^e of his Judgments, till they be brought forth unto
Victory, and the Soul comes to feel Redemption from Sin and Iniquity, through
the Blood of Jesus Christ.

We are living Witness of this great and powerful Work of the Almighty God in
and amongst the Children of our Family, by which he has begun to work out
their Salvation with Fear and Trembling, and to turn their minds from Darkness
to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto himself, that they may receive
Forgiveness of Sins, and Inheritance amongst them which are Sanctified by Faith
in Christ Jesus, to the great comfort and satisfaction of our Souls, who was
thus graciously pleased to appear and reveal himself in and among us, in his
Heavenly Power and Authority; for my Soul has often been poured out before the
Lord on their behalf, that he would be pleased to reach unto their Hearts in
his Heavenly quickening Power, that at length they might come to experience in
themselves what has been often declared to them by others, that so in the
sense of this Heartbreaking Power they might learn to fear him their Creator
in the days of their Youth, and their Souls might be engaged and constrained
to love and obey him.

Now the Lord has heard our Cry, and answered our Desire, he has manifested
his great Love, Favor and Mercy unto them and us, in the sense whereof my Soul
did and does rejoice, praising and glorifying his Name on their and our behalf;
I can beat my witness in Truth, that the sense of the goodness of the Lord did
rest upon my Spirit all the Night long, that after I awaked my Eyes were full
of Tears, and my Soul full of Holy Praises and Thanksgiving unto the Lord,
because of his tender Mercies and great Love toward us, breathing to the Lord,
that he in his heavenly blessed Power would carry on his great Work of
Regeneration, that he has begun in and upon our Spirits, and to Bless us daily
more and more with all Spiritual Blessings in Christ Jesus, to the Praise and
Glory of his Grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the Beloved, according
to the Riches of his Grace, wherein he has reached and abounded toward us, to
declare unto our Souls that he has pardoned our Sins, and received us into his
Fatherly love and care.

What shall I say of the next following Meeting? I am not able to express the
sweet refreshing Life, Virtue and Power of our heavenly Father arising in us
with healing under ^is Wings. For as the Evening before, Fearfulness and
Trembling came upon many, and Horror had overwhelmed them, so now at this time
the sweet Love of a most tender and merciful Father, embracing their Spirits,
did sweetly and livingly refresh and comfort their Souls; he healed the broken
in Heart, and bound up their Wounds with the Balm of his heavenly Life, Virtue
and Power, to the great comfort and satisfaction of our Souls, who partook of
the Water of Life, that the Lord poured forth and made us to drink of; in and
through which the Spirit of the Humble was quickened, and the Heart of the
Contrite Ones revived.

Now as the Lord in those two Meetings has appeared and revealed himself in
and to us in a most special, gracious and powerful manner, so his Sweet and
Heart-melting Love and tender Mercies have hitherto followed us from Meeting to
Meeting, sensibly and livingly, Refreshing, Comforting, Stregthening and
Confirming our Souls in his Love, Life, Virtue and Power, until this very Day,
Praises, Praises, Praises, Glory and Honor be to our God henceforth forever
and forever.

Moreover, it is sealed to my Spirit by the holy Spirit of the Lord God, That
we shall be Monuments of his Tender Mercies and Fatherly Love and Care (these
are the words which livingly arose in my Heart, as we were lately gathered
together, and arise again as I am writing this Testimony for God) I say, We
shall be Monuments of his tender Mercies and fatherly Love and Care, if we keep
Low, Humble, Meek and Tender before him, he will instruct u^, and teach us in
the Way which we shall go, and guide us with his Eyes, if we always Fear and
Dread his holy powerful Name, which he has revealed unto us, and poured forth
in and among us, as a good and precious Ointment, which causes us to be glad
and to rejoice in him, and to love him with all our Heart, Soul and Mind. In
the Sense of this great Love and tender Mercies of the Lord God, my Soul
desires that I and every one of us, especially our dear Children, that have
with us tasted of the good Word and Power of the World to come; by which our
Souls have been quickened and livingly refreshed and comforted, may be always
kept in a living sense of the Loving kindness and Goodness of the Lord toward
us, that so we may walk in Humility, Righteousness and Holiness before him, who
has reached to our Souls, and made us sensible of our inward State and
Condition, and also of his Love, Grace and Mercy, that we may walk worthy of
this his great Love, and Dread and Fear him in our Hearts, always having the
Eyes of our Mind toward him, that in his Light, shining in our Souls, we may
see even the least appearance of Evil, and waiting in it we may receive Power
to be kept and preserved out of it, lest by entering in or consenting to it we
should offend the Lord, and cause him to with draw his sweet Love, and to hide
the Light and Favor of his Countenance from us, which would bring Sorrow,
Anguish and Destruction upon our Souls. Oh! let us walk worthy of this great
Love, let every one of us be circumspect in our Lives and Conversations, that
our Enemies, who Reproach and Blaspheme the holy Name and powerful Work of the
Lord God, who has graciously and gloriously appeared in and among us, may
behold our Holy, Innocent, Upright Life and Conversation, and by it may be
reached and convinced, that not the Devil, but the Lord God in his holy Life,
Virtue, Power and Spirit has appeared in and among us, by which he has
wrought a new Heart, and renewed a right and holy Spirit in us, the blessed
Effect whereof is Holiness and Righteousness, which Work is not of Man,
muchless of the Devil, but of the Everlasting, Pure and Holy God, who in his
Everlasting, Holy, Pure and Quickening Power has begot us again into the
heavenly Image of his dear Son Christ Jesus, which consists in Holiness, and
Righteousness, and Truth, which the Devil is out of.

Having therefore received Grace and Mercy, Life, Virtue and Power of God, let
us cleanse our selves from all Filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, perfecting
Holiness in the Fear of God, that we may show forth the heavenly Virtue and
Power of him that has called and translated us from Darkness into his
marvelous Light, and turned from Satan's Power to his own Holy, Pure and Living
Power, in which we are enabled to do good Works, new created of God in Christ
Jesus unto good Works, that we may walk therein, in which if we are sound
walking and doing the Works of God, we shall never fall again; for so an
entrance shall be ministered unto us abundantly, into the Everlasting Kingdom of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who is the true Light, which lights every
man that comes into the World, in which heavenly and divine Light, we daily
receive Life, Virtue and Power, to escape the Corruption that is in the World
through Lust, and to live Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present World,
to the Honor and Praise of him that has called us to Glory and Virtue. For
this is the very end of the heavenly, living, powerful Appearance of our God in
the midst of us, that in and through the heavenly Power of his Son Christ Jesus
revealed in us, in his divine, heavenly Light, Life and Spirit, he might redeem
us from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealou^ unto
good Works; and that so out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings he may perfect
Praises for his Name. Let us therefore always be found in Well-doing, that our
Light may shine before men, that they may see our good Works, and glorify our
Father which is in Heaven, who dwells in the Light, and is Light, in which, if
we walk therein, we have fellowship with him, and one with another, and the
Blo^d of Jesus Christ his Son, which cleanses us from all Sins is inwardly
known and felt, and the true Fellowship with the F^^her, and his Son Jesus
Christ comes to be witnessed, Righteousness and Holiness is shown forth in our
Lives and Conversation by which our heavenly Father comes to be praised and
glorified. For herein is our heavenly Father of his Children glorified, when
they bring forth much Fruit of the Spirit, which is in all Goodness, and
Righteousness, and Truth, always proving and doing what is acceptable unto the
Lord; to whom be Glory and Honor Praises and Hallelujah, Wisdom and Dominion
from my Soul, in the living Sense of his great Love and tender Mercies, now
henceforth forever and ever, Amen, Amen.

Testified by me J. M
The 5th of the 5th Month 1679.
WHen I consider the Goodness, Mercy and Love of Almighty God to the Sons and
Daughters of Men, so largely manifested, and suited to every Capacity and
Condition to this end and purpose, that all, even from the least to the
greatest, may be made sensible and living Monuments of his wonderful Work,
which he has been carrying on in all Ages les^ or more; but now in this latter
Age of the World, is cutting the Work short in Righteousness; I see it clearly
in the Light of the Lord; for which my S^ul and Heart is overcome with Praises
and Thanksgivings to him, who (I see) takes pleasure to dwell with the lowly in
Heart, and that are willing to follow, him whithersoever he in his* Requirings
may lead; Glory to his blessed Name forever.

I say, the consideration of the Lord's wonderful Dealing with people, but more
especially with the Young Ones in our Family, constrains me at this time to
open my Mouth, in my small Measure, to declare of his Wonderful and
Soul-ravishing Virtue, livingly witnessed to, in my Measure, and also am an Eye
and Ear-Witness, but which is more, I find it sealed in my heart, that the Lord
has begun a blessed Work in and among the Younger sort, so that I can say in
Truth, The Lord has been here, the blessed Effects whereof do sufficiently
declare it: Oh! how is my Soul overjoyed when I see that wild Nature, which
bore rule in some, changed and brought under, so that I may justly say with the
Prophet, and do witness the same, both in my own particular, as also I declare
it on the behalf of the Children, That in some I see instead of the Thorns
comes up the Fir Tree, and instead of the Bryar comes up the Myrtle tree, and
it is for the Lord a Name, for an Everlasting Sign that shall not be cut off.
This has been the End and Tendency of all the Upright hearted Ones in their
Labor and daily Exercise in this Family, who are more nearly concerned in
them. And, Oh! let all Heart* join with me at this time, and at all times, to
Praise and Extol the God of all Goodness, who in his Love has given us an
Earnest of our Desires, which is more to us than Thousands of Silver or Gold!
This the Lord has been bringing to pass for several years past by his Almighty
Power and Out-stretches Arm invisibly in the Hearts of the Young Ones, and now
is more mani^estly begun to show forth his Power, to the melting of the
Rocky-hearted, and tendering of them into Tears, which was livingly witnessed to
by many, who felt the Power of the Almighty to overshadow them, in a Wonderful
and Soul ravishing manner, at our fourth day's Meeting in Waltham. Abbey; so
that in the Sense of the goodness of the Lord tendered to my Soul, and the Souls
of the Children there present, I was broken into Tears, having a deep sense of
the Work of the Lord in my own particular to work in my Heart; as also, I was
overcome with Joy to feel the Lord's Power so wonderfully to work on the
Children Minds, that they were melted and broken to the Amazement of many there
present, who never saw such a Day, nor witnessed the Lord's Power to change
them in their Minds: Oh! but what Joy? what comfort? what Satisfaction
unutterable was ministered to them, who waited upon the Lord for this, to see
their Expectation answered in this Matter? what greater Joy could be afforded?
surely none.

I can truly say, it was more to me (I hope to my dying Day never to forget it)
then all Visible or Created Comforts whatsoever. And so as the Lord did in a
wonderful manner break forth in his Living Power upon the 4th day, being the
4th day of the 4th Month, so we have witnessed since, and do witness daily
(Praises to our God for it) the same Arm of Power to work in our
Family-Meetings; so that forsome Nights we have gone to Bed with the Tears in
our Eyes, being filled with the Love of so tender and merciful a Father, who
thus had visited us in his love, and filled our Hearts with unexpressible Joy:
And this I say more on the behalf of the Children, that some have been so
livingly refreshed in our Evening-Meetings, that after they have been in Bed,
their Sleep has been taken from them for several hours together, and their
Souls have been filled with Praises and Thanksgivings more then could be
uttered.

This I was constrained to say for the Lord, that he is no hard Master, that he
takes no pleasure in the Death of Sinners, but thus even in our day, as of Old,
so fatherly, tenderly, and condescendingly he deals with People, even with the
tenderaged, as to accommodate himself in his appearance, to their Capacities,
that they may feel him at work in their inward parts, who works all his
Childrens work in them and for them, to the everlasting renown and praise of
his worthy Name forever.

Now let all be invited hereby to bow and submit their Necks to the Yoke of
Christ, and let them be made willing to take it upon them; for truly it is
light to them that are made willing in the day of his mighty Power. Further,
let me entreat all who have been sharers with me in this late and continued
Heartbreaking-Power, to walk worthy of the same, that we together may pass the
time of our sojourning here in fear, that in the end when we shall lay down
these Tabernacles, we may be admitted unto the full Fruition and complete
Enjoyment of his favor, who has called us, and that very early, whose favor
is better then Life, whereof of late we have had a larg earnest, to the
refreshing of our Souls, and the establishing of them in his fear, Everlasting
Praises, Glory, and Renown, be sounded forth unto our bountiful Lord and Master
Christ Jesus, World without End, Amen.

A. PATERSONE.

THE END.

