EPISTLE FROM THE Women's Yearly Meeting at York, 1688. AND An EPISTLE from Mary
Wait.

A TESTIMONY for the Lord and his Truth, given forth by the women friends, at
their yearly meeting, at York, being a tender salutation of love, to their
friends and sisters, in their several monthly meetings, in this county, and
else where, greeting.
Dear friends and sisters,
WE, being met together in the fear of the Lord, to wait upon him for his
ancient power, to order us, and, in his wisdom and counsel, to guide us in our
exercise relating to church affairs: It has pleased him to break in among us
in a glorious manner, to our great satisfaction, and he has filled our meeting
with his living presence, and crowned our assembly with his heavenly power, and
opened the fountain of life unto us, and caused the streams of his love freely
to flow among us, and run from vessel to vessel, to the gladding of our hearts,
which causes living praise, and hearty thanksgiving to be rendered unto him,
who alone is worthy. And, friends, we hereby signify to you, that there has
been many living testimonies delivered among us from the divine openings of the
spirit of life, in many brethren and sisters, whereby we are fully satisfied
that the Lord is well pleased with this our service, and does accept our
sacrifices and free will offerings, and returns an answer of peace unto our
bosoms, which is greatly our reward. Here has also been brought several
testimonies in writing from diverse of our monthly meetings, to our great
satisfaction, touching the care of friends for the honor of God, and
prosperity of truth in one another. And, dear friends, in that unchangeable
love and precious truth of our God, we dearly salute you, wherein our relation
and acquaintance with him, and one with another, in spirit, is daily renewed,
and our care and concern for his honor, and one another's good, is still
continued; and therein we see there is as great need as ever to watch over one
another for good; though it has pleased God, in his infinite mercy and love, to
give us a day of ease and liberty, as to the outward, and has broken the bonds
of many captives, and has set the oppressed free, and has opened the prison
doors in a great measure: living praises be given him for ever! And now,
friends, it is our desire that we all may make a right use of it, and answer
the end of the Lord in it, and neither take nor give liberty to that part in
any which may give the Lord occasion to suffer our bonds to be renewed, but in
his fear and holy awe walk humbly before him, in a holy and self-denying life,
under the cross of Christ Jesus, which daily crucifies us to the world, and the
world to us, and teaches us to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to
live righteously and soberly in this present world, that by our holy lives and
righteous conversation, others, seeing our good works, may glorify our heavenly
Father, and that, by our truth-like and Christian behavior, and upright
dealing in all our affairs among the children of men, we may walk as becomes
the truth. And, dear friends, join not with any sort of people further than
will stand with truth's honor, and reach God's witness in every conscience,
but as much as in you lies live peaceably with all men, and do good unto all,
especially unto the household of faith, and so daily fulfill the royal law of
love, in showing to all men that you are Christ's disciples, by loving him and
one another. And, friends, we cannot but warn you of the separating and
quarrelling spirit which leads unto strife, contention and jangling, and would
thereby lay waste your concern for God's honor, and one another's good; this
is that old adversary and enemy of mankind, who, in all ages, went about like a
roaring lion, seeking whom he might devour, and, as a ravenous wolf, sometimes
gets the sheeps clothing, and never wants specious pretenses to accomplish his
design, and bring about his end, which is to divide, read, tear, destroy and
separate from God and one another; and would lay waste the heritage of God, and
make spoil of his plantation, and leave his tender plants without care, in the
briars and thorns, and every hurtful weed to wrap about them to hinder their
growth, and draw them out of their order, by reason of which, as in the days of
old, the way of truth might be evil spoken of. The Lord disappoint him of his
purpose, and frustrate him of his end, is our prayer, and keep him livingly
sensible, that the end of the Lord, in all his fatherly corrections, gentle
chastisements, and kind reproofs, has been to preserve us from the snares of
the enemy. Therefore, dear friends, be concerned for the preservation of one
another in every of your respective monthly meetings, and be faithful in
performing your service and duty to God, and to one another, as he opens it in
you, and lays it upon you, in exhortation, admonition and reproof, in tender
love, for so it will be as the balm of Gilead unto those who are wounded by the
wiles of the enemy; for, dear friends, it is the very end of our travel and
labor of love, that the hungry may be fed, the naked clothed, the weak
strengthened, the feeble comforted, and the wounded healed. So that the very
weakest, and hindermost of the flock, may be gathered into the fold of rest and
safety, where no destroyer can come, where the ransomed and redeemed by the
Lord have the songs of deliverance and high praise in their mouths, giving him
the honor, who alone is worthy for ever. And, friends, let us ever remember
the tender dealing and mercies of the Lord to us, and that it was not for our
deserts, nor any worthiness in us, but his own good will, and for his seed
sake, in which he heard our many cries, and had regard to our tears, and helped
us through many exercises and trials inwardly and outwardly, and has been our
rock and refuge, and our sure hiding place, in many storms and exercises; and
yet preserves in perfect peace all those that trust in him, who keep his new
creation full of joy; and the voice of thanksgiving and melody is heard in our
land, and the Lord becomes unto us the place of broad rivers, and makes us
before him as well watered gardens, and affects our hearts with his divine love
to praise his name. And now to you young women, whom our souls love, and whom
the Lord delights to do good unto, and has visited with the tastes of his
love, be you ordered by him in all things, that, in your modest and chaste
behavior, your comely and decent dresses in your apparel, and in all other
things you may be good examples to others, not only those that are without, but
to some professing of the faith, that in the line of life, and language of
truth, we may speak one to another and say, Arise, ye daughters of Sion, shake
yourselves from the dust of the earth, put on the beautiful garments, even the
robes of righteousness, the saints clothing, the ornament of a meek and quiet
spirit. And be not too careful for preferment or riches in this world, but be
careful to know the Lord to be your portion and the lot of your inheritance.
Then testimonies will arise as in the days of old; our lot is fallen in a good
ground, we have large possessions. And, friends, be not concerned in reference
to marriage out of God's fear, but first wait to know your Maker to become your
husband and the bridegroom of your souls, then you will come to know that you
are not your own, but that he must have the ordering and disposing of you, in
soul, body and spirit, which are all his; for he, being the only one unto you,
and the chiefest of ten thousand among you, will be your beloved and your
friend. Oh! friends, this state is happy, and blessed are they that attain it,
and live in it; the Lord is not unmindful of them, but in his own time, if he
see it good for them, can provide meet helps for them; then will your marriage
be honorable, being orderly accomplished with the assent of parents, and the
unity of friends, and an honor to God, and comfort to your own souls: then
husbands and children are a blessing in the hands of the Lord, and you will
arise in your day, age and generation, as mothers in Israel, as those holy
ancients whose living testimonies reaches unto us, and blessed memories lives
with us according to our measures; as Lydia open hearted to God and one to
another, as Dorcas careful to do one another good, as Deborah concerned in the
common wealth of Israel, and as Iael zealous for the truth, who was praised
above women. And you, friends, who are under the present concern, and in your
day's work, do it not negligently, not with careless minds, but be you diligent
in every of your women's meetings, and order two faithful women in every meeting
to take the care upon them, and so far as may answer truth, do you endeavor
that nothing be practiced among you, but what tends to God's honor, and one
another's comfort; let nothing be indulged or connived at in any, whereby truth
is dishonored, and let that be cherished and encouraged in all wherewith truth
is honored; and these our testimonies cast not carelessly into a corner, but
some time peruse them, and mark well the wholesome advice therein; that our
travel may be answered, the Lord honored, and you reap the benefit; and let a
record be kept from month to month, and from year to year, of the Lord's
dealing with us, and mercy to us, to future ages; that from age to age, and one
generation to another, his own works may praise him, to whom all praises do
belong, and be ascribed both now and for ever.

From our yearly meeting at York, the 28th of the 4th month, 1688. Signed on
the behalf of the meeting by Catharine Whitton Judith Boulby Elizabeth Sedman
Frances Tailor Mary Wait Deborah Winn Eliz. Beckwith Mary Lindley


A WARNING to all friends, who profess the everlasting truth of God, which he
has revealed and made manifest in this his blessed day, whether on this side,
or beyond the seas.
Dear friends,
IN tender bowels of love do I feel, from the Lord, a warning spring in my
heart to you, that you all may be kept low in his humble self-denying life,
where safety is to be found; for, assuredly, the great and notable day of the
Lord is at hand, in which he will arise in the greatness of his strength, to
plead the cause of his suffering seed with all its enemies, whether within or
without.

So all dear friends be faithful under your several dispensations; for in our
Father's house are many mansions. Keep in the low valleys, for there will be
your safety, there will the green pastures of God's love be partaken of, and
with such will he delight to dwell. So, all friends, keep to your watch, that
the day of the Lord come not in an hour you look not for it, and so you receive
the unfaithful servant's reward; for indeed, friends, my soul is in a great
travel for the prosperity of Sion, that her walls may be builded, her breaches
repaired and made up; for, for many months, yea some years, has my spirit been
bowed down, and groaned under the sense of an easeful, selfish, lukewarm
spirit, that has crept in upon many for want of watchfulness, and keeping to
the daily cross of Christ Jesus, and in the narrow way and savoury life, that
only will bring honor and praise to the name of the Lord. And how to be eased
of these weights and burdens I did not know: my cry was to the Lord, that he
would give me wisdom and strength to do his will. And it pleased him to lay his
hand upon me, and bring me near to the gates of death, so far as I saw; and was
pleased to hide himself from me, and my soul was in a languishing condition,
and my cries were great unto the Lord, that he would not hide his face from me,
but let me feel of his wonted goodness and mercy, by which I had received daily
comfort and satisfaction from him in his unerring path, in which he had been
pleased to lead me. And, at length, the Lord appeared, and said he would be my
physician, and cure my disease, and came in and comforted my spirit with his
overcoming love, which greatly revived me. And in the openings of the bowels of
his endless love, he showed me a terrible day drew near, even, as one may say,
at the door, and laid it upon me, to go warn his people in this city, and
elsewhere, to depart from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, from all
lukewarmness, from the fashions, customs and friendships of this world; from
pride, covetousness, and every sin that separateth from the Lord, and brings
dryness, barrenness and deadness upon many, and makes as unsavory salt, that is
good for nothing, but to be cast forth and trodden upon.

And to warn them not to delay time, but come into the true humility, lowliness
of spirit, and self-denying life, that the Lord might be a hiding place to
them, for terrible will that day be to all the unfaithful and disobedient. All
the sinners in Sion shall be afraid, fearfulness shall take hold on the
hypocrite, dread and horror shall surprise them. O whither will you unfaithful
fly! Would you not be glad that either rocks or mountains could hide you from
the presence of the Lord, and the wrath of the Lamb? O this will be a terrible
day indeed unto all those that have had a form of godliness, but denied the
power that would have saved them out of all defilements and pollutions of this
world.

For long has the spirit of the Lord been grieved with these, who have long
come and sitten among God's people, as if they had been of them, but never came
to sink down to the heart searching light of Christ Jesus in them, that by it
they might be cleansed from all secret and open sins, from every Dalilah that
lodges in the bosom, as pride and covetousness, which often the one attends
the other; covetousness, says the servant of the Lord, is the root of all
evil, and advised them to fly from it; but who abide not in the spirit of
judgment, and of burning, which God has prepared to purge away the filth of
the daughter of Sion, their filth has not been purged or done away, which
causes many miscarriages, blots and stains, and great reflections have such
brought upon the blessed truth, and much dirt has been thrown on the pure,
holy, and undefiled way of the Lord, which he has cast up for the ransomed to
walk in, and so through the unfaithfulness and uneven walking of such, the name
of the Lord has been greatly dishonored, his spirit grieved, and the hearts
of the righteous made sad. And many a wounded soul there is among the Lord's
people, who are bowed under these weights and pressures; but assuredly the day
hastens that every one must bear their own burden, and the Lord will ease his
innocent ones, who have been bowed down before him, and have mourned and
groaned under these things; yea the day hastens, that the unfaithful and
disobedient shall bear their own burdens. And the Lord will arise for his own
name and glory sake, and will ease him of his enemies, and avenge him of his
adversaries, and take to himself his great power, that he may reign and rule in
the hearts of his, that faithfully labor in his work, and order their
conversations aright before him. His glory shall rest upon them, for he will
not give it to another seed or birth, but to Christ Jesus the seed of the
woman, who was given to bruise the serpent's head; he has born the iniquities
of all, and been pressed under them as a cart with sheaves; his face has been
more marred than any man's, and his voice not heard in the streets, no beauty
nor comeliness seen in him; and, because he has been a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief, therefore has he been passed by, and not regarded, but
the Lord will make him the joy of many generations, and his Sion the praise of
the whole earth.

Therefore, dear friends, love him with all your souls, and be you delighted in
him above all enjoyments whatever, that you may lie down in the bosom of his
love, and be nourished by his side, as children of our heavenly Father,
begotten by the immortal word of life, to live and reign here in it, and, when
time shall be no more, enter into that blessed rest prepared for all those that
have obeyed his glorious gospel; and though as yet we be but as the gleaning of
the vintage, yet the Lord has many to gather, yea the numberless number shall
be gathered, and great will be the work of our God, which he is bringing to
pass in this his blessed day; it cannot be declared as it is seen and felt in
the spirit.

So, friends, be faithful in the work of your day, be valiant for the Lord and
his blessed truth; come up in the nobility of his life, and stand faithful
witnesses for him; for we are the city set upon a hill, yea battle axes in
God's hand, though our weapons are not carnal, but spiritual and mighty,
through the power of God, to the pulling down the strong holds of sin and
satan. Friends, we are they whom the Lord has raised to hold forth Christ
Jesus, whom he has given for an ensign to the nations, unto whom all the ends
of the earth must come for salvation.

So, dear friends, let your light shine forth before men, that they may see
your good works, and glorify your heavenly Father, so that by your godly life
and holy conversation many may enquire the way to Sion.

All friends be faithful, and keep your meetings in the fear of the Lord; be
diligent in his work, for the woe and curse belongs to them that do the Lord's
work negligently, or with careless minds, and it is come on some already, and
will come more upon others, if by speedy repentance they return not unto the
Lord. So be zealous for the Lord and his truth, and, as much as in you lies,
gather orderly together as near the time as possible, that the meeting is
appointed at; for disorderly coming has been a hurt and burdened the faithful,
who dare not be negligent in the Lord's work, and often they have waited a
considerable season, and God's power has been felt, and the manifold grace of
God been dispensed among us and then others come in and miss of the counsels,
admonitions and refreshments, which the Lord, by the operation of his blessed
spirit, hands forth to his people, and so, for want of zeal in coming duly to
meeting, especially on the week days, truth has not grown in them, but such
have long traveled in the wilderness, and many carcases fallen there, and so,
for want of zeal and faithfulness, the enemy has crept in, and darkened many
minds, where once there was tender good desires raised after God. So all have
need to be faithful, and wait diligently every opportunity the Lord gives you
to feel your strength renewed; for in the world are many encumbrances and
intanglements, some on one hand, and some on another, to draw the mind from
God, and but one to draw it to him; so there is great need of holy zeal and
diligence, in observeing the time to wait upon the Lord to feel your strength
renewed, to help through the many things, and his power to strengthen and
support, that in your families, and all your undertakings, you may be a good
savor to the Lord, being guided by his wisdom to rule and order your children
and servants, and he will give authority to stand over every thing that is
contrary to his witness. And in the fear of the Lord I warn and exhort all
parents not to wink or connive at any sin in your children, as you tender their
everlasting well being; let no sin go unreproved or uncorrected, but take the
wise man's counsel, who says, Folly is bound up in the heart of a child, but
the rod of correction must drive it out, and he that corrects his child shall
deliver his soul from death. So, friends, train up your children in the blessed
truth and fear of the Lord, so may you have hope they will not depart from it
when they are old. And take heed of giving way or suffering them to get into
pride, and the vain and foolish fashions, which are a shame to sober people,
and a great inlet to many evils, for they are prone to that by nature, and it
may soon be set up, but hard to get it down. So, friends, keep the yoke upon
that nature that is proud, stubborn, or disobedient to parents, break that will
in them betimes which comes from the evil one, and bend them while they are
young, lest when they grow up you cannot. And then you may sorrow greatly when
it is too late; for by your overlooking their folly or pride, the wrong nature
grows in them to a strong head, whereby you have helped them forwards in the
broad way which leads to destruction, and their blood may come to be required
at your hands. Ah, friends! friends! as much as in you lies keep down the evil,
and the good will arise, then there will be room for the tender seed to grow up
in them, and they will bless the Lord on your behalfs, for your love and care
of their immortal souls.

And all masters and mistresses of families, keep in the dominion of truth,
that in it you may rule over every unclean thing, and wrong spirit, that is
contrary to the Lord, that you abiding in him who is the highest power, and
higher than the powers of darkness, may in it keep your authority in your
families; and look that all be kept sweet and clean out of the condemnable
state, first in yourselves, and then in your families, to see that all
wildness, wantonness and rudeness, be kept under by the power, yea every thing
that would blot or stain the precious truth. And then if the Lord requires any
service or testimony of any of you, for his name and blessed truth, that all
may be clear in yourselves, and justified by God's witness, that you have stood
in his counsel and authority in your families, and been good examples in life
and conversation, by keeping your own houses in order, and ruling there for
God; then may you openly with boldness appear for the Lord, and thresh down sin
and every evil way, in the power and authority of his life, that none may have
any thing to accuse any of you on the accounts above mentioned. And, dear
friends, all keep in the savoury life; but more especially you who are drawn
forth to bear public testimony for the Lord and his blessed truth, keep you to
the watch, that at all times, places, and on all occasions, your lives may
preach for God, by a clean unspotted conversation, which is the crown of all
the faithful, who labor in the work of the Lord, and are upright before him;
his glory shall rest upon them, and their reward is sure.

Now unto all you young people, sons and daughters, apprentices, men or maid
servants, all that are convinced of God's truth, and the way that leads to
everlasting life and happiness, be you all faithful to God's witness in you,
and mind the motions and operations of it, that thereby you may be changed, and
all judge out what is contrary to his pure witness; let not your minds wander,
neither look at the vanities in this world, for Christ's kingdom is not of it,
nor to be found in pride, wantonness, and lust of the flesh, the fashions,
customs, and friendships of this world, for the devil is the king of pride, and
all its antecedents, that lead to the gates of hell and everlasting
destruction, where there is woe and misery, and that for ever more, where the
worm never dies, the fire never goes out; so all you young and tender ones,
where desires are begotten after God, keep you low in his fear, and to the
daily cross, that all the contrary may be crucified, and all the enmity slain
upon it. For every one that will be a disciple of Christ Jesus must come into
the self-denying life. You cannot have two kingdoms; so my advice to you all
is, stoop to Christ's appearance in you, he who invites all to come and learn
of him, who is meek and lowly, and you shall find rest to your souls. So all be
faithful in your several places and the exercises you may be under, that you
may grow in grace, and in the fear and wisdom of God. Let not your eyes look
out at others, but mind your own conditions; for, if you do, it will spy many
faults in others, and may be overlook more at home. This hinders the growth of
many, so all wait low within to feel your growth in the blessed truth, and know
how the work goes on, and whether thou feel God's love, mercy and goodness,
renewed to thee day by day, or not; for your accounts will be for the deeds
done in your bodies, and not for others, so every one is to labor to know your
calling and election made sure.

And you that are apprentices keep in the truth, love and obey it, for it will
keep you faithful in your places, and out of every deceitful way, performing
them not with eye service, but with singleness of heart, as unto the Lord, from
whom you must receive a reward. And if the enemy entice, consent not, though he
come in with never so fair pretenses, That thou may deceive thy master, and
it will never be known, etc. or purloin or waste his Goods: believe him not, he
is a liar, and the father of lies; for there is an eye that sees in secret,
which will bring all the hidden deeds of darkness to light, and every work to
judgment. So as thy work is, shall be thy reward. But fear the Lord and obey
his voice in thee, and he will deliver thee out of every unclean way and
polluted path, by his dear son Christ Jesus, whom he has given for a high way
of holiness, and a restorer of paths to dwell in. Glory to his Name for ever
says the redeemed, who are now returning unto Sion with songs of deliverance
in their mouths, and everlasting high praises are sounded unto him, by those
whose garments are made white in the blood of the Lamb, for Sion's redeemer is
come, the taker away of sin and iniquity is made manifest, the mourners in Sion
comforted, the weary travelers are refreshed, the feeble knees are
strengthened, the broken spirit bound up, and the wounded soul has oil poured
in: who can but rejoice and be exceeding glad? for he has put a new song in
our mouths, he has given his people beauty for ashes, and, instead of
heaviness, the spirit of praise. All that know him will speak well of his name,
for all the noble acts he has brought to pass for his children. My soul is
greatly affected in the remembrance of the Lord's numberless mercies (to me)
and a little remnant whom he has plucked as brands out of the fire, to show
forth his praises, and declare of his goodness in the land of the living, to
hold forth Christ, the way to the Father, to the nations, that his scattered
seed may be gathered from all the ends of the earth.

So I have cleared my spirit of what has long lain upon me, and discharged my
conscience, in delivering the Lord's message faithfully, according to the
ability he has given me. And so am clear in my spirit: The Lord set it home
upon every heart whom it may concern, and that it may be received in the same
bowels of love it was given forth. Then shall I have my reward, and the Lord
his glory. And so shall return to my tent, and enter into the hole of the rock,
where safety is to be found, till the indignation be over past; and in the
endless unchangeable love of God do I salute you, and bid you farewell in the
Lord.

MARY WAIT.
York, the 10th of the 2d month, 1679. Let this be read in friends meetings,
when they are gathered together, in the fear of the Lord, and in his weighty
savoury life.



FINIS.

