A Testimony from the People of God, Called QUAKERS, AGAINST Many Lying and
Slanderous Books, and a Ballad lately published in Envy and Malice, to render
the said People odious, and accusing them of things they are clear of.
Whereas there was lately published a Ballad, called, a Wenching Quaker, or
the Rosemary-Lane Wonder, Being a Chandler, dwelling in Rosemary-Lane, as the
Ballad specifieth; which has been enquired after; and a Testimony from the
Inhabitants, Neighbors, and Officers was taken as follows; viz, That the
Party intended in the Ballad neither is, nor ever heretofore was reputed or
accounted to be a Quaker by any that knows him; and if occasion be, many of the
Inhabitants may be brought, to testify to the truth hereof: And this is
written for the clearing of the Truth, and taking off all Aspertions, Lies, and
Slanders that are cast upon the People of God called Quakers, by Liars and
Slanderers; but we know it is no new thing; for when at any time any wicked
action is done by any bad Person, then envious People are ready to cast it as a
reproach upon us the People of God aforesaid; and make Ballads and Books of it,
thinking by so doing it will sell the better, and they shall get the more money
for it; and so the Sayings of Christ are fulfilled, They shall speak all manner
of evil of you falsely for my Name sake; but rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for
happy are ye.

And there are several lying Pamphlets, and bundles of Lies scattered up and
down the City and Country against us called Quakers; that is to say, There are
two of Robert Riches, and several of Mugletons, the Tailor; and of Robert
Cobbet, the Tailor; and of a shameless woman, one Elizabeth Atkinson, that
sells Meal and Bread; and one of Rice Jones, Welch-man; and a lying
slanderous Pamphlet of Nathaniel Smiths, a Shoemaker, who would have been
called a Doctor, but he was sufficiently known, and the Lord cut him off by
death before he got his wicked work published; also there is another envious
Book against the Principles of Truth, written by Robert Gorden Scotch-man,
which Michael Stancliffe Hosier helps to spread up and down; and formerly
another railing, slanderous, and lying Pamphlet of one Bunions, the Tinker, and
another, called, News from Cambridge, where the Judgments of God were seen upon
the woman, who was a drunken Sot, and the ground of that scandalous Book; who
afterward hanged her self. All which lying and slanderous Books we testify
against; for by Printing their Lies and Slanders they think to render us odious
to the World, and to set the Magistrates against us, and the rude Multitude
upon us; but the Lord does clear his People, and preserve his Heritage, and the
slanderous Lips and lying Tongue he does abhor; and we know that modest and
sober People, and the Neighbors will not receive such things against an
innocent People; but the rude Multitude, that are nearest to the Slanderer, and
Liar, and that is the Devils last shift, when he cannot resist the Principles
of Truth, then he will invent Lies and Slanders, and cast them upon the Truth,
and the People of God; and such as are given up to believe Lies are the nearest
(to them that invent such Lies and Slanders) to receive them, but the clamorous
spirit plucks his own house upon his head.

And these scandalous Pamphlets stuffed full of Lies by envious spirits, against
the People of God called Quakers; some of them are not worth the answering, or
bestowing Paper upon, more then what is already written in answer to them; for
we are so well known, and our Principles are so well known to sober People,
that they will not give credit to their Lies and Slanders, vented from their
envious malicious spirits, which they are well known most of them: For all
unrighteousness and ungodliness, either private or public, our Principle of
Truth, which leads us to Christ, the second Adam, and Heavenly-Man, does teach
us to deny, and to love Virtue, Righteousness, and Holiness, without which none
shall see the Lord; and so we can defy all the Regiment of Slanderers and
Ballad-mongers, with all their Scandals and lying Pamphlets, and we are over
them in the Truth, and their end will be according to their works.

And further to clear the precious Truth professed by us, called Quakers, We
testify against all disorderly, loose, and profane spirits and persons; and
when any are manifest, or found out to be in any uncleanness, wickedness, or
scandalous enormous actions, who have feignedly come sometimes to our Meetings
(some of whose own party have watched for wickedness, and then set it to sale)
We deny and reject it and them (whatever they pretend or profess) as
Instruments in the Devils hand to gratify his Followers (who rejoice in
Iniquity) by raising Blasphemies and Reproaches against the Innocent, and the
Truth it self. And we do not own Society with such as are disobedient and
corrupt, who hold the Truth in unrighteousness; neither can we own or receive
them or any such, until they truly repent and reform; for true Judgment amongst
us is set upon the head of all deceit and wickedness.

London the 11th of the 2d Month, 1670. From the People of God, called
Quakers, and is to go abroad in all Cities, Towns, and Countries where those
Lying Pamphlets and Ballads have been spread.

