A LIGHT to the LONGITVDE: OR The Use of an INSTRUMENT CALLED The SEAMAN'S
DIRECTOR.

SPEEDILY Resolving all Astronomical Cases and Questions Concerning the SUN,
MOON, and STARS.

WITH Several Propositions whereby Seamen may find at what Meridian and
Longitude they are at, in all Parts of the WORLD.

Published for the Advance of NAVIGATION.

By Robert Theaker.

LICENSED, June 28. 1665.

Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid for William Fisher at the Postern-Gate near
Tower Hill. 1665.

The CONTENTS.
THE Description of the Upper Moving-Sphere or Plain, representing the
Celestial Globe. Page 3. Having the day of the Month known. To find the Sun's
Declination, his place, Sign, and Degree in the Ecliptic, and his right
Ascension in Degrees and Minutes or in Hours and Minutes. p. 5. The Sun's place
in the Ecliptic being known, to find the Hour and Minute of the Sun's Rising
or Setting any day of the Year. p. 6. To find any fixed Stars Declination,
right Ascension in Degrees and Minutes, or in Hours and Minutes, his place,
Sign, and Degree, or Longitude in the Ecliptic, and day of the Month belonging
to that Star. p. 8. To find, every day in the Year, when any of the fixed Stars
comes to the South. p. 10. To find, every day in the Year, when any of the
fixed Stars Rises or Sets. p. 11. To find the Sun's Rising or Setting the
same way as you find the Stars Rising or Setting. p. 12. To find the Sun's
Altitude, every day of the year, when he comes to the Meridian. p. 14. To find,
every day, how many Degrees the Sun or Stars dippeth or goes under the Horizon
at Midnight; Also to find the Amplitude of the Sun or Stars, every day in the
year, at their Rising or Setting. p. 15. To find at all times when the North
Star is directly South above the Pole, or North under the Pole. p. 17. To Draw
the Parallels of the Sun or Stars Declinations, and thereby to know when they
Rise or Set, or whether they Rise or Set at all. ibid. To find, every Day in
the year, at what time any of the Planets comes to the South. p. 18. To find
the true Distance of the Moon's Motion from the Sun. p. 19. To find the
longitude, by knowing when any of the fixed Stars comes to the South. p. 20.
To find exactly the True Meridian and Longitude of the City of London. p. 22.
The first of April, I demand how the proper and particular Meridian and
Longitude of the City of London may be found and discovered, by this
Instrument. p. 23. To find the true Longitude of the City of London, at the
Sun's Setting. p. 24. To find the true Longitude of the City of London at the
Sun's Rising. p. 25. To find the true Longitude of the City of London by the
Moon when she comes to the South. p. 26. To find the true Longitude of the
City of London by the Moon when she comes to the South. p. 27. Two several
Questions by finding the Moon South to know what Meridian you are at. p. 29.
The first Question. ibid. The Rule and reason for turning the upper Sphere is
from 360 degrees. p. 31. To cut the Horizons for all Latitudes. p. 32.
To the KING's most excellent Majesty.
Dread Sovereign,
THese following endeavors having been brought first of all before Your Sacred
Majesty, who did not then despise the day of small things, but out of Your
Princely Favor granted Access, and had the patience to hear the Reasons and
Objections; Your Heroic Breast being truly inspired and persuaded, that the
greatest Mysteries and Matters in the world, were first made known and
discovered by plain men, and hid from the Learned; and so to this day the
greatest pretended natural knowledges are still overruled by practical
Proof-pieces; upon which considerations Your Majesty's faithful Subjects Robert
Theaker and Charles Saltonstall, after much expenses of money and time, are now
endeavoring to enable all practical Seamen, with the full knowledge of this
Instrument; and in regard Charles Saltonstall has made several long Voyages
and Discoveries, instructed and brought up a considerable number of expert
Navigators, (many of them being now in your Majesty's Service) it is hoped in
time he will also enable them with this knowledge, that their Proof-pieces may
give an end to all Objections: In which hope for the present I humbly lay all
down at Your Majesty's Feet, beseeching a favorable acceptance of this Mite,
which may prove more worth than the offerings of abundance. And so in all
obedience I submit my self to Your Majesty's Princely good will and pleasure,
desiring the great God of Heaven and Earth to grant Your Majesty a long,
prosperous, and happy Reign.

Your MAJESTY'S most humble and obedient Subject and Servant, Robert Theaker.

To the READER.
HAving for many years taken diligent notice of the Diurnal Motions of the
Heavens, and how the Sun, Moon, and Stars did daily pass, and appear to be
South once in 24 hours, at all the respective Meridians in the world. I did
apprehend that there might be contrived an Instrument which would readily
distinguish to all men at what particular Meridian and Longitude they were at
in all parts: And so did at last after many alterations and examinations
complete this Instrument, now called, A Light to the Longitude; which does in a
plain and facil way speedily Answer all Astronomical Propositions concerning
the Sun, Moon, and Stars, only by turning the upper Plain representing the
Heavens or Terrestrial Globe, without the knowledge of the doctrine of
Spherical Triangles, which many men did never attain to: Also by frequent
practice and a little Instruction in using this Instrument, all the
Constellations and fixed Stars in the heavens are readily found out and known
in all places at any hour of the Night, very helpful to practical Seamen in the
Art of Navigation, and being joined with the true nature and way of the turning
this Instrument, I suppose they will speedily find at what particular Meridian
they are at, which is indeed true Astronomical, Geographical, and
Hydrographical Longitude, and is not the measuring of Distances betwixt any two
Meridians by Pendulums, Sand-glasses, Water-glasses, etc. but offers to find
under which of the 360 Meridians all Islands, Head lands, Main-Lands, Cities
and Towns are truly Situated and Placec, against which there has been much
opposition endeavoring to darken and put out this Light to the Longitude: But
there was a person (very well known to most Navigators) which stood in the Gap,
and defended it from being quite extinguished, whose further Study and
endeavors I doubt not but will daily add more and more Light to this matter,
until at last practical Seamen gain the honor, and bring home their
undeniable Proof-pieces, and put an end to all Objections; And so for present I
leave all my endeavors to your favorable Construction, hoping they will prove
worthy of your Acceptance, and in time beneficial to all men.

Your Friend To. Theaker.

IF there be any one that desires to be more fully instructed in the use of
this Instrument, they may repair unto Charles Saltonstall Public Professor and
Teacher of the Mathematics, living near the Postern-gate on East-Tower-hill,
who will satisfy their desires.

The full Description of an Instrument lately Invented by Robert Theaker, but
now upon his request explained, and the manifold Uses thereof written for the
general good, by Charles Saltonstal, Professor and Practitioner of the
Mathematick, near the Postern-gate on East-Tower-hill.
THIS Instrument consists of two Plains, the lowermost represents the
Terrestrial Globe, and stands fixed, and is not to be removed at all, and
thereupon is delineated and drawn three distinct hour Circles; the outwardmost
Circle is divided into 24 Hours, ending at Aries, and numbered into the East
with 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. until the whole Circle be counted round about to 24 hours
ending again at Aries where it first began. In this hour Circleis reckoned the
right Ascension of the Sun ot fixed Stars, according to time, or in Hours and
Minutes; The next, or second hour Circle I call Aries hour-Circle, because
Aries stands there betwixt 24 hours in the outward hour-Circle, and 12 hours in
the inward or third hour-Circle, and this hour-Circle is numbered from 12. of
the Clock at Noon the Meridian of London, into the West, with 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
to 12 of the Clock at Night; and from thence back again with 1, 2, 3 4, etc. to
12. of the Clock at Noon the Meridian of London, where it first began; now in
this hour-Circle is reckoned the time of Sunrising or Setting, the hour of any
fixed Stars Rising or Setting, and coming to the Sorth, as hereafter in the use
of this Instrument will more evidently appear; The third hour-Circle begins
at Aries with 12 of the Clock the beginning and ending of all Longitude in the
Equinoctial, where is also placed 360 degrees, and is numbered into the West
with 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. to 12 of the Clock, and from thence back again with 1, 2,
3, 4, etc. to 12 of the Clock where it first began, Aries; In this Circle is
reckoned the difference of time, as hereafter will amply appear; The next and
innermost Circle drawn upon this fixed Plain representing the Terrestrial Globe
is the Equinoctial beginning and ending at Aries with 360 degrees, Numbered into
the East with 10, 20, 30, etc. until it be counted round about, and then
concludes again with 360 degrees where it first began, the beginning and
ending of all Longitude upon the Earth; Then upon this lower fixed plain
representing the Terrestial Globe, there are drawn at every tenth degree from
the Equinoctial, straight Lines, all meeting in the Center, which is here in
this Projection counted the Pole of the World; then from that Center or Pole,
at every ten degrees Latitude or Breadth from the Equinoctial, there is drawn a
Concentrick Circle, which are numbered by Tens from the Equinoctial in this
manner, 10, 20, 30, 40, etc. concluding with 90 degrees in the Center, or Pole,
all graduated upon a moving Meridian turning about in the Center, which is here
counted the Pole of the World, by which means the Latitude of all places upon
the Terrestial Globe are readily discovered and made known; Then there are also
two small Protractors represented containing the 32 points of the Compass upon
this fixed Plain, which may be made of Brass, Horn, or Pastboard at pleasure,
by which means all Courses and Bearings betwixt place and place according to
the Terrestrial Globe, thus projected in Plano, wherein you may readily find
the Latitude, Longitude, Course, and Distance, betwixt any two places howsoever
situated upon the Terrestrial Globe: And by the Application of the upper Moving
or Turning Plain representing the Celestial Globe, many excellent Matters,
Operations and Conclusions in Astronomy are readily performed, and plainly
demonstrated according to the Motions of the Heavens, as will be hereafter
amply manifested.

The Description of the Upper Moving-Sphere or Plain, representing the
Celestial Globe.
IN this Upper Moving Plain or Sphere, upon the outward edg there is drawn the
Circle of Months numbered by tens, contrary to the Diurnal Motion, placing
always the tenth day of March at Aries, by which means you may there find any
day of the year you desire, and so know the exact time of the Sun or Stars
Rising, Setting, and coming to the South, as hereafter will amply appear: The
next and innermost Circle described upon that uppermost Moving Plain, or
Sphere, is the Equinoctial Circle Numbered by 10 degrees, 20, 30, 40, etc. into
the East, until you count round about to Aries again, and there end and finish
with 360 degrees, where you first began, in the same manner as the Equinoctial
is numbered and described on the lower fixed Plain; And from this Equinoctial is
reckoned the Sun or Stars Declination, upon another moving Meridian called an
Index, placed and turned about in the Center of this upper moving-Plain, as
hereafter in use will facilly appear; Then upon this upper Moving Sphere or
Plain there is described the Ecliptic Circle, being the pathway of the Sun,
and is numbered from Aries in the Northern Signs with 10 degrees, 20 degrees,
and then 30 degrees, and then beginning again from with 10 degr. 20 degr. and
then 30 degr. and so in the same manner numbering again from Gemini 10 degrees,
20 degrees, and 30 degrees to Cancer, attributing and allowing to each Sign 30
degrees; and so in the same manner are the Southern Signs numbered, beginning
from Libra with 10 degrees, 20 degrees, and then 30 degrees; and then beginning
again from Scorpio, with 10 degrees, 20 degrees, and then 30 degrees, etc.
reckoning still on in the same manner, until you have counted round about and
return again to Aries, where you first began; keeping the same order as you did
in the Northern Signs, allowing 30 degrees to each Sign; And on this Moving
Plain there is also a smaller Circle described representing the Tropicks of
Cancer and Capricorn touching the Ecliptic in the first minute of Cancer and
Capricorn; Cancer showing that the Sun's greatest Declination North, is 23
degrees 30 Minutes; and Capricorn shows the Sun's greatest declinations South
is also 23 degrees and 30 minutes, the Tropicks only showing the turnpoints in
the Ecliptic, as the word signifies, declaring and setting bounds to the Sun's
greatest Declinations North or South, not to exceed 23 degrees, 30 minutes, but
must then turn back again. There is also belonging to this moving Plain,
representing the Celestial Globe, a Moving Meridian I call an Index, graduated
both ways from the Equinoctial, numbered with 10 degrees, 20, 30, 40, etc.
concluding with 90 degrees in the Center or Pole of the World, and the whole
graduated Moving Meridian is exactly in length equal to the Diameter of the
Equinoctial described on that upper Moving Plain, and the other parts of this
Moving Meridian or Index, which are beyond or without the Graduated parts,
serves to cut the Circle of Months, the hour-Circles and Equinoctial
described, on the fixed or lower Plain, as the Case shall require. Lastly, there
is placed upon this Upper Sphere or Moving Plain, a Turning Horizon in the
Center, being to draw all Pannoles thereupon, and may be fitted for any
Latitude required, having two Indexes thereunto belonging, the Longer Index to
be applied for the Rising or Setting of the Sun, when he is in the Northern
Signs: or for the Southing, Rising, and Setting of the Northern Stars, and the
shorter Index is to be applied to the Meridian for the Rising, Setting, and
Southing the Southern Stars, or for the Sun when the Sun is in the Southern
Signs. These are all the parts of this Instrument described on the lower fixed
Plain representing the Terrestrial Globe; as also the Moving Upper Sphere, or
Plain, representing the Celestial Globe, which being well understood, and
rightly applied, will perform many excellent things in Navigation and Astronomy.

Having the day of the Month known. To find the Sun's Declination, his place
Sign, and Degree in the Ecliptic, and his right Ascension in Degrees and
Minutes or in Hours and Minutes.
THese propositions are all readily wrought by this Instrument by the Circles
described on the uppermost plain representing the Celestial Globe, and by the
outwardmost hour-Circle in the lower plain representing the Terrestrial Globe,
between the Equinoctial and the Center which is the Pole of the World: first
then I say, turn the uppermost Sphere, being the Celestial Globe, until Aries
there agree with Aries in the lowermost Shere representing the Terrestrial
Globe, then bring the moving Meridian or Index to the day of the Month wherein
you desire to know any of these several propositions, and you will then find
that the distance at that time in the upper plain betwixt the Equinoctial and
the Ecliptic, reckoned in the moving Meridian or Index, is the Sun's
declination; and the point or place cut in the Ecliptic at the same time by
the same moving Meridian or Index, shows the Sign, Degree, and Minute that
the Sun is in at that time. And the Degree and Minute then cut in the
Equinoctial, by the same moveing Meridian or Index, shows the Sun's right
Ascension in Degrees and Minutes, and then in the outwardmost Hour-Circle on
the lower plain the same moving Meridian or Index shows the Sun's right
Ascension in time or Hours and Minutes. So the 23d day of February you will
find by this Instrument that the Sun has 6 Degrees South declination, his
place and Sign in the Ecliptic 15 Degrees of Pisces one of the Southern Signs,
his right Ascension in Degrees 346 Degrees, whose complement to a whole Circle
is 14 Degrees, the distance from Aries the next Equinoctial point, and the time
of the Sun's right Ascension is in Hours and Minutes 23-4, and the complement
from Aries in time is 56 Minutes.

So in the same manner, the 20th day of April, if you desire to know the Sun's
Declination, his place, Sign, and Degree in the Ecliptic, his right Ascension,
in Degrees and Minutes, as also in Hours and Minutes; fix this Instrument in
all respects as before, making Aries in the upper plain and Aries in the lower
plain to stand right against each other, and then bring the moving Meridian or
Index to the 20th day of April, and you will then find the Suns declination is
15 degrees North, his place in the Ecliptic 10-8 Degrees eight Minutes of
Taurus, his right Ascension in Degrees from Aries; the next Equinoctial point
is 38 degrees, which in time is 2-32 Hours thirty two Minutes, as appears in
the outwardmost hour-Circle in the lower plain, where the moving Meridian
cutteth,

So the 31day of May you will find the Sun's declination 23-10 Degrees and ten
Minutes North, his place in the Ecliptic 19-50 nineteen Degrees and 50 Minutes
of Gemini, his right Ascension 78 Degrees from which in time is 5-12 Hours and
twelve Minutes, as appears in the lowermost outward hour Circle, and so in
the same manner all sorts of propositions of the like Nature.

Note all these five propositions: that is to say, the Sun's declination, the
Sun's place, the Degree and Sign, which the Sun is in every day, the Sun's
right Ascension in Degrees, the Sun's right Ascension in Hours, and Minutes,
are all answered at one operation, only by bringing the moving Meridian or
Index to the day of the Month, which is an exceeding great dispatch, and will
prove very profitable in Astronomical practices.

The Sun's place in the Ecliptic being known, to find the Hour and Minute of
the Sun's Rising or Setting any day of the Year.
THe Sun's place being found by this Instrument, as has been formerly taught;
bring the longest Index of the Horizontal plain having nothing but the pannage
there on graduated unto 12 a clock in Aries hour-Circle, the same Index then
cutting 20 Degrees of longitude in the lowermost plain, the longitude of the
City of London, and there keep that Horizontal Index fast, and then turn the
upper moving plain, representing the Celestial Globe, until the place of the
Sun in the Ecliptic come exactly to the plain Horizon, at which edg
inter^ecting or touch point keep the Ecliptic farst, and then bring the moving
Meridian or Index to that intersection, made by the meeting of the Sun in that
point in the Horizon, and then at that time in the East Hemisphere in Aries
hour-Circle, you will find the moving Meridian does there cut the Hour and
Minute of Sun rising, and in the West Hemisphere, the other end of the moving
Meridian in Aries hour-Circle does at the same time show the Hour and Minute of
Sun Setting; also at the same time the moving Meridian will show the Sun's
declination in the moving Meridian and day of the Month in the Circle of days
and Months, whether the Sun be either in any of the Northern Signs or Southern
Signs.

So the Sun being in the first Minute of Taurus, bring the longest Index of the
Horizon to 12 Hours and 20 Degrees in the lowermost fixed plain, and there keep
that Index fast; then turn about the upper moving Sphere until the first
Minute of Taurus in the Ecliptic intersect, touch or joyneth with the edge of
the plain Horizon, and there hold all fast together, and then bring the moveing
Meridian or Index to that point or intersection in the Horizon, and one end in
Aries hour Circle in the East Hemisphere will show the Sun Rises then at 5 a
clock in the Morning; and the other end at the same time in the West Semicircle
of the Sphere in Aries hour-Circle will show the Sun then Sets at 7 a clock
in the Afternoon. Note when you would know the time of Sun Rising, you must
count the hour from 12 in Aries hour-Circle backwards calling 11one, 10 two, 9
three 8 four, 7 five, 6 six, 5 seven etc. or having the hour of Sun Setting if
you substract that from 12, there will rest the hour of Sun Rising: so if the
Sun Rises at 5 that subtracted from 12 rests 7 a clock for Sun Setting, or
if the Sun Sets at 7 a clock that subtracted from 12 rests 5 hours for
the time of Sun Rising. Also now at the same time that end of the moving
Meridian or Index which cuts the Sun's place brought to the Horizon in the
Circle of days and months, will show that it is now the 10th day of April,
and that the Sun has now 11 Degrees and 35 minutes North declination accounted
in the moving Meridian or Index.

So in the same manner the 20 day of October, the Sun being then in the 7
Degree of Scorpio, by this Instrument, as has been formerly taught, you will
find the Sun Rises at 7 a clock 13 minutes past in the morning and Sets at 4
a clock 47 minutes past in the Afternoon: and in the Circle of Months the
moving Meridian will show then that it is the 20 day of October, and at the
same time on the moving Meridian or Index you will see the Sun has 14 Degrees
South declination; and so in the same manner you may find all these several
propositions: the Sun being in any Sign and Degree in the Ecliptic, in all
which you may facilly perceive, very great expedition and dispatch, which will
prove very useful to all practical Seamen, and such as have occasion to
inquire into these Astronomical cases.

To find any fixed Stars Declination, right Ascension in Degrees and Minutes,
or in Hours and Minutes, his place, Sign, and Degree, or Longitude in the
Ecliptic, and day of the Month belonging to that Star.
THese propositions are all readily wrought by this Instrument, by the
application of the great Circles, described on the uppermost moving Sphere or
plain representing the Terrestrial Globe, and by the moving Meridian or Index
thereon placed, with the help of the outwardmost hour-Circle placed on the
lower fixed plain representing the Terrestrial Globe; for if you turn the upper
plain until Aries in that plain agree or point directly with Aries in the
lower fixed plain representing the Terrestrial Globe, and there hold it fast,
and then bring the moving Meridian or Index to that Star whereof you desire to
know the declination, right Ascension in Degrees or Time, his place and Degree
or longitude in the Ecliptic, with the day of the Month belonging to that
Star, and there also hold that moving Meridian fast; and you will then find in
the moving Meridian that the distance betwixt the Equinoctial and the Star is
his declination, the Degrees cut in the Equinoctial his right Ascension in
Degrees, and the hour cut by the same moving Meridian or Index at the same time
in the outwardmost hour-Circle upon the lowermost fixed plain shows his right
Ascension in hours and minutes; also at the same time this moving Meridian or
Index does then cut in the Ecliptic the place, Sign, Degree, and longitude of
that Star: and lastly, this moving Meridian does then show in the Circle of
months the day of that month belonging to that Star wherein all these
Astronomical effects, cases, and conclusions come to pass.

So if you desire at any time to know the declination, right Ascension in
Degrees and Time, the place, Sign, Degree, and longitude of the fixed Star
called Orion's left shoulder: First turn the upper plain until Aries in that
moving plain be right against Aries in the lower fixed plain, and there keep
them together, then bring the moving Meridian or Index unto the Star called
Orion's left shoulder, and there also stay and hold fast that moving Meridian,
and then you will readily find the distance between that Star and the
Equinoctial reckoned in the moving Meridian is 6 Degrees, which is his
declination, North; and the same moving Meridian will then at the same time cut
77 Degrees in the Equinoctial, which is his right Ascension in Degrees, and
al^o at the same time cutteth in the outward hour Circle on the fixed plain 5
hours and 8 minutes, which is his right Ascension in time; and in the Ecliptic
the same moving Meridian at the same time cutteth 18 of Gemini which is his
place or longitude; and lastly, the same Index at the same time in the Circle
of Months shows that it is the 29th day of May, all which by this Instrument
is apparently manifested at one and the same time, which is a notable dispatch,
and worthy of observation. So again in the same manner, if you desire to find
all these Astronomical propositions concerning the Star called the Great Dog,
move as before the upper plain until Aries there stand right against Aries in
the lower fixed plain, then bring the moving. Meridian or Index to the Star
called the Great Dog, and you find the distance betwixt that Star and the
Equinoctial reckoned in the moving Merridian, is 16 Degrees 32 minutes, which
is his declination South, and at the same time this moving Meridian in the
Equinoctial shows his right Ascension is 98 Degrees, and in the outward
hour-Circle in the fixed plain shows 6 hours 32 minutes is the Great Dog's
right Ascension in time and then lastly cuts in the Ecliptic 7 Degrees of
Cancer which is the Great Dog's place or longitude, and in the Circle of Months
17 day 2 minutes of June, and so of all other Stars whatsoever.

To find, every day in the Year, when any of the fixed Stars comes to the South.
FIrst, bring the moving Meridian or Index to 12 hours in the lower fixed plain
in Aries hour-Circle, then the same Index at the same time will also cut 20
Degrees in the Equinoctial, described on the lower fixed plain, which is in
this projection accounted the longitude of the City of London, and there
keeping the moving Meridian fast, turn the upper plain representing the
Celestial Globe until the moving Meridian also cut the Starr which you desire
to know at what time it comes to be South, and there keep the Star fast, and
then turn the moving Index or Meridian to the day of any Month, and in Aries
hour-Circle the same moving Meridian will show the hour when that Star comes
to the South.

So the Star called the Great Dog being brought to stand right against 12 hours
and 20 Degrees in the lower fixed plain, and there kept fast, and then if you
turn the moving Index or Meridian to the first day of January, the same Index
will then show in Aries hour-Circle 11 a clock at night at which hour the Star
called the Great Dog comes to the South; and if you then keep the Instrument
unaltred, and turn the same moving Meridian to the first day of November, the
Index then in Aries hour-Circle will show 3 a clock 24 minutes in the morning,
which is the time when the Great Dog comes to the South: and on the first day
of December the Index shows 1 a clock 16 minutes in the morning for the hour
when the Great Dog comes to the South.

So in the same manner, if you would know when the Star called Orion's left
shoulder comes to the South, that Star brought to 12 hours and 20 Degrees in
the lowermost fixed plain, the longitude of London as before, the moving
Meridian brought to the first day of January will show 9 a clock 37 minutes past
in the afternoon, and then the Star called Orion's left shoulder comes to the
South.

To find, every day in the Year, when any of the fixed Stars Rises or Sets.
HEre in this case, if it be a Star that has North declination, bring the
longest Index of the moving Horizon, to 12 a clock in Aries hour-Circle, which
will then also cut the fixed Equinoctial 20 Degrees, the longitude of the City
of London according to this projection: but if it be a Star that has South
declination then bring the shortest Index of the moving Horizon, to 12 a clock
in Aries hour-Circle and 20 Degrees in the lowerm ost fixed Equinoctial as
before, and there keep the Horizontal Index fastand turn the upper moving
Sphere, or plain representing the Celestial Globe, until the Star, the time of
whose Rising you desire to know come exactly to touch the Circular edge of the
moving Horizon in the East Semicircle of the moving Sphere; or if you desire to
know the time of the Stars setting, turn the whole moving Sphere or plain
until the Star come to the Circular edg of the moving Horizon in the West
Semicircle of the moving Sphere; I call the East Semicircle that which is
contained betwixt Aries and Libra, the Ecliptic having thereon placed the six
Northern Signs viz. Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, and in the
Circle of months, April, May, June, July, August, September; and the other
Semicircle betwixt Aries and Libra contein the Southern Signs and the Circle of
months, March, February, January, December, November, I call the West
Semicircle: and in the East Semicircle I always contein the Sun or Stars
Rising, and in the West the Sun or Stars Setting: now the Star thus stated keep
all, turn the moving Index or Meridian to the day in the Circle of month
wherein you desire to know the time of that Stars Rising or setting, and the
same Index at the same time will show in Aries hour-Circle, the time of that
Stars Rising, if the Star touch the Horrizontal edg in the East Semicircle, or
in Aries hour-Circle, will show the time of the Stars Setting if the Star touch
the edg of the moveing Horizon in the West Semicircle of the Spheer.

So the Star called the Great Dog, if you desire to know the time of his Rising
the 10 day of March, (being the Star's declination is South) bring the shortest
Index of the moving Horizon to 12 of the Clock in Aries hour Circle, and to 20
degrees in the lower fixed Equinoctial; then keeping that Index there fast,
turn the whole moving Sphere or Plain until the Star called the Great Dog come
exactly to the edg of the Horizon in the East Semicircle, and then the moving
Index or Meridian brought to the 10 day of March, will show in Aries
hour-Circle, that the Great Dog rises at 1 of the Clock, 52 minutes in the
Afternoon, and sets at a 11 of the Clock and 8 minutes in the Afternoon, when
the Star is at the edg of the Moving Horizon, in the West Semicircle.

And after the same manner, if you desire to know when the Star called Orion's
left shoulder rises or sets the 10. day of March; now because the Star has
North declination, keep the longest Index of the moving Horizon on 12 of the
Clock in Aries hour Circle, and 20 degrees in the lower fixed Equinoctial as
before, then turn the upper Sphere or moving Plain until the Star, called
Orion's left shoulder, come to the edg of the Horizon in the East Semicircle,
and there keeping all fast, bring the moving Meridian to the 10 day of March,
and the same Index in Aries hour Circle will show that Orion's left shoulder
rises at 10 of the Clock and 40 minutes in the morning; and if the same Star
be brought to the edg of the moving Horizon, in the West Semicircle, and then
the moving Meridian brought to the 10. of March, the same Index will show in
Aries hour-Circle that the Orion's left shoulder sets at 11 of the Clock and 40
minutes in the Afternoon: and so of all others.

To find the Sun's Rising or Setting the same way as you find the Stars Rising
or Setting.
FOrmerly it has been showed, that when the Index of the Horizon was placed
upon the Meridian of London, at 12 hours and 20 degrees Longitude in the lower
fixed Plain, and there kept fast, then the place of the Sun brought to the
Horizon, and the moving Meridian to the day of the Month desired, one end of
that Index in the East Semicircle would then show the time of Sun Rising, and
the other the time of Sun Setting, but the Rising and Setting of the fixed
Stars could not be so found; for after the Index of the Horizon was kept at the
Meridian and Longitude of London, then the same Star was brought first to touch
the East part of the Horizon, and then according to the day proposed, the
moving Meridian did in Aries hour-Circle show the time of that Star's Rising,
and then the same Star brought again to touch the West part of the Horizon, and
the moving Meridian turned to the same day in Aries hour-Circle showed the time
of that Star's Setting; So in the same manner, if you please, you may employ
the place of the Sun to the East part of the Horizon for his Rising, and the
West part for his Setting; and the moving Meridian brought to the proposed day,
when the Sun is at the East part of the Horizon, will in Aries hour-Circle show
the time of Sun Rising; and on the same day, when the Sun comes to the West
part of the Horizon, the same moving Meridian in Aries hour-Circle will show
the time of Sun Setting: Provided always if the Sun be in any of the Northern
Signs, and so has North declination, then you must bring the longest Index of
the Horizon to 12 hours and 20 degrees in the fixed Plain, the Longitude of
London, and then proceed as before has been taught: But if the Sun be in the
Southern Signs, and so has South declination, then bring the shortest Index of
the Horizon to 12 Hours and 20 degrees, in the lower fixed Plain, the Meridian
and Longitude of London, and then proceed to find the Rising and Setting of the
Sun upon the day proposed.

So the 20 day of April, the Sun's place being 10 degrees 12 Minutes of Taurus;
now because Taurus is one of the Northern Signs, and so the Sun has North
declination, bring the longest Index of the moving Horizon to 12 hours 20
degrees in the lower fixed Plain, the Meridian of London, then bring the Sun's
place in the Ecliptic first to the East part of the Horizon, and so keep all
fast, and then turn the moving Meridian to the 20 day of April, and it will
then show in Aries hour-Circle that the Sun Rises at 4 of the Clock 41 Minutes
past in the morning, and Sets at 7 of the Clock 41 minutes past in the
Afternoon; Or if you desire to know the 20 day of October, at what time the Sun
Rises or Sets. Now again, because the Sun's place is 7 degrees of Scorpio,
one of the Southern Signs, and so has South declination, bring the shortest
Index of the moving Horizon to 12 of the Clock and 20 degrees in the lower
fixed Plain, and there keep it fast; and then turn the upper moving Plain,
until the Sun's place 7 degrees of Scorpio come to the East part of the
Horizon, and then the moving Index brought to the 20 day of October, will show
the Sun then Rises at 7 of the Clock 13 minutes past in the morning, and sets
at 4 of the Clock 47 minutes past in the Afternoon; which is a much better way
then to count one end of the Morning Index to cut the Hour of Sun setting, and
the other end counted back from 12 in Aries hour Circle for the time of Sun
Rising, as has been formerly taught; Also by this means the whole moving upper
Plain representing the celestial Globe, being turned about in this Diurnal
Motion upon any day required, will show the time of the Sun's Rising or
Setting, and all the Stars Rising, Setting, and coming to the South in order,
from whence in Astronomy, many beneficial conclusions may be readily drawn;
Seeing this Instrument is so exact, and makes such extraordinary dispatch
answering many varieties all at once, which by proportion and the doctrine of
Spherical Triangles, will require longer time, notwithstanding the help of the
Logarithmes and Natural Signs provided in our days.

To find the Sun's Altitude every day of the year when he comes to the Meridian.
THIS proposition is very useful for all Seamen readily to set the shadow vein
in observation at Sea to find the Latitude; First then, if you turn the moving
Meridian and shorter Index of the Horizon both together, to Aries in the moving
Plain, the edg of the Horizon will then cut the moving Meridian in 38 degrees
and 30 minutes, the height of the Sun upon the Meridian the 10 day of March in
the Latitude of 51 degrees and 30 minutes, and is also the height of the
Equinoctial in that Latitude for ever; Therefore at any time, if you add the
Sun's declination when it is North, or substract it when it is South from 38
degrees and 30 minutes, the height of the Equinoctial, it will show the height
of the Sun that day upon his Meridian; so the 20 day of April the Suns
Declination is 15 degrees North, which added to the 38 degrees 30 minutes,
shows the Altitude of the Sun that day upon the Meridian is 53 degrees 30
minutes; and the 18 of October the Sun has 13 degrees 30 minutes South
declination, which subtracted from 38 degrees 30 minutes, rests 25 degreet,
which is the height of the Sun that day upon his Meridian here in the North
Latitude of 51 degrees 30 minutes; and so of all others.

To find every day how many Degrees the Sun or Stars dippeth or goes under the
Horizon at Midnight; Also to find the Amplitude of the Sun or Stars every day
in the year at their Rising or Setting.
TO find the Sun's Amplitude at his rising or setting by this Instrument; there
must also be provided a straight Ruler, to be employed as occasion shall
require: First then, when you desire to know the Sun's Amplitude, you must
grant the Diameter betwixt Aries and Libra to represent the prime vertical
Circle, or Circle of the East and West, and the Quadrant from Aries to 90
degrees, reckoned in the Equinoctial, the Quadrant of Latitudes and the
Diameter, betwixt 90 degrees, and 270 degrees, the Horizon Circle; then having
the Latitude of any place, and declination of the Sun, bring the moving
Meridian to the Latitude, and there keep it fast, then with a pair of Compasses
take the declination out of the Equinoctial being one of the great Circles, and
join it to the point of Latitude, in the Quadrant of Latitudes toward Aries,
and then lay a straight Ruler from that point parallel to the moving Meridian,
which is held fast at the point of Latitude, and then observe where the Ruler
cuts or crosses the Diameter now representing the Horizon; and then also
observe under the Horizon where that straight Ruler cutteh the Equinoctial, and
so many degrees does the Sun or Star dip or go under the Horizon or Midnight;
then from the same point in the Horizon, turn or lay the straight Ruler
parallel to the prime vertical, and then in the Equinoctial, being one of the
great Circles, it will cut the true Amplitude of the Sun or Stars, which is
always the distance contained betwixt Aries and that point so cut.

So in the North Latitude of 51 degrees 30 minutes, the greatest Declination of
the Sun being 23 degrees, 30 minutes, if you bring the moving Index to 51
degrees 30 minutes in the Quadrant of Latitude, and thereunto join the
Declination 23 degrees and 30 minutes, and then from that point lay a straight
Ruler parallel to the moving Meridian or Index, it will cut under the Horizon
in the Equinoctial 15 degrees, and so much goes the Sun then under the Horizon
at Midnight; also at the same time note the place or point cut in the Horizon
by the same straight Ruler, and then turn or lay the Ruler from that point in
the Horizon parallel to the prime vertical, and where it cutteth the
Equinoctial, the distance betwixt Aries and that point is the Amplitude, which
here at this time appears to be 39 degrees and 50 minutes, being the greatest
Amplitude the Sun can possibly have here at London in the North Latitude of 51
degrees 30 minutes; And so in the same manner you may find the Amplitude of any
of the fixed Stars at their rising or setting.

Note, If the Sun has North declination, it is called North Amplitude; and if
it has South declination, it is called South Amplitude, and the greater
Latitude the greater Amplitude; and so of the fixed Stars.

Note also, Until the Sun be 18 degrees under the Horizon it is the Crepusculum
or Twilight; therefore here at London when the Sun has 23 degrees 30 minutes
North declination, the Sun dippeth but 15 degrees under the Horizon; Therefore
here at London at that time, it is not perfect Night at all, but the Twilight
continues.

To find at all Altines when the North Star is directly South above the Pole,
or North under the Pole.
TO know at what hour, every Day and Night, the North Star is directly North or
South, above or under the Pole; bring the moving Meridian to 12 of the Clock in
Aries hour-Circle and 20 degrees, the Longitude of London, then turn the upper
Plain, until the Star called Aliot, being a Star in the Great Bear's Rumpe, or
the hindmost of the 3 in Charles his Waine, unto that Index on the North or
Southside, and then if that Star be on the South side, the North Star is then 2
degrees 30 minutes under the Pole, and if Aliot be on the Northside, the North
Star is then 2 degrees 30 minutes above the Pole.

So the 22 day of March, Aliot is South at 12 of the Clock at Night, and so the
North Star is then 2 degrees 30 minutes under the Pole; and the 4 day of
February, Aliot is South at 5 of the Clock in the morning, and so the North
Star is then also 2 degrees 30 minutes under the Pole: And the 9 day of
September, Aliot is North at 12 of the Clock at Night, and the North Star is
then 2 degrees 30 minutes above the Pole; And the 25 day of October, Aliot is
North at 9 of the Clock at Night, and then the North Star is 2 degrees 30
minutes above the Pole.

To Draw the Parallels of the Sun or Stars Declinations, and thereby to know
when they Rise or Set, or whether they Rise or Set at all.
TO draw the parallels of Declination; First, set one Foot of the Compasses in
the Pole or Center of the moving Meridian, and then extend the other foot to 5
degrees, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, etc. in the same moving Meridian, according as the
Declination may require; then with the same extent so taken out of the moving
Meridian, set one foot in the Center of the moving Horizon, and from the
Diameter sweep an arch of a Circle both ways to cut the outward edg of that
plain Horizon, with points or Crossings in the edg of the Horizon, are the
direct places where those Stars come unto at their rising or setting; Note, if
any Star here in the Latitude of 51 degrees 30 minutes, has his Declination
North equal or more than the Complement of the Latitude, that Star (I say) sets
not at all, for then the Compasses in the plain Horizon will sweep an Arch of a
Circle within the plain Horizon, and will not reach the outward edg, therefore
that Star sets not at all; And so if any Star has South declination equal or
greater than the Complement of the Latitude, that Star rises not at all in our
Horizon, and so of all others.

To find, every Day in the year, at what time any of the Planets comes to the
South.
FIrst, bring the moving Meridian to 12 of the Clock and 20 degrees, the
Longitude of London, and there keep it fast, and then find the Sign and Degree
that the Planet is in at that time, and then turn the whole upper Plain until
that Sign and degree come to the moving Meridian placed at 12 of the Clock 20
degrees, and there keep them both fast together, and then look in the Circle of
Months for the Day you desire to know the time of that Planets coming to the
South, and right against that day in Aries hour-Circle, you will see at what of
the Clock that Planet comes to the South.

So Saturn's place or Longitude in the Ecliptic the 15 day of March, being 8
degrees 56 minutes of Capricorn, if you turn the whole upper moving Sphere
until that Sign and degree in the Ecliptic come to the Meridian placed at 12
of the Clock 20 degrees, and there hold them both fast together, and then right
against the 15 day Aries hour-Circle, it will appear that Saturn comes to the
South at 6 of the Clock 20 minutes in the morning; and Jupiter's place or
Longitude in the Ecliptic the 15 day of March, being 14 degrees 3 minutes, in
Aquarius comes to the South at 8 of the Clock 46 Minutes past in the Morning;
and the same day Mars being in 3 degrees 4 minutes of Pisces, comes to the
South at 10 of the Clock in the morning; and Venus the same day being in 18
degrees 50 minutes of Taurus, comes to the South at 2 of the Clock 46 minutes
in the Afternoon; and Mercury being then in 8 degrees 46 minutes of Aquarius,
comes to the South at 8 of the Clock 46 minutes past in the Morning: and the
same day Luna being in 19 degrees 22 minutes of Cancer, comes to the South at
7 of the Clock 21 minutes past in the Afternoon, allowing 2 minutes in the
Ecliptic for each hour to be added to the place of the Moon, so here was added
14 minutes; Note, if the day whereon you desire to know when the Star comes to
the South be in the East Semicircle, they are Morning hours; or if they be in
the West Semicircle, they are Afternoon hours.

To find the true Distance of the Moon's Motion from the Sun.
FIrst, by the Ephemerides find the Moon's place in the Ecliptic, then bring
the moving Meridian to 12 hours and 20 degrees, the Longitude of London, and
then bring the Moon's place in the Ecliptic also to that Meridian; and there
hold them both fast together, and then in the Circle of Months find the day you
desire to know, at what hour the Moon comes to the Meridian, and right against
that day you will find the hour of the Moon's then coming to the South.

So the 17 day of March, the Moon being in 18 degrees of Leo, being the moving
Meridian to 12 hours and 20 degrees, the Meridian and Longitude of London, then
turn the whole upper Sphere until the Moon's place in the Ecliptic also come
to that Meridian, and there keep them both fast together, and then in the
Circle of Months you will find right against the 17 day of March 9 hours 13
minutes in the Afternoon, which is the time of the Moon's coming to the South
that day, always in work remembering when you have found 9 hours to allow two
Minutes for each hour, which here is 18 Minutes, which 18 minutes in the
Ecliptic, at the Rate of 4 minutes for a degree, is 4 degrees ^ and that
joined to 18 degrees of Leo the Moon's place makes 22 degrees, which is the
true place that the Moon is then in; which brought to the Index placed at 12
hours and 20 degrees as before, and there kept fast right against the 17 day of
March will appear 9 of the Clock 13 minutes past in the afternoon, which is now
the direct true time of the Moon's coming to the South.

Note, On the lower fixed plain in this Instrument, are placed 3 hour-Circles,
the outwardmost with 24 hours at Aries is to measure the right Ascension in
time; the middle hour-Circle, which I call Aries hour-Circle beginning at 12 a
Clock and 20 degrees longitude, is proper for the Meridian of London, to
measure the hour of the day or night; the third, next the Equinoctial, is to
measure time from the general or first Astronomical Meridian according to the
distance betwixt the Sun or Stars.

To find the longitude, by knowing when any of the fixed Stars comes to the
South.
FIrst, you must observe, that by this projection in the lower fixed plain
representing the Terrestrial Globe, at one single certain point take in the
Equinoctial, there is set and placed 360 degrees with 12 of the Clock at noon
in the next hour-Circle, and Aries in the second hour-Circle, and 24 hours in
the outward hour-Circle, and this Meridian thus stated is the first Meridian of
the World, and declares the beginning and ending of all longitude; which
formerly by Geographers has been placed at several parts of the World, some
assigning it to pass through St. Michaels Island, one of the Azores, others
will have it to pass through Tenaref one of the Canary Islands, and some again
will have it pass by or through, the Westermost parts of Africa; all as yet
grounding themselves, from courses, distances, departures, differences of
latitude and longitude, found by expert skilful practical Navigators according
to their Sea observations and reckonings; for I suppose there have been as yet
but few Eclipses observed to contradict the expert Navigators endeavors, who
indeed deserve the honor and thanks for the originals which built that
demonstrative Figure and Type called the Terrestrial Globe, and I suppose will
in the future gain the like honor in this great matter, by practical proof
confirming a true Meridian and Longitude properly and peculiarly belonging to
each particular part and place upon the Terrestrial Globe, being the most
competent Judges grounding their knowledge upon their great Attempts and remote
Discoveries, which others, not versed in those things, must come far short off.
Now Astronomically we say 360 degrees must be accounted for the beginning and
ending of all Longitude, but we cannot place that Meridian upon the earth at
pleasure, for that is absurd and improper; but Astronomically, by knowing the
time of any of the fixed Stars coming to the South, and the place or Longitude
of the Sun in the Ecliptic that day, the distance then indeed betwixt the Sun
and Star reckoned in the Equinoctial, shows both their respective right
Ascensions and also the Longitude in degrees or time contained betwixt them, by
which means this Instrument will readily show the true Meridian and Longitude
in all places upon the Terrestrial Globe, provided it be granted, that at every
minute of Time in one place or other, the Sun and Stars are always Rising,
Setting, and coming to the Meridian (which is not to be denied) then I say,
each particular Meridian and Longitude, upon the Terrestrial Globe, may
undoubtedly be clearly discovered: For if it were inquired at what Meridian and
Longitude the City of London was truly seated, if we should search the
Terrestrial Globes they would show us several Longitude, according to the
several places, where they appointed the first Meridian to begin and end all
Longitude, and so in effect will show us just nothing; for indeed there is but
one single proper Meridian belonging to the City of London, or any other place
whatsoever, which may as surely be pointed out and showed which is it in
particular by this Instrument, as any Astronomical Calculator can tell you the
very Day, Hour, and Minut of the Stars coming to the South, which many will
affirm they can infallibly perform, and several Authors have already drawn out
Tables to that purpose, some of which I can testify are exceeding well, true,
and perfectly done and performed; but I have not observed that any of them,
has truly stated and discovered the Meridian properly belonging to the
particular Longitude of London, or pointed out which or where it is; I suppose
the reason has been, because they found the Longitude of places upon the earth
were variously affirmed, and therefore they meddled with none of them.

To find exactly the True Meridian and Longitude of the City of London.
FIrst, by this Instrument to find the true Longitude of London, you must
consider the day of what month you will employ for this service, which day I
then call the day of the Sun; then always bring the day of the Sun to 360
degrees, the beginning and ending of all Longitude, then take notice of any of
the fixed Stars placed upon the upper moving Plain in this Instrument, and
bring the moving Index to cut that Star, and in the outward hour-Circle you
will find the hour and minute of that Stars coming to the South, when the day
of the Sun stands at 360 degrees in the Equinoctial, which on the same day of
the Sun will show one and the same hour and minute, for the Stars being South
in all the particular Longituds of the World; and so that hour, common to all
Longituds, cannot distinguish the particular Meridian of any of them, but this
Instrument from that ground will show each proper and particular Meridian and
Longitude of all places upon the Terrestrial Globe which cannot be removed or
altered; for, if you count in the lower hour-Circle placed next the Equinoctial,
1 hour, 2 hours, 3 hours, 4 hours etc. according to the diurnal motion, until
you bring the day of the Sun to such an hour as right against it will stand the
hour and minute in Aries hour-Circle, answerable and equal to the hour first
found in the outward Circle containing 24 hours a Natural day, at which time
the day of the Sun was first brought to 360 degrees in the Equinoctial, and so
the hour of the Star was that day one and the same in all Longitudes: but now
(I say) if the day of the Sun be turned to so many hours and minutes in the
lower hour-Circle that then against the same day of the Sun in Aries
hour-Circle there appear the hours and minutes equal to the hours and minutes
first found in the outward Circle of 24 hours, I say, the Star proposed will
then stand right against the proper and particular Meridian and Longitude of
the place desired, and cannot possibly be removed or constrained to stand
against any other Meridian or Longitude, but that which properly and
particularly belongs to that one single part, point, or place upon the
Terrestrial Globe.

Example. The first of April, I demand how the proper and particular Meridian
and Longitude of the City of London may be found and discovered, by this
Instrument.
BRing the first day of April to 360 degrees, which I now call the day of the
Sun, then find on the upper plain or Sphere the fixed Star called the Lions
Tail, and thereon place the moving Meridian or Index, and then in the outward
hour-Circle it will show that Star comes to the South at 10 a clock 13 minutes
in the afternoon, which is the common hour for all Meridians in the World for
that day; therefore now turn about the upper moving Plain or Sphere until the
first day of April the day of the Sun come to 8 hours 52 minutes in the
lowermost hour-Circle, and then right against the same hour and day of the Sun
in Aries hour-Circle you will then find 10 a Clock 13 minutes at night equal to
the hour first found in the outward hour-Circle, and so the Star called the
Lions Tail will now stand exactly against 20 degrees in the Equinoctial, placed
upon the fixed plain at 10 a Clock 13 minutes at night, which is the proper and
particular Meridian and Longitude of the City of London, which cannot possibly
be removed, changed, or altered, and was never truly found or thus stated by any
Man before.

So in like manner, if you will the same first day of April employ the fixed
Star called Hidra's Heart, to find the true Meridian and Longitude of London,
bring again the first day of April the day of the Sun as before to 360 degrees,
and then place the moving Meridian upon that Star, and in the outward
hour-Circle it will show 7 a Clock 52 minutes; therefore now turn the day of
the Sun to 6 hours 32 minutes in the lowermost hour-Circle, and then right
against that in Aries hour-Circle you will find again 7 a Clock 52 minutes, and
then you will find Hidra's Heart, will stand again directly right against 20
degrees, the proper Meridian and Longitude of London as before at 7 a Clock and
52 minutes.

So in like manner if you will the same first day of April employ the Star
called Virgin Spik bring the day of the Sun to 360 degrees and place the moving
Meridian upon the Star, which will then in the outward hour Circle show 11 a
Clock 48 minutes, therefore now turn the day of the Sun to 10 hours 28 minutes,
and at the same time right against that, in Aries hour-Circle, you will find 11
a Clock 48 minutes at night, and then the Virgin Spike will stand right against
20 degrees, the true Meridian and Longitude of London as before, and so in the
same manner you may employ any of the fixed Stars which you think convenient,
and they will all affirm the true, proper, and particular Meridian and
Longitude of London is directly 20 degrees, which cannot be removed, altered, or
contradicted by any Man; and so being at any place or point upon the
Terrestrial Globe, by this Instrument, and the same Rule, you may find the
proper and particular Meridian and Longitude of that place, which cannot be
removed, altered, or denied by any one.

To find the true Longitude of the City of London, at the Sun's Setting.
Example.
SUppose the tenth day of April it be required to find the true Longitude of
the City of London at the setting of the Sun; bring the longest Meridian of the
moving Horizon to 360 degrees the first Index of the world, and there keep it
fast, then turn the upper moving Sphere until the place of the Sun, being then
the first minute of Taurus, come to the edg of the Horizon in the West
Semicircle of the Instrument; then bring the moving Meridian or Index to the
place of the Sun, which Index will then at the same time in the Circle of days
and months cut or show the 10 day of April the day of the Sun; and now the
Instrument thus stated, keep all the Indexes and Horizon unaltered, and then
turn the whole upper moving Sphere, until that Index which cuts the day and
place of the Sun come to 360 degrees, the first Meridian, and then the longest
Index of the Horizon in the outward hour-Circle will cut 4 hours, which is the
distance that day betwixt the Sun when he is on the Meridian, and the time of
his setting when he is in the Horizon, and so continues at the same distance,
for that day, upon all Meridians and Longitudes until the Sun, by the force of
Primum Mobile, is carried round about the world; Therefore now again turn the
whole moving Sphere unaltered according to his Diurnal motion, until the Index
at the day of the Sun cut in the innermost hour-Circle 5 hours 40 minutes, and
then at the same time the same Index will also cut in Aries hour-Circle 7 of
the Clock in the Afternoon, the time of Sun setting, which was also the first
distance cut in the outward hour-Circle; and then the longest Index of the
Horizon will stay at 20 degrees, the true Meridian and Longitude of the City of
London, which cannot be removed, altered, or contradicted, and was never before
found, known, or truly stated by any man until Now: and by the same Rule and
Directions, being in any part of the world, we can as truly and exactly find
the proper and particular Meridian and Longitude belonging to that place, as we
have now settled and discovered a true, proper, and particular Meridian and
Longitude, not to be changed, removed, or altered for the City of London, which
was never known or found before, confirmed both by the Southing of a Star, and
Setting of the Sun.

THE THIRD WAY. To find the true Longitude of the City of London: at the Sun's
Rising.
SUppose the same tenth day of April it be required to find the true Meridian
and Longitude of the City of London at the Sun's Rising; bring the longest
Index of the Horizon to 360 degrees, the first Meridian as before, and there
keep it fast; then turn the upper moving Sphere, until the place of the Sun,
being now the first minute of Taurus, come to the edg of the Horizon in the
East Semicircle of the Instrument; then bring the moving Meridian or Index to
the place of the Sun, which will then also cut the tenth day of April, in the
Circle of Months, which is now the day of the Sun; and so the Instrument thus
stated, keep all the Indexes and Horizon unaltered; and now being it is Sun
Rising, turn the whole moving upper Sphere, until the Index which cuts the day
and place of the Sun to 180 degrees, or 12 of the Clock at night, and then the
longest Index of the Horizon will show in the outward hour-Circle 7 hours,
which is the distance being upon the first Meridian Now at 180 degrees 12 of
the Clock at Night, which is the distance of the Sun that day betwixt the time
when he is upon the Meridian, and rises in the Horizon, round about the world
in all respective Meridians and Longitudes; Therefore now turn again the whole
moving Sphere, according to his Diurnal Motion, until the Index at the day of
the Sun in the innermost hour-Circle, cut 3 Hours 40 minutes, and then the same
Index in Aries hour-Circle, will show 5 of the Clock the time of Sun Rising,
and the longest Index of the Horizon at the same time will stay again at 20
degrees as before, the true Meridian and Longitude of the City of London,
confirmed by three several ways, and cannot be removed or altered to any other
point, which point of Longitude was never found before.

THE FOVRTH WAY. To find the true Longitude of the City of London by the Moon
when she comes to the South.
SUppose the 11 day of May, the Moon being then in 2 degrees of Leo, it were
required to show then the true Longitude of the City of London; first bring one
Index in the Circle of Months to the 11th day of May the day of the Sun, then
bring another Index to the 25 degrees of Leo, the Moons place that day, and
then the distance betwixt those Indexes will appear in the Equinoctial to be 88
degrees, which in time is 5 a Clock 52 minutes; therefore now turn the whole
moving upper Sphere, keeping the two Indexes unaltred, and bring the Index
placed at the day of the Sun to 360 the first Meridian and beginning and ending
of Longitude, and then the Index of the Moon, in the Equinoctial on the fixed
Plain, will show 88 degrees which is 5 hours 32 minutes in time: but in regard
the Moon for this distance of time must have 2 minutes allowed for each hour,
take with a pair of compasses 15 degrees of the fixed Equinoctial, and then set
one foot in 88 degrees, and turn over the compasses until they come to 360
degrees, and count how many times they are turned over which here will appear
to be 6 times, therefore at 2 minutes for an hour, is 12 minutes, which added
to 5 hours 52 minutes makes 6 a Clock 4 minutes agreeing with Mr. Wings
calculation, within 2 minutes; with 12 minutes add to 88 make 91 degrees, the
true distance, the Moons Index now standing there. Then the Indexces still
unaltred, turn the whole moving Sphere until the Moons Index comes to 6 a
Clock 6 minutes, which will also cut 111 degrees in the Equinoctial, and then
the Index of the Sun will then stay again at 20 degrees the true Longitude of
the City of London as before, which cannot be removed, altered or contradicted
by any one. And thus has the true Longitude of London been confirmed by four
several ways to be directly 20 degrees and no more, no Man having before now
ever discovered what it was, and so by the same Rule, may the true Longitude of
any part of the world be speedily found.

ANOTHER WAY. To find the true Longitude of the City of London by the Moon when
she comes to the South.
SUppose the eleventh day of May, the Moon being then in 25 degrees of Leo, it
were required to find the true Longitude of the City of London; First bring the
11th day of May now the day of the Sun to 360 degrees the first Meridian, and
turn the Index to 25 degrees of Leo the Moon's place, that day, and then the
distance betwixt the Sun and the Moon will appear, in the Equinoctial upon the
fixed Plain, to be 88 degrees, and in the outward hour-Circle 5 a Clock 52
minutes; but now in regard the Moon must be allowed 2 minutes for each hour to
be added to this distance take 15 degrees with a pair of Compasses out of the
Equinoctial and set one foot in 88 degrees, and you will find you may turn them
over near fix times before you come to 360 degrees the first Meridian,
therefore you must allow 12 minutes which is 3 degrees more in the Equinoctial,
and the Moons Index must now stand at 91 degrees in the Equinoctial, and then
in the outward hour-Circle will now show 6 a Clock 4 minutes. Therefore now,
keeping the Moons Index unaltred, turn the whole moving Sphere, until the
Index of the Moon cut in Aries hour-Circle to 6 a Clock 6 minutes in the
morning, and then the 11th day of May the day of the Sun will stand right
against 20 degrees in the Equinoctial, again the true Longitude of the City of
London, as before, which cannot be altered or contradicted by any one And thus
we have stated the true Longitude of London four several ways to be directly
20 degrees and no more; which was not known or discovered before this time by
any Man.

1. Note, the outward hour-Circle always shows the Suns distance from the
Star, from the Horizon, or from the Moon in hours and minutes, and the
Equinoctial shows the distance in degrees.

2. And the Innermost hour-Circle shows how many hours and minutes you may
turn the day of the Sun or the place of the Moon.

3. And Aries hour-Circle in the middle always in his own account shows the
same hour with the outward hour-Circle, and so determines the hour of the day
proper for that Latitude and Longitude which you are at.

Two several Questions by finding the Moon South to know what Meridian you are
at.
The first Question.
THe 10th day of June 1665 three Men being at Sea, the first Man had the Moon
South at 6 hours 18 minutes; the second Man, at 6 hours 29 minutes; and the
third Man had the Moon South at 6 hours 32 minutes. I demand what Meridian and
Longitude each of those Men were then at?

Example.
FIrst, the 10th day of June, you may then readily find that the Sun is then in
29 degrees of Gemini at 20 degrees the Meridian of London, and the Moon at that
time in 3 degrees 50 minutes of Libra; therefore now set one Index to the 10th
day of June the day of the Sun, and the same Index in the Ecliptic will then
cut 29 degrees of Gemini, the place of the Sun: then lay the other Index on 3
degrees 50 minutes of Libra, the place of the Moon, and with the Indexes
unaltred turn the upper Sphere until the Index of the Sun cut 20 degrees the
Meridian of London, and the distance betwixt the two Indexes in the Equinoctial
will be 94 degrees which is 6 hours 18 minutes, the first Man's hour of having
the Moon South: but the Index of the Moon then in the Equinoctial will also cut
115 degrees, the first Man's Meridian and Longitude that he was at.

The second Man having the Moon South at 6 hours 29 minutes.
THE Indexes remaining as before turn the upper Sphere until the Index of the
Moon come to 20 degrees the Longitude of London; but now in regard there must
be allowed 2 minutes for an hour for the Moons depression, which is 12 minutes,
therefore turn back the Index of the Moon 3 degrees, and then turn again the
moving upper Sphere until the Index of the Moon cut 20 degrees, the Longitude
of London; and the Index of the Sun will then cut 6 hours 29 minutes: so the
second Man had the Moon South at 20 degrees the Meridian of London.

The third Man having the Moon South at 6 hours 32 minutes.
THE Indexes not altered from the last proposition, turn the upper Sphere until
the Index of the Moon come to 320 degrees, but now having 3 hours difference,
allowing 2 minutes for an hour, turn back the Index of the Moon 1 degree, and
then turn again the upper Sphere until the Index of the Moon cut 320 degrees,
and then the Index of the Sun will cut 6 hours 32 minutes: so the third Man had
the Moon South at the Meridian and Longitude of 320 degrees.

The Second Question.
THe 17th day of June 1665 five Men being at Sea, the Moon then at the full at
10 a Clock 24 minutes past in the morning, the Sun in the 6 degree of Cancer and
the Moon in the 6 degree of Capricorn South at 22 a Clock, at 224 degrees the
first Man's Meridian and Longitude; but the Second Man has the Moon South at
12 minutes after 12 a Clock; the third Man 24 minutes after 12; the fourth Man
28 minutes after 12; and the fifth Man 34 minutes after 12 a Clock. I demand,
what Meridian and Longitude each of these particular Men were then at?

Example.
FIrst, lay the Index one end on the 17th day of June which will then also cut
6 degrees of Cancer the Suns place, and the other end will then cut 6 degrees
of Capricorn the Moons place, then move the upper Sphere until the Suns end of
the Index cut 10 a Clock 24 minutes past in the morning, the time of full Moon,
and the Moon's end will then cut 224 degrees in the Equinoctial, which is the
first Man's Longitude at 12 a Clock; then allowing 2 minutes for each 15
degrees, or one hour of time for the Moon's depression, you will then first
find that betwixt 224 degrees and 134 degrees is contained 90 degrees, which is
6 hours of time; now allowing 2 minutes for each hours depression, in all 12
minutes, which is 3 degrees, turn the upper Sphere, the Index unaltred, until
the Moons end come to 134 degrees then 3 degrees allowed for depression makes
exactly 12 a Clock 12 minutes past: So the second Man's Longitude must be 134
degrees at that time and place. The third Man having the Moon South 24 minutes
after 12 a Clock, allowing 2 minutes depression for each hour, it appears
that his Meridian and Longitude, when he has the Moon South, must be 44
degrees: because the distance betwixt 44 degrees and 224 degrees in the
Equinoctial is 180 degrees, or 12 hours, and then 24 minutes which is 6 degrees
allowed for depression makes 24 minutes after 12 a Clock: so the third Man
must have the Moon South at the Meridian and Longitude of 44 degrees. The
fourth Man had the Moon South at 20 degrees 28 minutes after 12 a Clock,
because the distance betwixt 20 degrees and 224 degrees in the Equinoctial is
204 degrees or 13 hours 9 minutes: therefore allowing 2 minutes depression for
an hour makes 28 minutes after 12 a Clock: so the fourth Man, had the Moon
South at 20 degrees the Meridian and Longitude of London. The fifth Man had the
Moon South at 334 degrees 34 minutes after 12 a Clock, because the distance
according to the Diurnal motion betwixt 334 degrees and 224 degrees is 250
degrees or 17 hours, allowing 2 minutes depression for an hour, makes 34
minutes: so the fifth Man had the Moon South at 334 degrees 34 minutes after 12
a Clock; which is all that was required.

The Rule and reason for turning the upper Shere is from 360 degrees.
THE rule is to see how many hours and minutes the Sun can be turned from the
first point of Aries, before the Star can come to be South: and the reason is
because the Star cannot be South but at one time at one Meridian.

To cut the Horizons for all Latituds.
UPon a piece of pastboard draw two lines Squarewise, that is perpendicular to
each other, and let the longest line be the diameter of the upper Sphere, and
the shorter the perpendicular, the Latitude from the Center of the Index, by
which means, from the Center where the two lines cross each other there is got
or found 3 points; now find the Center to those 3 points, and strike an arch,
and cut out by that arch the Horizon required.

THE END.
Errata.
Page 6. l. 28. for pannage read parallels, p. 8. l. 17. for Terrestrial r.
Celestial, p. 11. l. 26. for contein r. count, p. 17. l. 1. for all Altines r.
all Times, p. 24. l. 27. for first Index r. first Meridian.


