TWO SERMONS Preached against Immorality and Profaneness. The First, On January
13. School/9. The Second, On May 3. 1700. By JOHN THANE, M. A. And one of the
Prebendaries of Chester.

LONDON: Printed for R. Knaplock, at the Angel and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1700.

TWO SERMONS Preached against Immorality and Profaneness.
St. JOHN xii. 26. -- If any Man serve me, him will my Father honor.
THese are the Words of our blessed Savior, and they contain part of the
Discourse wherewith he entertained two of his Disciples, Andrew and Philip, who
came upon a particular Message to him. It was now about the time, as appears
from the Context, when his Sorrows began, and the Scene of his Sufferings was
drawing on; from the Prospect whereof he takes Occasion to inform his Auditors,
not only of that which he himself was about to undertake, but of that likewise
which he did require from all that had a Mind to be his Followers, and would
engage themselves in his Service. If any Man serve me, let him follow me, and
where I am, there shall also my Servant be: If any Man serve me, him will my
Father honor.

As if he had said, I am now about to drink off that bitter Cup, which the Sins
of Mankind have prepared for me; and since that for this very End, I came into
the World, that I might lay down my Life for its sake, let not any of my
Servants grudge or think it strange to tread in the steps of their Master, and
to follow his Example. Many I foresee there are who will break with me upon
these Terms, and will refuse to become my Disciples and Followers; but know ye
that blessed and only blessed shall they be, who upon the Preaching of my
Gospel shall come in, and believe in me, and receive my Doctrine, and shall
yield Obedience to my Laws and Commands. Happy I say again shall it be for
them, if they will learn of me, and will Practice the Rules of my Religion, for
these are they whom I will own and defend, and these are they whom my Father
also will honor.

Having thus briefly considered the Occasion of the Words, I come now to raise
some Observations from them: And they shall be these Five.

I. I shall inquire into the Nature and Kind of the Service which is here
offered in the Text, If any Man serve me. II. I shall also inquire who they are
that may properly be called the Servants of Christ. III. I shall show the
Reasonableness of the Service. IV. The Necessity of it. And, V. And lastly,
from these Words of our Lord, him will my Father honor. I shall by way of
Encouragement set before you that immense Reward which attends the sincere
Performance of it.
I. Then as to the Nature and Kind of the Service. And that will appear, if we
consider what it is, and wherein it does consist.

If we inquire into the nature of the Service, we shall find it to consist of
these two Parts: Viz. A firm well-grounded Assent to whatever Christ has
revealed, and a sincere actual Conformity to those manifold Obligations and
Duties which he has laid upon us. So that to serve Christ is briefly this, to
believe what he has Delivered, and to do what he has Commanded in his Word.
Whence the Consequence is plain and undoubted, that as long as we faithfully
Perform the Service, so long and no longer will Christ Own us for his Servants:
Which should make us so much the more Cautious and Circumspect in our behavior
toward him.

But then if we consider it as to its kind, we cannot but acknowledge it to be
best and properest for us, most befitting us as we are Men, and are endowed
with a rational Nature: As it gives us a clearer Sense of our frail and weak
Condition, and what for lorn and miserable Creatures Sin has made us: As it
presents us with right Notions of God and of his Worship, and with the plainest
and surest Directions for the Government of our selves: As it delivers us from
the Tyranny and Bondage of Sin, and from the Power of our Lusts, and instead
thereof puts us into a State of Sonship and Freedom, under the Influence of
God's Grace, and the Conduct of his Holy Spirit, whereby our Understandings are
enlightened, and our Wills directed, and our Affections are brought into order.
So that neither our professed Enemies from without, nor our treacherous Friends
from within, shall now be able to hurt us without our own consent. A farther
Account of whose Excellence we have in the Words of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 6. 9. Know
ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not
deceived; neither Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor Drunkards, shall inherit the
Kingdom of God: And such were some of you: But ye are washed, but ye are
Sanctified, but ye are Justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God.

Since then the Nature of Christ's service is such, since it is so Excellent in
its kind, and every way so much for our Advantage, is it not very plain that
it is not more our Duty, than it is our Interest and our Happiness, to accept
it, and live according to it: And if so, how inexcusable then are those, who
after they have taken upon them this Service, and have vowed Allegiance to
their Lord and Master, do notwithstanding rise in Rebellion against him, and
Affront him to his very Face. Which all such most certainly do, who by their
Actions or their Speeches, or perhaps both, disown his Authority, and despise
his Laws, and by that means endeavor to represent the Son of God as a Cheat
and Impostor.

These are the Men that are in the Interests of Irreligion and Infidelity,
which they serve most faithfully, and to the best of their Power: Who though they
have wholly abandoned themselves to Vice, and have quite cast off all Modesty
and Shame, have yet so much Assurance as to set up for Wits, and pretend to a
more refined way of Conversation. These are they who judge of things not as
they really are, but according to their own ill-grounded Sentiments and
Principles, which teach them to think it mean and unbecoming, to be tied up to
Rules, and be obliged to live as all sober considering Men choose to do. It
seems for their Part, they know better than to trouble themselves with
Religion, or the Obligations of Virtue and Morality, which to say the Truth,
they have no manner of regard or reverence for. If you inquire into these Men's
pretenses, as they are seldom without some, they will tell you they have
thoroughly studied the Point, and have Searched into the Reason and Nature of
things, and are thence clearly Convinced that Religion, especially the
Christian Religion, is at best but a cunningly devised Fable. This is the
Scheme which they have projected to themselves, and by such wild Notions do
they steer and govern their Actions: And what is stranger yet, seem to despise
all others that are not as wicked as themselves. Set the Men in Black, as they
in derision call Us, say whatever they can, they are resolved notwithstanding
to pursue their Pleasures, and gratify their Senses, and will never stint
themselves in any thing that Nature prompts them to.

And now is it not high time to give a Check to such avowed and barefaced
Impiety, which sets up in defiance of God himself, and which strikes at the
Foundation of his Honor and Authority in the World. This is what we are called
upon to do, and there is absolute need that it should be done, and doubtless
every good Man will contribute to the doing of it. For who can be silent when
Religion is insulted, or unconcerned when Libertinism is in Fashion and Request?

But as this kind of behavior is very unaccountable, so it is commonly fatal
in the Event, and will certainly prove so to the Sinners of this Nation, except
they repent. Because their Sins are more provoking, and do carry a deeper
Guilt, as being Committed against clearer Light, and more and greater
Advantages, than are afforded to other Christians: And Our Savior we know has
said, Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required. When
therefore Men have all the Means and Opportunities, and all the Encouragement
to Piety and Goodness that can be desired, and yet nevertheless turn such
Miscreants, and give such Scandalous Ill Examples, it looks as if God had some
heavy Judgment in store for us, and that we were a People devoted to
Destruction. After that God has showed himself so often and so tenderly
concerned for this our Sion, what else is to be expected from such base
unworthly Returns, but that he should pronounce the same of the English that he
once did of the Jewish Church, Isai. 5. 4. What could have been done more to my
Vineyard that I have not done in it? Wherefore when I looked that it should
bring forth Grapes, brought it forth wild Grapes? And now go to, I will tell
you what I will do to my Vineyard, I will take away the Hedge thereof, and it
shall be eaten up, and break down the Wall thereof, and it shall be trodden
down: And I will lay it waste, it shall not be pruned or dug, but there
shall come up Briars and Thorns.

But to return; Religion or the Service of Jesus Christ does justly challenge
our best care and regard, for that it enjoins nothing but what is highly
becoming, nothing but what our own Reason tells us we ought to do. It lays upon
us strict Engagements to Holiness and Virtue, which are Conditions absolutely
required on our part: So that whenever we depart or break off from our Duty,
and enter on a contrary Course of Sin and Disobedience, we become as it were
Vagrants and Fugitives, and may very properly be said to run away from our
Master.

Since then we have all Solemnly engaged at our Baptism, not only to be True
and Constant to Christ's Service, but also to Deny our selves, and Hazard all
for his sake, let us resolve to make good that our Promise, lest when he shall
come again to Judge the World, we should then be found Guilty, and accordingly
have Sentence passed on us as Renegades and Deserters. I come now in the Second
Place,

II. To inquire who they are that may properly be called the Servants of Christ.

Now to make us the Servants of Christ two things are required.

1. That we believe in Christ, and believing Love, Honor and Adore him as the
Son of God, and the Savior of Mankind.

2. That we so receive all his Laws and Commands as to make them the only Rule
of our Obedience and Practice.

This is the Substance of our Duty, as we are Christians, and if we are sincere
in the performance of it, and will do the best we can to please God, his Grace
will ever be ready to assist us, and to supply our Defects. So that now we know
who and what the Servants of Christ are, namely, All such who own Christ for
their Lord, and in Obedience to his Authority submit themselves to be governed
according to his Will and Pleasure. This is a short and plain Account of the
Matter, and is that which every one that makes any Pretense to Christianity
must acknowledge to be true.

And if what I have here said be true, as certainly it is, then what a fatal
mistake are they Guilty of, who think they can serve Christ well enough, while
they continue in a State of Sin, and go on in a constant Course of Wickedness
and Vice? For what a strange Contradiction is this, and how is it possible for
these men to reconcile their Belief and their Practice together? Do they
imagine that Christ will alter the Terms of Salvation, and will account them as
Servants, who are no better than Rebels and Outlaws? If Christ himself will
Condemn those who only call him, Lord, without ever doing the things which he
has said, then what a severe Doom do they deserve, who are so far from giving
him any such outward Verbal Respect, that they make no Scruple openly to
Affront and Revile him?

Blessed God! what a strange Degeneracy do we now see in the Faith and Manners
of most Christians, and to what a low ebb and despised Estate is Christianity,
the best and most perfect Institution, reduced! That very Religion which
heretofore seized on the Hearts and Affections of Men, and presently brought
them off from Idols and other Heathen Fopperies, and which insensibly engaged
the most rude, and fierce, and stubborn Dispositions: And not only so, but
moreover inspired them with such Zeal for the Truth and Purity of it, as made
vast Numbers of its Professors, choose to Sacrifice their Lives, rather than
renounce and betray it. How is that Religion now become the Scorn of Fools, and
the Sport of the Wicked and the Profane! And how are the Holy Scriptures
vilify'd by Seducers, and the Truths therein contained rendered of no Account
or Consideration by them? So that all things put together, who could believe
such a Change as now is, did not Experience show it, or even think it morally
possible, had not our Lord himself foretold it?

That there are too many Examples of this Kind, I need not say much to prove,
since the very Complexion of the Age does abundantly evince it.

Behold then on the one hand the Theist, or Moral Believer, who is so far from
being a Christian, that he calls in Question the Truth and certainty of
revealed Religion. This is a sort of Men who pretend it seems to more than
ordinary strictness and reservedness of Conversation, and so far indeed they
deserve to be commended: But then, alas! what can these signify alone to us
now, without Faith, and without a Redeemer? Next to the Theist comes the bold
Socinian Controvertist, one who laughs at the Doctrine of the Trinity, and
flatly denies the Divinity of our Lord and Savior. And though both Scripture and
Antiquity are plain against him, yet so highly conceited is he of his own
little Reason, that he sticks not to prefer it even to Fathers and Couneils.
This also is a growing Mischief, a spreading Infection, and therefore the
Danger it threatens is so much the greater: For if once Men be permitted to
vent such false and pernicious Doctrines, what else is to be looked for, but
that all should at last end in Skepticism, or downright Infidelity?

Look again on the other hand, and see where the Blasphemer appears, who not
content by a lewd and debauched Life, to crucify his Master afresh, and put
him to open shame, strives all he can to attacque him in his Person, and
pursues him to the very Seat of Majesty and Glory. This is the way and the
behavior of him, who is said by the Psalmist, Psalm. 73. 9. to set his Mouth
against the Heavens.

With the Blasphemer we may join the Profane Person, as being next akin to him.
And here again the Scene is Dismal enough, since it presents us with nothing,
but the bold Flights and Extravagancies of a profane Temper, which as it is too
visible in many of the Youth of our Nation, especially those who are in some
repute for Parts and Education, so it is very Industriously Propagated by
others, who take a pride in exposing Religion, and drawing Men off to
Infidelity and Vice. And though none perhaps who are Guilty in this way have
Actually renounced Christianity, yet they appear on all Occasions with such an
Air of Lightness, and are so mightily addicted to this abominable kind of
Railery, that neither God himself, nor his Son Jesus Christ, nor any the most
Serious and Sacred things can escape them. This is another Evil that ought
speedily to be remedied, else the Contagion will spread amain.

Next to these stands the common and Profane Swearer, one indeed who is much
better known to us, as coming oftener in our way, and meeting us almost
wheresoever we go. This, alas, is become so common and so reigning a Vice, and
which has spread it self so wide, and has got such mighty Numbers on its
side, that it is much to be feared it will not so easily be rooted out. However,
we may still hope to put a stop to it in some measure, if fit and proper
Remedies be duly applied. It Is true, the meaner sort of People are generally
tainted with this Evil, but then none can so effectually cure it in them as the
Magistrate. As for those of Quality and Condition, it is to be hoped that a
little Consideration will show them the Odiousness and Silliness of this Vice,
and will let them see how Contrary this Custom is to good Sense and good
Breeding, and will likewise convince them that it is altogether as unbecoming
the Gentleman as the Christian. Such commonly have great Advantages above
Ignorant Inferior People, and consequently would they but consider, as it
becomes them to do, the Being and Nature of God, if they have any Sense at all
of Religion, they cannot but own that the Divine Majesty is highly affronted,
while they make thus bold with his Name upon every vain and trifling Occasion.

Much more I confess might be said to expose this horrid Crime, which is become
so very rife not only in this, but in most other Countries, especially where
the Romish Religion prevails, but I forbear, because I would not be tedious.

There are two sorts of Sinners still behind, The Intemperate and the
Lascivious: I have chosen to mention these both together, because though they may
sometimes act singly and apart, yet they very often meet in one and the same
Person. For when by Drinking overmuch, or as Solomon's Expression is, by
Tarrying long at the Wine, the Head is intoxicated, and the Blood inflamed,
then Lust seizes the Man, and the brutish Appetite prevails, And here I cannot
but observe, that as unreasonable as these Vices are in themselves, and as un
becoming the Faith and Profession of Christianity, they have nevertheless been
a long while in Vogue and Repute amongst us, and the Frequency of the
Commission seems in part to have lessened the Reproach which is justly due to
them. For what more common than for the Drunkard to pass only for a pleasant
Companion, or for an honest and good-natured Fellow, one that does no Body any
harm, and the like? And then again as to the Lewd Person, how ordinary a thing
is it to hear him cried up for a fine Gentleman, and a Wit, and a Man of
Intrigue? All which in the Cant of Libertines pass for Titles of Honor, and
seem to denote the best and highest Accomplishments.

Thus have these two Excellent Virtues, Temperance and Chastity, which do so
properly belong to Christians, been in a manner discountenanced chiefly by the
Force and Power of Example. But for all that, Intemperance and Uncleanness are
Sins still, and such Sins as will finally exclude Men from the Kingdom of
Heaven. God no doubt intended by the Laws and Religion of his Son to restrain
Men from all manner of Sensuality, especially those gross Excesses and
Impurities, to which the Gentiles had universally addicted themselves: And
accordingly God is said by the Apostle to have called us not unto Uncleanness,
but unto Holiness, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 7. Thus St. Peter also warns the new Converts,
To live no longer in the Flesh, to the Lusts of Men, but to the Will of God, 1
Pet. 4. 2. This is the Evidence which the Scripture gives us, and if we believe
it to be true, nothing can be plainer than that the Practice of these Sins, as
harmless as some may think them, is enough to endanger their Salvation.

Nay, if we consider these Men with respect to this World, what would become of
these fashionable Sinners, were St. Paul's Rule once put in Practice? If any
Man, says he, that is called a Brother, that is, a Christian, be a Fornicator,
or a Drunkard, with such a one, no not to eat, 1 Cor. 5. 11. How would such an
Injunction as this shock most of the fine Wits and Gallants of our Days? The
Apostle, it is true, did give this Advice, or rather Command, to the Christians
at Corinth, which was as loose and debauched a Place as any at that time; but
still I much question whether such Discipline could be practiced among us now.
And yet 'twere but reasonable in my Opinion that some kind of Disgrace should
be fix upon them by Public Authority, and that for the sake and out of respect
to Religion, which can never have that Influence upon Men which it ought to
have, while such Crimes as these are connived at and suffered to go unpunished.

I am sensible that a great deal more might be said upon these Heads, but I
fear I have almost tired your Patience in thus representing the Blemishes and
Deformities of Humane Nature: But you will pardon me, since I had no other
Design in exposing them, but only in order to correct and reform them.

And that we may effectually do so, what other or better course can we take
than to consult our own Reason, which will easily discover to us the infinite
Scandal as well as Danger of such Practices, which are so odious to God, and so
detestable among all wise and good Men. This will teach us rightly to compare
things, and make a true judgment of them, and will plainly Demonstrate to us,
that to live Virtuously, is indeed to live wisely, and like Men, and according
to the Dignity of our Nature: That if we would in good earnest approve our
selves the Servants of Christ, and do all those things which he has commanded,
what an agreeable and delightful Change there would suddenly appear in the
World. The truth is, we may easily deceive and abuse our selves; but when all
is said, we must either be Christ's Servants, or the Devil's Slaves, either the
Laws of Christ must rule and govern us, or else Sin will have the Dominion over
us: According to that Aphorism Ispoken by our Savior to the Jews, Whosoever
commits Sin, is the Servant of Sin, John 8. 34. And St. Paul is likewise
very express to the same purpose: Know ye not, that to whomsoever ye yield your
selves servants to obey, his Servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether of Sin
unto Death, or of Obedience unto Righteousness, Romans 6. 16. Which brings me to
the Third Thing I observed from the Words, and that is the Reasonableness of
the Service.

III. Had Christianity nothing beside the Authority of its Founder, to
recommend and enforce the Practice of it, even that alone were sufficient of it
self. Have Thou said then, O Blessed Jesu, if any Man serve me, him will my
Father honor, and can any Man deny to serve Thee? Have Thou moreover done and
suffered so very much for the wretched Sons of Men, and will any of them refuse
to become obedient to thy Will? Nay, have Thou ascertained so ample a Reward
upon thy Word and Promise, and will not every one gladly accept this so kind,
this so gracious an Overture?

No; Thousands still there are who will not be persuaded for all that, who will
not understand their true Interest, but rather choose to make themselves Slaves,
than to live as the Sons of God, and Freemen of Christ. Stupid and ungrateful
Sinner! What has bewitched thee into this Treachery and Disobedience to the
best of Masters? How can thou answer these thy Doings even to thy own
Ingenuity and Conscience? Do thou imagine thou shall find thy Account sooner
or better in serving thy own Lusts, and gratifying thy unreasonable and
unlawful Desires, than in keeping the Laws of God, and obeying his most just
and reasonable Commands? If thou art really of this Mind, know then that thy
Case is desperate, since thou art not like to be undeceived, till it be too
late for thee to return and repent.

It Is true indeed, Christ has invited us all into his Service, but then he
justly expects that whoever will become his Servants, should strictly observe
the Rules and Orders of his House: Which is no more than what is commonly
practiced, and thought to be very reasonable among Men. Which Rules of his no
one amongst us can be ignorant of but by his own Fault: For the Word of Truth
lies open to all, and every one may see and learn from thence what he is
particularly obliged unto. Let none of us therefore scruple or boggle at any
thing that Christ has thought fit to command us: Let us not stand upon Terms
with our Lord, nor expect that we should pick and choose our own Work: Besure so
wise a Master would require nothing of his Servants, but what is fit to be done
by them; nothing but what is certainly very good and proper, and even necessary
for us in all Conditions: So that if after all his Kindness to us, we are still
wilful and perverse, and are resolved to serve our Lusts, and to continue in
our Sins, what can in reason be expected, but that we should be turned out of
our Service, and immediately be delivered over to the power of the Devil?

But I am willing to hope better things of you all, and things that accompany
salvation, because there is so much Reason for it; because there is such
Agreeableness and Satisfaction in the Practice of Religion and Virtue. Which
makes me wonder the more how it comes to pass, that Men otherwise of very good
Sense and Understanding, and who have had all the Advantages of an ingenious
and liberal Education, should after such fair and promising beginnings turn
errant Debauchees, and thereby defeat all the Hopes which their Relations, or
Friends, or Country, might conceive of them. But Wisdom is justified of her
Children, and Religion will always approve it self to the judicious and sober
part of Mankind: The Nature of whose Service is such, that whatever our
Circumstances are in the World, if we would distinguish our selves, and excel
in any degree, we cannot possibly miss of our Aim, so long as we keep constant
to our Rule.

IV. The Fourth Thing to be considered is the Necessity of the Service.

There is undoubtedly a Necessity laid upon us all of being Good, and Virtuous,
and Holy, and no Pretense whatsoever has Power to take off the Obligation: Though
some perhaps will be apt to say, They cannot leave off this or that particular
Sin: They have tried as they pretend, and have done whatever they could, but it
seems all in vain: The reason is, they have indulged themselves so long in the
Practice of Sin, that it is become in a manner natural to them, so that they
hardly perceive when they commit it. Thus it too often happens in the case of
profane Swearing and Cursing. Again,

Another perhaps will tell you, for his part he is very sensible that
Intemperance is a great Sin, but for all that he is not able to resist the
Charms of Wine and good Company; besides that, he has been so long and so
deeply engaged in this way, and has contracted such and so many Acquaintance,
that he knows not how to get fairly off: The Man perhaps is not so much
satisfied in what he does, as unwilling to thwart his corrupt Inclination.

The lewd Person no doubt has his Pretenses too as well as the former, but
these are for the most part such as are not so fit to be mentioned.

Now the Case of these Men is certainly very bad, and their Condition is highly
deplorable, and that because they trifle and are unconcerned about the main
Issue, and have not that inward affecting Sense of the Danger which they ought
to have. Were they once made sensible of that, they would quickly forego their
vicious Practices; but then here lies the Difficulty, that when Men's Impieties
have proceeded thus far, the Commands of God's Word, and the Terrors and
Threatenings of the Gospel, are too gentle an Application for the Cure of them:
And therefore some more effectual Methods are to be taken, such as may
thoroughly awaken Sinners, and may convince them of their Wickedness and Folly,
and engage them to become Modest and Temperate, Sober and Religious, or at
least restrain them from breaking out into open Lewdness and Debauchery.

It Is therefore a very proper Remedy which Solomon prescribes, a Rod for the
Fool's Back; it is seasonable doubtless and useful too in this Case: For when
Men are so bent upon Wickedness that they will not grow better by Reproof, it is
requisite some kind of Discipline should be exercised upon them: When they are
so hardened in Sin that neither Religion nor Reason will reduce them, they
should then be made to feel the Censure of the Law. This is the most likely
Method of effecting that Work, which Charity as well as Prudence requires to be
done: And the rather, because a little Severity, when rational Motives and
Persuasives fail, is the truest sort of Kindness that can be showed to such
Men: Who, if they are let alone in their Extravagancies, will soon grow Heady
and Licentious, and will not be stopped in their Career, till at last they give
themselves over unto Lasciviousness, to work all Uncleanness with Greediness,
Ephesians. 4. 19.

The Truth is, when I consider the Circumstances we are in, as to the abounding
of Vice and Immorality, it cannot but seem strange that it should be so: That
Religion, which is the chief Interest and Happiness of Mankind, should be so
little regarded as it is in the World: That Virtue should be so much
discountenanced, and Sobriety and Temperance so rarely seen: That Men should
thus prostitute their Reason, and affront and baffle their Understanding, and
at the same time should value themselves upon such Management as this: This, I
say, could not but seem very strange, were it not that the God of this World, 2
Cor. 4. 4. whom they have so faithfully served, has blinded the Eyes of their
Mind, and will not suffer the Light of Truth to shine clearly unto them.

But however that be, this is certain, that if they who are Christians will not
demean themselves as the Servants of Christ, if they will not consider and
actually return to their Duty, perish they must, there is no help for it: For
when they have said all they can for themselves, God, who knows their Hearts,
and what Means and Opportunities they have had, but have neglected, will
infallibly punish every wilful and impenitent Sinner according to his Desert. I
might enlarge upon this Head, but it is time now to turn my self the other way,
and to show in the Fifth and Last Place.

V. That immense Reward which attends the sincere Performance of our Duty.

If any Man serve me, says Christ, him will my Father honor. Blessed Lord!
What abundant Encouragement is here given to thy faithful Servants and
Followers from these comfortable Words of Thine? Have Thou said this, O
Gracious Master, and will not all those who profess thy Faith and Religion, be
eagerly ambitious of this Honor? Will any that have so vast a Recompense in
view and prospect, choose to seek and follow after any other? Or think it worth
their while to make their Court here below, to these fading Honors, these
tarnish'd Glories, which the Men of this World so much admire? Silly mistaken
Creatures! What is there in any, nay, in all of them, that should tempt us from
our Master's Service, only for the sake of a few vain, empty and insignificant
Titles? Did we but rightly know our selves, and understand our best Interest,
we should despise these gaudy Trifles, and should quite disrelish the grosser
Delights and Satisfactions of Sense: We should then mind Religion and the
weighty Concernments of it, and should make these the main Pursuit and
Endeavor of our Lives: We should fix our Thoughts and our Affections chiefly
on things above, and should be continually wishing for and aspiring after those
invaluable Rewards, those Glories and Honors, which eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither have entered into the Heart of Man to conceive.

These indeed are the proper Recompenses of our Fidelity and Constancy, and
they are the highest and noblest that our Nature is capable of: And though these
in the main are future only, and in reversion, yet Religion usually gives us
something in Hand beside; and that is the present Payment which every one that
Lives well, does one way or other receive.

The World, it is time, is generally very bad, and the Wicked are by much the
greater Number, however Virtue and true Goodness do very seldom fail of Respect
even among those. But suppose the worst to happen that can, and that Wickedness
should every where prevail, and Impiety get the upper hand, still the faithful
and sincere Christian is sure to be taken care of however; our Lord has
promised it, and we have good reason to depend upon his Word; for he is a great
Prince, and one that has all Power at command, and so is continually in
readiness, whenever he pleases, to right and vindicate his distressed Servants.
But if after all we should suffer a while here, let none of us be discouraged
thereat, since Christ has Honors and Preferments enough to bestow upon all
that shall suffer in his Cause, and upon his Account.

This is a very encouraging Consideration to us all, and which ought to animate
our Hopes, and excite our Ambition, not after earthly Honors and Advantages,
which too often betray us, but after those bright and dazzling Crowns, which are
reserved in Heaven for us. It Is the want of a right apprehension of these
Matters, that makes us so indifferent about our best and weightiest
Concernments: Did we but know how to value these as we ought, we should pursue
them with far more Zeal and Earnestness than we commonly do. And O that we were
all of us so wise as to understand our own Happiness, and would effectually be
persuaded to seek the Honor that comes from God only, John 5. 44. For it is
certain none but that can stand us in stead, none but that can make us truly
honorable.

And therefore whatever befalls us here, let us always appear on the side of
Religion, and let us endeavor to rescue it from the exceptions and cavils of
unreasonable Men: And so much the more, because whenever that is attacqu'd or
injured, the Honor of our Great Maker is then concerned, which we must be sure
to vindicate, or must expect to be disowned and discarded by him. The Words
which our Savior spoke to this Purpose are very remarkable, Whosoever shall be
ashamed of me, and of my Words, in this Adulterous and Sinful Generation, of
him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his
Father with the holy Angels, Mar. 8. 38. This is a terrible Sentence indeed,
and therefore we should do well to consider how far any of us may be concerned
in it: Whether at this very day, even in this adulterous and sinful generation,
whenever we hear the Son of God reviled in his Person, or ridiculed and evil
spoken of in his Laws and Doctrine, if we are silent and passive on such an
occasion, he may not then justly reckon us as ashamed of him and of his Words?

The Sum of all is this: If we will own Christ for our Master, we must then
serve him to the utmost of our Power; we must espouse his Interest, and
maintain his Cause against all Opposers whatsoever, against the Theist, and the
Unitarian, the Blasphemer, and the profane Person, against the Common Swearer,
the Drunkard, and the Lascivious: All which are one way or other, either in
Principle or in Practice, the avowed Adversaries of Christ, and of the true
Christian Faith and Religion. This, if we consider, is as little as any of us
can do, so long as we profess our selves Servants to the Blessed Jesus, all
whose Commands ought to be dearer to us than our very Lives.

And since Christ our Lord has strictly charged all Men, of all sorts and
degrees, without Exception, to shun the Ways of Sin, and the Paths of Iniquity,
let us contest this Matter with our selves, and with all our might strive
against the force and bent of our evil Inclinations and Passions. Whatever
Difficulty there may be in the Attempt, still Duty and Obligation ought to take
place here. Let us not take upon us to dispute or cavil at any of his Commands,
but let us readily comply with them all whatever they be, and be thoroughly
satisfied that it is our Interest, as well as Duty, to fulfill and obey them.

Let us not think any thing too hard or too dear to part with for his Sake, who
has showed himself the best Friend and the greatest Benefactor to Mankind that
ever was. And so much the rather, because in return to those manifold
unspeakable Advantages which he has procured to us, all that he expects or
requires from us, is, that we constantly maintain and practice his excellent
Religion, whatever Contempt or Hardship we may meet with from the World.

In a word: Though Vice and Profaneness have got many powerful Advocates on their
side, yet let not that be any discouragement to us while we have Christ on
ours. The Cause which we undertake is in it self highly honorable, and at this
Juncture the most necessary of all other. The things that we contend for are
Truth, Virtue and Religion, the best, the most valuable in themselves, and the
most deserving of our Zeal and Concern. Christ is our Master and Lord, and as
his Servants we appear, we strive, we oppose: Letus be found true to his
Service, just to his Interest, and zealous for his Honor, and then that God
who has said, them that honor me I will honor, shall translate us into his
own most Glorious Kingdom, and shall actually Reward and Honor us to all
Eternity.

Almighty and Merciful God, of whose only Gift it comes, that thy faithful
People do unto thee true and laudable Service: Grant, we beseech thee, that we
may so faithfully serve thee in this Life, that we fail not finally to attain
thy heavenly Promises, through the Merits of Jesus Christ our Lord.

AMEN.
A SECOND SERMON Preached against Immorality and Profaneness.
DEUTERONOMY. xxxii. 6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O Foolish People and Unwise? --
THese Words are part of that Prophetic Song which Moses composed, and which
he tells us he spoke in the Ears of all the Congregation of Israel. Here in a
kind of Poetical Strain he sets forth the Goodness of God, and the Perverseness
and Disobedience of the People: And being shortly to leave the World, he
Summons them together, and rehearses this Song for a Testimony against them, if
so be they should hereafter turn aside and forget their God, as he foresaw they
would.

Alas, so very deceitful is the Heart of Man, so prone to Evil, and so averse
from Good, that the wisest and best Instructions can make but little Impression
upon it: Though Moses here says, my Doctrine shall drop as the Rain, my Spirit
shall distill as the Dew, yet from so corrupt a Root, so cold and barren a Soil,
scarce any fruit or increase was to be hoped, for such was the unhappy Temper
of that People, so weak their Judgment, and so perverse their Will, that the
Prophet seems to give them up for lost. They are, says he, a Nation void of
Counsel; neither is there any Understanding them, ver. 28.

And indeed what Wisdom, or Understanding, or Counsel, can any People or Nation
be said to have, when once they have cast off God and Religion, and are sunk
into all manner of Wickedness and Vice? That is a sad and deplorable Case
indeed, and which will bring swift inevitable Ruin upon us, if we do not
bethink our selves in time, and return to a wiser and better Mind. Which is the
best thing that we can do, and the only certain way for us to escape the
Danger? Whereas while we are thus Unmindful of the Rock that begat us, and do
thus forget God that formed us, we have reason to expect that he will rub up
our Memories, and will, to our cost, make us feel the weight of that
Displeasure which we refused to stand in awe of.

I say we have all just cause to fear that, because as this kind of behavior
is the worst sort of Ingratitude, so it is moreover a very high Dishonor to
God, and a downright Contempt of his Majesty and Laws. And do ye thus requite
the Lord, O Foolish People and Unwise?

In discoursing upon which Words I shall endeavor to make out these Four
things.

I. The Baseness and Ingratitude of a Sinful and Irreligious Course of Life.
II. The gross Absurdity and Unaccountable Folly of such a Course. III. The evil
Consequences which attend it with respect to Men's private Interests and
Concerns. IVly, and Lastly, As it is Destructive of the Welfare and Prosperity
of any Nation or People.
I. The Baseness and Ingratitude of a Sinful and Irreligious Course of Life.

The Obligations we lie under to God are Certain and Unquestionable, whether we
take the light of Nature, or the brighter Discoveries of Revelation for our
Rule and Guide. Either of which does plainly show Impiety to be Baseness and
Disobedience the utmost Ingratitude. Thus several of the Heathens, though they
had only the dim light of Reason to direct them, could nevertheless discover
the necessity of Obedience to the Will of God: Which made one of them to say,
Virtue, Philosophy and Justice, are but the sound of empty Words, it is only a
good Life that can make Men Happy, Sen. Ep. 123. But then as for Revelation,
that indeed has made our Duty, and the several Obligations of it, so plain,
that Men must be utter Infidels if they reject it. So that upon either of these
Accounts no pretense of Ignorance whatsoever can excuse Men for their
Disobedience or Unbelief. For as Moses says in the Words immediately after the
Text Is not he thy Father that has bought thee? Has not he made thee, and
established thee?

And indeed whoever considers God under the Notion of a Father, has all the
reason in the World to honor and obey him: Because for any one to call him so
what is it but at the same time and in the same words to acknowledge him as the
Author of his Being, the Preserver of his Life, and the Founder of all his
Happiness* I shall therefore consider God in these three Respects, any of which
does exact from us all possible Obedience and Service. And,

1. As he is the Author of our Beings.

Did we not Live in an Age that call^ every thing, how certain soever, in
question, it might seem needless to Vindicate the truth of this Proposition:
But since Infidelity is become a sort of Profession, and Atheism begins to gain
Proselytes amongst us, it is surely high time to appear for God, and to assert
his Being and Sovereignty over the Sons of Men. And the rather, because wicked
Men have been, and still are very Industrious in corrupting the Minds of unwary
People: The Poison has been long prepared and dispersed abroad in Books and
Pamphlets, and the ill Effects it has produced are visible in the Lives and
Manners of too many amongst us. Never perhaps in any Age did Sin and Wickedness
more generally abound; at best never was less Zeal shown in the Exercise of
Devotion, and all other instances of Piety and Religion, than in these unhappy
Days of ours. And yet when I have said this, it cannot however but seem very
strange, that in a Nation where Christianity is truly professed, there should
any be found so desperately wicked as to disown their Maker: Because to do that
is a most flagrant Crime, it is the very height of Impiety, and Men must first
abandon their Reason before they can arrive at it.

Since it is God therefore that has bestowed a Being upon us, since it is he
that has made us, and not we our selves, shall we be so highly Disingenuous,
so heinously Ungrateful, as to dishonor at least, if not deny him, by the open
looseness and viciousness of our Lives? Suffer me a little to expostulate the
Matter, not to upbraid but to convince you. Is God our Father, and can we find
in our Hearts to carry it thus undutifully toward him, and seem at least by
our Actions, as if we had a mind to cast him off, and disown all kind of
Relation to him, and Dependence upon him? Again, has God made us only that we
should serve and enjoy him, and to that End has given us a reasonable immortal
Soul, and several excellent Faculties and Endowments, whereby we are enabled to
do him Homage, and shall we, ungrateful Creatures as we are, employ these Gifts
of his, upon the very worst things, in the gratification of our Lusts, in the
service of our Sins and Follies, in the discountenancing of Virtue, and in
neglecting or despising every thing that is Commendable and Praiseworthy? This
must needs be a great Reproach to us as we are Men; and had we any the least
sense of Duty or Gratitude, we could not but inwardly abhor and condemn our
selves for it. It Is true, we may flatter our selves now, and think whatever we
please, but we shall assuredly find at one time or other, that this kind of
behavior is the highest Indignity, the basest Ingratitude that we can possibly
be Guilty of.

But then as God is our Maker; so,

2. Is he our Preserver also. As God of his Goodness first brought us into
Being, so does he by his Providence still continue the same unto us: For that
according to the Apostle he upholdeth all things by the Word of his Power, Heb.
1. 3. And not only so, but as we are his Creatures, he is graciously pleased to
provide for us, and freely to dispense to us not the Necessaries of Life only,
but the Comforts and Conveniences of it too. He it is that takes care of us
and our Concerns, and that keeps us in all our ways: It Is his good Providence
that Watches over us, and that Defends and Guards us in all Dangers. It Is his
Blessing that constantly brings us in Provision, and supplies our Store, and
that makes our Corn, and our Wine, and our Oil to increase.

These and such like are the good things which come down from above, and which
we may make a right and proper Use of, if we please. But, alas, it is so far
from that, that although God be thus Kind and Indulgent to us, yet how Ill is he
served by too many of us? How perverse commonly is our behavior toward him,
and what a wretched requital do we make him for those many Favors and
Blessings which we receive? Nay, though they are all his Gifts that we subsist
upon, yet for the most part so disingenuous are we as to misemploy and abuse
them.

Thus in times of Prosperity, when by the divine Providence we are made Rich,
how apt are we to forget or slight our great Benefactor, and upon our being
full to deny him, and say, who is the Lord? Prove. 30. 9. When we are in
Possession of all that our Hearts can wish, instead of acknowledging his
Kindness as we ought, we presently grow either Covetous, or Sensual, and are so
far from using what we have to the best Advantage, that is, to the Glory of
God, and the Relief and Benefit of others, that perhaps we will not use it at
all; or if we do, it is chiefly in the service of our Lusts and Vices. It Is with
these his Enemies that we take part, and rebel, and fight against him; it is by
these that we break his Laws and violate his Commands; by these we affront his
Goodness, reproach his Name, disparage his Word and Truth, and do the most we
can to bring Religion it self into Contempt. In short, though it be in our Power
to do Good, and to live like Men, yet we choose rather to abuse his Creatures,
till by so doing we debase our Nature, and become like unto the Beasts that
perish.

3 As God is our Maker and Preserver, so likewise is he the Founder of all our
Happiness. The Consequence of which is, that there is no possible way for us to
be happy without God. That both the thing it self, and the way to it, and the
qualifications for it, are all from him: When we had lost our Integrity, and
had forfeited our Happiness, even then God was pleased to have pity on us, and
receive us again into Favor: And the better to encourage our Obedience, which
is the Condition that he requires from us, he has graciously Promised to
reward us with Eternal Life. So that it Concerns us all, as we desire to be
Happy, to understand our Duty, and to Practice it; to forsake our Sins, and
amend our Ways: And in order to that, to curb our unruly Wills, to regulate our
Passions, govern our Affections, and to subdue and mortify our Lusts. In a
word, we must endeavor so to change our corrupt Nature, as to become better
Men, and better Christians too than I doubt most of us are. This is what we
must all resolve to do, because the very Nature of Happiness does require it:
But if we will try other Experiments, and will seek for Happiness in our own
way, we shall one day be convinced of our Mistake, but then it will be too late
to correct it: Which brings me to the Second Thing I proposed to make out, Viz.
The gross Absurdity and unaccountable Folly of a wicked Life.

II. Every vicious ungodly Person is liable to the imputation of Folly, and
that because he puts a notorious Cheat, a most shameful Abuse upon himself. His
whole design is to serve his Lusts, to humor and gratify his Senses: He makes
no account at all of his better Part, nor shows any regard to the Dignity of
his Nature: He considers not what is Proper and Necessary for him to do, but
follows the motion of his Will, and the bias of his depraved Inclination. He
has made a blind and wretched Choice, and is resolved to pursue it, let the
Issue and Consequence be what it will. This is the way that the Wicked take,
and this their way in the Psalmist's Language is their Folly, Psalm. 49. 13. For
since Religion was designed to make Men first Good and then Happy, what greater
Absurdity can there be than to indulge corrupt Nature, and to place our
Happiness in that which is our Reproach and our Danger too?

In the Account of the World, that Man is generally reputed a Fool, who Acts
contrary to his plain visible Interests, and that only in temporal Matters, and
the Affairs of this present Life. If he manages these untowardly, and to
disadvantage, there is no escaping the Censure of others: How much rather then
is he to be accounted such, who wilfully deceives himself, and quite mistakes
his main Point, I mean the Happiness and Salvation of his Soul.

Hence it is that wicked Men are so often in Scripture branded with the
reproachful Name of Fool. In one place they are said to be Children of Fools,
viler than the Earth, Job 30. 8. The reason is, because Sin by its tainting
Quality does debase them to the last degree of Vileness and Corruption. And
elsewhere it is said, Have all the workers of Iniquity no knowledge? No Judgment
nor Consideration of things? And again, Fools, because of their Transgression,
and because of their Iniquities, are afflicted, Ps. 107. 17. And Solomon tells
us that it is abomination to Fools to depart from Evil, Prove. 13. 19. In all
which, and several other places, we are to understand by Fool, not the Idiot,
but the Sinner; not the Natural, but the wilful Fool; one that Affects and
Chooses to be such when he may be otherwise. In short, it is the giddy, rash,
unthinking Person, he that rusheth blindly on, and so considers not in his
Heart, neither is there Knowledge nor Understanding in his Head. It is this
stupid senseless sort of Men, upon whom the wise Prophet bestows this
Character, They have not known, nor understood; they have shut their Eyes that
they cannot see, and their Hearts that they cannot understand, Isai. 44. 18.
This is a miserable State indeed, but then it is every Man's fault and reproach
too, if he fall into it. For since Happiness or Misery is sure to be our
Portion hereafter, accordingly as we demean our selves in this Life, what
egregious Folly is it, if instead of pursuing our main Business, and that for
which we came into the World, we only trifle away our time, or which is worse,
spend it in an idle fruitless course of Sin and Vanity.

If we would act like Men and reasonable Creatures, we must propose to our
selves some End, which if attained to may be sufficient to make us Happy. Now
it is certain nothing can ever make us so, but only the Service of God, and the
Practice of Holiness and Virtue. We may try other Experiments if we please, and
so come to pay dear for our Folly at last: But that is the approved, certain,
and only infallible way which never yet deceived any Man. Reason, and
Knowledge, and Understanding, are all on the side of Religion, and do all
Recommend and Assert it. Religion is the best and most valuable Enjoyment of
all other; it is the great Rule of our Actions, and the chief Ornament and
Perfection of our Nature. In a word, it is of that Importance to us in every
Respect, that we can neither be Wise, nor Virtuous, nor Happy without it.

Vain surely then are their pretenses to Wisdom and Knowledge, who know not
God, nor his Service, nor his Laws: For whatever else they may seem to
understand, yet if they are Ignorant or Regardless of these, they can never
deserve the title of Wise: For to be Wise is to be Religious, and consequently
whoever thinks to arrive at Wisdom any other way, is engaged in a Mistake,
which will effectually prove him to be a Fool in the End. Again,

2. Another Instance of the gross Ignorance and Folly of wicked Men, is that
fond mistaken Notion, which most of them have entertained of worldly and
sensual Delights! It Is here that their Hearts and Affections are engaged, it is
here they expect to find not only their Ease but their Happiness too. But what
a shameful piece of self-deceit are these Men Guilty of, and how wretchedly do
they cheat and abuse themselves, while they pursue these False Fantastical
Pleasures, these Imaginary Joys. While for the sake of some beloved Sin, some
bosom darling Lust, they not only lose all that peace and satisfaction of Mind,
which is certainly to be found in the ways of Virtue, but moreover expose
themselves to the stings and upbraidings of a guilty Conscience. Which whenever
it is thoroughly awakened, as it will be one time or other, is sure to vex and
torment them: For then the Pleasure, whatever it was, is vanished and gone, and
there remains nothing but trouble and disquiet, horror and remorse, which so
gall and distract their Minds, that they know not which way to turn themselves.
None of their former Methods are now able to divert them; neither the
Amusements of Wit, nor the Charms of Wine, nor the Gaiety of Mirth, can
entertain or relieve them. So true is that Observation which the Prophet Isaiah
makes, The wicked are like the troubled sea when it cannot rest, whose Waters
cast up mire and dirt: There is no Peace, says my God, to the wicked.

But beside that inward regret and anguish which Sinners create to themselves,
and which gives such disturbance to their Minds, how do they languish many
times under bodily Pains and Diseases; so that their bones are pierced in them
in the Night-season, and their Sinews take no rest. Job 30. 17. As Job
expresses it, Thus one Man drinks himself into a Fever or a Dropsy, another is
tortured with the Gout or Stone, and a Third pines a way of an Incurable
Loathsome Distemper. These are very often the Effects of a loose and irregular
course of Life: But alas, so besotted and senseless are most wicked Men, that
they never consider the Consequences of their Actions: Whatever Inconveniences
they are like to endure, whether Poverty, or Disgrace, or Sickness, or even
Death it self, they still hug and caress their Vices, and pursue their
Debaucheries: They will not refrain their lewd intemperate Courses, though
thereby they break their Strength, and destroy their Health, and ruin their
Constitution, so that at last whole troops of Diseases seize upon them, and
they go down with rottenness to the Grave.

And now, all things considered, is not this a fine discreet way of managing
things? What! are these the marks and properties of Wisdom, and are such Men to
be accounted the only refined and improved Wits of the Age? On the contrary, to
speak yet plainer, is it possible that such Folly, or rather Madness as this
is, should pass for Sense and Reason and Understanding? Or that a Course of
Life which is so Prejudicial both to Soul and Body, should ever come to be so
universally engaged in? And yet as unaccountable as the thing is, how many are
there in the World, who though they live at this vile abominable Rate, are so far
from thinking the worse of themselves for it, that they rather take a pride in
being Extravagant, and Glory in being distinguished for their Vices. As if
there was no Sense but in sinning, and no Reason like that of living like
Beasts.

From what has been said upon this Argument, it is, I hope, pretty plain that
Religion is the truest Wisdom, and that Sin and Vice are nothing else but
downright Ignorance and Folly. That wicked Men, as wise as they take themselves
to be, are all grossly mistaken, that the Principles they proceed upon are False
and Groundless, and that their Practices are utterly inconsistent with the
Dictates of right Reason, and the Laws of Sound and pure Religion. This is what
I have endeavored to prove, though I am sensible when all is said, wicked Men
may still plead in behalf of their Vices, and may deceive themselves if they
please, and too many I fear have so little Sense as to do so: But yet when live
as if there was no God, and do every thing in Contradiction to Reason as well
as Religion, surely then it is no hard Matter to prove them to be void of true
Understanding.

David I remember in one place has this Expression, The Lord looked down from
Heaven upon the Children of Men, to see if there were any that did understand
and seek God, Ps. 14. 2. Which Words seem to Imply, that Wisdom and true Piety,
though they are different in Terms, are yet in Effect but one and the same thing:
And Consequently that none but good Men, and such as seek or fear God and
regard his Service, can in a proper Sense be said to Understand. The like was
spoken also by Job long before. And unto Man he said, the fear of the Lord,
that is Wisdom, and to depart from Evil is Understanding.

Thus I have showed at large the Ingratitude and the Folly of a sinful course
of Life. I come now in the Third place, to consider the evil Consequences which
attend it with respect to Men's private Interests and Concerns.

3. Great and manifold are the Mischiefs which attend the practice of Sin and
Vice, and so close and constant is the attendance, that no Man thus engaged but
is sure to have a share of them. To prove which I might appeal even to wicked
Men themselves, whether they have not experienced in some Measure, more or
less, the sad unhappy Consequences which these produce: Whether the Sins and
Enormities they are Guilty of, have not done them some real sensible Prejudice:
Whether they have not either wounded their Conscience, or blasted their Credit,
or brought some outward Calamity and Disaster upon them? It Is true indeed, some
Sinners may and do escape better than other, because the evils of this Life do
not happen to all alike: Though some for their Sins do meet with quick and speedy
Disappointments, yet others are seen to flourish still, and make a glorious
show, till at last some odd unlucky chance, some unexpected fatal stroke dashes
all their greatness in Pieces. When that happens, then is that Sentence of
Zophar verified, Though his excellency mount up to the Heavens, and his Head
reach unto the Clouds, yet they that have seen him shall say, where is he? The
Eye also which saw him, shall see him no more, neither shall his Place any more
behold him, Job 20. 6, 7, 9.

Many and various are the Instances and Ways in which the evil Consequences of
vice Appear. I shall at present mention but these Three. 1. That of our
Reputation. 2. Our Estates. And, 3. Our particular Callings.

1. As to our Reputation in the World. That I Confess is a very true and tender
Point, and most Men pretend to a more than ordinary Concern for it. Nay, there
is hardly any Body so dissolute, so void of all sense of Honor or Virtue, but
will express some kind of Resentment, some Concern at least, whenever that is
Attacqu'd or Questioned. And yet were that in truth as dear to some Men as they
say it is, certainly they would take more and better care of it than they do:
Had they such a desire to be well thought of in the World, they would not
surely expose themselves to Censure: They would not transgress the rules of
Decency, Modesty and Sobriety, nor break in upon the Obligations of Truth and
Justice: They would not Swear, and Curse, and Blaspheme, and be guilty of the
vilest Practices, as they too commonly are. Such Men perhaps may look great in
their own Eyes, and fancy themselves priviledg'd to do as they please: But
still while they demean themselves at this rate, are sure to appear
Contemptible to every Body else. For as the wise Man rightly observes, Who will
Honor him that dishonors his own Life?

Many it is certain there are who will talk much and loud of their Reputation,
and will assert it too sometimes very unreasonably; but for all that are
content to part with it almost at any Rate, and as if they were weary of
keeping it, will Sacrifice it, to the next Temptation that comes in their way.
Alas, so little regard have Men nowadays to their Reputation, that they
rather seem to put it to sale, and for fear lest they should lose their Market,
are willing to let it go at any Price: A small sum of Money, or a thin gust of
popular Breath, or any the most sordid Vice, is able to purchase it.

Some again are very shy and reserved in their outward Behavior, and while
they suspect that others observe them, are afraid to take the least step amiss:
These Men, the better to conceal their ill Designs, have put on a Mask of
Piety, a Form of Godliness, but never consider that such Artifices, such
Disguises do but render them still more deformed. The truth is, every Body
almost is aware of them, and knows their Practices, and hates to be imposed on
by fair Outsides, and specious Pretenses: Beside that so odious, so detestable
a Sin, is Hypocrisy, that Religion it self does still suffer on Account
thereof.

But whatever others do, let all of us resolve to maintain a clear Reputation,
an unblemished Character: 'Twill be of unspeakable Advantage to us in most of
the Concerns and Duties of Conversation: Let us therefore cherish it with the
greatest tenderness and care, and let us strive to establish it, not by talking
much of Religion, or pretending highly to it, but by the sincere, constant and
uniform Practice of it. Let our Zeal for God and his Service shine forth in all
our Actions, let it appear bright, but not too glaring, for that is sometimes
found to do rather Harm than Good. This is the only way to Preserve or Increase
a good Reputation where it is, and effectually to retrieve it when it is
unfortunately stained or lost.

Consider again what a mean contemptible thing it is to be either Vicious or
Unjust, and what a grievous Scandal it brings to the Christian Profession: And
therefore be careful to eschew all manner of Evil, especially the too common
and fashionable Vices and Corruptions of the Times, and not barely to eschew,
but as occasion offers to reprove them too. Discourage as much as in your lies,
all Profaneness and rash Swearing, all kind of loose, obscene or atheistical
Discourse: Reject the enticements of Lust and Intemperance, and if at any time
you are tempted thereto, say to your Acquaintance or Companions, as David did
on the like Occasion, Depart from me, ye evil Doers, for I will keep the
Commandments of my God. I am a Companion of all them that fear him, and of them
that keep his Precepts, Psalm. 119. 115. v. 63. But more especially, as you
value a good Name, a fair Reputation, take that friendly Advice of his Son,
Enter not into the Path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil Men: Avoid
it, pass not by it, turn from it and pass away.

2. In respect of our Estates. That Sin and Wickedness have a fatal Influence
upon these is plain even to a Demonstration. Sometimes a Curse is entailed upon
our Possessions, which secretly descends to Posterity; then it is that the
Innocent but Unhappy Inheritor can neither Enjoy that Wealth, nor secure that
Inheritance, which at first was raised by Injustice or Oppression. But the
mischiefs of Prodigality are much more Sensible to us, we see plainly the many
and great Inconveniences which attend that way: How Men's Follies and
Extravagancies do prey upon their Estates, and make them moulder away so fast,
that nothing but Shame and Contempt is to be looked for, and Poverty which
comes upon them like an armed Man. This is the natural result of Luxury and
Profuseness, which are Sins now very rife and common amongst us: The
Consequence of which has been and still is the ruin of a great many Families
and Estates. But before I dismiss this Head, I cannot but take notice of one
very common, but withal very mischievous Custom, and it is that of excessive
and immoderate Gaming. Which as it is nowadays practiced by too many, is such
a fruitful complicated Evil, as deserves to be severely Censured by the Laws.
However, all I shall move is, that if Men will not Consider what they do, they
may even thank themselves for the Event; since they have nothing to complain of
but their own vain Humor, their Carelessness, their Vices and Impieties, which
are of themselves sufficient to undo them, but oftentimes the Judgment of God
strikes in, and so makes their Misery certain and unaviodable.

3. In respect of our particular Callings. That Religion is highly serviceable
to these Ends no Body can doubt, that will but consider what an immediate
dependence these have upon the blessing of God, which is more than all the Care
and Industry that Men can possible use. For except that second and prosper
their Endeavor, it is vain for them to rise up early, and sit up late, and eat
the Bread of Sorrows, Psalm. 127. 2. In vain do they Project and Contrive to
better their Fortune or increase their Store. So that if any such Person be a
bad Man, a loose and careless Liver, unmindful of his Duty to God, and
regardless of his Worship and Service, no wonder then if his Custom fails, his
Trade decays, and all, even his most promising Designs, miscarry. For upon what
Ground can such a one expect to thrive, or look that any good Success should
attend his Hopes and his Cares?

If on the other Hand, to serve some little Ends and Interests of his own, he
takes up a Form of Godliness, and appears a Zealous and Devout Christian, but
at the same times does very ill Things, is perhaps a false and unjust Dealer,
and makes no Conscience to defraud and overreach in Buying or Selling, that
Man after all his demureness is a gross Hypocrite, a downright Knave. And if
that his wickedness be sweet in his Mouth, as Job speaks, so that he will not
repent of and forsake all such dishonest Practices, he will soon find to his
Sorrow that he has indeed Cheated many, but his own Foolish wretched self most
of all.

The Sum of what has been said is this: That Irreligion and Vice are very
pernicious things, and do in their own Nature tend to the prejudice of Men's
temporal Affairs: That it is for want of due Consideration that Temptations gain
upon them, and they are so often carried down the stream of bad Example: That
it is a great Unhappiness they do not see their Error, and are not sooner
convinced of the Danger that awaits them: That were they once made sensible of
that, they could not but Condemn themselves, and wonder how they came to be so
mistaken: That were they but so Wise as to Discern their true Interest, they
would quickly see the folly of Injustice and a wicked Life, and what a plain
palpable Absurdity it is to do any thing contrary to Truth, Reason, Honor or
Conscience.

I might here go on to show what farther Mischiefs may and do Actually arise
from a general Dissoluteness and Depravation of Manners, particularly in the
ordinary Business and common Transactions of Life. What a bad Influence it has
upon the Advantag's of Society, and how apt it is to untie the Bands of
Friendship, to destroy mutual Fidelity, and consequently to create Mistrusts
and Jealousies among Men. For when they come to observe how little Regard is
had to Religion, they presently conclude, and with good reason too, that all
things are running to Confusion, and that no heed at all is to be given to what
any Man says or declares, seem he ever so serious and reserved.

Indeed when all is done, it is Religion alone that makes Men fit to be trusted,
it is that which breeds a generous Confidence, and which maintains a friendly
Correspondence between them; when therefore Wickedness does so prevail, that
neither Religion nor Conscience is regarded, what Suspicion and hard Censure is
that like to produce? Where then is the Man whose Word will be taken, or whose
Faith is to be relied upon: Nay, what Ground of Assurance can others have, but
that after the fairest Promises, the most solemn Professions, they may come to
be deceived by him at last? These and many more Inconveniences will
unavoidably befall us, whilst Impiety and Profaneness, and every other sort of
Vice is suffered to abound.

I might likewise show how our Sins and Vices tend directly to divide us,
whether in Opinion or Affection, and consequently do touch and wound us in the
most sensible Part, I mean the Honor and Safety of our Mother the Church,
which is now so miserably Torn and Rent in pieces by Faction and Schism. But I
shall wave this Argument, and proceed to show in the Fourth and last Place,

IV. How destructive Impiety is of the Welfare and Prosperity of any Nation or
People.

Now for the Proof of this particular Point, what need we any other Instance
than that of the People in the Text, which is very Remarkable. God had Born
long with that Stubborn, Disobedient and Sinful People, but after all the
Essays which he had made upon them for their Good, they still continued to do
wickedly, and walked in the Counsels and in the Imagination of their evil
Heart. Great and Clamorous were their Sins, and such as had Provoked God to a
just and a severe Resentment? Therefore, says he to the Prophet Jeremy, pray
not thou for this People, neither lift up Cry nor Prayer for them, neither make
Intercession to me, for I will not hear thee, Jer. 7. 16. God had now fixed the
date of their Calamity, so that no Intercession should move him to avert it: He
saw there was no likelihood at all of their Repentance and Amendment, and
therefore he had determined to Chastise and Punish them to purpose: And to that
end he raised up a potent Enemy against them, who with a mighty Force invaded
their Country, seized upon their Possessions, and carried the greater part of
the Inhabitants away into Captivity: Of which Calamity and the Cause of it God
himself assures them in a solemn manner, Hear, O Earth, behold, I will bring
Evil upon this People, even the Fruit of their Thoughts, because they have not
hearkened unto my Words, nor to my Law, but rejected it.

They have not hearkened unto my Words, nor to my Law, said God to the
Impenitent Jews: That was his Complaint and Charge against them, and that
likewise was the sole Cause of their Misery and Desolation. And now that God
was thus Angry with his own People, and did so severy Punish them for their
Transgressions, have not other Nations, whose Sins and Iniquities abound, as
much reason to fear the like Judgment and Severity? Yes, most undoubtedly: For
do we not find that the same or like Sins and Provocations have ruined Cities,
destroyed Kingdoms, and laid waste several Great and Flourishing Churches, even
since the days of Christianity? Thus it has fared with those false Christians,
those unprofitable Servants, those slothful and wicked Husbandmen, who were
long since cast out as well as the Jews, and that because they took not
sufficient Care of their Lord's Vineyard. The Kingdom of God, as our Savior
speaks, has been taken from them, and given to others that should bring forth
the Fruits thereof, Matt. 21. 43.

These and such like Examples of Divine Vengeance are enough, one would think,
to Startle us, if we have not lost our Senses, and to put us upon endeavoring
a speedy and thorough Reformation. That is the thing we want, and that which
our Circumstances plainly require; and the rather, because nothing but that can
do us any Good, nothing but that can preserve us from Evil. It Is not long, if
we remember since our Fears were upon us, when God's Hand was lifted up, and
the Stroke was just falling upon us: Then indeed we Sighed, and Mourned, and
showed some Signs and Tokens of Amendment, but no sooner was the Danger removed
from us, but we presently fell to our old Sins again, and soon became as Bad or
Worse than we were before. Surely to behave our selves thus after so great
Mercy, is double Ingratitude, and who can tell but that the Guilt of it is
already put upon the Nation's score?

No Man certainly knows whether the Sins of this Nation be yet come to a
Crisis, so as to be ripe for public Vengeance; however thus much any Man may
see, that it is high time to put a Stop to that Torrent of Wickedness which is
breaking in upon us, and which nothing but a Discreet and and Resolute Zeal is
likely to Oppose. So that if we have any Kindness for our selves, or for those
that shall come after us, we must immediately resolve upon other Measures: If
we have any value for our Religion, our Government, our Liberties and Laws, we
must do all we can to discountenance Impiety, and bring Vice to open Shame. As
we desire the Continuance of these our Enjoyments, which cannot but be dear to
every one of us, we must be Vigorous in Promoting so Great, so Glorious, so
necessary a Work. Which if we are Backward or Unwilling to Engage in, let us
consider what the Consequence of that Neglect must be, and what a Reproach it
is we should Live as we do, Quiet, and Secure, and Careless, of all that is
Good? Like the Inhabitants of Laish, when, as it is said, there was no
Magistrate in the Land that might put them to Shame in any thing, Jud. 18. 7.

We are Intent enough most of us upon the things of this World, Riches and
Honors, and Pleasures, and nothing can Discourage us in the pursuit of them,
but we commonly leave Religion to shift for it self: That, it is plain, is the
least of our Care, unless it be to Wrangel and Dispute about it, which
oft-times we do to the Hurt and Reproach of it. The thing is very certain, and
all good Men are concerned to see it, that the Interest of Religion declines
daily amongst us; but then where is the Fault and Misfortune of that to be
charged? Is it not upon the Coldness of some, and the ill Lives of others, who
Profess it? If we would in good Earnest Secure or Promote the Welfare of
Religion, the best way to do that is to practice it, and then we need not fear
that either Popery or Fanaticism will gain much Ground upon us. Let us
therefore do something for our own Safety, for the Honor of God, for the
Public Good, something toward the healing of the Nation, that so God may be
reconciled, our Sins pardoned, and we become a Prosperous and Happy People.

On the contrary, let us be assured that if we still persist in our Impieties,
our good Things will all vanish and come to nothing: That very Liberty which we
are so tender of, will become a snare to us, and will at last end in Slavery
and Oppression. Consider how God threatened the Jewish Priests, If he will not
hear, and if ye will not lay it to Heart, to give Glory unto my Name, says the
Lord of Hosts, I will even send a Curse upon you, and I will curse your
Blessings, Mat. 2. 2. In like manner, if we the sinful People of this Land will
not Hear, and if we will not lay it to Heart, so as to fear God, and give Glory
to his Name by a sincere and timely Repentance, then will he be Angry with us,
and will curse our Blessings also. All outward worldly Comforts will then fly
away, our Peace and our Plenty will both forsake us, and either some Foreign
and Powerful Enemy will invade us, or else we shall fall out, and divide, and
crumble in pieces amongst our selves, so fatal an Aspect has Irreligion upon
the Welfare and Prosperity of any People.

To the End therefore that both Church and State may Continue and Flourish
amongst us, let us take care to amend our Lives, and Reform our Manners, that
so God our great Benefactor may have no cause to complain of us, as having
conferred so many Blessings and Mercies upon a Disobedient and Unthankful
People. That God has of late appeared so Eminently in our behalf, is a sign
that he has a Kindness for us, and will still Watch over us for good, if we by
our Perverseness do not force him upon other Methods. It is our part therefore
so to Qualify our selves as to be capable of his future Favors: He has
showed us what is Good, and what he does require of us, which is only to do
justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with our God.

To conclude; I question not but all sober thinking Men will agree with me in
this: That wherever it is that Atheism, Irreligion and Contempt of Godliness
are seen, there nothing but Disorder and Confusion is to be looked for: On the
other Hand, that wheresoever it is that Virtue is encouraged, the Honor of God
and of Religion maintained, and every kind of Vice effectually discountenanced,
there will the Divine Providence appear as a sure Guard and invincible
Security. There shall Peace, and Tranquillity, and Abundance be found, and
nothing shall interpose to Vex and Annoy. Not all the Power, nor all the Malice
of the World, shall ever be able to Undermine that Society, Overturn that
Government, or Destroy that Church which stands upon so firm a Foundation.

FINIS.

