THE TESTIMONY OF THE Hartford Quakers FOR The Man Christ Jesus, VINDICATED

From the Malicious Slanders, Perversions, Confusions, Impertinencies and Idle
Quibling of William Haworth an Independent-Preacher, in his ANIMADVERSIONS on
the said Testimony from the Hartford Quakers, as (in Derision) he calls them.

With a Brief and Serious Reply by Mary Stout, to what concerns her in William
Haworth's former Book, Entitled, The Quaker converted to Christianity
Re-established; which about two years since John Crook and William Bailey have
more fully Answered, in their Book, entitled, The Counterfeit-Christian
Discovered; intended hereafter to be published, unto which THE SUBSTANCE of
this Tract will serve for an APPENDIX.

He (i. e. Christ) is despised and rejected of men, etc. who shall declare his
Generation? Isa. 53.

Behold I lay in Sion a Chief Cornerstone, elect, precious; but unto them
which be disobedient, a Stone of Stumbling, etc. 1 Pet. 2.

Printed in the Year, 1676.

A Brief Introduction TO THE Unprejudiced Reader
SInce we have in our late Testimony to the Man Christ Jesus, in the Fear,
Sight and Presence of Almighty God seriously confessed unto the VERY CHRIST,
the Son of God, both with respect to his miraculous Conception by the Holy
Ghost, his being born of the Virgin Mary, his Life, Sufferings, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension into Glory, his Coming again in Spirit and in the Power
of his Father, etc. according to the plain Testimonies given of him in the four
holy Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, the Acts of the Apostles, etc.
William Haworth in the Pride and Malice of his Heart has endeavored to
invalidate our Profession, and abusively rendered us Liars, Cheaters,
Equivocaters, page 11, 12. Poor Unbelieving Creatures, p. 15. like a Railer
aspersing us with [The deadly Poison, Enchantments, Divinations, Errors of the
Socinians, Quakers, Ranters, Muggletonians, Papists] thus he ranks us: And with
his impertinent Scribles has opposed our Confession of Christ's spiritual
Coming and Presence with his Members on Earth, limiting the Spirit of Christ to
a wonderful distance from his Saints and Members on Earth, because he says,
It Is the Soul or Spirit of Christ's Manhood or Humanity in Heaven; which Spirit
(or Christ's spiritual Presence) that it should so much as extend to the Saints
upon Earth, this he cannot swallow, Animad. Page 10. (on this, much of his Work
against us depends) yet let it be remarkt, that to the utter Overthrow of his
own Cause he has in plain words confessed thus, viz. We confess again, that the
Deity perfects all Good IN US and for us; but then the Humanity is in Union
with it, and ACTS WITH
IT, and they must not be put assunder, p. 28.

Howbeit, when he often grants, that Christ is present with and in his Saints
on Earth by his Spirit (which is all we would have granted, if it were in
Reality) he says, he means the Holy Ghost, who is God, and infinite, and can
be and is in all the Saints, both in Heaven and on Earth at once; not the
Spirit of the Manhood, that is a finite Creature, he says. But where proves he
by the Scripture, that the SON of God is a Finite Creature? Yet to vary and go
round again, We are very apt to be swallowed up with the abstracted Thoughts of
the Deity, Antid. page 13. And that Christ has a Fellow-feeling with his
People in all their Streits, being touched with the Feeling of their
Infirmities, Hebr. 4. 15. p. 12. Besides the plain Scripture he cannot get
over, viz. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is no^e of his, Romans 8.
9. And God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our Hearts, crying Abba
Father, Gal. 4. 6.

But it will appear in the following Tract, that this man has confusedly
rambled, varyed from, and confounded Scripture Language, relating to the
Manifestation and Operation of the Son of God, as the Way and Means of Man's
Deliverance and Salvation from Sin and Death, and coming unto the Father; for
no man comes unto the Father but by the Son. This Way and Method of God's
Salvation through his Son we stand for, against Confusion and Darkness: For the
Light of Truth is risen over it all.

Note that when W. H. is proved a Forger, in his citing the Dispute between the
Baptists and William Penn, etc. at Barbican, to prove that we deny the Manhood
of Christ in Heaven, then to prove his Slander, that we deny Jesus of Nazareth
to be the Messiah, he closely sticks to a Certificate, dated Sept. 19. 1676.
and signed by Daniel Doughty, John Albury, Steph. Tothill, which is, That at
the Discourse they had with William Bates, they did more then once hear him
plainly say, That what Christ took of the Virgin had now no Being. And to
aggravate the Matter against the Quakers, and to prove them No Christians,
Seducers, etc. W. H. says, He has heard it out of the Mouth of a Prophet of
their own, with Three Witnesses, and has read it in their own Books (without
page 3.
quoting any such Books and Pages.) But Note that in his Epistle to his
Antidote, etc. (which we had some Months before the Date of the said
Certificate) he has it in some other Terms, viz. That W. Bates frequently said,
He did not believe that the Humane Nature, that which was taken by Christ of
the Virgin had now any Being: See his Variation, as to Matter of Fact. The
Phrase [Humane Nature] and that [he frequently said it] is not mentioned in the
said Certificate. However we own neither Passage, but look upon the words as
unadvisedly spoken, whether way soever William Bates did express them; or if he
spoke any thing to the same import, he was ensnared by the Priest's Craft: and
therefore his Charging the Quakers hereupon with denying Jesus of Nazareth, is
as utterly false, as his calling W. Bates a Prophet of our own, to prove us
guilty; whereas he was never esteemed (nor known to be, that we know of) either
a Prophet, Preacher or Teacher among us. And W. H. his charging the Quakers,
Antid. Epist.
(yea, many Thousands of them) with disowning Jesus of Nazareth, from the words
of that one Person, shows his Injustice and Malice: And we having plainly
confessed to the same Christ Jesus, as still in being, W. H. to his own
Contradiction says, they evidently see we are not all Anim. p. 11.
guided by one and the same Infallible Light. It seems then, that though W.
Bates was not, others of us are. More Shame then for our Adversary to brand the
Quakers in general (and to call us gross Liars and Cheaters) for this one man's
Occasion, Would he have himself and his Brethren to be so served? Has he done
as he would be done by? Oh, Shameless Man! And we demand of him; to know in
what Books of ours he has read these words, as he says, viz. That what Christ
took of the Virgin has now NO Being: Let him produce those Books and Pages of
ours, wherein those words are asserted by the Quakers (as their Opinion) or
forever stop his Mouth; and be ashamed of Reviling and Abusing us, as he has
done. We doubt not but the Righteous God will rebuke his Malicious, Envious,
Lying Spirit, and manifestly abase him for his Perverting the Truth, and
Belying and Reviling the Servants of Christ, as he has frequently done in his
Writings.

Here follows a brief Collection of William Haworth 's Doctrines, about which
the Controversy between him and us Chiefly has depended.

1. OF the Body of Christ in Heaven, That it is a Humane Natural Body, of an
Earthly Substance, having the same Materiality, Form, and Figure and Shape
ESSENTIAL to it, that it had when here upon Earth, Anim. p. 10, 11. and 7. and
16. compared with Antid. p. 6. [Contrary to Phil. 3. 21. 1 Cor. 15. 44, 45, 46,
47, 48.

2. Yet (in Contradiction) That it is a very Glorious Body, more bright then a
Thousand Suns, gloriously represented and painted out to us by Daniel, and John
in the Revelation.

3. That Steven saw the Heavens opened, and the Body of Christ, yea, Christ
Jesus, on the Right Hand of God, with his Bodily (or Carnal) Eye, from Acts 7.
55, 56. See also Antid p. 6, 12. compared with Animad. p. 14, 15.

4. That the Man Christ Jesus is not here on Earth, as to his Spirit; nor is or
may his Soul or Spirit be (so much as) extended to the Saints upon Earth,
Antid. p. 2, 3. compared with Anim. p. 10. [Yet in Contradiction to this by his
own Expressions] CHRIST has always been present with his Disciples in the
Discharge of their Ministerial Gifts, and will be to the End of the World by
his Spirit -- The Union between Christ and his Church is mystical and
spiritual, not corporal and carnal, as there is one Soul throughout the natural
Body of Man, the same in the Head, and in every Member; so one Spirit in Jesus
Christ, the Mystical Head, and in every one of his Members the Saints, 1 Cor.
6. 17. Animad. p. 9. Christ is present BY HIS SPIRIT IN his Saints, p. 30. And
whoever has not the Son, has not the Father, p. 26.

Note, If he knew what he says, and were real in his Confession, so as not to
vary from it, the Controversy in this would be at an End, since Christ is
confessed by both of us to be God and Man.

But further observe W. Haworth's Doctrines.

5. That Infants are not Innocents, but have the Guilt of Adam's Sin upon them,
page 21. Contrary to Ezekiel. 18. 20. and Chap. 18. 15. Mat. 18. 3. and 19. 14.
Mark 10. 14.

6. That the Light within every one, is nothing but Nature, which is corrupt:
We are by Nature Children of Wrath, p. 21. [But in plain Contradiction.] This
Light within is the Law of Moses written in the Heart, that the Apostle (he is
sure) calls it Nature, Romans 2. 14. But now to [Mark.]
come off (how miserably soever) he says, The Law of Moses in the Heart is the
Work of the Law, p. 22.

Query, But we ask, were those Gentiles, who did by Nature those things
contained in the Law, Children of Wrath by the Work of the Law in their Hearts?
(contrary to plain Scripture, Psalm. 19. 7. Romans 2. 13, 14.) Now risum teneatis
amici.

7. That the Apostle says of these Gentiles, that had done by Nature the
Things contained in the Law, and had the Works of the Law written in their
Hearts, notwithstanding this they were unrighteous, Sinners, guilty, etc. as a
natural Man doing Part of the Law by the mere Strength of Nature is nothing but
Sin, is a Child of Wrath, in a damnable Condition, no right Principle from
whence he acts, not a Dram of true Faith in Jesus Christ, p. 22.

Query, What then was it (or could it be) corrupt sinful Nature, by which those
Gentiles, mentioned Romans 2. 14, 15. did those things contained in the Law, and
were justified?

8. That W. H. and his Brethren cannot, dare not, must not admit of any Thing,
no not so much as our Faith (though it is wrought in us by the Spirit) into that
Righteousness that justifies us in God's Sight, p. 23. Contrary to plain
Scripture, Romans 5. 1. 1 Cor. 6. 11.

9. He questions whether there be any Works done by the Spirit upon any of the
Sons of Men (except Christ) but there still remains a Body of Sin in them?
Intimating that a Body of Sin still remains in them all, Christ excepted.
Contrary to Romans 6. 7. and ver. 18. Col. 2. 11. And contrary to his own
Confessions, viz. God works upon us by his Spirit, to renew our evil Natures
after his own Image, p. 24. We confess that the Deity PERFECTS all Good in us,
etc. p. 28.

10. That we are not justified by Works done in the Spirit, as Abraham 's
Works, David 's Works, etc. p. 26. Contrary to Jam. 2. 21, 24.

11. That David describes the Blessedness of the Man unto whom God imputes
Righteousness without Works DONE BY THE SPIRIT, Antid. p. 18. Contrary to Psalm.
32. 2.

12. That Isaiah calls HIS observing Moses 's Law in THE SPIRIT filthy. Rags in
that Place, Isa. 64. 3. p. ibid.

13. That Paul 's delighting in the Law of God after the inward Man (which was
to keep it in THE SPIRIT) he counted Loss for Christ, when converted to Christ,
and this but his own Righteousness, on Phil. 3. p. ibid.

14. To the Question, Is it good Doctrine to say, that Paul, when a Christian,
counted his spiritual Obedience Loss and Dung for Christ? W. Haworth answers,
This is the Man that pretends highly to esteem and value the inward Work of the
holy Spirit in the Hearts of Saints, and his Renewings, Comfortings,
Quickning^, etc. p. 22.
Yes very good, sound, blessed and comfortable Doctrine, received by Millions
of Saints in Heaven and Earth (he adds) [in Point of Justification] Animad.
p. 27. Contrary to Romans 8. 13. and 6. 16. and 16. 26. 2 Cor. 10. 5. 1 Pet. 1.
2. 14. 22. Heb. 5. 9. Acts 5. 32. Jer. 7. 23. Isaiah. 1. 19. Deutr. 30. 14.
Romans 10. 8.

15. We are not justified by any Righteousness of ours done in the Spirit (this
he calls, the Deeds of the Law) contrary to Romans 8. 1, 2.

16. That our own Righteousness (that which the Apostle Paul calls his own, in
Phil. 3. 9.) is within us, Inherint in our Souls; it CONSITS in those Gifts and
Virtues that the Spirit of God works in our Minds, and we express those
outwardly, etc. [His proof for this Doctrine is] viz. Faith is called your
Faith, Love is called your Love, etc. The Spirit works Faith in us. See his
Quaker Converted, Epistle Dedicatory.

Observe, See what an exposition is here made upon Paul's words about his own
Righteousness, which he desired not to have, but counted it loss for Christ.
How horribly has this Man perverted this Scripture, Phil. 3. 9. Those Gifts and
Virtues of the Spirit of God in Paul, as Faith, Love, etc. Could he part with
these, and count them loss for Christ, when he had gained them by Christ? And
W. H. acknowledges, That it is Regeneration that makes us meet for the
Kingdom. See how he is confounded.

17. That that Righteousness of Faith by which we are justified is wholly
without us, in the person of Christ, Quak. con. Epist. Contrary to Isa. 26. 12.
Romans 8. 1, 2, 4. and 10 6, 7.

18. Regeneration is to be distinguished from Justification, as the Cause from
the Effect, Justification the cause of Regeneration, Animad. p. 27.

Note, As if men were justified in an Unregenerate state, contrary to 1 Cor. 6.
11. Tit. 3. 5, 6, 7.

19. What he calls the personal Righteousness of Christ, upon which only he
places the Justification, Imputation, and merit of God's Kingdom, he explains,
viz. That is only by the BLOOD-SHEDING of Jesus Christ, Anim. p. 27.

Note, This SHEDING of Christ's Blood, then has he preferred above the Virtues
and work of his Spirit in us: And whose act was the SHEDING of his Blood, pray
you? Was it not his Persecutors? Whereas it was by the eternal Spirit in him,
that HE OFFERED up himself a Lamb without spot to God: So that his Offering up
himself was Act of obedience, proceeding from the inherent Righteousness and
Holiness, which dwelt in him.

20. Of Satisfaction. A Vengeance ready to punish Sin: This is as dear to HIM
(i. e. God) as his mercy, IT being HIMSELF, it must therefore be satisfied;
this way it is satisfied, viz. THE FATHER POURED OUT ALL HIS WRATH UPON HIS SON
JESUS CHRIST, upon whom the Guilt of his People was Charged, vid. Quaker
Converted, Epistle Dedicatory.

Note. Oh! Wonderful yet un scriptural Satisfaction: Thus W. Haworth has showed
his Respect to the Son of God, thus highly to set the Father against the Son,
even as much as his Brother T. Powell, in his affirming THAT JESUS CHRIST WAS
THE GREATEST SINNER Note his Blasphemy
IN THE WORLD: Whence it must needs follow, THAT THE FATHER POURED OUT ALL HIS
WRATH UPON HIS SON. Do the Independent Congregations thus think to live at ease
in their Sins, and go Scot ^ree, or accquite themselves from the Wrath of God?
If they do, their Hope and expectations will fail them.

By these Doctrines before, wherein William Haworth has shown his Madness
against the Light within, and the Works wrought by and in the Spirit of God in
the Saints, and against the Son of God himself; by rendering him the Subject of
his Father's wrath the Reader may suppose what kind of stuff the rest of his
work and Scribbling against us is. We have here forborne to give a particular
Answer to all these his Doctrines and Confusions, or a Recitation of all his
Lies the matter being fully Answered elsewhere in other Books, particularly by
John Crook, in his Treatise, Entitled, The Counterfeit Convert discovered, [in
Reply to William Haworth's Book, Styled, The Quaker Converted to Christianity
Re-established] which (since W. H. has given us new occasions, and like a
cracking Boaster, now Dares us to Reply) is intended to be made Public, so
soon as may be with Convenience, If the Lord will.

We are Friends to all that desire to know the Truth as it is in Jesus Christ.
viz. Richard Thomas, Edward Flumsted jun. H. Sweeting, Abraham Rutt, Richard
Martin, H. Stout.


Here follows William Bates his Retraction and Account, to stop William
Haworth 's Clamours on that Occasion.
WHereas William Haworth has taken occasion to reproach the People of God
called Quakers, as being no Christians, Seducers, etc. from some words which
fell from my self in discourse with him, which his Witnesses certify were
thus, viz. That what Christ took of the Virgin had now no Being.

At four sundry times W. Haworth did set upon me with Accusations and
Questions: And the first time, when he with several of his company came, as
appears, to ensnare me with an Unlearned Question, about the Body (and Humane
Nature) of Christ, Whether it be not the very same Flesh, Blood and Bone in
Heaven as he took of the Virgin? I cannot deny but some such words past from
me, as before cited; wherein I do acknowledge it was my Weakness and Oversight,
to give him any such Answer. And that my Weakness herein may not be further
charged upon the People called Quakers, I do (in the Sight of God) affirm, That
I never was taught any such words among them; nor do I know any such thing to
be held by any of them, as that, What Christ took of the Virgin had now no
Being; I should rather have answered his Question with Silence; for I did not
understand his word [Humane Nature] However, I hope I shall be more careful how
and whom I answer for the time to come. Yet nevertheless, let it be noted, That
when I perceived W. H. had gotten Advantage at my words, I presently confessed
my Belief of the same Christ Jesus, as still in Being; several times desiring
him not to write those words (which had given him Advantage) yet he told me,
But he would; and still made use of the former Advantage against me; ^^lling
me, I was a Mad Quaker; he had had discourse with diverse of the Quakers, but
never heard the like from any of them; and withal, That my Brethren would call
me to an Account for what I had said. In the Fear of the holy God I do declare
this to be the very Truth of the Matter, so near as possibly I can remember.

The 16 th of the 10 th Mon. 76.

William Bates.

Now observe, Reader, how disingenuously this W. H. has dealt in this matter;
Is It, In accusing the Quakers on this Occasion with denying the same Man Christ,
and disowning Jesus of Nazareth to be the Messiah, when he knew (as appears)
the contrary, by expecting they would call W. Bates to an Account for what he
had said: Oh, Unconscionable and void of Common Honesty! how like the Devil has
he acted? when he has ensnared a Man, then insults over him, and since that to
accuse a People from that particular Occasion. And 2dly, To notify the Man to
the Nation as a Prophet of ours for these words, which he desired him not to
write down; but thereby intimated a desire, they should not be insisted upon,
and here he has honestly retracted them, and therein shown more Respect to
Truth then ever W. H. has done, or is like to do whilst he persists in his
Lying Aspersions and Abuses against us; For which the Righteous God will judge
him, and his Folly and Madness against God's holy Truth, will the more be
manifest to his Shame and Confusion, if he persist therein.

THE TESTIMONY OF THE Hartford Quakers FOR THE Man Christ Jesus VINDICATED.
TO William Haworth's Accusation in his Title Page, W. H demonstrating that it
is not the same true and real Man Christ Jesus that they (i. e. the Quakers)
give Testimony unto, but another false and feigned Jesus. Answer, A blasphemous
Aspersion: See our Testimony, page 7, 8, 9. which is unto the same Christ Jesus
that was miraculously conceived by the holy Ghost overshadowing the Virgin
Mary, that was crucified and put to Death, as concerning the Flesh, buried,
rose again, ascended, etc. that we have always believed and owned the Man
Christ Jesus, according to the plain History of him in the holy Scripture, as
well as in the Mystery. Where Is now the false and feigned Jesus? If W. H. will
not believe our Confession herein to be Real, but Quibling, we may not swear to
it, nor shall we need an Asseveration to clear us; but leave him to God to deal
withal for his Abuse.

Instead of proving, That the Quakers denied the same Numerical, True and Real
Manhood of Jesus Christ in Heaven, etc. at their Dispute with the Baptists (at
Barbican, London) which he instanced for proof thereof, as one main Ground of
this Charge, he is now fain to pull back his Horns, as to that Proof, being so
evidently disproved by our Citation of that Passage at the said Dispute, viz.
W. P's Confessing in the Name and Person of the Quakers, That we do believe the
Man Christ Jesus to be glorified in Heaven; We do believe the Holy Manhood to
be in Heavenly Glory, etc. This evidently making against W. H's Asper^^on, he
is fain to tell his Reader (instead of proof from that Dispute) That some that
are not acquainted with their Way of speaking, may think this sufficient
(calling this a brave Sound of Words) but others, that have been used to them
cannot, till W. Penn describes what he means by the Man Christ Jesus, and what
by the Manhood, p. 6. See here, instead of proving his Charge from the Dispute
quoted by himself for it, he is now to seek W. Penn's Meaning, when it concerns
Matter of Fact. Oh, silly Adversary!

His Instance of G. F's telling of Christ in the Male, and in the Female, and
that Christ's Nature is not Earthly [or (in that Sense) humane] proves not that
the Quakers deny the Man Christ Jesus to have ascended into Heaven, any more
then that the Apostles did so in confessing to Jesus Christ in them, their
HAVING the Son of God, and Life in him, the Spirit of Christ in them; and
because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
Hearts, crying Abba Father. And the Apostle plainly distinguished between the
first Man Adam, that was made a living Soul, and the last Adam, that was made a
quickening Spirit; the first Man being of the Earth earthly, the second MAN the
Lord from Heaven, 1 Cor. 15. 45, 47. Let our Caviling Opposer fight with plain
Scripture, if he will, if he still believes Christ's Manhood or Nature to be of
an Earthly Substance (i. e. as that of the first Adam 's) p 7. He may keep his
Faith to himself, and take his Unscriptural Expressions back again, or
endeavor to reconcile himself to the Scripture Language, The second MAN is the
Lord from Heaven, etc. Is not here a Heavenly Manhood opposed to the Earthly?
For, if Man was Created in the Image of God; so as Man is called the Image and
Glory of God, 1 Cor. 11. 7. And the second man who is Lord from Heaven, the
Image of the invisible God, Col. 1. 15. The BRIGHTNESS of his Father's Glory,
the EXPRESS Image of his Substance, Heb. 1. 3. Does this Manhood or Image
consist of man's Corporal earthly shape or figure? Nay; Is not here a Manhood
of a higher Nature, Image and Glory, then that of the earthly Natural Body,
shape or form of it? Which does not at all deny Man that Body or Form that God
has (at his own pleasure) allotted for him, and is proper to his Condition.

But the sum of our Conf^ssion (that we believe the man Christ to be glorified
in Heaven, etc.) he says, is this, viz. That the Light within being hea^kened
to and obeyed is lifted up and exalted and glorified in the heart of man -- and
that nothing is more obvious in our Discourses with them then that Heaven is
within them, p. 7. When they say the same Man ascended into Heaven, they mean
nothing but that Globe which we call the Earth, p. 8.

Rep. Oh, Disingenuous Man! when thou can get nothing against us as Matter of
Fact from our plain Confession, thou will forge Meanings for us; as when we
have plainly told thee, as thou thy self have cited, viz. That the same MAN
CHRIST that suffered and was put to Death in the Flesh, and was raised from the
dead by the mighty Power of God, ascended into Heaven, ascended both as to
change of Place and State of Glory: Thou make our Meaning to be nothing but
that Globe which we call the Earth; as if by Christ's local and visible
Ascension from the Earth [which was a signal Evidence of his being the very
Christ, the Son of the Living God] we meant his Descension into the Globe of
the Earth. Oh! gross Perversion: We could not have more plainly and
historically signified our Meaning then we did from these Scriptures, Luke 24.
50, 51. Act. 1. 9, 10. yet still withal confessing Christ's SPIRITUAL PRESENCE
in the Hearts of his People, who are quickened and saved by him, the Mystery of
Christ in Spirit no ways opposes the History of Christ in the Flesh [mark
that] unto which our Confession before is so plain that W. H. adds to it,
viz. Is not here a full and plain Confession? Would not you take the Hartford
Quakers more orthodox then others of them? p. 7. [Whereas the Quakers have
neither been taught nor confessed the contrary, whatever he would insinuate
against them to the contrary.]

W. H. adds, They have altogether lost their Credit and Reputation with many,
as in this matter, in that we have so frequently caught them juggling, Gross
Slanders.
equivocating, quibling, cogging the Dice, that we can no more trust them, p. 8.

Answ. They are not out of Credit and Reputation with any, but such prejudiced,
envious, perverse and partial men as thou art, who slanderest us in saying, We
have so frequently caught them juggling, etc. We have caught thee in Forgery,
Lies and Confusion, who beliest us in saying, We unsay what we have said (as to
Christ's Ascertion, and Exaltation into Heaven and Glory, as before) By our
saying, that it was not that he might remain separate from his Body (which he
is Head of) for was Christ's Ascension, or being taken up into Heaven from his
Disciples, that he might remain separate from them, as to his spiritual
presence? when he said, I will not leave you comfortless, I will come unto you,
John ^4. 2. ver. 18. which thou confessest, speaks of HIS comi^g in the Power
of the Spirit to their Hearts to comfort them in the Evil Days, wherein they
should be cast, p. 13. [his coming] whose coming? The same Christ's that went
away. Is this to unsay or deny his Ascension, or being in Heaven? W. H. thou
art quite out.

Again, that Change that we believe Christ Jesus to have had into a State of
Glory, which, as the Son, he had with the Father before the World began, does
not at all deny Jesus of Nazareth to be the Messiah, as most unjustly thou have
accused us, both in thy Antidote and Animadversions, p. 6. for it was the same
Jesus that so prayed, Father glorify thy Son, glorify thou me with thine own
self, with the Glory which I had with thee before the World was, John 17. 1. 5.
yet it is a plain falsehood to say, that We suppose that the manhood (as thou
calls it) that was taken of the Virgin, is turned into an Imme^se i^finite
being, a Deity? It was never our Supposition, p. 6.
that the mere ^lesh and Blood that the Son took of the Virgin (which was part
of the same the C^ildren had) became a D^ity, an Immense infinite being, when
thou want proof for thy Slanders against us, thou must needs Invent and
Forge suppositions, meanings, and absurd Consequences for us: Oh! perverse Man;
is this to support thy Credit and Trade among thy Hearers, to say we do supp^se
that which never entered into our Hearts?

W. H. His Soul was in the Saints: We may dispare at this rate ever by words to
understand one another; here is Babel, p. 8. Answ. In Babel thou art, who
accusest and revilest us, and drawest thy absurd Meanings upon us without
understanding us, showing thy ignorant Confidence. Of the Soul or Spirit of
Christ we shall speak anon. Against our saying, He [Christ] had all Power in
Heaven and Earth given him, and therefore could descent at his pleasure; and he
promised to be with his Disciples always to the End.

W. H Objects. To Argue from Christ's Power to his will, was never accounted
strong or right Reasoning. But the learned and Zealous Protestants, affirmed
Christ's Spiritual presence with his Church, in opposition to the Papists
Doctrine of his Carnal presence in their Sacrament.
The Papists argued thus against the Martyrs, for their Transubstantiation,
viz. God had Power to turn Bread into his natural Body, Ergo, p. 8. Ans. A most
gross perversion and abuse, not only against us but against Christ's own
Testimony, whereby his WILL to be with his Disciples to the end of the World,
as well as his Power to come again unto them, is signified: And JESUS spoke
unto them, saying, ALL POWER is GIVEN unto me, etc. Lo I am with you always even
unto the end of the World, Mat. 28. 18, 20. But W. H. has denied Jesus Christ
to be here on Earth as he is Man (that is, either as to his Body or Spirit)
Antid. p. 2, 3. It is not a Corporal and carnal Union between Christ and his
Members that we plead for, that is not the Controversy, nor do we speak of the
manhood being locally [or Personally] present with, and in the Saints (as he
would Insinuate) p. 9. But the spiritual presence of Christ Jesus according to
his promise, Mat. 28. 20. As the SON of God, to whom all Power IS GIVEN
according to his own sense. And though our Adversary has denied the Holy
manhood of Christ, even in the Spirituallity of it, (that is, as to his Spirit)
to be on Earth, in or with his Church; yet has he confessed, that CHRIST is in
the Saints by his Spirit, Antid. p. 5. And that Christ has always been present
with his Disciples in the discharge of their ministerial Gifts, and will be to
the end of the World by HIS Spirit, Animad. p. 9. Where Is now the Controversy?
Is the heavenly Man Christ wholely separate from his Church and Members, not
only in Body, but in Spirit also; yea, circumscribed in some place as far as
the highest Heavens are supposed from the Earth, Antid. page 6. As a Man may be
many Miles distant from his Wife, etc. Anim. p. 9. And yet this same Christ
always present with his Disciples? And as there is one Soul throughout the
natural Body of man, the same in the Head, and in every Member; so ONE Spirit
in Jesus Christ, the Mystical Head, and in every one of his Members the Saints,
Anim. p. 9.

Now if thi^ man meant really as he speaks, as to the spiritual Presence and
Union of Christ Jesus with and in his Saints and Church on Earth, and would lay
aside his Enmity and Confusion, and keep to Scripture Language, the
Controversy between him and us would be at an end. But in p. 10. he has framed
a Dilemical Quarrel against the Spirit of Christ being in every Saint, which he
says, we invest with the Office of the holy Ghost, which he concludes cannot
be so, either with or without the Body; nor yet extending from it in Heaven to
every Saint upon Earth: For that were to render the Soul of Christ immense and
i^finite, and then there must be a new created God in time; the Soul of
Christ's Manhood was created in time; Error is Crookedness, Absurdity and
Rottenness, quoth W. H. And yet he says, The Saints ought to worship the
Humane Nature of Christ in Union with the Deity, Anti. p. 6, 7. And that the
Humane Nature gives Life to our Souls, p. 7. Can it do so, and yet his Spirit
not so much as extend to us, though immensly empowered with the Deity? How does
he darken Counsel by words without Knowledge? And W. H. leaves us not thus, but
has another fling at us, p. 19. But he (Christ) is on Earth (the Quakers say)
at least in one essential part of his Manhood. His Soul is in every Saint. You
see Error is big-bellyed and fruitful. And p. 20. and 30. Refining Religion,
and the blessed, holy, true, real, operative Manhood of Jesus Christ into Air,
Wind, Fancy, Nothing, Gross Lies.
etc.

Rep What a heap of jumbled Arguing, mudled Stuff, with a most false Conclusion
against us is here? as if we went about to annihilate the most holy and
glorious Manhood of Jesus Christ. Now we would query of this Man:

First, If the Soul and Spirit of Christ be not one and the same?

2. If he was the Son of God, before the World was; what then is his Soul, and
in what time created?

3. If the Spirit of Christ and the holy Ghost be separate or divided?

4. If Jesus Christ in all the parts essential and proper to him (viz. in Body
and Soul or Spirit) be so circumscribed and limited in Heaven, as in no sense
or degree to be in or with his Saints or Members on Earth; then how is his own
Promise or Saying made good, Lo I am with you always to the End of the World?
And how has the Father given the Son Power over all Flesh, that he should give
Eternal Life to as many as the Father gave him? John 17.

5. And does not God send the Spirit of his Son into Believers Hearts, that
thereby they might partake of his holy and heavenly Nature and Humanity, of the
same Mind; the same Meekness, Gentleness, Humility, Kindness, Fear of the Lord,
Obedience, etc. that was in him? Else how can any be true Christians?

If W. H. answers, viz. I grant that Christ is present with and in his Saints
by his Spirit, that I mean the Holy Ghost, who is God, and infinite, and can be
and is in See Antid page 13.
all the Saints, both that are in Heaven and on Earth at once; not the Spirit
of the manhood, an essential part that is a finite Creature He confess^th, that
the Consideration of the Manhood of Christ in Heaven does give Boldness and
Access in Prayer. God has rendered himself much more familiar to us this Way.
We are very apt to be swallowed up with the abstracted Thoughts of the Deity.
But does this Man pray to and worship Christ as a finite Creature, that has not
Power to extend his Spirit to him? No; but as in Union with the Deity, then we
hope, as in that Union, he has Power to minister of his own Life and Virtue to
all that believe in his Name. However, he grants, that as God, Christ is in all
his Saints in Heaven and Earth. Well, show us the Father, and it suffices us.
To which Christ answered, He that sees me, sees my Father also, John 14.
Therefore the true Knowledge and Sight of God is through his Son.
(as his words are) page 10. Now Christ as God is immense, as to his Presence;
he is every where; and as to his Saints, he is with them always, and in them by
his Spirit, Antid. page 5.

Rep. Now you have his Opinion, how Jesus Christ is in and with his Saints;
that is, That the immense infinite God is in and with them: But is nothing
essential to the Heavenly Man Christ Jesus (the Son of God) as such, extended
to them? See but what a Labyrinth the Man runs into, through his deviating from
plain Scripture Language, dividing Christ, the Head, from his Body, to such a
vast distance as he knows not the Omnipresence of an infinite God, who
questions: But how does he own his SONSHIP, or Manifestation. Operation, or
Dispensation of the SON of God, as such, or as Mediator between God and Men, or
the Kingdom of the Mediator? And when Christ said, All Power in Heaven and
Earth is given unto me; Lo I am with you always; is this only as an infinite
God? Who then gave him this Power? And who gave the Son Power over all Flesh?
or empower him to give Eternal Life? Did God give it to himself? Did not the
Son say, My Father is greater then I? But if, as a Son, he be wholely excluded
and separate from the Saints on Earth, how said he, If any man love me, I and
my Father will come unto him, and make our Abode with him; And if any man have
not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his; And because ye are Sons, God has
sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your Hearts, crying Abba Father? Gal. ^.
Is there nothing of the heavenly and holy Manhood in this Spirit of the Son,
but only the mere infinite Deity it self? or does it then mediate, intercede or
cry Abba Father to it self, without Respect to any lower State or Dispensation,
as a Son (as the Way and Means to come to God) or to Christ Jesus, as the
eminent Instrument and Workman of God, as Mediator? The Gospel we have
received, we had it in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, who are
inseparable, and not divided either in Heaven or in Earth. We have nakedly
confessed Jesus Christ, the Son of God, as having all Power in Heaven and Earth
to be both God and Man; he is that Immanuel, God with us: And has not he
Power, as such, to breathe upon and inspire his Saints (and to give Light and
Life to Mankind) without any lessening or limitation to his own Being, as Jesus
Christ the Son of God? It is the Spirit of the Son wherein we receive of his
Life, Virtue and Power; and its only in and through the Mediator that Man is
capable of receiving the Knowledge of God; For God who commanded the Light to
shine out of Darkness has shined in our hearts, to give the Light of the
Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6. Whose
Knowledge and In dwelling we have in measure received, according to the Measure
of the Gift of Christ, whereby we feel him to dwell in our Hearts by Faith, as
truly as we know that God dwells in us, and we in him, because he has given
us of his Spirit; Jesus Christ received the Spirit without Measure, we by
Measure: Moreover, is not all the Graces, and Operations thereof in us, and
spiritual Good we receive from God to our Souls, said to be through Jesus
Christ? (a Phrase frequently used in Scripture) who said also, Without me ye
can do nothing. And how is Christ Jesus, the Way to the Father, given for a
Covenant and Leader to his People, and for Salvation to the Ends of the Earth,
if not at all upon Earth? and why did he say, No man comes unto the Father but
by me? Was this considered only as God, without any Condescension as a Son or
Mediator below the mere Deity? were not this to confound the Order and Manner
of the holy Ghost's plain and distinguishing Testimonies in Scripture relating
to the Dispensation of Christ?

Another Instance we have to prove the Blessed and Heavenly man Christ Jesus
not now upon Earth in or with his Members [with respect to HIS Spirit or
spiritual Presence] and that is, Act. 3. 21. Whom the Heavens must receive till
the Times of Restitution of all things. [Which God had spoken by the mouth of
all his holy Prophets since the World began] These words he leaves out.
If (quoth W. H.) they would mind this one Scripture, it would put an End to
all their Cavils -- which Times let them dare to say are already come, page 9.

Answ. Dare he say, that these Times of Restitution of all things, spoken by
the holy Prophets, are not begun in these Gospel Times, wherein Christ's
spiritual Appearance, Dispensation and Revelation is made known, what is the
Restitution, and the Times of it? Is it not a Restoration, gathering and
making up the Church of Jews and Gentiles into the spiritual Fellowship and
Faith of the Son of God? who therein are the Seed of Abraham, whom God promised
to bless, in sending Jesus, to turn away every one from his Iniquities; see
Acts 3. 20. to the end. And are not those Times of Restitution Gospel Times,
New Covenant Times? Let it be considered according to Scripture, how far the
Times of Restitution of ALL things, spoken by the Holy Prophets, extend, and
what that Restitution is, and it will appear, Whether those Times and that
Restitution are not begun; and whether or no its now a Time to persuade People,
that Christ Jesus is not sent for such a Work, as that of Restitution; as also,
how far the Phrase [Heavens and Heavenly Places] according to Scripture,
extends?

Whereas to our saying, The Apostles had Signs and Evidences of Christ's
Coming, who by HIM wrought Miracles, Act 4. 10. (i. e.) [saith he] The Miracles
were Signs of his Personal Coming -- since his Ascension, p. 14.

Personal Coming are none of our words, but this Man's own Meaning on ours;
therefore his Risum teneatis amici, with all his scornful Stuff, touches not
us: It was Christ's Spiritual Presence and Power that we pleaded in those
Miracles. And he is fain to grant, that Miracles wrought by the Apostles were
only Signs of the Coming of Christ in Power and Spirit, P. 14. Well, then
CHRIST came again in Power and Spirit after his Ascension; yes, and on that
Scripture, Jo. 3. 13. he confesses, CHRIST was spiritually in Heaven with his
Saints when on Earth, and is spiritually on Earth with them now he is in
Heaven, p. 13. Is CHRIST so? Why then does this Man cavil against us?

The Reader knows (says he) what we mean by the spiritual Presence of CHRIST
with his Saints.

He means, That God, whose Presence is immense and infinite, filling Heaven and
Earth, is with his Saints, not really Christ Jesus in Spirit, as Man; though he
be the second Man, the Lord from Heaven, the last Adam, and made a QUICKENING
Spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 45, 47. But is Christ divided? Is he not God and Man in
Union?

And to our Citations on Acts 3. 11, 16. and chap. 4. 10. By the Name of Jesus
of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the Dead, EVEN BY HIM does
this Man stand before you whole; and verse. 30. That Signs and Wonders may be
done by the Name of thy holy Child Jesus, whom thou have anointed. And Act. 2.
32. Having received, of the Father the Promise of the Holy Ghost, HE has shed
forth this which ye now see and hear. Well, it is granted that these Miracles
were only Signs of the Coming of Christ in Power and Spirit, wherein he was
spiritually on Earth. If he still says, This only concerned the Deity or
Omnipresence of God the Father, and not the spiritual Presence of the man
Christ, nor his spiritual Manhood: This were to tell us, that Peter and the
Apostles only went about to convince people of an infinite Deity, and that his
infinite Presence was with them, without respect to the Presence and Work of
Christ, as a Son or Mediator with them; when they endeavored to promote the
Name of Jesus Christ, who was crucified, and said, Even by HIM does this man
stand before you whole; and prayed, that Signs and Wonders might be done by the
Name of the holy Child Jesus: Which was, that through him the Power of God and
Christianity in the Life and Power of it might be promoted and spread: For by
HIS MEANS we believe in God, that raised him from the dead, and gave him Glory,
that our Faith and hope might 1 Pet. 1. 21.
be in God.

And seeing thou W. H. confessest in Joh. 14. 18. I will not leave you
comfortless, I will come unto you; That this Scripture speaks of his Coming in
the Power of his Spirit to their hearts, to comfort them in the Evil Days
wherein they should be cast, p. 13. And yet, As for his Deity, it is infinite,
and can in no wise be said, that the Heaven received it, p. 9. God is immense,
as to his Presence, he is every where with his Saints always, etc. Antid. p. 5.

From hence we may then answer thee, Argumentum ad hominem, or according to thy
own Reasoning: It cannot be said that Christ, merely as to his Deity, did come
again unto them any more then in that respect he ascended, or went from them,
his Deity being infinite, filling all places; therefore his Coming again surely
must in some sense have respect to his heavenly and blessed Manhood, by virtue
of the divine Power of his Father, wherewith he was wonderfully endued and
exalted, Ephesians. 1. 21.

But still to our Opposers circumscribing the Man Christ Jesus, the Mediator,
as to his whole Manhood, both in Soul and Spirit, as well as Body, to some
remote place in Heaven, from his Members on Earth, and deriding at us for
confessing to his spiritual presence, in, and with them. We desire the Reader
to observe one passage, wherein he has overturned his Work, given away his
Cause, and plainly hedged up his own way, and that is in p. 28. of his Anim.
viz. We confess again, that the Deity Anim. p. 28.

PERFECTS all good IN US and for us, but then the Humanity is in Union with it,
and acts with it, and they must not be put assunder.

How now W. H. What have thou been contending against us for? for confessing
something of Christ in us as Man as well as God, and for the Doctrine of
Perfection? And yet have here plainly confessed to both, that the Deity PERFECTS
all good IN US and for us: And that the Humanity (which is the manhood) is in
Union, and ACTS with it, and they must not be put assunder; what can be more
plain? And have thou not confessed The manhood with the Deity is but one Christ,
one Mediator, and both spoken of in that place, p. 19.
John 6. 53. And that the Flesh of Christ, which (thou call this Human
Nature) gives Life to our Souls in quickening of us to Righteousness, Antid.
p. 7. Thou have said enough, stop thy Mouth and Pen, and Cavil no longer with
us in this matter, thou have fairly given away thy cause and contest; do the
Saints now partake of any thing of Christ below the Divine being it self? what
say now? does not the Deity, and the holy manhood work together, in
perfecting all good in us? Thou have now fully answered thy self; and Scrible
as much as thou will, thou can never get over it.

And what say thou to these Scriptures, where God said to his Son, It is a
light thing that thou should be my SERVANT to raise up the Tribes of Jacob,
and to restore the preserved of Israel, I will also GIVE thee for a Light to
the Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation unto the ends of the Earth, Isa.
49. 6, 8. Acts 13. 47.

And said Christ, No man comes unto the Father but BY ME, John 14. 6.

And said the Apostle, Ye turned to God from Idols, to serve the living and
true God, and to wait for his SON FROM HEAVEN. whom he raised from the Dead,
even Jesus, etc. 1 These 1. 9, 10.

Looking for that blessed Hope, and Glorious appearing of the great God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, Titus 2. 13. The God of
p^ace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of
the Sheep, through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant make you PERFECT in
every good Work, to do his will, working IN YOU that which is well pleasing in
his sight THROUGH JESUS CHRIST, Heb. 13. 20 ^1. What Is more plain, then that
God enlightens us, and Works in us by his S^n Jesus Christ, in condiscention,
and sub^erviency to himself, and that those Primitive believing Gentiles waited
for his Son from Heaven, looked for the Glorious appearing of the great God,
AND our Savior Jesus Christ, as ^is Grace taught them, and that he did work in
them what was well pleasing in his sight THROUGH JESUS CHRIST, Mark that; did
the Heavens then, and yet contain Jesus Christ at such a Remotenes^ from all
Saints on Earth? Were all these former Believers disappointed in their hope and
expectations, and waiting for the Son of God from Heaven? Or did they only
attain to the Glorious appearing of the great God, and not of Jesus Christ?
does not this suit thy Notion, who speaks not IN Christ, nor IN his knowledge,
who never wast Baptized into Christ; thou have not received the Spirit of the
Son, it is a Mystery hid from all such a^ry Notionists, who have signified to
us, that All those places where we Read of Jesus Christ by name APPEARING, are
to be understood, that either they saw him, the Heavens being opened (as it is
said of Stephen) ^r his was in extacy, Antid. p. 4.

And thou have explained how Stephen saw the Heavens opened, and the Son of Man
standing on the Right Hand of God; that it was with his Carnal Eyes, his Sight
being strengthened in a wonderful way, Antidote, page 4. and 12.
And what is that other way of seeing Jesus Christ in his appear^ng? It is in
Extacy: What Is that? It is as when one is in a Trance, or Swoon, when one so
forgets himself that he is not in the exercise of his Reason or
Understanding: Thou may preach and pray long enough before thou will be in
any such Extacy or Trance, or see the Heavens opened, and Christ's Appearing,
with thy Carnal Eyes. But were the believing Gentiles waiting and looking for
the Son of God from Heaven, the glorious Appearing of the Great God and our
Savior Jesus Christ, 1 These. 1. 10. Titus 2. 13. in Expectation either to see
him with their Carnal Eyes, the visible Heavens being opened; or to see him
only in some Extacy, Trance or Swoon? If so, then they were not to see Jesus
Christ while in their right Wits or Understandings, or in the exercise of their
Gifts: Strange Doctrine. Yet we grant that great Visions and Raptures have been
in Extacies: A Man in Christ caught up into the Third Heaven, whether in the
Body or out of the Body I know not, said he. Peter at Prayer fell into a
Trance, and saw Heaven opened, Act. 10. 10, 11. But this hinders not the Saints
Spiritual Sight and Sense of Christ in their daily Enjoyment of him and living
in him. But Stephen being full of the Holy Ghost, saw the Glory of God, and
Jesus standing on his Right Hand, and said, Behold I see the Heavens opened,
etc. Could he with his Carnal Eyes see all this, viz. the Glory of God, his
Right Hand, and Jesus standing at it? And were the Heavens outwardly opened?
What mean Conceits have thou of God and Christ? who also tellest of Stephen's
seeing Christ in Heaven with his Bodily Eye, it being strengthened by the Lord,
Anim. p. 14. And did he see the Glory of God and his Right Hand with his Bodily
Eye also?

Thou say, Thou would not be guilty of any Carnal Thoughts of God, or his
Glory; but yet dare not but believe the Scriptures of Truth in these Matters,
although thou should not satisfy thy Reason. And addest, I do believe the
Deity it self cannot be seen, no Mortal Eye can approach that Invisibility, p.
16.

And then where do the Scriptures say, that Stephen saw the Glory of God with
his Bodily or Carnal Eyes? The Scripture in the same place as plainly says,
That he saw the Glory of God, as that he saw the Heavens opened, and Jesus
standing on the Right Hand of God. And thou have granted, No Mortal Eye can
approach the Invisibility of the Deity it self. See how thou art shaken in thy
Work, about thy saying, Christ passed into the invisible Heavens, thou now
variest it to unseen; as many Stars are invisible, yet capable of being seen by
any Teliscope or Prospective-Glasses, p. 14.

So then by Invisible most supreme Heaven (that is far above all Heavens; i. e.
all Heavenly Powers, all Angelical Nature and Perfection; He is above them all,
Antid. p. 8.) we are to understand thou meanest an Unseen yet Visible Heaven,
above all Heavenly Powers, all Angelical Nature, etc. that may be seen by the
Carnal Eye, when eminently strengthened, as (thou think) Stephen's was. What
then is this Angelical Nature, and those Heavenly Powers. which this invisible,
unseen, visible Heaven is so far above? Thou come off but poorly in this, how
poor and Unbelieving Creatures soever thou countest us, p. 15. Thou art high
and rich in thy own Conceit; but is it not with other men's Notions, intermixed
with thy own Conceits, confused and carnal Fancies?

In the 13th page of our Testimony we required thee, To show us that Book and
Page of ours, where ever (from these Scriptures Ephesians. 4. 10. Mat. 28. 20. or 1
Cor. 15. 50.) the Quakers thus argued, viz. Therefore Christ is not in Heaven
in his Manhood; how then can he be in Heaven? But instead of producing us Book
and Page or Dispute for these Words or Inferences, thou proceedest in thy
Forgery to abuse us; still charging thy own Objections with the same Inferences
of thy own forging upon us, with thy Ergo, He is not in Heaven, etc. p. 13. Oh,
Forger and Perverter!

And for thy Belief of Christ's Manhood and Nature being of an Earthly
Substance, Anim. p. 7. A Humane Natural Body, p. 10. having the same Matter,
Finiteness,
Shape, Form, Figure it had on Earth, p. 11, 17. and that Christ's Soul or
Spirit, an essential Part of his manhood, Antid. p. 3. is a Finite Creature,
Animad. p. 10. How shall we reconcile these words with thy Confession, viz. We
say, the WORD was made Flesh, Joh. 1. 14. and in that Flesh ascended into
Heaven, p. 12.

We hope thou will not say, That WORD was made an Earthly Substance, a Humane
Natural Body, nor yet a Finite Creature; for all things were made by that Word,
Joh. 1. 3. And this was the Son of God, by whom God made the Worlds, Hebr. 1.
2. Thou had need use some nice Distinction here by some Figure or
Communication of Properties to wind thy self off from Socinianism and
Confusion, though thou exclaimest highly against the Socinians; and its a
question whether that will do thy Cure: For, what Preeminence have thou allowed
Christ, if both his Essential Parts be but such finite Creatures? i. e. His
Body in Heaven, but a Humane Natural Body, of an Earthly Substance, of the same
Matter and Form it had on Earth, and his Spirit but a finite Creature; yet it
was the Word that was made Flesh ascended. What! is the Word a Natural Earthly
Body or Substance in Heaven? Why do not keep to Scripture? And is Christ's
Body in Heaven a Natural Earthly Body? If so, then he has a meaner Body then
his Saints and Members shall have; theirs shall be Spiritual, Celestial and
Glorious: but, alas! Christ their Head must still have a Natural, Humane,
Earthly Body in Heaven, in the same Shape, Form and Figure it had on Earth. But
we told this Man in our Testimony, page 12. If so, where its said in the place
cited, Phil. 3. 21. Who shall change our vile Body, that it may be FASHIONED
like unto his Glorious Body: That were as Good Sense as to say, We shall be
fashioned like unto what we are; where then is the Change? We can gather no
satisfactory Answer to this, but only the same invested with more Glory, p. 16.
that is to say, That Christ's Natural Earthly Body in Heaven is invested with
more Glory then on Earth, and so shall our Vile Body be: So the changing and
fashioning of the Body shall not be any Change of the Substance or Fashion of
the Body it self, but only the investing the Vile Earthly Body with some better
or more beautiful Clothing then now it has. See how this Opposer has
perverted the plain Scripture, and what mean Conceits he has of Christ's
Glorious Body: In plain Confutation to which we would have him read Dr. H. Moor
his Modest Enquiry into the Mystery of Iniquity, Apol. Chap. 3. p. 494. in his
Search into the Nature of a Glorified Body, wherein he declares, That the Body
of Christ in Heaven is not Terrestrial Flesh and Bones, but of a more refined
Nature; Observe.
and that according to Testimony in Scripture we find, that a Glorified Body,
or that Body wherewith they shall be rewarded, who shall attain to that blessed
Resurrection, may be dignified with these three Titles, Angelical, Spiritual,
Celestial.

We would advise W. Haworth to Read Henry Moore, upon this Subject of the
Resurrection-bodies; for W. H. may learn something of him, he being a man of
far more wit and parts then himself; however, he would seem to be some learned
Philosopher: Where he tells us [that if it (i. e. the Body of Christ) be not
the same in Kind and Nature, it cannot be the same in number, Anim. p. 5.]

This cannot be Universally true in every respect, if H. Moor's enquiry into
the Nature of a glorified Body be true, even in this very instance of the
glorified Body of Christ: That is, if it be so Transmuted or changed, and come
to be of a more refined Nature, then a terrestrial Body, that is become
spiritual, and Celestial. Let him answer H. Moore on this subject as before
cited if he can.

That Christ's manhood cannot be seen with the bodily Eye, p. 5. (in any Sense)
is not our affirmation, or words, for Christ has power to show himself Visibly,
and Invisibly as he pleases as he did to his Disciples after his Resurrection,
to Paul in the Light shining from Heaven, and inwardly by Revelation: As also
to Nebuchadnezar in the Fire, The form of the fourth is like the Son of God,
Dan. 3. 25.

But where W. H. States, The same figure, form; or shape as ESSENTIAL to
Christ, p. 11, 16. on which much of his Work hangs, we think him very Ignorant
herein; for then, when Christ appeared in another form -- and variously
manifested himself both visibly, and invisibly, outwardly in Peron, and also by
Visions and Revelations, by this his being must be changed, which we do not
believe; for he is the same to Day as he was yesterday, and forever.

Against our instance of Christ's appearing in diverse Forms after his
Resurrection, Mark 16. 12. After p. 17.
that he appeared to two of them in another Form.

W. H. tells us, All the Books of the Evangelists do but complete the History:
-- This of Mark is the shortest fall. -- But from Luke 24. 15. He says, It was
then he himself, with the SAME FORM and Figure Human.

Rep. This does not only imply Mark's writing to be shorter then the rest; but
that Luke and ^e contradicted one another, as much as for the one to say, He
appeared in another form, and the other to say, Nay, he appeared with the same
form and figure: Thus he has opposed the Evangelist Mark. And by his saying,
that He seemed to them as one in another habit: So the word (...) does
sometimes sig^ifi^^, p. 17. What has he mended the matter here? What other
Habit? Was it another Garment? Is that the proper Signification of the word
(...)? Does it not properly signify the Face or Form, some times the figure or
likeness.

Concerning Christ's appearing twice in the mid^t of his Disciples, the Doors
being shut John 20. 19, 26. He grants here a change of State and Condition; but
how of state and condition, if still but earthly and Natural without any
alteration, either as to the matter or form of a Natural earthly Body? But why
do we bring that Scripture? Was it to prov^ that he penetrated the Doors or
Walls? as he says, we suppos^, p. 5. No, we concluded not how, it being a Sign
of an eminent Power Christ had, the Doors being shut when he appeared in the
midst of them, None of them, nor any other man opened the Doors for him (as is
confessed p. 18.) This Scripture was then brought by us in order to stop W. H's
ignorant Intruding into things he has not seen, to avoid unlearned Questions,
and not make himself wise above what is written; he adds, There was then no
question a miracle wrought by him. How came Peter out of Prison? Did he come
through the Iron Gate -- they came to the Iron Gate that leads unto the City,
which opened to them of its own accord? Could not Christ Effect the like t^ink
you, for himself? Yes he could do it, but the Scripture is silent in it: But
that he appeared in the midst of them, the Doors being shut.

It is Remarkable how W. H. in page 19. Makes himself sport in his abusive
Forgery, where he tells what a strange manhoo^ they have confessed to; when
it is of his own Forging, none of our Confession; and yet has the impudence to
say, It Is without wronging them a Tittle.

But seeing he sometimes takes manhood for the Body, Antid. p. 6. and Anim. p.
5. we ask him, Where, in what Book or Page did we ever so confess of it, as he
says?

1. That it was no way the Object of Sense? 2. That it is an Infinite Immense
God? 3. That it was so thin, subtle, that it could penetrate Doors and
Stone-walls? 4. In Form without Shape, Figure, etc? 5. That it did not dye for
Sinners?
But in these things he has not on the Particulars distinguished what he means
by [Manhood] whether the Body or Spirit of Christ, or both; and so h^s dealt
un^ai^ly, and not only in these, but in many more Particulars, has he abused,
perverted and confounded our words (as well as the Scriptures) which would fill
a Volumn to open distin^tly, He makes no Conscience of belying us, and grossly
perverting our Words and Intentions.

It Is probable he would take it as an Affront and Injury if we should
retalliate upon him, or enumerate the Consequences of his Carnal Conceits, to
show what a strange Christ he has set forth. But at present we will suppose these
two (to follow from his Doctrine, until he reconcile and clear himself better
then he has yet done) viz.

1. That Christ being wholely in the highest Heaven, and his Body there more
bright then a Thousand Sons, Antid. p. 6. yet cannot be seen by any Teliscope
or Prospective Glasses (as many unseen Stars may) He must needs be at a
wonderful vast Distance from his Saints and Members on Earth.

2. That his very Spirit or Soul is so bound up in that Body at that vast
height and wonderful distance in Heaven, that it cannot so much as extend to
any Saints upon Earth, to vi^it and comfort them in any of their Trials or See
p 10.
Temptations: Satan it seems has more Power to come and tempt them, then Christ
has to come to help them, though beyond measure endued with Divine Power [sad
and inconsistent News] And yet the Flesh of Christ is such as gives Life to
our Souls in quickening of us to Righteousness, Antid. p. 7. It seems then his
Flesh extends farther then his Spirit. But the true Christ is not divided; His
Heavenly Humanity and Divinity act in Union in quickening whom ^e will; the
Seed that he has sown in the Souls of men, and the Spirit of Life that he
breaths in, are of himself as truly as that HOLY THING conceived in the Virgin
was of the Holy Ghost. And was not Christ spiritually formed in the Saints by
the same Power of the Holy Ghost? And Christ said, He that eats my Flesh and
drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him, John 6. 56.

Moreover, We do both firmly believe, that the Worlds were made by the Son of
God, and that by him all things consist, he being that Word that was with God,
and that was God in the Beginning; and that this Son of God was the first born
of every Creature, and the first begotten of the Dead; and since by Man came
Death, by Man came also the Resurrection of the Dead: And also, we do as really
confess according to holy Scripture, That this Son of God in due time took upon
him a real Body prepared for him, of the same Flesh and Blood which the
Children had, Hebr. 2. 14. was made of the Seed of David according to the
Flesh, and declared to be the Son of God with Power, according to the Spirit of
Holiness, by the Resurrection from the Dead, Romans 1. 3, 4. That this Christ,
the Son of God, took upon him the Form of a Servant, and was made in the
Likeness or Habit of men; and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross, wherefore
God has highly exalted him, etc. Phil. 2. So that he being come s^ low, as to
be thus made and fashioned as in the similitude of men, as man his Soul was
capable of Humiliation, Sorrow and Affliction for Mankind, and of sympathizing
with his Servants, yet still was the Only begotten of the Father, and was full
of Grace and Truth, the express Image of his Father's Substance; he was also
made a quickening Spirit to all who are spiritually quickened by him; he was
taken up into Glory; he was glorified with the Deity or God himself, with the
same Glory that he had with the Father before the World began; he ascended far
above all Heavens, that he might fill all things; for it has pleased the
Father, that ALL Fullness should dwell in him. So that the True Christ is
neither divided, nor may we entertain such Mean, Low and Carnal Thoughts of
this Son of God (this only begotten of the Father) as, That he is a FINITE
Creature, in a natural earthly Body in Heaven, and he therein wholly separate
(as one there circumscribed or limited) to such a wonderful far Distance (as is
supposed) from all his Saints and Church on Earth: We have neither thus learnt
Christ, or received the Son of God, nor thus read of him in the holy Scriptures
under those Terms; but have a Measure of the Knowledge of the Son of God, as
the Father has revealed him in us.

Finally, There is no more Inconsistency (or denying the Man Christ) between
our confessing his Ascension into Heaven and Glory (yea, far above all Heavens)
and his coming again in Spirit, to be spiritually present with and in his
Church, then is in these Testimonies of the holy Apostles, viz. 1. That Saying
of Peter, Who is gone into Heaven, and is on the Right Hand of God, 1 Pet. 3.
22. And

Behold I lay IN SION a Chief Cornerstone, elect, precious, 1 Pet. 2. 6.

As also, Heb. 4. 14. Seeing then that we have a great High Pri^st, that is
passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God. Compared with

Hebr. 12. 24. Ye are come to Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant, etc.

Ephesians. 1. 20. -- Which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the Dead,
and set him at his own Right Hand in the Heavenly Places. Compared with

Ephesians. 2. 6. And has raised us up together, and made us sit together in
Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus.

1 Cor. 15. 3, 4, 5. Christ dyed for our Sins, he was buried, rose again the
third day, was seen of Cephas, then of the Twelve, etc. Compared with

2 Cor. 4. 11. We which live, are always delivered unto Death for Jesus's sake,
that the Life also of Jesus might be made manifest IN our mortal Flesh.

Gal. 2. 20. I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me, etc.

Romans 8. 10. If CHRIST BE IN YOU the Body is dead because of Sin, but the
Spirit is Life because of Righteousness.

2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith; prove your own
selves; know ye not your own selves, how that JESUS CHRIST IS IN YOU, except ye
be Reprobates?

Let our Adversary Answer these Scriptures, if he can; but we suppose he dares
not accuse them with Inconsistency, nor any of them with denying the Man Christ,

But if W. H. be minded to busy himself with an Answer or Reply to this
Treatise, and thereby put his Hearers to further Charge with his Books, we
would advise him first to consult with some of his learned Brethren, who are
wiser then himself, that they may view his Work before it go to the Press, and
take special Care that he writes pertinently, and consistently, lest he run
into further Absurdities, and self-contradictions, which he is in great Danger
of; and also, that before he writes an Answer to this, he would stay for and
seriously view John Crook's Book aforesaid, Entitled, The ^ounterfeit Convert,
etc. which may further inform him, this being but as a precedent Appendix to
it; for we are not willing to answer him, as single William Haworth, but (if we
do) rather, as the Independants Agent; and let him not expect, that his Logical
and Artificial Terms, as, Numerical, Circumscribed, Personal, Materiallity,
Form, Figure, Finite, Abstracted, Essential, Immense, etc. will quit him of the
Controversy, but a rev^king of his Sl^nders and Abuses, and a sincere
Endeavor to be reconciled to the Holy Scripture, and the plain Language
thereof, which his work will lie open to the Censure of.

And whereas in page 20. William Haworth says, He has done wi^h the
Controversy concerning the Manhood of Christ, and then hints something
concerning C. Tailor, which he has up several times, saying, that if he be
alive, he thought might answer for himself. To which we say, he is alive, and
capable to answer for himself, and has Argument good enough against W. H. to
foyl him in plain Scripture Sense upon that Subject, of calling Children
Innocents, in opposition to the predestinary Point; but those things we shall
leave to him, if he think W. H. worth the answering.

In the same page W. H. shows his dissatisfaction, that (in our Answer to his
Antidote) we account him a crazed, distempered man, and says, That
questionless they have recourse in their Thoughts to that Prophet of theirs,
William Bailey, who pronounced a dreadful Sentence against me (viz.) that I
should be mad. -- To which we answer, that he has not rightly, or wholely
related W. B's. words, which were, that if he persisted in this Way of opposing
the Truth, or did not repent of his Wickedness, that then he should dye mad:
Now in part this is come to pass already on him; for let any unbyassed Person
view his Papers, and mark the Confusions, and Inconsistencies in his Writings,
and he does appear so like a discomposed man, and besides that little Wit which
one would take him to have, that others may, as well as us, count him a crazed
man; and for what W. B. pronounced on him to come to pass at his End, we look
not for it, as he falsely imagins, but rather desire his Repentance, that so the
punishment in that Respect may be prevented; and let him leave off to boast
over the Dead, as saying, William Bailey was soon after cut off by Death at Sea,
whether by shipwreck or otherwise, he had not learned. As to that we shall
inform his Ignorance, that W. B. made a Voyage to the Barbados, whence
returning in a weak Condition, as the Ship was homewards bound, near the Coast
of England he dyed on his Bed, though upon the Sea, and sensibly, in Peace with
the Lord, as several sober men can witness, who were Hearers of what proceeded
from him and this was many Months after his pronouncing that conditional
Sentence at Hartford.

W. H. would vindicate himself against our Censure, by comparing his being
counted a Madman, with that of Christ being accounted besides himself by his
Kindred, and the Scribes and Pharisees; and the Apostle Paul accounted mad by
Agrippa and others. But this does not suit his Condition in any of them, except
in that of Paul in the 26th of the Acts and verse 11. where Paul says of
himself, as in the persecuting Nature, he was mad, and in that Respect he has
rightly compared himself with Paul; but Agrippa does no where call Paul a mad
man, or stigmatize him in such Terms. Again, W. H. in page 21. would vindicate
one of his Absurdities (viz.) That the Light within every one is nothing but
Nature, which is defiled, and the same Nature by which we were the Children of
Wrath, Ant. p. 17. and yet also says, that it is the Law of Moses written in
the Heart, in which we think he contradicts himself, and talks like a mad man,
notwithstanding his supposed proof in Romans 2. 14. The Gentiles do by Nature
things contained in the Law.

And here he brings in one of his observations of the Quakers, viz. That they
are always much moved when we do not give that Honor to their Light, which
they think is due, when we allow ^t to be no mo^e then Natural.

To which we answer, that we may be moved with a godly Zeal in our Hearts
against any that speak blasphemous words against the Light of Christ Jesus,
even that Light which he enlightneth men and women withal, and does himself
testify, that he is the true Light, John 8. 12. and 12. 36. and it is no other
Light, that we say, then the Light of Christ that men are enlightened withal,
which we contend for; and it is hard to be born, that men who pretend to know
the Scriptures of Truth should so undervalue this true Light, as to call it
Natural, yea, corrupt, or defiled Nature, or to give it other vilifying Terms,
as this man and many others of his Fraternity have done: And yet we are ready
to allow what the Apostle has in Ephesians. 2. 3. that by Nature we were Children
of Wrath, even as others; but by the Grace of God, through which this Light is
given, we affirm, that whosoever embraces and obeys it in the Faith, shall come
to have that Nature changed, by which they once were Children of Wrath, to be
made Partakers of the Divine Nature, which the Apostle Peter mentions, 2 Pet.
1. 4. and that is the Nature whereby the things contained in the Law are truly
done, Romans 2. 14, 15.

We shall pass over much of his incongruous confused Matter wherein he has
shown his Folly and Weakness, and come to that in page 29. where he says,
That the People at Hartford are to persuade him to be quiet among his
Neighbors, which doubtless is a good Caution, and cannot but seem good Advice,
if it be but considered how much Discord he has stirred up since he came to
Hartford betwixt one Neighbor and another; for before we lived much quieter
and friendlier then now we do, though we could tell him, that the time was when
he was suspected by some of his own Hearers to be very like the Quakers even so
much, that he was said to preach their Principles, and if it should be but
heartily laid to Heart by him, doubtless he cannot but confess that he was then
in a better Condition then he is now in, and knows that this is true, but it
may be he will say (as we heard he should to one) that he had been ten times a
Quaker, which, if true, then we say, he shows his Apostasy and Uncertainty the
more, and such a one ought not to be trusted nor believed.

But the main thing that troubles him is, that we should persuade his Hearers
to give him no more Money, and to answer that he brings a Comparison, That
could any persuade the Dutch to be quiet, and give their Soldiers no more pay,
the King of France had done his Work. We say that it is known to be a common
Proverb, That Money is the Sinnews of War; for take away the Money and the
Services would cease. Now it seems that Money is the Sinnews of his Cause; so
take away the Money and William Haworth's Services will cease. But again, in
page 30. he has it up [You must give me no Money] this Fear of loosing his
Sallery does much trouble him.

And it is well (says he) if their Religion be not propagated that same Way; we
know it, in a great Part it is. To this we say, that it is well known, our
Religion is not propagated by Money, and he himself knows (doubtless) it is
not; but in all this he will not say, that Money is not a moving Cause to
maintain his preaching; for he knows, that if the Money were taken away, let
who will preach to his Christians at Hartford, since he already so severely
admonishes, and upbraids them in this Passage, viz. Take heed lest they (i. e.
the Quakers) ensnare you by the Gain and Trade of the World, they know they
have a Hank upon you this way already, some of the Town they have won to them
by this means, others have abated in their Zeal for Christ, fearing to loose
their worldly Interest among the Quakers, page 30.

What is now the Matter? Is he not angry with some of his Hearers because they
are not so malicious and reviling against the Quakers as himself? or is it
because they abate in their Gifts and Rewards toward W. H? Had not the People
of Hartford more need to caution him to take heed of dishonouring the Name of
Christ and the Gospel, and wearying his hearers, by reviling and railing
against the Quakers, and by too much coveting after Money and Lucre, Gifts and
Rewards, as the Support of his Warfare, to the making his preaching chargeable,
as well as burdensome? which it is to be hoped in time many of his Hearers will
be weary of, and of his confused, Railing and scurrilous Books against the
People called Quakers.

Hartford the 10th Month, 1676.
Mary Stout's Reply TO William Haworth's Answer.
William Haworth,
I Did not expect an Answer from thee, knowing there was nothing in what was
written to thee, that thou could justly have opposed; the truth of which does
and will stand over thee, turn it off which way thou will.

Thou say, That which was true Tenderness, in avoiding what was really evil,
was still maintained in thee; but childish Scruplosi^y, and that Bondage-spirit
which thou have been in, and which the Quakers remain in, is removed from thee
through a more Gospel-knowledge given to thee.

Answ. What do thou call really evil, and what is not? All Unrighteousness is
Sin; and he that breaks the least Command is guilty of all: That Spirit of
Bondage thou elsewhere termest Obedience to the Law. Does the Gospel allow
what the Law forbids, as to Holiness and Strictness of Life? or was that
therein to be scrupled under the Law which was not under the Gospel? Was there
not as much Morality under the Gospel as under the Law? And if that which was
spoken by Moses was strict, when he said, Thou shall not kill, Christ spoke
stricter when he said, Love your Enemies, do good to them that hate you [you
must not so much as hate them] and much more he spoke in the 5th of Matth^w to
that purpose, where he says also, He came not to destroy the Law, but to
fulfill it. Thou will say, That was in his Person: I say, Yes, and in his People
too; the Apostle Paul did not leap over the Law, when he spoke of his Liberty
in the Gospel; but thus he says, I through the Law am dead to the Law, that I
may live unto God, Gal. 2. 19.

Thou say, The way to be little in our own Eyes, is, to have a sense that by
Nature we are Sinners, Enemies to God and Children of Wrath. Thou ask also,
Which is like to be least ^n ^is own Eyes, he that sees he has nothing to
justify him but what is without, which God by a free Gift imputes to him; or
he that thinks there i^ enough within from the Birth, if it be obeye^, which
he has Will and Power to do?

Answ. What is it which gives that sense? Can any thing make manifest Darkness
and the Deeds thereof, but Light? For whatsoever is reproved, is made manifest
by the Light, which is of Christ, Ephesians. 5. 13, 14. And we say as the Apostle
John did, We know that he was manifested to take away Sin, and to destroy the
Devil and his Works, 1 John 3. 5 8. And the same Power that works this
Effect, brings in Everlasting Righteousness, Dan. 9. 24. which relates to the
former; and if brought in, then not wholely without. Thou will say, That is by
Faith. I say so too; but the true Faith gives Victory over the World, and
purifies the Heart, and keeps it clean, and is held in a pure Conscience; and
is so far from lifting up, as thou supposest, that it brings down, not only
Words and Actions, but every high Thought into Captivity to the Obedience of
Christ, 2. Cor. 10. 5. and this is not done by our Will or Power; but it is God
that works in us both to will and to do, Phil. 2. 17.

Thou say, Christ's Person is the Truth; and thou art still against the
Errors of the Quakers, who are certainly against the Person of Christ, and set
up another, a quality that is in every Robber, and yet it will not teath many
things necessary to be known.

Answ. And is not his Spirit the Spirit of Truth, which he promised he would
send, which should guide into all Truth? John 16. 13. And how can thou say,
We are against Christ, when we say, We own no other but he which spoke those
words? Do thou call that a Denying of him, to believe his Promises, and wait
for the fulfilling thereof, which is to be led by his Spirit into all Truth?
Though thou say, The Light will not teach many things, yet we believe it
will all; for it is a measure of the same Spirit, and not another, that he said
should convince the World of Sin in order thereunto; and if a spiritual Light,
then not a natural. And it is no Error to say, That Thiev^s are enlightened
thereby; for it shows them their Wickedness, and condemns them for it; and
it was that which showed the Thief on the Cross, that they received the due
Reward of their Deeds, but Christ had done nothing amiss.

Thou say, There may be Honesty where no Godliness, and thou should be
glad if the Quakers were as sound in their Judgments, as moral in their Lives,
though of late they have much declined from Morality.

Answ. I ^ay, it i^ a good sign their Judgments are sound, and that the Tree is
good where good Fruits are brought forth; but thy word (they) makes it a
general Charge, which is fal^e.

But thou say, How honest soever they be in their Callings, thou know
there are Errors of a deep die amongst them.

Answ. I say, it is easy to prove a bad Conversation to be a Fruit of Error,
but it is hard to prove a good one to be so; and it is not thy calling our
Principles Error that does prove them so to be? I have often heard thee call
them so, both by Word and Writing, but I never heard thee prove it by either;
Scripture; indeed thou mentionest many to that end, but so i^pertinent to the
Business that there needs no other to prove thy self to be in Error, and we to
be in the Truth.

Thou say, The Scriptures do no where call the Light that every man has,
the Light of the Son of God; and I may as properly call the Sun in ths
Firmament so:

Answ. The Scriptures are plentiful in this Case, but that of John 1. verse. 4,
and 9. is enough, In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men; and that
was the True Light, that lights every man that comes into the World I know
thy answer will be, That was meant of the Person of Christ, which was to be
believed in. But I ask thee, What Possibility was there then, or is there now
of knowing him to be the true Christ, that should come, and which was to be
believed in, without a measure of his spiritual Light to reveal him, seeing
that Flesh and Blood cannot real him, and he that sees him sees the Father
also? But we know it to be the Light of Christ by the Effects thereof; the
Works that he does, bear Testimony of him: thy own words also will witness
against thee i^ this, in page 109. of thy Book, where thou grantest, There is a
Spark remaining in fallen man of that Light which Adam had in a full Flame
before Transgression; and also, that it will teach some Truths, and some divine
things, that there is a God, and he is to be worship^; and this the Sun in the
Firmament could never do.

Thou also say, Thou have this Light, and walk not contrary to it, but it
is not thy Guide nor Rule, but the Spirit leads thee to the Scriptures, as thy
Rule, and there thou have seen higher things then the Light could discover to
thee; and so bids me take heed I have not rebelled against the Knowledge I once
had from the Scriptures.

Answ. Do thou here speak like a Minister of Christ, that had received hi^
Spirit? Did the Spirit in Paul lead him to the Scriptures, as his only Rule and
Guide, after he knew the Son of God revealed in him? then His Spirit was his
Rule and Instructor (as he says, Ephesians Chap. 4. Verse. 12.) every where and
in every thing, and opened his Understanding to know the true Meaning of what
the holy Men before him had writ and spoke, which before he knew not,
notwithstanding all his Knowledge from the Scriptures; and the Prophets and
true Ministers of Christ in all Ages did point to the Spirit as the Rule, and
not to their Words; for those high things which they saw, could not be seen but
by the same Spirit in which they saw them.

Thou say, Thou considerest thy self to be in Christ, and that thou art
doing that which he would have thee do for him in thy Generation; and thou art
fighting for Jesus of Nazareth against the Quakers Christ.

Answ. To be in Christ is a high State, and it were well for thee if thou
knew what thou say; but if thou did truly know Jesus of Nazareth, and
were in him, thou could not fight against the Quake^s Christ, for he is the
same, and not anot^er, and he never employed thee to fight against his
Spiritual A^pearance in his People; thou had better lay down thy Weap^ns, and
submit to him; for he will be too strong for thee, and a Woeful Reward for thy
Work will thou receive at his Hands, if thou Repent not.

Thou say, Tho^ art b^und to do thy Duty, and leave thy Work with Christ;
and though thou may apprehend our Kingdom w^ll prosper, yet thou art not
discouraged, but believe we are in Error st^ll, and though none of you can,
yet Christ can and will in time still the Ragi^g of the Sea, and divide and dry
up these Waters, and though w^ soar as high as the Clouds in vain Boasting, yet
thou can m^u^t a^ov^ us in the Spirit of Faith and Confidence.

Answ. Vain Boasting we deny; but none shall hinder our Glorying in the Lord;
b^t the Day will declare, and the Fire will try every man's Work of what sort
it is, and the Righteous Judge will determine; unto whose Judgment alone we
desire to stand: But what Spirit is it that has lifted thee up so high, seeing
thou denyest and opposest the spiritual Light of Christ, which is the Door of
Entrance to all that find Pasture? And the same that said, I am the Light, said
also, I am the Door of the Sheep fold, John 10. 9. and all that climb up
another Way are Thieves and Robbers: and so, although thou art climbed never so
high, yet down again must thou come to this, else the higher thou mountest, the
greater will be thy Fall.

Thou say, thou believe, and therefore speak^st; infinitely stronger is he
that is with you, then he that is against you.

Ans. If he that (you think) is with you be in you, as Christ said, he would be
in his People, John 14. 17. by whom they overcame, because greater was he that
was in them, then he that was in the World, then you need not fear but he will
overcome for you; but there is cause to question it, when as thou do not
adventure to say so; and thy Words afterward do import, that thou do hardly
believe he is to be so known, else what do thou mean, when in answer to my
witnessing to Christ's being in his People to lead and save them; thou say,
Why not Emanuel, as well God with us, as in us?

Ans. His being in us denies not his being with us; as he is known in us, he is
with us; but what is it that renders us so Erroneous, and such, who by the
Consequence of thy words, thou accountest God's Enemies, whom he will drive
back and divide as the Sea, and still the Raging thereof.

Ans. The Saints who writ the Scriptures tell us, it was Sin (while they were
in it) and wicked Works that made them Enemies of God; and it was those, who
remained in Sin, that did oppose them, when they departed from it, which the
Lord overcame, both within and without them: But thou say, Thou never
expects to be free from Sin whilst in this Tabernacle, and that there is none
of Christ's Righteousness at all in your Minds, but in his own Person, then
that Hope is vain, and will perish, which expects to see Christ conquer his
Enemies to thy Comfort, when thou do not know him in thee, so as to expect he
will conquer his and thy Enemy, which is Sin; for when he is known within, so
as to reign, then his Righteousness is there too; for therein does his Kingdom
consist, in Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost. These things
truly considered, thou have Cause to fear, that those, whom thou accountest
God's Enemies, he accounts his Friends; then Woe will be to those that fight
against them; for it is not those that cry Lord, Lord, but they that do the
things which he commands, whom he accounts his Friends.

Thou say, Thou appealest to Christ, with what Spirit thou have preached and
writ against the Quakers; and I am too low to judge thee, and out of my Place;
and thou caust not preach the Gospel, but thou preachest against them.

Ans. I am not to learn the Duty of my Place of thee; and thou art not so high,
but that the least Child in the Truth sees over thee, and far beyond thee: I
am sure thou art out of thy Place, First, in calling the good Spirit of God (by
which his People are led) The Spirit of Delusion, and his true and faithful
Ministers, Witches, Jugglers, and what not that is bad enough, those whom he
has sent forth in the Power of his Spirit, to turn People from Darkness to
Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, that they may receive Remission of
Sin, and an Inheritance amongst those that are sanctified, through the
Revelation of the Son of God in them; and this was the Gospel or Power, that
Paul believed in, and which he preached to others; and if that Gospel which
thou preachest be another, then read what follows, Gal. 1. 8. And Thousands
there are, that do witness this Effect through their Ministry, and are come to
know the Lord to teach them, a Teacher that cannot be removed into a Corner,
and so are not at a Loss. as sometimes your Hearers have been, when their
Teachers have been removed into Corners.

Thou say, Thou art not of my Mind, that the Sun did rise in the North about
twenty Years since, and that then began the Day of God, when Fox came from
thence, as I intimate; through Grace thou see the Light of the Gospel, the
Law that goes forth of Mount Sion.

Ans. As to the time and Place, and Messengers, I shall not say much, though
much might be spoken in that particular: It is sufficient to me to know the Sun
is risen, and that by the Light thereof. I see my Way, when others are groping
for the Wall at Noonday: And as to the Knowledge thou have of the Law that
goes forth of Mount-Sion, and thy Sight of the Light of the Gospel, it may
easily b^ gathered what it is, by thy expressing thy self, both before and
afterward.

Thou say, If I mean a further breaking forth of the Light in thee, thou
have known Conversion by the Spirit; but I may read in thy Bo^k that Work is of
a different Ki^d from that which our Light effects.

Ans. I have read thy Book, and I do find indeed, that Conversion which thou
speak of, is of a differ^nt Kind and Nature, from that which the Lig^t of
Christ effects now, and which the Saints in former Ages witnessed also; for
the Light deceives none, but discovers all things as they are, and does not
make them appear as they are not; and so long as Sin has a being in any, it
reproves for it; and the Creature yielding Obedience thereunto, Power is
received, which removes and takes it away, and saves from it, and so a
Temple is prepared for the Lord to dwell and walk in. But that Conversion which
thou speaks of, is consistent with Sins having a Continuance for Term of Life
in the best of Saints, yet no Condemnation to them, because they are in P. 60.
and 24.
Christ (thou say) But thou should have read the next Words after, Romans
8. 1, 2. and they would inform thee, they were such, as walked not after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit, whom the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ, had
made free from the Law of Sin and Death, unto whom there was no Condemnation;
and such as were in Christ, were new Creatures, old things being passed away,
and all things become new. And if that be the truest Conversion thou know, I
desire never to partake with thee; for that Liberty is perfect Bondage, and
thou must retract; for instead of being come so far as Mount-Sion, when thy
Eyes are opened, thou will find thy self in Egypt, not come so far as Mount
Sinai.

Thou say, Thou can not learn from the Scriptures, that the Light in every
man is the Voice of Christ.

Ans. That the Scriptures are full to this purpose, nothing is more c^ear;
Moses often exhorting the Israelites to hearken to the Voice of God, and tells
them, it was not far from them, but his Word was in their Mouth and Heart, that
they might hear and do it: And Paul quotes his Words saying, that was the Word
which he preached to be believed in; and that is his V^ice also, which speaks
in his true Ministers.

Thou say, Do not I here proclaim my self to be one of those silly Women
which were ever learning? And how can you but pity us, to see us embrace a
Shadow, and let the Substance go?

Ans. It were well for you, if you could pity your selves; we need none of your
Pity, we are very sensible what Pity we were like to rec^ive at your Hands; but
what is it that makes us such Objects of Pity in your Sight?

Thou say, That Fox and Nailor should so bewitch us, as to cause us to dance
about this Shadow (the Light) and adore it; we know not what to call it, but
rather then miss we will call it every thing that Christ is called.

Ans. Surely thou art very full against Fox, thou have him up so often with
Derision, thou had much better let him alone; for all the Darts thou shoots
at him, and many others whom thou mentions, will but return back, and wound thy
self; but what has thi^ thou call Witchery produced? This it seems is an
Effect thereof, in thy Account, my using the Apostle's Words (to testify that
many were come to witness the Saints Conditions) who said, The Son of God is
come, and ha^h given us an Understanding to know him that is true. And many are
in him, and do know the Elect Seed born that cannot be deceived.

Thou ask, Is the Light in every Man the Son of God? then it is God Eternal,
and of the same Nature with the Father, before it was but his Voice, now it is
himself (say thou) and afterward his Light; and so thou bidest me see my
Inconsistency.

Ans His Light is his Voice, and he speaks by it, and would lead all out of
Darkness thereby, and those that follow and obey it, he leads unto the Life.
And my expressing of Christ under several Denominations does not manifest my
Inconsistency, but thy terming it so manifests thy own Ignorance in the Ways
and Working of the Spirit of God, not understanding that the several
Expressions of Christ relate to several States and Conditions that People are
in; and to know him as in one Manifestation, is in order to another; and
although we believe the Light in every man is the Light of the Son of God, and
is Eternal, yet it cannot be said, that all that are enlightened do hear and
know his Voice; neither can it be said, that all that know his Voice, do know
the Elect Seed born (yet there is no State so high to be attained unto, but
still his Voice is to be hearkened to, and obeyed, to be preserved in that
State) but Christ says, My Sheep hear my Voice, and they follow me; And he
that will be my Disciple, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross daily,
and follow me. And so it is those, and only those that follow him in the denial
of self, whithersoever he goes, that know the inward Washing and Regeneration,
till the new Birth is brought forth by the Immortal Word, which lives and
abides forever, and this is the Elect Seed which is Heir of God's Kingdom.

Thou say, Did not the Son of God come before this Doctrine came out of the
North?

Answ. Yes, the Apostles were Witnesses of his Power and Coming, and all that
know he is come now, must know it by the Operation of the same Power in them.

Thou say, He is come, implying there was a time when he was not come; what
do thou mean this to be, his first, or second Coming?

Answ. If thou did effectually know his first Coming, and the End thereof,
thou ne^dst not ask me what I mean; for then thou would wait for his second
according to his Promise, which is that I mean, John 14. 3. 18. I go to prepare
a Place for you; I will come again and receive you to my self. This he spoke
unto his Disciples, which knew he was come, yet he had many things to say unto
them, which then they could not bear, for which Cause it was expedient for them
that he should go away, that so the Comforter might come, the Spirit of Truth,
in which he would more fully and largely manifest himself to them, then before
he could do; but they were first to know a time of weeping and lamenting; and
they had a spiritual Travail to go through: And then I will see you again, and
your Hearts shall rejoyc^, and your Joy no man takes from you, John 16. 21, 22.

Thou say, Is the Light within the Elect Seed? then it must be saved, yet it
goes to Hell with many.

Answ. I have told thee before what I understand the Elect Seed to be, and the
Light also; and now how thou can make such a Blasphemous Conclusion as this,
to beget a disesteem of the Light, which is not fit to be mentioned, is very
strange to me that the Light goes to Hell with many, whenas, i^ ever thou
know Redemption from Hell, the Light must be the Way and Means whereby the
Lord does bring it to pass.

Thou say, We Quakers go the same Way with the Pharisees and thou know
Christ is the Way, believing in him; and the Spirit can make this Way easy and
short; and the Work of the Law upon thy Conscience has comp^lled th^e to this
Way.

Answ. The Spirit does make the Way easy to all that obey it, and are led
thereby in the Way of Holiness, in which the Unclean cannot walk; and it gives
Ease and Satisfaction to that Seed (which hungers and thirsts that
Righteousness may be exalted) which has long been oppressed under the Egyptian
Bondage of Sin; God has heard the Sighs and the Groanings thereof, and is come
down to deliver from under that heavy Yoke, Glory to his Name forever; but
there is no Ease to the Rebellious Nature, which is in Enmity against God, that
is still to be yoked till it be cut off and rooted out Branch and Root. So what
Way soever thou have found out short of this, it will end in Sorrow and
Disappointment.

Thou say, Following the D^ctates of Nature is not the Yoke of Christ; for
it leads to the Covenant of Works, which is a heavy Yoke to work for Life and
you are under it (say thou.)

Answ. I know the Dictates of Nature is not the Yoke of Christ, but that which
teaches to be meek and low in Heart, and gives Rest to the Soul is, and that
yokes the first Nature, which can dictate no good thing, and brings to pa^take
of the divine Nature, and it does not lead to the old Covenant to work for
Life, but to the new, where the Lord does not only command, but gives Power to
fulfill what he commands, which is the great Benefit in the new Covenant; for he
never intended by making a new Covenant, to make void his holy righteous Law,
as to his People, but brings it nearer then before, and writes it in their
Hearts, and puts his Spirit in their inward Parts, and I will cause you to walk
in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments, and do them, Ezekiel. 36. 27. And
so those that are led by his Spirit are not under the Law; for they are led out
of all those things, which the Law was added because of; those who are meek,
temperate and gentle, against such there is no Law, Gal. 5. 18, 23. And
although the same Work may be wrought which the Saints work, yet not being led
thereunto by the Spirit of the Lord, they are not accepted of; and Christ did
not find fault with the Pharisees for their outward Holiness, but because they
were not inwardly so too, and for omitting the great and weighty matters of the
Law; These things, says he, you ought to have done, and not to have left the
other und^ne; and they did it in their own Strength, not submitting to the
Leadings of his Spirit; this Paul law to be their State, after he knew the Son
of God revealed in himself, they being ignorant of Christ who is God's
Righteousness, went about to estab^ish their own, and did not submit unto the
Righteousness of God: So he goes on and tells where he was to be found, Say not
in thy Heart who shall ascend or descend to fetch Christ, but the Word is nigh,
in thy Heart and Mouth, that thou may^st ^ear and do it, and that was the word
which they preached to be believed in, Romans 10. 8. and so he does clearly
distinguish between the Righteousness and Works which is accepted, and that
which is not, as in Ephesians. 2. 9. By Grace you are saved, not of Works lest any
man should boast; here he excludes man's works; for we are his Workma^sh^p,
created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God has before ordained that we
should walk in them: So here he includes the Works wrought by and in the
Spirit of Christ. Now thou wanting the Key of Knowledge that which opens the
Understanding to know the true meaning of Scriptures, here thou art calling
Evil Good, and Good Evil; and because the Scriptures declare of some Works
which do not avail, therefore thou concludest there are none available to
Salvation, although wrought by the Spirit of the Lord; but that which thou
call, Faith, alone must save, and all who assert the contrary, they lead to
the Covenant of Works, and so to Popery to work for Life, which is a heavy Yoke
(say thou) Surely had the Apostle James been on Earth in our Days, thou
would have noted him for a Papist, when he says, Show me thy Faith without
thy Works, and I will show thee mine by my Works; and will thou know O vain
man, that Faith without Works is dead, even as the Body without the Spirit; and
by Works is Faith made perfect. Well may we say, as the Prophet David did. It
is time for thee O Lord to work; for they have made void thy Law. But thou art
much mistaken in us; for we work not of our selves for Life, but the Life
helps us, works all our works in us and for us, and his Yoke is easy, and
his Burden is light; ^n be it known to thee, God has a People upon Earth at
this Da^, though thou knows them not, unto whom it is become as ^n eat and
Drink to do his Will, and who can do nothing against the Truth, but for it, and
their Obedience is not as Egyptian Slaves for Fear of a Whip, page 91. of thy
Book, and so thou go on and say, although you Christians come not up to
that Height the Law requires, yet do not they love God more, and obey better,
that apprehend God's Love in Christ Unchangeable to them, then they that after
all their Toil, fear they may f^ll short? But what does that Love signify,
that keeps not his Commands? He that has my Commandments and keeps them, he
it is that loves me, says Christ; And he that loves the Lord with all his
Heart, and his Neighbor as himself, fulfils the Law, and if there be any other
Command, it is briefly comprehend^d in th^s, Romans 13. 9. Mat. 22. 40. for on
these two hang all the Law and the Prophets; for Love works no ill. But
according to your Love is your Obedience, and according to that is your
Assurance of God's Love to you; for it seems you do but apprehend that his Love
is unchangeable to you; but the Assurance which God's People had in former
Ages, and in this also, is another thing; for his Spirit which acts them in
their Obedience to him, the same bears witness with their Spirits, that they
are his Children.

Thou say, It is sufficiently manifest there are Errors amongst us, and we
have been weighed and found too light, and tried and found Dr^ss.

Answ. What have thou weighed and tried us with, seeing thou do not profess
the Spirit to be thy Rule, which is the just and equal Balance? The Spiritual
Man (or he that is led by it) judges all things by, yet himself is judged of
none; and nothing else is sufficient to try Spirits, but the Spirit of Christ
and so we may be Gold and weight enough too for ought thou knows; and if thou
say, Thou have tried us by the Scriptures, if the Spirit be not thy Rule
therein thou may fail; for those that persecuted Christ to Death thought they
tried him by the Scripture, when they condemned him as a Blasphemer; and no
question b^t they thought their Conceivings or Apprehensions from them were
right, else they would never have said, His Blood be on us and our Children.

Thou say, O that you were built upon Christ, the Rock! his Person is the
Rock of Eternity, and not the Light in every man.

Answ. We are built upon the Rock, of which the Fathers drank; For they drank
of that spiritual Rock which followed them, and that Rock was Christ, 1 Cor.
10. 4. He who said, Before Abraham was I am, which was before all Time. who in
Time took upon him that prepared Body of Flesh, wherein he did the Will of God,
this is the Rock of Eternity, the Foundation upon which Abraham and all the
Saints of old did build. But thou will say, Abraham saw he was to come, and
upon that he built. It Is true, he saw his Day; but what was that which gave him
to see Christ was to come in the Flesh? Was it not a Measure of his Spirit in
Abraham, by which he was q^ickened and made alive unto God? Christ's own words
do fully declare it, Mat. 22. 32. (by which he put the Saduc^s to silence,
which say, There is no Resurrection) I am the God of Abraham, of Isaac and of
Jacob; now God (says he) is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living; This
is that first Resurrection, in which he had a part, over which the second Death
shall have no Power.

Thou say, We may hold out in a Day of Man's Persecution and Opposition; but
when the Tempestuous Sea of God's Justice beats upon us, in an Hour of Death,
and in the Day of Judgment, then the Sandy Foundation of our own Righteousness
will fall: and so thou bidst us, Take heed that our Faith be the same with that
which Peter professed, which was that of the Person of Christ.

Answ. That Faith which will carry through and enable to hold out in the
Patience in a day of Man's Persecution and Opposition is more likely to be the
True Faith, and to be upon the Right Foundation, then that which will not; but
yours will not uphold you in a day of Man's Persecution, and therefore is very
unlikely to uphold you when God's Justice beats upon you in an Hour of Death,
and in a Day of Judgment to come.

Thou say, Against which Faith of the Person of Christ, all the Powers of
Hell shall not prevail; but our Profession is (thou say) that not Christ
Jesus of Nazareth, but the Light in every man is Christ; and against this Faith
we may be sure (it being false) the Gates of Hell will never prevail, for Satan
will never fight against it.

Answ. That we profess Jesus of Nazareth is not the Christ, is wholely false;
and although Satan will never fight against the False Faith, yet he has
already fought and prevailed against those that are in it; and he does still
prevail over them, first to make them believe a Lie, and then to keep them in
that Belief, which is, That although Sin, which he has wrought in them, do
continue in them while they live, yet they may be saved when they dye. And that
he does fight against the true Faith, which we are in, is very evident also,
and stirs up all the Force and Power he can too (although to little purpose)
else what means (and from whence comes) all that Opposition we have m^t with
ever since we were a People unto this day; for he knows that it strikes at the
Root and Foundation of his kingdom, which is Darkness, and the works thereof,
and therefore he is come down in great Wrath, because he knows his Time is
short.

Thou say, Do thou Repent, poor Woman, and do thy First Works, and go to God
as a poor Sinner, and not think (as thou fear I do) through Pride, that I am
rich, and have need of nothing, whenas I am blind, miserable and naked, and
thou see this to be my state.

Answ. This Exhortation was given by Authority from him who held the Seven
Stars in his Right Hand, Rev. 2 4, 5. to those that had left their first Love,
and to others that were neither hot nor cold, whom God would spue out of his
Mouth, Rev. 5. 15. Now have thou the Testimony that thou speak from the same
Authority and in the same Power and Spirit (which is very unlikely to be,
seeing thou do not profess the Spirit to be thy^ Rule?) And also, Can thou
make it appear, that I have left my first Love, and am neither hot nor cold? or
else of necessity these two things will follow, First, That thou speak when
the Lord has not spoken to thee: And secondly, That thy Exhortation is
improper and impertinent to me.

Thou also say, Thou counsellest me to buy Eye-sal^e to see my Poverty and
Nak^dness, and Raiment which ^s I^puted Righteousness, that I be not found
naked in the Day of Christ.

Answ. If thou did know where to direct me to buy this Eye Salve, certainly
thou would have bought some for thy self, that so thy own Eyes might have
been opened, and not have manifested so much Blindness and Ignorance, as thou
have done in this thy Work, and also discovered thy own Nakedness,
notwithstanding all thy pretense to imputed Righteousness, it will not cover
thee in the day of Christ^; for all Coverings then will be found too short and
too narrow, except the Covering of his Spirit: But if I should take this thy
Counsel, t^en might thou truly call me silly Woman, to dispossess my self of
the Earnest and First Fruits of an Everlasting Inheritance made manifest and
enjoyed within, for a bare Apprehension or Imagination of being saved by the
Imputation of that Righteousness which Christ wrought wholely without me (not
that I do believe that it is possible for any to be saved without the real
Imputation of his Righteousness; but that is not imputed to any but those in
whom his holy, righteous, divine Life is in some measure brought forth by the
Operation of his eternal Spir^t to live and reign even in their mortal Bodies,
and then according to his Promise, his Spirit that dwells in them, it shall
take of his, and give it unto them. But I have not so learned Christ, as to be
so easily persuaded out of him, neither can all the false Aspersions and
ignominious Terms, which thou and all that join with thee can cast upon his
pure, holy Way of Truth, and those that walk therein, make me out of Love with
it; but still, his Reproach is greater Ri^hes then all the Treasures of Egypt.
And this further I have to say to thee, It will (...) much more to thy
Advantage and Safety, to desist from teaching and giving Counsel to others, and
going about to try their Spirits, till thou come to know the most sure and
infallible Guide thy self, to try thy own spirit; for in this state, wherein
thou now stand, thou art but one of those blind Guides which will assuredly
lead all that follow thee into the Ditch; and therefore thou will do very well
to take that good Counsel which Christ gave, for it properly belongs to thee,
Mat. 7. 5. Thou Hypocrite, first cast out the Beam that is in thine own Eye,
and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the Mote that is in thy Brother's
Eye.

Mary Stout.

REader, Note that in part of the Impression of this Book, there happened this
Mistake in the Title Page, line 18. viz. Christian for Convert; the Title of J.
Crook's Book being the Counterfeit Convert, as it is mentioned in pages 10, and
35. Page 7. line 13. for 18. read Ezekiel. 28. and for 19. read Mat. 17. p. 32. l.
17, for in Form r. inform. The literal defects (or any of points) may be
perceived by the current of the matter.


