SOME PAPERS Writ in the Year 1664.

In Answer to a LETTER, Concerning the PRACTICE of PHYSIC IN ENGLAND.

By Dr. C. T.

Published at the Request of a Friend and several Fellows of the College of
Physicians.

LONDON, Printed for James Allestry, at the Rose and Crown, in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXX.

For my Worthy and much Honored Friend the Author of the following Discourse.
Sir,
I Own a very great Obligation for those Papers you were pleased to entrust me
with so freely as you did, and at the first request; and though it be now five
or six years since you writ them, yet I know they will be hugely welcome to the
public; and the World will be informed, that what is now prosecuted, is in
truth a matter of consequence, and not a caprice of young unpracticed heads, as
some endeavor to render it, but managed seriously by men of the ablest of the
Profession, and worthy of the care and consideration of our Superiors. And
pray give me leave in a few words to acquaint you with the occasion I had to
desire them of you at first.

It was my good fortune not long since to be in the Company of five or six
persons, not only considerable for their Estates and Interest in the City, but
likewise for their mature understanding of business: as they were discoursing
of several matters relating to the Trade both of the City and Nation in
general, it happened that one past through the room in which they sat, to go up
a pair of stairs that lead into a Chamber, where the only Son of the Gentleman,
at whose House they were, then lay under some little Aguish distemper: One of
the Company that spyed him, saluted him by his name, which occasioned another
to demand who it was; to whom the Gentleman of the House replied, it was his
Apothecary gone up to visit his Son who was at that time a little indisposed;
whereupon another ask't the rest if they had seen two Discourses lately
published by two very eminent Members of the College of Physicians, which (says
he) the Apothecary's passing by put me in mind of: one besides himself, said he
had seen and read them, and added frankly, they seemed in his judgment very
judiciously writ, and very much to be considered by all that regarded their
healths; so they left off a little their former discourse, and began to enter
into the matter of those Books, and the persons that read them represented to
the Company, some of the most important passages, as their memories served:
whilst they were thus discoursing, the Apothecary came down, and was called by
the Master of the House to this part of their Conference: To do him right, he
spoke very civilly, and told the Gentlemen he hoped all these appearances of
difference between the College and them would soon pass over, and presently
took leave and went away. After he was gone, one among the rest, a very grave
man, who had sat all the while silent and heard what was produced out of these
Books, began very solemnly to declare, that since health was one of the
greatest goods of life, and that which alone gives as it were their being so,
to all the rest; and since it was so much the interest of a Prince to preserve
his people in strength and vigor, he professed he could not understand how that
reconcilement of these differences between the Physicians and the Apothecaries,
which so much concern the lives and healths of the Kings Subjects, could ever
be so well made up as the person that was gone said he hoped to see. For, said
he, if what has been alleged out of these Books here, be true, there has been
too long already a foul and shameful abuse put upon the people, by the present
method of practicing Physic, as it now (so he phrased it) joggs on between the
Physician and Apothecary, and that since those able and well-known Physicians
had so freely and honestly of themselves proposed ways of redress, and so far
opened the eyes of all men to discern the mockeries they have been gulled with
so long, he said it was too late for them now easily to retreat: And believed
that all men who had read those Books would as well as he, look upon such a
composure, as a new way only of continuing the former abuses under some more
artificial and secret disguise. But whatever, said he, may be done out of
Conscience, I am sure they shall destroy their interest by it, and as long as
ever Apothecaries continue practicing as they do, so long shall the most
gainful and secure part of practice come into their hands, by means of the
Bills they formerly have, and daily will receive from them, and nothing remain
for the Physician but such sollicitous and extreme Cases (where the Apothecary
shall vouchsafe to call him in) in which his own credit shall every moment run
as great a fortune as the Patients life. For, said he, how many men in this
Town have been already, or ever shall be intended by the Physicians as
Apothecaries only, we in spite of common course they now take to hinder it,
shall to save charge and expense of Physic, always esteem and make use of as a
sort of cheaper Doctors; except only in such extremities where our lives are in
manifest danger. And I have often wondered that so great a Company of prudent
men should do such things every day, which if we in our particular Trades
should suffer, we should not only be laughed at, but others of the same way
would presently endeavor to obstruct or punish. For I have often observed my
self (to tell truth) when I have been with my Physician either for my own
concern or any of my Family, and have received good by what has been
prescribed; my Apothecary has often recommended the same, and repeated it again
without the knowledge of the Doctor; and at other times told my Wife of an
excellent course against the Scurvy, ordered by an eminent Physician, and named
him: and sometimes commended a Powder of another Doctors against the Worms, for
my Children, which he said he had by him: All which things I noted to be so
prejudicial to the Physician, that I could not choose but wonder that
Physicians would so carelessly expose the fruit of all their time and studies,
and put every day the best of their Trade out of their own hands into another
who had so little consideration of them: And this indeed wholly deterred me
from breeding one of my Sons a Physician, since I saw how easily every good
Medicine that my Doctor had, came into the hands of my Apothecary for a fee or
two, and after that, both I and all my Friends could readily command it, and
Mr. Doctor never the wiser.

When this Gentleman had done, we began freely to tell one another, being all
Tradesmen, who knew as well the difficulty of getting, as the use and
consequence of money, how it was customary with us to send to our Apothecaries
only, unless where the danger was very great, to avoid the charge and expense
of Physicians: Not but that we all concluded it would be better to have the
advice of a Physician at the very first, if they would so order the matter that
we might address our selves as reasonably to them as we now can to our
Apothecary; forasmuch as the greatest diseases have small beginnings, and it
were more comfortable to apply our selves where we may be as well advised of
the nature of our present indisposition and what it is like to come to, as
receive what is proper, either to cure or prevent it, which said they, on all
hands is confessed, the Physician is more able to do than an Apothecary, else
should we never fly to him where we fear a danger as now we do. I then took
occasion to tell them, that the principal design aimed at in those Books was to
exhibit such a method as might lessen the expense of Physic to the people more
then half in half, and to show that the Apothecary by his excessive prices, and
by his unnecessary and frequent repetitions of chargeable Medicines, besides
sees which some of them take, and expect, or else they think they are not
kindly used, amounted often to three times as much as they could hope to have
saved in fees by not going to the Physician; and farther added, that a worthy
Friend of mine a Physician had an excellent discourse by him to advance this
proposition, and enforce what had been already made public. They commanded me
to importune you for it, which since you are pleased so readily to consent to,
you have a great deal more obliged all the World in it than me, although I am
as much as any can be,

SIR, Your most affectionate and obliged Servant.

ERRATA.
Page 9. lin. 18. read Fevers. lin. 25. Physician, page 13. lin. 24. r. most of
us have been Travelers. p. 17. l. 11. r. they would. p. 35. the last line, r.
by Custom, and leave out the following by, page 37. l. 18. r. their, p. 41. l.
9. r. it proved, p. 43. l. 4. that Roman, p. 46. l. 4. Prujean.

Sir,
I Do assure you I defer much to your kindness, or to your judgment, or to
both, in that I am contented you should do what you will with part of those
papers I writ in 64 but since some of those people who invaded the profession
of Physic, and railed at learning and the College (with all that confidence
that great ignorance uses to enable bold Knaves with) are dead, or sunk into
that contempt such men at last must fall into, I would have all that which
concerns their Charecters wholly left out, nor am I at all willing that the
reformation of our faculty, which I there designed, should as yet be made
public.

For although I have been several times confirmed by better judgments than my
own, that it is a rational way to improve the usefullnesse of our profession,
as much as by the industry of a Society of men learned and most capable of such
an undertaking, it is possible to be done, yet I do not think the age, or the
world we live in, very susceptible of such propositions now.

The Charity there designed to supply all the poor of the Cities of London and
Westminster with advice, and some of them with medicines gratis, and the better
supplying and serving the sick in those Hospitals we have, would but be looked
upon as a decoy to bring in benefactours, whose bounty and Charity might be
perverted to luxurious uses, and the care that is offered at to provide against
the slaughters every day made by ignorant Quacks and Mountebancks, and yet to
secure all the encouragements that can reasonably be asked to any that are
really possessed of any thing that may be useful to the recovery or comfort of
those that are afflicted with sickness, would be looked upon but as a design to
Monopolise physic to the College, and to invest the Physicians with a power
to enslave Chyrurgeons and Apothecaries.

Alas Sir, we live in an age where to prescribe any bounds is to violate magna
Charta, we would all be Kings but Statesmen we are all, nor can any of those
that are really so, with so much confidence, venture to cure any disease in a
man, as the blew aprons in a Coffehouse shall all those in the State, for it is
the humor now to affect, to be wisest out of the Sphere that God, Nature, and
Education have placed us in, and we all think ourselves able, and are busy to
reform every thing, but that which is really our duty to endeavor the
amendment of, I am sure you cannot but meet with occasions every day to
confirm these observations.

And this I confess makes me think diversely from what I find the general
opinion to be, That it is an age for the advancement and improvement of
knowledge; I rather fear our tumbling into the greatest barbarity and the most
profound ignorance, the way to solid knowledge by cultivating of our reasons,
and inuring them to compare, compute, and estimate well, begins now to be
wholly despised, the young blades who have truanted at School, and debauched at
an University, if they have acquired but rongue enough to rally the ancient
learning, and talk of experiments, will disturb the gravest Societies with
their impertinenties, silence the most learned, and think themselves the only
dictators in universal learning, and if they are so unfortunate to be endowed
with wit and good natural parts, they turn every thing that is sober into
Ridiculous, and go out Doctors in Atheism.

Our municipal Lawyers have a bar that has hitherto kept ignorant invaders at
some distance in their profession, but Women, Weavers and Cobblers think
themselves able to comprehend all the mysteries in Divinity, and all the reason
of Physic, Zeal and good meaning may excuse them in their Divinity but I am
deceived if any thing, but pride, and the greatest folly, can be alleged for
their Physic.

How authoritatively will a Nurse with wind and vapors give you the causes of
all diseases and their Symptoms, but an Apothecaries Prentice with
Fermentation confounds the admiring Customers, who take him for a very priest
of Apollo pronouncing from his Tripode, whilst a learned and a rational
Physician, especially if he have the misfortune of being modest, is looked upon
at the best but as a weak, and a timorous man, if he has the good fortune to
be counted a safe man, he may perhaps have some few patients, but the Crowdes
for the most part follow the boasting and the lying Quacks; and although they
find themselves still cheated by them, yet a new one or the same with some
circumstances a little disguised shall cheat them over again, how often even
in our age, has the cheats and knaveries of the pretended Chemists been
detected, even with the ruin of some of the admirers of it, yet that vanity
wants not its Patrons now: and sober men who knowing the usefullness of
Chemistry, and the best ways of improveing it, would purge it from that lying
and knavery which makes the very enquiring into it a reproach in the opinion of
some sober men, are looked upon as not capable of knowing any thing in it, so
that with some men a man must not be thought a Chemist without renouncing
learning and his reason, and with others he is believed to have shaken-hands
with them and honesty to, if they think him one. I have a great many more
reasons why I would not have that part of my discourse printed truly I have
enough too that nothing of it should be, since I believe that there is very
little said in that which has not been better said by others: Besides when I
writ it, the letter which gave the occasion of it was just printed, and in every
ones hand, which would have a little satisfied, for the immethodicalness of the
answer; The provocations the Apothecaries had given us were very fresh, they
endeavor, dirtily and unjustly to asperse that Society of men who gave them
that Trade, by which they were grown rich, and had the Confidence to affront
the Kings prerogative in opposing our patent, although that prerogative is the
only title they have to be a Corporation: The pretended Chemists were then
setting up for a College to lay in a Magazine of charcoale, that they might
have the better utterance for smoke and lies, and to show how useful they might
in time be, did every day furnish us with some papers for necessary uses, but
all that being spent and the rest almost forgotten, the heat I then was in is
much cooled, and I confess I would rather contribute to the preserving the
Apothecaries, than the destroying of them, so it may be done honestly, but we
cannot be honest men if we do in the least connive at their abusing the people
in their Quacking, or the prises of their medicines, nor can they be honest
when they meddle in what they understand not, and unjustly injure those men to
whom they owe their being Apothecaries: To make this very evident is but
briefly and truly to stare the case betwixt us and them.

Although the College of Physicians had been established in the Reign of King
Henry the 8th under the broad seal of England, and was confirmed by several
acts of Parliament, yet there was no such thing as a Corporation of the Trade
of Apothecaries until the Reign of King James, when the College (I hope not
through pride and lasiness grown weary of making their own medicines, but) to
obviate all the mischiefs that might be done, where the ordainers of medicines
were the makers and exhibiters of them too, petitioned the King, that such a
number of men whose names they offered might be taken for the most part, I
think out of the company of Grocers, and constituted a company distinct; for
the making such medicines as the College of Physicians should ordain, this
petition was granted, and they by the Kings Charter made a Corporation, and in
that Charter there is special provision made, that nothing in it should in the
least infringe the privileges of the College of Physicians, the inventing,
ordaining, and making of medicines having always been a part of Physic, and
so publicly asserted in the Apothecaries constitution, that by the Kings
especial command the College of Physicians composed the London dispensatory,
and the Apothecaries not only of London but of all England are, by public
proclamation, commanded to follow that, as the rule of their Trade, they are to
make and sell those medicines in their shops, and the Physicians empowered to
search and examine those shops, whether they have them, and have them well
made: They have not the least clause in their Charter to enable them to advise,
prescribe or ordainany remedy, but they are faithfully to dispense such
medicines as shall be ordered by Physicians, and are not to make a Prentice
free without his being first examined by the Physicians.

It was upon these terms the College trusted the Apothecaries with the
knowledge of making their medicines, and let it be left now to any indifferent
man to judge what the honesty or gratitude of those men can be, who not only
betray a trust, committed to them with so much advantage to themselves, but
convert what they are trusted with to the hurt of those that trust them.

I should have thought this enough to have impartially stated the matter
betwixt them and us, if I had not lately read as ridiculous a piece of drollery
in my opinion, as no sense, less reason, and great confidence can furnish out,
nothing can speak more pride nor more ignorance; which two in conjunction do
always insolently endeavor to level every thing to the meaness of their own
understandings. I would have the Pulpit guard routed, and this witty pamphlet
called Lex Talionis or Vinditiae printed together, to show the uselessness of
those tedious methods of studying divinity, and Physic, and how unnecessary
the endowments of Universities, Colleges and Schools are. The civil law has
no great encouragements left amongst us, and if the Butcher, the Cobbler, the
Weaver with gifts are fitter to preach and teach than the men of humane
learning, and carnal knowledge; and if serving an Apprentiship seven years
with an Apothecary, and reading a little in those three ancient Authors
Frambesarius, Riverius and Primrose, qualifies any man sufficiently for the
practice of Physic, to what end this charge and trouble of taking degrees,
this twelve years study before a man can be a Doctor. The learning to know all
homebred and exotic plants, the Analyzing of them in their Elaboratories, the
considering what parts are useful of them, and what not, and how their
effects may best, and most gratefully be acquired, the inventing the best vvays
of compounding and mixing (which are things I am sure the Students in Physic
in both our Universities for some years past have busied themselves with) are
nothing to what may be acquired by making of medicines, according to the
Dispensatory, and selling them to the best advantage: but although this Animal
has showed his teeth thus against Learning and the Universities, and may
perhaps, because he could not bite, pass unpunished by them, sure the
Apothecaries have more sense than not to find him out, and punish him for his
most scandalous libelling of them, what ever their fortune may be otherwise, I
cannot think any of them so foolishly wicked as to be Wittals, nor so
wretchedly knavish to suffer the Physicians to go snips with them in their
profits, the better to cheat their customers which this thing of paper would
insinuate to the World that some of them do.

But the poor Droll had not sense enough to know, that making of Cuckolds and
getting of money are not by all accounted very disgraceful crimes, by what
instruments soever the pleasure or the profit is procured, nor did his little
understanding comprehend how vvretchedly contemptible those instruments of
either are even to those whose bad ends they serve, sure the honest
Apothecaries (and I cannot but persuade my self there are many such) when
they consider that this insiped libeller having insinuated, that there are some
Apothecaries, who are such vvretched instruments for the profit and pleasure
of Physicians, and not particularly marked them out; has given the censuring
part of the World occasion to think every Apothecary such an one: will rouse
themselves, and either by publicly branding the Guilty, vindicate the
Innocent; or else by persuing the sottish Defamor to a just punishment, do
something toward vviping off those dirty aspersions he has cast upon them.

Those Physicians that think any thing in the Pamplet reflects on them, may by
making their own medicines, and having as little to do with Apothecaries as
may be, testify to all the World that they are not in confederacy with
dishonesty, and the world will easily be satisfied that it is cheaper being
cousened by one than by two, and that it is much safer to trust him whose
credit and interest it is to cure Diseases, than him whose interest is only to
put off his vvare. But let the Apothecaries vindicate themselves as well as
they can, this fellovv being believed to be an Apothecary (and truly the style,
the method, and the force of his reasoning seem to make good the Proverb, that
he talks as an Apothecary) has left that scandal upon them and their
profession, they will not be able easily to wipe off, for it will be believed
he knew what he said, at least as to his own particular, and was therefore
vvilling enough to have the World believe the same of all the rest of his
profession; he should therefore have done well to have given his Book a truer
Title, Scandalum Pharmacopaerum had been much fitter for it than Vindiciae etc.

But Sir, I am grown almost as impertinent as he, and although I have already
outrun the limits of a letter, I cannot give over without telling you, I
think you did not do, your self, nor our faculty right, in that you did not
better inform the grave company you spoke off; you know as well as I, that it
is an experiment as old as Gallen (who with the same medicines cured feain Rome
with which some of the Roman Practitioners killed men) that not only the more
generous and powerful remedies, but the weaker and milder have when unduely
made use off, brought on irreparable mischiefs: I do assure you we have some
very late examples of it, where the Apothecaries Quacking with medicines
formerly prescribed by the Physicians, and he at last, though too late called
in has had the misfortune to see his patient die, and his medicines defamed,
vvhilest the Apothecarv to justify himself, affirmed he had given nothing but
what the Physitlan in the same case before ordained, whilst the miferable
Wretch had not only wholly mistaken the case, but most unduly exhibited the
remedies: We are able to produce many miscarriages of this kind, and indeed I
think it a duty incumbent upon us, to make things of this nature as public as
we can, for vvhilest we detect all the frauds and abuses that men may suffer
by, in the ill using of Physic, and do our own parts to the best of our
understanding honestly, c^ndidly, and charitably where our assistance is
required, we deliver our own Souls, and then in Gods name let every man
dispose of the care of his own life and health as to him seems best.

But Sir, it is time that I release you, and if you will be Printing these
Papers, remember I cannot think them worth the owning, especially after what
has been said in this kind already.

Sir,
ALthough I was extremely pleased with the news of your safe arrival, yet that
of the improvement of that noble Ladies health by what I sent her, gives me so
great and pleasing a satisfaction as you only can guess at; who know the
zealous designs I have to serve her as succesfully as I am sure I do
faithfully.

But the composition and making of that syrrup which my Lady has found so much
good by, and of diverse others out of the common road, are the effects of an
order lately made at a full College amongst us, to encourage all of our
profession to the making of medicines for their own practice, and to which if
the members of our Society will industriously settle themselves: as I doubt not
but we shall acquire all those noble ends you mention in your Letter, and which
as I go along I shall particularly speak to, so it will be the best way to
brand those men for their injustice, and ingratitude, who have had the
confidence publicly to affirm that they who made and taught them their
profession were wholly ignorant in it.

I do assure you Sir it is with some reluctance that I tell you, that we
believe that we are able to pick out, diverse Mrs. amongst them of name; that
appear full of business, but are really full of words, and yet are whollv
ignorant, in those first and simple preparations of infusions: and others, who
by their own acknowledgements, have been forced after they have set up for
themselves, to take Journeymen, to teach them how to make up the common
medicines of the Dispensatory, their Mrs. not having the will, or leisure (to
say no other) to teach it them, in the whole time of their Apprentiships.

But Sir as your own observations amongst men, have given you occasion enough
to remark the bold ignorance, of many of these invaders of our profession: so
they have amongst things too, taught you, how diverse the laws of drawing out
Tinctures exactly are, as to their proper menstruums, time, and heat, so that
you cannot much wonder at my Ladys complaint: That Apothecaries ignorant or
careless in these things, make up these sorts of medicines you mention, so
fullsome, nauseous, and unhealthy, but this not being my business at this time,
I shall proceed with your letter.

And should Sir with you and your good company, heartily bewail the State of
the professors of Physic at present in this nation, if my humor and
Philosophy, as you very well know, did not assign me rather amongst the
followers of Democritus than Heraclitus; I consess I cannot forbear smiling at
the scarce credible humor that reigns now amongst some men, that are
certainly no friends to inspiration, new lights nor levelling, of patronizing
those, who if they have any knowledge in Physic, it must be from inspiration
or new light, which some of them indeed pretend to, for as to any proper
education to what they profess, they are too well known to make any clame
here, learning or scholastic education they publicly declaim against, they
rail at Anatomical exercises as useless, and think the knowledge of plants,
fit only for an herbwife to make and sell Nosegays with, the Groom of the
Chamber of whom you shall hear more anon, tells you but with reverence to God
Almighty, that he might have spared his labor, of making all that wonderful
variety of medicinal plants, since he knows a seperating medicine worth them
all, a new knack as some of them call it, that cures (or kills) infallably.

But when I find these men have considerable Patrons, I cannot but merrily
consider to what that policy drives: perhaps it is hoped that the countenancing
this Phanatick humor of levelling our profession may cause it all to be spent
upon us, and save the Church and State, on which it is virulency had been so
long exercised, but may it not rather be feared, that others will with those
very arguments, are now urged to lay wast the faculty of Physic, and make it a
prey to Hostlers, Cobblers and Tinkers, hereafter bring Tailors to invade the
Bar, and Iuglers the Pulpit: But you will tell me it is easy to foretell, that,
what has been already done, may possibly be done again. But perhaps Sir, it is
not so easy, (if these men were ever able to bring it into question) to
destroy the privileges of a Society of men established, by so many acts of
Parliament, and (to say nothing of the merit of diverse of their members, whose
names are celebrated with honor in other Nations) at once to destroy the third
part of the portions of the younger Sons of the Gentry of England: For to one
of the three faculties, some of them are usually designed, nor yet perhaps to
rob both our Universities, of the honor and advantage, of educating generous,
and ingenious young men, to the faculty of Physic, nor of conferring upon them
honorable degrees, as rewards of their industry and merit: But these degrees
Sir are our faults, to be Graduates and Doctors are our crimes, for otherwise
we having the advantage confessedly of more learning, than those that at
present oppose us may have read as many Chemical Authors: Most of have been
Travelers, and not only seen the best Elaboratories, but have conversed with,
and been Disciples to the most celebrated Chemical Operators, our Western part
of the world knows; we have visited it is most famous Hospitals, followed and
observed the practice of the most exercised Physicians in them, but Sir we are
Doctors, and College Doctors that is after all this, before we could be
admitted to the lawful killing of a Cobbler in London, we have been forced, by
three days rigid examination, to give Testimony that we were able to do it in
good form, and according to rule, whereas like a company of Dunces, we might
have saved all this charge and trouble, and being but a little while
Philosophers, by the Fire, with the help of a three penny pipkin, and two pence
in Charcose, we might have found out a true seperating medicine, should have
killed hundreds, and the tens that had escaped, our selves nor no body else
knowing how, should have been printed for cures, we dubbed Hermetical Doctors,
and have set up for the Chemical College.

I know you will chide me for this, but give me leave to pursue my humor, and
laugh at what is so truly ridiculous; I am sure you can witness for me, I am
far from being a despiser of Chemistry, I love it and own it as one of the best
keys to the secret recesses of Nature, I think no man worthy the name of a
Physician, that is not knowing in it; for it has not only much mended the
Preparations of Medicines, but has produced many generous Remedies, and of
great use, but to make every little Fellow, that can build a furnace, burn some
thing in it until it stinks, and then Christen it by the name of a great
Medicine, a Physician; is to dub a labourer in the brick-kilns, an Architect;
or the maker of bellows an Organist. Would you not, Sir, think that man out of
the way, that should commend one for an excellent hors-man, because he made
good Spurs, or a Blacksmith for an excellent Watch-maker, because he made most
exquisite Files, if some of these pretenders to Chemistry only, were by the
communication of others, or by chance indeed, Masters of one or moro good
Medicines, would this think you qualify them for Physicians? were it
reasonable that one that understood nothing of the frame or the making of a
Watch, should mend it when out of order, although he had all the Tools of a
VVatchmaker in his power? I am sure you would not think it so, I wish no body
else would; but it is time I ask your pardon for this digression, and I am sure
of it from you, because you know I am always ready without prejudice to
embrace what ever can reasonably appear to be for the public good, and the
rendering the faculty of Physic truly useful and beneficial to Mankind, which
must give it its greatest honor; and estimation, and of this I hope to give you
farther testimony as I pass your propositions, and offer some of my own; being
resolved (only asking your leave forlittle extravagant digressions sometimes)
to answer your letter as I read it.

And therefore must next say something of the business of our Patent, in which
although I do to you acknowledge I was ever of your sense, considering the vast
length of it, in which it was impossible, but there must be a thousand clauses
might give occasion to captious men to quarrel, and so of force cause debates
for their explanation: Yet I could not but condemn that sense in my self, when
I considered the great vvorth, honesty and known abilities of him that drew up
that patent, beside the great assistance, and advice he took in the doing of
it: I need but name Mr. John Alleyne to have what is said of him believed; and
Sir you were I am sure sensible, in those fevv debates we had before the
Committee of the house, what little reason there was for those senseless
clamours against. it, how little there was asked de nov^, we being most
vvilling to put all our demands into that one of having sufficient power to put
in execution the true intents of Acts already established.

But Sir I think you know how impossible almost, in a great assembly of men it
is, to have them all of one mind, nay if they could all agree to the attaining
of one end, yet that they should not pitch upon several ways to it; for in
such, some men may have no information at all of the thing before them, others
extremely misinformed, others prejudiced because such men are engaged in it.

Sir, if to these you had been pleased to add the singularity of some, and the
levelling humor of others to oppose and destroy every thing that looks like
conformity, order or government, you had certainly with those you mentioned,
said all the reasons why any thing so long as our Patent, should not easily
pass with the consent of a great assembly.

It is most true Sir what you observe the genius of this present age seems
given up to penetrate into the causes of natural things, and it seems at last
to have pitched upon the true means, for so noble and great an exploration; by
promoting useful knowledge drawn from experiments, but besides the famous men
you mention for it, our own nation ought not to have, her Verulam, and Gilbert
Forgotten, nor our profession in it Harvey, Glisten nor Ent; to mention no
others now: and perhaps few men are so well qualified, for promoting this
useful way of knowledge, as well educated Physicians are: I shall not now
stand to discourse how much more difficult a thing it is than usually
considered to get experience from experiments: how few compare (or are indeed
qualified to do it) all circumstances; and since a little one, may make great
alterations in things, and the knowledge resulting from experience is, that
actions, or causes so circumstantiated, always will produce such an effect; the
circumstances not considered, or taken notice off, what can such an experience
amount to. How many impertinent Fools do we meet with every day, that talk
mighty big of experience, without knowing any thing of it, if they did, these
would neither pretend to miracles themselves, nor expect them from others,
this I confess amongst other things, makes me despair of any advantages to be
procured, for a real and true promoting the good our profession might bring to
mankind, or of any great advantages from the royal Society.

For although certainly, there yet never met a company of more excellent and
ingenuous Persons, who by a most virtuous, and innocent diversion, are laying
the foundation of great good to others, and this by a constant and considerable
charge to themselves, without the least injury or detriment to any, yet they
cannot escape the malicious Scommas and detractations of covetuous Persons who
either hope from them the Philosophers stone, or some wonderful projects for
the getting of money, or of ignorant and pretending Curiosos, who would
presently see a perpetual motion, or the squaring of the Circle. Beside the
liberty some men take, and think it the only wit too, of turning every thing,
into Ridicule, neither the Scripture, nor the great author of it God himself
excepted.

But Sir, I am now come to that part of your-letter which indeed speaks your
kindness to our profession, you will find few of us so brutish, as to hate
reproof, or not to love Instruction; I hope we all of us covet more the wounds
of faithful friend, than the kisses of a deceitful enemy, and therefore shall
acknowledge the imperfections, you charge upon the present method of practicing
Physic in this Nation: The world does too much want the advantages might be
drawn from it, both as to the assistances to health, and the knowledge of
nature in general our patients lives., and our credits are too often in the
power of an ignorant confident Fool; or an idle careless Boy: The charge of it
is often insupportable, as well as unconscionable, and uncharitable, we many
times prescribe, a drachme of Treacle, worth two pence, to a poor Neighbor out
of charity, the Apothecary makes him pay half a Crown for a Cordial Bolus.
There are of us, have retrieved some of our prescriptions, and the Apothecaries
bills upon them, you will perhaps be amazed when I tell you, that where a
Physician has without a Fee, Prescribed some thing worth sixpence, because it
was made into twenty four pills, there was so many shillings paid to the
Apothecarie upon his bill for it; but I will give you no more accounts of this
kind now, you may in good time see store of them, upon profes beyond denial;
we have endeavored already, and will always do what ever lies in us, to
reform what ever honest men think amiss, or to acquire that perfection knowing
men think we yet want, and is attainable, even to an universal medicine, when
ever we can be well assured it has been in the World or that it is like ever
to be.

We must acknowledge too, that the distributing two parts of our profession to
be exercised by others has been by accident the fatal cause of all these ills;
and though we may say, that the weakness of the heart, hands, or Eyes of very
knowing Physicians, might make them vvilling to instruct others, to the manual
operations in Physic, yet perhaps it will be hard to believe, that any thing,
but the pride and lasiness of others, spawned Apothecaries; the dispensatories
of all the World witness, that Physicians made and gave them their Trade: In
England their Charter will tell them, it was our College that made them a
Corporation, and you can tell your self Sir how grateful returns they have
made us, or will you not rather tell me, how justly we are punished for the
pride and lasiness I have confessed, but if you will a little better consider it,
you may have some reason to think, that honesty with the design of clear and
upright dealing with all men, and a supposition of improving the experience of
our profession, were the first motives to what was done in this matter: And
here Sir give me leave to assure you, that you need not ask the pardon of any
rational Physician, when you affirm that Physic is but a mass of noble
experiments, and I dare with confidence aver, no man can at this time name
one Physician of the College of London, fond of the common principles, in the
Physiologicall part of our profession, and that with old Doctor Winston, and
Doctor Wright, all our dogmaticall Gallenistes, as they call them, died, and
yet I believe all the inspired Chemists, that labor so much at this time for a
license (perhaps at last to coin) will never be able with their joined stocks,
to leave behind them, such an estate as the latter did, gotten all by honest
Gallenical practice.

But Sir to what I was saying, there might be great* motives of honesty and
ingenuity, with provision for the safety of mankind, although certainly much
against the private interest of Physicians to make the Pharmacy of Physic a
particular Trade, suppose Sir that goodly Tribe, who have lately with as much
ignorant impudence, as notorious falsehood, endeavored to surprise many
honorable and noble personages, and to persuade them into a belief, that it
was fit to establish a Corporation of practicing Chemists, that is a body of
men, who shall have liberty to exhibit secrets of their own; which none can
know but themselves, to those that are sick or would prevent sickness, besides
the mischiefs that this way, a bold and no way to be controuled ignorance may
do; what designed murders may not malicious contrivance with mercenary knaves
perpetrate; that there may be amongst these great pretenders of new discoveries
in Physic, that have been such; mercenary knaves, I mean; I think a man may
affirm without danger of an action: But Sir since as you have said Physic is
but a mass of noble experiments, and those performed by a great variety of
medicines, most of which have been of known use, for the better part of two
thousand years, if a select choice of these both simple and compound being
first made, it were committed to a body of men, bred up only to be knowing in
the kinds, and goodness of those simples, and an exact making of the compounds,
to have such always in readiness, to deliver out upon the prescript of the
Physician, and that prescript to be kept always on record, by which the
goodness, and aptness in the exhibition might be judged off, when needful;
certainly all is done, that morally can be thought on, to prevent the
mischeifs, both of ignorance, and villainy: Whereas the other way mankind is
left without defense against, or reparation of the attaque of either. And
certainly Sir, they that first designed to put the business of Pharmacy, into
this way, could not be ignorant of the great profit, and advantage of the
other, (that of making their own medicines,) would bring them in, and a little
practice would soon teach the Arts these men of mighty Secrets practice: when
one that appears mean and poor, gives but sixpence for that, which better
clothes gives five shillings for; besides, the often selling upon occasion
that, which they would otherwise hire some body to throw out of doors;
beside, that knowing men might often cos^n^ the people, with advantage to them,
as well as credit to themselves: and here give me leave to tell you a short
story.

A Physician of your acquaintance and mine, in the country in the beginning of
his practice there; being suddenly carried to a Gentlevvoman, that had been for
some time sick of a feavour; and she living at some distance, from his place of
abode; or from any Apothecaries, found as soon as ever he came, that though she
appeared just then worse than in the whole precedent time of her sickness, and
consequently despaired of by her friends, yet that her sickness was very near
determining, and as he thought he had reason to believe to health, he was
unwilling in his beginning, in a family of great relations in the Country, to
lose the credit of a great cure, and therefore thought it necessary to seem to
do some thing in it, yet something that might not at all impede, what nature
was so well in doing, and which he did believe, before he could send home or
to an Apothecaries, she would have done without him: vvhilest he was
considering this he had at a Table where he was leaning, made up three or
four fine pills, of white bread, and conveying them into a little box in his
pocket, by and by calls for a spoon, and in some liquor, with due formality
gave them, giving direction for her careful attendance, with confident
assurance of her speedy recovery, which accordingly happened, for in very few
hours, she fell into a most profuse sweat, and soon recovered perfectly: the
Gentleman was not only famous for his great cure, but his greater cordial, and
forced indeed to make a good one up into that form, to satisfy the importunity
of his patients for it, you may see by this Sir, how easy it is for any one,
to whom some lucky chance has given credit, if he will but pretend to secrets,
of secret, and particular preparation, to impose upon the not considering part
of the World, who yet are so zealous to be thought knowing, they are always
finding out, and rendering the causes of things, and generally will have that
to be it, which is the next obvious to their short understandings, though
farthest of any removed from the nature of that thing, they apply it to: And
Sir, you may by the by observe too, how often it must happen in like cases,
that bold and ignorant Quackes interposing, destroy those, whom nature would
cure, vvhilest the knowing and experienced Physician, who has been long since
taught, where truly there is need of it, to fly to the assistance of remedies,
as extreme as the danger, will not by unnecessary, and ignorant tamperings
destroy, where nature would certainly cure.

But now Sir, give me leave to assure you, that those two great evils,
which the way of practie as you suppose it now to be, had produced, have
been of late years very much amended amongst us, for since the time that our
great Dootor Harvey acquired that honor to himself, and to our nation in his
excellent Anatomical discoveries our younger Physicians grew generously to
emulate both his fortune, and endeavors, and perhaps the World has not a
Society, of our profession, in which considering the number of them, there are
so many excellent Anatomists, nor did they so give themselves up to this, that
they neglected the enquirlng into the natures of vegetables, and minerals, they
had, and have still though I acknowledge not by any public order of the
Society, their committees and meetings for particular enquiries, those that are
our old men now thus spent their younger years, and I think the learned Authors
of them will own, that the treatises de Rachitide, Anatomia hepatis, and de
Glandulis had, if not their production, yet improvement from such meetings as
these; and he that has lately heard Sir George Ents anatomical Exercises must
have acknowledged the great progress that is made in the Anatomia comparata,
and give me leave to tell you Sir, men that have been acquainted with the
practice of our English Physicians, must acknowledge no age yet ever saw such
an improvement of the materia medica; Sir they must be very malicious, or
ignorant, that have the face to affirm, that we are so tied up to the
prescriptions of Galen, as not to have embraced and cultivated Chemistry, and
that with diligence, reason, and success, we have not indeed embraced the lying
and boasting part of it, to cry up our selves, and medicines, at such a rate;
that if the boasted virtues of any one of them were true, there were no need of
any other Physician, or medicine, and the stupidity of the World, or of those
that possess such wonder working medicines, were to be admired, that the one
should ever want health, or the other money; I will not undertake Sir, to
justify every composition, in our present dispensatory, though I dare affirm
there are as good, if not better in it, as to the reason of the compositions,
and the usefulness of them, than in any other public one now extant; besides
that all of them have been approved by a long experience. I mean such an one as
knows how to make use of them with consideration of all circumstances, those
little Phanatick heads, that pretend to find fault with quantities, or the
ways of composition, in prescribed, and approved Medicines. (I do not intend
by this to justify some defects, in the directions, and rules of compounding,
or the mistakes of just proportions, to make things such as they should be,) do
not know what somewhere in your letter you observe, from our great Verulam, how
little the nature of any thing is known to us a priori, and that in things of
experience, a little alteration from the way experienced, makes it an other
thing, and puts us to seek a new; I do assure you Sir, knowingly that Z^elfon
who being bred an Apothecary, has made a rational attempt, to the correcting
the Augustan Dispensatory, has spoiled some very good medicines, and even in
matter of fact is so much mistaken, as to affirm that in some distillations
nothing of that can be brought over the Helm, which if he had ever tried he
must have known the contrary, and so in some other things proposes the doing
of what I think, cannot be done, in that way he proposes.

I do assure you Sir, our little Juntoes and committees, meet not to drink, or
to talk only, but they do impose taskes upon each other, and work cheerfully
and willingly in all the parts of Physic, so that I hope hereafter thoroughly
to satisfy you, that we have in this last age set our selves to improve our
profession, by those that you approve to be, and are certainly the best ways
to do it, and you will find, that when ever we come to the resolutions of
making our own medicines altogether: or have our privileges so bettered and
confirmed that we may safely trust the Apothecary, that their is provision for
a dispensatory, consisting of so choice experimented medicines, both Chemical
and others, especially with relation to our own nation, that no age has yet
produced a better, and they shall be all such too, as the Physicians of our
College have made, and long experimentea themselves. But I think as the case
stands yet betwixt us and the Apothecaries, none will expect, we should put any
thing of such a nature into their hands, who have made us so kind returns for
what we entrusted them with before: But Sir, that you may know this is not
only talk, I will give you now some little account of a weekly Junto that as I
am informed have met constantly this nine or ten years, never increasing their
number above five, and of which I think it a misfortune not to be one: for some
years it was their business to examine as far as they could, all the
dispensatories they could get, with the reformations and animadversions upon
them, to compare diverse compositions with our own, to consider upon what
authority they had been received, altered or amended, and to enquire, as much
as the nature of the thing would bear, into the reason of the compositions; for
though we be assured of the effects of a medicine, perhaps the why and the how
such effect is produced, will not be so easily ascertained, and in compositions
that which some little busy body, to appear wise, will be making pretensions
to mend, by altering, may be that which gives it as to this particular effect,
its greatest Energy: He that considers what alterations some bodies produce in
others, though at distance, which yet a little diversity of position, or
change of the Medium may alter, will be apt enough to apprehend, how little a
thing may alter the result of a composition, where diverse things must be
precisely, as to the measures of proportion, and time, and the quality of the
Mediums, by which they are to be imbodied, so made up; to produce such
effects, and though every novice in Chimistry may know this, yet vvanting the
knowledge of other things to enable them prudently to compare and adjoust
things to determine effects, or at least to the way of knowing truly their
effects: it serves them rather to spoil, than mend any thing they take in hand:
This little Committee therefore I was speaking of, made it their business most
to enquire into the real effects of medicines, and into all circumstances that
attend the effects produced, and to this end did not only bring in, and
communicate to one another, diligent observations in their own practice, but as
much as they could, that two of the most eminent Physicians in the Town, by
looking over their prescripts, and diligently enquiring into the occasions and
success of them, they had their times too, not only of considering homebred,
and exotic simples, as to the outward appearance of their several species; but
of their natures and effects, when used alone. And here Sir, I cannot but tell
you, I do believe there are very few Physicians of this present College that
would be long to seek in any place of the World, for some proper helps in any
occasion of sickness they should be called too, though there were no
Apothecaries or Chemist, besides himself in the whole Country. But besides
this Sir, this little Junto too in other years exercises, brought in not only
the Histories of the diseases their own practice furnished them with, but any
remarkable ones they could be furnished with from others, as well as many from
books, and besides the enquiring into the natures of them, both upon old and
new principles, they considered the just circumstances, and measures of
applying the most effectual remedies to their cure: In other years, they
treated one another once a week, with some animal, for anatomical dissections,
and very rarely in that whole time met, but they had some thing relating to
their profession, to enquire into: But I hope by that time you come to Town, to
give you a better account of this, and to make you and my self too, better
acquainted with some of this industrious meetings and I have given you this
account now, only to let you know, that we are not those useless insipid
drones, that some things of great noise would render us to the World; I could
tell you too of greater things done, for these will own themselves as yet but
for seekers by some of greater eminency, and of the elaboratories, and charity
every day exercised in assisting of the poorer sort, but they are no Grooms of
the great Chamber that do it, nor will they bribe any body, with the hopes, or
promise of a charity, to preach their cures, and their bounty, and to assert
the truth of things, of which it is impossible they should have any knowledge;
yet I would not have you think, I am now justifying every individual member of
our Society, in every thing. We are not perhaps all prudent, or good natured
men; but I dare all their enemies, to charge any one of them with want of
learning in his profession, with the want of honesty in the exercise of it, or
in his dealing in relation to others, because I am sure if there be any such
amongst us, it is because they are not made appear to be such; and I know the
constitutions of our particular government so well, it would soon free it self
from such scandals as that, and it is something of this in our Government, that
will always make ignorant, or vicious persons fly, as much as they can or
dare, in our faces, for we do not only make an onquiry into the learning, and
sufficiency for practice, of those that are admitted of our body, but into
their probitie and good manners too, which that we may have time to do, no man
can be admitted sooner than three months, after his first making his desire of
admission known to the College, that in the mean time the present Fellows may
have time to enquire after him, and if there be just exceptions against his
learning, or his honesty, they may be objected before his admission, as
Candidate, after which to, if he does not behave himself as a learned, and an
honest Physician, he shall then be barred for ever being Fellow; and there are
examples of Fellows being expelled, and forfeiting all their privileges
amongst us, for ill practice, dishonest Mountebankery, and ill manners: And
this I take it Sir, is bidding open war to ignorance, and knavery, and
therefore we must expect the effects of it; all the mischiefs, such enemies
can do us: for no virtuous or learned person, will ever scruple to have his
name registered, and enjoy privileges, and liberties established by law,
amongst a company of men of known learning, and of no blasted credits; because
they are required, with all respect and civility imaginable, to give an
honorable, and honest testimony of their abilities in their profession, to
men too, who have given the greatest testimonies, of any Societies of men in
the World, that they are not tied up to the dictates of any Sect of
Philosophers or Physicians, they have long since embraced the more generous,
and useful way of Philosophising freely; they cherish it, and encourage it in
all their members, and I do assure you Sir, no man was ever discouraged by
them, who gave a good account that he had judgment, and abilities for the
practice of Physic, though he were deficieat in the abstruser notions, and
nice distinctions of the Schools, provided they had no reason to think him
other, than an honest man: therefore certainly those that know this, must
always think the cry against Doctors, and College, is but a compact of
ignorance and knavery, which, if I do not forget before I have ended my letter,
I will make you a little more sensible of, by giving you a short account of
those people that make it most.

But I hope you are by this time satisfied, that the College of Physicians,
have without a Monitor, put themselves into the ways of improving the
usefulness of their profession, as much as the nature of the thing is capable
of, and nothing but ignorance, or malice can deny, what you are pleased to take
notice of; viz. That this College of Physicians in London, has more advanced
the true knowledge of Physic, within this last forty years, than any one
Society of Physicians in Europe besides; and then if you please to consider,
that this has been for the most part carried on, by the private endeavors of
several members of it, our College having none of the advantages of public
Professors, competently endowed from the Public, for teaching in the several
parts of Medicine (only one endowed Lecture from a private Benefactor for
Anatomy,) nor no public Physickgarden, nor Elaboratories for Chemical
operations, except those of private erection. You may perhaps be induced to
believe, that those men, who have been so industrious without those helps,
might advance much farther with them. If the Physicians of those Hospitals we
have, had such a Salary, as might oblige them to attend those places
diligently, and to suffer our younger Physicians for some time to attend on
them; by their direction to serve, and minister diligently about the sick,
keeping exact accounts of all Accidents, Cures and miscarriages, and of the
Anatomy of morbid bodies that die, and such of those as appeared really
useful, to be registered in the Archives of our College, might we not hope in
some time, to arrive at as much perfection in our Art, as is to be hoped for,
considering that we must, I fear when all is done, be still mortal, and whilst
men are so unwilling to believe that, or at least that it should be so yet with
them, how infirm or old soever they be; there will be employment for bold
pretending ignorance, which shall too, thrust sober knowledge out of doors; for
where those dastardly fears of dying are, they will catch hold of the next log
that offers it self to their short and fearful apprehensions; though in the
bottom of ignorance, where they must inevitably perish by it, certainly that
Bishop, had a great and generous soul, not clogged with those misbecoming
fears, who upon a bold undertaking of a Mountebank to cure him, when his
Physicians despaired, chose rather to dye in the hands of Art, as more becoming
the courage of a man, and the sobriety of a Christian, who should use none but
lawful means to preserve himself, than to have it said when he was gone, that
he would have been beholding to base and sordid Ignorance, for a few more years
of pain and trouble.

And now, Sir, I was just coming to the Reformation you propose in the practice
of Physic, if I were not startled at the danger you are running your self
into, it is well since your Letter is public, that your name is concealed,
what do you think otherwise might become of you and it, that dare venture to
provoke the mighty men of fire, what? Paracelsus, and Helmont not Philosophers,
I see squadrons arming against you, the Rosters of Geber, the Tosters of Lully,
the Fricasseers of Paracelsus, and the Olla Podrida men of Helmont, men that
all know how to roast Apples, stew Prunes, tossed Cheese; and some who can, it is
believed for need, toss a Panacke, can say, Archeus, Cas, Blas, Duelech,
Duumvirate, and a thousand harder words, which though you do not, they all
understand, one as well as the other, and because you do not understand them at
all, and perhaps may think, you have a pretty moral assurance they cannot,
because they are unintelligible; will you call the Philosophy of Paracelsus and
Helmont, idle and extravagant Theories? I dare assure you, I can tell you a
way, how you shall come to think you understand all those wonderful things, as
well as they, that think they understand them best, for there are some that
know the emptiness of them as well as you, but use them for sounds sake, and to
amuse admiring ignorance: but the way in short for you, or any body to
understand them as well as any, is to be mad, as they that think they do
understand them: do you not remember the two Fellows of a College in
Cambridge that had been for some years mad, and at last growing a little
civiller in their madness, were suffered to walk abroad, and coming into the
Chapel at Evening Prayer, sat devoutly and attentively there, until the second
lesson was now to be read, when one of them, before he whose turn it was to
read, could get to the desk was there, had turned to the proper Lesson and
began to read; all were a little surprised, but perceiving he read distinctly
and orderly, they let him go on to the end; hopeing he would as orderly then
recede; but instead of that, he began a very mad, senseless comment upon the
Chapter he had read; some were quickly ordered to get him out of the Chapel,
whilst the rest began the nunc dimiitis, when Prayer was done, the other
madman, who had continued civil to the end of prayers, coming to the master,
desired to know, why his fellovv madman was not suffered to go on, with his
pious and learned Comment, and being answered, because he talked like a Fool,
and a Madman, what none could understand; replied with some admiration, How,
not understand him, I profess, Sir, I understood him very well; and certainly
it is much after the same manner, that these Men of mighty words, and
inextricable notions, understand one another; but I cannot forbear to observe,
a pretty kind of errant like humor, dictated perhaps from the Custos errans,
in these men's understandings, that what ever there is plain, and of good use to
be found, in these Authors they deal on, they either do not understand,
over-see, or else pass by, as disdaining to take notice of any thing less then
Wind-Mills; but by this time you are, I believe, laughing at me, who have run
so goodly a course at them my self, and therefore I come now to the reformation
you propose.

And do assure you Sir, for all the sixteen reasons you give, I shall my self
be most willing so submit, to that very reformation, if we cannot have a
better, but since you do your self intimate a better, from the primitive and
certainly for that reason, that they made their own medicines, the best
practice of Physic; why should the College of Physicians go on to encourage a
Trade, set up only for their ease, and which if they will themselves be
industrious, there is not at all any use of to mankind; why should we be
concerned for their being a Corporation, or having been bred to a Trade, which
has only given them the confidence, before they well understand that, to
invade a profession, that few of them can ever be capable of understanding;
some of them have given it for reason why they did oppose the passing of our
patent, that it would hinder them from practicing Physic, which they did and
ought to do, and shall they say and do this expressly against known Laws, and
shall we scruple to do what both the Laws allow, our patients safties, our
own credits, and interests calls upon us to do, that is, make all our own
medicines; especially at this time, when we are ready to make a good and
thorough reformation in the whole Materia meaica, and when perhaps, we shall
not find many of them, for the general want amongst them of knowledge, in
Chemical operations, capable of assisting us: I do assure you Sir, there are a
great many amongst us, I am sure some of your acquaintance very knowing not
only in all our home bred simples, but in the ways of knowing and choosing the
best and most useful exotic medicinal things, (those that are not, let them in
Gods name learn, of those are) and therefore I cannot see if we will set our
selves thoroughly, and industriously to our business, what need we can have of
Apothecaries, eonsidering how many very good Druggists there are in Town, and
then having nothing to do: with Apothecaries at all, we comply wholly with your
first reason, we obtain all the advantages of your second, third and fourth,
for indeed as you well observe in this, what advantage in nature can an
ignorant Mountebanke, or boasting pretender to Chemistry have, beyond a sober
rational Physician, but in that of making trivial, and common things great
secrets, the better to cheat a sort of people, that love to be cheated; and
were born only to admire noise, and emptiness: This pretense to secrets Sir,
like the Quakers light within them, is to be encountered by no reason, he that
is the most knowing in all the materia medica, and the most skilful in the
preparations of medicines, will find it perhaps a hard thing, to confute a
fellow that with confidence tells you, of a thing of his own invention, unknown
to others, or of a particular way of preparing a known medicine, invented by
himself, though how many of that kind, when they have been known, have proved,
(if of use or good at all,) such as were known to every body, and of common
practice in the Town, and yet how many do we see every day, who if a fellow,
nay any old Woman, whose education has been never so remote from the thing
they pretend to, or their parts never so mean, shall confidently tell them of
great secrets, they presently cry those up, for the only knowing persons, and
all men else as Sots and Idiots, never considering that if a fellow ignorant in
every thing else, even vvanting much to have a share in common sense, should by
hap stumble upon any thing that is very good, and prove able to make up a good
medicine custom, and usage, yet by it is impossible but that his paramount
ignorantce, should some times do great mischiefs with this good medicine; for
we must allow such a thing as this, to be of force to cause great alterations
in our bodies, and then it may if not given with reason, make those
alterations sometimes to our destruction, except it be an Universal medicine;
and then I assure you, I shall no more plead for the faculty of Physic, but
will burn all my books, and if I cannot acquire it my self, will with all my
heart serve that earthly God, that I shall know Master of it; but till then
Sir, I cannot but think it reasonable, that Physicians should be Masters of
those things they have been the inventers of themselves, and since those they
have entrusted to make them refuse all subordination to them, or to submit
medicines invented and designed by Physicians, for such and such uses, to their
judgments, whether they be fit for these uses or not, nay rather then miss the
serving of a bill sent to them, because they want the things prescribed, will
according to their shallow capacities, put in one thing for an other, or any
thing, no matter what, so they be paid for the bill, though to the loss of the
Physicians credit, and health, if not life of the patient. I cannot Sir, but
think it most necessary, as well as most reasonable; that Physicians resume
this part of Physic into their own hands wholly: and either make Medicines for
their own practice themselves, or keep, some in their houses, who may do it
under their eye, and so enable them, to give a better account of all they do;
to the world, their own consciences, and to God. But if you urge against me
what I have said before for the making the Pharmacy of Physic a particular
Trade, as argument still to continue it so, I shall quickly reply, I will not
be against it, so that it be reduced to its primitive constitution, and that
we be secured of their honest and faithful dispensing of our prescriptions,
that they have their shops stored, with good and wholesome medicines, and to
secure that, that they of all men shall not on any terms be suffered to
practice, for that destroies the very reason of their constitution; and this
indeed is the great secret, and stirrs up their industrious opposition to us,
for whilst they can vend medicines, by their own practice, without the survey
or prescript of the Phystian, the putting off the worst, and refuse things,
brings in the greatest gain. Besides, that not knowing, or considering more
than that gain, they never want any thing: that which comes next to hand makes
up any Physicians prescript, and powder of a rotten post, may with some
wonderful commendations of its excellency, and virtue, serve there own
practice, better than the best garbelled spices: And that this is too much
truth, I think is evident by their no opposition, when lately the pretended
Chemists so industriously labored the making themselves a Corporation; for in
that the knife was at their Throats, and Apothecaries when that is done, will
certainly in a little time signify nothing: All the hurt it can do Physicians,
is to force them to what I would have them now do, the making their one
Medicines, and truly I think a very little consideration may serve a man to
forsee, that the next age will scarce know, what an Apothecarie is; for what
with these pretenders to secrets, and the affronts the Apothecaries put upon
us, with their confident invading our profession, we shall be driven at last,
to what I have been thus long speaking for: Our old practitioners are
unwilling yet to come to it, but the younger provide for it a pace, and I
doubt not but will find encouragement enough to pursue it: but the design of
your fifth reason, for the better breeding up of yound Students in our faculty,
will hardly ever be well acquired, as to the curing of diseases, but by some
such constitution for the Physicians of our Hospitals, as I have formerly
intimated: for although every Doctor in Ph^sick should be able to teach the
Anatomical, Botanical, and Pharmacutical knowledge of our profession, yet there
are not many that have so much practice in great Cities as to need help;
besides that those that are able to send for Physicians, will not always be
contented that a younger Physician should be trusted with the knowledge of
their infirmities. I could urge a great many inconveniences against this way,
but there can be none against constituting our Hospitalls so, that the sick in
them might be much better attended, and our younger Physicians, In a few Years,
acquire great knowledge, in the practical part of their profession, for thus a
three, or four Years attendance, on persons of all ages, and sexes, and sick of
all, perhaps of more than all the now known diseases, and under a well
experienced practitioner, must give men of any capacity, especially if before
but reasonably well grounded, in the true principles of their profession, that
judgment, (if you will give me leave to use one hard word) that Sto^asme, in
judging the nature, and causes of diseases, and application of fit remedies to
the cures of them, which only indeed makes an able and a fortunate Physician
and without which all the secrets and wonderful receipts, the promising
Quacks of this age boast off, signify not so well as herb ^ohn in Porredge,
since they are so far from doing no hurt, that they many times, do fatal and
irreparable misc^iess, by an unseasonable, and ignorant application of them.

But certainly part of your sixth reason is grounded upon mistake, if you
reckon that the Fees of Physicians makes any very considerable advance, in the
charge of taking Physic; For as no ingenuous Physician can or will grate on
the necessitous condition of his Patient, and make a Cure more irksome to him
than a disease, so the constitutions of our Society, and Custom as prevalent as
a Law, forbid, and restrain the most covetous amongst us, to contract for
Cures, or to make any bargains for our rewards, I speak now for the Fellows and
Candidates of our Society: And what ever Westminster Hall may show done by
others, I am very confident it can produce very few Suites commenced by any of
that number, against those that have recovered from sickness: The truth of it
is, we are generally, too much at the mercy of our Patients, as to that. An
honest, and conscientious Physician (I am sure if we are not all such, we ought
to be such) cannot neglect the life of a man, committed to his care, but many
of us can affirm by experience enough, that there are too many, that very much
undervalue, not only their Physicians, who by Gods blessing on his skill, and
industry, has restored them health for sickness, and case for pain, but even
that health and ease, they are now possessed of, whilst (though well able to do
otherwise) they give mean, and dirty rewards to their Physicians; or perhaps
reproaches instead of any. It is a common excuse for their closeness of hand,
that the Doctor gets his Fees easily enough, which he only makes a visit and
writes a few words for, but not to wish them that solicitude of mind and
anguish of soul, that the doubtful condition of a Patient has given me, I wish
they would consider for others, what I am sure they would for themselves, that
is the real loss, and gain in all they deal for; they would then easily
compute, that besides the labor of study, and the expense of as much time, as
would make up two Apprentiships, before a man can acquire a lawful title to
Physic; the charge of his Education, the taking Degrees, most commonly too his
Travel, the making of Experiments, and his Library, may amount to a greater
stock, than is necessary to make a man a Master in any other profession
whatsoever; and yet there are far greater encouragments for other professions
than for ours, the two other learned ones of Law and Divinity, mount men to the
highest Honors and Authorities next the King, and Royal Family, wealthy
Revenues are provided for Churchmen, and places of great profit for men of the
Law; but a Doctor of Physic never gets farther; some few of them acquire the
honor of being more immediately in the service of the King, but I have not
heard of any of them amonst us, very rich, except Sir Theodore Mayerne; all
which I have said to insinuate, what I doubt not but you will easily
acknowledge; that as Physicians may very well deserve the Fees, that use and
custom has allowed them, so it is not by those Fees that the charge of
Physic is increased, beyond what people are willing to make it; since every
Patient is in this case his own Chancellor. To confirm this truth to you,
before I come to discover the little arts by which the charge of Physic is
really increased; Let me tell you a Story, which to me seems not very
unpleasant.

One of our number, and a friend of yours and mine, one day in his study was
addressed to, by a man that appearred but of an ordinary condition, with his
urinal in hand, desiring as he phrased it, his worships advice, upon due
consideration of his complaints, if proved the man had gotten a disease, that
too often happens to his betters, and being now of some months standing,
required a little more than ordinary care to root it out; he said enough to
make the Physician commiserate his case, who without any consideration of his
promises of being very thankful, gave him directions then without a Fee, and so
from time to time after for his cure; so that in about two months time, with
six or seven pounds charge to the Apothecary, (who was wise enough to be paid
for his Physic as the patient had it) the man thought himself perfectly cured,
but in this time the Physician had learned, that he was a fellow did pay for
his debauches, and was able enough to pay for his cure too, and so grew into
some expectation of the fellows promises, who one day coming to him, told him
he was come to give his worships content, the Physician honestly advised him to
be sure he were well, because in this disease men too often thought themselves
well too soon, since it was in humane bodies like horse radish in the ground,
where if the least Fiber of the roots be left, it will over run the ground
again; but he boasting of good stomach, freedom from pains, and cleanness of
skin, very generously laid down two half Crowns for the Physicians reward, who
disdaining the meaness of it, told him if he were able to give no more, he
would not take that from him, adding that if he had gone to some of those,
that use to make bargains, they would have made him pay twenty pounds for his
cure, besides his Physic; to which the fellow replied with a little emotion,
how Sir, twenty pound, I protest I would not take so much Physic again, if
you would give me forty shillings, and so with his two half Crowns in his
hand, left the Physician, who heard no more of him, nor did he I assure you
ever think of suing him. I doubt not but many of our profession, often meet
with such returns as these, and if we did not meet with more generous, and
worthy dealing from better persons, the practice of Physic would be forsaken
by all learned, and ingenious persons. And the world would want that
improvement of real knowledge which that faculty has, and does every day make.

But as I insinuated before, this Story was only brought in to advertise you,
that whilst all men are their own Chancellours as to the reward they give their
Physicians, those rewards are perhaps, the least part of the charge in taking
Physic, and yet it must be acknowledged, as you observe, that the charge of
Physic is sometimes intolerable, and unconscionable, and I will endeavor now
to let you see how indeed it too often comes to be so.

And that you may know I am not partial to our selves, I will acknowledge that
I fear Physicians sometimes contribute to the making this charge, Apothecaries
very often, but patients are for the most part the occasion of it themselves:
few amongst us are so wise as the Romans, who entertaining, or being
entertained by some English, with more Wine than men of that Nation use to
drink, was the next morning very sick, with all those accidents that accompany
the debauches of men not used to it; he sent presently for his Physician, a
learned and ingenious person of our Nation, one who lived long in Rome, and
from whom I had the Story, who finding what his sickness was, by making him
keep his bed that day, with a little broth only, found him the next morning
reasonably well recovered, but still in fe^r that so violent a sickness, as he
had felt the day before, would not go off so easily, and therefore prayed
another visit from his Physician in the afternoon, who then found him up, and
almost in the opinion he should be well; which his Physician wholly confirmed
him in: the man with great joy when the Physician was going, puts two
Zechines of Gold into his hand, at which he being a little surprised, such fees
by men of his quality not being usually given there, nay my Doctor says the
patient, when you cure me without putting those Devils of Senna, Rhubarbe,
Agaricke, Marobatanes, into my Belly, I will pay you five times better, than
when you torment me with all or any of them; but few amongst us, will think a
Physician deserves a reward if he orders them no Physic, not considering that
he that conducts a sick man soonest, safest and with least trouble, to that
health he wants, deserves better than he that by unpleasant, long, and
troublesome ways brings him to it: It is of an English man the Story is told,
who gave the Barbor a shilling, ana his Wife six pence, who helped in pulling
him about the room by his tooth, and not drawing it: but thought the
tooth-drawer did not deserve six pence, who pulled it out dexterously and
quickly, because he had taken no more pains in the doing it.

This humor too often inclines the Physician, when perhaps there is little
need of it, to charge the patients belly with Physic, and his Table with
pots, and glasses; but if the Apothecary be a friend to the family, and the
Physician called in by him, if he does not then serve the Apothecary, as much
as the patient, it is ten to one but he is turned out again, however will scarce
ever be called another time: And it seems to me Sir, that I am now upon the
very reason of the great charge you mention in taking Physic, perhaps there
are fevv Tradesmen, that think it a fault to sell as much of that commodity
they Trade in, and to as much profit as they can, I am sure the selling as much
as they can, to those will buy it, can never be thought one; yet few people
mark, that it is as much the interest of the Apothecary to do this, as it is of
any other Tradesman. When an Apothecary calls to see how my Lord or his
worship, or my Lady and the family are, as to health, he is a very diligent,
honest, careful, good natured man; at that time the daughter Betty, or the son
Thomas, look as they had the worms, or they did not eat their Supper with
any Stomach last night (perhaps by reason of two full a Dinner at noon) or the
Woman or the Maid have a pain in their Heads, it may be by sitting up late
when the Master and Lady were in Bed, but the Apothecary will send something
that is good for them, presently that Doctor such a one prescribed, (for
usually it is upon the authority of some Physician, and with pretense to his
Medicines they drive on this trade) and the Child or the Woman is well, and all
is well at that time; but sometimes it happens, that by the untimely exhibition
of a very good remedy, they grow sick indeed, and until the Apothecary is
frighted with eminent danger, his trade drives on as he could vvish it; but if
any danger appear, a Physician must be called, and the Apothecary must be
advised with who is fittest to be called; and methinks it seems very natural,
that he should call in such an one, if he knows him, that is most likely to
save his credit, and will best help to carry on the trade of selling his
Medicines; such a one, who if he come Three or Four times a day, writes new
Bills for the Apothecary, compound Glysters, rich cordial Juleps and Boluses,
Pearl, Besoar and Gold, words that signify very much in augmenting the sum,
at the foot of the Account in an Apothecaries Bill: I do assure you many of us
in families where we are Physicians in ordinary, have known the Apotheoaries
Bill at Christmas come to thirty, Forty, Fifty pounds, sometimes more, for
Physic for the Family, when no Physician has ordained Ten pounds vvorth of
Physic; for in such Families the Coachman, Groom and Footman upon any little
occasion will be helping the Apothecary of the Family off with his ware,
without troubling Mr. ^octor for his advice, whether it be proper or no; and
Sir, if to these arts you add the unconscionable prises of some of them (for I
do not in this, nor in any thing before charge all of that profession, I know
diverse honest knowing and conscionable Men amongst them) put upon things of no
value, you may easily compute what it is that makes that intolerable charge of
Physic you mention: it is some years since, when Doctor Pursean, Doctor Bates
and myself, for three or four vveeks attendance on a person of quality,
received in Fees, three or four and thirty pounds, they being consulters
sometimes only, and I ordinary Physician had more than half of that sum; I
believe my self, the person was well, and well satisfied until the
Apothecaries Bill was brought in, but then I was called to the ungrateful work
of judging upon the prises of it, I was a little started, to find the sum
total Five and Fifty pounds, and I do assure you I speak moderately, when I say
if he were paid it, his gain was as much as the three Physicians received, but
it was an Apothecary of the patients own choice, and I had nothing to answer
for it.

You know Sir, by what means abroad, in many well governed States and Cities,
this is always prevented, where the Physicians once a year set the price of
all Medicines, and cause it to be printed, and I am afraid it was the
apprehension of our taking up this authority here, that made the Apothecaries
with so much industry oppose our Patent, and use us with so much disrespect
before the Committee of your house lately; for if they had well and honestly
considered their own interest, I know nothing which could more solidly have
advantaged them, than the prosperous condition of the College of Physicians.

But Sir, I have been too long upon this sixth reason of yours, and therefore
shall briefly tell you, that all the advantages of your seventh are better
obtained by Physittans making their own medicines, and that I cannot comply
with part of your eight, because no business of any great, though private
concernment, is brought to pass without an industry proportionate to the
acquisition of that we contend for: They who have the ease they wish for in
their private affairs, and have no concernment for the public, will no doubt
(without considering how things are changed now) keep the road they have been
used too, and in which they have acqnired the ease and advantage they enjoy,
and think it perhaps just to do so, because custom makes the greatest Sins no
Bugbear, but they that are well exoited by their particular concernments, or
with the desire of doing honestly in their Station, will never scruple to use
all ingenious industry to vindicate an honorable profession, of which they are
members, from the obloquie is brought upon it, by ignorance, or knavery: It is
on these, the wits vent their virulent Scommas and reproaches; no man yet was
ever reproached, for being an honest, able and learned Physician, he that is
that, and a young man, will generously contend for the reputation he deserves,
and never refuse any pains to help, out of charity, the distresses of the
needy; though called upon in the night to do it, his interest will make him
rise to help others; and it will become the elder Physicians, who are infirm,
so much to countenance, and advantage the younger men of the Society, as to
call them in to cases, in which those assistances you mention, are necessary to
the frailties of age, or humanity; and this too, if that candor, and ingenuity
be exercised, that becomes such men to use, may be so adjousted as not to
increase the charge of the patient; and this will give better satisfaction in
my opinion, than the sending one, that is but breeding up to be a Physician,
when two professed Physicians of the College should be so concerned in assisting
him.

Your 9th consists of many parts, but all the difficulties insinuated in it, as
to the hazard, and charge a young Physician, at his first entrance to practice
may run, in making a competent provision of medicines, may be obviated easily
enough, by what you insinuate your self, of remitting easy things, as common
Decoctions, Glysters, Ptysans etc. to the patients themselves; which may also
upon occasion, and according to emergent exigencies, be actuated by little
quantities of generous and lasting remedies, which no Physician that will
attempt the way, that you or I would have but must always have a competent
Stock of, readily to supply the sick with upon occasion; and I doubt not, when
you and I meet, but that I shall satisfy you, that some of us have contrived a
Materia medica, consisting of generous, lasting, and acknowledgedly, the most
effectual known medicines; which when the trouble of making them is once over,
may be contained in a Cabinet not of the largest size; and by present mixtures,
according to the occasion, and the help of easily prepared Vehicles, may serve
as effectually, as any other whatsoever, to cure all the diseases that infect
miserable man; or at least to give him all that relief, his condition is
capable to receive from medicine: I cannot therefore think, that having some
medicines made from shops, renders the way you propose better, because less
troublesome than that of the ancients, for I am one of those, that cannot value
any trouble, that is indeed really necessary to the acquiring an honest and an
honorable purpose; besides for the ease, and less trouble you mention, there
are three professions in Town, that may not only be better encouraged, but
likewise be very helpful, to those that would have that less trouble and ease:
All the manual operations in our profession, belong to the Chyrurgeons,
applying Blisters, (making issues, bleeding all, which the Apothecaries very
often do now) and giving Glysters (where the patient has not the convenience
of having one can give it at home) are all manual operations, and may if they
will, be performed by some of them; The Druggist may as well furnish us, as the
Apothecaries, and those Distillers that are known honest, careful and able men,
may be employed to destil great quantities of those waters, both simple, and
compound, which shall be judged fit to be always in readiness for use, and the
number of those I believe need not be many: And although I will allow those men
that will not take all the pains themselves, all the advantages of ease these
helps can give them; yet I would have every man of our profession, make himself
very knowing, both in the choice and preparation of the Materia medica, that he
may not easily be imposed on by those he buys from.

But Sir, that I may at last contract: All the advantages of your seven
following reasons, except that of your twelfth viz: of a Physician gratifiing
Apothecaries his particular Friends, are by that way I urge perfectly acquired;
and that which makes me at present zealous for this way, is that we may the
better vindicate our selves from those durty aspersions, these men before the
Committee of the House endeavored to cast upon us; we ought to let them know
that as our predecessors invented, and gave them that Trade, by which they now
subsist, and by which many have gotten fair estares, to wit the London
Dispensatory, and procured them to be made a distinct Corporation, that they
might the better apply themselves to the knowing, and choosing the best
simples, and compounding such Medicines, after such methods and forms, as
Physicians judged fittest for practice at that time; in trust and confidence,
that they would honestly apply themselves to that only, and not ingratefully
invade, and undermine the privileges, and interests of such benefactors;
neglecting their own honest duties, and destroying the very reason of their
constitution; which if it were an honest one, could be nothing, but the
obviating those mischiefs, that might be done, where ordainers of medicines
were the makers of them likewise: All this I say considered, we ought to let
them know, that we are not at all inferior to those predecessors of ours, to
whom they owe so much; but as in that Dispensatory they then made, they had
selected from a vast number of others, such Medicines as they judged fittest to
be ready in shops for the uses they should appoint them to; so we taught by
their experience, and our own, (besides the communications, we have had from
the rest of the learned World) have not only a great provision of
preparations, by that advantage the improvement of Chemistry has given us,
unknown to them, but know likewise the defects of many of those in the present
dispensatory, and the excellency of many others, not then brought into use.
Besides that the various complications of diseases, and the luxury, and
delicacy of this latter age, having produced many new appearances of Diseases,
not known or taken notice of before, it has put learned and industrious men,
upon the invention of appropriate, and more grateful Medicines: so that, That
Dispensatory of London being almost grown useless, we ought to recall it, and
then either keep the making of medicines to our selves, or else put it into
such hands, or into such a method, as may render all more safe, both to our
patients health, and our own credits.

Having therefore Sir, thus leaped to your 17th and lastly, you will find me
still of the opinion, that all the reasons of that proposition are likewise
better complied with, and all the advantages better acquired, by the way of
wholly making our own Medicines and having nothing to do with those men who
have used us so unkindly, provided there be prescribed that candor, and
integrity, that mutual communication, and assistance, to each other of the
Society, that ought to be amongst men of a liberal and ingenuous profession,
and that we do really set our selves to detect all the frauds, cheats, and
abuses, that are or may be practiced by any in the practice of Physic, so that
being severely honest our selves, we may cheat those, that think we are not so;
the best way, and if I be not much deceived my self; we are a body of men at
this time for the most part, very well qualified for such an undertaking:
Omitting therefore the thanks that not only my self, but all of our Society owe
you, for the just defense you have made for us, and the good opinion you have
of us, I will as shortly as I can, offer the Reformation I would propose, in
order to promoting all the advantages, the faculty of Physic can give to
mankind.

FINIS.

