That the Trade to Africa, is only Manageable by an Incorporated Company and a
Joint Stock, Demonstrated in a Letter to a Member of the Present House of
Commons, by a Gentleman in the CITY.
SIR,
BEing no less your Servant upon the account of your Merit and Quality, than of
the many Acts of Friendship that you have at all seasons exercised toward me;
you have an indisputable Right of Commanding my Service, and I own my self
obliged to yield you an entire Obedience in all that you are pleased to exact,
which lies within the Circle of my Power to perform.

Now, I need not tell you, that the Affrican Company as Established, did,
neither mould themselves into a Society, upon a previous Combination of a few
Wealthy and Covetous Gentlemen; nor did they enter into the present Method of
managing that Commerce, by wresting it out of the hands of others, that had
promoted and improved it to the Honor of the Government, and to a National
advantage; but they Embarq'd in it upon the Invitation and Encouragement of
King Charles II. and His Privy Council, as well as upon the Persuasion of many
other Persons of Quality and Sense; and this they did at a Juncture and Season,
when it was fallen under such a Decay, that it was apprehended by all people of
Thought and Prospect, to be in danger of being totally lost.

And as it could not then escape your Observation, no more can it now your
Memory, that the Trade of Africa was about twenty years ago, not only so
abated, but sunk to such a degree, that it became a matter of State,
challenging the utmost Wisdom and Care of his then Majesty, and of those of the
profoundest prudence, and of the largest Mind, for the public good, who were
at that time in the Ministry, how to Revive and Restore it, so as to render it
consistent with the Honor of the Government, useful to the American
Plantations, and of ampler advantage to the Nation, both in the Export of our
Manufacture, and in the supplying us with larger quantities of the Produce
which That Country yields, and Ours does require.

Nor is it unworthy of remark, that the Credit and Reputation of the Trade to
Africa was then so low, that though encouraged by the Kings Invitation to all
His Subjects, to join in the recovery of it; and though furthered by the
Subscriptions of many Wealthy, Prudent, and Great Men, who upon a National,
rather than Personal Motives, pursued the restoring the Kingdom to a gainful
share in it; yet the Book laid open for receiving Subscriptions proportionate
to such an Undertaking, continued so above Nine Months, ere a Stock could be
obtained adequate to so large a Coast, where not only so many difficulties were
to be encountered and conflicted with, but where so great and expensive Forts
and Defenses were to be Erected for the securing the Traffic there, and the
preserving those Factors, Officers, and Servants that should be employed in it.

And as the whole Stock, after so much time wasted in attendance upon
Subscribers, amounted at last but to One Hundred and Eleven Thousand Pounds; so
those who have from that time hitherto been entrusted with the Conduct thereof,
have not only preserved it entire for the support of that Trade, but
notwithstanding the vast Disbursments they have been at in Purchasing and
Erecting Castles, and Forts for the security of it, they have made such
improvements both in the increase of the Stock, and the enlargement of the
Traffic, as those parts are capable of admitting.

But as all public Undertakings, though first attempted at the expense of a few,
are upon the being improved to Personal and National Advantage, liable to be
invaded by selfish and avaritious persons, who after they have declined the
hazard and expense needful either to give birth unto, or to bring such designs
to perfection, are covetous to participate in the gain of them; so it has been
the misfortune of the present African Company, to have their Trade broken in
upon, and the advantages arising by a Traffic which they had recovered to the
Nation, and rendered safe to the Dealer, Ravished from them by Interlopers, who
while they pursue nothing but their private Interest, do cover themselves with
the Mantle of pretended Zeal for public Liberties and Rights.

Now Sir, the whole Stock, that was either Originally, advanced, or which upon
an improvement has been reserved out of the Dividends, for the carrying on and
increasing of the African Trade, being entrusted and lodged in the hands of a
certain number of Managers, you cannot therefore but commend the Integrity of
the present Governing Members of the African Society, and their Fidelity to the
Trust reposed in them, if they do not tamely abandon either their own Cause and
Interest, or the Cause and Interest of those for whom they are Trustees, and of
whose Estates they are Guardians; but if by all those ways that are Just and
Legal, they endeavor to defend and vindicate their own and the Companies
Right, to a quiet and undisturbed Possession of the Affrican Trade.

And whereas through the Companies having no other Authority for precluding
others from that Trade, but what they derive from Charters granted unto them by
our late Kings, several have taken the confidence, not only to dispute the
Power of our Kings in the granting Charters of this Nature; but have in
defiance of those Charters, challenged a Liberty of Trade into those parts of
Africa, which are reserved unto the Company by them; you cannot avoid praising
the Temper, Modesty, and Prudence of the African Society, who from a
sensibleness of their own incompetency to Judge of the Validity of Charters
granted by Sovereign Princes, and for the preventing Quarrels with their fellow
Subjects, and the obviating expensive Suits in Courts of Law, did the last
Session apply in way of Petition to the Legislative Power, for obtaining a Law
in Confirmation of what they have hitherto only enjoyed by Charter.

Which as it has given occasion, to those no less peevish than clamorous
Papers against the Company, that led you to require my thoughts on this
Subject; so I doubt not, but both to discover unto you the frivolousness and
impertinency of all those Allegations, upon which a certain sort of angry Men
are endeavoring to alter the present Method of the Affrican Trade; and withal,
to demonstrate unto you, that the taking it off this Foot and Basis, will prove
the subversion and ruin of it.

And seeing the benefit of the whole Community, and not the profit of a few, as
the Complainants themselves do acknowledge, is the Standard whereby we are to
Judge, both of the necessity and of the National benefit of all particular
Commerce and Traffic, and of the several Regulations under which they are to
be managed; I do thereupon affirm, that the Trade to Africa, can neither with
Honor to the Government, Profit to the Kingdom, nor with safety to the
Merchant, be carried on and upheld in any other Method, save that of an
Incorporated Company, and of a Joint Stock.

Nor can any thing administer greater Evidence that I am not mistaken, than
that all the European Nations, who are Competitors with the Company in that
Trade, do in this way both support their Traffic thither, and enlarge it
there. For though it might be possible, that some Nations, either upon worse
motives, or by mere casualty and chance, might fall into this way of Traffic
thither; yet it is impossible that all should concur and centure in one and the
same method, but upon an evident impracticableness of managing it with safety
and advantage in any other manner.

And as there is no managing of that Trade, but under the protection of Forts
and Castles; so they could never have been erected, nor can they be maintained,
but by an Incorporated Company acting upon a Joint Stock. It Is only under the
protection of Castles, Forts, and an Armed Strength, that the Companies
Factors, Servants and Goods, can be safe from the Treachery and Rapine of the
Natives, and from the Violence and Depredation of their European Rivals. Were
it not by reason of those places of Shelter and Defense, none of those whom the
Company is forced to employ for transacting their business, would ever be
persuaded, or able to live amongst so perfidious a people as the Negroes are
known to be. Nor could any thing less, than the security enjoyed by Forts and
Castles, encourage the Merchant to venture his Estate into a Country, where his
Effects must otherwise lie exposed both to Hostility and Treachery,

And as the Affrican Trade cannot be supported to any advantage, without large
quantities of Goods upon the place, waiting for, and attending a Market; so
nothing but Forts and Castles can prove secure Warehouses for the preservation
of those Goods in the interim. Nor are they only the safe Receptacles, both of
the Commodities exported thither, till they can be vended, and of those
purchased there, till they can be transmitted hither; but they are also the
only Stores for Food and Physic, without which, neither Factors, Soldiers,
nor Sailers could be supplied with the necessaries, much less accommodated with
the comforts and conveniences of life.

Nor can any Body of Men, but an Incorporated Society acting by, and upon a
Joint Stock, gain and maintain such an Intelligence, as may upon so vast and
extended a Coast, either give life unto, or procure an advantage by Trade. As
persons trading thither unprovided of settled Factors and Factories, can neither
have an extended nor a certain and constant Intelligence; so without such an
Intelligence, there is no knowing what may be vended of our Manufacture in the
several parts of Africa, nor what may be obtained of their Produce. For as all
Commerce there, is managed by way of Barter; so every place does neither take
off the like quantity of our Commodities, nor afford the like proportion of
their own. Nay, it often happens, that through an eruption of War among the
Natives; those places which administer a large and gainful Trade one year;
yield either none, or that which is, both very little in it self, and as little
beneficial to us in another.

Moreover, it is only by means of an Incorporated Company; that the English in
their Dealing and Trafficking with the Natives, can be restrained to a due
Observation of the Rules and Measures of Humanity, Truth and Justice. For as
Traders at random, do seldom propose any thing, besides and beyond their
private ends, so it is easy to be imagined, on what Insolences, Frauds and
Rapines, scattered and particular Men will venture, upon the hope and prospect
of enriching themselves, when there is no Common and Established Society
accountable for the miscarriage of every individual. And especially seeing it
is indifferent to them, whether the Trade be lost for ever afterward to the
Nation; Provided that they have by Treachery and Violence, compassed before
hand the Wealth that they aimed at. Nor is it probable, that they who come
seldom, and may be but once into those parts, and who have none residing upon
the place to be responsible for their behavior, should comport themselves with
that temper Moderation, and Justice, that the Servants of, and the Agents for
the Company are obliged to do, and that, not only because their Factors who
remain upon the place, are liable to the Revenge and Recentment of the Natives,
for every misbehaviour toward them; but because the Offenders themselves are
accountable upon their return hither, in case they be complained of by the
Companies Correspondents and Agents from thence

Nor can any Society but that which is Established upon, and which acts in
the way of a Joint Stock, either enlarge the African Trade further, or preserve
it in that extent to which it is already brought, and whereby it is become so
profitable to the Nation. For as there are no Kings of those extended
Territories, and of that uncontrouled Sovereignty, upon the African Coast, who
upon the having Residents from hence with them, can allow and secure unto the
Merchant any large and safe Trade; so there are no Cities or great Towns where
through the settling Consuls and Factors, we may as is practiced in other parts
of the World, drive a safe Commerce for the Sale of our own Commodities, and
for the Purchase of theirs. But the Chief Trade of Africa, is either managed at
the Companies Castles and Forts where the Neighboring Natives buy what they
want and sell what they can spare, or else it is maintained by the sending
small Vessels to the remoter Parts and Rivers, where by Barter our own Goods
are put off, and theirs fetched away. Both which ways of Traffic as they are
only practicable by a Company managing a Trade upon an United and Joynt-Stock;
So they are inconsistent with, and repugnant unto the granting every one that
will a right to Trade.

Further, As there is no carrying on the African Trade, to such an advantage,
as may both encourage the Merchant, and reward his Cost, Hazard and Industry;
but by having large Quantities as well as various sorts of Commodities lodged
in the Country to attend both the Season, and the Changeableness of Trade; so
nothing can be more evident, than that as this is not practicable, without
Castles and Forts where Goods may be secured, no more is it to be effected to
the degree which it ought, by what is Transported by Single Adventurers and in
Private Cargoes.

Again as there is no preserving the Trade of Africa without the being able and
provided, to assist those Princes, in whose Territories our Traffic lies, with
Money, Arms, and Ammunition, to empower them against those with whom they are
in War; so this being an undertaking which no Single and Private Person, either
will or can pretend unto, it may therefore lay every thinking Man under a
Conviction, of the Necessity of an Incorporated Company and a Joint Stock, for
answering the Exigencies, which the preserving the African Trade, the gaining
and keeping the love of the Natives, and the preventing their being obliged to
the Aid and Assistance of other Europeans, and thereby coming under a
dependence upon them, may crave and bespeak a Relief and Supply of.

Moreover, As nothing but an Established Company acting upon a Joynt-Stock, can
either at first raise, or for any long time maintain Forts and Castles; so were
it not for those upon the Coast of Africa, where the Company has both supplies
of Men, to furnish their Ships with Navigators, in case of Mortality among the
Sailors, and Stores of Timber to repair them upon decay, as well as other
necessaries to relieve them under losses, it would many times be impossible to
perform their Voyages, so that several Ships must be left to perish upon the
Coast either through want of Men to Sail them, of Materials to render them
Navigable, or of Supplies to relieve the Mariners.

Finally nothing does more demonstrate that the African Trade, ought to be
managed in the way of a Joint Stock, than that both the Open and the Regulated
Way, have upon Trial and Experience been found dishonorable to the Nation, and
destructive of that Commerce. For whereas that Trade, though Incorporated by
King James the first lay open to all that would engage in it, during the whole
time of the last Civil War, yet instead of its being rendered thereby either
Honorable and Advantageous to the Kingdom, or Safe and Enriching to the
Managers, the Traders grew poor, and most of the Traffic was lost from the
Nation, and the little that remained, lay at the discretion of those who Rival
us in Commerce. And whereas the miserable Estate, to which it was reduced, by
every Man's Trading ad libitum gave an occasion Anno 1662 to the Revival of the
African Trade, under the care of an Incorporated Company, and upon the Fond of
a Joint Stock; so that Company through the losses which they sustained by the
violence of the Dutch An. 1664, became necessitated to throw it into a more
unconfined method, and to give liberty to any ships to Trade into those parts
under the Regulation of Three Pounds per Tun. But alas even this Method, after
a Trial of six years, was so far from being found subservient to the profit of
the Kingdom and the enlargement of the African Trade, that the King upon a
belief that it would be lost to the Nation, if suffered to continue on that
Foot, did with maturest advice both of Statesmen and Merchants give an
Establishment to the present African Company.

Of which after the fullest enquiry I can make into its Conduct, I may presume
to say, That never any Society has more fully answered the ends of its
Institution, than that has done. For as it has rendered the African Trade safe
to the Kingdom in defiance of all our Competitors, so in token of their having
preferred the profit of the Nation to their own gain, they have used to carry
out greater quantities of English Manufactures than the Consumption of those
parts does require, or their produce require. Nor have they since they were
Incorporated, exceeded Seven per Cent. for One Year with another in all their
Dividends, but whatsoever they have gained beyond that, by their Industrious
and prudent management of the Stock, it has been all applied either to the
enlarging, or to the securing of the Trade.

And Sir suffer me to tell you, That as the loss of 7 per Cent. in case of the
suppression of the Company, can be no great prejudice to persons, who for the
most part have not above 4 or 5 Hundred Pounds in the Stock, and who besides
their having considerable Estates in Land, do many of them drive a Trade to
other places; so were it not out of respect to the prosperity of the Kingdom,
more than out of regard to their private gain, they would instead of opposing,
pursue the laying open the Guiney Trade. Seeing there can be nothing more
apparent, than that through the knowledge they have of the Country, and by
reason of the Interest, which their Factors and Servants have acquired them
among the Natives, they are in a condition upon such a Change and Event, to
supplant and ruin all those who shall presume to drive the African Trade in
competition with them.

And now Sir, to come to what some men style Objections against the African
Company, I do think it may be no rudeness to style them groundless and
impertinent assertions. For whereas,

I. They do charge the Company, with hindering the vent of the Woollen
Manufacture, by Trading inconsiderably themselves, nor suffering others, a
tenth part of the product of England is not Exported for Guiney, as might be,
if the Trade were open, or managed by a Regulated Company. I do hereunto answer
several things.

1. This Objection reflects on the Wisdom of the Company, as much as upon their
Honesty; and it makes them false to their own Interest, as well as unkind and
unjust to the Nation.

2. It Is a gross mistake, that a Trades being Open, or its being Incorporated,
gives the measure of what may be exported of our Manufacture. Seeing that
depends upon what the Natives there can take off, and give us returns for, and
not upon what the Nation here can make, or the Merchant carry thither. Nor is
it the selling much in one year, but the constant vent that either the Nation
or the Traders shall grow opulent by. And this can be much better effected by
an Incorporated Company, than by particular persons trading at random.

3. The Company is so far from being chargeable for sending less thither than
can be vented, that they had, by their last advices, in their Castles and Forts
Goods unfold, to the value of 80000 pounds.

4. Whereas the Trade when managed from hence by every Man at pleasure, became
both a reproach to the Nation, and was by our Rivals wrested from it, through
our having abused the Natives with false and decayed Ware, who though never so
simple, yet being cheated once, they would not be so twice; the Company has
not only recovered the credit of the Nation, and retrieved the Trade, by taking
care to have all the Commodities good in their kinds, which they export
thither, but they have much enlarged it, by furnishing the Negroes with such
Ware as their mean and indigent condition will allow them to take off, and have
enriched and promoted the Trade of the Kingdom, by the Fabric of several new
Manufactures not made before in England.

And whereas it is Objected,

II. That the Company advances the Trade of other Nations, seeing by
forbearing to supply the Coast with Goods, other Nations fill it and beat us
out of Trade with their Manufactures, when our own would at the same time sell
better among the Natives, if we would supyly the Market.

Now tho most of what is here suggested, be only a Repetition of what was
lately alleged, and is already answered, and serves rather to declare the
pregnancy of their Malice, than either the Fertility of their Wit, or their
integrity; yet for the silencing of their Clamor, as well as the gratifying
their Importunity, I do offer these several things in way of Answer.

I. That were it not for the Forts and Castles which only an Incorporated
Company, Trading upon a Joint Stock, can maintain; Foreigners instead of
leaving us any share in that Trade, they would Engross the whole. Nor is it to
be supposed, that private persons can upon their narrow. Fonds, contend against
the Power and Craft of those other European Nations, who manage their Traffic
thither by a Joint Stock.

II. As it is by means of Forts and Castles, that other Nations have acquired
and secured a Trade upon the African Coast, so there is no hindering or
abridging them in the venting of their own Manufactures, unless we can beat
them out of those Strengths and Fortresses. Which as it may be unjust for any
to attempt; so I Am sure that the laying the African Trade open, has not the
least tendency to accomplish it. But the throwing it either into that, or into
a Regulated Method, were, instead of gaining upon our Competitors, or a
weakening of them in their Traffic to become a prey unto them, and to lose our
own, or at best to hold it precariously upon the Terms, and in the Degrees that
they shall think fit to allow.

III. It Is a renouncing of all Truth and Modesty, and an attempting to impose
upon the Kingdom by Impudence and Falsehood, to say that other Nations beat us
out of our Trade with their Manufactures; seeing there is no Nation whatsoever,
that vendeth those quantities of Woollen Goods there, as the English African
Company does. And if Men would so far hearken to Reason, as to pursue a regular
course for narrowing and abridging our Foreign Competitors, in what they are
now in a condition to sell to the Natives of Africa, it must be by preventing
the Exportation of our Wool, and thereby denying them the means of fabriquing
Clothes in their own Territories at home, and not by restraining them from
transporting them to Africa when they are made, or from selling them when they
are there.

IV. The Authors of this Objection must be persons of a strange Forehead, and
must take those to whom they Address to be very credulous and easy of belief,
seeing the chief Complainant Mr. Gardner well knows, that the last year the
Ship Swan found the African Coast so well supplied by the Company with English
Manufacture, that of a small Cargo in which the Owners had a share, of twenty
Says consigned to the Master Giles Daniel, to be sold at any place on the
Coast, between Cape Mount and Taccarada, yet the said Master in 49 days stay on
that Coast, could sell but two pieces of Says, so was forced to leave the
other 18 at the Companies Castle, together with several other Goods, for want
of vent.

And whereas it is objected, 3dly. That the Company set what Price they please
upon the Manufacture of England, so lower the Price of Wool, ruin the Workers
and Dealers in the Woollen Manufacture, because there is but one Buyer.

To this, how frivolous soever it be in its self, and how much despised by Men
of Sense and Thought, I shall to gratify the querulous humor of those
Gentlemen, return these few things by way of Reply.

1. It Is impossible that the Company should be able to fix and determine the
price of the Woollen Manufacture, seeing the whole Trade to Africa cannot take
off the hundred part of what is Fabriqu'd in England. Nor therefore,

2dly. Can it be subject to one Buyer, seeing there are many hundreds that
Trade to other places, who buy of the Clothiers as well as they.

3dly. All Woollen Manufactures, whither proper for Guiney and bought up by the
Company, or more agreeable to the vent in other places, and purchased by the
respective Dealers thither, are much fallen from what they formerly went at,
and that not upon the account of the Trades being managed by a single Buyer,
but by reason of the plenty and cheapness of Wool at home, and of the great
Manufacture of Woollen Clothes made by our Competiters in Trade abroad.

4thly. Most of the Goods sent to Africa, being of a different Quality from
that which is vended elsewhre; it is not to be imagined that the Laborers in
the Woollen Manufacture, would merely for the gratifying of the Company,
concern and employ themselves about what they need, if they did not find their
profit and advantage in it. Nor,

5thy. Did I ever hear that those clamorous Gentlemen, have at any time for the
encouraging the Woollen Manufacture of England, been willing to afford a higher
price than others have bought for. And were I to enquire into their conduct in
relation to the Commodities they deal in, I do not doubt but that they would be
found to act with less Honor and Generosity, as well as with less Mercy and
Justice, than those do whom they accuse and slander.

And whereas it is objected,

4. That the Company ruineth Their Majesty's Plantations, partly by not
supplying them with a necessary quantity of Negroes, partly by taking excessive
Rates for those they sell, and partly by furnishing the Planters with Negroes
that are unfit.

I do thereunto answer many things.

I. That by all which does yet appear in the several Papers published by the
Complainants, they only seek a liberty for themselves to Trade, but have
proposed no advantages, either to this Nation, or the American Plantations, but
what they do already enjoy by the Affrican Company.

2dly. The Company has and does yearly Import more Negroes into the
Plantations, than the Planters have at reasonable Rates, been either willing,
or able to pay for. And it were more becoming those angry and calumniating
Gentlemen, to propose ways whereby the Planters may pay the Company the Debts
they have contracted, being indebted to the Company above 170000l. Sterling,
than to clamor because they do not trust them, beyond the hope and prospect of
any satisfaction.

3dly. It is not likely that private Traders, either would or could Import more
Negroes than the Company does. Nor is that the thing which is aimed at, but the
design is, that the Rich Planters having liberty to fetch Negroes, may furnish
themselves with the best, and then to oblige those Planters that are poor and
needy, to take off the worst upon such terms, as they shall think fit to sell
them.

4thly. As it is demonstrable, that the Company are both abler, and will find
their Interest in it, to bring more Negroes than private Traders can do; so it
is no less evident, that the indigent and necessitous Planters will be more
mercifully, as well as equally dealt with by the Companies Factors, whose
business it is to carry themselves indifferently to all, than they can expect
or hope for from their fellow Planters, whose advantage it is to supplant, if
not ruin to them.

5thly. The great increase in the Produce of the Plantations, since the Company
had the management of the Negro Trade, is both a sufficient confutation of
their wanting hands, and of the Companies neglecting to supply them. For as it
is by Negroes, that their ground is cultivated, and the whole product of it
Manufactured; so it is easy to conclude, that they have not been scanted in
hands, by the vast increase of the Produce of their grounds beyond what it was.

6thly. Nor is it possible for the Company to enhance the price of Negroes,
seeing that as they cannot in expectation of a Market, without loss as well as
expense, keep them for any long time after their arrival at the Plantations,
and by consequence cannot prescribe a Rule to the Buyers; so the Company not
being the alone sellers, they must comply with the Rates that others are
willing to dispose them for. For as every Master of a Ship is furnished with
Negroes to sell, through the Companies allowing him one of five toward the
defraying the Freight of the rest, so it is observed that they do usually sell
theirs at a dearer price, though for ready payment, than the Company have for
their own, albeit, obliged to allow credit in a very large measure.

7thly. As the Company would not have departed from that Order of the Council
the 12th. of Nov. 1680. by which they were restrained to certain prices at
Jamaica for their Negroes, if the Planters would have complied with the
payments that they were to make, and have taken them by Lot, and not by Head;
so that Order was upon a full hearing at the Council the 12th. of April 1684.
Reversed and Repealed by reason of the Planters ill payment. And yet it can be
proved that notwithstanding the Cancelling that Order, the Company was so
careful of the Plantations, that from the year 1680. to 1688. they made
Provision to supply Jamaica by sending Cargoes to purchase 25000 Negroes,
whereby the Debt on that Island to the Company, increased 40000l. more than it
was before the making that Order.

Finally, whereas it is objected, That the Company does greatly oppress Their
Majesty's Subjects, by their exacting 30 and 40 per Cent for those Ships, which
they afford License unto, to Trade to Guiney.

To this I have likewise diverse things to Reply.

1. That it is unjust to complain of that, as an injury, which they desired as
a favor. And the Company may have just reason to take it amiss, that what they
yielded in order to prevent the clamor of a Monopoly, and to beget a general
satisfaction, should give occasion for a new accusation, and increase the cry.

2 As the Company upon their first settlement, proposed by a Declaration which
they Emitted for the Encouragement of the Plantations, that they would deliver
Negroes at Barbados for 15 pound a head; at the Loward Islands for 16 pound;
and at Jamaica for 17 pound; so it is observable that the Planters after
several Contracts made for Negroes upon those Terms, where the first that
departed from being concluded by those Offers, and that renounced the benefit
of them; for they chose rather to give from 30 to 40 per Cent. to have suitable
Cargoes, and to take the benefit of the African Trade, than submit to be
supplied by the African Company at the aforementioned Rates.

3. The utmost that the Company have taken, does not exceed what may be justly
expected toward the support of their Charge, the interest of their Money, and
the liberty of fetching Angola Negroes. For as the Companies Annual Charge is
15 per Cent. on the whole Trade; so being out of their Money about two years,
it may well be expected they have 10 or 12 per Cent. per Annum more where they
give credit for Goods in the way of Trade, and whereby in all probability the
Buyers may pay the Company with their own Money.

4. The Company in order to silence all Complaints, and to create a
satisfaction in all Their Majesty's Subjects, have this year declared, That
whosoever will buy their own Cargoes, and oblige themselves to Trade only
beyond the Cape Foamosa, such shall thereupon have Licenses granted them at the
rate of 15 pound perCent. And seeing the Company through their being at the
Charge of 15000l. per Annum, for preserving the African Traffic, do not trade
at a cheaper rate themselves, it cannot be accounted a burden imposed upon
their fellow Subjects to take of them the same terms.

So that now Sir upon the whole, I do not only presume the having given you
satisfaction in this matter, but I have that confidence in the Wisdom and
Justice of the Parliament, as to promise my self that so Judicious and August
an Assembly, will be so far from laying the African Trade Open, which were in
effect to destroy it, that they will by a Law confirm that Right unto the
Company, which they have been so long in the possession of by a Charter. And as
I can be under no apprehension, that so wise a Body as the Parliament of
England, will deprive a Society of their Property, which their Castles and
Forts unquestionably are, without allowing them a just and valuable
consideration; so I dare affirm, That all which is hitherto proposed for their
satisfaction, is not only frivolous and uncertain, but wholly impracticable Nor
does it seem reasonable, that after they have by vast Expense, excellent
Conduct, and indefatigable Industry recovered, enlarged and secured a Trade,
and made it of as National Advantge, as it is well capable of being, that
others should step in both to rob them of the profit, and to worm them out of
it. And as such a procedure must infallibly discourage all Men from undertaking
any Noble and Generous Design hereafter: So it is easy to foresee how fatal
and mischievous this may prove to our Posterity, if it does not to the present
Generation.

Nay Sir, suffer me to tell you, That the settling the African Trade under a
Regulated Company, which is the great Method, that crafty and confident Men do
propose, and which weak Persons are inclined to hearken unto; will be so far
from rendering it more enlarged and National, that it will reduce it into fewer
hands than it now is in, and will exclude many from all benefit by it, who
under the present Establishment, have both a share in it, and do partake of the
gain and profit arising from it. For while it is supported and carried on by a
Joint Stock, Persons of all Qualities, Sexes, and Ages, are capable of being
Adventurers in it, and of having equal Advantage by it with the very Managers
themselves; whereas upon the exchanging this way of management into the Method
of a Regulated Company, not only all Females, Children and Persons of great
Figure and lofty Title, must be shut out, but it must immediately lapse into a
few hands, and those such who are both the most wealthy and opulent, and whose
alone Province is Traffic and Commerce.

Yea whereas some intregneing Gentlemen study to flatter and delude several
Persons of Interst, to destroy the present Incorporated African Company, and to
establish a Regulated one in its room, and that upon a suggestion that the
Members of the latter, will both supply the Plantations with more Negroes, and
at cheaper Rates, than those of the former has done, I will therefore farther
add, that nothing is more demonstrable, than that disappointment in both these
must necessarily attend such a change. For as Merchants disinterested in the
Plantations, will never engage themselves in the Negroe Trade, both because of
the vast credit they will be forced to give, and by reason of the uncertainty
in payment that they must at last submit unto; so we may be sure, that how
careful soever the rich Planters will be to provide for, and to furnish
themselves with a multitude of lusty hands; yet they will not judge it for
their Interest to supply their poor Neighbors, either with such numbers as
their grounds do require, or with those of that Ability that their work does
bespeak, or lastly at such easy rates as they may grow rich by their labor.
But the poor Planter for want of ready payment must engage his Plantation to
his Neighbor, whose Interest it is not to show Mercy, but upon failure of
payment by bad Crops or the like, to suppress others that his own Commodity may
better turn to account.

But to conclude, If there be any just doubts arising about the Powers granted
by Charter to the present African Company; or if there be any inconveniences
in their managing of themselves pursuant to that Right, which they judge vested
in them: I do presume that they will with the utmost alacrity and cheerfulness,
submit themselves in all to the Authority of Parliament, and will expect from
the Wisdom of the Great Senate, the Redress of all that may be either
inconvenient to themselves, or injurious to others. And as they propose nothing
by craving a Law for confirmation of their Charter, but the Honor of the
Government, the Prosperity of the American Plantations, and the promoting and
increasing the Wealth of the Kingdom; so I do not question, but that they are
able to represent such Ways, Means, and Methods unto the Parliament, as that
all those ends may be fully answered. I am

SIR, Your most Obedient Servant. London, November. 15. 1690.

