THE TESTIMONY, OF Some persecuted Presbyterian Ministers of the Gospel, unto
the Covenanted Reformation OF THE CHURCH of SCOTLAND, And to the present
expediencie of continuing to preach the Gospel in the Fields, and against the
present Antichristian Toleration in its nature and design, etc.

Given in to the Ministers at Edinburgh by Mr. JAMES RENWICK upon the 17.
Janwarii 1688.

Hos. 2.1.2.3. Say ye unto your Brethren Ammi, and to your Sisters Ruhamah.
Plead with your Mother, plead: for she is not my Wife neither am I her Husband:
Let her therefore put away her whoredoms out of her sight, and her adulteries
from between her breasts; Left I stirp her naked etc.

Isa. 58.1.2. Cry aloud spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show
my People their transgression, and the House of Jacob their sins. Yet they seek
me daily and delight to know my ways, as a Nation that did righteousness, and
forsook not the ordinance of their God; etc.

Lamen. 2.14. Thy Prophets have seen vain and foolish things for thee, and they
have not Discovered thine iniquity, to turn away thy captivity, but have seen
for thee false burdens, and causes of banishment.

Jer. 6.14. They have healed also the hurt of the Daughter of my People
slightly, saying, peace, peace, when there is no peace.

Printed in the Year 1688.

TO THE READER.
Christian and Candid Reader,
SUch is the iniquity and unhappiness of these times; wherein Judgment is
turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off, Truth is falen in the
streets and equity can not enter, yea Truth fails, and he that departs from
evil makes himself a prey, whereat the Lord is displeased, when he sees there
is no man, and Wonders there is no Intercessor; That, now when the Case of
Confession is very clear and clamant, to aim at these indispensible and ever
heretofore indisputable duties, of pleading for Truth, seeking the Truth, being
valiant for it, standing in the Gap to turn away wrath, pleading with our
Mother to put away her whoredoms, allways called for in such a Case, is
flouted at with disdain and exploded with indignation, as a ridiculous
impertinency. And so declaredly are these duties declined, and so industriously
are these declentions daubed, that the common dialect used and known among the
Confessors of Christ is inverted, and the very name and notion of these things
professedly perverted, under the interchanged designation of their opposite
extremes: When now Tyranny passes under the name of Authority, and arbitrary
absolutness under the notion of Magistratical prerogative; Compliance with
mischiefs, framed into Laws by a Thron of inquity, goes for Loyalty;
Acceptance of a Popish, Religion-undermining, Reformation-overturning,
Liberty-perverting, Law-subverting, Truth-enslaving Toleration, improving a
Liberty to preach the Gospel; sinful and shameful silence and unfaithfulness,
passing over the indignites done unto Christ, His Cause and Covenants broken,
burnt, and buried, and encroachments made upon His Kingly prerogatives, and
Kingdoms Liberties, without a witness, is counted warry and witty prudence;
stupid indifferency in the Lords matters, preferring their oun things to His,
posponing His precious Interest, to present ease, and selling Truth to purchase
an unhallowed peace from and with Christ's Enemies, is called and encouraged as
moderation: On the other hand, To stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free, that is taken for licenciousness; To maintain Religion with
human Liberty, that is Rebellion; To stand at a distance from and withstand
these Land-defiling and destroying sins, that is faction; To abstract and
abstain from all accession to saying a Confederacy to all to whom the People
say a Confederacy, for fear of the Lord, lest the benefice of His sanctuary be
forfeited, that is schism and sinful separation; To give every thing its own
name, in plainness and Gospel simplicity, that's reproachful railery, and
pitiful silliness; faithfulness, that's folly; zeal, that's wildness; Tenderness
of Conscience; that's superstitious and preposterous scrupulosity; a Testimony
can no sooner be named, then it is suspected of Giddiness, hot headedness, and
presently huffed and puffed at, cast away and laid by, as an Ignorant,
impertinent, insignificant ridicule. Under such distempers and prejudices, it
must needs be very difficult and discouraging to offer a Testimony for the
precious Truths of Christ; especially for the hunted hiden ones, incessantly
chased, continually pursued indefatigably persecuted by the rage of enemies,
contempt of friends, and reproach of alls; and Labournig under such
disadvantages, that the sense of their oune incapacity to exhibit it, with any
suitablness to the matter and moment of it, the want of the concurrence of
those that are better accomplished for it, little hope of the countenance of
these that do not concur, of acceptance with those that do not give their
countenance, or of access to communicate it to those that do not accept it
(without exposing themselves to manifest Hazard) or of getting their help to
publish it, to whom they dar not freely communicate it, can not but demur,
dauntand discourage them from any such essay. The fellowing Testimony was
attended with those disadvantages; which contrary to the intention of the
Authors, did both retard the publishing of it in the manner first resolved, and
precipitate the printing of it in the present exigence. For it was first
intended to have been given in to some solemn Meeting of Presbyterian Ministers
who preach under the present Toleration, that by them it might be communicated
to whom they pleased, and Jointly Cognosced upon, and thoughts of it returned.
But such meetings being hid from us, and hardly access to persons in our
Circumstances, the principle Author a faithful Minister and now Glorified
Matyr of Christ, Mr. James Renwick (now above the reach of rage and reproach,
and Crowned with victory over sin and sorrow, pride of men and strife of
tongues, with which for his masters sake he had a continual conflict until he
overcame by the blood of the Lamb and the word of his Testimony, not loving his
life unto the death, by which also he sealed this present Testimony) with the
consent of others concurring, thought it expedient to slip no time, but take
the first and the fittest opportunity of spreading it among them in such away
as might be least offencive. And accordingly, hastening toward the time of his
appointed dissolution, a little before his being taken, he delivered it upon the
17. day of Januarii as it were his dying Testimony into the hands of a Reverend
and learned Minister, whom he supposed to be the Moderator of the meeting at
Edinburgh: who, not knowing him (for if he had, its like his knoun Loyalty,
and respect to the Councils sentence of Intercommuning, would have made him
more reserved; as he showed himself afterward, when one of the Informatorie
Vindications, was offered to him, which he superciliously refused) at that
time, recieved it very courteously, and promised to consider and communicate it
to his Brethren. Which for some time was expected, in the hope that either he
or some other, should have had so much regard to the importance of the matter
of it about which it treats, or respect to him, who set to his dying seal to
it, or tenderness to our Souls, who adhere to it if they think us in an error,
or Zeal for the Covenanted Cause, if they think that thereby wronged, as to
signify their sentiments of it, in approving what is right, and disapproving
what is wrong in it. Yet in stead of this, after it has been much spoken of
and inquired after, by occasion of its being confirmed by a Martyrs Testimony,
it has been not only smothered and imbezilled, but when sought for,
represented as insignificant, impertinent nonsense, not worthy of their
Cognizance. Which indeed is the easiest way, and shortest cut to answer all
things: And perhaps it were not worth the while, to vindicate the weakness of
some of our hands in it from some such Charge. But suppose it were, the matter
of it (tho weakly managed) is of some consideration. It is a Testimony against
the Addressers for, Accepters of, and all that have any interest in, or
accession to this Toleration; with reflections upon the Granters design, and
the Receivers sin: Surely if they have Loyalty for the Granter, and love to the
benefit Granted, and peace in improving it, they must Justify it; and how ever
it is incumbent to watchmen to show whether it be sin or duty to these that
challenge and Allege it to be sin. It is a Testimony for the Covenants, now
interdicted to be ouned; which all Presbyterians must Avouch, or else their
Adherence thereunto will be suspected. It is a Testimony for the present
expediency of Field meetings, not long ago Generaly approven of Presbyterian
Ministers, and even of them who now condemn them in the same Circumstances,
wherein they themselves maintained them; It is worthy of some Cognizance
either to purge themselves of unstedfastness, or impute to them folly who
charge it, and to tell whether it be sin or duty, when People are daily
brought to suffering upon this head. What if it have no significancy, has it
no signification? Or cannot these Masters of sense and learning understand the
scope of that which Conscience speaks, and it concerns theirs to hear, tho it
do not observe the rules of Grammar: What if it be folly? Yet they knew not,
but the Case may be such as makes the answer expedient, lest we be wise in our
oun conceit, when they do not discover our folly: Or shall we allow our selves
to think, they care not what conceits or deceits we run upon? But we rather
conjecture, the other case of Answering folly, that the Wiseman determines in
the negative, does more bind our Brethren, that is, they will not answer, lest
they be like unto us: for either they may fear to discover some folly too, and
then they will be like unto us; or else, by breaking silence, and the
boundaries prescribed in the Terms wherein they are Tolerated, they may break
the Toleration, loss their patrons protection, and then they will be like unto
us. And there is some reason to think this Policy preponderates with them,
which indeed as thy are Circumstantiated may conciliate pity: For, if they
answer, without discovering the Constantly asserted principls of Presbyterians,
concerning Tolerations of or from Papists, and ouning the Obligation of the
Covenants, etc. All will suspect them either of prevarication or palpable
defection; If they do discover them, they will forfeit the fancied benefit of
the pretended favor. But we would have them also to consider, that if they be
altogether silent at such a time, tho their known learning and sense will
absolve them from inability to answer it, yet their disdain of our ignorance,
will not clear them of the Censure of unfaithfulness. And let not their fear of
Papists and Malignants, if they do speak, make them altogether misregard our
constantly resolved Testifying against them, if they do not speak,
insignificant and impertinent as it is. However the present industry to cover
and smother it, together with the inconvenience of incorrect Copies, and the
mocks and jears, wherewith they are entertained, do provoke us to make it more
public, and to take this way of publishing it; that impartial unprejudiced
Readers, may see with their oun eyes, and at least be invited and incited to
search and try, whether the course here testified against, be to be approved or
reproved, and consequently whether to becountenanced or discountenanced: And
what light they obtain by searching the Scriptures, whether these things be so,
it is desired they may ascribe all the praise of it, to the Father of Lights,
and not astrict all the profit of it to their oun breasts, but impart it also
to others; and not with hold it from those, who oune this Testimony, who desire
nothing more than to be friendly admonished of any wrong in their way, that
being convinced thereof, they may confess and forsake it, and to do to others
whatsoever thy would that men should do to them. Fare well.

THE TESTIMONY, OF Some persecuted Presbyterian Ministers of the Gospel, unto
the Reformation of the Church of Scotland, namely to the perpetual obligation
of the National Covenant, and solemn League and Covenant, and to the present
expediencie of continuing to preach the Gospel in the interdicted Meetings in
the Fields: And against this Antichristian Toleration, in its nature and
design, tending to bury all these in oblivion, lately obtruded upon, and
accepted by the body of this Nation; given in to the Ministers at Edinburgh, by
Mr. James Renwick. 17. Jan. 1688.
IT was ever reckoned the renown of the Church of Scotland, tho now brought
very low, and like to be lost as a prey in the Dragons mouth, that Christ's
conquest of that Land which the Roman Legions while heathenish could not
subdue, among the first fruits of the Gentiles. And when overcome and long
overrun by Roman Locusts when Antichristian, his Glorious outstretched Arm did
emancipate and redeem his Inheritance from the bondage of Antichrist unto such
a Pitch of Reformation in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, that it
becam a Pattern to other Churches, and had this prerogative above them all,
that at once and from the beginning, nothing was left unremoved or unreformed
that ever flowed from the man of sin: And every part of the Reformation was
regulated by the measuring line of the Sanctuary, the Word of God; And not only
established by righteous and laudable Laws ratifying the same with the Sanction
of the penal Statuts against the enemies thereof, but confirmed with strictest
Engagements to preserve and promote it, in the National and solemn League and
Covenants, whereby Scotland became the Inheritance of the Prince of the Kings
of the Earth by manifold and undoubted Rights, by his Fathers Grant, by his oun
Purchase; and by our solemn Surrender and Dedition by Covenant: Whereof ever
since he took Infeftment, he has continued his possession, and maintained his
Title by the Testimonies of his Witnesses against all Invasions thereupon,
through all the periods of this Church which also has ever been repute the
Glory of this Reformed and Covenanted Church, that nothing was ever attempted
against any part of her Reformation, but was faithfully witnessed against by
Ministers and Professors, from time to time: Especially from its first
establishment, and abolition of Popery, no essay could ever be made to
introduce, or procure the Toleration of any of its superstitious fopperies, but
the Zeal of the Lords witnesses was found to flame against it, with a
pecularity of fervor. It was never known in Scotland, before this last fatal
Degeneration that ever a favor could be obtained to Papists to practice their
Idolatries, without a resolute Protestation against it, much less was it ever
heard that the open Profession of it, should not only be allowed without
control, but applauded in the congratulatory Addresses of some called
Protestants and Presbyterians, for a Toleration Declaredly Designed to
introduce it. The Addresses of Protestants on such an occasion used to run in
an other strain. There is one dated Maij 27. 1561. presented to the Council.
Showing that honesty craved them, and Conscience moved them to make the secrets
of their hearts patent, which was, that before ever these Tyrants and Dumb Dogs
empire over them, they were fully determined to hazard life, and whatsoever
they had received of God in temporal things: And that these enemies of God
might assure themselves, that if the Council put not order to them they should
shortly take such order that they shall neither be able to do what they list,
neither yet live upon the sweat of the brows of such as are no debtors to
them. Nor were ever wanting in their warnings and witnessings against the least
remissness in Zeal against Papists, or any tendencie toward favoring them: As
when the mischievous Mary the Daughter of the degraded Queen returning from
France, set up the Mass but in her oun family, the Godly at that time gave
plain signification that they could not abide, that the Land which God by his
power had purged from Idolatry should in their eyes be polluted again, and that
Idol be suffered again to take place in this Realm. And a Proclamation being
then emitted to protect the Queens Domestic Servants that were Papists, there
was not wanting a peremptoty Protestation against it. That if any of her
Servants shall commit idolatry, say Mass, participate therewith or take the
defense thereof, in that case this Proclaimation should not be extended to
them, nor be a safeguard to them in that behalf, no more than if they commit
murder. But that it may be lawful to inflict upon them the pains contained in
Gods Word against Idolaters, wherever they might be apprehended without favor.
Mr. Knox had such an impression of the danger of such a Toleration that he
counted it a Joining hands with Idolatry. And declared that one Mass was more
fearful to him, than if ten thousand armed Enemies were Landed of purpose to
suppress the whole Religion, for, said he, in our God there is strength to
resist and confound Multitudes, if we unfeignedly depend upon him; But when we
join hands with Idolatry, it is no doubt, but both Gods amiable presence, and
comfortable defense will leave us, and what shall then become of us? Therefore
in the reign of K. James VI. upon the discovery of the Plots of the Popish
Lords conspiring with the King of Spain, who yet favored by the Kings
Indulgence, it was resolutely declared by Mr. Davidson that it favored much of
defection in those days, that such notorious Rebels to God, and the Country
should be so treated with; and that a door should not be opened to Gods
enemies. And when a Convention in Falkland was consulting to call home these
conspiring Traitors, Mr. Andrew Melvin thought it his duty to go thither
uncalled, and when rebuked by the King for his boldness, took the confidence to
charge him and the Estates in the Name of Christ and his Church, not to favor
Christ's Enemies whom he hates, nor go about to make Citizens of these who have
traterously sought to betray their City and Native Country, with the overthrow
of Christ's Kingdom. And to challenge them with Treason against Christ, his
Church, and the Country in that purpose they were about. Afterward when the
Covenanted Reformation was upon the ascendant and meeting with multifarous
assaults from all hands, how impartial and uniforme the witness of the Faithful
was against the Toleration of pernicious errors, the warnings and Testimonies
of the General Assemblies do evidence beyond contradiction. And after the
invasion of the Sectaries, the Testimony of sundry Ministers of the Gospel in
the Provinces of Perth and Fife against their vast Toleration is yet in the
hands, and recent in the hearts of these that desire to retain former
principles: Besides the many writtings of Truths Champions against it, which
are yet on record. This has been the constant tenor of the Testimonies of the
witnesses of Christ, ever before this woeful and wretched Catastrophe, which
puts an indelible infamy on the shamful security, and ass-like stupiditie of
this generation; That having received such an excellent Testimony, deposited
and transmitted to us through a continued tract of witnessings and wrestlings
of our worthy Ancestors, now to let it slip and slide through our feeble
fingers. Whereby as we have forfeited the honor of being esteemed the
offspring of such Heroes (while we not only suffer and consent to, but
congratulate and applaude the Introduction and Establishment, at least do
embrace and close with that which is introductive of Idolatry and Tyranny,
Popery and the Slavery, they built with so great expense) so we may fear the
curse of posterity for interrupting the propagation of so excellent a Testimony
to succeeding generations, who when they shall read the flattering and fauning
Addresses of this age to, and of their so hasty and hungry embracements of
ensnaring and destructive favors, from an Antichristian Tyrant, so palpably
designed for, and so properly and natively tending toward the undermining and
overturning of the Reformation, will disdain and disoune such for their
Fathers, with indignation at their memory, for such dishonorable and dastardly
yeeldings. O let it not be told in Goth, nor published in the streets of
Asskelon, that the Ministers are so far degenerate. Alas all that hear of it
will hiss at them for this, that as they had been silent and omitted a
seasonable, Testimony against abjured Prelacy, and blasphemous Supremacy, when
these were introduced; So now also even when this Mystery and Conspiracy of
Popery and Tyranny twisted together in the present design of Antichrist, had
made so great a progress, and was evidently brought above bourd: So except what
was endeavored in a Protestation emitted at Sanquhair Maij 28. 1685. (Which
here we homelogate) the Generality were left to forego this opportunity of a
Testimony also, to the reproach, of the sometimes Renowned Church of Scotland.
Yea the very rabble may arise in Judgment against them in that they testified
their detestation of the first erection of the Idolatrous Mass; and some of the
Soldiery, and such as had no Profession of Religion, suffered unto death for
speaking against Popery, and the design of the King, while the Ministers were
silent: And some of the Curats, and Members of the late Parliament, made some
stickling against Papists, while Presbyterians, from whom might have been
expected greater opposition, were sleeping in a profound submission. Wherefore
tho we be very insignificant nothings, and therefore both incapable and
unworthy to aim at supplying this vacancy of a Testimony, and dare not aspire
unto the presumption of thinking to fulfill it, with any proportion to the
moment and merit or the matter of this clamant Case of Confession; Yet
considering the weight and worth, profit, and price of those Truths, now
committed to us to Testify and suffer for, our indisputable duty as Ministers
and Members of this Church; The indispensible obligation of our Holy Covenants;
The eminent dangers imminent on the Land, apparently ineluctable, if not
prevented by giving and taking timeous warning: We cannot, must not, dare not
forbear to offer our Mite of a Testimony, for the present precious Word of our
Lords patience, and the Covenanted Reformation of Scotland, in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government; and against all the Injuries, insolent
Indignities, and audacious encroachments, done unto, and made upon the same, by
which God is highly dishonored, the Throne of his Glory affronted, the Kingdom
of his Son undermined, and many Souls dreadfully involved in the guilt of this
Confederacy against him. And so much the more confidence we have, and necessity
we find, to prompt to this undertaking, that both this duty is abandoned by
others, and imposed upon us by reason of the still continuing and growing
persecution incessantly pursuing us, without relenting, notwithstanding others
are flattered with pretenses of clemency, and tenderness to Conscience, which
is both encouraging and engaging to us to maintain this Testimony for which we
suffer, and being so sequestered from others, and separate (we say, not from the
benefit, but) from the snare and curse of this Toleration by the late
Proclamations against us, we take the more boldness, and have the more
advantage to speak our minds, that what we say, as it is not by communication
with others, so it cannot endanger any but our selves. And for what danger, we
may be exposed to upon this so honorable account, We are not careful in this
matter: Our God is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and if
not, we think it rather a matter so be ambitious of, than of shame or fear, to
be endangered there upon.

The present Invader of the Regal power, in his Proclamation of the Twentieth
of Feberwarii last past 1687. has by his Sovereign Authority, prerogative
Royal, and absolute power, which he requires all his Subjects to obey without
reserve, granted a Toleration to Papists, to Quakers, and to Moderate
Presbyterians, under certain conditions, restrictions and Limitations. In Which
Proclamation the Moderate Presbyterians are Tolerate only to meet in their
private houses and only to hear such Ministers as accept of this Indulgence,
and none other (whereby all adhering to old Presbyterian principles and
Protestations against such a vast Toleration are excluded, and such admitted to
be heard who have receded from them) who are thereby obliged to say or do
nothing contrary to the peace of his reign, seditious, or treasonable, under
the highest pains these crimes will import, (and consequently must not declare
that part of the Counsel of God, which cencerns his Antichristian enemies but
consent that faithfulness to Christ be reputed a Crime) nor are they to presume
to build Meeting Houses, or to use outhouses or barnes (but content themselves
with the confinements, whereunto, they are restricted in preaching the Gospel)
In the mean time all Preachers, Assisters and Connivers at Field Meetings are
to be persecuted according to the utmost severity of the Laws made against
them. Nevertheless all Laws or Acts of Parliament, Customs or Constitutions,
made or executed against any of the Popish way, are suspended stoped and
disabled (and consequently all the Legal Establishments of the Protestant
Religion are unhinged) so that they shall be in all respects as free, as any
Protestants whatsoever, not only to exercise their Religion, but to enjoy all
Offices, Benefices, etc. Which he shall think fit to bestow upon them in all
time coming (whereby he may put in any Popish Priest, in any Paroch Church,
when he pleases) wherein also he claims a power of vacuating and annulling
heritable rights (and by that same power may invade men's heretable properties,
when he is pleased so to exert his Absolutness) and of cassing and discharging
all former Oaths: And in place of all, substituting a new one, wherein he
requires all his subjects or such of them, as he or his Council shall please,
to swear that they acknowledge him to be rightful King and Supreme Governor of
the three Realms, and over all Persons therein. (Not over all Causes, for the
Ecclesiastical Supremacy is restored to Antichrist from whom it was borrowed,
and for which there is no use at present, Absolute power may do the turn as
well as this) that they hold it unlawful for subjects on any pretense, or for
any cause whatsoever (even tho he should command his Popish Janissaries to
massacre all Protestants, which is the tender mercy and burning fervent charity
of Papists) to rise in arms against him, and that they shall never practice,
or assist the Practisers of the same; and that they shall never resist his
power, nor oppose his Authority to his person (which is the Compend of all the
former Oaths, and further comprehends an Engagement to justify all his personal
Administrations, tho never so outrageous as Acts of Lawful Authority) but upon
the other hand shall to the utmost of their power, defend and maintain him his
heirs and Successors, in the exercise of their absolute power and Authority
against all deadly (where they are to engage not only to oune his power,
paramouut and transcendent to all Law divine and humane, and to mancipate their
Religion and reason with all their Religious and civil Liberties, to the
Lustful rage, and unbridled will of a Tyrant; But if he should erect the formal
and direct worship of Devils, and bring all their necks under the bowstring,
they must neither resist it, nor contradict it, but upon the other hand
actively concur with him, in doing all his will to the greatest excess of riot,
And must become executioners of their Fathers Mothers, Wives and Children, if
it shall please him to put forth his absolute power in that exercise; For
herein he claims and hereby is given a power to command what he will, and
obliging Subjects to obey whatsoever he will command, to obey absolutely
without reserve, without reserve of Conscience, Religion, Honor, Honesty, or
Reason: Which proclaims him in whose name the Proclamation is emitted, the
greatest Tyrant that ever lived in the World, far surmounting all the lust,
impudence, and insolence of any Roman, Sicilian, Turkish, Tartarian, or Indian
Tyrant, that ever trampled upon the Liberties of mankind.

But finding this Proclamation was not well approven, because of the palpable,
odiousness of this Oath; Therefore to mend the matter in a Letter to the
Council (dated March 31. 1687. the supreme Law at present) he granted, to all
that should desire on these terms, the benefit of the said Indulgence, without
being obliged to take the Oath, during his pleasure only, or so long as the
Council should find them behave themselves regularly and peaceably without
giving cause of offense to him, or any in Authority or trust under him. By
which none of the former restrictions are taken away (the Oath only excepted)
but further explained, that they shall not only say or do nothing, contrary to
the peace of his reign, seditious or treasonable, but that they behave
themselves regularly and peaceably, without giving any cause of offense to him,
which comprehends lesser offenses than sedition or Treason, even every thing
that will displease a Tyrant, and a Papist, that is all faithfulness in
seasonable duties or Testimonies. But taking to his consideration that some may
easily put such interpretations upon his foresaid Proclamation, as may discover
his drift and design; And, lest his different procedure in this project with
England and Scotland should make his pretenses to conscience suspect of
Treachery, Therefore he has fallen upon a more plausible way and given forth a
more smooth Proclamation, of the date the Twentieth eight of June the same
year, superstructed upon the former, in which are further explications, but no
taking off of former restrictions (except the Oath) seeing he further declares,
that by the same Sovereign Authority, Prerogative Royal and absolute power he
suspends stops and disables all penal Laws. And to the end that by the Liberty
thereby granted, the peace and security of his Government in the practice there
of, may not be endangered (that is, that his Tyranny may be secured in the
peaceable Possession of all his Encroachments upon our Religion, Laws and
Liberties, in the practice of this Toleration) he gives his subjects leave to
meet and serve God after their oun way and manner (every way which is their
oun, and according to their model, if it be not in Christ's way) in private
Houses, Chapels, or hired places, so that they take care that nothing be
preached or taught, which may any way tend to alienate the hearts of the People
from him or his Government (and consequently no faithful warning must be given
of the sins, duties or dangers of these times, or Testimony against the
wickedness of this Toleration, or the wickedness of the Tolerator, by any that
accept it, for these would be interpreted to have a tendency to alienate from
the Government) and that their Meetings be peaceably held (suitably to this
commenced confederacy with Antichrist who here requires of all, who take the
benefit of the present truce with him, and binding to the good behavior) and
publicly all persons freely admitted to them, (which is for the Informing
trade, that Jesuits flies, may have access to observe and delate how the
Instructions are kept) and that they signify to some of the next privy
Councillors Sherifs, etc. What places are set a part for the uses, with the
names of the Preachers (whereby they are restricted to the terms of a formal
bargain, and must have their lease and license for every place of preaching,
and no persons are admitted, but such as give up their names excluding hereby
all that for any measure of faithfulness in duty are obnoxious to their wicked
Laws) in the mean time Field Meetings are strictly prohibited, and all Laws and
Acts of Parliament are left in full force and vigor against them; for which now
he says after this favor, surpassing the hopes, and equalling the very wishes
of the most Zealously concerned, there is no shadow of excuse left (which may
hold to true of some, who by this acceptance discover their hopes and wishes,
and Zeal to be terminate upon peace rather than Truth, ease rather than duty,
and their oun things rather than the things of Christ: But as for us, it some
way answers our fears, and corresponds with our jealousies; And therefore while
others are rejoicing under the shadow of such a bramble, we think it matter of
mourning, not because we are excluded from the benefit of it, but that so many
are included in the guilt of it, and exposed to the curse of it; And do look
upon it, as a seasonable and necessary Testimony for the Cause of Christ, and
the Interest of the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of the
Country, all overturned and subverted by this Toleration, to keep our Meetings
as in former times in the open Fields, whether his Tyranny has driven us.

But these who are carrying on wicked designs know not what course to take as
most effectual for gaining their ends, and do change their methods so often as
they change their thoughts about the means most apparently successful: So he
has again thought fit to give out another Proclamation of the date the fifth
day of October, the foresaid year, declaring not only that all persons,
Preachers and hearers that are present at any Meeting in the open Fields (which
are their greatest eyesore, because the Rights of the Crown and Kingdom of
Christ are there pleaded, asserted and vindicated) but also all dissenting
Ministers, who shall take upon them to preach in houses, without observing the
foresaid directions, as are prescribed by the late Proclamation, viz. (that
nothing be preached or taught among them, which may any way tend to alienate
the hearts of the People from this absolute and incontrollable Monarch or his
Government, and that their Meetings be peaceably, openly, and publicly held,
and all persons freely admitted to them; And that they do signify and make
known to some one or more of his privy Councillors, Sheriffs, Stewarts,
Bailies, Justices of peace, or Magistrates of Royal Burrowghs, what place or
places they set apart for these uses, with the names of the Preachers) shall be
also prosecuted with the utmost rigor and severity, that their Laws will allow.
And to make all sure, he requires every one of his foresaid Officers, to whom
such intimation shall be made, to send to the Clerks of the privy Council once
every month, the names and Sirnames of the Preachers, and the times and places
of their Meetings. In all this unexpected Clemency (as he terms it) not
satisfying himself with what he has declared against Field Meetings, in the
forsaid Proclamations concerning them, he gives out yet another of the date
the 18. of October last against such Meetings, calling such assemblies for the
Worship of God, Randevouzes of Rebellion, Authorizing all Officers, Civil and
Military to apprehend, secure in firmance the persons of some Ministers, and
for encouragment, ensures them the sum of 100. p. Sterling. for each of these
Ministers; A goodly price, where with not only they, but their Master and
Message are prized, and put upon some, who ever since the first of these
Proclamations have been so unhappy as to be innocent of these things laid to
their charge, being out of the Kingdom, and so out of capacity to concur in
that duty of carrying and following Christ's standart in the preached Gospel,
indispensibly required of all his Confessors that are in it. Which as it
proclaims the manifest impudence of those lies, wherewith the Proclamation is
stuffed; So it may provoke all who are touched with zeal against the
Indignities done to Christ, and would be accounted among his faithful
witnesses, against the present Antichristian design, to an ambition of exposing
themselves to the reproach of such lying mouths, the greatest honor of the
Servants of Christ.

Having now in this delineation of the foresaid Proclamations already
discovered somewhat of the obvious iniquity of the present design against our
Covenanted Reformation: We shall now proceed to offer our Testimony for the
same, against the present attempts to ruin and zaze it. And therefore in the
first place, Testify against the Toleration; And next for the obligation of
our Covenants, and the necessity and expediency of keeping our Meetings in the
Fields, the suppression of which being one of the wicked designs of the
Toleration, that suspends other Laws, but leaves all in force and vigor against
these.

But ere we begin with the first of these, that we may clear the matter,
prevent mistakes, and preoccupy objections, we must premit. 1. That Lawful
Magistrates are placed in the Commonwealth by God, the Supreme Governor of the
whole World, to be a terror to evildoers, and a praise to them that do well; So
they rule not for men, but for God, with whom is no iniquity: But as Tyrants
and Usurpers have no more interest in this than Robbers have in the
Authorization of rightful proprieties; So where Magistrates are Lawful, and
acting Lawfully, they will find it their duty to be a terror to these evil
doers, who are now Tolerated, and a praise to them, who are persecuted. 2. We
cheerfully subscribe to that Article of our Confession of Faith Chap. 23. 4.
That Infidelity or difference in Religion does not make void the Magistrates
just and legal Authority, nor free the People from the due obedience to him.
But we think it no way inconsistent therewith to say with Naphthali page 6.
Prior Edit. Let the words be considered, and we are confident, that no sober
man will think the acknowledgment of just and legal Authority, and due
obedience a rational ground to infer that Tyranny is thereby either allowed or
privileged. Further we grant all that is in the Confession, viz. Dominium non
fundari ingratia. Yet this we assert; that a Prince, who not only is of another
Religion, but an avowed enemy to, and overturner of the Religion established by
Law, and intending and endeavoring to introduce a heretical, false,
Blasphemous and Idolatrous Religion, can claim no just and legal Authority; but
in this case, the People may very lawfully decline his pretended usurped
Authority. For tho Infidelity or difference of Religion, does not make void
Authority, where it is lawfully invested with consent of the People, and
without encroachment on their religious and legal Liberties; Yet it may
incapacitate a person, and lawfully seclude him from Authority, over a
Christian People having the reformed Religion established by Law, and confirmed
by solemn and national Covenants, both according to the Laws of the Land, which
do incapacite a Papist of all Authority, Supreme or Subordinate; And by the
Oath of Coronation, which obliges all Kings at the reception of their Princely
Authority, to make their faithful promise to maintain the true Religion of
Christ Jesus (by which ever since the framing of that Oath, was meant only the
Protestant Religion) and shall abolish and gainstand all false Religions, etc.
And consequently must not so much as Tolerate Popery which no Papists can
engage, or be admitted to swear, according to the Word of God, which forbids
expressly to set a Stranger over us, who is not our Brother Deuteronomy. 17.15. Which
includes as well a stranger of a strange Religion, as one of a strange Country.
This is not our Notion only; It is asserted by Doctor Guild in his exposition 2 Samuel 5.1, 2. Observe 5 page 104. We infer the general rule of election of
Magistrates, as well in regard of his qualities, and form of election as of the
end, wherefore he is to be elected. As for his qualities 1 He must not be a
stranger in birth, much less in Religion, but must be of a conjunction natural
and spiritual with them whom he governs, otherwise there can be no sympathy
nor symbolizing between them. 2. He must be able to govern, which is called
here to lead out and in: Next the form of his election should be by common and
voluntary consent, according to the constitution of the State, and Oath or
obligation of right administration, the rule whereof, should be the Law of God,
and positive Constitutions of the realm, and last the end should be to feed the
People, caring that they be spiritually fed in the food of life, and
temporally, that they be not spoiled, or bereft of their means of the life
corporal, to be their Guider, Protector, Father, Patron, and to have a regard
to all necessities, as the good Pastor has to his sheep and the Father to his
family. And before him, it is affirmed by Famous Mr. Knox, whose four
propositions, as they are to be read, in the account of his life, before his
History in quarto, and prosecuted in his second blast, we shall here insert. 1.
It is not birth only, nor propinquity of blood that makes a King lawfully to
reign, over a People Professing Christ Jesus, and his Eternal verity, but in
his election, the ordinance, which God has established in the election of
inferior Judges must be observed. 2. No manifest Idolater, nor notorious
transgressor of Gods Holy precepts, ought to be promoted to any public
Regiment, honor or dignity, in any realm, Province or City, that has
subjected themselves to Christ Jesus, and his blessed Evangel. 3. Neither can
Oath or promise bind any such People, to obey and maintain Tyrants against God,
and his Truth known. 4. But if rashly they have promoted any manifest wicked
person, or yet ignorantly have chosen such an one, as after declares himself
unworthy of regiment above the People of God (and such be all Idola^^^^ and
cruel persecuters) most justly may the same men depose and punish him, that
unadvisedly before they did nominate, appoint and elect. And besides we are to
remember, the practice of these venerable divines, that penned that excellent
Confession, how avowedly they professed and prosecuted, and animated and
encouraged the Parliament to an opposition to the then King, abusing his
Authority to the detriment of Religion and Liberty, and to the obstruction of
Reformation: And the declared principle of the general assembly of this Church,
when they refused to concur in that unlawful engagement, for restoring of
Charles the first till security were had by solemn Oath under his hand and
seal. That he should for himself and Successors, give his Assent to all Acts
and Bills, for enjoining Presbyterian Government, and never make opposition to
it, nor endeavor, any change thereof July ult. 1648. sess. 21. And when they
refused to admit Charles the second to the exercise of his power, except he
should take the Covenant, as it is to be seen in their seasonable and necessary
warning July 27. sess. 27. 1649. And in the Act of the West Kirk August 13.
1650. wherein they declare that they will not oune him nor his Interest,
otherwise than with a subordination to God, and so far as he ounes and
prosecutes the Cause of God and disclaims his and his Fathers opposition to the
Work of God, and to the Covenant. By all these it is evident, that our renowned
Reformers, were not men of such a principle, as that People were bound to oune,
obey, and maintain a Tyrant against God, and his Truth: And that neither the
Authors of our Confession of Faith in England, nor owners thereof in Scotland,
did ever understand that Article so, as that a Malignant enemy to our
Covenanted Reformation, let be an Idolaterous heretical Enemy to the Christian
Religion, could be capable of bearing rule, or owned to be a Ruler over the
Lords People in Britain and Ireland: And that could ground the entire Loyalty
superstructed upon it by the Citizens and Inhabitants of Edinburgh and
Cannongate, that give out themselves to be of the Presbyterian persuasion, and
professed by them in their Address to the person and Government of such an one,
as the Duke of York. 3. It is the right and duty of Magistrates to use an
imperative, coercive and cumulative power about Church matters, in commanding
Ministers to do their ministerial duties, prescribed unto them, by their only
Head and Master Christ; In restraining Idolatry, Superstition, error and
Prophanness; In giving the Ambassadors of Christ their protection, and add
their civil sanction to just and lawful Ecelesiastick decrees. And it is the
duty of Ministers, to grant unto the Magistrate all the foresaid power, and to
be thankful to God, and grateful to them, for the benefit of the right
exercise of it. And to pray for them, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable
life in all Godliness and honesty. But for usurpers to assume to themselves a
Sovereign Authority, prerogative Royal and absolute power, to ranverse their
Constitutions, Tolerate Idolatry, and allow Meetings for Gospel Ordinances only
with restrictions to persons who may preach, places where they may preach, and
matter what they shall preach, cannot be allowed by any, who dare not have a
hand in betraying the Church and yielding to all such encroachments on her
Liberties: And to pray for the prosperity of Tyrants, that we may be enslaved
in our Religion and Liberty, is a wicked thing. 4. It is indeed the honor of
Kings and happiness of People, to have true Humane and Christian Liberty,
established in the common wealth, that is, Liberty of persons from slavery,
Liberty of privileges from Tyranny, and Liberty of Conscience from all
Impositions of men, consisting in a freedom from the Doctrines, Traditions or
the Commandments of men, against or beside the Word of God, in the free
enjoyment of Gospel Ordinances in purity and power, and in the free observance
and establishment of all his Institutions of Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, in subordination to the only rule conscience, the revealed will of
its only Lawgiver Jesus Christ. When this is ratified as a right, by the
Sanction of approven Authority, and countenanced and encouraged as Religion, by
the confirmation of Laws, approving whatsoever is commanded by the God of
Heaven, to be done for the House of the God of Heaven (which is the full amount
of all Magistrates Authority) then we are obliged to accept of it, with all
thankful acceptance: But such a Liberty, as overturns our Rights, our
Privileges, our Religion, and Tolerats it only under the notion of a crime,
and Indemnifes it under the notion of a fault to be pardoned, and allows the
exercise thereof only in part, so and so modified, cannot be accepted by any to
whom the reproach thereof is a burden, and to whom the reproaches of Christ,
are in esteem, in such a day, when even the hoofs of Christ's Interest, buried
in bondage, are to be contended for. What Liberty this may be to some
Consciences. It is none to the tender, according to the rule of Conscience. 5.
It is certain a Magistrate ought to restore, what right or Liberty, he has
robbed from the Church, if it be the same Liberty restored, that was taken
away. Yea we concede, if a Magistrate shall grant a simple permission and
Liberty to the Ministers of the Church, to exercise all the parts of their
Office without any encroachment upon any kind of power seated in Churches
Indicatories, and having no sinful tendency, Ministers may lawfully improve it,
for the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ: But this is so far from
being the same that was taken away, that no part of it is restored as it was
robbed, but so defaced and depraved with Antichristian and Tyrannical
Modifications, that none that adhere to Scotlands Reformation, can receive it,
as apart of that Liberty wherewith Christ had made them freer 6. As it is
Ministers duty, by virtue of their Commission and Charge from Christ, to
exercise all the parts of their Office fully and freely, whither Magistrates
will or not; So if we might have Liberty so to exercise our function in a
freedom from civil restraints we would willingly take and improve it. Yea as we
abhore the continued persecution against us, not so much for the wrongs we
sustain by it, as for the wickedness thereof; So we detest the extending of it
against any for Religion or Conscience sake, or the offering violence to any
man's Conscience, and in a safe sense could allow that principle, which he would
make the world believe to be his, who now seeks to withdraw all Consciences
from the trwe and only Rule of it, that it ought not to be violented or (as it
is said in the English Declaration) forced in matters of mere Religion; or that
invincible necessity, ought not to be used against any man on the account of
his persuasion. If his constant encroachments upon our lives, Laws and
Liberties, and all our Interests as men and Christians, besides the known
bloody Tenets of Papists, did not manifest the impudence of this lying
pretense, and if it were not notour, that even since this pretended Liberty,
many have been banished, imprisoned and pursued, merely for Conscience sake.
And it must be great blindness not to see, and great boldness willingly to
winck at that double faced equivocation, in matters of mere Religion, or using
invincible necessity; By which he can elude when he pleases all these
flattering promises of tenderness, by excepting at the most necessary and
indispensible duties, if either they be such, wherein any other Interest is
concerned, beside mere Religion or if the troubles sustained thereupon; be not
altogether invincible necessities. Hence the plain falsehood and doubleness of
his assertions, as to what is past, may give ground to conclude his intended
perfidie in promises of what is future. But to accept of a Liberty clogged with
encroachments upon the Liberties of Christ's free Kingdom, or either formally or
interpretatively, directly or indirectly to give way to a Toleration of
Idolatrous or false ways of worship, is odious to all that know the rule of
Conscience: Tho Conscience is not to be forced either to Religion or
Irreligion; And Religion is not to be propogated by force, yet the open efforts
and overt-acts, and propagation of Irreligion, Atheism, Idolatry, Blasphemy,
etc. ought to be restrained by force, and every person pretending to Conscience
constrained to give outward respect to the Lawgiver, and rule of Conscience.
And what Liberty is either intended, or does natively tend to Tolerate what is
dishonourrable to God or destructive to conscience, cannot be embraced by any
who are tender in keeping a Conscience void of offense toward God and man.

These things premitted. We come in the next place to declare our Testimony
against the Toleration. And this we shall do, both as it is simply and
complexely considered.

First considering it simply, we cannot but testify against it.

1. In regard that it does palpably cross and contradict the will of God,
revealed in the Scriptures of Truth, Genesis 35.1, 2, 3, 4. Exodus 23.31, 32, 33.
Exodus 34.12, 13, 14, 15. Deuteronomy. 7.2-6. 25, 26. Deuteronomy. 13.6, 12. etc. Josh. 22.10,
12. Josh. 23.11, 12, 13. Judge. 2.1.2, 3. 1 Samuel 3.13, 14. 1 King. 18.40. 2
King. 9.22. 2 Chronicles. 15.15, 16. Psalm. 101. throughout. Prove. 20.8. Cant. 2.15.
Ezekiel. 43.7, 8. Zech. 13.2, 3, 4. John 2.15, 16. Romans 13.3, 4. Revel. 2.2.14,
20. Prove. 17.16.

2. The Commissioners of the General Assembly did plainly and fully witness
against the Toleration that was in the bud Anno 1649. And the reverend Assembly
of divines at West-minister, have in the Larger Catechism, in the exposition
of the second Commandment, reckoned the Toleration of false Religion, amongst
the sins forbidden therein. And in the Confession of Faith Chap. 20.. 4.
Asserted that such opinions or practices as are contrary to the light of
nature, or the known principles of Christianity, or destructive to the external
peace and Order which Christ has established in the Church, they may be
proceeded against, by the Censures of the Church, and by the power of the civil
Magistrate. And Chap. 23.. 3. That it is the Magistrates duty to take care, that
the Truth of God be kept pure and entire, that all blasphemy and heresies be
suppressed, all corruptions and abuses in worship and discipline, prevented or
reformed, and all the ordinances of God, duly settled, administered and
observed.

3. In regard that a Toleration is utterly repugnant unto and inconsistent with
the indispensible Oath of God in the National Covenant very expressly
condemning it, and more particularly the solemn league and Covenant. It is not
the way to maintain (nay cannot consist with maintaining) Reformation, to carry
on a Uniformity to extirpate heresy, superstition, schism, profanness, and
whatsoever is contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; To free
our Souls from the guilt of others men's sins, to make the Lord one, and his
Name one; All which we are engaged and sworn unto in the presence of Almighty
God, the searcher of all hearts, with a true intent to perform the same, as we
shall answer at the great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be
disclosed.

4. In regard of the sad and sinful effects, that it produces such as the
growth and increase of heresy, superstition and error, the profaning the
Lords day, the contempt and casting loose of Church discipline, the subversion
of Souls, the offense of the Godly and Faithful. In stead of Reformation,
Deformation; Instead of the power of Godliness, vain Jangling; Instead of love,
bitter heart burnings and jealousies; Instead of union, schism and divison;
And instead of peace, contention and strife; Instead of Government and Order,
Anarchy and Confusion, as it is elegantly held forth and evidenced by the
Ministers of Perth and Fife in their forecited Testimony page 31. The General
Assembly of our Church in their Declaration and Exhortation to their Brethren
in England, say, what is Liberty of Conscience, but Liberty of error, scandal,
schism, heresy, dishonor of God, opposing the Truth, hindering Reformation,
and seducing others. And the Ministers of the County Palatine of Lancaster in
their harmonious Testimony against Toleration subscribed by them March. 7.
1647. do fittly add that a Toleration is the putting a Sword into a mad man's
hand, a cup of Poison in to the hand of a child, a letting loose of mad men
with fire brands in their hands, an appointing a city of refuge in men's
Consciences for the Devil to flee to, a laying of the stumbling block before
the blind, a proclaiming Liberty to the Wolves to come into Christ's fold to
prey upon his Lambs; A Toleration of Soul-murther (the greatest Murder of all
other) and for the establishing whereof damned Souls in Hell, would accurse men
on earth: Could it be to provide for tender Consciences, to take away all
Conscience; If evil be suffered it will not suffer good; If error be not kept
under, it will be Superior. In fine, let any read Mr. Durham in his excellent
Treatise of scandal, particularly part. 3. Chap. 2. page 146. 147. And they
will see how he holds forth the Toleration, and suffering of error to be a
thing most hateful in its self, most hurtful in its consequences, and most
displeasing to Christ: For if error, (says he) be such an evil, that
thwarteth. 1. Both with Gods Holiness and Truth: And 2. That hazardeth so many
Souls (for never a plague has so destroyed the face of the visible Church nor
carried so many Souls to Hell as error has done) then the suffering of it,
cannot but be hateful to him, who Loves his Church. 3. There is no way,
whereby the Devil reproacheth Ordinances, and the word, more than by this, by
turning them to the quite contrary end, as if he would outshoot the Lord in his
oun bow (which is abominable to mention) and invert his oun means, and turn his
oun weapons upon him, and suffering of this is a conniving at his design. 4.
There is no way by which the Devil may so get in on Christ's Servants to seduce
them, as by this, as in the Epistle to Thyatira is clear. And can there danger
come so nigh Christ and he not displeased with what strengthens their snares.
5. This does equal, yea in some respect prefer the Devil to him so far as in us
lies, and so cannot but provoke his jealousy; For, so the Devil has Liberty
to vent his Lies with Truth equally; And there being many Lies, though there be
but one Truth he has by this more doors opened to him than the Gospel has. 6.
This does make even the Truth, Ordinances and Religion it self to be thought
light of; When all these have toleration, it is on the matter a proclaiming an
Indifferency to be in these things than which nothing can more reflect on the
jealous God, who in his Word puts such a difference, and shows such
detestation at indifferency. 7. This brings hudge confusions on the Church.
For 1. If these errors and corrupt teachers prevail, they carry Souls after
them and destroy them, and ought that to be thought light of? 2. If they
prevail not, yet they cross, afflict and offend them, and so prove a snare and
burden to them, of whom the Lord is tender. 8. Toleration does either account
little of error, as being no hurtful thing, and so there can be no esteem of
Truth; or it does account little of the destruction of Souls; both which must
be abominable. 9. Error does not only break Gods Law, but does teach others to
do so; and suffering thereof must be a maintaining of teachers to transgression
and Rebellion against the Lord.

Next we witness against this present Toleration complexly considered. And that
we do

1. In respect of the Granter, considered either as to his morals, or Religion,
or Relation, he is to all considering men, a person of that character, whose
dainties are not to be desired, and that when he speaks is not to be
believed, for there are seven abominations in his heart, Prove. 26.25. His Plots
and practices in his known accession to the burning of Londen 1666. In the
Popish Plot discovered 1678. In the Murder of the Earl of Essex, do give some
swatch and specimen of his former craft and cruelty, and of what further he may
be suspected to intend as meritorious to atone for such villainies, to wit the
Exterpation of the Protestant Religion, than which in the esteem of Papists
nothing can be more meritorious. And for which he has deserved to forefeit all
trust with men of knowledge or Conscience; he is known of all to be an
Excommunicat Papist, and a sworn votarie and vassal of Antichrist, and enrolled
in the Society of Jesuits, and therefore being in his principles professedly
treacherous, yea obliged to be both treacherous and truculent by that Religion,
he cannot be trusted in the leist concerns, let be those of such momentuous
consequence, without a stupid abandoning of Conscience, reason and experience;
When both that known principle, that no Faith it to be kept to Heretics,
espoused by all Papists, does to them justify all their lying dissimulations,
equivocations and treacheries imaginable; And that. Lateran canon, that enjoins
Kings to destroy and extirpate Heretics under the pain of excommunication,
does oblige him to be cruel to Protestants, by him esteemed to be such. Besides
that in his relation, he cannot be looked upon, as a rightful or righteous
Magistrate, by any that understands and considers the Institution,
Constitution, Characters and Boundaries of that Sacred Ordinance, and knows by
what dreadful and detestable means he usurped that place, who can say a
confederacy unto, make transaction with, or take any security from such a
Granter, that expects the benefit of the Lords Sanctuary Isai. 8.12.13. If it
was the Schechemites sin and shame to strengthen a naughty Abimelech and
strengthen themselves under the shadow of his protection Judge. 9.9. Much more
must it be to take protection for Religion, as well as peace from a man of
cruelty and treachery.

2. In respect of its design: which he himself expresses to be to unite the
hearts of his subjects to him in loyalty, and to their Neighbors in Love:
Which is to incline and induce them by flattery to lawless loyalty, and a
stupide contented slavery, and make them actively cooperate, in setting up, and
settling his Tyranny in the indisturbed possession of all his usurpation; And
to incorporate them with Babylon; For, who are the Neighbors, he would have
them unite with in Love, but the Papists, against whom all the Lovers of
Christ, must profess irreconcilible Enmity. But in the sense and sentiments of
all sound and zealous Protestants; The design of the Work and Worker is to get
unto himself an acknowledgment of his blasphemous absolutness, and to advance
it over all Laws, in a way, which will be best acquiesced in by the People till
he be so strengthened in it, that he fears no control; To get all the Accepters
one way or other to operate with him in his Popish and bloody ends. To get our
penal Laws against the Subjects and Promoters of Antichrists Kingdom with the
less contradiction stoped and disabled which by this esteemed gracious Grant,
and grateful Acceptance of it, he has already effectuated. And now by the same
measures he is encouraged to atchieve the total rescinding and repealing of
them. In the mean time his drift is very visible, and palpable to increase
differences, divisions and animosities amongst Protestants to hyre these
Presbyterians, whom he calls more moderate to commend his Clemency, while he
is exercising it, in pillaging plundering, hunting, apprehending, stigmatizing,
banishing and killing other Conscientious Non-conformists; To stop the mouths
of Protestants with this morsel of Liberty, while he is filling all the places
of power and trust, with men, devoted to his way, by taking off the penal Laws,
disabling them, and then when all power is in the hands of bloody Papists, none
shall dare to mutter, against the setting up of the public Masses. And finally
he designs to infatuate the body of the Land, and lull them asleep, by this
intoxicating Opium, or at leist to lay them by from all opposition, till he
undermine and overturn the Protestant Religion, and establish Popery and
Slavery, which he intends either to accomplish by these smooth flatteries, by
peace to overturn Truth, and by getting the Laws against the Popish repealled,
to make way for rescinding these for the Protestant Religion: Or rendering them
secure, as the Zidonians, who dwelt carelessly, to make his bloody Massacring
attempts upon the whole body, and what he intends to do with the whole, if they
come not the full length of Compliance, may be seen in his outrageous beginings
with the West of Scotland, the old butt of his malice which as sometimes he
has expressed his desire, so now it seems he designs to make a Hunting-field.
We may see through the Tragical History of former ages, what wicked and hellish
design the men of his character have had, in their Protestations and
Proclamations of pretended favor. It is kwon how Julian the Apostate amongst
other devices he used to root out Christianity, gave a Toleration openly to all
the different Professions, that were among Christians, whereof there were many
Heretical in those days: And he commenced this cursed contrivance, by calling
home the Orthodox Bishops, whom Constantius banished, that the Church might be
embroiled by a civil war of Contention among themselves, as Sozomen observes
lib. 5. And in the mean time conniving at, and encouraging the lawless outrages
of barbarous heathens against them, which they thought they were well enough
Authorized, in knowing it would please the Emperor, which was an unwritten Law
to them, which afterward was followed with a more open faced and declared war
against all that professed Christ; which is exactly aped by James the Apostate
now for the same end. So the Massacre of Paris was carried on with the Kings
Marrying his Sister to the King of Navar, a famous Protestant Prince, and with
many public and solemn Protestations and Declarations of favor to the
Protestant Church, while in the mean time, they were plotting and conspiring
how to Massacre them all, whereunto he was instigate by Jezebel his Wife,
though he was forward enough himself, his genius leading him that way, and
which was carried on by the Duke of Guise, as the main leader of these
Murderers, who still cried out (which was all the Law and reason he used, for
instigating these bloody Russians to that hellish outrage) Courage my Fellows
this is the Kings command, It is his express will and pleasure. And after
butcherig the famous Coligni, they went through the streets (at the toling of
the Royal bell, which was the sign of that horride perpetration) killing all
Protestants, without distinction of age, sex or quality, so that in the space
of two hours or there about, ten thousand were cruelly put to death in that
City. The like villainy was committed through the rest or France, and the
carrying on of the present and almost unparalelled persecution there, with the
Tyranny and Treachery of that Bigot Arbitrarian after so many Laws and Edicts
seemingly securing the Protestants against all fears, may let us see, what may
be expected of those Princes, who devout themselves to the lust and rage of
Popish Orders, these locusts come out of the bottomless pit. We have also a
recent instance of the cruelty and Treachery of that fiery little Tiger the
Duke of Savoy, against some of the relicts of the old Waldenses in the valley
of Piedmont, who after some ruffles received, promised unto them the enjoyment
of their Religious and civil Liberties, if they would lay down their Arms; But
after had got them spoiled of their outward defense, he catched many thousands
of them, killing them in Prisons with hunger and cold. And as the Duke of York
does affect much the absolutness of the French Monarch, so we may expect no
better of him (what ever he promise (who can do and undo, by virtue of his
declared Prerogative, being as absolute over promises as over Laws) and however
many do extol him as a Gracious Prince) then that he shall trace the steps of
his falsehood, treachery, cruelty and Romish Zeal; That so we may have an
Instance of Babylons deceit and rage acted in Britain and Ireland, which may
make other Instances, not to be Remembered. They are blind who do not see, and
stupid who have not the sense of the dreadfulness of these designs of this
Tolerator, which he thinks to accomplish by this Toleration, unto which it is
very subservient and which cannot be counteracted, but very much stregthened by
this acceptance of it.

3. In respect of its Fountain, from whence it flows, and is given forth, a
despotical and Arbitrarian Domination, outvying and surmounting the night of
Otteman Tyranny. It proceeds from and is refounded on the Leviathan of
Sovereign Authority, Prerogative Royal and absolute power, which all are to
obey without reserve. Which is a power loosed from, and above all Laws, only
regulable by the Royal lust, which cannot be owned, by any, who know what
Religion or Liberty is, being contrary, to nature, contrary to the ends of all
Government, the Glory of God, and the good of humane Societies, mancipating all
the Interests of mankind to the lust of one empowered to destroy all, against
the exorbitancy whereof, no means are left to prevent its obstructing all the
fountains of Justice, and turning all into anarchy and confusion, inconsistent
with any security, People can have, either of Religion or Safety, and so cannot
be the ordinance of God, nor the person assuming it, his Minister for good; A
Lawless power making all Laws void, needless and useless, and so Tyrannical in
Actu signato, claiming a power Jure to Tyrannize when he pleases; A power
destructive to the Peoples Liberties, under which the People cannot be secured
in the possession of any thing they have in the world; A power invading the
incommunicable prerogative of the Universal King, who only is absolute, whose
Glory is to have his will, for the Rule of his power. Psalm. 115.3. Ephesians. 1.11.
Isai. 46.10. A power expressly condemned as Tyranny in Scripture. Dan. 5.19,
20. Amos. 6.12, 13. Which in a word cannot be better named nor represented
under a better notion, than that which the famous and faithful Mr. Andrew
Melvin calls it, The bloody gullie of absolute power, as he inveighs against
it, in the assembly 1582. This is the fountain and foundation of this
Toleration, by which indeed, the name and common profession of the Protestant
Religion, may be for a time suffered precariously durante beneplacito
donatoris, until his pleasure shall be to command the establishment of Popery,
which then he will expect must be complied with without control. But all
avouched adherence to old Protestant and Presbyterian principles is hereby
interdicted, so all the tenure, that Protestants have for their Religion, is
only the arbitrary word of an absolute Dominator, whose principles oblige him
to break it, and his absoluteness to disdain to be a slave to it. Howbeit it
cannot be denied, that the acceptance of this grant declaredly proceeding from
such a power, and professedly requiring the acknowledgment of it, in the
acceptance does, imply the recognizance of this power, that the Granter claims
in granting it.

4. In respect of its Conveyance, and that is through the conduit of the most
apparent means of establishing Popery, and subverting Protestancy, by stoping
and disabling all these penal Laws and Statutes enacted against Papists, and
leaving in force, yea commanding to execute according to their rigor, all laws
made against honest Presbyterians, the most true and faithful Protestants, and
stoping none of the most cruel of them, but emitting more and more barbarous
Edicts against them; For the most cruel, are such as are made against
Field-meetings, which are hereby left in full vigor, what mean can be more
effectual to destroy our Reformation; than to suspend all Laws against any,
that shall attempt the utter subversion of it, and ratify all wicked Acts
against such as would most avowedly assert, or own the obligation of all sacred
bonds to preserve it? Hence as he has presumed by absolute power to suspend
all Laws, made for the protection of our Religion, so by the same, when he
will, he may repeal all Laws for its establishment. And these who approve the
one by such an acceptance, cannot disallow the other, but most recognosce a
power in this Tolerator to subvert all Laws; And so by accepting this lawless,
and Law-subverting Liberty, they make themselves guilty of the palpable breach
of the national Covenant, where the Laws are contained, which this Toleration
suspends; And dreadfully accessory to all the sad effects of this undermining
all the legal bulwarks of our Religion.

5. In respect of the nature and extent of it. It is Toleration, which is
always of evil, for that which is good, cannot be Tolerated, under the notion
of good, but countenanced and encouraged as good. Therefore it reflects upon
our Religion, when a Toleration is accepted, which implies such a reproach;
seeing it is not ratified as a Right, nor encouraged as a Religion, but
Tolerated under the notion of an evil to be suffered. And such a Toleration as
maks the Professors of Christ, partners in the same bargain with Antichrists
Vassals, and sets up the Ark in the place, and under the same sconce with
dagon; and the Devils thresholds by the Lords threshold; and whereby a sluice is
opened, to let the enemy come in like a flood, none lifting up a Standart
against them. Since it is a Toleration, not only of Archbishops, Bishops and
Curats, but of all Quakers and Papists, reaching all Idolatry, blasphemy,
Heresy: which to accept, is contrary to Scripture, our Confession of Faith,
and Catechismes, as was showed above; and clearly inconsistent with the
principles of the Church of Scotland, with the Covenants, national and solemn
league where we are bound to extirpate Popery, etc. Preserve the Reformation,
defend our Liberties, and so never to accept of a Toleration in its nature and
tendency eversive of all these precious Interests, we are sworn to maintain.

6. In respect of its conditions, limitations and restrictions, by which all
the kinds of power, that Christ has seated in his Church is invaded,
invalidated, and evacuated. As (1) the Dogmatick power, whereby Ministers are
to judge of Truth and Error, in point of Doctrine, according to the Word of God
only: this Key is extorted out of their hands, for according to the foresaid
Proclamations, nothing may be taught by the moderate Presbyterian Ministers, in
their Tolerated Meetings, that can be interpreted by the Court, (according to
their will, or their Law, for all is one) to have any tendency to alienate the
hearts of the People, from this incontrollable Tyrant or his Government. Now by
virtue of this condition, they may not doctrinally discover unto People, the
affronted wickedness of this unparalelled prerogative; They may not show the
iniquity of the Laws, nor warn of the evil thereof; They may not testify
against the introduction of Popery, nor these means that give an inlet unto
it; They may not once mention any wicked design, in all this course of a cursed
Toleration; They may not teach the obligation of the Covenants; Neither witness
against the breaches thereof expressly; Nor reprove the public sins of the
time; Nor warn of the dangers thereof, nor exhort them against complyances in
particular with any course established by Law: For all this may be interpreted
by Court Expositors, to have a direct tendency to alienat Peoples hearts from
the man, and his Government. Accordingly Mr. Hardy is apprehended, imprisoned
and proceeded against, for giving Concional Testimony against the taking off
the penal Laws, and Statutes, which would be thought, could not have offended
any Protestant. (2) The Diatactik power, whereby the Courts of Christ are to
decern the circumstances of the worship of God, as time, place, etc. For order,
decency, and edification, according to the general rules of the Word. This
power is invaded, the Key of order is wroung out of their hands in like manner;
For now the places of worship are determined in the Royal Proclamations, which
must be made known to some of the Court Patrons on whose warrant they are tied
to depend. What may be the hidden design of this intimation we know not; we
heartily wish and pray, it may not be to do with them, as Jehu with the Priests
of Baal. In the mean time Fed-meetings for the worship of God, which have been
signally contenanced of the Lord, are severely interdicted; whereby the Word of
the Lord, is bound and bounded; And by the accepters consent to such a model,
the bloody Laws against preaching in the open Fields, where People have freest
access with convenience and Safety are justified; The manner of meeting is also
restricted to be in such a way, as the peace and security of the Government,
may not be endangered, and that they be peaceably and publicly held, yea it is
expressly required in the Proclamation October. 5th. That all who shall preach,
by virtue of this Royal Grant, at any time, or in any place, make intimation of
their preaching, as to time and place, to same one or more of the next privy
Council-Lords, which shall be sufficient for them, during their abode only:
Whereby they not only are engaged to keep the peace with Antichrist, or his
Lieutenant in all their Meetings, and not only to give accession to all his
Clandestine Censores, to observe how they keep their Instructions; But formally
must mancipate their Ministry, and the freedom of its exercise, to a dependence
upon the license of his Trustees; Which is not only a formal bargaining, with
the enemies of Truth and Godliness, but a becoming their Servants, and so a
forfeiting the honor of being esteemed, while they continue so enslaved, the
faithful and free Servants of Christ, especially considering how as to the
matter of their Preaching also, they involve themselves in such
inconveniences, that either they must forbear some part of the Counsel of God,
and decline the Testimony of this day, or else expose themselves as a prey to
the lust of enemies, who hereby have brought them into a hose-net. 3. The
Critic, or Corrective power, which the Courts of Christ's have to censure
Delinquents and absolve the Penitents, according to the Word of God, is also
invaded and made void; For not only does this Toleration robb the Ministers
Tolerated, and the Accepters, consent to be robbed of that power of impartial
censuring those scandals that are Tolerated thereby, and all that make
themselves guilty of complying with the same; or have been involved in sinful
scandalous complyances with wicked courses formerly, such as taking of sinful
Oaths, subscribing of sinful bonds, paying of sinful exactions, and other
scandalous breaches of Covenant; Nor dare these that are free of them censure
or remove from among them their guilty Brethren, and so separate the clean from
the unclean: But also invads and usurps this power, formally, in investing the
Tolerator with Authority to Inhibite, and discharge some Ministers the exercise
of their office whom the standing Laws of this Church do Authorize, and to
allow others whom the Word of God, and Constitutions of our Church, require to
be laid aside, and suspended from that function. 4. Finally, the Exousiastick
power of trying, sending and Authorizing office-bearers in the Church, is made
useless and void by this Toleration; For, however an allowance is pretended to
keep assemblies, and send out Ministers to answer the Peoples call; Neither are
these assemblies lawfully constitute of, nor free for all that have right to
sit there: Nor is their mission of Ministers nor the Peoples call, of any
significancy or value, except intimation be made to this Exotic power of their
names, that are to officiate, under this Toleration, and they be found such as
please the Court Patrons, which is the worst of Patronages, that ever burdened
this Church. Hence if a Minister were never so lawfully ordained, never so
blamless in his personal deportment, never so formally appropriate to a
particular flock, he cannot exerce his function, in any place, unless the next
privy Councillor, Sherif, etc. Give their allowance. They will forfooth, have
the Judging whether he be qualified or not, and if he have not the new conditio
sine qua non, that only Qualification of them that are to be Tolerate,
moderation, in the Court sense, which is nothing but loathsome lukwarmness in
the things of Christ, and Court Loyalty to a vassal of Antichrist, which is
disloyalty to Christ, he can have no Liberty to exercise his Office.

7. In respect of the manifest and manifold scandal of it, we cannot but
witness against the acceptance thereof, so offensive to the generation of the
Righteous, so dishonorable to God, disgraceful to the Protestant Religion, and
prejudicial to the Interest thereof. As we would not be accounted unfaithful to
Christ, yea betrayers of our native Country, and Complyers with the design of
Antichrist, who has always mischief in his heart, and intends this as a
preparative, for inducing and enforcing all that are hereby lulled asleep,
either to take on this mark, or bear the mark of his fury hereafter. Hereby
foreign Churches may think Scotland is now in a fair way of reconciliation
with Antichrist, when his harbringers favors is so kindly accepted, and it
cannot but be very stumbling to them to see the Ministers of Scotland, whose
Testimony used to be terrible to the Popish, and renowned through all the
Protestant Churches, purchasing a Liberty to themselves, at the rate, of
burying and betraying the Cause in bondage and restraint, and thus to be laid
by from all active and open opposition to the designs of Papists in such a
season. Alas, sad and shameful have been the scandals given and taken, by and
from the declining Ministers of this Churchs heretofore, which have rent and
racked the poor Remnant, and offended many both at home and abroad; But none so
stumbling as this, which to the present and succeeding generation, will appear
to be a succumbing at length, and yielding up the Cause, and surceasing from
any more contending for it, a contemning of former wrestlings for the same,
tending to harden and hearten open adversaries in their wicked invasions on our
Religion, Laws and Liberties, an sad evidence of being weary of the Cross of
Christ, and that they would fain have ease upon any terms, and a weakening of
the hands, and condemning the practice of these that suffer, when others are at
ease.

Next, as we must testify against the Accepters of this Toleration, who must
be interpreted to take it, as it is given, and receive it as convoyed from its
fountain of absolute power, through its channel of an arbitrary Law-disabling,
and Religion-dishonouring Proclamation, with consent to the sinful Impositions
with which it is tendered; Against all which there is no access for a
Protestation, consistent with the improvement of it, it being granted and
accepted on these very terms, that there shall be no Protestation; For if there
be, that will be found an alienating of the hearts of the Subjects from the
Government, which by that Proclamation would be reflected upon: So in a
particular manner, we must testify against the Addressers for it, who have
formally said a Confederacy, and congratulated the Tolerator for this
Toleration, and all the mischiefs he is machinating and effectuating thereby,
especially seeing they have presumptuously taken upon them to send their
Addresses, in the name of all Presbyterian Ministers, we think it concerns all
honest men, Zealous Christians and faithful Ministers of that persuasion and
denomination, in honor and Conscience to declare to the world by some public
Testimony, that they are not Consenters to that sinful, shameful and scandalous
conspiracy, with which, all will be interpreted Consenters, that are not
Contradicters, and charged with the guilt of it, that does not make the
resentment of it notour* We cannot express with what horror and sorrow, our
hearts were filled to see an Address in the name of all the Presbyterian
Ministers in Scotland. And another from the Inhabitants of the City of
Edinburgh and Cannongate, who call themselves of the Presbyterian persuasion,
who having been always forward in a Catechrestick loyalty, or slaverie of
their persons and Consciences, are now ambitious, not to behind any in a
flattering Profession of it* We say we are filled with wonder that they should
assume to themselves, the name of Presbyterian Ministers, and give out their
Addresses in the name of all, and that it was at their desire; when as the
contents of it, are clearly contrary to Presbyterian principles, by justifying
an Antichristian usurper, in undermining Religion, and approving the abrogation
of the national, Covenant, confirming the Laws vow disabled, by thanking the
Tolerator for opening a door to introduce Popery, which we are sworn to
extirpate, by consenting to limitations and restrictions, upon the exercise of
their Ministry, by accepting of a bounded Toleration, wherein Idolaters and
heretics have the greatest share, contrary to our Confession of Faith in the
places forecited Chap. 2.23. which, notwithstanding they have insinuate, that
they do own, wherein either they bewray great inconsiderateness in acting so
contrary to themselves, or else no small impudence, in laying claim to that
Confession, which does so condemn their way; Therefore we testify against
these Addressers. 1. Because of the ground for which they Address. What can
they allege for this? It is either for the Liberty granted to the exercise of
their Ministry or else the Toleration complexely considered: If the former,
then suppose they had got a full and free liberty, it would have been, but what
was due, and to thank a man for giving what is not his own seems to insinuate
a recognoscing a power to him to withhold it; But now their Liberty is loaded
and clogged will sinful and scandalous conditions, which is little ground of
thanks; If the latter be said, then they give their consent to set up Popery
and Quakerisme, for these are also Tolerated, Also it is not to be passed, that
there is nothing in all the Proclamations concerning this Toleration in the
lest protested against by the Addressers; So we cannot see, how they can free
themselves of congratulating their, clement benefactor, for all the woeful evils
in the foresaid Proclamations that respect their imaginary favor, more
valuable to then (as they say) than all earthly comforts. 2. Because of the
sinful and shamful deficiency of the Addresses, they speak not a word against
the openly designed Introduction of Poprie, no resentment of the eversion of
Religious and civil Liberties, no representation of the wrongs sustained under
the grassation of the two Brothers; No Protestation against the invasion made
upon the power that Christ has seated in the Courts of his Church; and
consequently upon his own incommunicable Headship: Not a word of the Covenants,
but they are passed over in silence, as if they were ashamed of them; They say
nothing of the Reformation, whereunto we once attained, and were solemnly
engaged. 3. Because of their Lawless and illimited loyalty. This is professed
by the foresaid Ministers, To his Excellent, To his Gracious, and to his Sacred
Majesty: Loyalty not to be questioned, an entire Loyalty in Doctrine, which
is in effect disloyalty to Christ, in not observing their Instructions
received from him, but keeping silent at the wrongs done to him, and not
declaring against the invasion of his open enemies: A resolved Loyalty in
practice, whereof also the Inhabitants of Edinburgh and Cannongate, will have
him assured: This is no less than betraying Religion and Liberty, in lying by
from any active Testimony and opposition to the open Destroyer of both: A
fervent Loyalty in Prayers, which we shall not now insist upon, being to speak
of them afterward. This Loyalty of theirs, is not a Christian Loyalty, or
Profession of subjection for Conscience sake, to a Minister of God for good,
who is a terror to evil doers, nor a Presbyterian Loyalty, to a King as it is
qualified in the national and solemn League and Covenants; But a stupid
subjection, and absolute allegiance to a Minister of Antichrist, who gives
Liberty to all evil men and seducers; A Loyalty to a Tyrant in his overturning
Religion, Laws and Liberties, and protecting and encouraging all iniquity. 4.
Because of their soulsome flattery: We need not instance how the Ministers in
their Address say, from the deep sense they have of his Majesty's gracious and
surprising favor, finding themselves bound in duty to offer their most humble
and hearty thanks to his Sacred Majesty, the favor being to them valuable
above all earthly comforts: And how the Inhabitants of the City of Edinburgh
and Cannongate express themselves; We cannot find suitable expressions to
evidence our most humble and grateful acknowledgements of your Majesty's late
gracious Declaration. The matter were less, if they did not speak a lie, for
they say they are allowed the free and peaceable public exercise of their
Religion. Peaceable and public it is, They know not how long; free it is not,
for their Ministers are bounded with sinful restrictions as is shown above. And
again they add, could we open our hearts, your Majesty would undoubtedly see,
whet deep sense and true Zeal for your service, so surprising and signal a
favor has imprinted on our spirits, etc. This is worse than flattery: We say
we need not adduce particular instances of their Adulation, for their whole
strain is a rapsodie of flatteries more becoming Sycophants and Court
parasites, than Ministers and Professors that give out themselves to be of the
Presbyterian persuasion. 5. If the Addresses were only stuffed with flatteries,
it were less, but we cannot dissemble or conceal our horror and astonishment at
some expressions; Which (if they come not near the borders of blasphemy) are
Equivocations inconsistenwith ingenuity: The Ministers bless the Great God, who
has put this in his Royal heart: Which must either be understood in that
sense, where it is said Revel. 17.17. God has put in their hearts to give
their Kingdom unto the beast; Which they durst not express to him, whom they
Address, neither durst they bless the Lord for it with application to him: And
to say this with such a reserved meaning, were odious to Protestants, and all
honest men. Or if they be ingenuous then they bless God for putting it in his
heart to project all this wickedness, discovered in the design, tendency and
nature of this Popish Toleration; which is not far from blasphemy to make the
Holy one, the Author of that, which he has declared his detestation of in his
word. They further express their resolution, by the help of God, so to demean
themselves, as his Majesty may find cause rather to enlarge than to diminish
his favors toward them. Which upon the matter is either a double
Equivocation, or else it must be understood, they resolve to demean themselves
so, as that a Zealous Papist shall find cause to enlarge his favors to them,
and shall not find any cause of displeasure at them. They know what he makes
criminal against others, to wit, their teaching the obligation of our
Covenants, the lawfulness of defensive arms, their testifying against the
encroachments made upon the Kingly power of Christ, and against the taking off
the penal Statutes that concern Papists, and the like pieces of faithfulness.
And consequently they resolve, they shall be as unfaithful and silent
Ministers, as ever pleased a Papist; For if they be faithful, they may be
assured, he will find cause to diminish his favors toward them: Now to
purpose this by the help of God, comes very near the borders of blasphemy. The
Citizens of Edinburgh and Canongate, do engage to continue still in their
Prayers, for blessing his Person and Government; And show by what Argument they
plead for it, to wit, that by the God of Heaven, Kings reign, and Princes
decree Justice. Which with application to the Person whom they Address, is
absurdly impertinent, otherwise to bring it forth as an adulatory equivocation,
with a reserve that they intend only to offer that general proposition in
Thesi, without application to him, in the mean time, making him believe, they
assert the divine approbation of his Government: Or else it has the appearance
of blasphemy to extend that proposition to him, which they cannot do, except
they turn it thus, by the Lord Tyrants reign, and usurpers decree Justice;
which to say, according to the Lords preceptive and approbative will, as that
Scripture must be understood, were a blasphemous Indignity to the Holy one,
with whom such a Throne of iniquity can have no fellowship, whereof the
possessors are set up, but not by him, and he diswoneth them, Hos. 8.4.6.
Because the Ministers in their Address, disowne these, who avouch an Adherence
to the Covenanted reformation, and avow an opposition to Antichristian usurpers
(which they call promoting disloyal principles and practices) humbly beseching
the Tolerator not to look upon such as any of their confederacy. They needed
not have been so solicitous upon this head, for all that abide in the
principles and practices of the Church of Scotland, (which they have deserted)
would count it a sin and scandal, laying them obnoxious to the displeasure of
the Holy and jealous God and a shameful reproach, exposing them to the contempt
of all of whom they might expect sympathy, to be rekoned of their association,
who have thus betrayed the Cause and the Country. 7. Because of their mercenary
prayers, that are disagreeable to the will of God: The Ministers pray for
divine illumination and conduct (they durst not say conversion, for that would
have reflected upon the man, either as a wicked man or a Papist, or both, but
they warrily term, it, illumination and conduct that he might interpret it, to
be for light and leading in this Antichristian way of his) with all other
blessings ever to attend his Person and Government; Therefore they cannot pray
for bringing down the Kingdom of Satan, seeing they pray so heartily for the
support of an eminent prope of it: They pray not that God, may remove such an
absolute Tyranny, but that temporal and spiritual blessings may attend it. And
the Loyalists of Edinburgh and Cannongate, after their dutiful and faithful
assurances, That as they had not been formerly wanting in praying for him
(where we fear they are not wanting in flattering dissimulation) for so
refreshing and unexpected a favor (so term they the Toleration) will much
more engage them to offer up their desires to God, to bless his Person and
Government. We wonder whence they have the impudence to seek of God, that he
would bless a Government loosed altogether from his Law, and Diametrically
opposing it, and regulated only by the lust of an arbitrarian: And after all,
that he would Crown such a Popish Zelot, with an incorruptible Crown of Glory
in Heaven. Can they be ignorant of the revealed will of God, that such prayers
do clash with it? Can they be unmindful of that, which is generally professed
by Protestants, to wit; That a Papist living and dying true to the principles
of the Church of Rome, cannot be saved. They would have him to think, that
Heaven is to be gotten very easily, when after all his Idolatry, Atheism,
Murder, Tyranny and Treachery (without any word of repentance) he may attain to
that Everlasting Blessedness: Heaven is not a City for unclean things. How such
prayers will find acceptance with God, let any who read the Scriptures Judge.

Upon these considerations, having witnessed against the accepting of, and
addressing for this Toleration, we come now to testify against the sinful and
scandalous conjunction of that Incorporation, which is made up of so strange a
mixture, some having embraced the former Indulgences; some having given bond to
the Council not to preach, for an indefinite, or a longer or shorter time; Some
having ordinarily heard and communicated with the curats; some having come under
sinful bonds and Oaths to the persecuting adversaries, repugnant to the Oath of
our Covenants; And others of them, having gone on in sundry other steps of
defection, and in no small contradiction to Christ's more faithful Sufferers and
Witnesses; Admitting also some to the charge of ruling elders amongst them, who
had habitually complied with prelacy, and had born the name of that office
under the Curats and all this without any resentment of such horrid courses
that the World can hear of: And so they are a corrupt mixture of all sorts of
Compliers, and Suffers these who have gone on in dreadful Apostacy, and sworn
the wicked Oaths, even the Test it self, to present their Children, to the
Sacrament of Baptism, without any profession of repentance. Now likewayes,
they must according to the Royal Proclamation have one common purse with the
Curats, by casting in their Baptism and Marriage money together, like that in
the Proverbs Chap. 1.14. Cast in thy lot among us, let us all have one purse;
But who would regard the will of the Lord must regard what follows v. 15. My
son walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy feet from their path. This
confederacy of theirs, is as the conspiring of the Prophets in the midst of
Jerusalem, like a roaring Lion ravening the prey, Ezekiel. 22.25. Can such a work
be of God, and can it stand, which has such a foundation, such a
superstructure, such measures and such workers? We must in like-manner testify
against the Constitution of their Ecclesiastic Meetings, to wit, their
Presbytries, Synods and Assemblies; In regard that they are made up of such a
corrupt mixture of members, who (for the most part) by the Word of God, and
decrees of our Church, would be suspended, if not deposed from their office,
and brought in as delinquents to undergo censure, and not as constituent
members of a Judicatory; In regard that the Accepters of this Toleration, hold
their ministry upon a dependence upon the courts of men; And in regard that
they carry on a course of defection contrary to the Scriptures, our Covenants,
and the Acts and Constitutions of this Church, And further we testify against
all that they may conclude that may be any way prejudicial to our Reformation,
or corroberating to this course of Apostasy. And plainly protests that
whatsoever determinations, Acts or Commissions that shall be given by them, may
not be interpreted as binding to the Church of Scotland.

But now to put an end to this sad and deplorable declamation, which we can say
with some singleness of heart, that only Zeal for our Masters Glory, Love to
our Brethren involved in such a sad snare, and the exoneration of our own
Consciences, has extorted from us, having no access in any other way to
acquit our selves in our duty to them: We must subjoyne a sorrowful, but
necessary consequential inference; and thereupon subsume that we cannot avoid,
but are constrained in Conscience to warn all the Zealous and faithful Lovers
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who are desireous to confess Christ before men, and
to be listed among his called, chosen and faithful Followers, who must side
themselves for him now, in adhering to his Standart when the enemy is coming
in like a flood, and the war is declared between Christ and Antichrist, as they
would not be involved in this confederacy, and so forefeit the hope of his
sanctuary, in a day when he is a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense to
both the Houses of Israel, and so many are fallen, broken, snared and taken,
and as they would not be found accessory to, nor guilty of the innumerable
evils that are either implied in, or do natively follow upon this new way, to
come out from among, discountenance and withdraw from the Promotters, Abetters
of, Carriers, on, Concurrers with this course of defection, we mean the
Addressers for, and Accepters of this Toleration, whose iniquity we have
endeavored in some measure here to discover. We abhore that principle that we
are invidiously calumniated with, of casting off the Ministry, or disowning
all the Ministers of the Church of Scotland: We hope all are not, and shall not
be so far left in this hour of tentation, so to abandon the Word of the Lords
patience as thus to forget and forgo the hitherto continued Testimony for the
Covenanted Reformation, by embracing a Toleration so plainly and palpably
eversive thereof; And doubt not but there are some of our dear and Reverend
Brethren who dare not concur in this Conspiracy, who both mourn in secret, and
are willing to witness their dislike at the sins and scandals of this course,
(as they find occasion, whom only Misinformation by the industry of our
Traducers does demur from concurring in this Testimony: But as for our
declining Brethren, involved in the guilt of this defection, though we respect
and reverence them in the Lord, as our beloved Brethren, yet out of Love to
them, and to the Souls of the People, whom they and we must answer for; we
cannot but witness against them, and obtest them in the Bowels of Christ, to
relinquish this Course, or otherwise we must warn all that would be free of the
sin of it, and escape the Judgments, where with it is like to be pursued, to
discountenance them, while they continue in it. 1. Because by this bargain and
Confederacy with the Tolerator, in the acceptance of this his Antichristian
Toleration, receiving upon certain conditions what he gives, complying with
what he demands, obeying what he commands, relying on what he promises, and
acquiesing in what he offers upon the very terms that he offers it, (which is a
formal confederacy) they become in the exercise of their Ministry the Servants
of men, and bound to please them; whereby they forefeit the honor of the free
Servants of Christ Gal. 1.10. And change the holding of the freedom of their
Ministry with Changelings, of which sort it is not good to meddle, Prove. 24 --
21. Mr. Durham in a digression of hearing Ministers Revel. Chap. 1. page 55. in
quarto: Shows that by palpable defection from the Truth and Commission given to
Ministers in their call, they may forefeit their Commission, and so no more are
to be accounted Ambassadors to Christ or Watchmen of his Flock, than a
Watchman of the City is to be accounted an observer, when he has made public
defection to the enemy, and taken on with him. Seeing then they have made such
a palpable defection from the Truth, as is evidenced above, and from the
Commission Christ has given them, they so far take on with the enemy as to
Address him, and accept of his favors, with a cessation of the war, they
should maintain against Antichrist, they must be looked upon in tantum, and pro
tempore, as having Jure forfeited the wonted respect due to Christ's faithful
Ambassadors while they continue in that defection. 2. Because they cannot be
submitted to, without consenting to the great encroachements, made upon Both
the Privileges of this Church and Liberties of this Kingdom; For they are
fixed in such and such places by a warrant from Councillors, Sherifs, etc. And
others are discharged, they are Authorized to preach there, by a power
encroaching on the Privileges of the Church, and usurping the freedom of their
Ministry. 3. Because while they are under this pretended Liberty, not only must
they keep Truth in bondage, not daring to declare the sins, snares, duties and
dangers of the times faithfully, but People are in hazard of being perverted
from some parts of our Covenanted Reformation, by the Loyalty of their
doctrine and prayers, savouring more of sinful compliance with, and flattering
of wicked men, than of Loyalty to, or Zeal for Christ as King; And while in the
application of their doctrine, they condemn such essential parts of the present
Testimony, as are the known and received principles of the Church of Scotland,
in her best and purest times; And in the mean time recede, and justify their
recession from their former way of preaching and praying formerly, who used to
preach up the Reformation, and the obligation of the Covenants, and cry against
the sins of the time, and especially the heaven-daring usurpations of the
Court; And used to pray against the Throne of Iniquity, the Kingdom and Seat of
the beast, and all that gave their power to the beast, to support that
tottering Kingdom: But now People must expect another strain in their doctrine,
and another style in their prayers, since they received this hyre of Liberty,
who to the sad stumbling of many, and observation of all are found to have an
apparent tincture of Mercenariness, while in stead of joining with the
incessant cry of all the elect for vengeance against Babylon, and the
destruction of the whore, they pray for all blessings upon the Person and
Government of a chief Pimp of hers, who knows but ere long, by such prayers
People may be induced to such a remitting of their Zeal against Popery, as to
think it tolerable to pray for the Pope, as well as for a Popish Tyrant. By
such doctrine and prayers they may be caused to err from the words of
knowledge, and to receive that instruction that Solomon bids us cease to hear
Prove. 19.27. Sure it has a tendency to cause divisions and offenses contrary
to the doctrine, which we have learned, and therefore such as cause them, are
to be marked and avoided, Romans 16.17. 4. Because as there are many terrible
Charges and Adjurations laid upon Ministers, in reference to a faithful
diligence in their Ministerial function, and a suitable Testimony concerning
the sin and duty of the time, as is well observed by the Judicious Author of
Rectius Instruendum Confut. 3. Dial. Chap. page 21. So for their negligence and
unfaithfulness herein, there are many Scripture woes and threatenings thundered
against them, and the People for adhering to them, Isai. 9.16. Isai. 43.27, 28.
Jerem. 14.15, 16. Jerem. 23.14, 16. Lam. 4.13. Ezekiel. 3.18. Ezekiel. 13.10, 11, 14,
18, 22. Ezekiel. 22.25. to the end. And therefore as People would not be partakers
of the Judgment with which this Toleration will be pursued, we must warn them
to beware of adhering to those who are palpably unfaithful, in not witnessing
against, but justifying the sins of this course. 5. Because Communion with them
in these circumstances, will infer a participation of their sin, being a
Communion in Sacred things, which makes the partakers of the bread to be one
body, 1 Cor. 10.17, 20. And an unequally yoked fellowship to be separated from,
2 Cor. 6.14, 17. Since it is such a Communion as in the present circumstances
is interpreted to be a Tessera of incorporation with them, and sign of
approbation of them in this new way of theirs. 6. Because of the scandal in
countenancing them in this way, it would be foreborn, not only with respect to
their own Consciences who join not with them, but of others also, giving non
offense, neither to the Jews, nor Gentiles, nor to the Church Of God, 1 Cor.
10.28. etc. Master Durham in the forecited disgression, makes that a reason of
forbearing joining with some, that it carries offense along with it, in
reference to the party joined with, it proves a strengthening and confirming of
him, and so a partaking of his sin; In reference to others, it either
strengthens them by that example, to cast themselves in that snare, or it
grieves them and makes them sad, who are tender of such things, and makes all
difference of that kind to be thought light of. Since then in the Toleration it
self, addressing for it, and accepting of it, there is such a manifest scandal,
there must also be a manifold offense in countenancing those; that are so
Tolerated and consent thereunto, it strengthens and confirms them, it
strengthens others to incorporate with them, and weakens the hands of these
that witness against it. 7. Because our duty to themselves yea our greatest
office of Love, we owe to them in order to their conviction, does oblige us to
withdraw from them to shame them out of their sin; and not suffer it upon them,
especially because they are Brethren, 1 Cor. 5.11. That walk disorderly
against and without the order of their office, and the order of the Church. Qui
quod sui est ordinis atque officii non faciunt, and facientes turbant: 2 Thessalonians.
3.6-14. We plead not here for schism or sinful separation; only we apply to
this present Case, the constant doctrine of Presbyterians; Wherefore we shall
here subjoyne some plain Quotations out of their Writtings, Mr. Rutherfoord in
his Due Right of Presbyteries, page 253. etc. Distinguishes a separation from
the Church, in her worst and most part, and a reparation from the best and
least part, and page 258. when the greatest part of a Church makes defection,
the lesser part remaining sound, the greatest part of the Church are
separatists. Truth is like life, that retireth from the married members, into
the heart in case of danger. So it is the major part, that has made defection
which are to be accounted separatists, and not such who stand to their
principles, tho they cannot comply or join with the corrupt majority. Apolog.
Relat. Sect. 14. page 291. says, there may be a lawful withdrawing, where the
ordinances and Ministry are not cast at, so long as People does not cast at the
Ordinances, but are willing to run many Miles to enjoy them; Nor cast at the
Church, as no Church (tho they sadly fear that God shall be provoked by that
dreadful defection, to give her a bill of devorce) nor at the Ministry, for
they love these that stand to their principles dearly, and are most willing to
hear them either in public or private. The Grave Author of Rectius Instruendum
Confut. 3. Dial. Chap. 1. page 7. etc. Allows that every separation is not
schism, even from the Church which has essentials, yea and more than
essentials, if it be from those tho never so many, who are drawing back, from
any piece of duty and integrity attained, for this is still to be held fast
according to many Scripture Commands. Next he says, If we separate in that,
which a national Church has commanded us as her members to disowne by her
standing Acts and Authority while these from whom we separate, own that
corruption. He asserts there likewayes, there is a lawful forbearance of Union
and Compliance with Backsliders in that which is of its self sinful or
inductive to it, which is far from separation strictly taken, the commands of
abstaining from all appearance of evil, and hating the garments spotted with
the flesh, do clearly include this. He adds many things will warrant
separation from such a particular Minister or congregation which will not
warrant separation from a Church national, nor infer it. Lastly he says there
is a commanded withdrawing from persons and societies, even in worship: the
precepts Romans 16.17. 2 Cor. 6.17. Prove. 19.20. Act. 2.40. will clearly import
this by consequence. Surely the Ministers and Professors adhering to her
reformation, must be the true Church of Scotland tho the lesser number. These
Soldiers who keep the Generals order, are the true members, not the deserters
of the same.

In the next place, considering how our Covenants are slighted, the obligation
of them forgotten, and they like to be buried in oblivion; We Judge we are
necessarly called to speak a word of our Covenants national and solemn League,
desiring to bless the Lord, who put it in the hearts of his People to engage
themselves to enter into Holy Covenants unto his Holy Majesty, and one to
another in subordination to him, in order to these things, that concern Truth
righteousness and Holiness. And we do testify our cordial approbation of, and
real adherence unto these memorable engagements, for we are persuaded in our
minds, that it is the duty of People and Nations, who professes the name of the
Lord, to enter into Covenant with him. It is the first and great Commandment,
that we should have no other Gods before him, Exodus 20.3, And that we do his
Statutes and Judgments, and to avouch the Lord to be our God, and to walk in
his ways, and to keep his Statuts and Commandments, and his Judgments, and to
hearken unto his voice, Deuteronomy. 26.16, 17. And whereof we have many notable
precedents in the Book of God, of entering into, and renewing the Covenant of
Israel by Moses, Deuteronomy. 29. by Joshua Chap. 24. by Asa. 2 Chronicles. 15. by
Hezekiah. 2 Chronicles 29. by Josiah. 2 Chronicles. 34. by Ezra Chap. 10. by Nehem. Chap.
9.38. Chap. 10.29. And we are also no less convinced in our Consciences, that
the obligation of our Covenants is perpetual and binding upon posterity: And to
confirm this, we shall add these few considerations. These engagements are
national promises, laying in pledge the public Faith. Certainly that promise
of the Jewish nobles and rulers, not to exact usury of their Brethren, would
have brought their posterity, under the curse if they should have done it,
Nethem. 5.12, 13. They are national vows, whereby they devoted themselves, and
their posterity to be the Lords People. Jacobs vow at Bethel, that the Lord
should be his God, Genesis 28.21. did oblige all his posterity virtually
comprehended in him, he found him at Bethel, and there he spoke with us, says
Hosea many hundred years after Chap. 12.4. So the Rechabites were bound to
observe the vow of their Fore-father Jonadab. They are national Oaths, and
these do oblige posterity, Joseph took an Oath of the Children of Israel to
carry up his bones to Canaan, Genesis 50.25. which the posterity going forth of
Egypt in after-ages, found themselves straightly sworn to observe, Exodus 30.19.
And accordingly buried them in Shechem, Josh. 24.32. They are national
Covenants, wherein King, Parliament and People do Covenant with each other to
perform their several and respective duties, as to Religion and Liberty: These
oblige the posterity, as Isreal's Covenant with the Gibeonites, Josh. 9.15, 19.
for the breach whereof many ages after the posterity was plagued, 2 Samuel 21.1.
They are national attestations of God, as witness for the perpetuity as well as
fidelity thereof. Such are these Covenants wherein the name of God is invocated
as witness, and so they are called the Lords Covenants, as that which Zedekiah
brake, and wherefore the Lord punished him. Ezekiel. 17. They are national
Covenants made with God as party contracting, which none can dispense with;
Such were the national Covenants of the Lords People renewed by Joshua, Asa,
Jehoshaphat, Hezakiah Josiah, Ezrah, Nehemiah: They are for the matter national
Covenants about things moral objectively obliging and so perpetual, Jerem.
50.5. They are for their ends, which may be all summed up in this, preservation
of Religion and Liberty inviolably, because these ends are constantly to be
pursued. They are national adjurations, under the pain of a national curse,
which does make the posterity that break them obnoxious. They are for their
Legality national Laws, being solemnly Ratified by Parliament, and by the King,
and made the foundation of their compact with him, at his inauguration, whereby
they became among the leges Regnandi. They are national Covenants of an
hereditary nature, like that of Israel, Deuteronomy. 29.14, 15. which did oblige, not
only the present but the absent, and consequently the posterity. Now
considering these things, concerning the obligation of our Covenants, the
rejoiceing that was at the Oaths of God, when they were taken, the singular
manifestations of his spirit at that time, and his testifying in his Works of
providence, his approbation of what his People did in these things, according
to his Word, by his going forth with his People and their Armies and making the
enemies to fall before them. We cannot but profess the sorrow of our hearts,
and testify the abhorrence of our Souls, against all the breaches, injuries or
affronts that have been, or are offered or done to our Covenants national and
solemn league; which now (Alas) are like to be despised and buried in
forgetfulness: Even when now they are not only nationally broken but burnt, and
the owning of them is declared criminal, by an Act of Queensberries Parliament
which makes it a case of confession to assert their obligation, particularly we
testify against the sinful, shameful, and scandalous defection of many
Ministers in this point, by their laying by these Sacred Covenants, forbearing
(under this Toleration) to preach plainly the obligation of them, to discover
particularly the breaches of them; and to mention them in the engagments, which
they require of Parents, when they present their Children to Baptism. Tho at
first publication of the foresaid Act of Parliament, many of them did privately
preach against it, when there were none to challenge it, but being exposed to
the Court censores, in their public and peaceable Meetings, they are
submissively silent. We find the foregeting and breaking of the Covenant of the
Lord, lies under most heavy threatenings, and has been punished with most for
Judgments, Levit. 16.25, 16, 17. Deuteronomy. 29.14.15, 19, 21. 1 King. 9.8, 9.
Jerem. 22.8, 9. Zech. 5.3, 4. Mal. 3.5. We cannot slight that which the
Ministers of the County Palatine of Lancaster, in their harmonious Testimony
against Toleration (of which we have spoken before) do say in the like case, if
we shall now cast by the Covenant* after we have reaped so much fruit and
benefit by it, who knows, but we may be forced to take it up again to save
our Lives.

In the last place, Because Field-Meetings for Gospel ordinances, dispensed in
freedom and faithfulness, which the Lord has often signally owned and
countenanced to the conviction of many, in the conversion, confirmation,
edification, and consolation of many poor Souls, are now by wicked and
sanguinary Laws (left still enforce, when the righteous Laws against Papists
are suspended) interdicted and discharged under pain of death: Therefore we
must testify our abhorence of this cruelty, when others are silent at it; And
signify also our reasons of endeavoring to maintain these interdicted
Meetings with respect to the convenience, secrecy and safety of the People to
whom we preach: Not daring to trust these, who are thirsting insatiably after
bur blood, nor give them such advantage as they are seeking to prey upon us, by
shutting our selves within houses. And moreover taking our selves, to be called
indispensibly in the present circumstances, to be as public or more than ever
in our Testimony for the preached Gospel, even in the open Fields. We grant
that under the Evangelical dispensation, there is no place more Sacred than
another, to which the worship of God is astricted; And that when we are
persecuted in one place, we may flee into another; And that if a Magistrate
should prohibit one place and leave all other free, we would not strive for a
spot; If we were only excluded out of one place, and not included and
restricted to other places, nor otherwise robbed of the Churches privileges.
But this is not our case, for we are interdicted of all places, and have to do
with one, from whom we can take no orders to determine our Meetings. It is not
then the place of Fields or houses which we contend for. Nor is it that which
he mainly opposes, but it is the freedom of the Gospel faithfully preached,
that we are seeking to promote and improve, and he seeking to suppress; And
therefore as an enemy to the matter and object of these Religious exercises,
which are the eyesore of Antichrist, he prosecuts with such fury and force,
vigor and rage, cruelty and craft. the manner and circumstances thereof. But
for the expediency, and necessity of our continuing to keep up our Meetings in
Fields, in our circumstances, we offer these reasons. 1. It is necessary at all
times that Christians should meet together for Gospel ordinances, whether the
Magistrate will or not, the Authority of God, their necessity, duty and
interest maks it indispenisible in all cases; If then there must be such
Meetings, for such ends, then when they cannot meet within doors, with
convenience and safety, they must do it without; If they cannot get the Gospel
in houses, they must have it wherever they can, with the freedom and favor of
God cost what it will. 2. these Meetings must be as public as may be with
convenience and prudence, especially in an evil-time when wickedness is
encouraged, and a witness for Truth suppressed. Then the Meetings of the Lords
People, that endeavors to keep clean garments, should be more frequent,
public and avowed. For (1) Then the call of God, by his Word and Works is more
clamant, for public and solemn humiliation, in order to avert imminent
Judgments and impendent strokes from God, Zeph. 2.1, 2, 3. Joel. 2.15, 16. 1 Samuel 7.2, 6. The way that the Scriptures points out to evite and avert public
Judgments is to make our resentment of these indignities done to our God, our
mourning over them, and our witness against them, as public as the sins are,
at least as public as we can make it, by a public pleading for Truth, Isai.
59.4. a public seeking of Truth, Jer. 5.1. an avowed valor for the Truth upon
the earth, Jerem. 9.3. a making up the hedge, and standing in the gape, Ezekiel.
22.30. A public pleading with our Mother, Hos. 2.2. These things cannot be
done in private, but by way of Testimony. (2) The nature and end of Meeting for
Gospel ordinances is for a public Testimony for Christ, against all sin, and
every dishonor done to the Son of God, the preached Gospel being not only the
Testimony of Christ, but a Testimony for Christ, Psalm 122.4. Math. 24.14.
Revel. 6.9. Revel. 12.11. Where ever then the Gospel is preached, it must be a
Testimony, but it cannot be a Testimony, except it be as public a can be. (3)
It is the great work of the day to carry the Gospel, and follow it, and keep it
up as Christ's banner of love over his Friends and the Standart of war against
his enemies: When now Zion is laboring to bring forth as a Woman in travel,
and made to go forth out of the City, and to dwell in the Field, and that which
will prompt to beat men out in this public work, must be a public spirit,
aiming at no less than Christ's public glory, the Churches public good, the
Saints public comfort, a public concern for all Christ's interests, a public
symphathie with all Christ's Friends, and a public declared opposition to all
Christ's enemies, which where it is, will put his Zealous Lovers and Votaries to
a public appearance for him, and avowed seeking of him. Cant. 3.1, 4. Cant.
5.7. Psalm. 132 5, 6. (4) The Privilege of the Gospel to have it in freedom,
putitie power and plenty, is the public concern of all the Lords People
preferrable to all other Interests, and therefore more publicly, peremptorly
and zealously to be contended for, than any other Interest whatsoever: And
therefore we must resolve, they shall sooner bereave us of out hearts blood,
than of the Gospel in freedom and purity, but we cannot contend publicly for
it if our Meetings be not public. (5) The nature and business of the Gospel
Ministry is such, that it obliges them that exercise it to endeavor all
publickness, without which they cannot discharge the extent of their
Instructions. Their very ^^^^nes and Titles do insinuate so much, being
Witnesses, Heranlds. Ambassadors, Watchmen, light that cannot be hid. The
Instructions given them infer the necessity of it, Isa. 58.1. Isai. 62.6, 7.
Jer. 6.17. Ezekiel. 2.5, 6. Ezekiel. 16.2. Ezekiel. 20.4. Math. 10.17. These things
cannot be done in a Clandestine way; And therefore now when there is so much
necessity, it must be the duty of all faithful Ministers to be laying out
themselves to the utmost, to give a public Testimony against all the evils of
the time, not withstanding of any prohibition to the contrary, in the most
public manner, according to the example of all the Faithful Servants of the
Lord, both in the Old and New Testament, tho it be most impiously and
Tyrannically Interdicted, yet the Laws of God stands unrepealed, and therefore
all that have a Trumpet and a Mouth should set the Trumpet to the Month, and
found a certain found, not in secret, for that will not alarm the People, but
in the most public manner they can have access; Therefore seeing Meeting must
be as public as they can be. That they should be in houses, safety will not
permit, to us to go to the streets or market places, neither safety nor
prudence will admit, what can we do then, but go to the Fields. 3. Keeping of
Field Meetings now is not only most convenient for testifying, but a very
significant Testimony in it self* (1) Against the Popish toleration: Reason and
Religion both will conclude that this is to be witnessed against by all that
will adhere to the Cause of Reformation thereby overturned, and resolve to
stands in the gape against Popetie, thereby to be introduced, and will approve
themselves honest Patriots, in defending the Laws and Liberties of the Country,
thereby subverted; Seeing then it must be given, it is certainly most expedient
to do it there, where the meeting is without its Covert, and interdicted by the
same Proclamation that tenders it; And where the very gathering in such a
place, is a Testimony against it; For to preach in houses constantly and leave
the Fields* would now be interpreted an homologating the Toleration, that
commands preaching to be so restricted, (...) with it. (2) It is a Testimony
against that wicked Law, that discharges them as criminal, which cannot be
lawfully obeyed when in some respect, it is come to a case of confession; For
if Daniels case, praying with open windows, when public prayer was discharged
under the Pain of death, was a case of Confession, then must our case come near
to it; when public preaching is discharged to us under the same penalty: Tho
to us, we reckon it as indispensible duty from these Scriptures, 1 Cor. 9.16. 2
Cor. 6.4.8, 9. 2 Timothy 4.2. It is equivalent to an universal discharge of all
public preaching, when that manner of it, is discharged, which we can only
have with freedom and safety, in a way of public Testimony; which can be none
other in our circumstances, but in the Fields. (3) It is a Testimony for the
headship, honor and princely prerogative of Jesus, which has been, and is the
great Word of his patience in Scotland, and by an unparalelled insolence
encroached upon by usurpers in our day; since in these meetings there is a
particular Declaration of our holding our Ministry, and the exercise thereof
from Christ alone, without any dependence on, subordination to, or license from
his usurping enemies, and that we may and will preach in public, without
Authority from them. (4) It is a Testimony for our Covenants, national and
solemn league, the owning whereof, is declared criminal by that same Law, that
discharges these Meetings; Since then the owning of these Meetings, and our
Covenants are both discharged together and the owning of the Covenants does
oblige to a public opposition against the dischargers, and an avowed
maintenance of the Churches privileges, whereof this in a manner is the only
and chief Liberty now left to be maintained, to keep Meetings where we may
testify against them, without dependence on their Toleration, it must follow
that these Meetings are to be maintained, which only can be in the Fields with
convenience. 4 To give over Field-Meetings altogether, at this time, would be
very stumbling, born to Friends, who might look on it, as a fainting and
succumbing at least in our contendings for the Cause of Christ, as being quite
overcome: And to enemies prove very hardening and encouraging in their wicked
design of banishing all Meetings out of the Land; For certainly it will not
terminate upon a simple suppression of Meetings of this sort, but further is
intended to extirpate all Meetings for Gospel Ordinances, in which there is any
Testimony against the Antichristian Enemy: To comply therefore with such a
forbearance of them at this time, would lay a stone of stumbling before them in
these their designs, when they shall see their contrivances so universally
complied with wherein they might boast that at length they had prevailed to put
quite away that eye-fore, the freely preached Gospel of Jesus Christ.

But to come to an end, we shall conclude with that pertinent Epilogue of the
Ministers of Lancaster in England used by them in their Testimony against
Toleration, thus fearing leist if we had altogether held our peace, at this
time, God might have sufficiently vindicated his Truths by other Instruments:
But for our baseness, judged us unworthy to be entrusted any longer, with so
precious a Treasure as Truth is; We have therefore chosen rather to approve our
selves faithful unto God, tho for so doing, we should be never so much
persecuted and condemned by men, than by our sinful silence, seem to be ashamed
of Christ, his Truth, our Covenants, Reformation, and the faithful Confessors
of Christ in all ages, although thereby we might be assured to gain the whole
World. And now having discharged our Consciences in this point, however our
Actions may be misconstrued by some, yet knowing that our witness is in Heaven,
and that God is the righteous Judge, we are hopeful that the Testimony of our
Consciences (that herein, we have aimed at nothing. but the Glory of God, the
defense of his Truth, the health and recovery of his bleeding and declining
Church the casting some discountenance upon this woeful Toleration and to
testify our Adherence to our Covenants and Reformation) will abundantly
support us against the worst of evils that can befall us, for witness bearing
to the Truth.


