THE CHARACTER OF HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS WILLIAM HENRY PRINCE OF ORANGE.

With Allowance.

LONDON: Printed for Randall Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. MDCLXXXIX.

THE CHARACTER Of His ROYAL HIGHNESS W. H. Prince of Orange.
WHEN the Almighty designs a Great HERO to fight his Battles, and deliver his
People from the Fury and Treachery of their Enemies, he inspires them with
Courage, Prudence, Constancy, and Magnanimity; and so appears to be William
Henry Prince of ORANGE, if we do but consider the Wonderful and Glorious
Actions he has performed both in Peace and War, and so affable, and of such a
sweet Temper, that it may seem a doubt whether he has made greater Conquests
over his Enemies by his Sword, than by the Charming Dispositions of his Mind;
as if he had not only the Meekness of Moses, but the Courage and Valiancy of
Joshua.

And by his Birth he seems to be destined by Heaven to be the Savior of his
Country, and of the Protestant Religion; for his Grandfather, Uncle, and
Father, were so many Bulwarks against the Fury and Tyranny of the Spaniard, and
other sworn Enemies of their Country and Religion, which they bravely defended
all their days, against Implacable Foes, to their Confusion, their Countries
Peace and Safety, and to their own Everlasting Honor and Renown.

For William of Nassau, Prince of Orange, born in the Year 1533. as soon as he
came to Man's Estate (finding his Country, and Religion, and his own Life,
through the Cruelty of Philip of Spain, in eminent Danger, the Counts of Egmont
and Horn, and Eighteen other Lords and Gentlemen, and 18000 of meaner Rank
executed on several Scaffolds; and the utter Destruction of his Religion
threatened by the Spanish Inquisition) generously took up Arms in Defense of his
Country and Religion; and having drawn several of the States General into an
Association mutually to stand by one another; after having defeated the Bloody
Duke of Alva in several Battles, bafled Requesenes, and Don John of Austria,
Governors of the Spanish Netherlands for King Philip; and the Spaniards being
no way able to withstand his Victorious Sword in the Field, caused him
Treacherously and Barbarously to be Assassinated by one named Balthazar
Guerard, a Burgundian. And thus fell the Great William of Nassau a Sacrifice
for his Religion and Country.

Philip William his Son, being bred up by the Spaniards in the Catholic
Religion, dyed without any Great Actions performed by him.

Maurice of Nassau, second Son of William, valiantly defended his Country for
Forty Years, Won Forty Cities, and Breda by a Stratagem never paralleled by the
greatest Captains; he obtained several Signal Victories, but especially the
Famous Battle of Newport, and defended Ostend Three Years, beleaguered by the
Marquess Spinola with a Numerous Army; and Dyed in the Year 1625, laden with
Honorable Scars, but more with Renown and Glory.

Henry Frederick, Third Son of William Prince of Orange, was not only as
courageous, but more fortunate than the rest; he took Oldersell, Groll, Bois le
Due, Wessell, Maestricht, Rhinberg, Skink, and afterward the Castle and City
of Breda in Four Months, which cost Spinola Twelve to master; Won Three Naval
Battles, in one of which he took 20000000 l. from the Spaniards; in another,
destroyed 40 of their Ships of War; and thus having utterly broken the Strength
of Spain, and forced that Proud Monarch to Renounce his Claim to their
Territories, he may be justly said to be the Founder of the Most Potent
Republic in the World; and under the Tablet of this Heroic Prince, and his
Royal Family, deservedly might have been these Verses,

Illustris Origo est
Principis Augusti, Qualis erit Soboles?
Resp.

Qualis erit? qualem depinxit Homerus Achillem.
Marti, and Consilio Nestora, Talis erit.
And now let us see whether William Henry Prince of Orange, by this present
Character will appear to be such; for I design not the History of his Life, but
a short view of those Glorious Actions he has performed, by which the whole
Word will better know him, than those that have stared on his wonderful
Proportion and Features e're since his Cradle.

He is Son to Henry Frederick of Nassau, and Mary of England, Eldest Daughter
of Charles the First, King of Great Britain, and seems to have engrossed all
the Virtues and Glories of his Ancestors, the Courage and solid Judgment of his
Grandfather William; the Fortitude and Policy of his Uncle Maurice; the
Prudence, Fortunate Success and Magnanimity of his Father Henry Frederick, and
with these Virtues he raised the Republic his Ancestors had saved from
Destruction, to a Grandeur able to cope with the greatest Monarchs upon Earth.

In his Minority the De Wits, who had Treacherously sold their Country to the
French, with a Devilish Policy undermined the Royal Infant, and his weak Party;
they ingratefully took from him all his Rights, Jurisdictions and Privileges
which his Ancestors had purchased with the loss of their dearest Blood and
Lives, and thereby Peace, Freedom, and Grandeur, for the United States of the
Netherlands.

When he was 22 Years of Age, the effect of the De Wits Treachery began to
appear, for the French King invading the Netherlands with a Powerful Army, like
a swelling Ocean when it overtops its Banks overturns all, the De Wits had put
into the Garrisons Governors who were at their own Devotion, and manned them
with raw Soldiers and Burghers; so that through the Cowardice of the one, and
Treachery of the other, the French no sooner appeared at their Gates, but they
basely surrendered in a Day, Fortifications that might have defended themselves
from the whole Power of France, many Months.

This awakened the Dutch out of their Lethargy, and the People Sacrificing
Cornelius and John De Wit to their Fury, he was at Dort, and afterward by the
States of Holland, Zealand, and West Frizeland, declared Stadtholder, and
Captain, and Admiral General of the United Provinces, with all the Rights,
Jurisdictions, and Privileges his Ancestors had enjoyed.

And now our Young HERO taking Command of the Army, he first valiantly repulses
the French from the Walls of Ardenburg, the Bishop of Munster from Groaning,
takes Coeverden in a Day, with the loss of only 60 Men, which cost the Bishop
of Munster much Time and Blood to master; as also Naerden, Bon, Brevill,
Lechnich, Woerden, Creveceur, Hardwick, Vtrecht, Bommell, Campen, Ellburgh,
Hatten, Steenwick, Meppel, Northom, Zutphen, Tiel, Arnheim, Dinant, Deventer,
and Graves, with a far greater Celerity than they were taken by the French and
Munsterians.

But now he is to engage one of the most Renowned Captains in the World; and
indeed whoever reads the Life of the Prince of Conde, will find it full fraught
with Wonders of Courage, Conduct and Policy: The Prince of Conde lay encamped
behind the River Pieton, the Prince of Orange with his own Forces, the Germans
and Spaniards his Allies, endeavor by several Stratagems and Provocations to
draw him to a Battle; but that wary General made their Attempts vain; whereupon
the Prince of ORANGE directs his March to Binch, but being to pass through very
difficult Ways and Lanes, the Prince of Conde knowing his Advantage, suffers
the Vanguard, and some part of the main Body to pass by him, and then silently
drawing out his Army, and putting them into Battalia, furiously falls upon the
Prince of Vaudemont, who was to secure the Rear-guard with 4000 Horse;
Vaudemont sends to the Prince of ORANGE for Two Battalions of Infantry, (the
Place where he engaged being not so proper for Horse) and has Three sent him,
and withal the Troops that lay on the other side of the River that runs by
Seneff, the French could not force them from their Post, but passing the River
a little higher, and joining all their Forces, the Confederates wanting
Elbow-Room, and the French falling upon them from all Parts, the Confederates
were enforced to retire, having lost several Principal Officers: Then the
Prince of Conde pushing on his advantage, fell on vigorously on the Horse,
commanded by the Prince of Vaudemont and put them to the Rout, and afterward
on the Duke de Villa Hermosa who commanded 16 Battalions of Infantry, who
valiantly withstood their Charge, but at last was forced to a disorderly
Retreat, and so put those that came to his Assistance into much Confusion,
whereby the Prince of Conde became Master of the Baggage of the Dutch Army.

Things being in this ill Posture, it was high time for the Young Belgic Lion
to rouse his Courage; he embattel'd the Imperialists and Spaniards in the Left
Wing, and his own men in the Right, in such Excellent Order, that being joined
by General Souches, who was advanced some hours March before with the
Vanguard, that although the French were never observed to Fight before with such
obstinate Resolution, yet he put a Check to the Progress of their Victory: The
Valourous Prince of ORANGE ran with his Sword in his Hand, and stopped the flight
of his Fugitives, then threw himself into the midst of his Enemies; so that his
Army being animated by so Glorious an Example, Fought with incredible Bravery.

Neither had the Prince of Conde any better Success in his Attacking the main
Body, or the Right Wing of the Confederates, although he charged them with his
Curiasseers, and the Troops of Horse of the French King's Guards; for the
Prince of ORANGE with a Prodigy of Valor maintained the Fight, until Nights
Black Mantle shrouded the Prince of Conde, who under that Covert made a
disorderly Retreat with his Army, and left the Field of Battle, the certain
Sign of Victory, to the Conquering Prince of ORANGE, who snatched the Wreath of
Bays that Conde had won at the beginning of the Battle from his Brows, and
placed it on his own.

I shall give you but one Instance more of his Martial Prowess, and that is the
Wonders he performed against the Duke of Luxemburg, a Renowned and Experienced
Captain, at the Famous Battle of Mons; Luxemburg was so advantagiously posted,
and slighted the Prince's Design of Attacking him so much, that he was pleased
to say, He would not rise from his Dinner for the Attempts of the rash Boy; but
the Prince Charged him with such a Manly Courage and Fury, through all the
Storms of Shot and Fire, although he was to March up a Hill before he could reach
him, and afterward through deep and difficult Lanes and Ways, and thick Woods,
that he not only made him lose his Dinner, but forced him to seek a new
Lodging, for he drove him out of his Camp, and possessed himself of it, his Tents
and Baggage.

And thus I have given you a short view of the Martial Actions of this Heroic
Prince; and will now only Instance a few of his Politics relating to the Civil
Government.

There have been many Illustrious Men carried on by the Heat of Youthful
Courage, whom Success has Crowned with Victory, that have been esteemed great
Conquerors; but all History cannot produce a Parallel of a Person of the Age of
this Young Prince, to have been so great a Statesman, and so well skilled in
the Politics of Government.

When he was declared Stadtholder at the Age of about 22 Years, he found the
Government quite out of Frame, the Laws prevaricated or overturned, and such a
Regulation in Cities and Corporations, as we lately had here in England; all
the Just, Grave, Worthy Magistrates turned out, and only such put into their
Places (tho never so undeserving) as favored the Faction of the De Wits.

And as the City of Dort first led the way, and made him their Stadtholder, he
not only settled that City, but West-Friezeland, and the City of Middleburg,
which were all in Uproar and Confusion; he no sooner appeared amongst them, but
their Differences and Mutinies vanished; the Fame of his Success against their
Enemies abroad, and the Sweetness and Moderation which he expressed at home,
gained him so much Reverence, that their Arms fell out of their Hands, the
Ancient Magistrates were restored, and all those States and Cities to their
former Peace and Tranquillity.

He never had the least Relax from his Martial Employments, but he applied
himself in that spare time in Reformation of the Government; he caused New
Elections to be made of Persons to officiate in the College of Counselors
Elect; and a New Choice to represent the Body of the Nobility; and placed Men
of Integrity and Ability to be of the Magistracy and Councils of the several
Cities; he drew up such Orders for their well-Government for the future, which
he was so far from imposing on them, that after they had debated them in their
several Assemblies, they not only Joyfully approved of them, but in requital
settled the Offices of Governour-General, Captain and Admiral General on him and
his Male Issue.

Thus this Valorous and Prudent Prince redeemed his Country and Religion from
the slavery of the Potent French King, and resetled the Government upon its
Ancient Basis, which had been in a horrid Confusion, through the Treachery of
the De Wits, and the Disorders which the French Invasion had contaminated it
withal; and in the Year 1678 that Victorious French Monarch was forced, and did
conclude a Peace with the Prince of ORANGE, much to his Glory and Renown, and
as much to the Advantage of the States of the United Provinces; the French King
quitting by this Peace, all that he had taken from them. But as if he were
designed by Heaven, not only to be the Savior of his own Country and Religion,
but the Champion of the Lord of Hosts, to deliver his true Church from the
Fury, Treachery, and Tyranny of its Enemies; the Church of England being
surrounded with Dangers, that threatened her on every side, those Laws that were
made and accounted as the Bulwarks against Popery, being all made invalid. The
Judges and Chief Ministers of State then in Office corrupted, and such as
sought her Ruin. The King himself, tho of Excellent Qualities, yet poisoned by
Jesuits Powder, and other corrupted Officers, by whom he was misled to his
great Misfortune. The Church of England being in this Deplorable Condition,
sending up her Prayers to Heaven for a Moses to deliver her, and withal
imploring the aid, by her Clergy, Nobility, and Gentry, of our William Henry
Prince of ORANGE, he pitying her Tears, and to approve himself the only
Champion for the Protestant Religion, takes the Almighty's Cause in hand, and
with an inconsiderable Force to what was raised against him, Lands in England,
and finds the effects of his Virtues more powerful than his Sword; for the Fame
of his Valor and Conduct, Prudence, Justice and Moderation, being his
forerunners, the Gates of all Cities and Strongholds opened to him: And not
only so, but Fortresses more obstinate and difficult to Conquer; I mean the
hearts of the Clergy, Nobility and Gentry of the whole Kingdom: And it is much
a Nobler Conquest over the Hearts, than the Bodies of Men. And he, to show that
his Zeal in this Expedition was only for the Protestant Religion, spurs on the
Convention of the Lords and Commons Assembled, and leaves it wholly to them to
settle the Government, and their Religion, upon such a firm Basis, that it may
hereafter outbrave all the Treachery and Fury of Rome; and that the Laws and
Properties of the Subject may be secured from Tyranny and Oppression for the
future.

I shall now come to a Corallary upon the whole: As to his Phisiognomy, it is
Martial; but though there is a fierceness in his Eyes, yet withal a Charming
Sweetness, and a little Melancholy Air in his Countenance, in which you may
read Temperance and Mildness; His Courage has been such in his green years,
that he opposed the French King in Person, the great Conde, Turene, Luxemburgh,
and several other great Generals; and not only measured his Sword with them,
but gained much more Honor upon them, than they did on him. His Patience and
Temperance was so great, that he endured all the indignities the De Wits and
States General put upon him in his minority, without a murmur: His Prudence and
Policy in Civil Government is without parallel, in the Settling the Government
and Religion of his Country, notwithstanding all the confusions the De Wits,
and the French Invasion had brought it into, on the old Foundation: And not
only so, but improved its Glory to such a pitch, through his Conduct, that now
the States General of the United Provinces are the most potent in the World.
His Constancy appears, that he was not at all shaken or dejected at the
stupendous devastation the French King made, when he first like a Torrent
overwhelmed his Country; much less at the vast advantages that great General
the Prince of Conde obtained over him at the beginning of the Battle of Seneff;
but with a Constancy and Resolution worthy himself, having born the brunt of
their fury, triumphed over it, and all their Policies. He talks not much, but
very well; and of great Judgment to discern the best advice given, whether at a
Council of War, or a Debate at the Convention of the States General:
Magnificent in his Entertainments, without prodigality. Women and Wine, the two
great Seducers of Mankind, never could entice him to the least frailty. Thus
the Charms of his Valor, Justice, Temperance, and the Sweetness of his
Disposition makes him Triumph, not only in Battle, but by a more powerful
Conquest, over the hearts of his Opponents, as the Nobility and Gentry of
England must acknowledge: So that He may more justly, than Titus Vespatiam,
claim the style of

Deliciae humani Generis.
FINIS.

