A TESTIMONY Against JOHN PENNYMAN's Lies, Slanders, and False Accusation of
Blasphemy, etc.
If nothing more had been said or done, touching that Wicked Action, attempted
by John Pennyman, of the City of London, Draper; concerning the public
Sacrificing of the Holy Scriptures, and other good Books and Writings of the
Faithful Prophets and Servant of God, at the Exchange, to his own deluded
distracted Imaginations (which was no better then Cain's Sacrifice) who Slew
his Brothers, it cannot yet be buried in Oblivion: But what has the frequent
giving out of many Papers by him against us, the People of God, called Quakers,
but revived the Remembrance thereof? Against which said Action, this Testimony
was by us given forth, ( viz.)

WHereas John Pennyman of late did bring, or cause to be brought unto the
Exchange, in London, several Books and Writings, and amongst others the holy
SCRIPTURES of Truth, which testify of Christ, with other Writings and
Testimonies recorded of the holy Servants of God, and Martyrs of Jesus; with
intention to destroy and burn the same (as by his outward Actions and
Expressions might justly be judged and suspected.) Now we the People of the
Lord (called Quakers) do declare unto all People, That we do utterly disown and
testify against that Action, of the said John Pennyman, touching the said
Books and Writings (so far as he had any Intention, or did give just Cause of
Jealousy or Suspicion of such Intention, to destroy and burn the same) and
that he therein was instigated by the Devil (what ever otherwise his pretenses
are, or might be) even by that spirit that ruled in those, who in the days
past crucified Christ, and persecuted and shed the Blood of his Holy Servants,
Prophets, and Martyrs; and in endeavoring to Burn and Destroy their Writings,
manifests, that it would do the same things now, if it had the same Power. And
we do further declare and testify, That we dearly and truly own the holy
Scriptures, before mentioned, given by inspiration, as a true and infallible
Testimony of Christ, spoken forth by his own Spirit, (which is our Guide and
Leader) and that they are written for our learning; and the Writings and
Testimonies of, and concerning the Lord's faithful Servants, and Martyrs are a
good savor to us, and their memorial i^ blessed forever. And we further
declare and testify, That we have no union nor fellowship with the said John
Pennyman, nor that spirit that now rules in him, he being departed from that
pure, meek, Holy Spirit, which sometimes he had some knowledge of: And that he
has given just cause (before the said Action, and since also) of jealousy and
fear, that he is in measure broken and discomposed in his Mind and
Understanding; nor can he have any union or fellowship with us, until he shall
publicly condemn this Action of Folly and Wickedness committed by him, and
give a full Testimony of his unseigned Repentance for the same. And we also
testify, That if any Person whatsoever shall Act or Speak any thing that is
evil, under pretense of a Motion from the Spirit of God, we utterly deny that
Motion to be of God; for the Holy Spirit of God never did, nor never will move
to that which is evil; and all evil is of the Devil. And this we have though
fit thus publicly to declare, for the vindication of Truth, and the Lord's
People, who profess and enjoy it, that the Innocence of the Upright may be
cleared and manifested, and all Iniquity and Unrighteousness judged and
condemned, and God, and his pure, holy Truth exalted, over all Unclean, Dark,
Deluded, Arrogant, and Imaginary spirits whatsoever.

Given forth the 10th day of the Month called August, 1670. By us, Who are in
scorn called Quakers.

ANd our Design and End in giving forth this Testimony, was, that if possibly
the said J. P. might have been awakened to a sense of his Condition, and come
to Repent of his Wickedness; or otherwise, to clear God, his Truth, and People
of such Works and Workers of Darkness. But the said J. P. instead of answering
our desire, in his return to a Sense of his Condition, has manifested himself
to be one of those in Restless Torment, that repent not, neither give Glory to
God, pouring out his Floods of Wickedness against us, that testify against
him, if possible to destroy our Testimony; or otherwise, to destroy us, by his
Lies, Slanders, and false Accusations of Blasphemy, and raking up, and
publishing what Evil he can against us; as by his several Papers, given out
against us, appears; thereby (rather then to answer our good Desires for him)
to work his utmost Revenge upon us, which, if his Power could reach but as far
as his Envy and Malice, would it reach short of our Destruction, Body and Soul?
in all which he has made full Proof of our said Testimony against him. And
now, on the consideration of the whole matter, the many Papers, given out
against us; the Envy, Malice, Confusion, Madness, Folly, and Wickedness therein
manifested, and the Ground thereof for our Testimony against his Wickedness;
and all being weighed in the Righteous Balance, we may safely conclude, that
in the Eye of Moderate Unprejudiced Persons, it more and more demonstrates
himself, and needs no Answer of ours thereunto, but may sufficiently serve for
his own Confutation and our Vindication. But yet, for the sake of the Simple,
and as far as possibly lies on our parts, that all Stumbling Blocks may be
removed, it seems good unto us, to give a few words in answer to that Paper of
his, in which he so Enviously charges Blasphemy against Solomon Eccles, G. F.
and the Quakers, from S. E's. words, in that Paper, called. The Quaker's
Challenge.

And first, we say in general, All Blasphemies and Blasphemers are denied by
us; neither do we judge such a man as J. P. (who through the strength of his
Malice and Envy, or Craziness of his Brain, is not fit for things of less
concernment) to be a fit Judge of Blasphemy, which is a speaking against God,
and reproaching of him knowingly and maliciously: But to believe and worship
that for a God, which is no God, is Idolatry, but both are judged by the Spirit
of Truth, and us that walk therein. Now as to the words mentioned in Solomon
Eccles's Paper, No man in his Wits will believe, that S.E. does believe that
G.F. made the World, who is not yet Sixty Years of Age; and is known to
Solomon, and us all, to be a man subject to the like Infirmities of Cold,
Sickness, and Age, as others; so that, except any be so Mad, to think that
Solomon Eccles does believe that G.F. made the World; they cannot believe him
to be a Blasphemer in that Particular; for the mis-placing of words cannot be
found to be Blasphemy, where the Mind and Judgment is not corrupt. And [mark]
it is said of Christ, He was in the World, the World was made by him, and the
World knew him not; So says S. E. it may be said of this Prophet, not leaving
out, or excepting those words (The World was made by him) which should have
been done; but if that were done, the Serpent would seek something else: this
is the spirit, that makes a man an Offender for a word, yea less then a word,
for the mis-placing of a word; but this Spiders nature will at last be caught
in his own Web, to his own Destruction.

And as to those words, whom John said he was not, John said not that he was
not G. F. but that he was not Christ; and both being mentioned before these
words, What reason has J. Pennyman, to think that S. E. should mean G. F. who
is not mentioned in the Scripture, and not Christ who is mentioned; but only to
show his Envy which is sufficiently seen, both against Christ and against this
Prophet G. F. as well as against S. E. but it will return upon his own Pate in
due time.

And whereas he speaks of G. F. owning S. E's Blasphemy in being gone to Sea
with him; the more shame to J. P. that he should imagine to have a Charge
against (...), and let them go to Sea before he charged them with it, and now
(...) a peevish manner to cry out against them, when their Backs are turned,
and are not here to answer for themselves, which is far from either Christian
or Manly civil Dealings; but things of this kind have been ordinary with J. P.
since he fell into this Folly and Madness, and turned from the Way of God: But
this We can safely say concerning G. F. who is not here; We having had long
acquaintance with him, that he has never sought any Titles, nor owned any, but
what became a Servant and Child of God; and when any such Titles were given by
some unto J. N. he bore his Testimony faithfully against it, as is known to the
Magistrates of Bristol, who took his Letters, and Testimony against the same
from the said J. N. and Company: And so, not judging the said J. P's Reproaches
worth much answer; but a few words in plainness and simplicity being (we hope)
sufficient to satisfy all that desire satisfaction; We need say no more but
this, We do own G.F. to be a Servant of the Living God, who is Redeemed by
Jesus Christ from the World's Conversation, and called and sanctified by the
holy Spirit, to bear a Testimony in this his Generation unto the Power of God;
and in and by it, to turn many to Righteousness: and whoever he be, that shall
judge or say, more of him, or any other Man, then what tends to Gods Glory and
Honor that we do deny; for it is his Honor we seek, and the welfare of all
Men's Souls, and profess our selves Servants for the Truth sake: Which shall
outlive the Race of Cain, Esau, and Ishmael, with all their Malicious, Bloody
and Treacherous Designs.

And thus we have given our answer in the simplicity of Truth; but let not this
busy mind, expect to be pursued in his restless imaginations, to obtain
Answers to all his confusion, lest we might be thought like himself; but to all
moderate unprejudiced Persons, this may be sufficient satisfaction,

Given forth the 4th of the 7th Month, 1671. From us whom the World calls
Quakers.


