A TESTIMONY Concerning the Life, Death, Trials, Travels and Labors of Edward
Buroughs That worthy PROPHET OF THE LORD Who dyed a Prisoner for the Testimony
of Jesus, and the Word of God, in the City of London, the 14 th of the 12 th
Month, 1662.

F. H.

London, Printed, and are to be sold by William Warwick, 1662.

The Life and Death of Edward Buroughs that worthy Prophet of the Lord, etc.
SHall days, or months, or years wear out thy Name, as though thou had had no
being? Oh nay! Shall not thy noble and valiant Acts, and mighty Works which
thou have wrought through the power of him that separated thee from the Womb,
live in generations to come? Oh yes! the children that are yet unborn, shall
have thee in their mouths, and thy Works shall testify of thee in generations,
who yet have not a being, and shall count thee blessed. Did thy Life go out as
the snuff of a Candle? Oh nay! thou have penetrated the hearts of many, and the
memorial of the just shall live for ever, and be had in renown among the
children of Wisdom for ever; for thou have turned many to righteousness, and
shall shine as a Star of God in the Firmament of God's Power, for ever and
ever; and they that are in that, shall see thee there, and enjoy thee there,
though thou be gone away hence, and can no more be seen in mutability; yet thy
Life, and thy Spirit shall run parallel with Immortality. Oh Edward Buroughs!
I cannot but mourn for thee, yet not as one without hope nor faith, knowing and
having a perfect testimony of thy well-being in my heart, by the Spirit of the
Lord; yet thy absence is great, and years to come shall know the want of thee.
Shall I not lament as David did for a worse man than thee, even for Abner when
in wrath he perished by the hand of Joab without any just cause, though he was
a valiant man? David lamented over Abner, and said, Dyed Abner as a fool dies?
(Oh nay! he was betrayed of his Life) even so have thou been bereaved of thy
life by the hand of the Oppressor, whose habitations are full of cruelty. Oh my
soul, come not thou within their secret, for thy blood shall be required at the
hands of them who thirsted after thy life; and it shall cry as Abels, who was
in the Faith; even so were thou; it shall weigh as a ponderous Millstone upon
their necks, and shall crush them under, and be as a Worm that gnaweth and
shall not dye: When I think upon thee, I am melted into tears of true sorrow;
and because of the want that the Inheritance of the Lord has of thee, my
substance is even as dissolved: Shall I not say as David said of Saul and
Jonathan when they were slain in Mount Gilboa, The beauty of Israel is slain
upon the high places: Even so wast thou stifled (...) nasty holes and prisons,
and many more, who were precious in the eyes of the Lord: And surely precious
wast thou to me, oh dear Edward, I am distressed for th^^ my brother; very
pleasant have thou been to me, and my love to thee was wonderful, passing the
love of women: Oh thou whose Bow never turned back, neither Sword empty from
the blood of the slain, from the slaughter of the mighty; who made Nations and
Multitudes shake with the Word of Life in thy mouth, and wast very dreadful to
the enemies of the Lord, for thou did cut like a Rasor; and yet to the seed
of God brought forth, thy words dropped like Oil, and thy lips as the
honeycomb. Thou shall be recorded among the valiant of Israel, who attained to
the first degree through the power of the Lord, that wrought mightily in thee
in thy day, and was worthy of double honor, because of thy Works sake; thou
wast expert to handle thy Weapon, and by thee the mighty have fallen, and the
slain o^ the Lord has been many; many have been pricked ^o heart through the
Power of the Word of Life, and coals of fire from thy Life come forth of thy
mouth, that in many a thicket, and among many briars and thorns it ca^e to be
kindled, and did devour much stubble that cumb^^ed the ground, and stained the
Earth. Oh how certain a sound did thy Trumpet give! And how great an Al^rm
did t^ou give in thy day, that made the Host of the uncircum^^sed grea^ly
distressed! What man so val^ant, though as Goliath of Gath, would not thy Valor
have encountered with, while many despised thy youth! And how have I seen thee
with ^hy sling and thy stone (despised Weapons as to war with) wound the
mighty, and that which has seemed contemptible to the Dragons party, even as
the Jaw Bone of an Ass, with it thou have slain the Philistines heaps upon
heaps, as Sampson. Thou have put to thy hand to the Hammer of the Lord, and
has^ often fastened Nails in the heads of the Lambs Enemies, as D^borah did to
Sisera; and many a rough stone have thou polished and squared, and made it fit
for the building of God; and much knotty Wood have thou hewed in thy day, which
was not fit for the building o^ God's House, Oh thou Prophet of the Lord, and
shall for ever be recorded in the Lambs Book of Life, among the Lords Worthies,
who have followed the Lamb through great tribulation, as many can witness for
thee from the beginning; and at last has overcome, and found worthy to stand
with the Lamb upon Mount Sion the Hill of God, as I have often seen thee, and
thy heart well tuned as a Harp, to praise the Lord, and to sound forth his
great salvation, which many a time has made glad the hearts of them that did
believe, and strengthen their faith and hope. Well, thou art at res^; and bound
up in the bundle of Life; and I know tears was wiped away from thy eyes,
because there was no cause of sorrow in thee: For I know thou witnessed the old
things done away, and there was no curse but blessings were poured upon thy
head as rain, and peace as a mighty shower, and trouble was far from thy
dwelling, though in the outward man trouble on every side, and has had a
greater share in that, for the Gospel sake (though a youth in thy time) th^n
many besides: But now thou art freed from that, and h^st obtained a Name
through Faith, with the Saints in Light. Well, had thou more to give up then
thy Life for the Name of Jesus in this World? Nay; and to seal thy Testimony
committed unto thee with thy blood as thou have often said in thy day, which
shall remain as a Crown upon thee for ever and ever. And now thou art freed
from the ^empt^tions of him who had the power of death, and art freed from thy
outward Enemies, who hated thee because of the Life that dwelt in thee, and
remains at the right hand of God, where there is joy and pleasure for
evermore in the everlasting Light, which thou have often testified unto,
according to the Word of Prop^esie in thy heart, which was given unto ^hee by
the Holy Ghost, and art at rest in the perfection thereof, in the beauty of
Holiness; yet thy Life and thy Spirit I feel as present, and have unity with
it, and in it, beyond all created and visible things, which are subje^t to
^utation and change; and thy Life shall enter into other^, to testify unto the
same truth, which is from everlasting to everl^sting; for God has raised, and
will raise up children unto Abraham, of them that have been as dead stones,
whose Po^er is Almighty, great in his people in the midst of their Enemies.

This same Edward Buroughs was born in the Barrony of Kendal, in the County of
Westmoreland, of honest Parents, who had a good report among their Neighbors
for upright and honest dealing among men, who brought up Edward in his youth in
learning and good Education as the Country does afford. He was a very
understanding Boy in his youth, and his knowledge and understanding did far
exceed his years: He had the Spirit of a man when he was but as a child; and I
may say, gray h^irs was upon him when he was but a youth; for he was clothed
with Wisdom in his Infancy; for I had perfect knowledge of him from a youth. He
was inclinable from his youth upwards, to Religion, and the best way, always
minding the best things, and the best and nearest way of Worship to the
Scriptures of Truth, and always did accompany the best men, who walked in
godliness and honesty, insomuch I have often admired his discreet carriage, and
his great understanding of the things of God: He was never known to be addicte^
to any vic^ or malignity, or bad behavior, neither followed any evil course of
life from his childhood, but feared the Lord, and walked uprightly according to
the light and knowledge received in all things. In his natural disposition he
was bold and manly, dexterous and fervent; and what he took in hand, he did it
with his might; loving, kind and courteous, merciful and flexible, and easy to
be entreated. His whole delight was always among good people, and to be
conferring and reading the Scriptures, and little to mind any sports or
pastimes, which there is an infidency unto in youth; but his very strength was
bended after God, and was separated (I may say) from his Mothers Womb, and
fitting for the Works sake whereunto he after was called.

And when it pleased the Lord to raise up the a^cient horn of salvation among
us, who were reckoned in the North part of England, even as the out casts of
Israel, and as men destitut^ of the great knowledge which some seemed to enjoy;
yet there was more sincerity and true love among us, and desires after the
living powerful presence of God then was among many in that day, who seemed to
make a great flourish, who ran into heaps and forms, but left the Cross behind
them, and indeed were strangers to it; God out of his everlasting love did
appear unto us according to the desire of our hearts who longed after him, when
we had turned aside from the hireling Shepherds T^nts, we found him whom our
souls loved, and God out of his great love, and great mercy, sent one unto us
immediately by his Power, a man of God, one of ten thousand, to instruct us in
the way of God more perfectly, who laid down the sure foundation, and declared
the acceptable year of the Lord; who indeed made the mourners to re^oice, and
the heavy hearted glad, which yet was terrible to all hypocrites, and all
formal profession; which testimony reached unto all our consciences, and
entered into the inmost part of our hearts, which drove us to a narrow search,
and to a diligent inquisition concerni^g our st^te, which we did come to see
through the Light of Christ Jesus which was testified of, and found it to be
even what it was testified of; and the Lord of heaven and earth we found to be
near at hand; and as we waited upon him in pure silence, our minds out of all
things, his dreadful power and glorious Majesty, and heavenly presence appeared
in our Assemblies, when there was no language, tongue nor speech from any
creature; and the Kingdom of heaven did gather us, and catch us all as in a
Net, and his heavenly power at one time did draw many hundreds to Land, that we
did come to know a place to stand in, and what to wait in, and the Lord did
appear daily to us, to our astonishment, amazement, and great admiration,
insomuch that we often said one unto another with great joy of heart, What, is
the Kingdom of God come to be with men? And will he take up his Tabernacle
amongst the sons of men, as he did of old? And what, shall we that were
reckoned as the outcasts of Israel, have this honor of glory communicated
amongst us, which were but men of small parts* and of little abi^i^i^s, in
respect of many others as amongst men? Howbeit, thus it seemed good unto the
Lord to choose the weak things, and the foolish things of this World, as to the
aspect of me^, that no flesh might glory, that no man because of his parts
might glory, or because of his streng^h or wisdom might glory, but that the
glory which is his might only be given to him; unto whom be the glory of all
his Works for ever and ever, Amen.

And from that day forward our hearts were knit unto the Lord, and one unto
another in true and fervent love, not by any external Covenan^, or external
Form; but we entered into the Covenant of Life with God, and that was as a
strong obligation or bond upon all ou^ spirits, which united us one unto
another; and we met together in the unity of the spirit, and of the bond of
peace, treading down under our feet all rea^oning, questioning, debating and
contending about Religion, or any part or parts, or practice or practices
thereof, as to any e^ternal thing; and we waited at time and times, as God did
grant u^ opportunities, and the more we had and could obtain from our necessary
occasions of this present life, the better we were, and the more we were
confirmed and strengthened in our hope and faith; and holy resolutions were
kindled in our hearts as a fire* which the Life kindled in us to serve the Lord
while we had a being, and ^o make mention of his Name and Power whilst we did
live, and to hold forth that Testimony which was committed to us, in the sight
of men and Nations, by doctrine, by practice, by a holy conversation; and
mightily did the Word of God grow amongst us, and the desires of many were
after the Name of the Lord. Oh happy day! Oh blessed day! the memorial of which
can never pass out of my mind. And thus the Lord in short did form us to be a
people for his praise in our generation.

Howbeit after all this and much more, which time would fail me to write of,
(neither is the purpose of my spirit bent that way at this time) we did come
through very great tribulations, extreme distresses, great perplexity, and
passed out oftentimes hungry, and hard put to it both within and without; yet
such wa^ our love to the Lord, and such fervency in our he^rts, that we rather
chused to dye, and to undergo every difficulty, than to dishonor or deny the
Name of Christ in the midst of suffering; because of that taste that we had of
his goodness and immortal life revealed in our hearts, this young man of whom I
am speaking, had his share, though but a youth at that time, of 16. or 17.
years of age, because of the Truth which crossed all the Worlds way; his
nearest Relations, even his own Parents cast him off as an Alien, and turned
him out from their House, as not to have any part or portion therein as a son,
nay, not so much as a hired servant, which this young man bore very patiently,
without murmuring or complaining, having a taste of that then, which was better
than all the World; and through conversing with his people, and among them, the
Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and the Spirit of Wisdom and understanding
entered into his heart, and the spirit of knowledge and sound judgment came to
be seated in his reins, and the Spirit of Prophecy came upon him like as it
did upon many more, through the Holy Ghosts power and operation; and he spoke
of the wonderful things of God amongst them that believed, and was one of the
first among us which the Lord opened the mouth of, to show forth his praise,
and to speak of the things of his Kingdom to as many as he met with, who waited
for the consolation of Israel, for the riches of the Gentiles, and to as many
as desired and hoped after eternal life: At last the Lord singled him out, and
commanded him to go forth into Countries unknown to him, as he did some more
besides, upon whom he laid a necessity to preach the Gospel freely, without
money, without price, without tithes, augmentations, gifts or rewards, and in
that he was as faithful a man, none exceeding him in his generation; for those
things were an abhorrency to his heart; and where he met with any such hireling
Shepherds, and deceitful workers which had gulled the Nations, and cheated the
people for dishonest gain, and kept them in blindness, the indignation of the
Lord was kindled in his heart, and the sword of the Lord was very sharp in his
hand; and whomsoever he met with which walked after this sort, they were sure
to feel the weight of his Weapon, and the force of his blow, by which many have
been deeply wounded, that they have grinned like Dogs on him, as greedy Dogs
indeed, because of their present wound and blow that he did give them; and
though he was but young in years, yet he was full of fortitude and true valor:
The Lord often times when he exercised him in such War as this, has filled his
Qui^er full of polished shafts, and made his Bow to abide in strength, and he
was as dextrous and as ready handed, as any that I knew in his day, against the
Dragon and his Power, against the Beast and his followers; and indeed he was
very even-handed, and had a special good arm, and seldom mist the Mark: God
had filled his mouth with arguments, so that he has often made a breach, a
breach in the face of an Host.

And it was my lot (which I cannot but say fell in a good ground) to be his
companion and fellow laborer in ^he Work of the Gospel, whereunto we were
called for many years together: And oh! when I consider, my heart is broken;
how sweetly we walked together for many Months and Years! in which we had
perfect knowledge of one another hearts, and perfect unity of spitri, not so
much as one cross word, or one hard thought of discontent ever rose (I believe)
in either of our hearts, for 10 years together, but our souls were bound up in
unity and peace, having the frame of our hearts bent after one and the self
same thing, to wit, the propagation of that Truth by which liberty was
obtained, and salvation received through Jesus Christ the true Light of the
World, seeing through his Light ^he whole World to lie in wickedness; a
necessity laid upon this person of whom I am speaking, being constrained by the
Spirit of the Lord, by which he was made an able Minister of the everlasting
Gospel, to preach repentance, conversion, salvation and remission of sins; and
accordingly he went forth in ^he Name and Power of the Lord Jesus the Savior
of mankind, and was an able Minister of the glad tidings of salvation, in many,
or most parts of this Land; and also he traveled through again and again, the
whole Nation of Ireland, and in some part of Scotland, and some part of
Flanders; and his Ministry ^as made effectual through the Almighty Power of
God, in turning many from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to
God; there are many thousands who are living in the body, and alive in the
Truth, who can in the Spirit of the Lord bear testimony to the power and verity
of his Ministry, in many Countries where he traveled; for he labored much in
diverse places, even in the heat of the day, though he began early in the
morning; and in the beginning of his travels and labors, it was his share to
break up rough places and un^illed ground; and to walk amongst many briars and
thorns, which scratched, and pricked, and teared; and traveled with some
other, not without great opposition; and he often trod the paths and ways
which had not been occupied in the Truth; and where darkness had the Dominion,
and was as a covering, he brake through as an armed man, not minding the
opposition, but the victory, and the good of all souls; though to my knowledge
his sufferings and trya^s has not been small, nor his exercise a little, on
the right hand, and on the left, in travels often, often times buffered,
sometimes knocked down by unreasonable men, who had not faith, loaded with
lies, slanders, calumnies and reproaches, often in weakness, yea in deaths
often, in watchings, fastings and temptations often; in straits and
necessities; in perils among rude multitudes, in perils in Idol-Temples, in
perils in Streets and Markets, where the Lord did move him often to go in the
beginning of his time; besides the exceeding weight of service from Weeks end
to Weeks end, in so much that he had seldom many hours of repose; and often
suffered by those spirits who lost their first love, and rose in opposition. He
was very diligent and faithful, true-hearted and valiant, and the yoke at last
came to be easy unto him, though no ease at all in the body as to the outward
man; for he made the Work of the Lord his whole business, without taking so
much liberty unto himself, or about any outward occasion in this World, as to
spend one Week to himself (to my knowledge) these ten years: He had ventured
himself often for the Bodies sake; and a great care I know was in his heart,
that them that he had ministered unto, and others that had believed in the same
truth, might thrive and prosper, and might walk as becomes the Gospel of Jesus
Christ.

He was of a manly Spirit in the things of God; he has engaged himself often
upon the Lords account singly in great Disputes, when there were many opposers;
he has stood in the door, and in the gap, against all his Enemies, for the
worthy Name of God, and taken the whole weight of things upon his o^n
shoulders, that others might be eased, though often to ^he weakening, and
almost destroying of the outward man, yet doing all in love to the Lord, and
for his peoples sake; he did it with cheerfulness, and it was a grief to him if
any opportunity was missed of doing good: He was a man of no great learning in
natural Tongues, which men so much applaud; yet indeed his heart was full of
matter, and his Tongue was as the hand of a ready Scribe and yet he had the
tongue of the learned, having had experiment of the Work of the Lord, and being
acquainted with many conditions which God had carried him through, he could
speak a word in season unto all who declared their conditions unto him; of
otherways in his public Ministry he was very plausible and elegant in his
speech, and indeed had the tongue of a learned Orator to declare himself to the
understandings and consciences of all men with whom he conversed, by which many
received great profit, and their understandings came to be opened; for his
words ministered grace to the Heare^^, and his words were forcible and very
pleasant, as apples of Gold in pictures of silver.

This young man of whom I am speaking, was one of the first (with some others)
who came to the City of London, where he met with no small opposition both from
professors of diverse forms, and also profane, who heeded no Religion at all,
and the way of Truth seemed contemptible, and without form or comeliness to
them all, which made the opposition so great, and the labor so hard, that
notwithstanding it pleased the Lord to reach unto the Consciences of many, and
many were pricked to the heart, so that they cried out, what shall we do to be
saved? And God made his Ministry very effectual to the conversion of many in
the City of London, whereby a great change was wrought in the hearts of many,
and many hundreds brought to know the Lord their Teacher, which are as seals
unto the Word of Life through him unto this day. And many hundreds, I may say
thousands, heard the lively Word of God declared by him, and were convinced of
the way of Truth, though still remaining in the disobedience to that of God in
their own hearts unto which he declared; and many have lost their day which
they had of hearing and receiving the things of God; for now he is taken away
which might have been a help unto them while they had time; and all such are
not worthy of him. He continued in this City very much at time and times,
betwixt eight and nine years together, preaching the Word of God, and speaking
of the things of his Kingdom to all that looked after it; and great watching,
travel, and exercise in the Work of the Lord; and his earnest desire was, That
all might have come to know God's salvation, and the redemption of their souls.
And his great diligence was known unto many, that his only rejoicing was in the
prosperity of the Work of the Lord, and the increase of Faith amongst them that
did believe; And his heart was much drawn toward this City; and often times
has he said to me when suffering did come for the Gospel sake, which he knew
would come, I can freely go to that City, and lay down my Life for a Testimony
of that Truth which I have declared through the Power and Spirit of God: Which
in the end indeed came to be his share, and will for ever be his Crown, who
loved not his life unto death for the Testimony of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And in the same year 1662. being pressed in his spirit to go visit them who
were begotten unto the Faith of God's Elect at the City of Bristol, and in
diverse other Counties, at diverse Meetings, and diverse particular Friends, he
took his leave of them, saying unto very many, That he did not know he should
see their faces any more; exhorting them all to faithfulness and stedfastness
in that wherein they had found rest for their souls: And said to some, I am
going up to the City of London again, to lay down my Life for the Gospel, and
suffer amongst Friends in that place, as having some sense of his suffering
before.

And a little after his return to the City, at a public Meeting which the
people of the Lord have kept these many years, to hear and speak of the things
of God to edification, at the Bull and and Mouth near Aldersgate, by certain
Soldiers under the command of Richard Brown then General of the City of
London, he was violently plucked down, and haled away in a barbarous manner,
and carried to the guard, and so committed to Newgate, not for evil-doing, but
for testifying unto the Name of the Lord Jesus, and for the Worship of God, as
though this were become a great crime worthy of Bonds, and (at last) death; he
was had to the Sessions in the Old Baily, and his accusers were Witnesses
against him, and them that had abused him violently, their Testimony was
received as good proof against him. And at last after two or three Sessions, he
was fined by the Court one hundred Mark, which at last was reduced to twenty
Mark, and to lie in prison while payment; Where he continued a pretty long
season, above 8 Months, with 6 or 7 score Prisoners be^ide, upon the same
account, many being shut up among the Felons in nasty places, and for want of
Prison-room, the natures of many were suffocated and corrupted, till at last
many grew vveak, sickned, and dyed.

At last this same young man grew vveak, and though a special Order from the
King was sent to the then Sheriffs of London, for the release of him and the
rest that were left in prison, yet such was the enmity of some of the Rulers of
the City, that they did what in them lay to obstruct the execution of the
Order, that he should not be released: And so weakness grew upon him daily,
though in much patience he was carried through all. In the time of his sickness
he was very fervent in prayer (and that often, both day and night) unto the
Lord as concerning himself, and also his people; and at several times he spoke
several precious words from the sensible feeling of God's spirit in his heart,
and said, I have had the testimony of the Lords love unto me from my youth; and
my heart has been given up to do thy Will: And he said, I have preached the
Gospel freely in this City, and have often given up my Life for the Gospels
sake; and now Lord rip open my heart, and see if it be not right before thee.
Another time he said when he had a little ease, There is no iniquity lies at my
door, but the presence of the Lord is with me, and his life I feel justify me.
Another day afterward he said, Thou have loved me when I was in the Womb, and
I have loved thee from my Cradle, and from my youth unto this day, and have
served thee faithfully in my generation. And he spoke to Friends that were
about him, to live in love and peace, and love one another. And at another time
he said, The Lord takes the righteous from the evil to come; and he prayed for
his Enemies, and for his persecutors, and said, Lord forgive Richard Brown, he
may be forgiven. And though the distemper and the disease was violently upon
him, yet he was preserved sensible; and in the morning before he departed this
life, being sensible of his death, he said, Now my soul and spirit is centered
in its own Being with God; and this form of person must return from whence it
was taken: And after a little season he gave up the Ghost, and dyed a Prisoner,
and shall be recorded, and is in the Lambs Book of Life, as a Martyr for the
Word of God, and the Testimony of Jesus, for which only he suffered, and gave
up his Life, whose death was precious in the eyes of the Lord. But now he ever
lives with God, and his Works follow him, and labour^ shall testify of him in
generations to come; and thousands beside my self can bear witness, His Life
and death was to the praise, glory and honor of the Grace of God; unto whom be
the glory of all his Works for ever and ever, Amen.

AND oh thou City of London! who have been a professing City of the Name of God
and Christianity so many years, must it be said of thee as Christ said of
Jerusalem, that a Prophet cannot perish out of thee: Oh how many Warnings have
thou had! and how do thou remain in obdurateness and impenitency! Oh! thou
art not worthy of those heavenly tidings of salvation which has been
proclaimed in the midst of thee these many years, by this faithful Messenger of
God deceased, with many more, who is taken away in judgment unto thee, because
many of thy Inhabitants despised and set at naught that in which the
blessedness of all Nations consists. Oh how is thy Gold become dim! and how
is thy glory stained! How is thy countenance marred! How is all thy profession
become dead, and thou like a withered Tree without sap! The symptoms of death
are upon thee; Your Sun is set, your glory is passed away; night is coming, and
darkness is surrounding you, and you shall have enough of da^kness, and your
paths and ways shall be filled with it, because you have hated the Light, and
would not have him who is the Light of the World, to rule in your hearts; but
has chused darkness rather than Light, because your deeds are evil, and in the
end thou shall be made to see, you have chosen lying vanities, and have taken
pleasure in the flesh, and have forsaken your own mercies. Repent, repent (if
any can find a place) while it is called to day, lest you be shut up in
everlasting darkness, and Truth be hid from your eyes for ever. Take warning,
cease from persecution and afflicting the Lords people, who desire to live
quietly and peaceably, and to worship God in truth and righteousness, with a
pure heart: It is too too much that you have done already; the suffering and
death of many innocent righteous men, who have suffered these Winters past,
will lie as a load upon your City in Summers to come. Remember what God did to
Amaleck the first of the Nations, and to Moab when Israel would have passed to
their own Land an^ Country that God had promised them, and have eaten their
own bread, and drank their water, and have passed on peaceably; but they rose
up and fell upon the poor, and upon the hindmost and weak; God was glad ^o
force his way, though it proved the ruin of Amaleck, and the misery of Moab.
We would gladly walk on our way to the promised Land which belongs to the
Saints in Light; we would eat our own Bread, and drink our water and what we
needed, and keep our Consciences clear (in our generation we must) to that
which God has promised; and if we cannot have a way, God will make one for us;
and that you that set your selves against the Lord, in the end shall be sure to
know and feel, though we shall never lift up carnal Weapon, nor drawsword,
neither use Bow nor Spear; for God has taught us to love our Enemies; and out
of these things we are come, and to the end of Wars, and to be for it; yet
God's purpose shall be fulfilled, and he has ways enough to plead the cause of
his people, and he will do it, and woe to all their Enemies. And do you cry ou^
of Popery because of cruelty and persecution? And will you be found in the same
footsteps, and in the same nature? Oh! let it never be said nor thought, that
ever the Church of God or true Christians did drink the blood of the Saints, or
cast them into prison; for that is Babylon the Mother of Harlots, that does so.
Therefore be informed and warned; set not briars and thorns in battle against
the Lord, neither stubble before devouring fire; for if you do, a consumption
will come upon you, and your name and memorial shall rot, dye, wither, and melt
away as Snailes; and glory shall rest with, and upon the Heads of the sufferers
of Christ for ever.

By one who has chosen rather to suffer with the people of God called Quakers,
than to en^oy the pleasures of sin for a season, or to be reckoned as a Prince
amongst the uncircumcised, Fran. Howgil.
Reading the 22. of the 12. Month 1662.
ANd as for E.B. our dear Brother and companion in travel, suffering and
consolation for the everlasting Gospel^ sake in his day, his Testimony lives
with us; he was a Preacher of Righteou^ness, and one who traveled for the
redemption of the creature from under the bondage of corruption, and proclaimed
liberty to the captives in the power and authority ^f God, and therein was a
true Witness against Oppression, and all the Antichristian yokes imposed in the
night of Apostasy* upon the persons and consciences of people; and truly and
valiantly he held forth the Liberty of Conscience, and vindicated it to the
great men of the Earth, in things appertaining to God in matters of Religion
and Worship, against the persecution and compulsion (which had its Original and
Rise from the Power of the Beast, which has made war against the righteous
seed) that men might be left free to the guidance of the infallible Spirit of
God (which is not to be limited) in these matters, and not be compelled nor
brought under the corrupt wills of men, nor their fallible judgments nor
invented forms in these cases: And the Name of this Mini^^er of Righteousness
is written in the L^mbs Book of Life; and all the Enemies of his Life can never
be able to blot it ou^, nor extinguish his memorial. Oh! the remembrance of his
integrity, uprightness and sincerity, has deep impression upon my heart; and
that tender love and affection in God's Truth which he was filled with toward
all the upright, (who are lovers of peace and unity in the Lord) is never to be
forgotten by u^ who are yet remaining in the Work of the Lord, and the
everlasting Gospel, for which he has left a glorious Testimony, the glory of
which shall never be extinguished, but thousands shall praise the Lord our God
because thereof; yea, even the Seed that is yet in the lower parts of the Earth
(where darkness covers it) and the child that is yet unborn in many, that is
curiously framed in the Mothers Womb, w^ose Members are written in the Book of
God, shall glorify the Lord on his behalf. And this testimony many have
already concerning him, that though his Body be dead, his Spirit lives in the
immortality of that Life that is immutable, and shall never dye nor wax old,
and is felt among the righteous, who walk in their integrity and constancy to
the Lord.

And this faithful servant of the Lord, and valiant Soldier of the Lamb (as in
his day was evidently apparent) as to live to him was Christ, to dye was gain:
And though in his time many were the sufferings and aff^ictions which his life
went under, and his upright spirit suffered by, both from his open enemies and
persecutors in the World (because of the valor and courage for the Truth of
God) and from deceitful and transforming exalted spirits, which burden the
holy Seed; but now his Life is caught up above them all (and is out of their
reach) in the transcendent and unspeakable glory, in the everlasting habitation
and firmament of God's Power, where he has shined (and does shine) among the
Stars, that have kept their habitations, as one that has turned many to
righteousness, and that has overcome by the blood of the Lamb, and the Word of
his Testimony, with those holy Prophets and Martyrs who rejoice over Babylon
and her abominations (in whom their blood is found) and against whom he was a
faithful Witness and valiant Warrier, whose living and absolute Testimony
therein, God has blessed, made prosperous, and will fulfill to the uttermost.
And though he be ceased from his labors, his Works do follow him, which will be
had in living remembrance and precious esteem among the upright, when his
persecutors shall be broken and laid low in the desolation and ruin of
Babylon; and all that continue in enmity and deceit, and all the deceitful
spirits that have burdened his righteous soul, shall fall, and their blossom
wither and come to naught.

And if any of his persecutors or oppressors be yet so impenitent and obdurate
as to triumph and be elevated in an exalted or prejudiced spirit, because of
his death, and in their exaltation and pride of heart say, he was taken away in
judgment, or in wrath.

To such in Gods fear I answer, That thousands of the servants of the Lord are
of another persuasion, not questioning but it was in Gods tender love (as to
his own particular) that he was removed out of the Earthen Vessel, in which he
(though a man as in the prime of his years) endured great travel in his time
for the Truth's sake, and the gathering of many into the way of the Lord, and
in which his travel was the greater (when the time of his dissolution drew
near) to be dissolved, because of his suffering (and the extremity of his
sickness occasioned thereby) which many others were partakers of, who suffered
persecution and imprisonment by unreasonable men in this City of London, for
the cause of God and of a good Conscience, as chi^fly for their meeting
together fingly in the Worship of God.

But this I testify in the Lord, as in him I have felt, that his being
removed, was in judgment from the Lord against his persecutors, who desired
and sought his destruction; and what they have done against him has greatly
added to the fulfilling of their iniquities, that the blood of the righteous
which cries for vengeance may be avenged to the utmost upon them who would not
suffer the righteous to have a being amongst men, nor lay to heart their being
taken away from the evil to come.

And they who in a biased or prejudiced spirit of enmity are lifted up because
of his decease, they were not worthy of him, nor of his Testimony, and they
have cause to mourn and lament amongst those that have pierced the just, and
slighted and despised the Messengers of Truth and Righteousness, whom God has
therein honored, and God will debase such, and their vain glory unto the dust,
and exalt the testimony and life of his faithful Witnesses over all their heads.

But we who have been well acquainted with the deep suffering of the righteous
Seed, and with the worth of true unity, in the weighty body and spirit of
Christ, and therein do behold the glory and compleatnesse of the City of our
God, which is at peace within it self, cannot but prize the Ministers of
Righteousness, and every Member of the same Body; and oh how blessed and
precious is the memorial of the righteous in our eyes! And how deeply is my
soul affected with that comfortable communion, and those many and living
refreshments that we have enjoyed one with another, even with him and others,
who have finished their course! Well, however in this I am satisfied, that
though we be left in travel, and our days have been days of affliction and
suffering for Christ and the gospels sake, (as in the World) yet in him whom
the Prince of this World has nothing in, we have peace, being come into
communion with the Spirits of just men, who are the Family of God, written in
Heaven, and called by one name both in Heaven and Earth, and the God of Life is
their portion, and his glory is the Rereward of his called, and chosen, and
faithful ones, who have dealt their Bread to the hungry, and brought the poor
to their House, even to the habitation of the righteous, where the living Bread
is received, and the Heavenly Mansions lived in, and enjoyed by all who abide
in the Truth, and retain their first Love, and habitation therein, in which
true fellowship is enjoyed, and the prosperity of the elect Seed known: blessed
be the Name of our God for ever and ever.

G^orge Whitehead.
London the 12 th day of the first month, 1663.
A Testimony of truth concerning the Servant of the Lord, and Minister of Jesus
Christ, Edward Buroughs.
FRiends, a necessity is upon me, and I am even constrained and pressed in my
spirit to bring in and give my Testimony concerning my beloved Brother
beforementioned, that it may remain and stand upon Record for Ages and
Generation^ to come.

And this first I say and declare unto all people unto whom this shall come,
That he was a man endued with the Almighty Power of God which lived and reigned
in him; and the treasury of pure, Divine, Heavenly Wisdom was opened in him,
etc. and understanding (in the things that relate unto God's Kingdom of peace
and righteousness, and in the things that concern the everlasting peace and
well-being of all mankind) was plentifully manifested unto him by the good
Spirit of God, which (I may say) he had received in a plentiful measure: And
this many can testify unto, and his own Writings which remain upon record,
will in a large measure manifest the truth thereof. And this spirit dwelt
plentifully in him, so that thereby he wa^ able to instruct many in the way of
life, peace and true holiness; and if any were afflicted in spirit or mind, by
reason of the wiles of the Enemy of their souls, or if they met with any
difficulty in their journey, as they passed from death to life, he was a man
able (through the large experience that he had of the dealings of the Lord, and
also of the wiles of Satan, having followed the Lamb in the regeneration) to
administer a word in season to their refreshment and comfort, and for their
establishment in the most precious, holy Faith; and this I know the Witness of
God in thousands must and shall testify unto, who are the seal of his
Ministry. And moreover he was a man that was able (through the wisdom and
blessed gift of God that was in him) to convince and stop the mouths of all
gainsayers of the truth, which he (with us) professed and lived in. And it is
well known unto many, that he was never backwards, but always ready and willing
to appear in a way of public conference, as in vindication of (and against any
that should oppose) the blessed Truth of God which he held and professed, and
also to manifest the grounds and reasons wherefore, we deny (and dissent from)
the National Prie^ts of the World, (and their traditional ways of Worship) and
the hypocritical professors thereof, who have not the life and substance of
what they profess in words. And these things (it is well known unto many) he
was often exercised in; and he did not go about in corners, nor creep into dark
places hiddenly nor secretly, but preached the Truth of God, and Doctrine of
our Lord Jesus Christ boldly and openly, even upon the house tops, and his
valor for God's Truth on Earth, was well known unto many, and his voice was as
the sound or rattling of the Charriots of God's Host upon the tops of the
Mountains, and was often uttered forth in the Name of the Lord, even like
thunder, and the voice of the Son of God was uttered forth through him, by
which the dead was raised; the Witnesses are now alive, let them bring in their
testimony, that the truth hereof may be confirmed. His Doctrine dropped as the
Oil of joy upon the Spirits of the mourners in Sion. His Life extended it self
as a sweet stream into the hearts of the children of Light that thirsted after
righteousness: He was one of the Cloud of Witnesses that dropped down the dew
upon the tender plants of God. He pleaded the cause of the innocent suffering
Seed, and earnestly contended with the Powers of the Earth of all sorts, in the
behalf, and for the freedom of the suffering people of God: He fore prophesied
unto them that were in Authority in the days past, of their destruction, and of
their overthrow, because of their deceitfulness to God, and their false and
cruel, treacherous and merciless dealings toward his people, who had made many
fair promises both to God and man in the time of their adversity, That they
would grant free liberty of Conscience in things relating to the Worship of
God, and that Oppression should be removed, and the like; but in the time of
their prosperity, when they were waxen fat, and grown great, and lived at ease
and in pleasures, then they forgot God, and regarded not to perform their
Engagements neither to God nor his people; for which cause the Lord cut them
off in hi^ sore displeasure, and brought an utter desolation upon them,
according to the words of his Servants, and this Prophet of God lived to see
their desolation come, (which was sad to behold) and his Prophesies was
fulfilled in his own days. And he also warned the present Rulers of this Nation
to take heed of walking in the steps of them that are gone before. And for
these things, and for the publishing of the Truth of God, and for bearing his
Testimony with boldness against all Oppression and Cruelty, he was hated of
the men of this gener^tion, but chiefly by some of the Rulers of the City of
London: He sealed his Testimony with his Life in bonds; and so they have
wilfully brought innocent blood upon themselves, and heavy will it lie upon
them in the day of account (which greatly hastens) wherein the Lord God will
make inquisition for the blood of the innocent, and reward every man according
to his deeds; then will his blood be upon you as the blood of a thousand men;
and how will you bear your sentence from the Lord of Hosts, because you will be
found guilty of the blood of his Prophets, Messengers and Servants, which he
sent unto you in love to your souls, to forewarn you of the evil which greatly
hastens to come upon you: Yet notwithstanding you have done all these things,
and the cry of innocent blood has been heard so loud amongst you, yet have you
hardened your hearts and go on in stiff-neckedness, and persist in your cruelty
toward the servants of the Lord that are left behind, and are found casting
them into prison: Oh woe is me for you! where will a place be found for you in
the day of the Lord? or what covering will you hide yourselves under? Or how
will you appear before the righteous God of Heaven and Earth? Have you no
consideration in you of your latter end? Or else do you believe that the Lord
sees not your cruelty toward his people, that you will not answer his
requirings, which is to do justly, and love mercy, and walk humbly with the
Lord, and to do unto all men as you would they should do unto? surely if the
consideration of these things was in your hearts, or if you had any regard to
keep your consciences clear in the sight of God herein, you could never do as
you have done. Wherefore consider these things, and lay them to heart, and
repent speedily, lest you sin your day away, and place of repentance there
cannot be found: For this I tell you plainly, that it is in vain for you to
strive against the Lord, or to seek to stop or hinder his work which he has
begun; for he will be too strong for you, and he will make you bow and bend to
his own Name and Power, whether you will or no. And though he bear with you
long, and suffer you long, yet his long-suffering will come to an end; and
though you should be permitted to fulfill your envious wills and lustful desires
so fa^ as to banish, or kill, or destroy us from off the earth, yea all of us
who are now in being, (which I do not believe ever shall be) yet would God
raise up another people by the same power and spirit in and by which we stand,
which should be a terror unto you, and should possess God's everlasting Kingdom
(which is not of this World) over your heads.

And in the time of his outward weakness he was heard to say, That though this
body of Clay must return to the dust, yet I have this Testimony that I have
served God in my generation, an^ that spirit which has lived, and acted, and
ruled in me, shall yet break forth in thousands; and my faith is, That it shall
be indeed even so; for we have found him a true Prophet amongst us, and ^o the
Nations. And this also near his departure he was heard to desire of the Lord,
That if it were possible, to forgive Brown, etc. And so let all Friends be
encouraged to wait upon the Lord in the feeling of the same Spirit that was in
him, (which we know is the Saints Comforter) that thereby you may be carried
through all tribulations and persecutions with cheerfulness, that in the end
you may all receive the Crown of everlasting righteousness with him and the
rest of the Saints of the most high God, and holy Prophets and Apostles of our
Lord Jesus Christ: And so the Lord God Almighty of Heaven and Earth be with you
all, and keep you all in faithfulness unto the end, Amen.

MY Brother dear the Lord has called away,
That in this World he should no longer stay:
Who was to many an Instrument of good,
While in the body (in God's great Power) he stood.
For many were from darkness by him turned
Unto the Light, in which they were confirmed
By the Power and Doctrine which to them was preached
By him, through which God's true Witness was reached,
In their dark hearts, where Satan long had reigned,
Over whom (through God's great power) Victory's gained.
He was a valiant Soldier of the Lamb,
And faithful to the Lord did always stand,
Till with his Life he sealed his Testimony,
(A London-Prisoner) as it is known to many.
But now in peace with God he is sat down,
And has with Christ an everlasting Crown
Of Immortality, Life and lasting joy,
Which never shall from him be took away.
He was entrusted with the hidden treasure
In a large, and in an abundant measure,
Which he dispensed to the Lambs of God;
But to the wicked he was a Scourge and Rod.
He fed the Babes and Children with the Word,
Which to the Wicked was a piercing sword:
Before him still God's Enemies did fall;
He never turned his back to them at all.
But now he has thus finished his course
With joy and peace, yet's Life we do not lose:
For oh dear Brother, thy Life I still do feel
Remaining with me, else I could not well
Remain behind thee with true satisfaction,
Because 'twould turn upon me with reflection.
For truly can I say, My heart is filled
With sorrow great, and grief is not expelled:
For oh! the sense of my dear brother's Love
Remains upon me, and shall never move.
But herein is my soul greatly refreshed,
That thy good savor and thy Name is blessed,
And shall remain in ages yet to come,
When visibles standing now; is past and gone.
But oh my brother dear Why soul did love
Thy Life, which not^ing was, nor is above:
For all t^ings it transcended, as to me;
In my esteem there is nothing like't can be:
Because it stood in that Eternity
Which always will remain, and never dye:
And Ages yet to come shall taste thereof,
And call thee blessed, in whom it was brought forth.
He was a man in whom Gods Power reigned,
Through Faith, in which he a great Victory gained
Over Death and Hell, the Grave and Power of sin.
And all things that were centered therein.
He was a man in whom the fullness dwelt
Of Grace and Virtue, was by many felt
To live in him, and speak in Gods great power,
And he descended as a sweet plenteous shower,
Which did refresh the Garden of the Lord,
The Plants that met together with one ^^cord
On God to wait, refreshment to receive,
And afterward in love to take their leave.
He was a man that was upright in heart
Toward God and man, and hated all deceit:
And what he was to God, there is few does know,
Neither can my Tongue or Pen declare or show:
But this I say, He was ^ men of God,
And in the Light of Righteousness he stood.
What might I say of this my precious Friend!
My soul loved him entirely to the end*
And still his Life is felt amongst the Lambs
Who in the Light and Power of God does stand:
Here he is read, here he is felt and known
Amongst the faithful, who with him are one.
His savour's good, my Life's therewith refresht;
His Name is now, and ever shall be blessed.
And now my brethren dear, and sisters all,
In this be you refresht both great and small.
Although our brother outwardly be gone,
Yet has not God the Lord left us alone;
For his Almighty Power is with us still,
Which in the Light of Life you all may feel
To your refreshment and eternal joy,
Which no man in this World can take away.
Here is our peace, herein our joy lasts still,
In which my love is to you all, Farwell,
And this is my Testimony for that man of God who has been a blessing to the
Lord in his generation, and also to this Nation: And in this I have eased my
Spirit, and am clear in my Conscience in the sight of God, having done that
which was my duty to do.

Josiah Coal.

A Testimony of G. F. concerning E.B.
HIs Name is Chronicled in the Book of Life; a righteous plant, pure, chaste,
clean: Who can tax him for oppressing them, or burdening them, or being
chargeable to them? who through the sufferings has finished his course and
testimony, who is now crowned with the Crown of Life, and reigns with the Lord
Christ for ever and ever. And in his Ministry in his lifetime, he went through
sufferings by bad spirits, who never turned his back on the Truth, nor his back
from any out of the Truth; a valiant Warrior, more then a Conqueror, who has
got the Crown through death and sufferings, who is dead, but yet lives amongst
us, and amongst us is alive.

G. F.

The End.

