TERMS OF ACCOMMODATION, Between those of the EPISCOPAL, And their Brethren of
the PRESBYTERIAN PERSUASIONS.

Supposed to be Consistent with the Declared Principles of the most moderate of
both Parties: And humbly presented to the Consideration of his MAJESTY, and
both Houses of PARLIAMENT.

By a Country Minister, a Friend to Both, a Stickler for Neither, but a Zealot
for the Peace of the Church.

BEATI PACIFICI.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Nevil, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the sign
of the Plow in Saint Paul's Churchyard, 1661.

Terms of Accommodation, BETWEEN Those of the Episcopal, and their Brethren of
the Presbyterian persuasions, etc.
I. FIrst, I take for granted these Postulata, or suppositions following (at
least until they be upon rational evidence disproved by either Party) which I
lay as a foundation to my design,

1. That all differences in the Church, (except such as strike at the vitals of
Religion, and the very being of the Church) are, with more agreeablenss to
principles of Religion and right Reason, and with more likelihood of
permanency, and stability, to be composed by accommodation, then suppression of
dissenting Parties.

2. That in accommodation there must be a mutual condescension of the Parties
accommodating, upon such Conditions, as may afford both a saving Bargain.

3. That in Religious Differences, such an accommodation cannot be made without
a Salvo to the Conscientious Principles of both Parties; neither of which can
save, when their Consciences lose.

4. That (in the Case in hand) both the Episcoparians, and Presbyterians,
(differing in no fundamental beforementioned) are dissenters capable of being
admitted to accommodation; and seeing they do, upon plausible grounds, and such
as (in charity we are bound to believe) do really influence their Consciences,
justify their several pretensions, ought to be accommodated with allowance to
both their conscientious Principles.

5. That (to omit the several particular Tenets on both sides, and their
particular Pleas for them) in general, their respective Pleas may be thus
stated.

1 The Episcoparian pleads (as his grand Principles swaying his Conscience) 1
(Not baulking Scripture) the harmonious consent of Antiquity, as the best
Commentary upon the Records of Church affairs mentioned in Scripture. 2 The
Constitutions of this Church, conformable to the Law of the Land.
2 The Presbyterian pleads (as the grand Principles swaying his Conscience) 1
(Not baulking Antiquity) the Letter of the Scripture, to which all Antiquity
must be reduced, and judged by it. 2 The Solemn League and Covenant.

6. That if what is here supposed rational to be yielded by the Episcoparian,
be neither contrary to the current of Antiquity, or Scripture, nor repugnant to
the legal constitutions of this Church: And what is expected from the
Presbyterian, be neither evidently contrary to the Scripture, nor aliene from
Antiquity, nor repugnant to the Solemn League and Covenant, all their pleas
from principles of Conscience, for keeping up their mutual distance, are out of
doors.

7. That the plea of the Episcopal Party from the Constitutions of the Church,
is of such a nature, as may, especially where it is not in conjunction with the
former, (the stream of Antiquity commenting upon Scripture) be voided at their
own pleasures, the power of altering those Constitutions (except where so
backed as beforesaid) being by Law in the hands of the present Governors of the
Church, that is themselves, and so can oblige them no further then they will be
obliged.

8. That the Plea of the Presbyterian party from the Covenant, obliges them no
farther in point of Conscience, then it stands in conjunction with the word of
God, and the example of the best reformed Churches, and (by consequence) that
they may, salva Conscientia, submit to any Terms of accommodation, which are
not repugnant to them.

9. That (in effect) the limitations of the reformation engaged for in the
Covenant; to the word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches,
are coincident. For how can it be judged, what Church is better or worse
reformed, but by the word of God?

10. That if the example of the best reformed Churches, be insisted upon as a
Distinct limitation: yet, it being not expressed in the Covenant, what
particular Churches the imposers of the Covenant judged most Reformed, nor
intimated what notion of Reformation it is, from whence they insinuate some
Churches to be more, and some less Reformed, (whether that which relates barely
to the separation from Rome, or that which relates to the degrees of pretended
improvement of one Protestant Church beyond another, in point of reformation,
though they all stand equally distant from Rome) it follows, that it is at the
choice of the Covenanters to model their reformation according to which notion
they please: or rather, that it is their duty to reform according to that which
any Protestant Church has attained to, beyond the rest, not espousing the
whole frame and constitution of any particular Church in gross as their
example, but picking that which seems most agreeable to Scripture, Antiquity,
and right Reason out of all.

11. That, supposing a reduction of Episcopacy to the Terms hereafter
specified, it does actually cease to be that Prelacy which is abjured in the
Covenant, and (in effect) falls in with a Scriptural Presbytery; and (by
consequence) relaxeth the Conscience of the Covenanter to a liberty of fair
compliance with it.

12. That however, (seeing the Covenant limits the endeavors of the Covenanter
in this, as well as other particulars, to his place and calling; and reserves
the rights of Supreme Authority in King and Parliament, which must be
understood with reference to matters Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil) no
private person or persons can be obliged to reform against the will of that
Authority, without an apparent exceeding the duty of their places and Callings:
and (by consequence) that it is the duty of every Covenanter, to endeavor by
humble applications to his Majesty, and the Parliament, to procure the best
Terms that he can for the reformation of the Church, and when he has done his
utmost that way, he is superseded in that obligation, by a moral impossibility,
being not in a capacity lawfully to act any further; except it be thought
further incumbent upon him to make a positive, or (at least) negative
separation from the Church, because not constituted as he desires: which
principle, how far it comes under the condemnation of Schism (abjured in the
same Article, as deeply as Prelacy) will admit a serious Question; and in the
decision of it, must needs touch close upon the state of the Question between
the Papists on the one, and the Brownists on the other side, and us concerning
the justifiableness of the English Church in its constitution before these
times, and so cannot safely be moved by any true Protestant.

II. Secondly upon these Postulata, if granted, I assert, [1.] 1. Assertions
relating to the Episcopal Party.
That the Episcoparian party may with safety of Conscience consent to the
Reduction of Episcopacy to the Model of his Majesty's declaration concerning
Ecclesiastical Affairs, seeing it is demonstrable, that wherein that model
varies from the former Vsages of Episcopacy in this Nation, it comes nearer to
the practice of Pure Antiquity. For,

(1.) That the ancient Bishops were constant Preachers, appears by their
Homilies, yet extant. (2.) That they had their Chorepiscopi, which in his
Majesty's model are Suffragan Bishops, is evident by many Testimonies produced
in this case, and allowed by the highest Episcoparians. (3.) That they had a
College of Presbyters who joined with them in all acts of Ordination, and
Jurisdiction, is clear by the mention of presbutrion in the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 4.14. in the work of imposition of hands; and the frequent conjunction of
the Bishop, and his presbutrion in Ignatius the great Patron of Episcopacy, in
those clauses where he requires subjection from the people to Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction; of which many instances besides these might be produced. (...) Ad
Ephesians. (...) Ad Magnes. (...). and, (...). Ad Philad. (...). Ad Trall. (...).
Ad Smyrn. etc. (4.) That they delegated their power to any other persons to act
in their names, seems most improbable. Nay there is a passage in Ignatius,
which not obscurely intimates, that (even in the necessary abscence of the
Bishop) his seat was void, or supplied (which is most probable) by none or the
Presbytery alone. For he sends commendations to his Church in Smyrna, when he
was upon his Journey to Rome, with this clause, (...), That he had left them
under the only Episcopal inspection of Jesus Christ [Ign. ep. ad. Romanos. (5.)
That if such delegation be supposed agreeable to the Primitive pattern, yet (to
be sure) there is not one footstep of a Lay-Chancellor or Commissary,
exercising Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in all Antiquity. (6.) That
confirmation, admission to, and suspention from the Lords Supper, Catechizing
and composing of Parochial differences, are works in which the Pastors of
particular Churches are most directly concerned, and therefore are most
rationally to be joined with the Bishop and Presbytery in all such acts as
concern them; may be concluded not repugnant to best Antiquity, till the person
that questions it, show sufficient evidence from it for a Contrary practice
then we have yet seen. (7.) And Lastly, that Bishops did not in the Primitive
times act arbitrarily, but according to rule, the acknowleged ancient Canons
(among the Patrons of Episcopacy (at least) whom we have now to do withal)
evidence.
All which are the substance of the platform laid by his Majesty, and much
consonant to the model contrived by his Royal Father, whose knowledge in the
nature of Primitive Episcopacy no man can doubt, who has read his learned
discourses upon that subject; and those approved by most Episcopal men, then in
being: so that I account my assertion firm thus far, at least.

But (2.) The Episcopal party may ( salva conscientia) condescend in these
farther particulars upon their own Principles.

(1.) To the reformation of Deans, Chapters, and Cathedral dependants in this
manner or the like, as shall seem most advisable to his Majesty and the
Parliament.

1. By annexing to every Cathedral dignity a Cure of souls, in, or near the
Metropolis of the Diocese where the Cathedral is, (especially where the Legal
maintenance of a Church is most inconsiderable, and most of all, where it is
impropriate to the Cathedral use:) and this Cure to be discharged by the
Dignitary in person, except in case of necessary hinderance. It being apparent,
that whatever footsteps of such a Collegiate Society of Deans and Chapters, are
to be found in Antiquity, inform us that the original of them was from the
convenient situation of the Neighboring Pastors to the Episcopal seat to
assist the Bishop upon all occasions, without damage to their flocks, when
those that lived at remoter distance could not be called in as often as he
needed them without inconvenience.

2. By erecting a standing Presbytery, consisting of such Ministers, having
Cure of Souls within or near the place of the Bishops residence, at the choice
of the generality of the Ministry of the Diocese (the Dignitaries of the
Cathedral not being included in the number, except so chosen) for the Constant
asistance of the Bishop in ordinary acts of jurisdiction which require not, or
in such extraordinary, as will not permit the delay requisite to the orderly
summoning of remoter Presbyters: There being no clear footstep in Antiquity for
the constitution of a select society of Presbyters to assist the Bishop
(exclusively to the rest of their brethen) who are barely entitled to that
Dignity by being entitled to a revenue annexed to the Mother Church; a
relation which till about Constantines time (at least) had no being.

3. By levelling all such privileges and immunities as hinder the reformation
of Cathedral dependants, and rendering them obnoxious to the same inspection
with the officers and members of Parochial Churches.

4. By taking away pluralities of such Ecclesiastical dignities, which hinder
the Dignitaries from attending the Services, which their original foundation
had respect unto.

5. By reducing the vast revenues of some Bishoprics to a more moderate
proportion, and assigning the surplussage of them, as an addition to the
maintenance of Suffragan Bishops, and for the bearing of the incidental charges
of such as are fain to attend the affairs of the Church upon occasional calls
far from their homes to Synods or other Church Conventions; and other such
uses. It being apparent, that till Cathedral Churches were built, they could
not be endowed, or privileged, and (by consequence) that in the three last
particulars, to plead Primitive Antiquity against what is propounded, involves
a self-contradiction.

(2.) They may also, upon their own Principles, condescend to a Law for the
ratifying of Ordination in these late years conferred by Presbyters, without
exacting a Submission to reordination in those who Scruple it. For,

1. That the Bishops hands are necessary to Ordination See Cades Justification
of the Church of England p. 311.
otherwise then upon the account of Ecclesiastical constitution for orders
sake, will be hard to evidence from Scripture or pure Antiquity.

2. That Ordaining of Presbyters by Presbyters, by the Bishops license, (as in
the case of the ancient Chorepiscopi) and in the necessary absence, or want of
Bishops (as Augustine and Ambrose testify concerning the practice in Egypt,
and particularly at Alexandria) has been of great Antiquity in the Church: and
certainly if leave or absence of the Bishop render it lawful for Presbyters
alone to ordain, it will follow that there is a radical and fundamental power
of Ordination in Presbyters, for else a Bishops leave or absence might as well
empower a mere Laick to give orders, which was only restrained for Orders sake,
as was said before.

3. That Arch. B. Bancroft and the rest of his Brethren, who admitted the
Scottish Bishops to consecration, required not their reordination: and surely
they were not ignorant of what plea's lay against it from Antiquity.

4. That in the Judgment of two or three late learned Prelates, Pr. of Armagh,
Browning, and it is said, Morton.
the greatest, if not only, blame with which Presbyteriall Ordination can be
charged in England, is, that it was done schismatically. But it will be very
hard to prove, that (according to the sense of Antiquity) Ordination is eo
nomine null, because performed by persons under a Schism. Nay our own Mason de
Minist. Augl. See validity of Ordination of the Ministers of the Reformed
Churches by F. Mason.
proves that Schism in the Consecrator does not null the Consecration of
Bishops, out of Antiquity; and (though he be no friend to Ordination by mere
Presbyters in England, though he justify it in foreign Churches, yet) there
is par ratio in both, as to this case, I mean scismatical consecration of
Bishops, and ordination of Presbyters.

(3.) They may also, without wrong to their Principles, give consent to a more
regular election and equal constitution of Synods, which with the impress of
Sovereign Authority are the ordinary Legal original of Church-Constitutions,
and those in whom (by representation, as the whole body of the People in an
House of Commons) the whole body of the Clergy do choose the Laws they will be
governed by. And under this head, it is supposed, No cogent reason from
Scripture or Antiquity can be given, why they may not consent to these
regulations following, or the like.

1. That all members of Convocation (except the Bishop himself, whose claim by
virtue of his office is not denied to be of great Antiquity, if the authority
of ancient Councils be allowed) being but Presbyters, may submit to an equal
election with the Clerks of Convocation except (which I think cannot be proved)
there be any footsteps in pure Antiquity priviledging one Presbyter beyond
another without election to sit in a Synod, and make Laws for the Church.

2. That if Cathedral members sit as representers of distinct Collegiate bodies
they belong to; either the number of them be lessened, or the number of Clerks
Elective be augmented to overballance them; it seeming unequal, that the Clerks
who represent the whole Clergy, should be liable to be outvoted by the number
of those, who, whatever burdens they lay upon their brethren and the Churches
under them, are by the privilege of their society little concerned in them
themselves.

3. That seeing the late dissolution of Government has exposed us to so many
Schisms in the Church, and factions in the State, and the animosities
occasioned by them are yet too flagrant among us; so that it may rationally be
supposed, our mutual heats may hinder us from all reconciliation by the debates
and conclusions of a Synod constituted of mere Natives; there be some course
taken (as in the Synod of Dort) to call in the assistance of some foreign
Reformed Divines, by way of advice, not jurisdiction; who being uninterested in
our quarrels, may be able to suggest better expedients for our accommodation,
then our passion and prejudice will suffer us to light on our selves. This
proposal is bottomed upon the use the ancients made of General Councils, which
seeing we cannot now have, it seems but equal, that when like causes call for
foreign advice, the same course be followed as near as it may.

4. That canvasing for voices by Apparitors, etc. be forbidden, and the present
way of summoning Ministers to such election by Apparitors which gives them
advantage so to do, and opportunity to leave those unsummoned whose votes they
doubt of, may be changed into a public proclamation in all Market Towns, or
the like, as shall seem best to Authority.

5. That no Proxy votes be admitted, except upon oath made, that the persons
deputing their Proxies are hindered from giving their attendance by some
necessary impediment.

6. That all elections be made upon such days as may not necessitate the
Ministers that live at distance to an inconvenience in reference to their Lords
day labors: and in such places as are near the Center of every Diocese, that
Ministers from all parts may attend them with less inconvenience.

These last-mentioned particulars carry so much equity in the front of them,
that it is not to be supposed, any one will think it needful to appeal to the
practice of the ancient Church concerning them: or if they should, it were no
difficult matter to derive sufficient countenance for them from the records of
ancient Councills.

(4.) Nor is there any thing to scruple their Conscience in the granting it,
from Scripture, or pure Antiquity, but rather much to induce them thereunto, in
case it be farther desired, That an abstract be made of all Ecclesiastical Laws
in force, and published, that all men may know when they are, or are not
obnoxious to Ecclesiastical Censures: and those litigations occasioned by the
dispersion of them in so many Books (too many already, but likely to be vastly
multiplied, in case the conceit of some great Churchmen now in being, hold
good, that a great part of the Canon Laws is still in force) no more turn
Ecclesiastical Iudicatories into Courts of Common Pleas. And that visitation
Articles upon which Churchwardens are sworn to present, be confined both in
number and quality to such a proportion, and nature, as they may safely swear
to.

(5.) Nor will it, to any one that considers how severe the ancient
discipline of the Church was, in cases of Scandal, and how indulgent in matters
of Scruple, be thought repugnant to their principles before mentioned, if they
be desired to make the yoke of Church censures heavier for Scandalous
Non-conformists to the Laws of God, then scrupulous Non-conformists to the Laws
of the Church, and take care that they be executed with a like difference.

(6.) Nor will it be a matter of Conscience, if upon the preceding
Consideration, it be desired, that bare nonconformity in circumstantialls,
where it is not joined with open contempt of authority, or an evident fomenting
of Schism and Faction, may not expose a Ministers station and Livelihood to
such hazards as formerly.

(7.) But rather, that the few Controverted Ceremonies be laid aside
altogether, that they may be no more a Shibboleth or note of distinction,
between Minister and Minister: nor expose the most conscientious persons (who
are the only persons apt to scruple in such cases) a prey to malicious
prosecutors, who are upon all occasions apt to make the neglect of them an
occasion of disquieting those Ministers, whose doctrine disquiets their lusts.

(8.) And seeing the strict observation of the Lords day, in the performance of
public and private duties of religion, is found by experience to conduce very
much to the promoting of knowledge and piety where it is so observed; and
ignorance and licentiousness where it is neglected; it is supposed they need
not scruple, (though possibly not upon the same ground, which the Presbyterians
plead (the morality of the day,) yet (at least) by an Ecclesiastical
constitution) to enjoin it. To be sure, if Scripture and Fathers, (as some
think) be not so severe, as to require a total abstinence from secular
employment, and recreations on that day, yet there is nothing in them against
the practice of such an abstinence in order to religious ends.

(9.) It is hardly to be imagined, that conscience can find so much in
Scripture or Antiquity, for the Justification of the whole frame of the English
Liturgy, and the forms of Ordination, etc. as that they shoold rationally
conclude it a Sin to make any alterations of mis-translations or inconvenient
expressions, the main body and bulk of them being preserved, which few quarrel
at.

(10.) Lastly, the multitude of holy days (as they are called) yet remaining,
is under the same disputableness, as to their foundation in pure Antiquity, and
so may (even with safety to their principles) be lessened.

I have not multiplied all these heads, as if I thought it unpossible to
accommodate the Presbyterians upon any easier Terms, or because I think it
necessary they should insist upon every punctillio of these Proposals. Nay,
some of them may possibly be already sufficiently secured in law for ought I
know, (who confess my self not much versed in that kind of reading;) and so it
may be superfluous to desire them. However, in case such provision be already
made, it were but meet, for satisfaction of those who desire it, that it be
made appear where, and how that provision is made; and that assurance be given,
that such Laws shall be better executed for the future then heretofore. And I
have this charity for the Presbyterian Ministers, that I am persuaded some very
few additions to the model, and concessions of the Kings Declaration, and those
barely useful to render them practicable; will reconcile the most of them to
their Brethren, and render them most entirely one with them. And what pity
would it be to cast off so considerable a number of learned, orthodox,
peaceable and powerful Preachers from public employment in the Church, for not
complying in the utmost extremity to those things, which may be more safely
indulged by the professed principles of their Governors, then they can be
practiced by theirs? And let it be seriously considered, whether if St. Peter,
and St. Paul, and the rest of the Apostles, who dealt so moderately in the
first Synod at Jerusalem, in a question of as great or greater importance then
any before mentioned, would, if they were now in England, not very much condemn
the violent principles and actings of some persons, who profess to succeed
them. Surely if to become all things (lawful) to all men that we may win some,
be an Apostolical practice, and commended in the Scripture to our imitation as
it is, that Principle that will not allow men to become any thing (though never
so lawful upon their own declared grounds) to so considerable a number of their
conscientious Brethren, is neither commendable nor Apostolical. But it may be,
the fault is on the other side. It is not meet the Episcoparian should (become
all things) to them, and they comply in nothing with them again. Very true; it
is not. And therefore, in the next place, upon the former postulata, as they
refer to the Presbyterian party, I proceed to Assert,

2. Assertions relating to the Presbyterian Party.
Secondly, That the Presbyterians may (salva conscientia).

[1.] (In reference to Church Government.)

1. Admit (at least Jure humano, as an Officer of Ecclesiastical constitution,
or as deputed by the Kings Majesty, and by virtue of his acknowledged
Supremacy) a single Person to preside over the Presbytery, of such or such a
convenient Precinct, as a Master of a College over his Fellows. For though the
Scripture do not (according to their grounds) appoint any such Officer, yet it
does not forbid the Constitution of such an one by the Church or Magistrate for
more regular managery of affairs: and it is doubtful (at least) whether such
an one were not admitted into the Church (for the remedy of Schism) as Jerome
says, before the death of St. John.

2. It need not scruple their Consciences by what name (so it be a name of
honor and reverence) he be called; whether Father, or President, or Moderator,
or Super-intendent, or Bishop. And if the Favor of Princes to this
Ecclesiastical Title, add another of Civil Dignity, I know not but they may
without scruple call him by that Name; as when an Earldom (as lately it fell
out in England, in a Noble Family) devolves upon a Minister of the Gospel, I
think, Right Honorable, and Your Lordship, does nevertheless belong to him,
because he is a Minister. It appears not to me, but the lawfulness of the
Titles of Master, and Father given to Ministers, is as disputable from the
Scripture, as that of My Lord. Though it little becomes Ministers to strive for
them, or be offended with those that scruple to give them.

3. Nor need it be a scruple of Conscience, that such a person is continued in
his Chair for Term of life, or quamdiu been se gesserit, and is not chose anew,
on every occasion of public meeting. For in this the Scripture I think (as to
any positive determination) is deeply silent, and Antiquity favors not the
later constitution at all, as far as I understand.

4. If this Person have large and ample Revenues beyond his Brethren, allowed
him, suitable to a Governor deputed by Authority, and to maintain the dignity
of his place, etc. (though it be true, that too large Incomes to Officers of
the Church, are but baits of Ambition, and temptations to supercilious Lording
and domineering over the Flock) I think need not scare the Conscience of any
man from accommodation; seeing Scripture determines not the exact proportion of
Maintenance which the Governors of the Church may require, and no more! and (if
a learned and leading man of that side which goes for Presbyterian, M. B. on
the Worcest. Petition.
say true) so large sums in Cyprians time, and Farms and Lands, were at the
Bishops disposal, that some of them complained of the burden of managing
them. And how much they allowed themselves, or the Church allowed them out of
those vast sums, who can tell?

5. Nor does the Constitution of Deans and Chapters, nor their Revenues (as
they are a kind of Collegiate preferments, for the encouragement of eminent
Divines, and in case they were so modelled as their influence might be less in
Ecclesiastical affairs, farther then they are elected by the Clergy, ut supra)
offer any violence to the forementioned Principles of a Presbyterian
Conscience; For neither Scripture, Antiquity, nor Covenant, forbid or exclude
such Societies or their Endowments, under that notion. Yea in the late times,
when some of those in power stiffly pleaded the Covenant for extirpation of
them, to justify Sacrilege, the Dean and Prebends of Christ's Church in
Oxford, would not be persuaded to believe themselves concerned in that Article,
because they stood barely in a Collegiate Capacity.

6. Nor is it a matter of Conscience to those of that judgment, who are not
Ordained already, to submit to Episcopal Ordination, whiles they admit a
competent number of Presbyters to lay on hands with them. Nay some of them (it
seems) are so far satisfied in it, that seeing the Law requires it of them, and
diverse of their people Episcopally minded, scruple the lawfulness of their
adminstrations without it, they do submit to super-induce it upon their former
Ordination; Nor need any one of Presbyterian Principles, refuse the imposition
of Episcopal hands, because the Scripture seems to invest a Presbytery with
it. For Bishop includes Presbyter, and he, (being not only a Bishop, but a
Presbyter) with his assistants, make a Presbytery.

7. The want of ruling Elders, which have been pleaded for as necessary
Officers of the Church, need not stick with their Consciences, if the
Churchwardens were well chosen annually, and conscientious in their offices,
and encouraged by the Bishops so to be. For who sees not that ( mutato nomine)
a Churchwarden is a plain Lay-Elder, as the Over-seer of the poor is a
Scripture-Deacon, (at least as to one part of his office, if the Episcoparian
be not satisfied that that is all) and annual, or not annual, where Scripture
is silent in determining, should make no difference,

8. Nor need they be disturbed upon a Conscientious account, if (while acts of
Jurisdiction run in his name, with the express consent of his Clergy or
Presbytery) such as merely relate to matter of Order, suppose the tacit
consent of the Presbytery, and (for expedition sake, and ease to the Ministers
assistant to him, whose occasions would be too much entrenched upon, if in
every such matter they should be Convened) run in the Bishops name only: For
such a power must be placed somewhere, during the Intervals of Presbyterian
Assemblies, even where they are settled most to the mind of the Patrons of
Presbytery; and comes under the rule of the Apostle, that all things be done
decently and in order. And if any, (extra Consessum Presbyterorum) why not in
the Bishop, as well as any other?

9. That some Underofficers, as Notaries and Messengers, etc. necessary for
the carrying on of Government, be allowed, is so far from clashing with
Presbyterian Principles, that the only thing that they have cause to complain
of herein, is that they are too often not so honest as they should be; and that
they are not maintained out of a public purse (rather then by occasional fees)
which were the more likely way to make and keep them so.

10. The Presbyterian Conscience picks no quarrel at the jurisdiction which the
Law places in the Bishop and his Chancellors, and other Civilians acting under
him in cases of Testaments and Marriages, as being merely assumenta, things
annexed to, and not properly parts of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

[2] In reference to Liturgy, habit of Ministers, Ceremonies, and Festivals,
Presbyterian Principles may admit, as I suppose,

1. The lawfulness of an imposed Form of Prayer (in Thesi) and the convenience
of it in reference to the essential parts of sacred administrations; and (in
Hypothesi) the lawfulness and compleatness of the Form established in this
Church, in reference to such Administrations, with very little alteration in
any thing of moment.

2. That diverse other parts of the Service established are very good, and
edifying, and (with liberty to forbear some passages which are offensive to
their people, till they be amended) may be when required, prevailed with to use
so much of it, as will declare them unwilling, upon this point, to break with
their Brethren. For they know, that some forms have Scriptural warrant; and
(therein) other forms a Scriptural precedent, and (upon that account) none
unlawful, farther then they contain something anti-Scriptural in their
composition.

3. They are sensible, that it is the mind of the Holy Ghost in the Scripture,
that all Sacred Duties, especially in Solemn Assemblies, should be performed
with the greatest reverence; and that God must be glorified with the body as
well as the spirit; and therefore have only a quarrel at such Ceremonies as are
only enjoined upon the account of significancy, and do not naturally (as
circumstances requisite to the Worship in hand) emerge from the quality
thereof; for with such as these, upon the grounds mentioned, they are perfectly
friends.

4. They so well know, that an unlimited liberty of habits, gives a Temptation
to Ministers to cloth themselves a la mode, and so, many times to conform
themselves to the common extravagancies of undecent fashions, and thereby lose
that reputation of gravity which should adorn the Ministerial function in the
eyes of the world, and therefore cannot but judge it agreeable to Scripture,
that that liberty be restrained, by the enjoining of grave and comely garments,
and it is believed, they forbear some of those enjoined in the Canon it self,
not from a principle of faction and singularity, but only because the long
disuse of them, has rendered them somewhat uncouth in the eyes of their people,
and they are unwilling to let others (who upon some accounts may do it with
less offense) render them more familiar by their use, before they take them up:
only they scruple the use of vestments peculiarly appropriated to divine
Service, as thinking them proper to the old Law, and abolished with it.

Lastly, they may (notwithstanding their persuasion, that no power on earth can
make any portion of time intrinsecally holy) admit the observation of those
eminent Festivals of the Church, that tend to the keeping in remembrance the
Birth, Circumcision, Baptism, Resurrection and Ascension of our blessed
Savior, and the descending of the holy Ghost, as they do other Anniversary
thanksgivings, appointed by Public Authority; so as no obligation be declared
to lie upon the Conscience to observe them, from any peculiar holiness in
those, more then in other days; and others abolished or left indifferently to
be observed or omitted.

I am very confident, that very few of that Party which they call Presbyterian,
will find themselves concerned in Conscience to dispute the lawfulness of many
(if any) of the forementioned Concessions (as here stated) in order to a
friendly accommodation. And am also so charitable to those of the soberer sort
of Episcoparians, as to think that upon a public Declaration, that they can
yield thus far, and intend not to start new scruples, when these here mentioned
are satisfied; (which I perceive is the jealousy that contributes much to the
continuing our distances, whiles the ruling Party are suspicious that if once
they begin to abate, the others for whose sake they do it will grow
unreasonable in their demands, and think to make use of one Concession, as an
Argument to prevail for another in infinitum) they would advance nearer toward
them. And hereby (unquestionably) those Brethren may, either expect to be
gratified in their desires, or render the persons that deny them before God and
the world, inexcuseable, if they would generally agree on the Terms on which
they will be satisfied, and solemnly declare that upon the Concession of them,
they will acquiesce, without disturbing the peace of the Church. And indeed it
seems but reasonable that this should be required of them; that so their
Governors may be assured that they have no reserves in ambuscado to disturb
them afresh, when the main body of their scruples is disbanded and dismissed
the Field. And I have taken this pains of purpose, (not to prescribe to the
Reverend Fathers and Brethren of the one, or the other persuasion, my own
conceptions as a just standard or balance by which the Articles of
Accommodation must necessarily be measured or weighed out: but) partly, to
excite them, by a kind of Pattern, how imperfect soever, (drawn out of those
Notions which by Books or Discourses I have taken up concerning the main
differences between them, and the Principles upon which they are engaged to
maintain their contrary Assertions) to do something more perfect themselves of
the like nature: And partly, with all submission and reverence, to set before
those in Public Authority, if the Parties themselves will not, in what way
they may quickly put an end to these strifes and divisions; to wit, by
requiring them severally (each side for themselves) to state the utmost of
their demands and desires, and the utmost of the Concessions and Condescentions
which they can with a safe Conscience yield each other upon those demands;
together with the grounds upon which they can go no farther; taken from the
publicly owned Rules and Principles by which they will be tried in
Concernments of this Nature: and (upon the whole matter) make themselves Judges
in the case, and compound the difference so, as it may offer least violence to
those Principles of Conscience on either hand. For certainly, what Persons or
Parties soever shall upon other Principles then those of Conscience, or farther
then those Principles by which their Conscience is governed do require, keep
open our wounds, and obstruct a Christian and Charitable Accommodation; will
ipso facto, declare themselves guilty of a Schismatical Design in the Church,
for some base and unworthy ends, and justly expose themselves to the jealousy
of the Magistrate, as those that nurse a Principle of new disturbances to the
State upon that account.

FINIS.

