THere be four Heads of Reasons by which the absolute necessity of a Religious
Correspondency between the Godly Party of this Commonwealth and foreign
Protestants, may be made manifest.

1. The first is taken from the truth of our Christian Religion whereof we make
profession. 2. The second from the present sad condition of the Churches. 3.
The third from the universal danger of the Public States of Protestants. 4.
The fourth from the peculiar and weighty Engagements under which the Godly
party of this Nation does stand for the performance of this duty, more then any
people of the world.
Of the first.
IN the truth of our profession of Christianity, there be four things which
oblige us mainly to maintain a Religious Correspondency with our Brethren of
the same profession in foreign parts.

1. First the Substantials wherein the truth of the Profession does consist. 2.
Secondly the Ends for which the graces and gifts of God are given to us, in the
truth, and received by us. 3. Thirdly the Means by which we may attain to these
ends.
1. The truth of our profession does consist in the soundness of the Doctrine
of Faith, and in the holiness of the life of the professors, Tit. 1. 1, 3, 8,
9. to advance and maintain both these toward one another, and toward all men:
the professors of Christianity are obliged by the special commandment of God
concerning the communion of Saints, which consists not only in the conjunction
of Believers, to strive together for the Faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1. 27. Jude
3. but also in a real endeavor by prayers to strive one for another, Ephesians. 6.
18. and in the communication of their gifts and graces, to provoke one another
unto love, and to good works, Heb. 10. 24. Now these endeavors cannot possibly
be put forth by us, except ^ome Religious Correspondency for the maintaining of
Truth and Holiness be intended and upheld amongst Protestants, therefore such
a Correspondency is absolutely necessary to be minded by us; and if we mind it
not, it is evident that we come short* of a fundamental duty, and fall under
the guilt of breaking the Communion of Saints; of neglecting the fight for the
faith, and of carelessness to provoke others unto love and good works, which
God will certainly require at our hands, if we continue to do so, having so
great cause and so much opportunity to do otherwise.

2. The End for which God does give the gifts and graces of his Spirt unto the
Saints; is, that the members of the body of Christ should profit thereby one
toward another, 1 Cor. 12. 7* and that they should trade therewith to gain
more graces for themselves, Luke 19. 12. 13. Mat. 25. 14. but it is no more
possible to do this without maintaining an intercourse of spiritual
Correspondency one with another, then it is possible to the dis joynted member
of a natural body, to conveigh blood and nourishment each to other. Therefore a
course of religious Correspondency is absolutely necessary for this cause also:
and if this be not intended, Gods aim in giving his gifts unto his Saints and
Churches is not fulfilled, and he will certainly deprive such of the gifts
which they have received, who continue under the guilt of not making a right
use thereof. For if the end of Gods giving should be answered by our receiving,
then we are bound in conscience to receive grace only for the advancement of
his glory, 1 Cor. 10. 31. and of our mutual edification, 1 Cor. 14. 26* and
Romans 14. 19. and 15. 2. and if these two Ends are so subordinate one to
another, that God cannot be glorified otherwise by us, then by this, that we
bring forth much fruit one toward another, Joh. 15. 6 (for our good cannot
reach to him as David says, Psalm. 16. 2. but to the Saints that are in the
earth, and to the excellent ones in whom ought to be all our delight ibid. v.
3.) then it will follow that the main use of all grace, is the improvement
thereof toward others. But it is not possible to intend this improvement of
our goodness toward the Saints for mutual edification, except we use means
to know one another spiritual condition by some course of spiritual
Correspondency; therefore such a Correspondency is wholly necessary to be
settled and entertained, if we will not deprive God of his glory, and the Saints
of the interest which they should have in us by the right use of our Talents
toward them.

3. The Means by which these Ends are to be attained, is to endeavor to keep
the Unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, which we are commanded, and by
many reasons exhorted to do, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6. Now this endeavor being the
effect immediately flowing from Charity, which is the chief edifying grace as
appears by 1 Cor. 8. 1. and chap. 3. p. totun. and Ephe. 4. 15, 16. And
seeing Charity cannot be maintained, nor edification advanced, nor the unity of
the Spirit upheld, except there be an eddeavour put forth to take notice of one
another state; therefore a Correspondency for mutual intelligence in
spiritual matters tending to unity and peace in the profession of the Truth,
is a thing absolutely necessary amongst such as intend sincerely to uphold the
Truth of the Gospel-profession; or if they intend it not, it is evident that
they come short of the fundamental duty of the life of Christianity, by
neglecting the means of mutual edification wherein God is chiefly glorified;
and such as continue in this neglect, and order not their way aright in the
profession of the Gospel, shall never see the salvation of God, Psalm. 50. 23.

Of the Second.
THe present condition of the Churches comes under a twofold Consideration,
the one is in respect of themselves, the other is in respect of their common
Adversaries.

The Churches considered within themselves, are found to be in their particular
relations, not only for the most part at a distance, and strangers to each
others affairs; but many of them are even at open defiance and opposition to
one another welfare, which is the more to be blamed and lamented not only
because this behavior is directly oppo^^te to the truth of the profession of
Christianity, to Gods end in giving, and our duty in receiving gifts and
graces; and to the means appointed to reach the ends we are bound to prosecute;
but because this mis-behaviour seems to me even contrary to common sense and
reason, so that it may be wondered at how it falls out amongst intelligent men,
that their understandings in fundamental matters of Faith being so fully
consonant, their affections should be so far dis-sonant: and again in matters
of duty, their conscience being for the main bound up to one and the same Rule,
which is the word of God; how they should be at so much division and strife
about the application of that Rule unto lesser matters. Furthermore it is no
small wonder unto me, that they having the Oracles of God, and there in two
Rules of scriptural Interpreration prescribed, viz. the Analysis of the Text,
and the Analogy of Faith; that the scholasticall way of handling Evangelical
debates should be so much in use, and that in the debates about the depth of
secret and unfear hab^e mysteries (which all sides confess to be such) there
should be so much Animosity. And lastly, that where the substance is agreed
unto, and in the outside of the profession only, there is some difference
about prudential and circumstantial matters of Order, Discipline, and
Government, there should be so little condiscention and mutual forbearance made
use of, notwithstanding all the acknowledged precepts and duties of Christian
charity, and long suffering for mutual edification. Now that from this
unreasonableness of division, and he great want of moderation and discretion,
in managing the same, scandals and offenses should infinitely be multiplied
amongst the Churches is no wonder at all; for how can it be otherwise, when all
charitable thoughts are laid aside, and no bowels of compassion by reason of
humane frailties entertained, but that all manner of provocations to offenses
will on all hands be both given and taken; whence prejudices will continually
be more and more heightened, and the Spirit of strife will (as we see it does)
carry on the parties to embrace in their opposite courses, wordly interests of
a contrary nature, that they may cross each others advantages: by which means
the world takes insensible possession of the hearts of Professors, which makes
them for the most part mind more the formality of their partial way, then the
simplicity of the Gospel and the power of Godliness: so that the life of the
spirit (though much pretended unto by some, and not altogether unknown to
others) cannot break through to work any sensible effects of holiness and
spiritual edification; but all the means thereof, and the ways of holy
communion being either neglected or obstructed, and the profane world
observing our miscarriages, the way of Truth and Holiness is evil spoken of
by them, and the name of God is blasphemed for our sakes.

Now to Remedy these evils, and to draw the Churches to some principle or
degree of spiritual unity, that the wrath of God may be prevented (which may
justly suffer us to devour one another, till we be consumed one by another, or
the Candlestick removed from us all) let us mind but one Apostolical Rule to be
put in practice amongst us, whereof the equity is altogether undeniable; and
there may be yet some hope of our pre^ervation in store. This Rule is given to
the Philippians to heal the breach which was between the Jews and Gentile
Believers Phil. 3. 15. 16
about the matter of Circumcilion, and it is this: If ye be otherwise minded,
God shall reveal even this unto you: nevertheless whereto we have attained
already, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing. If then we
could be so happy, as to be able to persuade the Churches to observe this part
of the Rule, one toward another: first, mainly to bear each with others
imperfection in knowledge, till God reveal further his Truth; and then if in
the mean time they would own one another in that whereunto they have already
attained; and therein walk by one Rule, and mind the same thing: that is,
intend that good toward others, which they would have others intend toward
them; the mischief which through the neglect of this duty is like to ensue
might be prevented; but how to make the Churches sensible of the necessity of
observing this Rule and Precept, is scarce imaginable, except some Godly party
would professedly own this as a duty toward them all in common, and undertake
to provoke them by some religious way of Correspondency to a reciprocal
practice thereof. Therefore again such a Correspondence is absolutely necessary
for the Churches upon this Consideration, namely to preserve them from the
forenamed evils of their homebred distempers, and from the wrath which
undoubtedly will follow thereupon, if they continue therein.

But if the Churches be looked upon with respect unto their common Adversaries,
the Papists on the one hand, and the Profane, the Hypocrites, and the Atheists
on the other; all which enemies lay the Churches wast several ways, and
undermine their Settlement: this religious Correspondency to maintain the unity
of the Spirit in that whereunto they have attained, will yet appear more
absolutely necessary. For it is without all contradiction evident, that nothing
does so much advance the wishes of Papists, and the plots of Atheistical
Statesmen against the profession of the truth, as our Divisions amongst our
selves. And these Adversaries chiefly the Papists make it a great part of their
work, by subtle Emissaries of all sorts, (which the College de propagande
side, as they call it does maintain) to foment these our divisions and
disorders, in hope that thereby we shall be made a prey unto them at last. Now
to take this advantage out of their hands, and to stop the gaps whereby they
break in upon us, that they may cunningly heighten our passions, and make our
divisions irreconcilible; there is no likely way but this, that some Godly and
considerate Party should stir up the rest to correspond with it self, and each
with another, in these main and fundamental Duties and Truths of Christianity,
wherein they are all united, and whereunto they have all attained,
notwithstanding their different opinions in lesser matters. And except some
such course be taken, there is no humane possibility to prevent the effect of
the plots which the Papal Conclave has against the Churches, which it has
proscated and does prosecute with indefatigable diligence, with innumerable
Agents of several sorts, with immense cost and charge, with all manner of
crafty insinuations, and fair pretenses, and with all the zeal that either the
opinion of deserving heaven, or the hope of temporal Greatness, Power, and
Profit can breed in Superstitious, in Ambitions, and in Covetous minds.
Therefore to countermine these practices of the common Adversaries, and to cut
them short of the advantages, by which they will at last work out their ends,
if no remedy be found: this religious Correspondency in things whereunto the
Churches have attained, is absolutely necessary; and without some intercourse
between them to this effect, it will be impossible, as to men to prevent the
mischief which will ensue.

Of the Third.
AS for the Protestant states in Germany, and elsewhere through out Europe; if
we look upon the causes of their weakening and unsettlement hitherto, we may
easily read their destiny in time to come, if these Causes be not speedily
removed. For it is certain that the House of Austria and the Papal Conclave,
since the days of Charles the V. When the first war about Religion was
raised, in the year 1546 have entered into a League for the Extirpation of the
Protestant Party, which has been to this day maintained between them and the
Design thereof constantly prosecuted; nor has any thing both first and last
given them the advantages of all their successes, so much as the divided
affections and neglected Interests of Protestants amongst themselves, about
matters of Religion: for the Elector of Saxony in this last war, did betray
and desert first the Elector Palatine in his undertaking, and made him miscarry
in the defense of the Protestant Cause, only because he was jealous; that the
Calvinists (as they are called) should become too great in the Empire. And then
afterward he refused to join in the Suedish Evangelical Confederacy erected at
Heilbmar, in the year 1633. only because he would not be engaged to maintain a
War for the securing of the Calvinists Liberties, jointly with the Lutherans,
which the Suedish undertook to do: and although at the pacification of Munster,
in the year 1648. the Suedes have carried it, viz. that the Rights of both
Lutherans and Calvinists, and their Liberties, shall be equally secured and
upheld in the Germane Empire; yet it is manifest, that not only the Emperor
ever since has persecuted the Protestants more then ever before in his
Hereditary Lands, and that at this present Diet of Ratisbone, nothing has been
ratified which was concluded at Munster, to the advantage of the Protestant
Cause; but the whole matter of that Treaty relating thereunto has rather been
made Disputable, and is hitherto without effect, and will henceforth be made
void; because he Pope having declared that whole Treaty prejudicial to the
Church, and consequently null: the zealous Papist is bound not to keep it,
though sworn to it, seeing he has dispensed with his Oath, it being against
the public good of the Church. Thus although the Suedes did constrain the
House of Austria to a peace with the Protestant Party; yet they will but watch
for their opportunity to break it with advantage as soon as they can, so that
it is is very manifest, that the Emperor having gotten his ends at this Diet,
to have his Son made King of the Romans, does still prosecute his design to
bring the Protestant States under his and the Popes subjection, and to make
himself absolute in the Empire: nor is there any humane possibility to prevent
the future prevalency of the Austrian absoluteness, and the effect of the
Papal league therewith for the extirpation of the Protestant Party, but by
removing the causes of that weakening and unsettlement which has hitherto
befallen unto them, which are none other but their want of concurrence and
hearty Correspondency in a common interest for common safety and Gospel
liberty. If therefore this concurrence, and the Correspondency in religious
matters, which is to be the true ground thereof, cannot be procured nor
maintained amongst Protestants; it is apparent that the Cause will be lost, and
that henceforth without a miracle (which we have no special promise to hope for
in this case,) no safety can be hoped for to secure and preserve the Protestant
States in Europe: seeing they are not only in Germany, but out of Germany
also; not only divided and shattered in their Counsels without any
Correspondency for a common aim, but even falling out one with another, and
fiercely breaking one another strength; which Divisions the enemies seek with
industry to foment, as is apparent between Us, and the United Provinces.

Therefore such as can foresee this eminent danger (and every one that is
rational cannot but foresee it) and such as can discern the only remedy
thereof to be such a religious Corerspondency as is here sued for; and yet are
not willing to set this remedy a work for common safety: it is evident that
such are not only unfaithful to the cause of Religion, but in their heart
Deserters and Betrayers of the common interest of Protestants, which God
certainly will call them to an acconut for, if he has betrusted them with
means fit to uphold the same for his truths sake: for God does give a Banner to
his people for his truths sake; and to whom the Banner is given, they are bound
to display it, Psalm. 60. 4. but how to display it without some religious
Correspondence toward a concurrence in the work of common edisication, is not
imaginable; and therefore such a Correspondency is absolutely necessary.

If the disadvantages which Protestants lie under at this time for want of a
mutual Concurrence in their common interest, should be reckoned up in
particular, this Discourse might be enlarged unto a great Volum, but this is
not suitable to my scope, and needless at this time; it will be sufficient to
observe, that whereas heretofore in the Empire, the Voices in the Electoral
College were equal, viz three Protestants, and three Papists; and the War was
raised for the casting Voice, namely that of the King of Bohemia, whether the
Protestant or the Papist should have it: now it is apparent that the issue is
not only a determination of that Voice, to be Hereditarily annexed unto the
House of Austria, but that in the other Voices of that College, the Papists
have gotten Four for Three, so that in the Supreme Sphere of the Empire, the
Protestant Party is wholly weakened; and if (as there is cause to suspect)tl at
the eldest Prince of the Saxon Electoral House, will turn Papist, then it is
likely the Five Papists will cast out the Two remaining Protestants,
Brandenburg and Palatin, which are so weak already that they can make no
defense, if any assault should be made against them.

As for the other disadvantages both within and without the Empire, there is
scarce any great Protestant Family, but the Papal industry has gotten some
branch of it to graft it upon the old Stock; by which means all manner of
instruments are prepared to divide and break them within themselves: as
formerly the Emperor Charles the V. brake the Saxou Family by setting Maurice
against John.

In France, all the places of Security which the Protestants had, are taken
from them; and that which in former time the Roman French Church rejected as a
prejudice unto their Liberty, is now received and admitted, viz. the Council of
Trent, which the Papal Conclave, and the House of Austria have made a yoke to
be imposed upon the necks of all States throughout Europe: and who ever will
not submit unto it, is to be cut off. Thus both in Germany and in France, the
Design of suppressing the Protestant Profession, is strongly carried on; and
there will be no possibility to hinder it in humane appearance, but all
appearance to hasten it, if there can be no Religious Correspondence set a foot
amongst the heads of the Protestants to concur in thoughts which should advance
the Gospel, and settle the grounds of common fafety for their mutual
preservation. Such then as are betrusted with the public management of the
affairs of Protestants, and make it* not any part of their work to advance a
Religious Correspondency to this effect amongst them, when they have the Means
in their hand, and ability and opportunity to do it, will have much to answer
before God. Therefore such a Correspondency is absolutely necessary to be
intended and maintained; not only for the advancement of the Truth of the
Gospel, in serving Christ with one shoulder against Antichrist; but in respect
of outward safety, and the securing of our Natural and Spiritual Rights and
Liberties, to our selves, to our Brethren, and to our Posterity.

Of the Fourth.
NOw if it has been Convincingly made out both upon Spiritual and Rational
grounds, that for the advancement of Christ's Kingdom in the world, and for the
outward safety and Preservation of the Churches, a Religious Correspondency is
absolutely necessary unto them; then an Enquiry may further, and ought also to
be made of two things. First, to whom chiefly the procurement of this
Correspondency does belong. Secondly, How it may be procured and obtained
amongst the Churches? And to answer these Queries, I conceive we may say thus
first in the General.

That the procurement of this Correspondency, does chiefly belong to those who
stand most in need thereof for their own welfare and safety, and who have most
eminently engaged themselves to undertake the procurement of it. And that the
way to procure it amongst the Churches, can be none other but a Christian
endeavor to live and converse with other Professors in the communion of
Saints, which is not to look to our own things alone, but that every one should
look also to the things of others; and in the consideration of others, to Phil.
2.4. Heb. 10.24
provoke them unto love, and to good works.

This much in General: but then to Answer the first Query in particular; I
conceive it may be truly said;

That the Godly Party living in this Commonwealth, does stand in more need of
this Correspondency for the welfare of their Cause, and for their own safety,
then any other Churches do; and that this same Party, has more eminently
Engaged it self toward God and Men, to undertake the procurement of this
Correspondency, then any other Churches have done. And to make out both these
Assertions to be truths, I shall briefly offer these Considerations.

First in respect of the need which they stand of it; it is in my apprehension
thus.

The Godly Party of this Nation has been led forth in a peculiar way of acting
against the world, and against Antichrist, which others have not been
acquainted withal.

This acting has set them in opposition, not only to the world and Antichrist,
in a more direct way then others, but also put them at a distance from their
Brethren themselves; who partly by reason of their weakness, partly for want of
that information which we should have given them; partly because they have been
prepossessed with false and injurious Informations against us, are for the most
part so offended at us, that they scruple to own us as Brethren, and look upon
us rather as Apostates from the Cause, and cut of from all Relation toward
other Protestants; in their esteem we are a new thing, start up and standing
alone by our selves. Now to be in such a condition, seems to be for us very
unsafe; for if our Enemies be able without any control, to represent us unto
the world, and to the Professors of the Gospel, as Monsters of Men; and if we
take no thought how to vindicate our Cause from false aspersions toward our
Brethren, and toward Men of impartial judgment; the Cause of Christian and
civil Liliberty which we have undertaken and maintained hitherto, cannot
prosper, but must needs at last miscarry in our hands. For the prosperity of
the Cause, is nothing else but the gaining of Godly Men's Affections at home and
abroad to it: and if we make no Appilcation to our Godly Brethren and
Neighbors, to set them right, and inform them of the truth of our Cause and
Proceedings, and to interest them to Correspond with us upon a Gospel account;
how can our Proceedings be successeful? how can our Cause be justified? and how
can we promise safety to our selves, when our professed Enemies, together with
our misled Neighbors, shall jointly conspire and rise up against us? I know,
and am confident that the Cause will prosper in Gods hand, and that he will
carry it on, and preserve the Instruments thereof, who follow him in his way;
but I do not see any ground to believe that he will do it without the ordinary
Gospel Means of propagating the Truth, and of maintaining the Communion of
Saints. If then he does intend to preserve us, and to make use of us any
further in this his work; I am very confident that he will set us in the way
whereunto he has promised to give a blessing, which is the way of Brotherly
love; in a Religious Correspondency toward the rest of the Churches professing
his Name in the Truth. By how much then our undertakings are more resolute and
destructive to the course of the world, by so much they are the more difficult
to be carried on; and therefore we stand the more in need of the help and
concurrence of the Godly, every where to carry it on with us to a good issue.
And by how much our present Leaders in the Cause are less interessed in the
Godly Party abroad; by so much if they desire to provide in Gods way for the
success of the Cause, and for their own safety therein: they should the more
apply themselves to advance a Gospel-interest toward all the Professors
thereof; and maintain with them to this effect, a Religious Correspondency
therein. For as a man that is in a fight, does not make use of any one of his
members alone; but all the members of his body are set in a posture to concur,
and supply mutual strength as standing in need of each others help: so in this
conflict of the Body of Christ against the Powers of the World, and the
subtilty of Antichrist; as all the Churches are aimed at and assaulted, so they
stand in need of one another help; and that part of the body which is most
violently assaulted, stands most in need of the assistance of the rest for
its safety. Now it is without all doubt, that the Godly Party of this Nation,
is most in the eye of the Enemy; and when the Universal breach (which is near
at hand) between Protestants and Papists shall be made, it will be most
violently put at; therefore it does stand most in need of help, and is bound
for its own safety in a Gospel way to endeavor to receive it.

But the matter of Danger wherein we are more then others, is not the only
reason which does oblige us to procure this Correspondency more then others;
but the Engagement which lies upon the Godly Party of this Nation more
eminently then upon others to procure it, is another obligation binding us
thereunto.

This Engagement is eminently apparent in three Declarations of the State.

First, In the Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, published by the
Parliament, Anno 1641.

Secondly, In the National League and Covenant of both Kingdoms.

Thirdly and Lastly, In the Declaration of this present Parliament, published
the 12th. of July, this year 1653.

In the Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, at the latter end thereof,
the Clause obliging the Godly Party which then did manage Public Affairs, to
mind a Correspondencie toward for reign Protestants, is expressed in these
words.

We will labor by all offices of Friendship, to unite the Foreign Churches
with us in the same Cause; and to seek their Liberty, Safety, and Prosperity,
as bound thereunto by Charity to them, and by wisdom for our own good: for by
this means our own strength shall be increased, and by a mutual concurrence to
the same common End, we shall be able to procure the good of the whole body of
the Protestant Profession.

This is as solemn a Promise, fully and expressly obliging them to seek this
Concurrence and Correspondency, as can in so few words be expressed.

In the National League and Covenant, the last words thereof engage also deeply
those that did swear it, to desire affectionately as in the presence of God,
and consequently when opportunity should be to endeavor sincerely this.

That the success of our proceedings, may be deliverance and safety to all Gods
people, and an encouragement to other Christian Churches groaning under, and in
danger of the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, to oyn with us in the same or
like Association and Covenant to the Glory of God, the enlargement of the
Kingdom of Christ, and the peace and Tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and
Commonwealths.

This profession being made in presence of God, with a hand lifted up unto
Heaven by the Godly Party of both Nations, as it is conscionably to be minded;
so it cannot reach the End for which it was made, to give an encouragement to
other Christian Churches, to assert jointly with us their Gospel Liberty,
except we endeavor to maintain a Religious Correspondency with them.

In the Declaration of this present Parliament, which is addressed in express
terms: To all Gods people as well in Neighbor Page 2
Nations as in this; the professions are more zealous and large to this effect,
then any of the former. For declaring a great expectation of the breaking forth
of the Kingdom of Christ Page 3,
in all the earth, they manifest their faith and hope to this effect; That God
will not suffer his people here to deal falsely with him in Page 4.
his Cause, till he has accomplished his great work, and brought about his
great Ends: whereupon their earnest prayer is put up unto Page 6.
him; that God would unite their hearts to himself, that they may be one
amongst themselves, and with all the people of God, who are members of the Body
of Christ; and that they may be fitted and used as Instruments in the hand of
God for amore full and clear revealing of the Lord Jesus, and a right
promulgation of the blessed Gospel, and the true interest of his Kingdom, and
the advance thereof, that oppressing yoaks may be broken, and all burdens
removed; that his Tabernacle may be fully raised up, and his Temple built by
his Spirit, that all his people may have one lip, one heart, one Page 7.
consent, one shoulder to how down and worship him; that the envy of Judah and
Ephraim may be taken away, that they may be one in one sold with one Shepherd;
that the Swords and Spears may be turned into plough Shares and pruning
hooks, and the earth filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters
cover the Sea.

Now where such professions are so solemnly and so largely in a public way
addressed unto God, and all his people in this and in Neighbor Nations, and
made in a manner the chief matter which is aimed at in this present Parliament;
what can be conceived more obliging toward the Undertaking of the work? If
therefore we should put forth no endeavors to perform this Duty, whereof we
acknowledge our selves so fully convicted, by so many Professions, and Vows,
and Prayers, and Declarations; will it not be a guilt lying so much the heavier
upon us in the day of our accounts, by how much the more we have engaged our
selves unto it. Certainly God will not be mocked; and if after so many
Protestations in times of distress, and Deliverances since obtained, and
Successes given in to enable us to perform our Vows and Engagements; we should
undertake nothing toward the discharge of this Duty, which lies so eminently
upon us, our guilt will suddenly overtake us, and the punishment thereof, if
not prevented by some attempts suitable to our Engagements, will be fearful and
severe.

Therefore that it may be prevented, the second Querie should be laid to heart;
viz. How a Religious Correspondency may be procured and maintained between the
Godly Party of this Nation, and the Foreign Protestant Churches?

Now to answer this Querie, it is not my scope at this time, I only do intend
to show the necessity of laying it to heart, by those who shall think
themselves concerned in finding some resolution thereunto; and as it shall
please God to move their hearts and open their inclinations, to set forward in
their way this Design: if they will acquaint me therewith, I shall not conceal
my thoughts from them, which I shall conceive conducible unto this End and
Purpose, which herewith I commend to the providence of God, and the prayers of
Godly Souls; and having discharged my Conscience for mine own part thus far in
this matter, I shall wait for the hand of God to lead those that love him
further, and remain for Sions sake, as in all these troubles I have been all
along without partiality according to my ability,

Their faithful Servant in the Communion of Saints.

FINIS.

