A Fast of Gods choosing, Plainly opened, For the help of those poor in spirit,
whose hearts are set to seek the Lord their God in New England, in the solemn
Ordinance of A FAST Wherein is showed 1. The nature of such a FAST. 2. The
Testimony God will give thereunto of his gracious acceptance 3. The special
Seasons wherein God will bear witness to such A FAST. 4. Some helps to Faith
that it shall be so. 5. Why such a FAST is so acceptable and successful. 6.
How much this concerns Gods people in New England.

Preached on a Fast called by publitk Authority, On 26. 1. 74.

By THOMAS THACHER, Pastor of a Church in Boston.

BOSTON, Printed by John Foster, 1678.

To the Reader.
BOth Scripture and experience has made it manifest to the world, that a
Religious Fast, when duly attended, is a Duty of no small importance and
advantage to the people of God. But those spiritual performances, which if
rightly managed, are the most beneficial, have a special difficulty and
contrariety to flesh and blood accompanying them. So is it an hard work to keep
a Fast in such a manner, as that it shall become an acceptable Day unto the
Lord: whence also it comes to pass, that very few even amongst those that
outwardly observe Fasting Days, are acquainted with the inward, spiritual, and
acceptable part of the duty. There have been that as to what is external in
such services regard not the divine precept; Some think the Prophet Isaiah (in
that Chapter (which is partly and judiciously opened in the ensuing Sermon)
reproves Enormities in that kind. And although mercy is better then Sacrifice,
nor may we urge any severities beyond what the word of God does impose, yet it
is to be feared that many amongst us do not make due conscience of that outward
abstinence which the rule, and which the nature of the duty does require. These.
Salmur part ult. Camero in Mat. 17. 21. Ames Answ to Burgess. p^. 1. page 145.
It is most true, that the Kingdom of God does not consist in meat and drink;
nor is Fasting in it self any part of Religion; when it is called worship, it
is by a Trope, as being a special adjunct of some extraordinary worship yet for
men to exact labors, or to find their own pleasures upon such days is an high
transgression. Others there are, that as to externals will be very exact, nay,
over-righteous. Whenas all that they do is before the Lord no better then
loathsome formality and hypocrisy. The Evangelist informs us that it was
customary amongst the Jews to fast twice a week. And the Jewish masters tell us
particularly, that it was upon the 2d. and 5th. day of the week, decreverun^
magistry nostri utjejunaretur diebus secundo et quinto, Volumen Jejunii, Fol. 54
propter tres res, viz. propter destructum Templum, propter legem Conflagratam,
and propter probrum divini nomini^. In imitation of whom some Christians call
two days of the week Fast days, albeit that they might not be thought to
Judaize, they have not fixed upon Thorndike of Serv^^ Re^ Assemb. c. 8
the same days the Jews did. But to what end is a multitude of these ons, if
con^^ded in? Do men think that their voice will be heard on high, (...). e.
that they shall have acceptance in Heaven merely because they fast; Certainly,
if there be not serious preparation for such days, unseigned Humiliation, and
Contrition in them, Reformation after them, days of Humiliation will become
days of provocation, before that God, who will never suffer himself to be
mocked by any of the Sons of men. When the most solemn and extraordinary duties
of Religion degenerate into Formality, it causes the God of judgment to come
near. Historians have observed, that Pompey seized upon the Temple on the Jews
solemn Fasting day; Also that upon one of their public Fasts Sofius took
Ios^phus de A^tiq. Indeor. l. 14. c. 8
Jerusalem; the Lord thereby testifying against the Formality of that
degenerate generation. And indeed days of Humiliation without Reformation, are
no other, nor no better then a Form of godliness without the power of it. So
the formal Jews in Isaiahs time. Notwithstanding their frequent facts they
persisted in doing their own wills, (and are therefore said to find their own
pleasure) though contrary to the commanding will of God. They continued to
oppress, and exact Labors of those that by the Law of Mr. Gatak^^ Annot^^n
Isai. 58.
God should have been set at liberty, Ier. 34. 17. Vexatious Law suits,
(smiting with the fist of ^ickedness) and other Contentions were ri^e amongst
them, after days of Humiliation; If a poor man were by any injurious Contract
fallen into their hands they would not loose those Bonds of wickedness. The
Lord therefore by his Prophet tells them, that as ever they desired God should
regard their Fasts, those prevailing iniquities should be reformed, and the
contrary duties practiced. To the same purpose Jeremiah upon a solemn Fasting
day, Ier. 36. 6, 7.

Now that the Lords people amongst us may be awakened and warned against
resting in any lifeless Formalities, or in Humiliation^ without Reformation, is
the design of the Reverend and worthy Author in this practical and useful
Sermon of his Discours^s of his nature are never unseasonable since no Age
passes wherein there is not afforded matter and ground sad enough to warrant
the performance of the duty urged.

Although the New Testament speaks nothing for stated Fasts or Tertullian de
^ejun. Epiph. Haris. 75. August de Here Is. c. 53.
Festivals, Tertullian before his Montanisme wrote truly, that religious Fasts
are to be observed pro temporibus and causis, as the Lord shall providentially
call thereunto ^ndeed A^rius was sometimes charged with Heresy, because he
withstood the Imposition of those and the like Formalities, but that was in an
Age when the darkness of Superstition began to over spread the Christian World.
Nevertheless the word is clear, that at sometimes frequency in the observation
of this service ought to be attended, John's Disciples kept many days of
Fasting and Prayer, probably (as a learned Interpreter conceives) upon
occasion of their Masters being Imprisoned, which providence was a sufficient
call unto them, to be much Grotius in Math. 9. 14
in extraordinary seekings unto God, and Humiliation before him that (if
possible) they might not be deprived of such a faithful and eminent Teacher.
And although the tenderness of Christ toward his own Disciples was such as that
he would not at first enjoin frequent Fastings upon them who had not been
accustomed to such severities, le^^ as new wine is ungrateful, and will be
rejected by those who have tasted that which is more Pleasant) being suddenly
put upon precepts too strong for weak Disciples, they should be Cradock Harmon.
c. 3 Sect. 20.
discouraged; yet the Lord does intimate that days of persecution and general
affliction would at last befall them, when they should be providentially called
(and their practice be suitable) unto frequent Fastings.

It is mavelous to consider (for his Spirit knows what shall come to pass
in the world, and inclines the hearts of his Messengers accordingly) how God
many times causes the words of his Servants in their public Ministrations to
fall in with his providential dispensations; of which we have some Instance in
the Sermon herewith emitted, which was delivered some years ago, even a little
before our late troubles. The Lord knew that Boston, yea, that New England
would have cause for many days of Humiliation, and therefore stirred up the
heart of his Servant, before hand to give instructions and Directions
concerning the acceptable performance of so great a duty. Some that were
affected in hearing the Word preached, and that did in short hand take what was
delivered, have Importuned the Reverend Author to give way unto its
publication, unto whose desires he has at last conceded. And I know not but
that the publication of what is in this way presented may be as seasonable as
the preaching of it at first was For if my Conjectures fail not, the days are
at hand when New England will have as great cause as ever to attend
Humiliations and supplications before the most High. There is no general
Reformation visible in New England, nor so much as an heart to comply with the
Scripture expedient for that end We have seen (...) Horse amongst us, even
bloody judgments and desolations, but are not bettered thereby: Now there is a
pale Horse come, and his Name that sits thereon is Death; Stars are falling,
our Heaven, and our Earth are shaking; What will come next, who can say? The
Decree has not as yet brought forth, wherefore such a Fast as the Lord has
chosen, would be a blessed means to lengthen out our Tranquillity; And O that
New England knew in this her day the things that belong to her peace.

Increase Mather.
Boston 2. mon. 1678.
Isaiah. 58. 5, 6. Is it such a Fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to
afflict his Soul, etc. Is not this the Fast that I have chosen, etc?
IT is (my beloved) hard work yea, one of the hardest parts of the work of the
Ministry, to awaken a people that are rocked a sleep in sin; especially a
professing people, that are lifted up to eminent degrees in profession, exalted
with great privileges, and have their hearts raised with these things unto
great pride, this (I say is a great and difficult work of the Ministry to
awaken such: But such a People this Prophet had to do withal, and therefore you
see what be must do, ver. 1. Cry aloud spare not, stretch thy throat, spare no
pains, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show my peopl their
transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins. They had Watchmen amongst
them, but they did not watch; Dogs that did not bark, Isai. 56. 10. and
therefore the Prophet must cry aloud, and show them their sins. Why? were they
so vile a people? they were eminent in profession, exalted in privileges, and
arrogant in both, as appears in five or six things. 1. They seek me daily, ver
2. 2. They delight to know my ways. 3. They did Righteousness, and they
forsook not the Ordinances of God, they were a practicing People, as well as a
knowing people, and further, they enquire and ask after the Ordinances of
Justice, and profess great delight in approaching to God, and that not only in
common and ordinary duties, but extraordinary, ver. 3. We have fasted, and we
have afflicted our Souls in our Fast, and yet says God to the Prophet: Cry
aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and make them to know their
transgressions etc. They were yet a people that did need awakening
notwithstanding all this.

But when was this people in this frame? and when was there such matter of
complaint against them? I Answer in general, it was when they did keep
hypocritical Fasts, which are here described, ver. 3. 4. and they did Fast, but
yet they did not Fast; It was a Fast (as to the external observation,) when it
was not a Fast, as to the spiritual Efficacy and right performance of this holy
Service. They were lifted up with their Service performed, and quarrelled with
God, and complained, as if some notable injury were done them, in that they
used Gods remedy for their malady, and yet their malady was not removed.

More porticularly. This seems to me to have reference to the days of
Hezekiah; You knew what glorious days they were, and how zealous he was in
Reformation, insomuch, that he brake in pieces the brazen Serpen^ which Moses
had made which they had so long admired and burnt Incense to, 2 King. 18. 4.
and what solemn Fasts did they keep? and what delight had they in approaching
unto God, 2 Cron. 30. 21. the Children of Israel that were present at
Jerusalem, kept the Feast of unleavened bread seven days, with great gladness,
and the Priests and Levites praised the Lord, day by day, singing with loud
Instruments unto the Lord. There was great joy; But alas as soon as these
things were well over, and they had purged out Idolatry in Chap. 32. 1. After
these things, and the establishment thereof, Senacherib comes up against them,
and their wound as to their Civil affairs is not healed. And in the sixth year
of Hezekiah the ten Tribes are led away by Shalma^^^ir, 2 King. 18. 10. that is
in the ninth year of Hoshea King of Israel* Samaria was taken, etc. and because
they obeyed not the voice of the Lord their God, but transgressed his Covenant
and all that Moses the servant of the Lord commanded, and would not hear them
nor do them. Now ver. the 13. In the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah
Zenacherib took all the fenced Cities of Judah, etc. Here was Israel carried
Captive before, and did not Judah fast then in good Hezekiahs days? here also
is Judah set upon, and the fenced Cities taken; and was Hezekiah, and the
people asleep all this while? did they not fast and pray? yea, but in the Issue
Jerusalem is besieged, and Rabshekah blasphemes, etc. was not here matter of
fasting and prayer? yet notwithstanding all this Jerusalem is in danger of
destruction, why then? wherefore have we fasted (say they) and thou see it
not? wherefore have we afflicted our Soul, and thou take no knowledge? here
is their quarrel with God, and God Answers this in ver. 3. 4. He gives (I say)
the Reason of it.

1. By discovering their sins that still remain notwithstanding their Fasts, so
that their Fasts were indeed no Fasts.

2. The benefits they should have obtained if their Fast had been a Fast
indeed; Is it such a Fast as I have chosen for a man to afflict his Soul for a
day, and to hang down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloths? etc. oh
no! but this is the Fast that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickdness,
to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free? etc.

Hence we may observe.

Doct. That a Fast of Gods choosing, or such a Fast as God has chosen will
certainly bring seasonable pledges of Gods gracious acceptance. When the heart
is right for God, and the Fast is ordered according to God it shall certainly
obtain mercy, and bring home help and succor from God. Prayer, especially,
extraordinary prayer is not only the Key of all earthly Treasures of Goodness,
which God has laid up for the Sons of men on Earth, but the Key of heavenly
Treasures in Christ Jesus also.

I shall observe this method in managing this Subject. 1. I shall open unto you
the nature of a Fast, and such a Fast as God has chosen.

2. I shall show you those Testimonies which God will give of his gracious
acceptance unto such a Fast. 3. I shall endeavor to show you the seasons
wherein God is wont to give, and his people may expect such manifest
Testimonies of his gracious acceptance 4. I shall labor to help your Faith
with some invincible Arguments and demonstrations of this Truth, and then the
Reasons of the point, and Lastly, how much this concerns us, a people so
Circumstanced as we are.

1. For the nature of a Fast you may take this imperfect diffinition or
description of it not taken strictly, only for an adjunct or means of worship,
but more largely as I suppose in my Text, and so a Fast is an extraordinary
part or act of Gospel worship wherein for a convenient Season we abstain from
the comforts of this life, and upon due examination of our ways toward God,
and consideration of Gods ways toward us, we make a solemn and real
profession that we justify God and judge our selves, we justify God for the
evil of affliction that we either feel or fear and judge our selves for the
evil of transgression which we find within us or that ^ath passed from us, we
solemnly profess godly sorrow and repentance for the evil of sin, we solemly
profess that we seek mercy and grace from God in Jesus Christ to save us from
our sin^ and sorrows, we solemnly profess that we with all readiness forgive
others that have offended us, as we hope to be forgiven of God, and lastly we
solemnly engage and bind our selves to reform the evil of our ways, and to
walk before God in new obedience according to his word for the time to come.
There is much of Religion lies in the right understanding of a Spiritual Fast*
Therefore I say first [a Fast.]

The very notion of a Fast speaks abstinence, a Fast is that wherein a man
denies himself the use of ordinary things whereto he is accustomed and
necessitated for some certain ends and for a certain season; if there be not a
denying your selves ordinary comforts, there is no Fast, and if not in order to
worship, it is not a religious Fast. And therefore though this be but an
adjunct of worship* yet its an adjunct appointed by God to abstein from your
ordinary comforts, and that in three things.

1. To abstein from meat and drink wholly, if strength of nature will bear it,
if not, so much as mercy and necessity will permit; This at least is commanded
of old, Esth. 4. 16. neither eat nor drink three days, night nor day, etc. she
appointed a three days Fast, which those Countries might better bear, and upon
that extraordinary occasion they might not eat nor drink, night nor day, so
Nineveh they must not eat nor drink, they are forbidden not only wine, but
water, Jonah. 3 7.

2 It is a part of the abstinence requisite to this duty, to abstein from our
wonted Ornaments. To adorn the body in the day of Fast is a transgression of
the Rule of fasting, Exodus 33. 4, 5, 6. there they are commanded to put off
their Ornaments, and they were wonted also to cloth themselves in Sackcloth,
now the rigor of this according to the darkness of those shadowing times is
not exacted from us, yet there is a proportion to be observed. The King of
N^niveh (though but the King of N^niveh and not the King of Israel) yet he
lays aside his Robes and put on Sackcloth, and that was a prevailing Fast, for
it was a self humbling Fast. And they were wont also to sprinkle dust and ashes
upon their heads, and to express all manner of self despisings and self
abomination. If you be loath to put off your Ornaments, then its an humbling,
and if it be an humbling, you ought to abstein from them with other your
ordinary comforts, in an extraordinary humiliation.

3. An absteining from all your lawful employments and sports, and recreations,
yea, even the pleasures of a Married life, 1 Cor. 7 5. Joel 2. 16. Let the
Bridegroom come out of his Chamber, and the Bride out of her Closet, etc. there
must be no sports nor pastimes. In a word, such abstinence is required whereby
the body may be afflicted, Isa. 58. 3 Lev. 23, 29. 30. and Dan. ^0. 2, 3, 12.
Ezra. 8. 21. And this abstinence must continue at least from Evening to
Evening, for so must you keep the Sabbaths, etc. not only your weekly Sabbaths,
but Fasting and Feasting Sabbaths, Lev. 23. 32. from Evening to Evening shall
you celebrate your Sabbath* Its a vain shift to say this is spoken concerning
Sabbaths only upon special occasions, for it concerns weekly Sabbaths, Lev. ^3
2, 3. and these also.

2. Now this very outward abstinence as an help to the worship in the day, and
so the whole Fast is a Gospel duty, that is, it is a duty directed unto* under
the Covenant of grace, and not apperteining to the Covenant of works; for the
Covenant of works did not admit of any day of Atonement: But it is the Gospel
that appoints days of Atonement, and it is required in the Gospel, as our
Savior says, when the Bridegroom is absent the Children of the Bride-chamber
shall Fast, the Bridegroom is Christ, and the Children are Believers under the
Gospel, and when he is absent, that is in Heaven, before he returns again there
shal^^e times of Fasting, Math. 9 15. Can the Children of the Bride-chamber
mourn as long as the Bridegroom is with them, but the days shall come that he
shall be taken from them, and then they shall Fast, and the Apostle gives
direction how they should manage themselves in Fasting and Prayer, 1 Cor. 7 5.
and therefore its a Gospel duty.

3. But yet (though a Gospel duty) it is an extraordinary duty, Fasting is not
an every weeks duty in a constant Course, as the Pharise thought, Luke 18. 12
saying, I Fast twice a week. God has appointed six days for labor and one
for a Sabbath and therefore for men to appoint to themselves constant Sabbaths,
besides the Sabbath of the Lord, is will worship, and not acceptable to God.
This then is not for Ordinary but special occasions; as first when there is
some notable or eminent public Danger, as in the days of Jehoshapha^, 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. So when some notable duty is to be performed which is very
difficult and hazardous, then is a season for a Fast as it was with Esther,
Chap. 4. 14 15, 16.

Again, when there is some great sickness lying upon those that are near and
dear unto us, Psalm. 35. 13, 14. But as for me, when they were sick my clothing
was sackcloth, I humbled my Soul with Fasting, and I behaved myself as though
he had been my friend or brother, I bowed down heavily, as one that mourns
for his mother. A friend and brother or Mother, or near Relations, when they
are sick and weak and in dangerous condition, it calls for Fasting, there is
then opportunity and occasion for this duty.

Again, when there is some notable blessing wanting, or we are in danger to
loose it: And so when a person or people are fallen under some great
transgression, whereby God may be provoked to indignation against them, its a
time of Fasting and mourning; thus Ezra. 9. 4, 5, 6 in the case of their
marrying strange wives, and polluting the holy seed. So when God goes forth
against a people in some notable calamity, or threatening judgment; as when
Israel fled before the enemy, Joshua and the elders fasted, Josh. 7. So in any
notable change or turn of a man's life, as the undertaking of a Calling or some
great Voyage, then is a time to begin with Fasting and prayer, to Implore the
aid of Gods gracious presence, his guidance, conduct and salvation: Thus did
Ezra, when he was going up from Babylon. Ezra 8. 21, 22 23. So that a Fast is
not a standing duty, but occasional, as it is now to be observed in the days
of the Gospel.

2. Concerning the spiritual performance of it, and here first in order to the
preparation thereto, there is examination of our own ways, and consideration
of the works of God; these are preparatory, and for want of these it is that
men's hearts are utterly indisposed to such spiritual services: Josh. 7. v. 6.
to 12. Lam. 3 38. to 44. in which you find them considering and bewailing both
their own sins, and Gods Judgments upon them for sin.

The next thing to be shown, is the very work of a Fast in the very nature of
it, and so I call it a real Profession, to distinguish between an acceptable
and an unacceptable Fast; I say it is a solemn and real profession. This people
professed great delight in Gods Ordinances, and sought the Lord daily* and that
they did, and would cleave to God in his appointments: They enquire after his
mind, they make great profession, and so exact were they in their Fasts, that
they afflicted their soul, and bowe^ down their heads like a bulrush, and
walked mournfully and spread sackcloth and ashes under them, and what could be
more as to an outward profession? but their hearts were not engaged in it it
was but a Lie a flattering of God, as Psalm. 78. 34 35, 36, 37. therefore God
upbraids them saying, Is this the Fast that (...)? But particularly,

1. There is a profession of our justifying God, for the evil of affliction
that he brings upon us, and a condemnation of our selves for the evil or our
transgressions against the Lord our God. Thus Dan. 9. 7. O Lord, Righteousness
belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, (...) this day^: so v 5, 8
16. they ascribe righteousness to God, though he had said waste Jerusalem burnt
the city, destroyed the temple, scattered the people, and made them captives,
yet says Daniel, Thou are righteous, and we have sinned. So Ezra makes a
solemn and heartbreaking prayer, Ezra 9. 6. My God, I am ashamed and blush to
lift up my face to thee my God, for our iniquityes are increased over our head,
and our trespasses are grown up unto the heavens.

2. A solemn profession of godly sorrow and repentance of the evil of
transgression which we have committed against the Lord. Joel. 2. 12, 13. Neh.
9. They confess their sins from the beginning of their being a people; and ^ay
such a load upon themselves, as might make their hearts heavy with godly sorrow.

3. There is a solemn profession that we fly for refuge, to the hope of grace
and mercy that is set before us in the Atonement made by Jesus Christ. Thus
David, 2 Samuel 1 2. 15, 16. he upon that occasion laments the plague of his
heart, and the wickedness of his fact and laments after the blood of Christ for
cleansing, and cries out for a new Creation of his heart, Psalm. 51. 10. Create
in me a clean heart and renew a right Spirit within me, this is the profession
of every one that Fasts that he flies for refuge, to the precious blood of
Christ for mercy to save him from his sin and Gods judgments, that he may have
peace and grace no more to return unto folly.

4. Again, there is a solemn profession in Fasting and Prayer, that we forgive
others, as we desire to be forgiven of God, Mark. 11. 25. when ye stand praying
forgive, if you have ought against any, that your Father also which is in
Heaven may forgive your Trespasses; Therefore in this Text he convinces them
by want of this, not to fast aright, Ye fast for strife and debate, etc. Isai.
58. 4. They did not heal but strengthen their divisions by fasting and their
Fasts were hypocritical, and not according to their profession.

Lastly, There is in it a solemn profession, that we bind our selves to reform
what is amiss, and to walk with God in new obedience, especially when you come
to God in a solemn way and manner, its a true observation concerning prayer,
that you can put no Petition to God for mercy but it implies a promise unto God
of new obedience, especially when you come to God in such a solemn way and
manner, you either come that you may obtain help for, or against your sin, help
to obey, or to continue in obedience, in every Fast there is an implicit
making and renewing Covenant with God, which the Saints of God upon these more
then ordinary occasions were wont to express; Neh 9th. the last verse, and the
whole tenth Chapter, so that in a Fast you solemnly profess that you are
grieved for your Transgressions, and seek his grace in Christ, to pardon and
heal you, and that all your hope is in the Atonement of Jesus Christ and that
you freely forgive all that have trespassed against you, laying aside all
anger, wrath, malice, envy, evil speaking, and whatsoever may be the fruits of
such displicency of Spirit against others, you profess that you put the
thoughts of these from you, as you desire your sins should be put away from
Gods sight, and you engage not to walk in the former course of iniquity, but
that you will set upon it, to do the will of God in all duties according to the
Rules of new obedience, its but a mocking of God, a flattering of him with your
lips, a lying unto him with your Tongues, if your Spirits be not thus disposed
and inclined in such a solemn duty. Therefore further to distinguish, there is
a Fast that God has chosen, and a Fast that he has not chosen, It this the
Fast that God has chosen, to hang down the head like a Bulrush for a day? etc.
and is this all that God requires, to put on a sad face and sad Clothes, and
sad thoughts for a day, or to fetch a sigh or two in your Closets, and pray in
your Familyes, and go to the public worship, and when the day is over to be as
you were before, not making Conscience of answering the expectation justly
raised upon your profession, but the proud is proud still, and the filthy is
filthy still? this is not the Fast which God has chosen, if you will show me
your Fasts, where are the fruits thereof? but sin is getting ground upon us
notwithstanding our Fasts, Schism, Heresy, Envy, Malice, and strife
notwithstanding your Fasts, and all our days of Atonement they prevail not to
consume, wast and destroy these abominations out of the Land, these are not the
Fasts which God has chosen; Gods Fasts will break the heart for sin and from
sin; But your Fasts keep the heart whole, and the life of sin whole within you,
never look for a tender he art, if you can but fast away the sense of your sin,
and sorrow for sin, and your care and diligent endeavors to walk with God. My
heart akesto think of the unfruitful Fasts that are amongst us as to the body
of this people, though I know there are precious Souls amongst us that mourn
for these things.

But ah New England, New England! how will thou be able to bear the burden of
thy Fasts? There is not a Soul that hears me but fasts either the Fast that God
has chosen, or that he has not chosen. You do fast, and therefore this is
your profession, that you are sensible of the displeasure of God hanging over
your heads, and that you are sorry with all your hearts that you have provoked
God; this is the profession of your actions, or else what do you here? You
profess that you do with all your heart entertain motions of love and
kindness, where there has been strife; and do profess you forgive them, as
God has forgiven you, and that your hearts are full of k^^passion to afflicted
ones, and that your hands shall be open to relieve them according to your
ability. Can any of your souls come to seek mercy from God, and have your
hearts shut up against the poor and needy, without great hypocrisy? How do
your hearts work toward these things? Consider it in the fear of God.

Q. What is the Fast which God has chosen?

Answ. It is when the Heart is sincerely and entirely carried forth in a holy
Conformity to that which the duty makes profession of? my Son give me thy heart
says God, God cares not for external performances without the heart, they are
but as the cutting off a Dogs neck, etc. Isa 66 3. It is an high abomination
when you come without a suitable heart to a day of Humiliation. There are four
things which show a suitable heart to a day of Humiliation,

First. When the soul comes with brokenness and contrition of heart, when a
holy trembling seizes upon such a man; when he draws nigh, lest he provoke God,
and procure his indignation, a broken heart and contrite spirit begins the day
and goes along through the day, when the spirit is indeed suited to the duty.

2. There is a penitent self abasement before God in and by the duty. These
Jews (that is the false hearted amongst them, though there were some among them
that were upright) they quarrel with God, wherefore have we fasted say they,
and thou see not: but the sincere soul is humbled in the acknowledgment of
this, That it were a just and righteous thing with God to cast away his prayers
and services; for God owes him nothing etc. and there is a strong and firm
resolution, that (the Grace of God assisting) he will no more return unto
vanity.

3 In a Fast that God has chosen, the soul de^ers not; nor delays nor puts
off the doing of that work which concerns it to promote the end of its Fasting:
You draw nigh to God, that your hearts and ways may be reformed; do you do it
forthwith. The delaying soul, that i^ putting off his Reformation and
Renovation, does not keep such a Fast as God has chosen. If it be not time for
you to do your duty, it is time for you to suffer affliction. If it be not
time for you to carry on a through Reformation, it is time for God to carry on
your sorrows and afflictions toward your desolation. These delaying souls do
not keep a Fast unto God; when you resolve a Fast, you must resolve to begin
and prosecute this work of turning unto God that very day, and carry it on to
the end.

Lastly. A Fast which God has chosen always leaves a warm impression of love
one toward another, and to all mankind as God gives opportunity. Oh when you
have tasted mercy from God, how merciful will it make you to be to others.
Therefore when men are hardhearted, cruel and harsh and their spirits not
inclined to mercy, they have been very little with God to what they ought to be.

Again, Why is this called the Fast which God has chosen?

I answer briefly.

Reas. 1. Because that such a Fast does exactly answer the counsel of Gods will
about it, which he had eternally in himself and which he gives forth to us in
his holy Word, and therefore it is referred to its first pattern and exemplar
unto the will and choice of God.

Reas. 2. Its a Fast that God has chosen, because God prefers this above any
other kind of Fast: There are Fasts many, but this God prefers above all: There
are Fasts which obtain some answer from God, yet are not like these. You know
what Ahab obtained from God by fasting, 1 King. 21 27, 28, 29. God had respect
to his Fasting and humbling himself, and Ahab obtained a Reprieve thereby, so
that the Judgment threatened was not executed in his days; but yet Ahab did not
fast with such a Fast as God has chosen, and delights in, and accepts of.

Reas. 3. Because God takes pleasure and has a gracious respect to his people
in it, and after it, the service is acceptable to him when it is a day he has
chosen, and it ascends as the offering of a sweet smelling Sacrifice: this is
noted in that the other is not an accepted day to the Lord, but this is a day
wherein God takes pleasure in Heaven* if there be joy in Heaven when one sinner
is converted, how much more when a whole Congregation is thus doing, to this
man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite Spirit, Isai. 66.
2. how much more when it is thus with a people.

Reas. 4. He will take his own time to manifest his own gracious acceptance of
his people in such a Fast. You are not presently answered (you will say) as you
expected. Be it so, Remember your time is always, but Christ's hour is not yet
come, but he that shall co^^, will come and will not tarry, beyond his own time
to Answer.

Quest. II. We are come in the second place to consider what those spiritual or
outward benefits are, whereby the Lord is wont to manifest his gracious
acceptance of such a Fast; And in general you may take it as a certain Truth
that when God is pleased to Answer the prayers of his people, he testifies his
acceptance thereof, but more particularly, there are three things whereby God
discovers his acceptance of such a day as this is.

1. When he gives them a praying and fasting frame of Spirit, such a frame as
he requires for this is not in man's power, but it is the gift of Gods grace
when God prepares the heart of the humble, he also hears their Cry, Psalm. 10.
17. when God causes your hearts and your Tongues to pray, he will certainly
cause his ear to hear; for he is the Hearer of Prayer. Prayer is a gift of God,
Romans 8. 26. We know not how to pray, but the spirit helps our infirmities, and
God knows the meaning of the spirit in us. When a man prays by his own
spirit, his own spirit is under his own command, and therefore he is uniform in
his Prayer he is not sometimes straightned, and sometimes enlarged, except it
be through the distempers of his Body, or the like: but when a man prays by
Gods Spirit, there are some strange outgoings of the heart in prayer, which no
mortal is able to command, such enlargedness of heart, such desires after
Christ and his grace, such affliction for sin, and earnest longing for
deliverance, as no man can possibly command in his own heart, and when God
gives such a Spirit, it is an argument of his gracious acceptance. It Is a day
of Humiliation, when God gives you an humble spirit; it is a day of Abstinence,
when God puts into thy heart an earnest desire of divorcement from all sin how
pleasant and profitable soever: this is a pledge of Gods gracious acceptance,
according to that promise, Isai. 65. 24. before they call, I will answer, and
while they are yet speaking, I will hear.

2. When God gives an heart, after fasting and Prayer to put in execution that
which concerns our selves in order to the obtaining our spiritual requests and
supplications presented unto God: that is when there is a reforming spirit, a
purifying spirit, a watchful spirit against sin, when the soul sets himself
with more watchfulness and industry to the work of the Lord; and so a people,
as in Nehe. 10. the whole Chapter, and the last Chap. of Ezra, after their
humiliation, how active were they for a through Reformation, when Church and
Court and all in their places endeavor the removal of sin, and making up the
breach between God and them, it is a certain demonstration that God is near at
hand to Answer them.

3. It is a mavelous gracious Argument of our acceptance with God when he
gives in any of those spiritual or outward blessings which are here mentioned
in the Text, there are eight glorious privileges here engaged to such a person
or people, 1. Light after darkness, v. 8. and 10. then shall thy Light break
forth as the morning, and thy Light shall arise in obscurity, and thy darkness
shall be as the noon day, etc. when God gives a poor (...) Light after
darkness, and Light in obscurity breaking forth as (...) morning, this is a
great benefit. Light signifies not only the inlightning of the understanding,
or quickening you with spiritual Light, but all kind of help and consolation,
and prosperity, and so darkness signifies all kind of affliction, whether it be
sense of sin, or other sorrows, or the like. There are four things in this.

First it is Light in darkness, when you see darkness has covered your Souls
that you have not known what your state and condition has been, and thereupon
has been great affliction and Agony of Soul, and there has been also great
afflictions outwardly, as commonly one affliction goes not alone, or when there
has been distress upon a people, and now God causes Light to spring after
darkness, some glimpses of hope, some raisings up of your Spirits, and
expectation of good days, some comfortable changes of providence, as Paul was
comforted by the coming of Titus which he ascribed to Gods comforting of him,
this is Light after darkness.

2. When this Light that is promised is gradual like the Light of the morning
that shines more and more unto the perfect day you must not say there is no
Light because it is not noon at first, if it be but the dawning of the day, or
the Light of the morning star, you have cause to acknowledge it as an Answer of
Prayers, if it do but foreshow the beginning of your return from spiritual
Captivity, or outward calamity, you are to acknowledge it as a spring^ng Light
which shall go on to the perfect day in full perfection of glory.

3. It is a prevailing and overcoming Light, it may be weak at first, and
obscured through clouds of darkness and temptation, but it shall be victorious
and overco^ing at the last.

Lastly, this Light is from the rising of the Sun of Righteousness, God will
manifest his gracious acceptance to your Souls when the Sun of Righteousness
shall arise with healing in his wings, Mal. 4. 2 that is, be it Light in
Ordinances, or Light in providence it is still a Light from the face of Jesus
Christ, there is something of Christ in it, there are common refreshings that
shine upon men which do not exalt Christ in the Soul but that saving Light that
comes from Christ leads unto Christ, and makes Christ most precious and most
glorious unto the Soul, now this is the Light God promises, whereby he will
testify his gracious acceptance of those that keep the Fast which he has
chosen.

2. Thy health shall spring forth speedily, that is, when God is pleased to
make Fastings healings, now this is his promise here, healing of your Souls, of
your Families, of your Churches of your commonwealths, healing to your affairs
inward and ou^^^^d, spiritual and worldly, there is some kind of healing still,
that God is wont to give f^rth in the Answer of the Prayers of his poor people.

3. When your Righteousness shall go before you, and the Lord shall guide you
continually, ver. 8. and 11. if it be a Fast that God has chosen, this will be
the fruit of it, and what is this Righteousness? the last expression opens
the first, Jehovah your Righteousness shall go before you, and the glory of the
Lord shall be your Rereward for it has refeference to Gods conduct of Israel
through the wilderness, God went before them in the pillar of Cloud by day, and
the pillar of fire by night, and in time of danger the Angel removed and went
behind them as at the Red Sea, Exodus 14. 19, 20. So that their Righteousness
was the Lord in the Cloud. They were a people full of all manner of iniquity,
perverssn^ss and Rebellion. Ay, but says God, I have seen no iniquity in
Jacob, nor perverssness in Israel, Jehovah went before them as a God pardoning
iniquity, transsgression and sin, and so he proclaims his Name, Exo^. 34. and
7. he had never lead them through the wilderness, but that as their
Righteousness he went before them, so when God accepts you graciously, through
the Righteousness of his Son Christ Jesus and so goes before you, this is a
benefit whereby he manifests his gracious acceptance, and the phrase signifies
three things.

1. That he goes before you to seek a place of rest for you, and so our Lord
Jesus Christ is gone before us to Heaven for that end. H^b. 6 20 whether the
Forerunner is, for us entered, even Jesus. When you see that the Lord Jesus has
gone before you, and has born affliction for you though he was holy and
righteous, he has born the curse and dyed for you, and rose again, and
ascended into Heaven, etc. he is gone to prepare your rest Joh. 14. 2. I go to
prepare a place for you.

2. He goes before you in his word, guiding you in the way wherein you ought to
follow him, that you also may attain to rest, and thus he did to Israel in the
wilderness, when God sends forth his Light and his truth to inform your
understandings, and bows your hearts to obedience according to that proportion
of spiritual Light manifested, then he goes before you as your Righteousness.

3. When the Lord goes before you to secure the way unto you as the great
Captain of your Salvation, he leads you as he did Israel, into Canaan, Josh. 5.
13, 14, 15 the Lord Jesus goes before you as the Captain of your Salvation.
This you shall obtain at the Lords hand when you Fast such a Fast as he has
chosen, and he will tread your Enemies under your feet shortly, the Devil, and
the world, and what ever else. And so for a common wealth in time of war, if
they fast sincerely, he will go before them and make their way victorious, and
their end Triumphant, Jehoshaphats Fast brought them to the Valley of Blessing,
2 Chronicles. 20 6. 26.

4. He will also be your Rereward, ve. 8. that signifies the gathering Host
that comes after the rest of the Army, to gather up the weak, and the feeble.
And those that are not able to secure themselves, this is called the gathering
Host, as in the March of Israel through the wilderness, there was the tribe of
Dan, they were the gathering host, Numb. 2. v. 25. to the 31. and this is that
which David refers to Psalm. 27. 10. When my Father and my mother forsake me,
then the Lord will take me up. When thy own heart shall fail, and all succor
from friends and thine expectations are cut off from creature helps, then the
Lord will gather you up, you are fatherless or widows, or the like, that is in
such or such a case of affliction, or under temptations, and you cannot resist
them and the Devil sets upon you with mighty force, and you cannot obtain help
from any other, in such a case, when you fast the Fast that God has chosen,
God himself will be your Rereward, he will come between you and the enemy.
Exodus 14. 19. 20. Isa. 59. 19.

5. He will satisfy your souls in drought, and make fat your bones and you
shall be like a watered garden, etc. v. 11. A time of drought is a time of
general want of rain and thereupon follows, not only want of water, as in Ahabs
days, but want of food also; now in this time of drought God promises to
satisfy your souls and to make you as a watered garden; that is, whatsoever
wants and necessityes have been or may be feared to come upon a person or
people, yet when they fast the Fast which God has chosen, he will satisfy
their souls in drought and make^ at their bones, alluding to Gods dealing with
Israel in the wild^rness, in giving them water out of the Rock, and Manna from
heaven which was not only food and water for their bodies, but spiritual food
and water for their souls so God will deal out a sufficient supply of all that
good that is needful for soul or body in this present life. Psalm 33. 19. To
deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in Famine.

6. He will make your soul as a watered garden, and as a spring of water, whose
waters fail not: As a watered Garden, that is, you shall be enclosed, and
secured from them that might spoil your roots or your fruits, or that might
make any sad and woeful impression upon your foundation, in matte^ (...) civil
policy, or personal considerations, and you shall not be barre^^ unprofitable
in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. A Fast which God has
chosen, is the way to all fruitfulness in all precious fruits like to the
garden enclosed, Cant. 4. 12. And lest you should fear scarcity after this,
saves God, They shall be as a living spring of water, whose waters fa^l not,
Joh. 4. 14. the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water
springing up into Everlasting Life, you shall have springing supplies of
outward and spiritual consolation as the matter may require, and when I say
consolation, I intend the ground of it as well as the sense of it, that is such
supplies of grace, and seasonable knowledge of those supplies, that you shall
not but acknowledge in them Gods everlasting loving kindness

7. There shall be a blessing to your posterity, as well as to your selves,
ver. 12, and there are three things in it, 1. They shall build the old wastes,
this wilderness for ought I know has lain waste from the beginning, and there
were never a Civilized people here before, now fasting and prayer is the way to
build the old wastes of Judah and Israel. 2. Thou shall raise up the Foundations
of many gnnerations, that is, thou, and thy seed. 3. Thou shall be called the
repairer of the breach, the restorer of paths to dwell in many breaches are
made in Churches and in common wealth and upon men's Souls, many breaches upon
the visible Church of God in the world, who are they that shall repair such
breaches? those that observe such a Fast, as God has chosen and the restorer
of paths to dwell in in the times of confusion, and those hurries that are
amongst men about the matters of Religion people loose their paths, and know
not how to order their ways before him to gracious acceptance; you that Fast
with the Fast which God has chosen, God will manifest his gracious acceptance
of you by making you and your posterity Instruments to hold forth the ways of
God clearly, wherein poor Souls may walk with God, and find peace unto their
Souls.

8. Again in the last verse then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord. etc.
There are three things in it, and the sum of all is that such a Fast as God
has chosen shall be powerful and effectual to bring you to the highest
happiness; for first, you shall delight your selves in the Lord, you shall have
God for your chiefest good, and he will be your portion to all Eternity. 2. You
shall ride upon the high places of the Earth, you that are trodden down, shall
have a time of Exaltation in a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, and thou shall
be fed with the heritage of Jacob thy Father, for the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it, that is, after all your sorrows and troubles, you shall find still
that God is your feeder, and that not with common food, but Jacobs heritage,
which was threefold, 1. The blessings necessary for this life.

2. The blessings necessary for his precious Soul* the feeding Ordinances of
God, and 3. The Eternal feeding which is promised at the glorious appearance of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Rev. 7. 17. the Lamb shall feed them and shall lead them
unto living Fountains of water, and God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes, are not these glorious privileges and admirable advantages? these are
the special favors of God, whereby in due time he will manifest his gracious
acceptance of his people, in their fastings and prayers which have been such
as himself has chosen. And thus we have seen the second general point proposed.

3. The next thing is to show the season when God delights to begin to give in
the manifestation of his gracious acceptance of his people: It is true, the
Seasons God has reserved in his own power, and therefore we cannot tell you
the day, Month, or year, but yet there are certain signs that are wont to be
Forerunners of Gods gracious manifestations. Therefore,

I shall give you some general Characters for help of your faith and raising up
your expectations as first, when the evil of affliction has done its work, it
may be God holds you long under some spiritual temptation, or outward pressure,
you are as a Sheaf in threshing upon the Floor, you have stroke after stroke
hardly ever free from Tribulation, yet be content, when affliction has done
its work God will call it back, this was the Centurions Faith, Math. 8. 9
afflictions came not forth without a (...) from God, and as it has its Go from
God, so it has its Commission, it has a wise work to do, its Do this also,
now when it has done its work it shall have its Come, it shall be called off
again. As he afflicts you for your profit so when the end is attained, the
affliction shall be removed, it is to make you partaker of his holiness; see
then how the work of God prospers in your Souls, under trials, afflictions and
Temptations, etc.

2. When your hearts are quickened to urgent importunity for the blessing on the
affliction, you may cry mightily for deliverance from evils felt or feared,
these and those distresses that are upon you; but are your souls wrestling with
God importunately for the blessing, as Jacob, I will not let thee go except
thou bless me. Its not the removing of the rod, but the giving in of the
blessing that may refresh thee, is it the blessing that thy soul is crying for,
certainly God will answer such prayers, as Jacob, after his earnest wrestling
with God, sees the face of God in the face of his brother Esau.

3. When your souls are ready to fail for thirst. In all the exercises and
trials of Gods people, God still has a tender care to prevent this sad
inconvenience, Isa. 57. 16. I will not contend for ever, neither will I be
always wroth, for the spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I have
made: Hence David uses this as an argument, Hear me speedily, my spirit does
fail.

4. When the enemy is most insolent and violent. If the storm be high and
terrible, ordinarily it is not durable, the gust will soon blow over. When the
enemy comes in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a Standard
against him. Isa. 59. 19. God himself will interpose and engage for your souls,
his spirit against your spiritual adversaryes, and the wonders of his
providence against your outward enemies. When he saw that there was none to
help, then his own (...) brought salvation; when they seem to be under the
power of the enemy then it is time for God to work for their deliverance. God
will appear (I say)

5. When you are come to a desperate Stand, you must have help or perish; you
have already suffered Shipwreck and are in the midst of the Flood, in the
midst of the fiery furnace, in the lions den, having received the sentence of
death in your selves, now is the time to trust in the living God who quickneth
the dead. In the mount of the Lord is shall be seen.

Lastly. That which is most comfortable, when your soul is brought to a quiet
and patient submission to the hand and dispensation of God, committing your
selves to his sovereign pleasure and waiting patiently for his salvation,
certainly your deliverance is near. This is a great mystery whilst a soul is
struggling against providence, and is displeased with Gods dispen^ation toward
it, there is cause to fear that deliverance is far off; but when it comes to
submit deliverance is near, and pledges of Gods favor are at hand. 2. Sam. 15.
26. If I shall find favor in the sight of the Lord, says David, he will bring
me back again, but if he say, I have no delight in thee, behold here am I, let
him do to me what seems good unto him. Now David is not far from
deliverance, when he is content that God should fulfill his own pleasure upon
him whatsoever it be; and that this is the method that God is wont to observe
in the way of his providence toward his people, the Apostle tells you, Romans 5.
3, 4. Tribulation works Patience, and Patience, (...), and (...) hope, which
makes not ashamed. It Is a mistake in the mystery of providence, to look for
experience of mercy in deliverance, before the work of patience in
selfresignation to the will of God. Thus of the 3d. thing.

4. The next general Head is to demonstrate to your Faith, that such a Fast as
is of Gods choosing shall have such an issue: This is hard to believe in times
of temptation, therefore (...) to bottom our Faith well, upon such a
foundation that cannot fail. I shall mention these,

1. That If God should fail to manifest his acceptance of his people upon this
account, then these and those that are under the powerful command of seeking
his face, should seek his face in vain; but says God I have not said to the
seed of Jacob, seek ye my face in vain, Isa. 45. 1^.

2. The gracious promises that are before us are a sufficient security that a
Fast that God has chosen, shall bring such gracious acceptance; as those
eight promises mentioned, and also Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me on the day of
trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. And so, 1 Kin. 8.
38. with many other verses before and after: and Christ himself also promises,
that whatsoever ye shall ask in his name he will do it for you etc. John. 14 14.

3. The manner of Gods dealing with his servants establishes this truth unto
us, Psalm. 119. 132. 133. etc. Be merciful unto me, as thou usost to do to
those that love thy name.

4. That God does not suffer the Fastings and the Prayers of others when they
are hearty though not spiritual, to go without their reward. The young Ravens
shall not cry unto him, but he will take care of them; he respects a very Ahab
that sold himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord, 1 Kin. 21. 25.
and yet v. 29. Because he humbles himself before me, I will not bring the evil
in his days. And so when Nineveh humbled themselves, he saved them from
destruction though it was against the very grain of the soul of Jonah. Jon. 3.
10

Lastly. It must needs be so, because there is nothing stands in the way to
hinder it. A Fast that God has chosen removes all impediments that stand in
the way of mercy, the great obstruction is some sin committed, or some habitual
impenitency remaining; for when the heart is truly humbled and broken, the soul
is prepared for some degree of mercy, wherein the acceptance of the Suppliant
may be made manifest. Thus of the fourth general Head.

V. The next thing is the Reason why God will do thus for his people, upon
their fasting the Fast which God has chosen?

I answer 1. Negatively, not for any inherent excellency in their fastings and
prayers, or services, for what benefit has God by our humbling our selves,
laying aside our Ornaments, and so humbling our bodies, or by our diligent
attention to external actions, but positively I shall give you three reasons of
it.

Reas. 1. Because it is a Fast that he has chosen, and therefore it is so
succesfull: were it of man's choosing it might be disappointed, and yet God not
dishonored; but he chooses it and appoints it, and now Gods honor lies at
stake for a gracious answer. It was the glory of God in Israel, to be
manifestly near to that people in all they called upon him for. etc.

Reas. 2. Because the persons are accepted (if such persons) and therefore
their offerings are accepted also. The Petition of a favorite is not easily
rejected by the Prince, especially being such a Petition as his Prince has
chosen and appointed for him. They are in a state of favor with God, and
therefore their Petitions must needs be successful. The spiritual Sacrifices of
this royal holy Priesthood are acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5.

Reas. 3. Because there is an admirable, misterious Communion between God the
Father, Son and holy Ghost, and the right Suppliant or the person that fasts in
the fast which God has chosen, for 1. there is not an holy prayer put up unto
God, but its Original is God the Father, that prayer of Faith which proceeds
from the heart of a Christian, was 1. In the heart of God the Father, and he
through the Intercession and Mediation of his Son, sends it down by his holy
Spirit into the heart of a poor sinner, and so stamps the Image of it upon the
heart of the poor sinner that he believes, and then the Holy Ghost that stamped
it there, takes it from thence, and presents this through Christ unto the
Father, and then the Fathers heart is to give forth the answer through the
Intercession of the Son, and to give notice of it to the Soul of a Christian by
his holy Spirit. And when thou have received the answer, the same Spirit works
in thy heart to return praise and Thanksgiving by the Son unto the Father, so
that here is a mavelous spiritual and mysterious Communion in this, between
God the Father, Son and holy Ghost, and the poor believer, and therefore such
fasting cannot be in vain. Thus of the fifth general head.

6. Of what concernment this may be unto our selves, and truly it is of very
great concernment. We are the people that do succeed Israel. We are Jacob. Gods
people that are under the same profession as the Lord speaks of them here, ver.
2. that seek God daily, and delight to know his ways, this is our profession,
we are a Nation that seek Justice, that is our plea, that we must do right and
not forsake the Ordinances of our God, this I say is our profession that we are
bound to hearken after Gods will, and enquire after the Ordinances of Justice,
we are they that by our daily practice in appearing before God in solemn
Assemblies profess that we delight to approach to him, therefore we are they
that have need to take notice of this great and solemn Truth, that the Fast
that is not of Gods choosing will be ineffectual, but that which is of Gods
choosing will prevail, and that to five or six ends.

1. To build us up in knowledge, there are great mysteries contained in this
Truth. I shall touch those that are of present consideration.

1. It teaches you that there is a vast difference between duty and duty,
between religious performances and religious performances, that which is spoken
of fasting reaches through the whole body of Religion, there is a prayer that
God has chosen, and a prayer that God has not chosen, and so this or that
Ordinance or observation there is that which God will own and accept and there
is that which he will not countenance nor bless: our God is a God that will be
worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, the manner and the end of our worship
discovers what the nature of that service is, or of that particular religious
act which we put forth toward him, look then to your own Spirits in your
worship of God, as it is said of the person worshipping, so it is true of the
worship, he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, but he that is one inwardly,
(Romans 2. last verse.) whose praise is not of men but of God; you may be
outwardly a Christian, and inwardly an heathen in the sight of God, all these
are uncircumcised in heart says the Prophet, when he reckons up the Nations
together with Judah, you may be a Heathen in heart, whilst you are in the
outward man a Christian, your Circumcision may become uncircumcision before
God; alas what is an outward Baptism, if your Souls never reach after spiritual
Baptism, if there be the washing with water without the Laver of Regeneration,
and the renewing of the holy Ghost, can you rest in that? or will God take
pleasure in it? What is it for you to eat the Lords Supper, and not to eat the
Lord who is that Supper? that is to receive Christ therein by Faith, mind the
Spirit with which, and the end for which you wait upon God in holy Ordinances,
What is your prayer, if it be not the prayer which God has chosen? it is but
the expression or voice of a lust that will not be accepted of God, Jam. 4. 3.
you ask and have not, because you ask amiss that you may consume it upon your
lusts, there are many mock services whereby mock-Christians mock God in their
profession. This is a sad mystery, but necessary to be known, there is a form
of godliness without power, this is to make an Image to your selves, and to
feed upon husks, and to deceive your own Souls with shadows, which will profit
nothing; If you think to put off God with outside services, such have a form of
godliness but deny the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3. 5. from such turn away.

2. It concerns us to know how hard it is to awaken a secure sinner that is
covered under a form of godliness: take a profane person and the whole power of
common Light, and common principles of humanity will fall in with the
conviction of his miserable lost condition: tell a Drunkard that he shall drink
in Hell for this his conscience tells him so, when he is sober. So an Adulterer
his Conscience being awakened tells him he shall suffer Eternal Torment for his
moments pleasure. So a griging person his Conscience falls in with the
Conviction, but a man under a form of godliness without the power thereof has
a ready salve for every sore, he stops his Ears with his Tongue, and becomes as
the deaf Adder, hence says God unto this people, Is this the Fast that I have
chosen? and inculcates it again and again, It is not the Fast that I have
chosen, etc. and calls upon the Prophet, ver. 1. Cry aloud, cry out in thy
throat, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, that thou may awaken
them to the consideration of their sin.

3. It concerns us to know that all our spiritual duties and services must come
to the trial, God will not only call us to account for all our open wickedness
and gross acts of Transgression but will try every service we perform; Is this
the Fast that I have chosen, says God? was it such a prayer, such a
participation in this or that Ordinance? Is this your Conference, are these the
holy meetings, are these the Sabbaths? thus God will ask you, and God will
accept none of your Services but they must pass through Gods trial; Therefore
we have need to examine our own Services, and our hearts in them, you are in
your Closets meditating, but is this the meditation God has chosen for Spirit,
for matter and for manner? you are crying and praying, but is this the prayer
that God has chosen? you are reproving, counselling admonishing your Children
or others, but is it in the way that God has chosen? you are dealing with your
Neighbor or brother for some Transgression, but is it such an admonition as
God has chosen? remember that all your actions must come under this question,
whether or no they are such as God has chosen? I choose out their way for them,
says Job, of the time when he was as King among them, so if Christ be your
King, he shall choose your way for you, and you will choose the things that
please the Lord, and will not take any contentment in that which does not
answer the Lords expectation.

2. As it is of great concernment for our knowledge, so it concerns us for our
examination and trial, to try our ways before the Lord our God, if God will
try our fastings, prayers, and other services, we had need to try and examine
our selves. To judge our selves is the way to prevent Gods Judgments. Briefly
examine we our selves concerning this our present Fast, is it a Fast which God
has chosen, as to our preparation for it? have you had solemn and serious
thoughts concerning the way of Gods providence, concerning your persons, your
Families, your Relations etc. have you considered your own Transgressions
before God, and the great cause you have had of deep humiliation before God in
respect of them? The defect of this is a failing of Gods expectation in the
beginning, however you may obtain in the procedure; have you been careful to
abstain from natural, necessary comforts and refreshings, further then
necessity in respect of infirmity calls for, and has your abstinence proceeded
from inward self-abhorrency, because of your sins. Extreme grief takes away the
appetite to eating and drinking. All the self denying acts that are required in
a Fast are to proceed from a deep affliction of heart, otherwise it is but a
shallow performance, and of no worth with God; It is therefore called the
afflicting of the soul, and if it do not come from Soulaffliction, it will be
very unprofitable and unacceptable. Again, are we real, are our hearts through
with God in that solemn profession we make in such a day as this? Are you
indeed sensible of your sins whereby you have provoked the Lord: Our particular
sins, the sins of our Familyes, towns Churches and the sins of the Country? Do
we sincerely look out to God in Jesus Christ for the Spirit of Repentance? Is
it his grace indeed that we look unto for help and succor, and that in the
very mediation of Christ Jesus, through his death and bloodshed? Where is that
spiritual self-abhorrency that should act and carry an end these holy services?
Is there indeed a forgiving spirit? When you come before God are not your
hearts, many of you, full of wrath and anger, are you meekened like lambs
before the Lamb of God in your holy offerings? Do you present your selves upon
that Altar which is the Lamb? Or do you fast for strife and debate, longing to
be at it again, that you may manifest your displeasure when the time is over?
And is there in you a spirit of compassion and working of bowels toward the
poor and needy, whilst you are seeking mercy from God? Do you oblige and engage
your hearts to return to God, and to reform what is amiss in your persons,
Families, Churches, etc. according to the object of your work, and where you
may have influence to the utmost of your power? The Lord help us solemnly to
examine our selves, for if it be not thus with us, it is not the Fast which God
has chosen: and mind what your sin is,

1. It Is like the worshipping of an Idol, you have turned an holy Ordidinance
into loathsome Idolatry, and (as I may speak with holy reverence) you have
carried it toward God, as if he had been one of the Idols of the Gentiles.

2. You have taken the Name of God in vain this day in an extraordinary manner
and so put an extraordinary dishonor upon God, which is a most horrible
profanation of the day, which should be kept as a Sabbath; to keep it only with
outward observance, without an heart spiritually disposed, and graciously
inclined, will you call this an acceptable day to the Lord?

Lastly. Consider what will be the woeful issue, and evil consequence of it
upon your selves, except God give you repentance of your formality in your
services: instead of softening it will harden you, Instead of mortifying sin,
it will quicken it; instead of obtaining grace, it will bring displeasure; it
will drive the Spirit of God from you, and bring Satan near unto you, and
instead of the good you desire, it will bring about the contrary evil; you
will be the worse for it, and not the better: where was there greater
wickedness effected, then has been done by Fasting and Prayer? See the
horrible wickedness in the matter of Naboth, 1 Kin. 21 was ever woman more
hardened then Jezebel? and who like Ahab that sold himself to work wickedness in
the sight of the Lord, whom Jezebel stirred up. It Is the way to be sealed up
under the Tombstone of an hard heart to celebrate a Fast with another Spirit,
manner, and end then God has chosen: Woeful ill consequents come upon persons
and Families upon this account, commonly after a Fast, or solemn Ordinance, if
not performed according to God; men, women, and children are the worse in their
practice: Mal. 2. 13. and this have you done again covering the Altar with
tears, etc. Insomuch that he regards not the offering any more, or receives it
with good will at your hand; when men will fast and pray and cover Gods Altar
with tears, and yet hold fast their carnal, corrupt, and impenitent frame of
heart, they will be worse and worse in their places and Relations as there he
speaks of the wife of youth against whom they had dealt treacherously, etc. And
alas what outward miseries will it bring upon a Family, 1 Cor. 1. 29, 30.
because in eating the Supper of the Lord, they did not eat it, therefore one
was sick, another weak, and another fallen asleep so if in fasting you do not
fast, if in humbling your Souls, you do not humble your Souls, if in praying,
you pray not, if you perform not such Services as God has chosen, it will
bring sickness upon those that are well and weakness and death upon the sick.
It Is mercy when we are thus judged of the Lord, that we may not be condemned
with the world, 1 Cor. 11. latter end.

Again it concerns us to consider what evil Consequents will come upon a people
in this case, whence comes wars whence comes Famine? whence plagues? these, and
those Judgments upon a professing people? because their worship is not
worship, their godliness, their fasting and prayer is not such as God has
chosen, there is not the life and power of godliness in what they offer up to
God and this provokes God to deal dreadfully with them, when lighter
afflictions will not prevail. This brought desolation to Jerusalem, because
they fasted to themselves, and not to the Lord, Zach. 7. 13, 14. Therefore it
is come to pass that as he cried and they would not hear, so they cried and I
would not hear, says the Lord of Hosts, but I scattered them with a
Whirlewind, etc. For they laid the pleasan Land desolate.

Again, it concerns those of us that are true observers of such a Fast as God
has chosen, it concerns them for their consolation as here in the days of the
Prophet Isaiah, when God was pleased to set so many precious hopes before them
for themselves and their posterity, what a comfort was it, etc. This is like to
be your portion if God has inclined your hearts to seek his Name.

1. Object. But you will say, these promises are indeed very glorious, but how
can I take comfort in them? since I find my self falling so exceeding short in
the qualifications required thereto?

I Answer, you must distinguish between ^alling short in degree, and in the
whole, if there be in you no degree of these spiritual qualifications you must
even wait upon God, in pressing upon your hearts the dreadful consequents
thereof, but if there be any, though the least degree, I would not discourage
you, for when we speak of Evangelical duties, we must understand the
qualifications in a Gospel sense, God looks at sincerity, and accepts the
uprightness of the heart though accompanied with much infirmity.

2. Object. Another may say, I have labored many a year, and cannot find my
prayers thus answered. -- Answ. We ought not to judge our selves by the Issues
of Divine providence, but by the operations of Gods Spirit in us, if the work
have been gracious in thy heart, the Issue shall be glorious to thy Soul in the
end, and he that shall come, will come, and will not ^arry.

3. Object. But if these things be necessary to an acceptable Fast, what
benefit is there in a public Fast, wherein the most do fall short of what is
required thereto?

Answ. Whosoever falls short, thou that do keep this Fast that God has
chosen, shall have the blessing thereof. Therefore look to thine own heart, and
thou shall receive the Testimony of his gracious acceptance, God knows how to
save the good Figs, when he destroys a whole Nation of bad, he can find an Ark
for a Noah, and cull out eight persons from a whole world to show them his
Salvation. Besides public Fasts procure at least Reprieves. God will wait to
see the fruit of it, and not put a full end to his patience, till there is no
hope of answering Humiliation by Reformation.

And lastly, it concerns every one of us, to look diligently to our own Souls,
when we have any such service to perform to the Lord our God that it be so done
by us as God has appointed, and that we repent of what has not been according
to Gods mind, and that we take care, that what remains may make it a Fast after
Gods own choice.

Q w^y is that possible? Yes if now at last thy Soul truly repents of thy sin,
and be humbled and melts before God for thy carnality, thy unpreparedness for
the day, and thy unspiritualness in the day. And looking unto Christ's Mediation
for pardon, and acceptance, trusting in his gracious help, you take up
resolutions to return to God, and to exercise mercy and loving kindness amongst
men and to do Justice and Judgment, and to walk righteously, holily, and
humbly with thy God it may turn this very Fast into a time of joy, and in Gods
gracious acceptance, may be esteemed such a Fast as God has chosen.

I would propound a few things here to your consideration as the Issue of this
your Fast, and but propound them briefly.

1 Look into your own hearts, get alone and consider what it is that has been
amiss in hearts and lives for time past, and set a narrow watch over your Souls
for time to come, that you may not provoke God, and because you are weak and
infirm, entreat God to set a watch over you by his holy Spirit.

2. Now take up a resolution to walk with God, in your house in a perfect way,
that neither your selves nor your Relations may be the worse for your Fastings,
and that Judgment may not come upon you in your house, because you have not
glorified God in his house.

3. Use your utmost interest for public good, for the free passage of Justice
and Judgment, Righteousness and Peace in the Commonwealth and Churches; and
though you have no power of your selves, wrestle with God for it that it may be
so.

4. Take care that you hold fast the word of Gods patience in the time of your
trial, hold it fast in Faith and practice, remember that word, He that
continues to the end shall be saved. And again, Let no man take away thy crown.
It is a day of trial, but look to it, that you may be found upright in the day
of trial.

Lastly. Be open hearted, and open-handed to those that are in misery and
affliction, Blessed are the merciful, for they shall find Mercy.

Now to him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or
think, according to the power that works in us, unto him be glory in the
Church of Christ Jesus, throughout all ages world without end, Amen.

FINIS.

