THE Charge of Schism Renewed against the SEPARATISTS, IN ANSWER To the Renewer
of that pretended Peaceable Design, WHICH IS Falsely called, An Answer to Dr.
STILLING-FLEET's late Sermon.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1680.

Doctor Stillingfleet Justified.
THere was lately put into my hand, a thing called an [ Answer to Dr.
Stillingfleet's Sermon] (on Phil. 3. 16.) [by some Non-conformists]: The Sermon
to which it pretends to be an Answer, was chiefly designed to show that the
Non-conformists Meetings in Congregations forbidden by Law, are sinful
Schismatical separations. The design of this (pretended) Answer, is to remove
that Charge; which it endeavors to do by giving, 1. A modest account of the
Non-conformists Meetings. And, 2. Some taste of their Reasons for
Nonconformity. These are two of the three things which we are told ( p. 3.)
were designed in that Discourse.

As to the first, The Pamphlet professes, that the Composers of it are in the
number of those Non-conformists, who do not go from the Parish Church, in
opposition to it, as if such Congregations were no Churches: For they expressly
acknowledge, p. 4. That our Parish Churches are true Churches; and, That it is
their duty to desire and endeavor the Union and Prosperity of those Churches.

And what (says this Author, p. 4.) would the Doctor, or any Conformist have of
us more, unless it be also to join with them there in the participation of the
Ordinances?

As if the Doctor had not plainly enough told him and his Companions in
Separation, that he would have them so true to endeavor after Peace and Union
with the Parochial Churches, as to agree together with them not only in the
same profession of Faith, but in submitting to the same Laws of Government, and
Rules of Divine Worship. This is that which the Doctor would have them do, and
he would have none of them guilty of either a total, or a frequent forbearance
of Communion with this Church, or any of its particular Branches in what
themselves judge lawful, nor of forming separate Congregations under other
Teachers, and by other Rules than what the established Religion allows, p. 20.
Whereas on the contrary, of late Years, the Non-conformists, says he, have
filled the People with greater prejudices (than formerly) against our
Communion, and gather them into fixed and separate Congregations, which have
proceeded to the choice of new Pastors upon the death of old ones; and except
some very few, scarce any either of their Preachers, or People in London, come
ordinarily to the public Congregation, ( p. 22.) Which, says the Doctor, we
lament as a thing which unavoidably tends to our common Ruin, if not in time
prevented; for by this means the hearts of the People are alienated from each
other, etc, It Is this obstinate and destructive course of Separation which the
Doctor designed his Sermon against: In which he has made it his business to
enervate the strength of those Pleas which are made use of by their best
Writers, to justify their Separation.

To which this Pamphlet pretends to be an Answer: And yet the Author of it has
not thought fit to reply particularly to any one passage therein contained, or
to show that what the Doctor has opposed to their Pleas, is either impertinent,
or unsatisfactory. But instead of that he endeavors an Apology for those
Schismatical Practices, by hinting, or holding forth, for I cannot say proving
these Principles.

1. That it is the duty of those who are set apart to the Office of the
Ministry, (supposing them every way to be fit and called) to preach the Gospel
by way of discharge of that Office.

2. That when two Duties come together, so that we cannot perform the one but
we must omit the other; the greater Duty must take place of the less.

3. That Hearing and Preaching being relata, which do mutually put and destroy
one another, the Peoples meeting is authorized by their Preachers commission:
And unless those Preachers do set, and keep up Conventicles, the whole
generation of the Nonconformist Ministers must be laid aside from the exercise
of their Office.

4. The People are bound to meet and hear those Preachers, because they are
convinced in their Consciences, that they do edify more by hearing them, and
so they also have the Plea of [ greater Duty.]

The first of these, he pretends to prove by the Apostles express Authority and
Example, Who when they were threatened and commanded to speak no more in
Christ's Name, have left us their Answer on record, We ought to obey God rather
than man.

Which reason is impertinent and insufficient. Impertinent, 1. Because the
Apostles there spoken of [St. Peter, and St. John.] had an extraordinary
Commission, and Command to preach the Gospel, which our Non-conformists have
not; and therefore, supposing they were forbidden to preach it by men, that
instance would not justify the preaching it not withstanding that Prohibition:
For they can produce no Command of God, which requires them to preach it, and
therefore their not preaching it would be no disobedience to God's Command:
But, 2. It Is more impertinent upon another account, because neither are they
forbidden by the Magistrate to preach the Gospel, but allowed to do it to their
own Families, and to five more, and therefore they may, if they are lawfully
set apart to the Office of the Ministry, exercise their preaching Talent. This
instance therefore being thus impertinent to their Case, it is insufficient to
justify their Practice.

As for his precedent of the three first Centuries, When, said he, the Gospel
was never preached, but contrary to the will of the Magistrate: I deny that
that was well done, unless the Preachers could produce some Command of God for
so doing.

And therefore, for my part, I do very much approve that which this Writer
calls, A slip of the Pen, in Dr. Tillotson's Sermon, That any pretense of
Conscience warrants any man that is not extraordinarily Commissioned as the
Apostles and first publishers of the Gospel were, and cannot justify that
Commission by Miracles as they did, to affront the Established Religion of a
Nation, (though it be false) and openly to draw men off from the profession of
it, in contempt of the Magistrate and the Law. This is a very great and useful
truth, and I was right glad to meet with it in a Sermon preached by that
Eminent Person. And the Author of this Pamphlet has said nothing to the
purpose against it.

He says, that Affirmative Precepts bind semper, but not ad semper: Which we
would fain have pass for a Reason, why Protestants do not use to preach under
the Inquisition: And tells us, There Is Prudence therefore to be used, and
Preachers need not be cast where they will be certainly trampled on. He means
where they that cast them, will be certainly trampled on. And the truth is, if
these Pearl-casters did foresee they should be Rent and Trampled on as they
deserve, I doubt not but they would be brought (by degrees at least) to keep
their precious Truths to themselves, and would be more wary of Preaching in
defiance of the Law that forbids them, if they were sure that the penalty of
the Law would be vigorously and constantly executed upon them: And that they
should get nothing by discharging their ( pretended) Duty, but the ( deserved)
reward of Gaol. But the truth is, there is Money in the case, and good store
(usually) of the Wages of Unrighteousness heaped upon such Malefactors, the
hope whereof tempts them to persist in the gainsaying of Corah; and therefore
they haunt those places most, where most of this Mammon is to be met with:
Which puts me in mind of a Passage in Mounsieur Balzac's [Prince] p. 61. where
reflecting on the Spaniards Voyages into the Indies: It Is their avarice, says
he, makes them cross the Seas, and run to the Worlds end; they publish it is
for the good of Souls, and the desire they have to save Infidels, that draws
them thither; and yet it is very true, that the charity of these good
Christians, carries them only to those Countries where the Sun warms the Earth
into Gold, and is not at all employed toward the farthest part of the Earth
where there are Souls enough to be Converted, but where they can only get Frost
and Snow.

And as for those few of the good Christians we are now discoursing of, that
are less fond of Money because they have less need of it, having competent
Estates of their own; the maintaining and keeping up a party, and the
cherishing and promoting of Schism and Sedition, does their hearts more good
than Money, and is to them a very satisfactory recompense for the factions
pains they take in their Conventicle-Preachments.

But as for those places where they see neither of these ends can be attained,
these Fanatic Missionaries will never believe themselves called to exercise
their Gifts in [ them] though possibly they may want such edisying Preachers,
as these Men pretend themselves to be, ten times more than London and other
Places do, where they commonly reside.

And so much for the first Principle, or Ground produced by this Author, of
Non-conformists Preaching contrary to Law.

The second follows, which is this, that when two Duties come together, so that
we cannot perform the one but we must omit the other; the greater Duty must
take place of the less: Now the two Duties which he supposes, come together in
the Non-conformists Case, are seeling Unity, and preaching the Gospel: If we
keep our parish-Churches, says he, we must not preach the Gospel; if we preach
the Gospel, we must go to private Meetings. (Which by the way is false: For
they may, and I think some few of them do, so far seek Parish union, (at least
in some places distant from London) as to assemble with the rest of the
Parishioners, and attend the Church in the time of Divine Service, and Sermons,
and then preach to their own Flock in their private Meetings afterward). But
our Author instead of proving by sound Arguments, that for them to preach the
Gospel (to more than five besides their own Family) is, 1. Their duty, 2. a
greater duty than to seek the Union of the Nation, by preserving that part of
it which consists in complying with Parish Church Order, he only asks
Questions, Which of these is of greatest moment to the Glory of God? Which is
the greatest Matter, Sir? To all his loose and indigested Talk, my Answer is
briefly this, That in the case now before us, there do not come two duties
together, the one whereof cannot be performed; for they may seek and maintain
the Unity aforesaid, and yet may preach the Gospel to such a number as the Law
allows them to preach to, and that it is his duty, or the duty of the rest of
the Gang to preach to more, he has not yet proved.

The third Principle is, that Hearing and Preaching being relata, which do
mutually put and destroy one another, the Peoples meeting is authorized by
their Preachers Commission; and unless those Preachers do set and keep up
Conventicles, the whole Generation of the Nonconformist Ministers must be laid
aside from the exercise of their Office.

To which I answer. 1. Let your Non-conformists prove, if they can, that they
have any lawful Commission to preach to more than the Law allows them to preach
to. For, 2. If they can show no such Commission it is their duty to be silent
rather than to preach to a greater number. 3. They who hear them, may if they
please, hear other legally-authoriz'd Ministers. 4. It is their duty so to do:
And it is a sin in them to promote and encourage by their presence that Faction,
Schism, and Sedition, which their Preachers are guilty of by preaching against
Law.

The fourth Principle which this Writer pleads in justification of the
Non-conformists, is this, That the People are bound to meet and hear those
Preachers, because they are convinced in their Consciences that they do edify
more by hearing them, and so they also have the plea of [greater Duty.]

Where he takes it for granted, that a man's expectation of receiving greater
Edification, or his persuasion that he shall receive greater profit to his Soul
by hearing Non-conformists, than by hearing his own Conforming Minister, does
make it his duty to absent himself from his own Parish Church, and to go to a
more edifying Conventicle: For which Principle, one would think he should have
endeavored (at least) to have brought some cogent Reason; but (for ought I
see) he has not so much as endeavored it, and if he had, I dare say he could
not have effected it; for it is a very false and pernicious Principle: For as
much as we ought not to do evil, that any, whether lesser or greater, good may
come of it. It Is evil to disobey Authority by transgressing those Bounds, and
breaking that Order, which it prescribes. Our Law requires that every
Parishioner should attend Divine Service and Sermons in his own Parish Church,
and to hear and receive the Word from the mouth of his own Parish-Minister: He
ought to obey that Law, and to expect salutary edification in the way of
obedience to, and compliance with that Order; and he cannot wellgroundedly
expect, or be rightly persuaded he shall receive it in the way of breaking that
Order, and wandering to other Churches and Preachers, especially such as are
disallowed by Law, for that is not God's way of giving it. He may indeed fancy
himself more edifi'd in some respects, but 'twill in the end prove a deluding
Edification, and he will one day find it a damnable thing so to attempt greater
edification in this or that part of Knowledge or Duty, as in the mean time to
neglect other parts of Duty, and to do that which (whatsoever this man pretends
to the contrary) must needs be (interpretatively at least) a contempt of the
Government, a neglect, and consequently discouragement of his own Minister,
with scandal to his conforming Neighbors, and therefore inconsistent with the
rule of Charity, Obedience, and Concord.

Nor is this Principle false in it self only, but very pernicious too in its
consequents, even as to Civils. For if a Parishioner may leave his own
Parish-Minister against that Minister's will, and the will of the Civil
Magistrate, for greater Edification, by the same reason, a Son or Daughter may
on the same account, leave their own Parents, and remove into another Family
against their Parents consent.

The Son or Daughter may pretend (and too often truly plead) that their Father
and Mother are unsanctifi'd Persons, that they are negligent of Religious
Family Duties, and take no care to educate their Children in the fear of God,
and therefore they will forsake Father and Mother, and betake themselves to
some other (Godly) Family for greater Edification: And so this Principle would
produce as great Schisms in Families as it does in Parishes: And therefore let
this greater Edification-Principle go for a great Falsehood, and a ruining
destructive Principle.

He talks, p. 7. Of some universal impression that there is on the hearts of
most honest People, which, says he, makes them tenderly sensible of the wrong
that we have suffered in being turned out of the Vincyard for our Consciences.

To which I answer, That it is a very evil thing for Non-conformists to complain
of suffering wrong for their Consciences, and to make no conscience of doing
it. What do these men mean by pretending they were turned out of Vineyard for
their Consciences? The case was this, When after the King's Restoration, the
Parliament upon due consideration of the horrid Mischiefs and sad Calamities,
the Land had groaned under for several Years, and likewise of the more horrid
Principles which occasioned those Mischiefs and Calamities, both in Church and
State, thought themselves obliged to prevent the like for the future, they
agreed upon an Act of Uniformity to that end, wherein the Peace and
Tranquillity of the State was endeavored to be secured, by enjoining the
renunciation of such seditious and destructive Maxims, as had before disturbed
and ruined it: And the prosperity and good order of the Church provided for, by
imposing the Book of Common Prayer, and requiring assent and consent to the use
of the Matters contained and prescribed in that Book: To which Renunciation and
Imposition the Act obliged all those to submit, who did then, or had at any
time a mind to enjoy any Church-Living, Promotion, or Lecture, in this Nation.
To which Act many men that had then Ecclesiastical Livings, either could not,
or would not Conform: And this they call being turned out of the Vineyard for
their Consciences. When as the truth is, They turned themselves out; being
tempted and prevailed upon so to do, either by their blind and deluded
Understandings, and misguided Consciences, which would not let some of them see
the lawfulness of that required submission and compliance, though they had
studi'd and examined things in order to it, or else by their perverse and
stubborn Spirits, being resolved beforehand not to comply, because they
thought it would be too great a dishonor to them to contradict their former
Principles and Practices, and too great a scandal to the Godly party, for their
Leaders to backslide, and abandon the goodly Reformation they had been
endeavoring and carrying on for so many Years.

Sir, For my own part I must needs confess to you, that I never did so much as
take it into consideration whether I should yield or not yield to what was
required in the Act for Uniformity; and that because, 1. Being fully satisfied,
by occasion of the more serious weighing of such Points in these latter days,
of the unlawfulness of those things which in my younger years I had conformed
readily to, upon little better ground than the example and encouragement of
others, I was brought (I hope heartily and sincerely) to bewail before God my
former conforming to many things, and therefore durst not think of returning to
that, for which I had formerly in such a solemn penitential way judged my self
before the Lord my God. And, 2. Because being now so far gone in years, that I
am come to Jacob' s must die, I cannot live much longer; I was not willing to
do any thing that was scrupulous and doubtful, lest upon my Death bed it should
prove an occasion of any disquiet, or disturbance to me; yet withal I must add,
That it was some farther satisfaction to me, when I found that the very same
things that seemed most dreadful to me, have also swayed most with you in
keeping you off from the Conformity required: Namely, 1. Those great words too
big for my swallow, of unfeigned assent and consent. And, 2. The doing of any
thing that is contrary to that Covenanted Reformation which we had so long and
earnestly prayed and labored for, or that might be scandalous to those that
rejoiced in the first fruits of it, and do still desire and endeavor to
promote it.

These are the very words of that prime, leading, London* Nonconformist, old
Arthur Jackson, in a letter of his, which I have still to show under his own
hand, dated February 26. 62. And I doubt not but most of the Tribe turned
themselves out of the Vineyard upon the same Temptations, and yet these men
have the confidence to cry out of the wrong they have suffered in being turned
out by others. Which is just as if the Romish Priests should complain of the
wrong they suffered by being turned and kept out of England (which was once
such a fruitful Vineyard to them) because such Oaths, and Renunciations, were
imposed upon them, and required to be made and taken by them (for the securing
of the Nation against their Treasonable, and Seditious Principles) as their
Consciences could not comply with. And yet our Author pleads for the Law's just
severity against them, p. 32. of this Pamphlet; where he tells us, That the
Supremacy of the Pope, and the Authority of the King, are inconsistent in this
Land, -- and that the Priest and Jesuit are taken by Law, as Factors for the
Pope, -- and an undermining the Government, is, says he, in all States a
capital Crime. Even so say I. The Authority of the King, and the owning of
those Principles required to be disclaimed in the Act for Uniformity, are
inconsistent in this Land, and therefore that they who will not disown and
declare against those Principles, are taken by Law as Factors for another
Schism and Rebellion, and as Persons that design again to undermine our
Government Civil and Ecclesiastical, and an undermining the Government is in
all States a capital Crime; and well had it been for this Nation, if such an
undermining of it had been made Capital in ours; so far am I from being of this
Author's mind (in his saucy Insinuations in this Page) that 'twas wrong and
iniquity in our Governors to make such a Law (for the good of the Nation) as
accidentally occasioned these Apologists to eject themselves out of their
Ecclesiastical enjoyments.

To these Apologies of theirs for preaching against Law, they presume it will
be said by the Episcopal Party [ But you may Conform.] If so, say they, we must
then desire one or both, of these Learned, Moderate, and Judicious Doctors
(Stillingfleet, and Tillotson) to contribute but this one thing toward it, to
answer the ensuing Objections, those especially which concern the Political
part of Conformity about the Oxford Oath and Subscription. For, say they, If
there be but one particular imposed upon us as a condition of Conformity, which
we prove to be sinful, and they cannot refel it; there is no man has been more
forward than Dr. Stillingfleet, to let us know out of Hales, That it is not the
Refuser but the Imposer, is guilty of the Schism.

That which Mr. Hales said, is this, That there is a Schism in which only one
party is the Schismatic; for where the cause of Schism is necessary, there not
he that separates, but he that is the cause of separation, is the Schismatic.

But with the leave of that great man, and of another that opines according to
that dictate, I do deny that there can be any necessary cause of Schism; for
all Schism is sinful, and there can be no necessary cause of Sin. 2. The
Paragraph is nonsense, if we should accept of Mr. Hales his own definition of
Schism: For, says he, Schism if we would define it, is nothing else but an
unnecessary separation of Christians, from that part of the Visible Church
whereof they were once Members: The Paragraph then must be thus Paraphrased.
There is a Schism in which only one party is the Schismatic; for where the
cause of Schism, that is, of unnecessary separation of Christians, is
necessary, there not he that separates, but he that is the cause of separation
is the Schismatic. The Nonsense whereof appears in its own light. 3. It Is
absurd upon another account; for himself grants, that what Sedition or
Rebellion is in the State, and in reference to Civils, that Schism is in the
Church, and in reference to Ecclesiastical union. He may as well say therefore,
that where cause of Rebellion is necessary, there not he that Rebels, but he
that is the cause of rebellion is the Rebel; which is very pretty when it
happens at any time that the Supreme Governor proves a Tyrant: And so upon
that (or any other less account) is the pretended cause of his Subjects
Rebelling: Indeed, a necessary cause he cannot be, let him be never so great a
Tyrant: But that makes that Dictate which this Author would persuade us the
Doctor makes so much use of, but does not, nor I believe can he tell us where,
so much the more absurd.

That Tract of Schism tells us, That when either false or uncertain Conclusions
are obtruded for truth, and acts either unlawful, or ministering just scruple,
are required of us to be performed, in these cases consent were Conspiracy; and
open contestation is not Faction or Schism, but due Christian Animosity.

I shall not stay to question the truth of this Assertion, as to those parts of
it [ or uncertain] and [ or ministering just scruple]: But though (I should
allow him that) in those cases consent were Conspiracy, yet open contestation
against our proper Governors may be sinful. He has not told us what he means
by the Expression; nor what sort and kind, what measures and degrees of open
Contestation he intended; but I affirm, there is a medium between Consent, and
open Contestation; and that is an humble and modest Refusal to comply with
those imposed Propositions or Actions, which upon due enquiry, and diligent
examination, we judge untrue, or unlawful; and humbly and meekly tendering our
Reasons if required, why we so judge. That any greater Contestation then this
amounts to, of Subjects against their Governors, is in any case necessary or
lawful, is more than I believe can be proved. I am sure if the Contestation be
so open, and proceed so far as either to set up another Bishop in opposition to
the former, or to erect a new Church, or Oratory for the dividing Part to meet
in publicly, Mr. Hales himself pronounces such separations complete Schisms,
and till this be done, the Schism he tells us, is but yet in the Womb. And, as
he goes on, In that famous Controversy in Holland, De Praedestinatione and
Auxiliis; As long as the disagreeing Parties went no further than Disputes and
Pen-combats, the Schism was all that while un-hatch'd; but as soon as one Party
swept an old Cloister, and by a pretty Art suddenly made it a Church, by
putting a new Pulpit in it for the separating Party there to meet: Now what
before was a Controversy, became a formal Schism. Whence it follows that even
in this man's judgment, our Nonconforming Barn-sweepers, and (in them) Pulpit
erectors, in order to meeting and preaching against Law, are formal
Schismatics. To the same purpose, Arthur Jackson aforesaid, in the same Letter
before quoted has these words, -- I confess I dread the falling upon the Rock
of Separation; but as long as I desire not to set up a new Church, but am
willing to join with the Public Assemblies in Hearing and Prayer, and only
withdraw from what is not of Scripture-Institution; I hope this partial Non
communion cannot be justly called Separation.

In the same Tract, Mr. Hales asserts, That it is not lawful, no not for
Prayer, or Hearing, for Conference, or any other Religious Office whatsoever,
for People to assemble, otherwise than by public Order is allowed; neither,
says he, may we complain of this in times of Incorruption: For why should men
desire to do that suspiciously in private which may warrantably be performed in
public? And in another part of the same Treatise, ' What, says he, if those to
whom the execution of the public Service is committed, do some thing either
unseemly, or suspicious, or peradventure unlawful? What if the Garments they
wear be censured, which indeed be, superstitious? What if the gesture of
Adoration be used to the Altars? -- What if the Homilist have preached, or
delivered, any Doctrine of the Truth whereof we are not well persuaded? A thing
which very often falls out, yet we may not Separate, except we be constrained
personally to bear a part in them our selves. The Priests under Eli had so ill
demeaned themselves about the daily Sacrifice, that the Scripture tells us they
made them to stink, yet the People refused not to come to the Tabernacle, nor
to bring their Sacrifice to the Priest. For in those Schisms which concern
Fact, nothing can be a just cause of refusing Communion, but only to require
the execution of some unlawful, or suspected Act. Thus he, which passage by the
way may serve for a rebuke to these men's greater edification-Argument, before
insisted on.

But because that expression [ or suspected Act] comes trumping in our way
again, I shall here take so much notice of it, as to acquaint the Reader, if he
know it not already, that not only very considerable Episcopal men, but some
Presbyterians too, are so far from thinking, that Governors requiring men to
do an Act which they scruple or suspect the lawfulness of, is a just ground for
Separation, that they deny it to be a just ground for nonperformance of that
Act; and on the contrary assert it men's duty in that case to do the thing
commanded. So the French Presbyterian Divines, and Professors at Saumur, (
These. Salmur. de summo Controvers. Judice, Sect. 46.) Sane quum demonstrari non
potest id quod jubetur aut statuitur repugnare regulae a Deo traditae,
acquiescendum esse definitioni non negamus, vel ob hoc ipsum quod sic ab iis
qui ordine legitimo constituti sunt definitum est, quos decet and vero simile
est esse reliquis prudentiores, and perspicaciores. To the same purpose, Baxter
in his Disput. of Church Government, p. 484. As an erroneous judgment will not,
says he, excuse us from disobedience to our Governors, so much less will a
doubtfulness excuse us. If upon advising with our Teachers we remain in doubt
about the lawfulness of some circumstance of Order -- if it may not be
dispensed with without a greater injury to the Church, or cause of God, than
our Dispensation will countervail, then is it our duty to obey our Teachers,
notwithstanding such doubts; for it being their Office to teach us, it must be
our duty to believe them with an Humane Faith, in cases where we have no
evidences to the contrary; and the duty of obeying them being certain, and the
sinfulness of the thing commanded being uncertain, and unknown, and only
suspected, we must go on the surer side.

It Is time now to return to our Apologists, who, I think, have got nothing by
tempting me by that Quotation out of Hales, to consult the Author himself;
since the other Dictates which I met with on this occasion in the same
Treatise, involve their separated, forbidden, Meetings for public Worship in
Anti-Churches of their own, in the guilt of Schism, and make the worshippers
there formal Schismatics.

That some notions in the latter part of this very Pamphlet, contribute very
much to the proving those men Schismatics, whom the former part would excuse
from that Crime. For, p. 31. thus we read, It is not all separation or division
is Schism, but sinful Division. Now the Supreme Authority as National Head,
having appointed the Parochial Meetings, and required all the Subjects of the
Land to frequent them, and them alone, for the Acknowledging, Glorifying, or
National Serving and Worshipping the one only true God, and his Son, whom we
have generally received, and this Worship or Service in the nature of it being
intrinsically good, and the external Order, such as that of Time, and Place,
and the like Circumstances, being properly under his Jurisdiction, it has
seemed to us hitherto, that unless there was something in that Order and Way
prescribed which is sinful, and that required too as a condition of that
Communion, there is no man could refuse his attendance universally on these
Parochial Assemblies without the sin of disobedience, and consequently his
separation thereby becoming sinful, proves Schism. But, says he, if the Scene
be altered, and those separate Assemblies made legal, the Schism in reference
to the National Church, upon the same account does vanish. Schism is a
separation from that Church whereof we ought, or are bound to be Members: If
the Supreme Authority then loose our Obligation to the Parish- Meeting so that
we are bound no longer, the Iniquity (we say upon this account) is not to be
found, and the Schism gone.

From which premises this Conclusion does evidently follow: That until the
Supreme Authority loosens the Obligation of Parishioners to the Parish-Meeting,
they ought and are bound to behave themselves as Members of their respective
Parishes, and not to separate from them. For if they do it is an unlawful
separation, that is, it is Schism.

He says indeed, that no man could refuse his attendance [ universally] on
Parochial Assemblies without the sin of disobedience: To which I say, 1. That
however then they who do universally refuse their attendance, which I presume a
very great number, if not much the greater part of Conventicles do, must be
accounted Schismatics by his own Doctrine. 2. If an universal non-attendance
on Parish-Assemblies be a sinful separation, and consequently Schism, because
it is a sin of disobedience, then every particular absence, and non-attendance
upon them is sinful, and consequently Schismatical, because it is a sin of
disobedience (in Ecclesiastical Matters) against that Authority which requires
the Parishioners of this Nation not only frequently but constantly, to attend
their own Parish Churches.

Now if being thus pressed, he shall think fit to fly off from his words, and
to say, That if the Supreme Authority requires all the Subjects to frequent the
Parochial Meetings, and those only, they who do not frequent them, but be take
themselves to other Assemblies are guilty of such a degree of disobedience as
will amount to Schism, then if any of those Subjects do (but) frequent
Conventicles, (though they are not universally there, but are sometimes present
at their own Churches) they must be granted to be Schismatics; and if so, he
agrees at last with that Doctor and that Sermon, which he pretends to Answer:
In which for ought I observe, the most that Dr. Stillingfleet contends for, is,
That all who own our Parish Churches as true Churches, would not either
totally, or ordinarily, forbear Communion with them in those things which they
judge lawful; nor proceed to form separate Congregations under other Teachers,
and by other Rules than what the established Religion allows, ( p. 20.) whereas
(as he complains, p. 22.) Except some very few, scarce any either of the
dissenting Preachers or People in London, come ordinarily to the public
Congregations; upon which account he charges them with Schism; in which guilt
this very Author does (for ought I see) involve them in this very Pamphlet,
which was designed to vindicate them from that Guilt.

To which Pamphlet I shall say no more at present, because I have already
replied to all that part of it in which the Doctor's Sermon is concerned: For
the following parts of it which are taken up in Apologizing for their Preachers
Non* conformity, and their refusing to comply with those things which are
imposed upon them, to make them Legal Ministers of this Church and Nation, are
perfectly alien and impertinent to Dr. Stillingfleet's Sermon.

In the 19th P. whereof he himself professes, that he did not intend to speak
of the Terms upon which Persons are to be admitted among us, to the exercise of
the Function of the Ministry, but of the Terms of Lay-Communion, that is, those
which are necessary for all Persons to join in our Prayers and Sacraments, and
other Offices of Divine Worship. -- Some of the most impartial of the
Dissenters themselves confessing, That very little is to be said on the behalf
of the Peoples separating; from whom none of those Subscriptions, or
Declarations are required, that are required of those that would be Authorized
Preachers. So that the People, says he, are condemned in their separation by
their own Teachers; But how they can preach lawfully to a People who commit a
fault in hearing them, the Doctor professes not to understand. An opposite
Answer to which one passage of the Doctor's Sermon would have been more to the
purpose, than all that these Apologists say for themselves in this Pamphlet. In
which they have not been so kind as to assist the Doctor's Intellectuals in
this matter, by making any other Apologies for the Peoples separating, than
what have been already Answered; and therefore I have done the Task I undertook
in reference to that Sermon; and shall not (at this time at least) take any
notice of the Objections made by this Author, in behalf of their Preachers, to
the Reordination, Declaration, and Subscription, required in the Act for
Uniformity, nor manifest the Blunders, Falsehoods, and Impertinencies contained
in those Objections.

FINIS.
Henry Brome's Advertisement, 1680.
WHereas there are several Discourses and Pamphlets abroad in the World, that
pass for the Writings of Mr. Roger L'Estrange; wherein he never had any hand at
all: This is to Advertise the Reader, that he has lately Published these
following Pieces, (all but the Three last) and no other.

Toleration Discussed, in a Dialogue betwixt a Conformist and a Nonconformist,
and betwixt a Presbyterian and an Independent. Seneca's Morals Abstracted. The
Guide to Eternity. Tully's Offices, in English. Twenty Select Colloquies of
Erasmus in English. Tyranny and Popery, Lording it over the Consciences and
Lives of the King and People. The Reformed Catholic. The History of the Plot,
in Folio. The Free born Subject. The Case put for the Duke of York. An Answer
to the Appeal. Seasonable Memorials. The Parallel, or, The Growth of Knavery. A
Dialogue betwixt a Citizen and Bumpkin. A Dialogue betwixt a Citizen and
Bumpkin, the second Part. A further Discovery of the Plot, with a Letter to Dr.
Titus Oats. An Answer to a Letter of Libellers. The Gentleman Apothecary. Five
Love Letters Translated. Discovery on Discovery in a second Letter to Dr. Titus
Oats. The Committee, or, Popery in Masquerade, curiously done in a
Copper-Plate. Narrative of the Plot.
The Way of Peace. The Arts and Pernicious Designs of Rome. The Conspiracy of
Atheism and Schism.

