White Hall, August 19. 1695. This Morning came in an Express from my Lord
Berkeley, with an Account of the Bombarding of CALAIS.
Published by Authority.
MY Lord Berkeley anchored with the Fleet before Calais the 16th of this month,
but it proving too calm, nothing was done till next day, when about 11 in the
morning Colonel Richards, with the Bomb Vessels, stood in to the Eastward of
the Town, and Anchoring in 3 Fathom Water, began to Bombard it with such good
Success, that by one a Clock the Town was seen on Fire in several places; at
which time the Enemies half Galleys came out, and stood to the Eastward under
their own Shore, thinking thereby to annoy the Bomb Ships; but our Brigantines,
and several Men of War standing in to them, Commanded by Captain Greenaway,
gave them such a Reception, as put them in great Confusion, and with much ado
they regained the Peer-heads; After which we received no other disturbance than
the usual Salutes of their Cannon and Mortars from their several Batteries. Our
Bomb Vessels continued firing till toward 5 at Night, during which time we
Shot into the Town about 600 Shells, which by the several Fires we saw, we
judge to have done very considerable Execution. We have received little Damage,
either as to Men killed, or Damage done to our Vessels. Captain Osborne of the
Alborough Ketch was killed.

Falmouth, August 15. On the 12th came into this Port two Zealand Privateers,
called the King William, and the Middleburg, of 26 and 24 Guns; They have been
out two Months, and taken three French Privateers, and one Pink laden with Wine
and Brandy. The same Evening came in sight of this place about 14 Sail of
Hamburghers, under Convoy of a Man of War of 50 Guns; They came from Milford
Haven with the Streights Fleet, but could not keep way with them; And on the
12th a Dutch Vessel was taken out of their Company by 3 French Privateers, but
the Litchfield Frigate coming in, gave Chase to them.

Plymouth, Aug. 16. The 14th came into this Port His Majesty's Ship the
Litchfield, and brought in a Ship of 140 Tuns, called the Justice of Amsterdam,
which she retook the 12th instant off Falmouth. Yesterday came in the Rupert
from Bristol, with a small French Privateer that was lately taken near Milford.

The Dutch Mail of Friday last is come in, and brings the following Advices.
From the Kings Camp before the Castle of Namur, August 15/25. 1695.
THese three last nights we carried on our Trenches about 500 Paces, 80 Yards
distant one behind the other, and we are come within 200 Paces of the Enemies
Redoubt.

The Enemy made a Review of their Troops on Monday at Soignies, but did not
march to Senef as was said. Yesterday they came to Felluy, between Nivelle and
Seneff, where they still continue.

The Forces of Lunenburg and Hesse are come up to us: The Foot encamped last
night within half a League of the Town, and passed the Maese this day at Noon,
being about 7000 men, who have taken Post in order to assist at the Siege. The
Horse and Dragoons, making 22 Squadrons, joined last night the main Army, under
the Command of Prince Vaudemont, at Mazy.

This Evening all things were prepared to Attack a Stone Redoubt at the Foot of
the Cohorne, near the Sambre; but upon the approach of our Men, a Lieutenant
and 15 of the Enemy that were in it, Surrendered.

Our Batteries continue to play upon the Castle and Coehorne with very good
Effect, and in 2 or 3 days we hope our Breaches will be ready for a general
Assault.

Hague, Aug. 26. The Letters from Paris say, the French King was ill of the
Gout, accompanied with a Fever.

Paris, Aug. 22. The 20th instant arrived at Versailles Monsieur de Puisequr,
Major General of the French Army in Flanders, being dispatched by the Marefchal
de Villeroy to lay before the French King the different Opinions of the General
Officers concerning the relief of Namur, whereupon a Council was held the next
day, and presently after he returned Post with further Orders to the Marshall
de Villeroy. The French Detachement from the Rhine arrived the 17th at Rocroy,
and from thence would continue their march to Flanders. They continue to work
at Toulon on the fitting out of several Men of War; which they think to have
ready by the middle of the next mouth. Monsieur de Noailles, Bishop of Chalons,
is named to be Archbishop of Paris; he is Brother of the Marefchal of that Name.

From Prince Lewis of Baden's Camp at Ravensberg, Aug. 19. The 16th Prince
Lewis received Advice, That the French had detached 10 or 12000 men toward
Hagenbach, wiith Orders to pass the Rhine there; Whereupon a Council of War was
held, and the next day our Army marched and encamped on the Gensberg, our Right
near Wiseloch, and our Left toward Malsch. Prince Lewis has sent Lieutenant
General Swartz, with 4 Battalions and 7 Squadrons toward Mentz, with orders to
join the Hussars and Dragoons that are there under Count Palfi, and to pass the
Rhine in order to give the Enemy a Diversion.

Francfort, Aug. 20. The Forces of Munster are, it is said, ordered to follow
the Hessiens and Lunenburgers to Flanders; they lie at present at Pungstat near
Darmstat, where the Foot will be shipped to morrow, and so pass by water to Mentz
and Coblentz.

Vienna, Aug. 13. The Imperial Army was still encamped the 6th instant at
Buckin, where the Elector of Saxony would arrive in few days. The Grand Vizier
was expected at Belgrade about the middle of this month, near which place there
lay encamped about 20000 Turks. It Is reported, that the Cham of Tartary is
returning home again upon the News of Azof's being taken by the Moscovites.

Turin, Aug. 13. The Imperial Infantry, that was at Casal, marched last Tuesday
to Rivoli. And the Troops of his Royal Highness about the same time to
Buriasque; Our Horse is encamped at Oquette and la Veillane. In the mean time
they continue to work on the demolishing of Casal, in which the French make all
the delay they can. The Governor of Milan is expected here in a day or two to
consult with his Royal Highness concerning some farther Enterprise.

Venice, Aug. 12. The late Captain General Zeno and Signior Pisani, having
performed their Quarantaine, desire a Trial concerning their Proceedings in the
Battle of Scio. Our Fleet was by our last Advice off Andros; and the Enemy
avoided meeting them.

Printed by Edw. Jones in the Savoy. 1695.


