An Historical and Geographical Account OF THE PROVINCE and COUNTRY OF
PENSILVANIA; AND OF West-New-Jersey IN AMERICA.

The Richness of the Soil, the Sweetness of the Situation. the Wholesomness of
the Air, the Navigable Rivers, and others, the prodigious Increase of Corn, the
flourishing Condition of the City of Philadelphia, with the stately Buildings,
and other Improvements there. The strange Creatures, as Birds, Beasts, Fishes,
and Fowls, with the several sorts of Minerals, Purging Waters, and Stones,
lately discovered. The Natives, Aborogines, their Language, Religion, Laws, and
Customs; The first Planters, the Dutch, Sweeds, and English, with the number of
its Inhabitants; As also a Touch upon George Keith's New Religion, in his
second Change since he left the QUAKERS

With a Map of both Countries.

By GABRIEL THOMAS, who resided there about Fifteen Years.

London, Printed for, and Sold by A. Baldwin, at the Oxon Arms in Warwick Lane,
School.

THE DEDICATION.
Friend William Penn,
I Here present Thee with a succinct (yet complete) Account of the late.
Improvement, and Present State of the Noble Province, and Fertile Country of
Pensilvania; with the strange things that have been found there, as the
Salamander-Stone, and several others, mentioned in this Treatise; discovered
since thou came out of those Parts. I desire Thee to excuse me for addressing
to Thee, such a Plain and Peasant-like Piece; yet however homely or coarse it
may appear, Thou will find here a true and genuine Description of that (once)
obscure, though (now) glorious Place. So considering how generous and candid a
Man Thou art, I know thou will bear with my weak and imperfect Performance, and
accept of my good Meaning and kind Intention, which may encourage me, in time
to come, to add some more Memoirs to this rough Essay of mine. Being unwilling
to tire Thee with any long or tedious Epistle, I take my Leave of Thee,

(Most Noble and Excellent Governor) and am Thy hearty Well-wisher, ever ready
to serve Thee on all Occasions, (in the way of Truth,) Gabriel Thomas.

THE PREFACE.
Reader,
THere never having been any fair or full Account given to the World of
Pensilvania, I thought the Curious would be gratified with an ample Description
thereof.

For though this Country has made little Noise in Story, or taken up but small
room in Maps, yet thus much with great Justice may be said of it, that
notwithstanding the Difficulties and Inconveniencie^ the First English
Collonies met with before they were well settled there, yet the mighty
Improvements, Additions, and Advantages that have been made lately there, are
well worth Communicating to the Public, and I am sensible they will be well
received.

The late Tedious, Hazardous, and Expensive War (in which England, in
Conjunction with the Allies was so deeply engaged) was without doubt no small
Bar or Obstacle to the Flourishing of this New Country. The great
Discouragements the Traders thither lay under, (together with the frequent
Capture of their Ships out and home, could not choose but baulk them in their
honest Endeavors, which (now Peace is restored) they may pursue with greater
Security and Satisfaction.

Nor is there the least question or doubt to be made, but this Noble Spot of
Earth will thrive exceedingly, and that in a short time too, and advance
considerably to the mighty Advantage of the Present and Future Propietors, who
have, and are willing to give all due Encouragement to any that shall Transport
themselves thither.

I could say much here in Praise of that sweet Tract of Land, but having spoken
so largely and particularly thereof in the Book it self, I shall forbear the
least mention in this place. Nor will I Anticipate or forestal thee, by
presenting thee here with what thou will find there, with the greater
Satisfaction. And so I bid thee heartily farewell.

Gab. Thomas.

map of east Pennsylvania and west New Jersey PENNSYLVANIA and WEST JERS^^


THE HISTORY OF Pensilvania, etc.
PEnsilvania lies between the Latitude of Forty and Forty five Degrees:
West-Jersey on the East, Virginia on the West, Maryland South, and Canada on
the North. In Length three hundred, and in Breadth one hundred and eighty Miles.

The Natives, or first Inhabitants of this Country in their Original, are
supposed by most People to have been of the Ten Scattered Tribes, for they
resemble the Jews very much in the Make of their Persons, and Tincture of their
Complexions: They observe New Moons, they offer their first Fruits to a Maneto,
or supposed Deity, whereof they have two, one, as they fancy, above (good,)
another below (bad,) and have a kind of Feast of Tabernacles, laying their
Altars upon Twelve Stones, observe a sort of Mourning twelve Months, Customs of
Women, and many other Rites to be touched (here) rather than dwelt upon, because
they shall be handled more at large at the latter end of this Treatise.

They are very Charitable to one another, the Lame and the Blind (amongst them)
living as well as the best; they are also very kind and obliging to the
Christians.

The next that came there, were the Dutch, (who called the Country New
Neitherland) between Fifty and Sixty Years ago, and were the first Planters in
those Parts; but they made little or no Improvement, (applying themselves
wholly to Trafique in Skins and Furs, which the Indians or Natives furnished
them with, and which they Bartered for Rum, Strong Liquors, and Sugar, with
others, thereby gaining great Profit) till near the time of the Wars between
England and Them, about Thirty or Forty Years ago.

Soon after them came the Swedes and Fins, who applied themselves to Husbandry,
and were the first Christian People that made any considerable Improvement
there.

There were some Disputes between these two Nations some Years, the Dutch
looking upon the Swedes as Intruders upon their Purchase and Possession, which
was absolutely terminated in the Surrender made by John Rizeing, the Swedes
Governor, to Peter Styreant, Governor for the Dutch, in 1655. In the Holland
War about the Year 1665. Sir Robert Carr took the Country from the Dutch for
the English, and left his Cousin, Captain Carr, Governor of that place; but in
a short time after, the Dutch re-took the Country from the English, and kept it
in their Possession till the Peace was concluded between the English and them,
when the Dutch Surrendered that Country with East and West-Jersey, New York,
(with the whole Countries belonging to that Government) to the English again.
But it remained with very little Impovement till the Year 1681. in which
William Penn Esquire; had the Country given him by King Charles the Second, in lieu
of Money that was due to (and signal Service done by) his Father, Sir William
Penn, and from him bore the Name of Pensilvania.

Since that time, the Industrious (nay Indefatigable) Inhabitants have built a
Noble and Beautiful City, and called it Philadelphia, which contains above two
thousand Houses, all Inhabited; and most of them Stately, and of Brick,
generally three Stories high, after the Mode in London, and as many several
Families in each. There are very many Lanes and Alleys, as first, Huttons-Lane,
Morris-Lane, Jones's-Lane, wherein are very good Buildings; Shorters-Alley,
Yowers-Lane, Wallers-Alley, Turners-Lane, Sikes-Alley, and Flowers-Alley. All
these Alleys and Lanes extend from the Front Street to the Second-Street. There
is another Alley in the Second Street, called Carters-Alley. There are also
besides these Alleys and Lanes, several fine Squares and Courts within this
Magnificent City, (for so I may justly call it.) As for the particular Names of
the several Streets contained therein, the Principal are as follows, viz.
Walnut-Street, Vine-Street, Mulberry-Street, Chesnut-Street, Sassafras-Street,
taking their Names from the abundance of those Trees that formerly grew there;
High Street, Broad-Street, Delaware-Street, Front-Street, with several of less
Note, too tedious to insert here.

It has in it Three Fairs every Year, and Two Markets every Week. They kill
above Twenty Fat Bullocks every Week, in the hottest time in Summer, for their
present spending in that City, besides many Sheep, Calves, and Hogs.

This City is Situated between Schoolkill-River and the great River Delaware,
which derives its Name from Captain Delaware, who came there pretty early:
Ships of Two or Three Hundred Tuns may come up to this City, by either of these
two Rivers. Moreover, in this Province are Four Great Market Towns, viz.
Chester, the German Town, New Castle, and Lewis-Town, which are mightily
Enlarged in this latter Improvement. Between these Towns, the Watermen
constantly Ply their Wherries; likewise all those Towns have Fairs kept in
them, besides there are several Country Villages, viz. Dublin, Harford,
Merioneth, and Radnor in Cumbry; all which Towns, Villages and Rivers, took
their Names from the several Countries whence the present Inhabitants came.

The Air here is very delicate, pleasant, and wholesome; the Heavens serene,
rarely overcast, bearing mighty resemblance to the better part of France; after
Rain they have commonly a very clear Sky, the Climate is something Colder in
the depth of Winter, and Hotter in the height of Summer; (the cause of which is
its being a Main Land or Continent; the Days also are two Hours longer in the
shortest Day in Winter, and shorter by two Hours in the longest Day of Summer)
than here in England, which makes the Fruit so good, and the Earth so fertile.

The Corn-Harvest is ended before the middle of July, and most Years they have
commonly between Twenty and Thirty Bushels of Wheat for every one they Sow.
Their Ground is harrowed with Wooden Tyned Harrows, twice over in a place is
sufficient; twice mending of their Plow-Irons in a Years time will serve. Their
Horses commonly go without being shod; two Men may clear between Twenty and
Thirty Acres of Land in one Year, fit for the Plough, in which Oxen are chiefly
used, though Horses are not wanting, and of them Good and well shaped. A Cart
or a Wain may go through the middle of the Woods, between the Trees without
getting any damage, and of such Land in a convenient place, the Purchase will
cost between Ten and Fifteen Pounds for a Hundred Acres. * Here is much Meadow
Ground. Poor People both Men and Women, will get near three times more Wages
for their Labor in this Country, than they can earn either in England or Wales.

What is Inhabited of this Country, is divided into Six Counties, though there
is not the Twentieth Part of it, yet Peopled by the Christians: It has in it
several Navigable Rivers for Shipping to come in, besides the Capital Delaware,
wherein a Ship of Two Hundred Tuns may Sail Two Hundred Miles up. There are
also several other small Rivers, in number hardly Credible; these, as the
Brooks, have for the most part gravelly and hard Bottoms; and it is supposed
that there are many other further up in the Country, which are not yet
discovered; the Names of the aforesaid Rivers, are, Hoorkill-River, alias Lewis
River, which runs up to Lewis Town, the chiefest in Sussex County; Cedar-River,
Muskmellon-River, all taking their Names from the great plenty of these things
growing there abouts; Mother-kill alias Dover-River, St. Jones's alias
Cranbrook-River, where one John Curtice lives, who has Three Hundred Head of
Neat Beasts, besides great Numbers of Hogs, Horses, and Sheep; Great
Duck-River, Little Duck-River, Black-Bird-River, these also took their Original
Names from the great Numbers of those Fowls which are found there in vast
quantities; Apequinemy-River, where their Goods come to be Carted over to
Maryland. St. George's- River, Christen-River, Brandy-Wine-River, Vpland alias
Chester-River, which runs by Chester-Town, being the Shire or County-Town;
Schoolkill-River, Frankford-River, near which, Arthur Cook has a most Stately
Brick-House; and Nishamany-River, where Judge Growden has a very Noble and
Fine House, very pleasantly Situated, and likewise a Famous Orchard adjoining
to it, wherein are contained above a Thousand Apple Trees of various sorts;
likewise there is the famous Derby-River, which comes down from the Cumbry by
Derby-Town, wherein are several Mills, viz. Fulling-Mills, Corn-Mills, etc.

There is curious Building-Stone and Paving-Stone, also Tile-Stone, with which
latter, Governor Penn covered his Great and Stately Pile, which he called
Pennsbury-House, the Name it still retains. There is likewise Iron-Stone or
Oar, (lately found) which far exceeds that in England, being Richer and less
Drossy; some Preparations have been made to carry on an Iron-Work: There is
also very good Limestone in great plenty, and cheap, of great use in
Buildings, and also in Manuring Land, (if there were occasion) but Nature has
made that of it self sufficiently Fruitful; besides here are Load-Stones,
Ising-Glass, and (that Wonder of Stones) the Salamander-Stone, found near
Brandy-Wine-River, having Cotton in Veins within it, which will not consume in
the Fire, though held there a long time.

As to Minerals, or Metals, there is very good Copper, far exceeding ours in
England, being much Finer, and of a more glorious Color. Not two Mile from the
Metropolis, are also Purging Mineral-Waters, that pass both by Siege and Urine,
all out as good as Epsom: And I have reason to believe, there are good Coals
also, for I observed, the Runs of Water have the same Color as that which
proceeds from the Coal-Mines in Wales.

Here is curious Diversion in Hunting, Fishing, and Fowling, especially upon
that Great and Famous River Suskahanah, which runs down quite through the heart
of the Country to Maryland, where it makes the Head of Chesepeck-Bay, in which
place there are an Infinite Number of Sea and Land Fowl, of most sorts, viz.
Swans, Ducks, Teal, (which two are the most Grateful and most Delicious in the
World) Geese, Diverse, Brands, Snipe, Curlew; as also Eagles, Turkies (of Forty
or Fifty Pound Weight) Pheasants, Partridges, Pigeons, Heath-Birds,
Black-Birds; and that Strange and Remarkable Fowl, called. (in these Parts) the
Mocking-Bird, that Imitates all sorts of Birds in their various Notes. And for
Fish, there are prodigious quantities of most sorts, viz. Shadds Cats-Heads,
Sheeps-Heads, Herrings, Smelts, Roach, Eels, Perch. As also the large sort of
Fish, as Whales (of which a great deal of Oil is made) Salmon, Trout, Sturgeon,
Rock, Oysters, (some six Inches long) Crabs, Cockles, (some as big as Stewing
Oysters of which are made a Choice Soupe or Broth) Canok and Mussels, with many
other sorts of Fish, which would be too tedious to insert.

There are several sorts of wild Beasts of great Profit, and good Food; viz.
Panthers, Woolves, Fither, Deer, Beaver, Otter, Hares, Musk-Rats, Minks,
Wild-Cats, Foxes, Rackoons, Rabits, and that strange Creature, the Possam, she
having a false Belly to swallow her Young ones, by which means she preserves
them from danger, when any thing comes to disturb them. There are also Bears
some Wolves, are pretty well destroyed by the Indians, for the sake of the
Reward given them by the Christians for that Service. Here is also that
Remarkable Creature the Flying-Squirrel, having a kind of Skinny Wings, almost
like those of the Batt, though it has the like Hair and Color of the Common
Squirrel, but is much less in Bodily Substance; I have (my self) seen it fly
from one Tree to another in the Woods, but how long it can maintain its Flight
is not yet exactly known.

There are in the Woods abundance of Red Deer (vulgarly called Stags) for I
have bought of the Indians a whole Buck, (both Skin and Carcass) for two Gills
of Gunpowder. Excellent Food, most delicious, far exceeding that in Europe, in
the Opinion of most that are Nice and Curious People. There are vast Numbers of
other Wild Creatures, as Elks, Bufalos, etc. all which as well Beasts, Fowl,
and Fish, are free and common to any Person who can shoot or take them, without
any let, hinderance or Opposition whatsoever.

There are among other various sorts of Frogs, the Bull-Frog, which makes a
roaring noise, hardly to be distinguished from that well known of the Beast,
from whom it takes its Name: There is another sort of Frog that crawls up to
the tops of Trees, there seeming to imitate the Notes of several Birds, with
many other strange and various Creatures, which would take up too much room
here to mention.

Next, I shall proceed to instance in the several sorts of Wild Fruits, as
excellent Grapes, Red, Black, White, Muscadel, and Fox, which upon frequent
Experience have produced Choice Wine, being daily Cultivated by skilful
Vinerons; they will in a short space of time, have very good Liquor of their
own, and some to supply their Neighbors, to their great advantage; as these
Wines are more pure, so much more wholesome; the Brewing Trade of Sophisticating
and Adulterating of Wines, as in England, Holland (especially) and in some
other places not being known there yet, nor in all probability will it in many
Years, through a natural Probity so fixed and implanted in the Inhabitants, and
(I hope) like to continue. Wallnuts, Chestnuts, Filberts, Heckery-Nuts,
Hartleberries, M^lberries, (white and black) Rasberries, Strawberries,
Cramberries, Plumbs of several sorts, and many other Wild Fruits, in great
plenty, which are common and free for any to gather; to particularize the Names
of them all, would take up too much time; tire, not gratify the Reader, and be
inconsistent with the intended Brevity of this little Volume.

The common Planting Fruit Trees, are Apples, which from a Kernel (without
Inoculating) will shoot up to be a large Tree, and produce very delicious,
large, and pleasant Fruit, of which much excellent Cider is made, in taste
resembling that in England pressed from Pippins and Pearmains, sold commonly
for between Ten and Fifteen Shillings per Barrel. Pears, Peaches, etc. of which
they distill a Liquor much like the taste of Rumm, or Brandy, which they Yearly
make in great quantities: There are Quinces, Cherries, Goosberries, Currants,
Squashes, Pumpkins, Water-Mellons, Muskmellons, and other Fruits in great
Numbers, which seldom fail of yielding great plenty. There are also many
curious and excellent Physical Wild Herbs, Roots, and Drugs of great Virtue,
and very sanative, as the Sassafras, and Sarsaparilla, so much used in
Diet-Drinks for the Cure of the Veneral Disease, which makes the Indians by a
right application of them, as able Doctors and Surgeons as any in Europe,
performing celebrated Cures therewith, and by the use of some particular Plants
only, find Remedy in all Swellings, Burnings, Cuts, etc. There grows also in
great plenty the Black Snake-Root, (famed for its sometimes preserving, but
often curing the Plague, being infused only in Wine, Brandy or Rumm)
Rattle-Snake-Root, Poke-Root, called in England Jallop, with several other
beneficial Herbs, Plants and Roots, which Physicians have approved of, far
exceeding in Nature and Virtue, those of other Countries.

The Names of the Counties are as follows; First, Philadelphia County;
Second, Bucks County; Third, Chester County; Fourth, New Castle County; Fifth,
Kent County; Sixth, Sussex County. The chiefest and most commodious places for
raising Tobacco, as also for Breeding and Improving all sorts of Cattle, are
the Counties of Kent and New Castle; the other chiefly depend upon Raising and
Improving English Grain, of which they have a prodigious Increase, which I have
particularly instanced in the beginning of this Book, both as to their Quality
and Quantity: All those Counties also very much abound in all sorts of Cattle,
both small and great, for the Use and Service of Man.

Their sorts of Grain are, Wheat, Rye, Pease, Oats, Barley, Buck-Wheat, Rice,
Indian-Corn, Indian-Pease, and Beans, with great quantities of Hemp and Flax;
as also several sorts of eating Roots, as Turnips, Potatoes, Carrats, Parsnips,
etc. all which are produced Yearly in greater quantities than in England, those
Roots being much larger, and altogether as sweet, if not more delicious;
Cucumbers, Coshaws, Artichokes, with many others; most sorts of Saladings,
besides what grows naturally Wild in the Country, and that in great plenty
also, as Mustard, Rue, Sage, Mint, Tanzy, Wormwood, Pennyroyal and Purslain,
and most of the Herbs and Roots found in the Gardens in England. There are
several Husbandmen, who sow Yearly between Seventy and Eighty Acres of Wheat
each, besides Barley, Oats, Rye, Pease, Beans, and other Grain.

They have commonly Two Harvests in the Year; First, of English Wheat, and next
of Buck, (or French) Wheat. They have great Stocks both of Hogs and Horses,
kept in the Woods, out of which, I saw a Hog killed, of about a Year old, which
weighed Two Hundred weight; whose Flesh is much sweeter, and even more luscious
than that in England, because they feed and fatten on the rich (though wild)
Fruits, besides those fatned at home by Peaches, Cherries and Apples. Their
Horses are very hardy, insomuch that being very hot with riding or otherwise,
they are turned out into the Woods at the same Instant, and yet receive no
harm; some Farmers have Forty, some Sixty, and from that Number to Two or Three
Hundred Head of Cattle: Their Oxen usually weigh Two Hundred Pounds a Quarter.
They are commonly fatter of Flesh, and yield more Tallow (by feeding only on
Grass) than the Cattle in England. And for Sheep, they have considerable
Numbers which are generally free from those infectious Diseases which are
incident to those Creatures in England, as the Rot, Scab, or Maggots; They
commonly bring forth two Lambs at once, some twice in one Year, and the Wool
is very fine, and thick, and also very white.

Bees thrive and multiply exceedingly in those Parts, the Sweeds often get
great store of them in the Woods, where they are free for any Body. Honey (and
choice too) is sold in the Capital City for Five Pence per Pound. Wax is also
plentiful, cheap, and a considerable Commerce. Tame Fowls, as Chickens, Hens,
Geese, Ducks, Turkeys, etc. are large, and very plentiful all over this
Country.

And now for their Lots and Lands in City and Country, in their great
Advancement since they were first laid out, which was within the compass of
about Twelve Years, that which might have been bought for Fifteen or Eighteen
Shillings, is now sold for Fourscore Pounds in ready Silver; and some other
Lots, that might have been then Purchased for Three Pounds, within the space of
Two Years, were sold for a Hundred Pounds a piece, and likewise some Land that
lies near the City, that Sixteen Years ago might have been Purchased for Six or
Eight Pounds the Hundred Acres, cannot now be bought under One Hundred and
Fifty, or Two Hundred Pounds.

Now the true Reason why this Fruitful Country and Flourishing City advance so
considerably in the Purchase of Lands both in the one and the other, is their
great and extended Traffic and Commerce both by Sea and Land, viz. to
New York, New England, Virginia, Maryland, Carolina, Jamaica, Barbados,
Nevis, Monserat, Antego, St. Cristophers, Barmudoes, New Foundland, Maderas,
Saltetudeous, and Old-England; besides several other places. Their Merchandise
chiefly consists in Horses, Pipe-Staves, Pork and Beef Salted and Barrelled up,
Bread, and Flower, all sorts of Grain, Pease, Beans, Skins, Furs, Tobacco, or
^^t-Ashes, Wax, etc. which are Bartered for Rumm, Sugar, Molasses, Silver,
Negroes, Salt, Wine, Linen, Houshold-Goods, etc.

However there still remain Lots of Land both in the aforesaid City and
Country, that any may Purchase almost as cheap as they could at the first
Laying out or Parcelling of either City or Country; which is, (in the Judgment
of most People) the likeliest to turn to account to those that lay their Money
out upon it, and in a shorter time than the aforementioned Lots and Lands that
are already improved, and for several Reasons. In the first place, the Country
is now well inhabited by the Christians, who have great Stocks of all sorts of
Cattle, that increase extraordinarily, and upon that account they are obliged
to go farther up into the Country, because there is the chiefest and best
place for their Stocks, and for them that go back into the Country, they get
the richest Land, for the best lies thereabouts.

Secondly, Farther into the Country is the Principal Place to Trade with the
Indians for all sorts of Pelt, as Skins and Furs, and also Fat Venison, of whom
People may Purchase cheaper by three Parts in four than they can at the City of
Philadelphia.

Thirdly, Backwards in the Country lies the Mines where is Copper and Iron,
besides other Metals, and Minerals, of which there is some Improvement made
already in order to bring them, to greater Perfection; and that will be a means
to erect more Inland Market Towns, which exceedingly promote Traffic.

Fourthly, and lastly, Because the Country at the first, laying out, was void
of Inhabitants (except the Heathens, or very few Christians not worth naming)
and not many People caring to abandon a quiet and easy (at least tolerable)
Life in their Native Country (usually the most agreeable to all Mankind) to
seek out a new hazardous, and careful one in a Foreign Wilderness or Desert
Country, wholly destitute of Christian Inhabitants, and even to arrive at
which, they must pass over a vast Ocean, exposed to some Dangers, and not a few
Inconveniences: But now all those Cares, Fears and Hazards are vanished, for
the Country is pretty well Peopled, and very much Improved, and will be more
every Day, now the Dove is returned with the Olive Branch of Peace in her Mouth.

I must needs say, even the present Encouragements are very great and inviting,
for Poor People (both Men and Women) of all kinds, can here get three times the
Wages for their Labor they can in England or Wales.

I shall instance in a few, which may serve; nay, and will hold in all the
rest. The first was a Blacksmith, (my next Neighbor) who himself and one
Negro Man he had, got Fifty Shillings in one Day, by working up a Hundred Pound
Weight of Iron, which at Six Pence per Pound (and that is the common Price in
that Country) amounts to that Sum.

And for Carpenters, both House and Ship, Brick-layers, Masons, either of these
Tradesmen, will get between Five and Six Shillings every Day constantly. As to
Journey-Men Shooe-Makers, they have Two Shillings per Pair both for Men and
Women's Shoes: And Journey-Men Tailors have Twelve Shillings per Week and their
Diet. Sawyers get between Six and Seven Shillings the Hundred for Cutting of
Pine-Boards. And for Weavers, they have Ten or Twelve Pence the Yard for
Weaving of that which is little more than half a Yard in breadth.
Wooll-Combers, have for combing Twelve Pence per Pound. Potters have Sixteen
Pence for an Earthen Pot which may be bought in England for Four Pence.
Tanners, may buy their Hides green for Three Half Pence per Pound, and sell
their Leather for Twelve Pence per Pound. And Curriers have Three Shillings and
Four Pence per Hide for Dressing it; they buy their Oil at Twenty Pence per
Gallon. Brick-Makers have Twenty Shillings per Thousand for their Bricks at the
Kiln. Felt-Makers will have for their Hats Seven Shillings a piece, such as may
be bought in England for Two Shillings a piece; yet they buy their Wool
commonly for Twelve or Fifteen Pence per Pound. And as to the Glaziers, they
will have Five Pence a Quarry for their Glass. The Rule for the Coopers I have
almost forgot; but this I can affirm of some who went from Bristol, (as their
Neighbors report) that could hardly get their Livelihoods there, are now
reckoned in Pensilvania, by a modest Computation to be worth some Hundreds, (if
not Thousands) of Pounds. The Bakers make as White Bread as any in London, and
as for their Rule, it is the same in all Parts of the World that I have been
in. The Butchers for killing a Beast, have Five Shillings and their Diet; and
they may buy a good fat large Cow for Three Pounds, or thereabouts. The Brewers
fell such Beer as is equal in Strength to that in London, half Ale and half
Stout for Fifteen Shillings per Barrel; and their Beer has a better Name, that
is, is in more esteem than English Beer in Barbados, and is sold for a higher
Price there. And for Silver-Smiths, they have between Half a Crown and Three
Shillings an Ounce for working their Silver, and for Gold equivalent.
Plasterers have commonly Eighteen Pence per Yard for Plastering. Last-Makers
have Sixteen Shillings per dozen for their Lasts. And Heel-Makers have Two
Shillings a dozen for their Heels. Wheel and Mill-Wrights, Joyners, Brasiers,
Pewterers, Dyers, Fullers, Comb-Makers, Wyer-Drawers, Cage-Makers, Card-Makers,
Painters, Cutlers, Rope-Makers, Carvers, Block-Makers, Turners, Button-Makers,
Hair and Wood Sieve-Makers, Bodies-Makers, Gun-Smiths, Lock-Smiths, Nailers,
File-Cuters, Skinners, Furriers, Glovers, Patten-Makers, Watch-Makers,
Clock-Makers, Sadlers, Coller-Makers, Barbers, Printers, Book-Binders, and all
other Tradesmen, their Gains and Wages are about the same proportion as the
forementioned Trades in their Advancements, as to what they have in England.

Of Lawyers and Physicians I shall say nothing, because this Country is very
Peaceable and Healty; long may it so continue and never have occasion for the
Tongue of the one, nor the Pen of the other, both equally destructive to Men's
Estates and Lives; besides forsooth, they, Hangman like, have a License to
Murder and make Mischief. Labouring-Men have commonly here, between 14 and 15
Pounds a Year, and their Meat, Drink, Washing and Lodging; and by the Day their
Wages is generally between Eighteen Pence and Half a Crown, and Diet also; But
in Harvest they have usually between Three and Four Shilling each Day, and
Diet. The Maid Servants Wages is commonly betwixt Six and Ten Pounds per Annum,
with very good Accommodation. And for the Women who get their Livelihood by
their own Industry, their Labor is very dear, for I can buy in London a
Cheese-Cake for Two Pence, bigger than theirs at that price, when at the same
time their Milk is as cheap as we can buy it in London, and their Flour cheaper
by one half.

Corn and Flesh, and what else serves Man for Drink, Food and Raiment, is much
cheaper here than in England, or elsewhere; but the chief reason why Wages of
Servants of all sorts is much higher here than there, arises from the great
Fertility and Produce of the Place; besides, if these large Stipends were
refused them, they would quickly set up for themselves, for they can have
Provision very cheap, and Land for a very small matter, or next to nothing in
comparison of the Purchase of Lands in England; and the Farmers there, can
better afford to give that great Wages than the Farmers in England can, for
several Reasons very obvious.

As First, their Land costs them (as I said but just now) little or nothing in
comparison, of which the Farmers commonly will get twice the increase of Corn
for every Bushel they sow, that the Farmers in England can from the richest
Land they have.

In the Second place, they have constantly good price for their Corn, by reason
of the great and quick vent into Barbados and other Islands; through which
means Silver is become more plentiful than here in England, considering the
Number of People, and that causes a quick Trade for both Corn and Cattle; and
that is the reason that Corn differs now from the Price formerly, else it would
be at half the Price it was at then; for a Brother of mine (to my own
particular knowledge) sold within the compass of one Week, about One Hundred
and Twenty fat Beasts, most of them good handsome large Oxen.

Thirdly, They pay no Tithes, and their Taxes are inconsiderable; the Place is
free for all Persuasions, in a Sober and Civil way; for the Church of England
and the Quakers bear equal Share in the Government. They live Friendly and Well
together; there is no Persecution for Religion, nor ever like to be; it is this
that knocks all Commerce on the Head, together with high Imposts, strict Laws,
and cramping Orders. Before I end this Paragraph, I shall add another Reason
why Women's Wages are so exorbitant; they are not yet very numerous, which makes
them stand upon high Terms for their several Services, in Sempstering, Washing,
Spinning, Knitting, Sewing, and in all the other parts of their Employments;
for they have for Spinning either Worsted or Linen, Two Shillings a Pound, and
commonly for Knitting a very Course pair of Yarn Stockings, they have half a
Crown a pair; moreover they are usually Married before they are Twenty Years of
Age, and when once in that Noose, are for the most part a little uneasy, and
make their Husbands so too, till they procure them a Maid Servant to bear the
burden of the Work, as also in some measure to wait on them too.

It is now time to return to the City of Brotherly-Love (for so much the Greek
Word or Name Philadelphia imports) which though at present so obscure, that
neither the Map-Makers, nor Geographers have taken the least notice of her, tho
she far exceeds her Namesake of Lydia, Thirty German Miles from Smyrna.
(having above Two Thousand Noble Houses for her Five Hundred Ordinary) or
Celisia, or Coelesyria; yet in a very short space of time she will; in all
probability, make a a fine Figure in the World, and be a most Celebrated
Emporeum. Here is lately built a Noble Townhouse or Guild Hall, also a Handsome
Market-House, and a convenient Prison. The Number of Christians both Old and
Young Inhabiting in that Country, are by a Modest Computation, adjudged to
amount to above Twenty Thousand.

The Laws of this Country, are the same with those in England; our
Constitution being on the same Foot: Many Disputes and Differences are
determined and composed by Arbitration; and all Causes are decided with great
Care and Expedition, being concluded (generally) at furthest at the Second
Court, unless they happen to be very Nice and Difficult Cases; under Forty
Shillings any one Justice of the Peace has Power to Try the Cause. Thieves of
all sorts, are obliged to restore four fold after they have been Whipped and
Imprisoned, according to the Nature of their Crime; and if they be not of
Ability to restore four fold, they must be in Servitude till it is satisfied.
They have Curious Wharfs, as also several large and fine Timber-Yards, both at
Philadelphia, and New Castle, especially at the Metropolis, before Robert
Turner's Great and Famous House, where are built Ships of considerable Burden;
they Cart their Goods from that Wharf into the City of Philadelphia, under an
Arch, over which part of the Street is built, which is called
Chesnut-Street-Wharf, besides other Wharfs, as High Street Wharf,
Mulberry-Street Wharf, and Vine-Sreet Wharf, and all those are Common Wharfs;
and likewise there are very pleasant Stairs, as Trus and Carpenter-Stairs,
besides several others. There are above Thirty Carts belonging to that City,
Four or Five Horses to each. There is likewise a very convenient Wharf called
Carpenter's Wharf, which has a fine necessary Crain belonging to it, with
suitable Granaries, and Storehouses. A Ship of Two Hundred Tun may load and
unload by the side of it, and there are other Wharfs (with Magazines and
Warehouses) which front the City all along the River, as also a Curious and
Commodious Dock with a Drawbridge to it, for the convenient Reception of
Vessels; where have been built some Ships of Two or Three Hundred Tuns each:
They have very Stately Oaks to build Ships with, some of which are between
Fifty and Sixty Foot long, and clear from Knots, being very straight and well
Grained. In this famous City of Philadelphia there are several Rope-Makers, who
have large and curious Rope-Walks especially one Joseph Wilcox. Also Three or
Four Spacious Malt-Houses, as many large Brew-Houses, and many handsome
Bake-Houses for Public Use.

In the said City are several good Schools of Learning for Youth, in order to
the Attainment of Arts and Sciences, as also Reading, Writing, etc. Here is to
be had on any Day in the Week, Tarts, Pies, Cakes, etc. We have also several
Cooks-Shops, both Roasting and Boiling, as in the City of London; Bread, Beer,
Beef, and Pork, are sold at any time much cheaper than in England (which arises
from their Plenty) our Wheat is very white and clear from Tares, making as good
and white Bread as any in Europe. Happy Blessings, for which we owe the highest
Gratitude to our Plentiful Provider, the great Creator of Heaven and Earth. The
Water-Mills far exceed those in England, both for quickness and grinding good
Meal, their being great choice of good Timber, and earlier Corn than in the
aforesaid Place, they are made by one Peter Deal, a Famous and Ingenious
Workman, especially for inventing such like Machines.

All sorts of very good Paper are made in the German-Town; as also very fine
German Linen, such as no Person of Quality need be ashamed to wear; and in
several places they make very good Druggets, Crapes, Camblets, and Serges,
besides other Woollen Clothes, the Manufacture of all which daily improves:
And in most parts of the Country there are many Curious and Spacious
Buildings, which several of the Gentry have erected for their Country-Houses.
As for the Fruit Trees they Plant, they arrive at such Perfection, that they
bear in a little more than half the time that they commonly do in England.

The Christian Children born here are generally well-favoured, and Beautiful to
behold; I never knew any come into the World with the least blemish on any part
of its Body, being in the general, observed to be better Natured, Milder, and
more tender Hearted than those born in England.

There are very fine and delightful Gardens and Orchards, in most parts of this
Country; but Edward Shippey (who lives near the Capital City) has an Orchard
and Gardens adjoining to his Great House that equalizes (if not exceeds) any I
have ever seen, having a very famous and pleasant Summer House erected in the
middle of his extraordinary fine and large Garden abounding with Tulips, Pinks,
Carnations, Roses, (of several sorts) Lilies, not to mention those that grow
wild in the Fields.

Reader, what I have here written, is not a Fiction, Flam, Whim, or any
sinister Design, either to impose upon the Ignorant, or Credulous, or to curry
Favor with the Rich and Mighty, but in mere Pity and pure Compassion to the
Numbers of Poor Laboring Men, Women, and Children in England, half starved,
visible in their meagre looks, that are continually wandering up and down
looking for Employment without finding any, who here need not lie idle a
moment, nor want due Encouragement or Reward for their Work, much less Vagabond
or Drone it about. Here are no Beggars to be seen (it is a Shame and Disgrace
to the State that there are so many in England) nor indeed have any here the
least Occasion or Temptation to take up that Scandalous Lazy Life.

Jealousy among Men is here very rare, and Barrenness among Women hardly to be
heard of, nor are old Maids to be met with; for all commonly Marry before they
are Twenty Years of Age, and seldom any young Married Woman but has a Child in
her Belly, or one upon her Lap.

What I have delivered concerning this Province, is indisputably true, I was an
Eyewitness to it all, for I went in the first Ship that was bound from England
for that Country, since it received the Name of Pensilvania, which was in the
Year 1681. The Ship's Name was the John and Sarah of London, Henry Smith
Commander. I have declined giving any Account of several things which I have
only heard others speak of, because I did not see them my self, for I never
held that way infallible, to make Reports from Hearsay. I saw the first Cellar
when it was digging for the use of our Governor Will. Penn.

I shall now haste to a Conclusion, and only hint a little concerning the
Natives or Aborigines, their Persons, Language, Manners, Religion and
Government; Of Person they are ordinarily Tall, Straight, well-turn'd, and true
Proportioned; their Tread strong and clever, generally walking with a lofty
Chin. Of Complexion Black, but by design, Gypsie-like, greasing themselves with
Bears-Fat Clarified, and using no defense against the Injuries of the Sun and
Weather, their Skins fail not to be Swarthy. Their Eyes are small and black.
Thick Lips and flat Noses so frequent with Negroes and East Indians, are rare
with them. They have Comely Faces and Tolerable Complexions, some of their
Noses having a rise like the Roman.

Their Language is Lofty and Elegant, but not Copious; One Word serves in the
stead of Three, imperfect and ungrammatical, which defects are supplied by the
Understanding of the Hearers. Sweet, of Noble Sound and Accent. Take here a
Specimen.

Hodi hita nee huska a peechi, nee, machi Pensilvania huska dogwachi, keshow a
peechi

Thus in English. Farewell Friend, I will very quickly go to Pensilvania, very
cold Moon will come presently,



I might Treat largely of their Customs and Manners, but that will not agree
with my proposed Brevity.

As soon as their Children are born, they wash them in cold Water, especially
in cold Weather. To harden and embolden them, they plunge them in the River;
they find their Feet early, usually at Nine Months they can go. The Boys Fish
till Fifteen, then Hunt, and having given proof of their Manhood, by a large
return of Skins, they may Marry (else it is ashame to think of a Wife) which is
usually at the Age of Seventeen or Eighteen; the Girls stay with their Mothers,
and help to hoe the Ground, Plant Corn, bear Burdens, and Marry about Thirteen
or Fourteen.

Their Houses are Matts, or Barks of Trees set on Poles, Barn-like, not higher
than a Man, so not exposed to Winds. They lie upon Reeds or Grass. In Travel
they lodge in the Woods about a great Fire, with the Mantle of Duffils they
wear wrapped about them, and a few Boughs stuck round them.

They live chiefly on Maze, or Indian Corn roasted in the Ashes, sometimes
beaten and boiled with Water, called Homine. They have Cakes, not unpleasant;
also Beans and Pease, which Nourish much, but the Woods and Rivers afford them
their Provision; they eat Morning and Evening; their Seats and Tables are the
Ground; they are reserved, apt to resent and retain long: Their Women are
Chaste (at least after Marriage) and when with Child, will not admit of their
Husbands Embraces any more till Delivered. Exceeding Liberal and Generous; Kind
and Affable; uneasy in Sickness, to remedy which, they drink a Decoction of
Roots in Spring Water, forbearing Flesh, which if they happen to eat, it must
be the Female; they commonly bury their Kettles and part of their Goods with
their Friends when they die, suspecting (poor Souls) they shall make use of
them again at the Resurrection. They Mourn a whole Year, but it is no other
than blacking their Faces.

Their Government is Monarchical, and Successive, and ever of the Mothers (the
surest) side, to prevent a Spurious Issue. The Distaff (as in France) is
excluded the Regal Inheritance. Their Princes are Powerful, yet do nothing
without the Concurrence of their Senate, or Councils, consisting chiefly of
Old, but mixed with Young Men; slow and deliberate, (Spaniard-like) in
resolving, naturally wise, and hardly to be outwitted. Their Punishments are
Pecuniary. Murder may be atoned for by Feasts and Presents, in Proportion to
the Quality of the Offense, Person, or Sex injured; for if a Woman be killed,
the Mulct is double, because she brings forth Children. They seldom quarrel,
when Sober, and if Boozy, (which of late they are more apt to be, having
learned to drink, a little too much Rum of the Christians, to their shame) they
readily pardon it, alleging the Liquor is Criminal not the Man.

The way of Worship the Sweeds use in this Country, is the Lutheran; the
English have four sorts of Assemblies or Religious Meetings here; as first, The
Church of England, who built a very fine Church in the City of Philadelphia in
the Year 1695. Secondly, the Anabaptists: Thirdly, the Presbyterians, and two
sorts of Quakers (of all the most numerous by much) one Party held with George
Keith; but whether both Parties will join together again in one I cannot tell,
for that Gentleman has altered his Judgment since he came to England,
concerning his Church-Orders in Pensilvania, by telling and showing them
Precepts that were lawful in the time of the Law, but forbidden under the
Gospel to pay Tithes, or Ministers to Preach for Hire, etc. As also to sprinkle
Infants; and he tells the Presbyterian Minister, That he must go to the Pope of
Rome for his Call, for he had no Scripture for it, and that Water Baptism and
the Outward Supper are not of the Nature of the Everlasting Gospel; nor
essential Parts of it, see his Truth Advanced page 173. He gives likewise a
strict Charge concerning plain Language and plain Habit, and that they should
not be concerned in the compelling part of the Worldly Government, and that
they should set their Negroes at Liberty after some reasonable time of Service;
likewise, they should not take the Advantage of the Law against one another, as
to procure them any Corporeal Punishment: These Orders he tells his Followers,
would make Distinction between them and Jews and Moral Heathens, this was in
the Year 1693. in Pensilvania: But now the Year 1697. since he came to England,
his Judgment is changed, for he tells his Disciples, that Water Baptism is come
in the room of Circumcision; and by so doing, they would distinguish themselves
from either Jews, Pagans, or Moral Heathens: He keeps his Meeting once a Week
at Turners-Hall in Fill-Pot-Lane, London, on Sundays in the Afternoon; he
begins between Two and Three of the Clock and commonly ends between Four and
Five.

Friendly Reader, by this thou may see how wavering and mutable Men of great
Outward Learning are, if the Truth of this be by any Body questioned, let them
look in the Creed, and the Paper against Christians being concerned in Worldly
Government, and the Paper concerning Negroes, that was given forth by the
Appointment of the Meeting held by George Keith at Philip James's House in the
City of Philadelphia, in Pensilvania; and his Letter also in Maryland against
the Presbyterian Catechism, Printed at Boston in New England in 1695. with the
Answer to it bound up together in one Book and in Truth Advanced, page 173. And
for what relates to him since in England, let them look into the Quakers
Argument Refuted, Concerning Water Baptism and the Lord's Supper, page 70. And
now Reader, I shall take my leave of thee, recommending thee with my own self
to the Directions of the Spirit of God in our Conscience, and that will agree
with all the Holy Scriptures in its right place; and when we find our selves
so, we have no need to take any Thought or Care what any Body shall say of us.

The End of the History of Pensilvania.
An Historical Description OF THE PROVINCE and COUNTRY OF West-New-Jersey IN
AMERICA.

A short View of their Laws, Customs and Religion: As also the Temperament of
the Air and Climate; The fatness of the Soil, with the vast Produce of Rice,
etc. The Improvement of their Lands (as in England) to Pasture, Meadows, etc.
Their making great quantities of Pitch and Tar, as also Turpentine, which
proceeds from the Pine Trees, with Rozen as clear as Gum-Arabick, with
particular Remarks upon their Towns, Fairs and Markets; with the great Plenty
of Oil and Whale-Bone made from the great number of Whales they yearly take: As
also may other Profitable and New Improvements.

Never made Public till now.

By GABRIEL THOMAS.

LONDON: Printed in the Year School.

To the Right Honorable Sir John Moor, Sir Thomas Lane, Knights and Aldermen
of the City of London, and to the rest of the Worthy Members of the West-Jersey
Proprietors.
Worthy Friends,
TO whom can the History of West-Jersey with more Justice pertain, than to you
the Noble and Generous Proprietors.

That was the chief Motive that inclined me to this Dedication, which I hope
will be the more acceptable to you, because the Account of that Country is so
Sincere and Candid.

I have endeavored (by setting forth) the great Encouragements there are) to
persuade the Poor, the Idle, the Lazy, and the Vagabonds of these Kingdoms and
of Wales to hasten thither, that they may live plentifully and happily, and I
doubt not but they will hearken to it, because it is their true Interest. I
have done my best endeavors to possess them and others of the great Fertility
and Plenty in those Parts, which I need not repeat to you, who must needs be
well ac, quainted with the State of that Place. That it may Flourish and
mightily tend to your Advantage, as also to the Benefit of England, the hearty
desire of your Friend,

Gabriel Thomas.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
MY Chief Design in writing this short Account of West-New-Jersey, is to inform
all (but especially the Poor) what Ample and Happy Livelihoods People may gain
in those Parts, whereby they may subsist very well without either Begging or
Stealing, for if they Steal, they are Whipped, and obliged to pay Four Fold; and
if they are not of Ability to do that, they must abide in Servitude till they
have made Satisfaction to the injured Person: And if they should be Lazy and
turn to Beg, they will get nothing by that Base and Scandalous Employment; But
if they be so Poor that they have not of their own to supply their Wants and
Necessities, nor are able to Work, they will have no need to Beg, for People
out of their own free Compassion and pure Charity will relieve them in their
Necessities. Now if this were all, (though it is not) it would be a sufficient
Encouragement to the Idle, the Sloathful, and the Vagabonds of England,
Scotland, and Ireland to hasten thither, where besides this, they have a fair
prospect of getting considerable Estates, at least of living very Plentifully
and Happily, which Medium of Life is far better than lingering out their Days
so miserably Poor and half Starved; or Whipping, Burning, and Hanging for
Villainies, they will have little Temptation, nay or Inclination to perpetrate
here. The French Refugees or Protestant People, would soon find it their
Interest to remove thither, where they would live far better than in Germany,
Holland, Ireland or England. Written by one who earnestly wishes thy Welfare
and Prosperity in the ways of the Lord, and then thou can not do amiss in
this World.

Gab. Thomas.

THE HISTORY OF West-New-Jersey.
WEst-New-Jersey lies between the Latitude of Forty, and Forty two Degrees;
having the Main Sea on the South, East-Jersey on the North, Hudson's Bay on the
East, and Pensilvania on the West.

The first Inhabitants of this Country were the Indians, being supposed to be
part of the Ten dispersed Tribes of Israel; for indeed they are very like the
Jews in their Persons, and something in their Practices and Worship, for they
(as the Pensilvanian Indians) observe the New Moons with great Devotion, and
Reverence: And their first Fruits they offer, with their Corn and Hunting-Game
they get in the whole Year, to a False Deity or Sham-God, whom they must
please, else (as they fancy) many Misfortunes will befall them, and great
Injuries will be done them. When they bury their Dead, they put into the Ground
with them some House-Utensils, and some Money, (as Tokens of their Love and
Affection) with other Things, expecting they shall have Occasion for them again
in the other World. And if a Person of Note dies very far from the Place of his
own Residence they will carry his Bones home some considerable time after, to
be buried there. They are also very curious, nay, even nice in preserving and
repairing the Graves of their Dead. They do not love to be asked twice their
Judgment about one Thing. They are a People who generally delight much in
Mirth, and are very studious in observing the Virtues of Roots and Herbs, by
which they cure themselves of many Distempers in their Bodies, both internal or
external. They will not suffer their Beards to grow; for they will pluck the
Hair off with their own Fingers as soon as they can get hold of it, holding it
great Deformity to have a Beard. They are very loving to one another; for if
three or four of them come into a Christian's House, and the Master of it
happen to give one of them Victuals, and none to the rest, he will divide it
into equal Shares among them: And they are also very kind and civil to any of
the Christians; for I my self have had Victuals cut by them in their Cabbins,
before they took any for themselves. Their chief Employment is in Hunting,
Fishing, and Fowling, and making Canows, or Indian Boats and Bowls, in all
which Arts they are very dexterous and ingenious: Their Women's Business chiefly
consists in planting of Indian Corn, and pounding it to Meal, in Mortars, with
Pestils, (as we beat our Spice) and make Bread, and dress their Victuals, which
they perform very neatly and cleanlily. They also make Indian Mats, Ropes,
Hats, and Baskets, (some of curious Workmanship) of their Hemp, which there
grows wild, and Natural, in the Woods, in great Plenty. In short, the Women are
very ingenious in their several Employments as well as the Men. Their young
Maids are naturally very modest and shamefaced: And their young Women when
newly married, are very nice and shy, and will not suffer the Men to talk of
any immodest or lascivious Matters. Their Houses are, for the most part,
covered with Chesnutt Bark, but very close, and warm, insomuch that no Rain can
go through. Their Age in Computation may be compared with the Christians. Their
wearing Habit is commonly Deer-Skins, or Duffles. They don't allow of
mentioning the Name of a Friend after his Death; for at his Decease, they make
their Face black all over with black Lead; and when their Affairs go well with
them, they paint their Faces with red Lead, it being a Token of their Joy, as
the other is of their Grief. They are great Observers of the Weather by the
Moon. They take great Delight in Clothes of various Colors. And are so
punctual that if any go from their first Offer or Bargain with them, it will be
very difficult for that Party to get any Dealings with them any more, or to
have any farther Converse with them; And moreover it is worthy of Remark, that
when a Company of them are got together, they never interrupt or contradict one
another, 'till two of them have made an end of their Discourse; for if never so
many be in Company only two must discourse at a time, and the rest must keep
Silence. The English and they live very peaceably, by reason the English
satisfies them for their Land.

As to the manner of their Language, it is high and lofty, with a Short
Sentence. Their way of counting is by Tens, as to say Two Tens, Three Tens,
Four Tens, Five Tens, etc.

I shall now proceed to show something of the manner and way of Discourse that
happens between them and the Neighboring Christians that use to deal and
traffic with them, or when they meet one another in the Woods accidentally,
one a looking for his Cattle, and the other a Hunting the Wild Deer, or other
Game, by way of Questions and Answers. I shall put the Indian Tongue on one
side of the Leaf, and the English just opposite. Their Discourse is as
follows.

The Indian Tongue. The English of it. Quest. Hitah takoman?

Answ. Andogowa nee weekin.

Quest. Friend, from whence come?

Answ. Yonder.

Quest. Where yonder?

Answ. My House.

Quest. Tony andogowa kee weekin?

Answ. Arwaymouse.

Quest. Where is thy House?

Answ. Arwaymouse, which is the Name of an Indian Town.

Quest. Keco kee hatah kee weekin?

Answ. Nee hatah huska wees youse og huska chetena chase og huska orit chekenip.

Quest. What have got in thy House?

Answ. I have very fat Venison, and good strong Skins, with very good Turkeys.

Quest. Chingo kee beto nee chase og youse etka chekenip.

Answ. Halopa etka nisha kishquicka.

Quest. When will thou bring me Skins and Venison, with Turkeys?

Answ. To morrow, or two days hence.

Quest. Keco kee hata kee weekin?

Answ. Nee hata orit poonk og huska horit haloons etka neskee og marchkee
ochqueon.

Quest. What have got in thy House?

Answ. I have very fat Venison, and good strong Skins, with very good Turkeys.

(O huskia orit.)

(Very well.)

Quest. Kee namen neskec kabay og marchkec moos etka opeg megis?

Answ. Mata namen megis nee namen neskec kabay undogwa tekany.

Quest. Did thou see black Horses and red Cows, with white Sheep?

Answ. I saw no Sheep: I did see black Horses yonder in the Woods?

Quest. Kee namen marchkec moos undogwa tekeny?

Answ. Mogy.

Quest. Did see red Cows yonder in the Woods?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. Kee squa og enychan hatah?

Answ. Mogy.

Quest. Have thou a Wife and Children?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. Kacha hatah?

Answ. Neo.

Quest. How many have?

Answ. Four.

Quest. Benoingtid etka squatid?

Answ. Nisha benointid og nisha squatid.

Quest. Boys or Girls?

Answ. Two Boys and two Girls.

Quest. Tongtid enychan hatah?

Answ. Mogy.

Quest. Have got a young Child?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. Etka aroosise?

Answ. Neo kishow.

Quest. How old?

Answ. Four months.

Quest. Etka aroosise kee?

Answ. Pelenacheenckan katingan aroosis.

Quest. How old art thou?

Answ. Fifty years old.



In the next Place I shall give an account of their way in counting or
numbering; which is as follows.

The Indian Counting. The English to it. Kooty nisha nacha neo pelenach Kootash
nishash choesh peskonk telen.

One, Two, Three, Four, Five, Six, Seven, Eight, Nine, Ten.

Nishinchkan nachinchkan neochinchkan pelenchinchkan.

Twenty, Thirty, Forty, Fifty, etc.



The Names of some of the Indians.
Anachkooting, Bussabenating, Okonycan, Potasko, Quindamen, Lames, Alpoongan,
Kohonk, Hiton, Temeny.
The Dutch and Sweeds inform us that they are greatly decreased in number to
what they were when they came first into this Country: And the Indians
themselves say, that two of them die to every one Christian that comes in here.
Reader, I shall not insist any farther upon this Subject, because what is
deficient or short here, is inserted already in the preceding History of
Pensilvania; for the Natives both of that, as well as of this Country, speak
the same Language, and live after the same manner; for my chief aim, in the
next place, is to acquaint thee how, and after what manner the Christians live
there And I hope I have pleased thee so far, as it may prove a means to
encourage me to give a larger Description hereafter.

The next who came there were the Dutch; which was between Forty and Fifty
Years ago, though they made but very little Improvement, only built Two or
Three Houses, upon an Island (called since by the English) Stacies-Island; and
it remained so, till about the Year 1675. in which King Charles the Second (or
the Duke of York (his Brother) gave the Country to Edward Billing, in whose
time, one Major Fenwick went thither, with some others, and built a pretty
Town, and called it Salam; and in a few Years after a Ship from London, and
another from Hull, sailed thither with more People, who went higher up into the
Country, and built there a Town, and called it Burlington, which is now the
chiefest Town in that Country, though Salam is the ancientest; and a fine
Market Town it is, having several Fairs kept yearly in it; likewise well
furnished with good store of most Necessaries for humane Support, as Bread,
Beer, Beef, and Pork; as also Butter and Cheese, of which they freight several
Vessels, and send them to Barbados, and other Islands.

There are very many fine stately Brick-Houses built, and a commodious Dock for
Vessels to come in at, and they claim equal Privilege with Burlington for the
sake of Antiquity; though that is the principal Place, by reason that the late
Governor Cox, who bought that Country of Edward Billing, encouraged and
promoted that Town chiefly, in settling his Agents and Deputy-Governors there,
(the same Favors are continued by the New-West-Jersey Society, who now manage
Matters there) which brings their Assemblies and chief Courts to be kept there;
and, by that means it is become a very famous Town, having a great many stately
Brick-Houses in it, (as I said before) with a delicate great Market-House,
where they keep their Market: It has a noble and spacious Hall over-head,
where their Sessions is kept, having the Prison adjoining to it.

Likewise in the said Town there are very many fine Wharfs and large
Timber-Yards, Malt-Houses, Brew-Houses, Bake-Houses; and most sorts of
Tradesmen, (whose Wages are upon the same Foot with the Pensilvanians) viz.
Cloath-Workers, who make very good Serges, Druggets, Crapes, Camblets, (part
Silk or Worsted, and part Camels Hair) and good Plushes, with several other
Woollen Clothes, besides Linen.

There are many Fair and Great Brick Houses on the outside of the Town which
the Gentry have built there for their Country Houses, besides the Great and
Stately Palace of John Tateham Esquire; which is pleasantly Situated on the North
side of the Town, having a very fine and delightful Garden and Orchard
adjoining to it, wherein is variety of Fruits, Herbs, and Flowers; as Roses,
Tulips, July-Flowers, Sun-Flowers (that open and shut as the Sun Rises and
Sets, thence taking their Name) Carnations, and many more; besides abundance of
Medicinal Roots Herbs, Plants, and Flowers found wild in the Fields.

There are kept also in this Famous Town several Fairs every Year; and as for
Provisions, viz. Bread, Beer, Beef, Pork, Cheese, Butter, and most sorts of
Fruit here is great Plenty and very Cheap; all those Commodities are to be
bought every Market Day.

A Ship of Four Hundred Tuns may Sail up to this Town in the River Delaware;
for I my self have been on Board a Ship of that Burden there: And several fine
Ships and Vessels (besides Governor Cox's own great Ship) have been built
there.

There are also two handsome Bridges to come in and out of the Town, called
London and York-Bridges. The Town stands in an Island, the Tide flowing quite
round about it. There are Watermen who constantly Ply their Wherry Boats from
that Town to the City of Philadelphia in Pensilvania, and to other places.
Besides there is Glocester-Town, which is a very Fine and Pleasant Place, being
well stored with Summer Fruits, as Cherries, Mulberries, and Strawberries,
whither Young People come from Philadelphia in the Wherries to eat Straberries
and Cream, within sight of which City it is sweetly Situated, being but about
three Miles distance from thence.

There are several Meetings of Worship in this Country, viz. the Presbyterians,
Quakers, and Anabaptists: Their Privilege as to Matter of Law, is the same both
for Plaintiff and Defendant, as in England.

The Air is very Clear, Sweet and Wholesome; in the depth of Winter it is
something colder, and as much hotter in the height of Summer than in England.
Commonly (with them) the Days differ two Hours in length from ours here. The
longest Day in Summer is shorter by two Hours than the longest Day in England,
and the shortest Day longer by two Hours than with us here.

As for Corn, they have Wheat, Rye, Pease, Oats, Barley, Rice, etc. in vast
quantities: Also Indian-Corn, Pease and Beans, likewise English Hemp and Flax,
which prospers there exceedingly. Eating Roots, Pumpkins, Cashews,
Water-Melons, Muskmellons, Cucumbers, Squashes, Carrots, Artichokes, Potatoes,
Turnips, Garlic, Onions, and Leeks grow there in greater Plenty than in
Enland. And for Herbs, they have Cabbages, Coleworts, Savoys, Lettice,
Purslane, and other Sallads in abundance; beside Wild Herbs which are there
very commom, as Pennyroyal, Mint, Mustard, Sage, Rue, Tansey, etc. and
likewise there are choice Phisical Roots, as Sassafras, Sarsaparilla,
Black-Snake-Root, Rattle-Snake Root, and Poake-Root, with diverse others, which
there is great store of.

Of Fish, they have Whales, Sturgeon, Cod, Scale-Fish, Cole and Hake-Fish,
large Mackeril, Flat-fish, Rock, Shadds, Cattes, Eels, Perch, and many other
sorts in prodigious Shoals: And Wild-Water-Fowl, as Geese, Ducks, Swans,
Diverse, etc. are very numerous, even beyond all expectation. As to Land-Fowl,
Turkeys, Geese, Pheasants, Partridges, Pigeons, Woodcocks, Blackbirds, etc.
they are there in extraordinary great abundance, and very large. There is also
that uncommon and valuable Bird (being near the bigness of a Cuckoo) called the
Mocking-bird (known, but not very well in England, being so very Nice and
Tender, that they usually die by the way) with several other Charming and
Curious Birds, too tedious here to specify.

As to the Wild Vermin, There are Otters, Beavers, Foxes, Mush-Rats Minx's,
Wild-Cats, Rackoons, Pollcats, and also that cunning Creature the Possom,
particularly mentioned and distinguished in the annexed Account of Pensilvania
for its remarkable Qualities, whither I refer the Reader, not in the least
being fond of Tautology. This Creature is about the bigness of an English Cat,
being of a light gray color. Likewise there were some Wolves and Bears, but
now they are very rare to be seen, by reason the Indians destroy them (as
before). Also that strange Creature the Flying Squirril, mentioned in the
foregoing Book. There are great numbers of Wild Deer, and Red Deer also; and
these wild Creatures are free and common for any to kill and take. And for Wild
Fruits, there are Chestnuts, Filberts, Hickery-Nuts, Grapes, Mulberries,
Strawberries, Rasberries, Huckleberries, and Craneberries, with several sorts
of Plumbs, and all those Fruits in great plenty being free for any Body to
gather.

Now I am a coming to the Planted Fruit Trees, as Apples, Pears, Apricocks,
Quinces, Plumbs, Cherries, Gooseberries, Currants, and Peaches, from which last
they distill a liquor as in Pensilvania, much like Rumm or Brandy, in the taste;
and all those Trees will come to bear in a little more than half the time, they
do in England, the Soil is so rich; they have great plenty of the
aforementioned Fruits, which are exceeding delicious. These, as also many other
Fruits that come not to any pitch of Perfection in England, are the Natural
Product of this Country, which lies warmer, being more befriended by the Sun's
hot and glorious Beams, which without doubt is the chief Cause and true Reason,
why the Fruit there so far excells the English. They have likewise great Stocks
of Horses and Hogs, raised in the Woods; of the latter of which I have seen
some of a Prodigious Weight that only fed there, their Horses are very hardy,
strong, and of good Spirit for Labor or Traveling; they commonly go unshod
(which in many Years saves much Money). Their Plow-shears require but small
Reparation, wearing out but little. They Harrow their Ground with a
Wooden-tyned-Harrow, and twice over does the business.

Of Bees also they are well provided, and abound in Sheep naturally very sound,
and that stand well, the Rot, Scab, Maggots, etc. rarely invading them; they
usually bring forth two Lambs at once, and their Wool is very fine, white, and
thick; they have great Stocks of Cattle, as Cows, Oxen, etc. Their Oxen
commonly weigh well.

Tame Fowl there are (almost) incredible in numbers, viz. Geese, Turkeys, Hens,
etc.

In this Country also is great Plenty of working Timber, as Oaks, Ash,
Chestnuts, Pine, Cedar, Walnut, Poplar, Firr, and Masts for Ships, with Pitch
and Rosin, of great Use and much Benefit to the Country. Here are several good
Navigable Rivers, besides that famous River Delaware (which I have mentioned
elsewhere, and where the Tobacco is excellent) being deep enough for Vessels to
come in: First, Prince Morise's River, where the Sweeds used to kill the Geese
in great numbers, for their Feathers (only) leaving their Carcasses behind
them; Cohansey River, by which they send great store of Cedar to
Philadelphia-City; Allaway-River; Salam-River, which runs by Salam-Town (of
greatest Antiquity;) Naman-River, Rackcoon-River, which had its Name from the
great numbers of those Creatures that always abound thereabouts; Old Man's
River; Manto-River; Woodberry-River; Great Eggharbor River (up which a Ship of
two or three hundred Tuns may sail) which runs by the back part of the Country
into the Main Sea; I call it back, because the first Improvement made by the
Christians, was Delawar Riverside: This Place is noted for good store of Corn,
Horses, Cows, Sheep, Hogs, etc. the Lands thereabouts being much improved, and
built upon: Little Egg-Harbor-Creek, which take their Names from the great
abundance of Eggs, which the Swans, Geese, Ducks, and other wild Fowls on those
Rivers lay thereabouts: Timber-River, alias Glocester-River, which has its
Name (also) from the great quantity of curious Timber, which they send in great
Floats to Philadelphia, a City in Pensilvania, as Oaks, Pines, Chestnut, Ash,
and Cedars. This River runs down by Glocester-Town, which is the Shire-Town;
And Newton-River, that runs by Newton; Cooper-River; Pensokin-River;
Northampton-River, with several others, at a convenient distance upon the Sea,
the Shores whereof are generally deep and bold) of less Note, as
VVissahiskonk-River, that runs down into the great River Delaware, by
Burlington. The Country inhabited by the Christians is divided into four Parts
or Counties, though the Tenth part of it is not yet peopled; It Is far cheaper
living there for Eatables than here in England; and either Men or Women that
have a Trade, or are Laborers, can, if industrious, get near three times the
Wages they commonly earn in England.

Courteous Reader, As yet I have given thee no Account of East-Jersey, because
I never was there, so in reality cannot properly or pertinently speak to that
Matter. I will not pretend to impose any thing on the World, but have all
along, and shall still declare nothing but Verity; therefore one Word of that
by and by. I might have given thee a much larger Account of this Country, and
have stretched this (now) Pocket Volume to an extraordinary Bulk and Size; and
yet without straining or deviating in the least from the Principles of my
Profession, which are Truth it self. I have no Plot in my Pate, or deep Design,
no, not the least expectation of gaining any thing by them that go thither, or
losing by those who stay here. My End chiefly in Writing, nay, indeed my great
Aim, is to inform the People of Britain and Ireland in general, but
particularly the Poor, who are begging, or near it, or starving, or hard by it
(as I before took notice in my Preface) to encourage them (for their own Good,
and for the Honor and Benefit of their Native Country, to whom they are now a
Scandal and Disgrace; and whose Milk and Honey these Drones eat up, and are
besides a heavy Burden to the Commonwealth, in the Taxes paid by every Parish
in England, etc. to support them.

Law-Causes are here (as in Pensilvania) speedily determined, in the second
Court at least, unless in some difficult Business. One Justice of the Peace
has Power to try a Cause, and give Judgment therein, if the Original Debt be
under forty Shillings. And for Thieves and Robbers (as I hinted before in the
Preface) they must restore fourfold; which, if they are not able to do, they
must work hard till the injured Person is satisfied.

I shall conclude with a Word or two on New-East-Jersey. This Country is
exceeding fruitful in Cattle, of which I have seen great numbers brought from
thence, viz. Oxen, Cows, Sheep, Hogs, and Horses, to Philadelphia, the Capital
of Pensilvania. The chiefest Manufactory (besides English and Indian Grain) fit
for Traffic that this Country affords.

Now I shall give thee an Account of the English Manufactory, that each County
in West-New-Jersey affords. In the first Place I shall begin with
Burlington-County, as for Peltage, or Beavers Skins,! Otter-Skins, Minks Skins,
Musk-rats Skins, Rackcoon, Wild Cats, Martin, and Deer-Skins, etc. The Trade in
Glocester-County consists chiefly in Pitch, Tar, and Rosin; the latter of which
is made by Robert Styles, an excellent Artist in that sort of Work, for he
delivers it as clear as any Gum-Arabick. The Commerce carried on in
Salam-County, is chiefly Rice, of which they have wonderful Produce every Year;
as also of Cranberries which grow there in great plenty, and which in Picle
might be brought to Europe. The Commodities of Capmay-County, are Oil and
Whale-Bone, of which they make prodigious, nay vast quantities every Year,
having mightily advanced that great Fishery, taking great numbers of Whales
yearly. This Country for the general part of it, is extraordinary good, and
proper for the raising of all sorts of Cattle, very plentiful here, as Cows,
Horses, Sheep, and Hogs, etc. likewise it is well Stored with several sorts of
Fruits which make very good and pleasant Liquors, such as their Neighboring
Country before mentioned affords. Now Reader, having no more to add of any
moment or importance, I salute thee in Christ; and whether thou stayest in
England, Scotland, Ireland, or Wales, or go to Pensilvania, West or
East-Jersey, I wish thee all Health and Happiness in this, and Everlasting
Comfort (in God) in the World to come. Fare thee well.

FINIS.

