THE Presbyterians Unmasked: OR, ANIMADVERSIONS UPON A Nonconformist Book,
CALLED, The Interest of ENGLAND IN THE Matter of RELI^GION.

Nihil ^cci dici^ 3 I^o Nihil Fateris.

QVISEQVITUR ME NON AMBULAT IN TEN^^RIS.

Non Quis, sed Quid. Not Who, but What.



LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred Majesty, at the
Angel in Amen-Corner, 1676.

THE PREFACE.
THough perhaps there have been several Junctures since 1661. wherein the
publishing of these Animadversions (which were then finished) would have been
judged more seasonable, yet I must profess my self in the number of those men
who believe nothing of this nature can come out unseasonably, till either the
Old cause cease to be thought good, or else the good old cause cease to be on
the Anvile. And who can imagine but that it is so still when men still
endeavor to support factious Parties in opposition to the Laws of the Land?
Nay have the impudence to inveigh even against the Laws themselves that were
designed to secure the State for the future, against the malignant influences,
and the disturbing pernicious attempts of Presbyterian (as well as other
Sectarian) Spirits, witness that late vile Letter from a Person of Quality to
his Friend in the Country; in which the able, but more daring Author accuses
the Act for regulating Corporations as keeping many of the wealthiest,
worthiest and soberest men out of the Magistracy of those places: The Act which
settled the Militia, as establishing a standing Army by a Law, and swearing us
into a Military Government. (Whereas nothing does more justify the necessity of
a standing Army (of which such a jealousy is pretended) than the cross-grained
seditious humors of those men who exclaim most against it.) The Five-mile-
Oxford- Act, as imposing a most unlawful and unjustifiable Oath; and the Act
for Uniformity, as that which rendered Bartholomew-day fatal to our Church, and
Religion, in throwing out a very great number of worthy learned pious and
Orthodox Divines. In which glorious Titles the Presbyterian Divines were
without doubt intended to have the greatest share, and the Lay-Presbyterians in
the forementioned character of the Wealthiest, Worthiest, and Soberest men.
It Is a wonder he did not add [ and most loyal Subjects;] but it may be he was
not so intimately acquainted with them as this John Corbet was, who is so
profuse and lavish of his praises as to commend Presbyterians Interest of
England, p. 66. 2. Edit.
even on this score too. [We affirm boldly, says he, that those for whom we
plead (viz. Presbyterians) must needs be good Subjects to a Christian King, and
good members of a Christian Commonwealth.] The Man I confess has an excellent
knack at whitening Aethiopians, and putting Wolves into sheeps clothing: But he
must not be angry if we endeavor (for our own and other men's security) to
strip them of that covering, lest under the specious disguises of Religion,
Reformation, and Liberty they once more rend and tear us, and make us a prey to
Atheism, Confusion, and Tyranny. It concerns us to have the Presbyterian vizor
taken off, and these worthy, learned, sober, serious Gentlemen of the padd
exposed in their proper shape and features, that so they may be too well known
to be suffered to rob us any more of our Laws, Government, Order, Peace and
tranquillity. And therefore he does a very good office who at any time gives
men warning to take heed of these devouring Sepulchers: And because this demure
Author had taken so much pains to make them appear beautiful outwardly, I
thought it worth mine to pare away the grass, and to set a fresh mark upon
them, that so honest men might not fall into them unawares, nor permit
themselves to be again defiled with Presbyterian uncleanness.

Imprimatur

Maii 2. 1676. G. Jane R. P. D. Henr. Episcopo Land. a Sac. Dom.
ANIMADVERSIONS on a Book Entitled, The Interest of ENGLAND in the matter of
RELIGION.
THE Author having told us, Page 16. (26. 2. Edit.) that among the various
disagreeing Parties within this Kingdom, two main ones appear above the rest,
viz. the Episcopal, and Presbyterian: and that the disunion between these
Parties must be removed either by the abolition of one Party, or by the
coalition of both into one, or by a toleration indulged to the weaker side, he
proceeds p. 17. (27.) (without staying to inform us how disunion of Parties may
be said to be removed either by the abolition, or toleration of one Party) to
that which he presumes the great case of the time, and therefore proposes it as
the subject of his discourse, viz. in which of these three ways, Abolition,
Coalition, or Toleration the true Interest of the King and Kingdom lies. And
the first thing that he enquires into is,

[ Whether in Justice or reason of State the Presbyterian Party should be
rejected and depressed, or protected and encouraged?]

Which Party he distinguishes from Prelatists by these Characters (which p. 20.
(30.) he calls their main and rooted Principles.) 1. They admire and magnify
the holy Scriptures, and take them for the absolute perfect Rule of Faith and
life without the supplement of Ecclesiastical Tradition -- yet they deny not
due respect and reverence to venerable Antiquity. 2. They assert the study and
knowledge of the Scriptures to be the duty and privilege of all Christians --
yet they acknowledge the necessity of a standing Gospel-ministery, and receive
the directive Authority of the Church, not with implicit Faith, but the
Judgment of Discretion. 3. They hold the teaching of the Spirit necessary to
the saving knowledge of Christ -- yet they hold not that the spirit brings new
Revelations. 4. They exalt divine ordinances, but debase humane inventions in
Gods worship, particularly Ceremonies, properly religious, and of instituted,
mystical signification -- yet they allow the natural expressions of reverence
and devotion, as kneeling, and lifting up of the hands and eyes in prayer: as
also those mere circumstances of decency and order, the omission whereof would
make the service of God either undecent or less decent. 5. They rejoice in
Christ Jesus having no confidence in a legal righteousness, but desire to be
found in him who is made unto us righteousness by gracious imputation: yet
withal they affirm constantly that good works of piety toward God, and of
justice and charity toward men are necessary to salvation. 6. Their Doctrine
bears full conformity with that of the Reformed Churches held forth in their
public confessions, and particularly with that of the Church of England in the
39 Articles; only one or two passages peradventure excepted so far as they may
import the asserting of Prelacy, and humane mystical Ceremonies. 7. They insist
much on the necessity of Regeneration, and therein lay the groundwork for the
practice of Godliness. 8. They press upon themselves and others the severe
exercise not of a Popish outside, formal, but a spiritual and real
mortification, and self denial according to the power of Christianity. 9. They
are strict observers of the Lords day, and constant in Family Prayer. 10. They
abstain from Oaths, yea petty Oaths, and the irreverent usage of Gods name in
common discourse. 11. They are sober, just and circumspect in their whole
conversation. Such, says he, is the temper and constitution of this Party,
which in its full latitude lies in the middle between those that affect a
ceremonial worship and the height of Hierarchical Government on the one hand,
and those that reject an ordained ministry and settled Church Order and
regular Unity on the other hand.

Now either the man would have all these particularly looked upon as truly
discriminating characters of the Presbyterians, from the Prelatical party, or
he would not; if he would not, to what end does he here mention them? and that
as middle Principles in reference to the two extremes, viz. Prelatists and
rejecters of an Ordained ministry and settled Church Order, and regular unity?
if he would, with what face, justice or honesty, does he imply that the
Prelatists magnify not the holy Scriptures as the absolute, perfect, rule of
Faith and life? that they deny the study and knowledge of the Scriptures to be
the duty and privilege of all Christians, or the teaching of the Spirit to be
necessary to the saving knowledge of Christ? that they exalt not divine
ordinances? that they worship not God in the spirit according to the simplicity
of Gospel Institutions? that they affirm not constantly good works toward God
and men necessary to salvation, etc. Let him evince if he can, that the
Prelatists are thus culpable; if he cannot, he deserves to be reckoned, not in
the number of such Presbyterians as are [just and circumspect in their whole
behaviour] but of such as practically deny justice and charity toward men to
be necessary to salvation. And if he can with truth affirm (as I suppose he
may) that the Presbyterian party believe S. James his Epistle (and the second
chapter of it) to be Canonical Scripture, and that (according to his doctrine
verse 10.) he that offends in one point of the Law of liberty is guilty of all,
they are little beholding to him for exhibiting such a Character of them to the
world, wherein so very few of those excellent virtues taught by our Savior in
his Sermon on the mount, and inculcated as Essential to Christianity and
absolutely necessary to salvation, are mentioned as practiced by that Party.

I am sure Prelatists have great reason to complain of his fraudulent,
disingenuous dealing, in endeavoring to cheat the world with such an imperfect
pourtraicture of the Presbyterian party: wherein his behavior is no more
commendable than his would be who had either ignorance or confidence enough to
give this as an adequate description of the Sect of the Pharisees, viz. They
were persons that disdained not to hear John the Baptist's Sermons, and to come
to his Baptism, Matthew. 3. 5, 7. They gathered together also to hear Christ
himself, Luke 5. 17. Mark 2. 6. They kept him company at Feasts, as appears
from Mark 2. 16. and abroad, Matthew. 12. 2. One of them invited him to his house
to Dinner, Luke 7. 36. They made long Prayers, Matthew. 23. 14. They gave Alms,
Matthew. 6. 2. They fasted twice a week, and gave Tithes of all they had, Luke
18. 12. They outwardly appeared righteous, Matthew. 23. 27, 28. They avoided the
Society of such as were reputed sinners and offensive in their lives; and
therefore accused Christ (though wrongfully) for eating with them, Matthew. 9.
11. They were the most exact and strictest Sect of the Jewish Religion (their
Doctrine was, say some, least corrupt,) of which Sect Paul was, Act. 26. 5.
Their Disciples as well as S. John's were exercised in fasting and prayer, Luke
5. 33. Would our Author account it candid and sincere dealing if one of the
Pharisees friends should present him with such a partial character of them?
would he not look upon it as too grossly parasitical, and scandalously
favorable? especially if exhibited in order to the re^olution of such a
question as this, [ Whether the Pharisaical Party ought in Justice to be
rejected and depressed, or protected and encouraged by our Savior?] or whether
they ought to be called Hypocrites, Serpents and a Generation of Vipers, and to
have Woe denounced against them eight times in one Sermon? would he think it
fairly done to conceal their devouring widows houses? their straining at Gnats,
and swallowing Camels? their covetousness? their neglecting the weightier
matters of the Law, Judgment, mercy, and Fidelity? Or suppose the question were
put [ Whether in justice or reason of State the Jesuits should be rejected and
depressed, or protected and encouraged here in England?] Would he (in order to
the decision of this question) rest content with this character of that
Society, viz. they believe all the books of the Old and New Testament, (which
the English Protestants own) to be the word of God. -- They assent to all the
Articles of the Creed commonly called the Apostles Creed. -- They acknowledge
the necessity of a standing Gospel Ministry. -- They allow the natural
expressions of reverence and devotion, and those circumstances of decency and
order, the omission whereof would make the Service of God either undecent or
less decent. -- They affirm works of piety toward God and of charity toward
men, to be necessary to salvation. -- I say, would this man judge this
character of that Society so entire and comprehensive, as that a more full and
impartial decyphering of them would be needless in reference to a right
determination of that question? I trow not. Would he not judge this also fit to
be considered, viz. whether they deny that Faith is to be kept with
Protestants? -- Whether they own the Kings Supremacy in all matters, over all
persons, Ecclesiastical and Civil, within his own Dominions? Whether they will
take the Oath of Allegiance and fidelity to Him, his Heirs and Successors? --
Whether they approve Subjects taking up Arms against their Sovereign? whether
they are persons resolved to yield all due obedience to the Laws of the Land
and constitutions of our lawful Governors both Ecclesiastical and Civil,
supreme and subordinate? Surely Reason of State (if by that be meant
State Policy in order to self-preservation) will prompt all Kings and Princes
diligently and deliberately to enquire and consider, whether those who would be
protected and encouraged by them deserve to have such a black character affixt
upon them or no, and consequently they might justly treat that Writer with
severity who should dare to move Kings to protect and encourage such persons,
by giving in a list of a few wholesome opinions of theirs, and trecherously (or
rather traitorously) concealing their damnable and pernicious tenants.

That this man's Character of the English Presbyterians is of this nature may be
evident to any person that reflects upon and seriously considers their solemn
League and Covenant, framed and imposed in the time of the Long Parliament, in
the first Article whereof they swear that they will sincerely and constantly
endeavor in their places and callings the preservation of the Reformed
Religion, [in the Church of Scotland,] in Doctrine, Worship, [Discipline and
Government.] Now the Scotch Author or [Ladensium (...)] in his Postscript
against Lysimachus Nicanor, tells us, p. 35. that Episcopacy is no way so
opposite to the Discipline of [any reformed Church] as to that Discipline which
many Assemblies and Parliaments have settled in Scotland: and therefore he
concludes thus, p. 36. 37. [we cannot dissemble any longer our hearty wishes,
-- that England would after the example of all the reformed Churches ridd
themselves at last of their Bishops trouble, as they did of old, without any
repentance to this day, of their Abbots and Monks. This, says he, we conceive
would much increase the joy and prosperity of all the three Dominions.
Accordingly those Covenanters swear also to endeavor the reformation of
Religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland in Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline and Government, according to the word of God, and [the example] of
the best reformed Churches. Now all the reformed Churches, as the same Author
affirms, p. 35. cast out at first, and to this day have carefully holden at the
door even that kind of Episcopacy which their chief Divines seemed not much to
oppose. Suitable whereunto is that which Presbyterians swear in the second
Article of the Covenant, viz. to endeavor the extirpation of Church Government
by Bishops (as well as by Archbishops, Chancellors, Commissaries, etc.) With
what face therefore can this Author presume to tell us, p. 19. (29.) that the
Form of Ecclesiastical Government by Parochial and Classical Presbyteries,
Provincial and National Assemblies, is remote enough from the main cause of
Presbytery? especially since he affirms, p. 24. (34.) that one of his Majesty's
Kingdoms (Scotland) is Presbyterian, by which sure he means not [moderately
Episcopal:] for p. 59. (69.) that he may prove the Presbyterian Form of
Government a. Fence against Heresies and Errors, he instances in the Form of
Ecclesiastical Policy and method of Discipline in the Church of Scotland, which
(as there described) is no otherwise than by Parochial and Classical
Presbyteries, Provincial and National Assemblies. Now how injurious the Scotch
Discipline (which English Presbyterians have thus covenanted to introduce) is
to the civil magistrate, how oppressive to the subject, and pernicious to both,
Bishop Bramhall, (since Primate of Ireland) has abundantly manifested in his [
Fair warning for England to take heed of the Scotch Discipline; or as it is
lately Printed, of the Presbyterian Government.] In which treatise he
endeavors to prove that their Discipline does utterly overthrow the rights of
Magistrates to convocate Synods, to confirm their Acts, to order Ecclesiastical
Affairs, and reform the Church within their Dominions; that it robs the
Magistrate of the last Appeal of his Subjects; that it exempts the Ministers
from due punishment; that it subjects the supreme magistrate to their Censures;
that it robs him of his pardoning power (as to some crimes) of his civil power
in order to Religion; that it makes a monster of the Commonwealth, is most
prejudicial to the Parliament, is oppressive to particular persons, and hurtful
to all orders of men; that the Disciplinarians challenge this exorbitant power
by Divine right. The truth of these propositions he has evinced out of their
Books of Discipline, and public Records of their practice. Since therefore the
English Presbyterians have sworn to endeavor the preservation of this
Discipline and Government in the Church of Scotland, and to reform the
Discipline and Government here in England, according to -- the Example of the
reformed Church in Scotland, it is but a piece of justice and reason that the
King's Majesty should look upon them as persons owning those seditious
Principles, upon which such enormous Disciplinarian practices are grounded.
Some of which Principles are these: 1. That their National Assemblies ought
always to be retained in their own liberties (of convening lawfully together,
p. 7.) with power to the Kirk to appoint times and places. 2. That they have
power to abolish and abrogate all Statutes and Ordinances concerning
Ecclesiastical matters, that are found noisome and unprofitable, and agree not
with the time, or are abused by the people; and to make Rules and Constitutions
for keeping good order in the Kirk, (p. 8.) 3. That Ecclesiastical Discipline
ought to be exercised, whether it be ratified by the civil magistrate or no, p.
9, 12. 4. That from the Kirk there is no reclamation nor appellation to any
judge Civil or Ecclesiastical within the Realm, p. 13. 5. That to their
Discipline all the Estates within the Realm must be subject, as well Rulers as
they who are ruled, p. 16. 6. That the Civil Magistrate cannot pardon any crime
that was made capital by the judicial Law, p. 12. 7. That matters of the Pulpit
ought to be exempted from the judgment and correction of Princes, p. 14. In
proportion to which principles, the Kirk p. 5. by their own Authority decreed
the abolition of Bishops, requiring them to resign their offices (as not having
any call from Gods word) under pain of Excommunication, and to desist from
preaching till they had a new admission from the general Assembly. -- They
resolved also to dispose of their possessions as the Kings Patrimony in the
next Assembly. -- When they could not prevail to have their Book of Discipline
ratifyed by the Civil Authority, they obtruded it on the Church themselves, p.
6. ordaining that all those who had born or did then bear any office in the
Church should subscribe it under pain of excommunication. -- By their own
authority also, p. 7. under the specious title of Jesus Christ, King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, the only Monarch of this Church, and under pretense of his
prerogative Royal they erected their own Courts and Presbyteries in the most
part of Scotland, long before they were legally approved or received. -- In
their Assembly at Edinburgh, 1647. they determined, that nothing should be
passed in the next Parliament till the Church was fully restored to its
Patrimony; yea, (says the Lord Primate p. 5.) they arrived to that degree of
sauciness, Anno 1600. and reduced the Sovereign power to such contempt that 20
Presbyters (no more at the highest, sometimes but 13, sometimes but 7 or 8)
dared to hold and maintain a general Assembly (as they miscalled it) after it
was discharged by the King, against his Authority; an Insolence which never any
Parliament durst attempt. Anno 1582. they rejected Mongomery's appeal from
themselves to King James, as made to an incompetent Judge, and proceeded
violently against him notwithstanding the Kings prohibition, p. 13. They who
have a mind to see more instances of the like nature may read that Book of the
Archbishop.

Now the Question must be, 1. whether those English Presbyterians who have
covenanted to endeavor the Preservation of the Discipline and Government of
the Church of Scotland, ought not to be looked upon as persons approving those
Principles and practices upon which that Discipline and Government is founded
and exercised? 2. Whether those English Presbyterians who have covenanted to
endeavor the reformation of Religion in the Kingdom of England in Discipline
and Government according to the example of the best reformed Churches, in the
number of which Churches they may well be supposed to reckon the Kirk of
Scotland, ought not to be looked upon as persons engaging themselves to imitate
that Kirk by endeavoring the Introduction of the like practices here in
England, grounded on the like principles? 3. Whether therefore such an
approbation of those Principles and Practices ought not in justice to have been
mentioned as part of their Character? and 4. Whether persons that may justly
have such a character affixt upon them, ought in justice or reason of State to
be protected and encouraged, or rejected and depressed?

Whereas this Author tells us, p. 24. (34.) [that the men of the Presbyterian
persuasion are not lukewarm, but true zelots.] I answer, They are so much the
more dangerous and more likely to be Instruments of mischief, unless their zeal
be ballasted with knowledge and discretion, and exerted in lawful ways. Indeed
if they are like the Scotch Disciplinarian zelots before mentioned, they are so
far from being lukewarm, that they are rather Seditious Incendiaries, and prone
to nothing more than the kindling of devouring Fires in that Nation where they
are encouraged.

Nevertheless, says he, they have no fellowship with the spirit of
Enthusiastical and Anabaptistical fancy and frenzy.] What! not in their main
and rooted Principles? By which he characterizes them, p. 20, 21. (30, 31.)
which I intimate chiefly as another Argument of the lameness and imperfection
of that character. We have reason to believe that our modern Presbyterians are
somewhat better than their Forefathers, if they do not agree with them and the
Anabaptists: 1. In disturbing the Church under pretense of reforming it. 2. In
laboring both by conferences in private, and by Sermons in public to draw the
common people from their liking the present State. 3. In publishing factious
Books to the view of the world. 4. In disdaining and reproaching Magistrates
for endeavoring to bring them to conformity by compulsion. 5. In slandering
and reviling those Ministers that withstand their factious proceedings,
attributing much good to themselves, and pouring contempt and discredit upon
their opposites. 6. In impugning the prescript Form of Prayer. 7. In holding
that the word of God must of necessity be preached before the Administration of
the Sacraments. 8. In protesting that they go not about to take any authority
from Magistrates, even while they seek to overthrow the Government of the
State. That the Anabaptists in Germany were thus guilty, and the Presbyterians
in England in Q. Elizabeth's days, I refer the Reader for proof to Oliver
Ormerod's picture of a Puritan, (written about those times, and reprinted
1605.) wherein he endeavors to prove, that the Puritans then resembled the
Anabaptists in above fourscore Points. See also Archbishop Whitgift's defense
of his Answer to the Admonition, p. 33, 34. (in Fol.)

And I wish it were not easy to manifest, that our late Covenanting
Presbyterians have had too much fellowship with the spirit of these
Anabaptistical Frenzies now mentioned, -- who, says this Author, are no
Fanatics, although they begin to be by some abused under that name. But he
might have known that turbulent Presbyterians have been so called long since,
by one that had skill enough to give persons such names as were suitable to
their Natures, even King James himself in his (...), B. 2. where speaking of
some Scotch Puritans, such fiery-spirited-Presbyterians as endeavored to
introduce a parity in the Church; you shall never find, says he, with any
High-land or Border Thieves more lies and vile perjuries, than with those
Fanatic Spirits, etc.

But, says this Author, they are persons of known learning, prudence, piety,
and gravity in great numbers.] Here it may be questioned, 1. How he can prove
this Encomium of them to be true? 2. Whether the Quakers do not excel them in
gravity, the Anabaptists in piety, the Independents in prudence, the Prelatists
in learning, and some Jesuits in all four? and yet this Author seems willing
enough to have all these parties rejected and depressed.

[ Besides of inferior rank a vast multitude of knowing, serious, honest
people.] 1. This also wants proof. 2. The more learning, prudence, piety, and
gravity, those of the superior rank have, the more peaceably and quietly they
will live under lawful Governors, and the more obediently they will submit to
their Laws; which therefore if either they or those of inferior rank refuse to
do, they are either less knowing or less serious and honest than in conscience
it concerns those to be, who expect to be protected and encouraged by Governors.

[ None of all which are led blindfold by Tradition or implicit Faith.]

This man sure is a very knowing person himself, if he be so well acquainted
with all the Presbyterians, as to be able to aver this of them all, or of a
vast multitude of them upon good grounds. But is he indeed certain that none of
them are so lazy, ignorant, and sottish, as to be led blind^old by the
Tradition and dictates of their Presbyterian Parsons? Did none of them by an
implicit Faith believe it lawful to take the Covenant? Do none of them by an
implicit Faith believe the Rites and Forms by Law and Canons established among
us unlawful? p. 29. (39.) Was it not an implicit Faith (in the seditious
Doctrines of the Society of Jesus) whereby they believed it lawful to take up
Arms against their lawful Sovereign?

[ Or do run headlong into Fanatic delusions.] Are any turned Fanatics at
last but those that were first such Presbyterians as himself describes, p. 21,
22?

[ But they give up themselves to the sole direction and authority of the holy
Scriptures.]

He has told us before, that they deny not due respect and reverence to
venerable Antiquity, p. 20. (30.) Let him show if he can, how they respect and
reverence venerable Antiquity, if they afford it not [some directive]
Authority. 2. Why may not Independents and Anabaptists as well be said to give
up themselves to the sole direction and Authority of the holy Scriptures, as
Presbyterians?

[ Wherefore impartial Reason will conclude, that they chose this way as with
sincerity of affection, so with gravity of judgment; and that the things
themselves, even the more disputable part of them (as that against the
Hierarchy and Ceremonies) are such as may frequently prevail with good and wise
men.]

Which inference signifies nothing till the truth of the premises be cleared,
except the Authors confidence that the Prelatists have reason to believe
whatsoever he says in the praise of Presbyterians, merely because he is bold
enough to say it.

[ Inasmuch as they appear to those that have embraced them, to have the
Impress of Divine Authority, and the Character of Evangelical Purity.]

Dares this Author deny that the Principles of other Sectaries appear to those
that have embraced them to have the Impress of Divine Authority, and the
Character of Evangelical Purity? If not, does it follow that those men also
chose their way with sincerity of affection and gravity of judgment? or that
their opinions may frequently prevail with good and wise men? if it does not
follow, why does he argue so weakly and injudiciously?

[ For the reasons aforegoing, the infringment of due liberty in these matters
would perpetuate most unhappy controversies in the Church from age to age.]

It seems the man is of opinion, that all parties ought to be tolerated, yea
encouraged, who choose their way with sincerity of affection and gravity of
judgment, and upon such grounds as may frequently prevail with good and wise
men, inasmuch as they appear to them to have the Impress of Divine Authority,
and the Character of Evangelical Purity. If he be not of this opinion, let him
show why Presbyterians ought to be encouraged, and not others that have the
same qualifications. If he be, let him produce convincing Arguments that other
Sects have not all these qualifications, that is, that the Independents,
Anabaptists, and Quakers were for the generality either Fools or Knaves, when
they chose those ways. Besides, does he imagine that the Independents,
Anabaptists, and Quakers are not as desirous of due liberty in their way as the
Presbyterians are in theirs? or that the men of those persuasions are so
lukewarm in their affections, or so inconsiderable for their number, as that
the infringment of their liberty will not perpetuate most unhappy Controversies
in this Church? Ergo, by this Authors (Presbyterian) Logic, they ought in
reason of State to be protected and encouraged as well as Presbyterians.

If the three next Pages prove any thing, they evince that the Presbyterian
Leaven will from time to time sour the lump of this Church and State, if such
literally-Polemical, and unchristianly-practical Teachers, as too many of them
are, be protected and encouraged. It Is no wonder that Tares should grow where
they are suffered to be sown; and that they should spoil the Wheat where they
are nourished. I find it observed by a late writer, See the Apology for
Bishops sitting and voting in Parliament, P. 73.
out of Bishop Bancroft, that he long since plainly foretold, that the Puritans
would never give over their clamor for Reformation, till they had utterly
ruined the whole Kingdom and Church: and yet, said he, there are diverse
(meaning men in great places) that would gladly have these things smothered up,
being willing to think that the Puritans were no such dangerous men as he and
others did take them to be; only scrupulous and peevish perhaps about
Ceremonies, and therefore were willing to forbear them, and not to censure them
sharply. But that Prelate did wisely tell them, That if any such mischiefs
(which God forbid) shall happen hereafter, they were sufficiently warned, that
both should and might (in good time) have prevented them; and withal it would
then be found true which Livy says, Urgentibus Rempublicam fatis, Dei and
hominum salutares admonitiones spernuntur. -- When the Lord for the sins of a
people is purposed to punish any Country, he blinds the eye: of the wise so
as they shall either neglect or not perceive the ordinary means for the safety
thereof, etc.

This Author would persuade us, p. 29. (39.) that the numerous Presbyterian
party will not vary from it self, or vanish upon changes in Government or new
Accidents; for it rests not upon any private, temporary, variable occasion, but
upon a cause perpetual and everlasting. Those forementioned principles of
science and practice which give it its proper being, are of that firm and fixed
nature, that new contingencies will not al^er them, nor length of time wear
them out.] To which I answer: 1. If this Party is so invariable, how comes it
to pass that those Rites and Ceremonies which himself tells us, p. 28. (38.)
were heretofore by the greatest part of the Ministers named Puritans, looked
upon, and yielded to as things in their own nature [Indifferent,] are now
accounted ( p. 29. (39) by most of this way [Unlawful?] Does not this argue a
variation in this Party from it self? Has not length of time worn out those
their former Principles of science and practice? Dr. John Burges (in his
Preface to his answer in Vindication of Bishop Morton touching Ceremonies)
tells us, p. 11. that the State (in K. James his Reign) would never suffer
these Ceremonies to be questioned of [unlawfulness] which Dr. Reynolds, Dr.
Chaderton, Dr. Spark, and the rest of the most eminent men of this Nation, who
seemed to favor that Party, would neither affirm to be unlawful, nor be known
that any of that side were so [weak] as to think so. But now it seems the men
famed so much by this Author for their Learning and Orthodoxy, their excelling
in Polemical and Practical Divinity, p. 23. (33.) these Judicious and Prudent
men that have no Fellowship with Anabaptistical Fancy and Frenzy, p. 24. (34.)
these knowing and wise men, ( p. 24, 25.) these fixed and unalterable men, p.
29. (39.) are grown so weak and feeble in their Intellectuals, so Feminine in
their resolves, as to deem them unlawful. Again, if they are such an invariable
Party in their Principles of science and practice, what is the reason that in
these days they have Covenanted to endeavor the extirpation of that English
Hierarchy which in the days of yore their Presbyterian Ancestors were far from
condemning as wicked and intolerable? Witness this passage which Crakanthorp in
his Desens. Eccles. Anglicanae contra Archiepisc. Spalat. p. 243. quotes out of
Henry Jacob, one of that Party, who is his Tract de Veritate Vocat. Minister.
p. 88. against Johnson the Brownist, speaks thus; Quisquis quicquam de
Ecclesiae Anglicanae Statu intelligit, non potest non videre multos eosque
doctos in Ecclesia Anglicana sentire and docere Hierarchicum quod nunc est in
ea Regimen unicum esse verum ac legitimum Regiminis genus; fere omnes (etiam
Puritanos) idem ut indifferens and legitimum agnoscere, perpaucos vero and vix
usquam quenquam invenies qui ut malum, impium aut non ferendum judicant. He
that understands any thing of the State of the English Church, cannot but see
that many learned men in the Church of England believe and teach, that the
Hierarchical Government by which it is ruled, is the only true and legitimate
Form of Government: and that almost all men acknowledge it indifferent and
lawful: and that there are very few, scarce any men any where to be found who
judge it evil, wicked, or intolerable. Thus he, who in the same P. is quoted by
that Doctor as expressing himself to this purpose in behalf of the English
Church Government and Discipline. Haec vero Christi esse dicuntur, licet non a
Christo sed ab Ecclesia mandata and praescripta sint, cum Ecclesiae
Authoritatem Christus dedit ea quae commoda ipsi visa erant instituendi and
praescribendi. Ex hoc genere and regimen Ecclesiasticum and Ceremonias dicimus,
quia non simpliciter in Fundamento aut Verbo Dei ut perpetuo observanda
traduntur, sed arbitrio Ecclesiae and Magistratuum relinquuntur. Sic nos de his
docemus, tenemus, and persuasi sumus nihil usquam in sacris literis repugnans,
sed potius his consona reperiri. -- Quod si objicias multos inter nos socus
sentire, respondeo, Generale hoc esse and Ministrorum and Ecclesiarum
Anglicanarum de his Judicium, etiamsi unus forte aut duo ex centenis aut
millenis secus opinentur. These things, viz. the Hierarchical Government and
Discipline are truly said to be of Christ, though they are not commanded and
prescribed by Christ but the Church, forasmuch as Christ has given the Church
Authority to institute and prescribe those things which to her seem expedient;
of this kind we affirm Ecclesiastical Government and Ceremonies to be, because
they are not simply and immediately founded on the Word of God, or delivered
there as immutable Constitutions, but are left to the pleasure of the Church
and Magistrates. This is our Doctrine and opinion touching these things; and we
are persuaded that nothing can be found in sacred Writ repugnant, but several
passages agreeable to these sentiments: And if it be objected that many among
us are of another mind; I answer, That this is the Judgment of the generality,
both of the Ministers and Churches in England, though perhaps one or two among
a hundred or a thousand opine otherwise.

But now it seems the Presbyterian party is so variable and alterable from
these its quondamopinions and principles, as to imagine those Rites and Forms
which the Church has prescribed, unlawful, and that the Hierarchical Form of
Church Government ought to be extirpated. And if they are now changed (in their
science and practice) though to the worse from what they were heretofore, why
may we not hope that (if not merely length of time, yet) some afflicting
contingencies may make them change hereafter for the better from what they are
now? I doubt I should rather enquire whether there be any thing besides this
Authors bare word to secure us that they will not still grow worse and worse,
deceiving and being deceived. Certain I am, the more unalterable they are in
these their Fancies, the more mischief they are like to do in that State that
encourages them. But what kind of Argument is this, -- The Presbyterians will
not vary from themselves, therefore they ought in justice and reason of State
to be protected and encouraged by his Majesty? Is not this as good? The Jesuits
will not vary from themselves; those Principles of Science and practice which
they own and are actuated by, are of that firm and fixed nature, that new
contingencies will not alter them, nor length of time wear them out: Ergo,
Jesuits ought not in justice or reason of State to be rejected and depressed,
but protected and encouraged by our King and Kingdom. One may suspect by this
manner of arguing in the behalf of the Presbyterian party, that the Author of
it was either a Jesuit, since his reasoning is so favorable to that society;
or an half-witted Presbyterian, so dull as not to discern, that several of his
arguments conclude as forcibly for the encouragement of Jesuits among us as
Presbyterians.

But in this P. 29. (39.) it is suggested that the Presbyterians are [a
numerous] Party -- and that the imposing of such matters of Controversy as by
[so many] are held unlawful, -- cannot procure the peace of the Kingdom.] I
might here ask whether the Anabaptists or Quakers are not altogether as
numerous as that Presbyterian party which holds our Church-Ceremonies unlawful.
Nay, are not the Independents themselves as numerous? for I confess I am in
good hopes that there are comparatively but very few Presbyterians given up to
such blindness of mind, such strong delusions, as to believe our Ceremonies
unlawful. But my answer is this.

If that Party be indeed so numerous that the endeavoring to reject and
depress them will probably prove pernicious to the King and Kingdom, perhaps
State Policy will dictate that it should not be endeavored. But I affirm
withal that though they were twice as numerous, yet (unless their Practice
contradict their Doctrine) there is no such danger will accrue to the King or
Kingdom by their rejection. For if this Author does not grossly abuse and impose
upon his Readers, p. 54, 55. The Presbyterians are such learned knowing
creatures, as to teach faith and holiness, as also obedience active in all
lawful things, and passive in things unlawful, enjoined by the higher power.
Now they that are resolved to be passively obedient, will not be instruments of
mischief in a Kingdom, (though they are never so numerous) they will live
peaceably, neither railing with the Tongue nor smiting with the First of
wickedness; and therefore if the Presbyterians are indeed such good men and
such good Christians (in this particular) they may (notwithstanding their
number) be rejected and depressed (in State Policy) because of their other
persuasions repugnant to the public profession of the Nation, since their
suppression will not prejudice the peace of the Church or Kingdom.

In p. 30. (40.) (after some non sensicalcontradictious canting in praise of
Presbyterians, for how can the inward spirit of Presbytery be said to actuate
their whole body, to knit them each to other, and to remain in full strength
and vigor, if some principal members of that body fall off and turn
praevaricators?) Our Author enquires what those great things are for which this
sort of men contend? Surely, says he, p. 31. (41.) they are no other than the
lively opening of the pure Doctrine of the Gospel, the upholding of all Divine
Institutions; particularly the strict observation of the Lord's day, a
laborious and efficacious ministry, taking hold of the conscience and reaching
to the heart, a Godly Discipline correcting true and real Scandals and
disobedience; in a word, all the necessary and effectual means of unfeigned
Faith, and holy life, that the Kingdom of God may come in power. And for these
things sake they are alienated from the height of Prelacy, and the Pomp of
Ceremonious worship.] Say you so? It seems these godly Disciplinarians do not
look upon disobedience to the Laws establishing Prelacy and Ceremonious worship
as true and real disobedience; nor the scandal arising from that disobedience
as true and real Scandal; or else they implicitly confess that the
Presbyterians thus scandalously disobedient, were not chastis'd by the Bishops
so severely as they deserved. It seems they fancy that Prelatists are enemies
to the lively opening of the pure Doctrine of the Gospel, to some divine
Institutions, to a laborious and efficacious ministry, to
Scripture-Discipline, to some necessary and effectual means of unfeigned Faith
and holy life; whereas the only proof he offers of this Prelatical guilt is, 1.
Their suppressing Lectures and Afternoon Sermons: which is nothing to the
purpose, unless he had proved also that these are of Divine Institution, or are
necessary means of unfeigned Faith, and holy Life. 2. A book for sports and
pastimes on Sundays enjoined to be read by Ministers in their Parish Churches,
under penalty of deprivation. What? so as to exclude either Common Prayer and
preaching in the Morning, or Divine Service and Catechizing in the Afternoon?
or so as to license the absence of any Parishioner from that service either
part of the day? 3. Superstitious Innovations introduced; Si accusasse
suffecerit, quis erit innocens? 4. A new Book of Canons composed, and a new
Oath for upholding the Hierarchy enforced. By whom? were not this Oath and
those Canons composed in Convocation, by our Church Governors? were they not
confirmed and imposed by the Royal Assent? And why I pray was the new Oath for
upholding the Hierarchy established by Law more superstitious than the newer
Oath for destroying that Hierarchy so established? Far be it from me, says he,
p. 32. (42.) to impute these things to all that were in judgment Episcopal; for
I am persuaded, a great if not the greater part of them disallowed these
Innovations. These Innovations? what Innovations? The word must in reason refer
to the particulars just now enumerated. viz. The new Book of Canons, the new
Oath, the Book for sports and pastimes on Sundays. But are these men in justice
and Reason of State to be protected and encouraged, who dare to call new Laws
either of State or Church, or both (occasioned by new emergencies) Innovations?
or new practices, superstitious, merely because not commanded in Gods word? Now
these things are so far from being a proof of the inconsistency of Prelacy with
the lively opening of the pure Doctrine of the Gospel, with the upholding of
all Divine Institutions, a laborious and efficacious Ministry, etc. that the
contrary is evident from the instance of the Right Reverend Bishop Morton (whom
this very Author, I believe, has scarce confidence enough to accuse as a
Delinquent in those particulars; since p. 67. (77.) he reckons Bishop Morton in
the number of those Episcopal Divines, whose Doctrine is entirely embraced by
the Presbyterians.) Who yet did not only approve of, but had the chief hand in
contriving and publishing that Declaration which allowed some Sports and
Pastimes as that which was then the most probable course to stop the current of
Popery and profaneness, as appears from the story of that Bishop's life,
published by Dr. Barwick, p. 80, 81. So it is evident also from the Augustan
Confession, c. 7. De Potest. Ecclesiastica, and Mr. Calvin's Institutions, that
both he and the Lutheran Reformers were far enough from thinking the Lords day
of Divine Institution, who yet were for a lively opening of the pure Doctrine
of the Gospel and a laborious efficacious ministry.

In some following Pages the Author pretends to manifest, that the Presbyterian
Interest will never be extinguished while the State of England continues
Protestant. For, says he, p. 34. (44.) let but the Protestant Doctrine, as it is
by Law established in the Church of England, be upheld and preached, and 'twill
raise up a genuine offspring of this people, whose way is no other than the
life and power of that Doctrine.

But I as confidently affirm on the other side, that if the Protestant Doctrine
by Law established in the Church of England, be upheld and preached, 'twill
raise up such a genuine offspring of true English Protestants, as shall own
Prelacy and the Churches Authority in appointing Ceremonies, both which are
established by that Doctrine, but rejected by Presbyterians. If their way be no
other than the life and power of that Doctrine, they act suitably to these
Principles, viz. That the Church has power to decree Rites or Ceremonies; and
authority in Controversies of Faith: (Artic. 20.) That whosoever through his
private Judgment willingly and purposely does openly break the Traditions and
Ceremonies of the Church, which be not repugnant to the Word of God, and be
ordained and approved by common Authority, ought to be rebuked openly (that
others may fear to do the like) as he that offends against the Common Order of
the Church, and hurts the Authority of the Magistrate, and wounds the
consciences of the weak brethren. Every particular or National Church has
authority to ordain, change, and abolish Ceremonies or Rites of the Church,
ordained only by man's authority, so that all things be done to edifying.
(Artic. 34.) They practically own the Kings power within his Realms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and all other his Dominions and Countries, as the
highest power under God, to whom all men as well inhabitants as born within the
same, do by Gods Laws owe most loyalty and obedience before and above all other
Potentates in Earth. They act as if they believed his Majesty to have the same
Authority in causes Ecclesiastical, that the godly Kings had among the Jews and
Christian Emperors in the Primitive Church. They use the Form of Gods worship
in the Church of England established by Law, and contained in the Book of Common
Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, without surmising it to be either
corrupt, superstitious or unlawful, or to contain any thing in it that is
repugnant to the Scriptures. They are obedient to the Government of the Church
of England, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and the rest that bear
office in the same; not fancying it to be either Antichristian or repugnant to
the word of God. They do not combine themselves together in a new brotherhood,
accounting the Christians who are conformable to the Doctrine, Government,
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England to be profane and unmeet for them
to join with in Christian Profession. They imagine not, 1. that any of the 39.
Articles are in any part superstitious or erroneous; or 2. that the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church of England by Law established are wicked,
Antichristian, or superstitious, or such as being commanded by lawful
Authority, men who are zealously and godly affected may not with any good
conscience approve them, use them, or as occasion requires, subscribe to them;
or 3. that the sign of the Cross used in Baptism is any part of the substance
of that Sacrament. They hold that things of themselves indifferent do in some
sort alter their natures when they are either commanded or forbidden by a
lawful Magistrate, and may not be omitted at every man's pleasure, contrary to
the Law when they be commanded, nor used when they are prohibited. These are
parts of the Doctrine established by Law in the Church of England, as is evident
from the 1, 2, 4, 7, 9, 5, 6, 30. Canons legally framed and ratified: But where
are those English Presbyterians to be found, whose way has been no other than
the life and power of this Doctrine? Have not their practices too loudly
proclaimed to the world, that they have robbed the King of his Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical affairs, and traitorously placed it in some Lords Temporal and
Commons? Is the metamorphosing of our venerable Church-Liturgy into a thing
called a Directory; the extirpating of our Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, etc. the casting off of the Rites and Ceremonies established by
Law, and fancying them unlawful; is this, I say, the life and power of that
Doctrine before mentioned? Is Covenanting and combining against the loyal
Asserters of the Kings Supremacy and our Liturgy, of our Prelacy and
Ceremonies, as Incendiaries, Malignants and evil Instruments, the life and
power of that Doctrine? Durst this J. C. have canted at this rate, unless he
had beforehand braz'd his Forehead with Impudence? For what besides was it
that made him talk thus? and further to say and testify, that [ Let but the
Free use of the Holy Bible be permitted to the common people, and this
[Presbyterian] Generation of men will spring up afresh by the immortal seed of
the word.] Let him prove, if he can, that they will spring up any otherwise
than Independents, Anabaptists and Quakers do, viz. by a misunderstanding of
some places in the holy Bible, and perverting them to unholy practices: which
it is no great wonder if unlearned and unstable persons (such as too many of the
common people are) be guilty of. Grotius in his notes on Cassander's
consultation, would have the reading of the Scripture permitted to all men,
but, Hauriant, says he, quantum necesse actutum est; minime vero de locis
omnibus jus sibi sumant interpretandi, sed consulant eruditos: He would not
have them assume to themselves a right of Interpreting all places of Scripture,
but to advise with learned men, and ask their judgment: Which counsel (as Rivet
approved of in his Animadversions, p. 203. so) it behooves common people to
follow, lest otherwise that permission occasion their destruction, 2 Pet. 3.
16. He goes on,

For that pure spiritual and heavenly Doctrine pressing internal renovation, or
the new birth, and the way of holy singularity and circumspection, and being
written with such Authority and majesty must needs beget though not in the most
yet in many a disposition and practice in some sort thereunto conformable.

Which words, by the way, unless understood cum grano salis, will smell of
Socinianism; but come out of the clouds, O thou Presbyterian, and tell us
whether thou think this to be pure spiritual heavenly Doctrine? Let every
soul be subject to the higher powers: Whosoever resists the power, resists
the Ordinance of God: And they that resist shall receive to themselves
damnation. Be subject not for wrath only but for Conscience sake. Where the
word of a King is, there is power; and who may say unto him, What do thou?
Mark them which cause divisions among you contrary to the Doctrine which you
have been taught, and avoid them. The works of the Flesh are manifest, which
are these: -- Hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,
envyings, Murders. -- They that do these thing; shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God. Put them in mind that they be subject to Principalities and Powers,
that they obey Magistrates, be ready to every good work: that they speak evil
of no man: that they be no brawlers, (fighters) but gentle (soft) showing all
meekness to all men: Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your
selves. Where envying and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether unto
the King as Supreme, or to Governors as to those that are sent by him for the
punishment of evil doers. Honor all men: Love the brotherhood. Fear God:
Honor the King. Servants be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to
the good and gentle, but also to the froward. Let none of you suffer as a
murderer, or as a Thief, or an evil-doer, or as a busie-body in other men's
matters, etc. What think thou J. C. Do these and the like Scriptures press
any point of internal renovation, and the new birth, and the power of
Christianity, or no? Is the Presbyterian party persuaded of the heavenliness
and spirituality of this Doctrine? or do they account it (...) to love their
enemies, to bless such as curse them, to do good to those that hate them, to
pray for such as despitefully use them and persecute them? Has their practice
manifested that they esteem this imitation of the divine goodness a piece of
holy singularity? Has their way here in England been none other than the life
and power of that part of the Law of Christ? Have they accounted it a part of
holy circumspection to redeem time in evil days? to purchase to themselves a
longer time to do good in by all just complyances, by honest actions, by a fair
civil carriage, a peaceable conversation, by bending in all those flexures of
fortune and condition which they cannot help? ( See Dr. Taylor's Sermon on Mat.
10. 16.) Or have they acted as if they believed these other passages of
Scripture to be divinely inspired? If any man will come after me let him deny
himself and take up his Cross and follow me: Except you be converted and become
as little children (in all humility and subjection) ye shall not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven: Take my yoke upon you: Learn of me for I am meek and lowly
in heart: If when you do well and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is
acceptable with God. Christ has suffered for us leaving us an example that we
should follow his steps; who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he
suffered he threatened not. -- In the last days perilous times shall come, for
men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers,
false accusers, intemperate, fierce, despisers of them that are good, traitors,
heady, high-minded, -- having a Form of Godliness, but denying the power
thereof, from such turn away. We beseech you brethren that you study to be
quiet and to meddle with your own business. -- If any man love life, and would
see good days, let him refrain his Tongue from evil, and his lips that they
speak no guile, let him seek peace and ensue it. Follow peace with all men, and
holiness, without which no man shall ever see the Lord. The fruit of the spirit
is love, peace, long-suffering, meekness, gentleness. Now speak out man, is
this pure spiritual heavenly Doctrine or no? Is the practicing of it a duty
incumbent upon all that would testify themselves internally renewed, or is it
not? Is the contrary neglect an argument of an unregenerate person? were these
things written by the Penmen of Scripture with such Authority and Majesty, as
to beget in Presbyterians a disposition and practice in any tolerable measure
thereunto conformable? If this Author has the confidence to answer in favor of
Presbyterians, let him evince or at least endeavor to evince that their
Covenanting to overthrow things legally established, their reproaching those
that would have upheld them as Malignants, Incendiaries, and Evil Instruments,
their choosing to take up Swords into their hands rather than the Cross: their
being so far from submitting to the King as supreme, and the Governors sent by
him, that they resisted and maintained a long War against both. Let him, I say,
evince that such ways as these are the life and power of that pure spiritual
and heavenly Doctrine taught in Scripture, and owned by all true English
Protestants. Nor let him be angry that I handle him in this manner, and reply
thus particularly to his ambiguous generalities; since the question now being
Whether Presbyterians are the best English Protestants, and whether on that
account they ought in justice or reason of State to be encouraged; It concerned
him, if he meant to discourse pertinently and clearly, to manifest that they
practically own those pure spiritual and heavenly Aphorisms in particular which
so much conduce to the peace of the State, and the preservation of the Order
and Government by Law established; and that they heartily acknowledge and
embrace all that English Protestant Doctrine which is subservient to that end;
for otherwise the encouraging, yea tolerating of them will probably prove
pernicious to the State.

To affirm that the Presbyterian Interest is one chief strength of the true
Reformed Protestant Religion, p. 35. (45.) is much easier than to prove it.

Let those well known Principles, says he, which strike to the heart of Popery,
be brought forth for evidence: viz. 1. The perfection of holy Scripture, in
opposition to unwritten Tradition. 2. The Authority of Canonical Books in
opposition to the encroachments of the Apocrypha. 3. The distinct Knowledge of
the Doctrine of Salvation according to every man's capacity in opposition to
implicit Faith. 4. The reasonable serving of God according to the Word in
opposition to blind devotion. 5. Spiritual Gospel Worship in opposition to a
pompous train of Ceremonies. 6. The efficacious edifying use of Religious
exercises in opposition to the Popish Opus operatum, or work done. 7. The power
of Godliness in opposition to splendid formality.

A. 1. I deny this Argument; The Presbyterians acknowledge the Truth of these
Principles; therefore that Party is one chief strength of the true reformed
Protestant Religion; for either, 1. they may own other Principles also which
contradict these, and consequently weaken that Religion: or 2. they may own
together with these such principles as are inconsistent with other parts of the
Protestant Faith (grounded on and actuated by those Scriptures before
mentioned) and with the English Protestant Doctrine by Law established conform
to them. 2. Perhaps those seven Principles, as those many Presbyterians
understand them, who are said to account our Ceremonies unlawful, are no part
of the English Protestant Doctrine; but supposing they are rightly understood,
with due limitations and explications, they are not all the parts of the
Protestant Doctrine, nor the chief parts of it, as it refers to Government and
Obedience, which yet should have been most of all considered in the discussion
of this Question. 3. Independents, Anabaptists, yea, Socinians do as heartily
embrace all those Principles as Presbyterians, therefore he may as rationally
conclude, that those also are chief supporters of the true reformed Protestant
Religion, and consequently to be protected and encouraged in this Kingdom. 4.
Presbytery may be extinguished, and yet these seven Principles (understood in
sano sensu) may be asserted by Prelatists, and consequently the State of
England may continue Protestant without Presbyterian aids. That Prelatical men
assert them as well as Presbyterians, this Author denies not; only he seems
willing, p. 36. (46.) to have it believed that the Presbyterian Party is [more]
rooted and grounded in those principles, which for my part I am ready to
believe when I see it proved. But 1. This implies that Prelatists also are
rooted and grounded in those Principles. Whence it follows, that England may
keep her self pure from Romish abominations, though Prelatists only be
protected and encouraged by her. 2. Till I see the contrary proved, I believe
that Prelatists are more deeply rooted and grounded than Presbyterians in those
and other Protestant Principles, so far as they are by Law established among us;
in which sense they sufficiently strike at the heart of Popery, even by this
Authors own confession, p. 34. (44.) where he assures us (if we may rely on his
bare word) that, Let but the Protestant Doctrine [as it is by Law establisht] in
the Church of England, be upheld and preached, and 'twill raise up a genuine
offspring of [sound Protestants;] and therefore England may continue
Protestant, though Prelatists only are encouraged, and Presbyterians rooted
out; which therefore may be done in Justice and Reason of State,
notwithstanding this Argument to the contrary.

As for his story, p. 37. (47.) I observe, 1. that the English Roman Catholics
are called a Faction in Religion, which is strange language from the pen of a
Venetian Agent. 2. That the Agent looked not upon Puritans as Protestants,
which as this Author tells us, p. 38. the Presbyterians complain of as a
palpable injury, and give evident proof, that they of right have as much
Interest in that venerable Name as English Prelatists. Now really I am much of
his mind in this particular, if by Protestants he mean such as approve of
Subjects protesting against the will the pleasure of their Sovereign; and such
as deny obedience to the Edicts and commands of Kings and Emperors, or lawful
Superiors: and if Romanizing spirits call this Puritanism, perhaps he well
observes, p. 39. (49.) that the more primitive times of protestantism were more
leaning to it: (I add, than they should have been) and I hope puritans have a
greater portion of those venerable qualities than prelatists: But if he mean by
protestants such as practically own the truth of the English protestant
Doctrine, by Law established in the Church of England, (in which sense I suppose
the Venetian Agent implicitly denied puritans to be protestants) I acknowledge
the name of protestant in that notion venerable, (since in that notion it is a
part of Christianity) and shall be very glad if this Author can produce any
evident proofs, that the presbyterians have any right to and interest in that
name; which till he do, he must pardon me if I suspend my assent, since himself
has given another character of them, p. 22. and 29. (32. and 39.) and if he had
not, their practices, especially of late years, too evidently prove them to be
creatures hugely differing from true English protestants; forasmuch as the
Discipline of the Church of England excludes such Animals from its Communion.

Watson in his second Quodlibet and first Article, proposes this Question. [
Whether the Jesuits or Puritans be more dangerous, pernicious and noisome to the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, or any other Realm where both or either of
them live, together or apart.] He answers thus: [ The Jesuits without all
question are more dangerous; not that their Doctrine is as yet so absurd as the
Puritans -- in matters pertaining to Manners, Government and Order of Life, nor
that their Intent is manifested as yet to be more malicious against both
Church, Commonwealth, Prince and Peer than the Puritans are; but because the
means and their manner of proceeding is more covert, more seeming substantial,
more formal and orderly in it self, and therefore are the more dangerous,
because of the two they are more like to prevail, by managing of whatsoever
they take in hand; and the rather, for that their grounds are more firm, their
persuasions more plausible, their performance more certain, as having many
singular fine wits among them; whereas the Puritans have none but Grossum
Caputs -- so that if matters come to hearing and handling between Jesuits and
Puritans, the latter are sure to be ridden like Fools, and come to wrack.

In the second Article the same Author proposes this Question: [ Whether the
Jesuits Doctrine abstracted from matters of Faith and Religion come nearer in
matters of life and manners to the Protestants or to the Puritans.] His Answer
whereunto is: [ That Jesuits are in this respect all wholly Puritans, and
therefore, says he, do some for distinctions-sake call the one Puritan-Papists,
and the other Puritan-Protestants.] Then he lays down a parallel between the
Jesuits and the puritans in twenty five particulars: Some whereof are, That
they agree in calling themselves the Saintlybrotherhood, in scoffing, scolding,
and ignominious disgracing speeches, (Puritans against the Bishops and English
Clergy, Jesuits against the Bishops and Prelates of Rome) in refusing to have
any Superiors, -- in acknowledging no obedience (due, I suppose he means) to
any Ecclesiastical dignity, though dissemblingly they will yield it. The
Puritans labor to pull all Bishops down, and to have none but Superintendents
in England, and have already made havoc of all such in Scotland; and the
Jesuits will let no Bishops be in either Realm, if they can keep them from the
superiority over them. The Jesuits check and control both Pope and Prince, as
at least their equals; and the Puritans control both Princes and Prelates, as
if they were their superiors, etc.] At last he concludes, that the Jesuits and
Puritans do come nearest together in platforms, though both opposite one to
another in intention as far as may be.

The use that may be made of these passages is this: since the Puritans of
former times were (if these pictures of them be rightly drawn) of such an ugly
complexion, it is no great wonder, 1. That the hatred of Prelatical Protestants
against Puritans was (as that Venetian Agent observes) greater than against
Catholics, (those Catholics, I presume he means, who were of the
Widdringtonian persuasion, in reference to the obedience due from subjects to
Kings and Princes;) for the Widdringtonian Catholics were more opposite to
those Jesuitical principles and practices which are so prejudicial to the
Authority of Kings and Princes, than such Puritans were. Nor is it a wonder, 2.
That the hatred of such Catholics was greater against Puritans than against
(Prelatical) Protestants: for such Protestants differed from such Catholics,
not so much about matters of Government and obedience, as matters of Faith; but
such Puritans were opposite to them in both, in a very high degree. Nor 3. was
it wonderful that the hatred of Puritans was greater against such Catholics
than such Protestants. Because such Catholics are more opposite to such
Puritans than Prelatical Protestants are; for these Protestants differ not so
much from those Puritans about matters of Faith, as of Order, Discipline and
Government; but those Catholics differ from them in both. Nor is it strange,
4. That both such Catholics and such Protestants did easily combine together
for the ruin and rooting out of Puritans: for those Puritans entertained such
principles as were inconsistent with that obedience, which both such
Catholics, and such Protestants ( Widdringtonian Catholics, and prelatical
Protestants) acknowledged to be due from subjects to their Sovereign; upon
which score also both those parties were eagerly bent against Jesuits.

And now much good may these [notable observations] (out of the Venetian
Agent's story) do this Author, who, p. 39. (49.) thus argues: Papists impose
the name of Puritans on such as retain the old Protestant spirit of antipathy
to Rome; therefore in the Puritan party lies the heart and strength of
averseness and enmity to the Heresies and Idolatries of the Roman Church. Which
is so far from being (what he is pleased to term it) a good Argument, that it is
a mere sophism, unless he can prove that Papists [ therefore] call some men
Puritans, viz. merely because of their averseness to the Heresies and
Idolatries of the Roman Church; but that they do not call any so on that
ground, is evident from this, that they do not call all by that Name, who are
resolute enemies to the Heresies and Idolatries of the Roman Church. The
Venetian Agent by this man's own confession, p. 38. (48.) called that Faction in
the Church of England [Puritans,] because being seasoned and initiated with the
Doctrine of Calvin, they judged the English Reformation imperfect, and so
refused submission to that Form of Policy,] endeavoring to introduce a purer
and more perfect Form of their own. This is Puritanism in opposition to that
old Protestant spirit which animated our 39. Articles, and the Canons
Ecclesiastical ratified by Q. Elizabeth and K. James.

Besides, suppose there were any Truth in this assertion, that the heart and
strength of averseness and enmity to the Heresies and Idolatries of the Roman
Church lies in the Puritan party, yet unless they are enemies also to those
seditious and rebellious principles maintained by some Papists, they are not
true English Protestants, and consequently they deserve not to be protected and
encouraged by England's King. -- If mere averseness from Popish Idolatries and
Innovations were a good Argument of a good Protestant, 'twould prove Socinians
the best in the world.

[ Those Bishops, said he, in the Church of England, who were heartily averse
from Popish Innovations, were more benign and favorable to Puritans.]

Which signifies little, unless he could prove it true of [all] such Bishops;
but it may be he understands by [Popish Innovations] either the old Ceremonies
enjoined by Law, or some new Ceremony permitted and allowed, perhaps
recommended, by Law; and it had been strange, if such kind of Bishops as were
heartily averse from such Ceremonies, because they fancied them Popish
Innovations, should not favor Puritans. And again, If some Bishops in the
Church of England were more benign and favorable to Puritans, it is no great
wonder, since the same Bishops were (it seems) counted Puritan by the adverse
party. Indeed both King and Bishops were more benign and favorable to many of
them than they deserved; which gave them leisure and opportunity to grow
numerous; to increase and strengthen their party, till at last they were too
strong both for King and Bishops; for the loyal Nobility, Gentry and
Commonalty; and when they had got the power in their hands, O what grateful and
ingenuous returns they made them for that benignity and favor! They ruined the
Bishops, (not sparing even those most heartily Protestant Bishops, who had been
so benign and favorable to them,) they raised a War against the King;
plundered, sequestered, murdered those that adhered to him, and by degrees
extorted from himself such grand diminutions of his Royal Prerogative, as that
they left him little more than the Title of a King: And are such men as these
such true English Protestants, so good Christians, as that they ought in
justice and reason of State to be still treated benignly and favorably? Nay
rather, should not King, Nobles and Commons ( p. 40. (50.) remember their
darling Protestantism? I mean, that good English Protestantism contained in the
39. Articles; by Law established in the Church of England; that true mean
between Fanatic and Jesuitical Protestantism. Should not, I say, King, Nobles
and Commons remember this their darling, and in reason of State abandon that
sort of persons, who have contributed so much to the destruction of it? Let
them not sleep securely, while the seeds-men of the envious one sow the Tares
of Division in our Field, not only to weaken and hinder, but to choke and eat
out our English Protestant Faith, Order and Government: And let our gracious
Sovereign still show himself gracious where his undeserved clemency is like to
produce happy (permanent) effects; but on the other side, let the mischiefs
that befell his Royal Father, through the stubborn Insolency of ungrateful and
disloyal Presbyterians, make him wary in time, and circumspectly provident for
his own and the Kingdoms safety, lest himself also know and feel by sad
experience what it is to protect and encourage presbyterians.

P. 41. (51.) The Author takes upon him to vindicate Presbyterians from the
many Calumnies with which he tells us they are loaded. The first that he
mentions is, [ their plucking from the Civil Magistrate his power in Causes
Ecclesiastical, and erecting Imperium in Imperio.] Which, says he, is a
groundless and gross mistake, and to prove it so he urges the declared judgment
of the Highest of that way according to their own words, which are these.

[ To the Political Magistrate is allowed a Diatactick ordering regulating
power about Ecclesiastical affairs in a Political way; so that he reforms the
Church when corrupted in Divine Worship, Discipline or Government.]

But notwithstanding this there may be Imperium in Imperio: For the Kirk may
assume to themselves the power of judging whether there are such corruptions or
no; and whether the Civil Magistrate reforms those corruptions in a warrantable
manner or no; and consequently of checking him in both respects if he chance to
judge otherwise than they do, witness the next.

[ He convenes and convocates Synods and Councils made up of Ecclesiastical
Persons to advise and conclude determinatively according to the word of God,
how the Church is to be reformed and refined from corruption, how to be guided
and governed when reformed.]

But notwithstanding this there may be Imperium in Imperio: For the Kirk may
challenge to themselves a power of convening without, yea against the Civil
Magistrate's command, and here they actually challenge the power of
conclusively determining how the Church is to be reformed and governed.

[ He ratifies and establishes within his Dominions the just and necessary
Decrees of the Church in Synods and Councils by his Civil Sanction.]

But notwithstanding this there may be Imperium in Imperio: For the Kirk may
claim the power of determining whether its own Decrees be just and necessary or
no; and of putting them in execution, though the Civil Magistrate deny to ratify
them by his Civil Sanction.

[ He judges and determines definitively with ae consequent and political
judgment, or judgment of Discretion, concerning things judged and determined
antecedently by the Church in reference to his own Act.]

But notwithstanding this there may be Imperium in Imperio: For the Kirk may
take upon them to control the King (as well as private persons) if his
difinitive Judgment of discretion (which they allow to every [private] person,
p. 20. (30.) in reference to his own act) should chance to contradict their
antecedent determinations.

[ He takes care politically that even matters and Ordinances merely and
formally Ecclesiastical be duly managed by Ecclesiastical Persons orderly
called thereunto]

But notwithstanding this there may be Imperium in Imperio: For the Kirk may
imagine that in case the King refuse to take this Political care, themselves
may appoint Ecclesiastical Persons to manage them, and that their so doing is
an orderly call to those Persons to act accordingly.

[ He has a compulsive, punitive or corrective power formally Political in
matters of Religion in reference to all sorts of Persons and things under his
Jurisdiction]

But notwithstanding this there may be Imperium in Imperio: For holy Kirk may
deny her self to be, in matters of Religion, under his Jurisdiction.

[ He may Politically compel the outward man of all Persons, Church Officers,
or others under his Dominion unto External performance of their respective
duties and offices in matters of Religion, punishing them if either they
neglect to do their duty at all, or do it corruptly.]

But notwithstanding this also there may be Imperium in Imperio: For the Kirk
may fancy themselves the only or chief Judges of what are the duties and
offices belonging to such and such Persons, and whether they neglect or
corruptly perform them.

So that if Presbyterians grant no more power to belong to the King of England
in Ecclesiastical matters, they deny his Supremacy and consequently erect
Imperium in Imperio.

How they who give up themselves to the sole direction and Authority of the
holy Scriptures, p. 24. (34.) can (in reason) acknowledge a spiritual power
over the Conscience as intrinsecally belonging to the Church, I leave him to
inform us; who would have us believe, p. 43. (53) that [ Presbyterians do not
claim for the Convocation or any other Ecclesiastical Convention an
Independency on Parliaments.]

That they do not claim it for a Convocation of Bishops and Episcopal men I am
apt enough to believe. But I cannot entertain any reasonable hope that they who
have Covenanted so deeply in the behalf of the Scotch Discipline and Form of
Government, as to swear an endeavor of reforming things in England according
to the example of the Kirk of Scotland, (as one of the best reformed Churches)
will acknowledge the ratification of the decrees of all Ecclesiastical
conventions to depend on Parliaments. For, if Bishop Bramhall deceive us not,
(Fair Warning p. 9.) It Is a Scotch maxim, that Parliamentary ratifications can
no way alter Church-Canons concerning the worship of God; for Ecclesiastical
Discipline ought to be exercised whether it be ratified by the Civil Magistrate
or not. The want of a Civil Sanction to the Church is but like lucrum cessans,
not damnum emergens, as it adds nothing to it, so it takes nothing away from
it: If there be any clashing of Jurisdictions, or defect in this kind; they lay
the fault at the Magistrates door, accounting it a great sin or wickedness for
the Magistrate to hinder the exercise or execution of Ecclesiastical
Discipline. But we, say they, do give Christian Magistrates a Political power
to convocate Synods, to preside in Synods, to ratify the Acts of Synods, to
reform the Church; we make him the keeper of both Tables. Take nothing, says
the discerning Bishop, and hold it fust; Here are good words but they signify
nothing, for they teach that this power of the Christian Magistrate is not
privative and destructive to the power of the Church, but cumulative and only
auxiliary or assisting: Which very Doctrine is taught by [the highest of the
Presbyterian way] here in England in their Jus Divinum Regiminis Ecclesiastici;
where their concessions just now mentioned by this Author are to be found, but
p. 77. with this restriction, All the former power, say they, that is granted
or may be granted circa sacra to the Magistrate, is only [cumulative] not
[privative,] he may help her in Reformation, not hinder her in reforming her
self, convening Synods her self, as in Act. 15. otherwise her condition were
better without than with a Magistrate: The Christian Magistrate much less ought
to prejudice her herein; otherwise her state were worse under the Christian
than under the Pagan Magistrate. Thus the Presbyterian Authors (or Author) of
that Book. Besides the power (as the Bishop goes on) which they abusively call
authoritative, but is indeed ministerial of executing their Decrees, and
contributing to their settlement; they ascribe to the Magistrate concerning the
Acts of Synods (that which every private man has) a judgment of discretion,
but they retain to themselves the judgment of Jurisdiction, and if he judge not
as they would have him, but suspend out of conscience the influence of his
Political power where they would have him exercise it, they will either teach
him another part of Popery, that is, an implicit Faith, or he may perchance
feel the weight of their Church Censures, and find quickly what manner of men
they be, as our late gracious King Charles, and before him his Father, his
Grandmother and his great-Grandmother did all to their cost. See more p. 11, 12.

Mr. Parker in his discourse concerning Puritans (printed 1641) though he talk
sometimes extravagantly enough in their favor, yet now and then he has his
Lucida intervalla wherein he speaks more agreeably to Truth and Reason. Having
mentioned some Tenants concerning Spiritual and Temporal Jurisdiction
maintained by that great Arch-Prelate Mr. Calvin, p. 28. according to the
Popish Grounds, p. 29. he tells us that that method of Mr. Calvin' s is the way
to crect Regnum in Regno, and to maintain such concurrent Jurisdictions as
cannot possibly stand together, p. 31. for all being subject to sin and offense
as well the Spiritual as Temporal, either the one or other must go
unquestioned, and this may produce division, or else both, and that will cause
most certain conf^^sion. Both sides here seem, says he, s^rangely puzzled, (of
which assertion he subjoyns not so much as a seeming reason as to the Episcopal
side, but proceeds thus) The rigidest of the Episcopal Faction allow Princes a
coercive power over Priests and Prelates where they perform not what their duty
is in their Functions or Jurisdictions, and this power requires an higher power
of summoning, arraigning, and legally trying them; and yet the moderatest of
the Presbyterian Faction would have Princes questionable, tryable, and
punishable by the Spiritualty. Which sufficiently implies that he thought not
any Episcopal men guilty of that crime.

From which premises I conclude, that notwithstanding any thing produced here
by this Author to the contrary, this first charge against Presbyterians is a
true accusation, not a calumny.

He proceeds to a second, and tells us, p. 43. (53.) There goes a voice that
Presbyterians are Antimonarchical, (as if 'twere vox and praeterea nihil.)

[ But are their Principles inconsistent with Monarchy, or any impeachment to
the same? These are contained in the character above written.]

But what if that Character of them be traitorously partial, and in reference
to the Question here treated of ridiculously impertinent and abominably
deceitful? whereof if this Author or any of his Brethren desire farther proof,
I may chance to satisfy their desires before I conclude these Animadversions.

In the mean time let us listen to his fine Apologies.

[ Peradventure, says he, p. 44. (54.) the exact Presbytery, that is, the
parity of degree and Authority in all Ministers is that against which this
charge is directed.] Judge then whether that forementioned character, where
that which is exact Presbytery is altogether concealed, be an exact description
of Presbytery. [ Although this parity is not insisted on] Was it not insisted
on at the Isle of Wight Treaty? [ or urged to the breach of peace.] He did [but
think] p. 20. that most Presbyterians here in England allowed in order to peace
Episcopum Praesidem: but here he is more peremptory, and withal (it seems) so
scandalously ignorant, as to believe that Tumults, Riots, Covenanting, and
fighting in the behalf of Scotch-Presbytery is no breach of peace. [ Neither is
it essential to Presbytery,] whence I gather, that exact Presbytery is not
essential to Presbytery: but was it not essential to the Presbytery contended
for at the Isle of Wight? was it not essential to that Form of Government which
they had before Covenanted to introduce?

[ Yet what reason can be rendered why this may not comport with Kingly
Government?] A. Even the self-same reason which some of his own party have (as
I take it) made use of, to prove that Episcopacy cannot comport with Kingly
Government, viz. that it pretends (as some men discourse of it) to be Jure
Divino: which since presbyterian parity also pretends to, it is upon that score
inconsistent with Monarchical Government, as much as Episcopacy: the argument
is as good against both Forms as against either. But 2. Since this Author is
guilty, either of such gross ignorance, or such Treasonable dishonesty, as to
make us believe, either that there is, or that he knows not any ground of this
Accusation, but what is fetched from the presbyterian parity: I shall for his
and other such men's better information, take the pains to transcribe part of
the Answer to a Letter written at Oxford, and superscribed to Dr. Samuel
Turner, concerning the Church and the Revenues thereof. Examine, says the
Answerer, p. 15. the Presbyterian principles, and you will clearly find Kings
and they cannot stand together; for either you consider that new Government in
the Scottish sense, which allows no appeal to any other power; and then it is
plain, that where men admit this they admit of a Supremacy, which does not
reside in the King, and by consequence of two several supremacies within the
bounds of the self-same Kingdom, which can no more stand with Monarchy, than it
can with Monogamy, to be married to two several Wives; and though it is said,
that this Presbyterian Government meddles only with spiritual things, which
concern the good of the Soul, and so it cannot hurt Regal power, yet this is
but only said and no more; for it is well known, that in ordine ad spiritualia (
and all things may by an ordinary wit be drawn into this rank, as they have
been by the Church of Rome) this Government intrudes upon what things it
pleases: and where a supremacy is once acknowledged, no wise man can think
that it will carry it self otherwise; so that King James his maxim was
undoubtedly most true, No Bishop, no King. For that most prudent Prince did
soon discern, that if a power were once set up, which (at least in the legal
execution of it) did not derive it self from the King, there was no doubt to be
made that it would ere long destroy the very King himself. -- Or consider the
Presbyterian Government in the English sense, as it is now set up by the two
Houses at Westminster, which is a Government limited by an Appeal to the
Parliament; for either by Parliament here they mean the two Houses, excluding
the King, and then it is as plain as before, they set up two supremacies, his
Majesty's and their own; or else by Parliament they mean the King with both
Houses; and then 'twill follow, that either there must be a perpetual
Parliament (which sure the King nor Kingdom cannot have cause to like) or else
the supremacy will be for the most part in the Presbytery; because whenever a
Parliament sits not, there will be no Judge to appeal to; or if it be said, the
Parliament may leave a standing Committee to receive Appeals in such
Ecclesiastical causes, then either in this Committee the King has no Negative;
and in that case it is clear, that the Ecclesiastical supremacy will be not at
all in the King; or else the King has a Negative, but yet is joined with
persons whom he himself chooses not, and so most probably will be chek'd and
affronted in any sentence he intends to give; and this clearly overthrows that
which is already declared by Parliament to be a right in the King, as inherent
in his Crown, that Ecclesiastical Appeals may be made to him alone in Chancery,
(for the Statute names no other) and that his Majesty alone may appoint what
Commissioners he pleases for their final decision: I say consider the
Presbyterian Government in the English Parliament sense, and in the sense of
the English Assembly, (for the Presbyterians there are wholly for the Scottish
Form, as appears by their quarrels at what the Houses have already done in
their Ordinances,) and 'twill appear that their aim is not only to set up a new
Government, but in plain terms, a new Supremacy: and hence, to say truth, he
must see very little, who discerns not, that though the Presbyterian party
seems to strike at the Bishops, yet their main aim is at the King, whose
supremacy they endure not, as being a flower which they intend for their own
Garland; and so though they hypocritically cry out (that they may abuse the
people) against the pride of the Lordly Bishops, yet in the mean time the wiser
sort must needs see that they intend to make themselves no less than indeed
Kingly Presbyters. Thus he: And if this Author thinks this reasoning
insufficient to prove Presbytery Antimonarchical, let him tell us why.

In the mean time it follows, p. 44. (54.) [ Or would his sort of men
[Presbyterians] have no King to reign over them?] A. None, if he will not
comply with their humors. [ Does a Republic better please them?] A. Not an
Independent or Anabaptistical Republic; but time has been when a Presbyterian
Republic (some parcels of the two Houses) did please them far better than an
Episcopal King.

[ Did the English or Scottish Presbyters ever go about to dissolve Monarchy,
and to erect some other kind of Government? In no wise, quoth he; for in the
Solemn League and Covenant they bound themselves to endeavor the preservation
of the Kings person and Authority; and declared they had no intent to diminish
his Majesty's just power and greatness.] (Of the justness of which power
themselves would be judges: But) did not all Covenanters do so as well as
Presbyterians? The man sure would make us believe, either that our Monarchy was
not dissolved (and another kind of Government exected) or else that 'twas done
by some that were not Covenanters. For why is not this Argument as good?
Independents Covenanted to preserve the Kings person and Authority: Therefore
they never went about to dissolve Monarchy? This is a much better consequence:
Neither the English nor Scottish Presbyterians endeavored to preserve the
Kings Authority, just power and greatness, (the Justness whereof must be judged
of by Law, not by the dictates of insolent minds puffed up with prosperity)
therefore either they never bound themselves and intended to preserve it, or
else they practiced contrary to those obligations and intentions. If he has the
confidence to deny the Antecedent, I may chance to evince it to him before we
part. Indeed his next words suggest a very considerable proof of it.

[ After the violent change of Government, they (the Presbyterians) came
slowest, and entered latest into those new Engagements imposed by the Usurped
powers.] Which is an implicit confession: 1. That those Engagements were
inconsistent with fidelity to Monarchical Goyernment, and the Kings Authority.
2. That yet at last the Presbyterians did enter into them; whence I gather, 1.
That whereas the third Article of the Covenant obliged them to endeavor ( not
only sincerely, but also) constantly (with their Estates and Lives) to preserve
and defend the Kings Majesty's Authority, just power, and greatness; they
ceased to do so at last, when they entered upon those new Engagements, and
consequently did then break their Covenant. And 2. That the Presbyterians are
not such fixed and unalterable Creatures (as he would needs have persuaded us,
p. 29. (39.) they are) since they did upon changes in Government vary by
degrees from themselves, and either deserted those principles which kept them
from engaging with the foremost, or else contradicted them by engaging at last
though slowly. And truly that they did so is tacitly acknowledged by this
Author, p. 45. (55.) where he tells us, that [ the generality of conscientious
Presbyterians never ran with the current of those times;] which sadly implies,
either that the generality of Presbyterians were not conscientious, since they
generally ran with the current at last, or that some conscientious
Presbyterians did, notwithstanding the dictates of their conscience, run with
the current: For either he must mean, that the generality of Presbyterians
[otherwise conscientious] did [in that particular] by an error of Conscience
run with the current; but this seems not to have been this Authors meaning, for
then it follows (by his own confession) that the generality of them were
deluded by an erroneous Conscience into a breach of Covenant, which yet this
passage is brought to absolve them from; or else they must mean that some
Presbyterians conscientious in this particular also, did run with the current,
and then it follows that though they were conscious of their duty to the
contrary, yet they did engage notwithstanding that practical dictate.

His following Apologeticks are these, 1. That the Scotch Presbyterians
adventured no more than all to uphold our Sovereign that now is.] Did they
adventure so much as all? 2. [ That when he fell, it was said by the adversary,
Presbytery was fallen.] No wonder if Scots adventured much to uphold that King
whom they believed willing to uphold their Presbytery. 3. [ That keeping
company with the chief Presbyterian Ministers, was objected by the Republican
Council of State, as a crime causing (meritoriously I suppose he means)
imprisonment.] It may be they were some such Presbyterian Ministers as had
quite forgotten the obligation that was upon them (by their entering into the
Engagements aforesaid) to be true and faithful to a Common-wealth-Form. And
when they saw themselves like enough to be dealt with by other Sectaries, as
themselves had dealt with the Episcopal party, began to bethink themselves
whether they had not in the days of Yore entered into a Covenant to preserve and
defend the King's Majesty's Person and Authority in this Nation, and to act as
if they thought themselves obliged thereby against a Republican Form. 4. [ That
the Presbyterians by their influence first divided and then dissipated the
Sectarian party, and so made way for his Majesty's return in peace.] That
Presbyterians have, where they are protected and encouraged, a faculty of
dividing first and then dissipating, I am not so envious as to deny: But 1.
Either they had lost this faculty in Oliver's time, or else they were very loath
to exert it in the behalf of his Majesty; the visible reason whereof was
because Cromwell tolerated them in their Form of worship, and did so far
protect and encourage them, as to continue them in those places of profit and
preferment out of which they would very probably have been ejected by those
Sectarians, who afterward domineered. 2. That 'twas the Presbyterian influence
which wrought those blessed effects among them whom he calls the Sectarian
party, I would fain see him prove, and when he has done that, he would do me
another favor if he would tell me why he calls that party (which he speaks of
as divided and dissipated) Sectarian, but let him take heed lest he do it upon
such grounds as being applied to Presbyterians will prove them also Sectarians.
5. [That it is acknowledged by some eminent on the Episcopal side, that the
sense of the Covenant has lately quickened many men's Consciences in their
Allegiance to the King, so as to bring him with David home in infinite Joy and
Triumph.] Their consciences it seems were a long time dead and callous; why did
not the sense of their Covenant animate them when our Sovereign was at
Worcoster to preserve and defend with their Estates and Lives his Majesty's
Person and Authority? From these premises he concludes that [ They are not
averse from Regal Government or the Royal Family; but they desire to dwell
under the shadow of our dread Sovereign, (but mark the following words) hoping
to revive as the Corn, and to grow as the Vine under his gracious Influence] I
doubt the man has unawares discovered the chief ground of Presbyterians
Loyalty (at least if instead of the Corn and Vine he had said the Ivy, and
expressed himself thus, hoping to grow as the Ivy under the gracious influence
of the Oak. (which at last kills the Oak that protected and nourished it.) For
my part I never thought Presbyterians averse from any Regal Government that
would advance their Party; or from the Royal Family, if they believed that that
family would secure their designs: they were willing enough that Monarchy
should revive and flourish, and that in the Royal Line, on supposition and in
hopes that Presbytery would revive and flourish together with it; otherwise our
experience sufficiently informs us, that two Houses (as I intimated before)
pleased them better than a King, and Richard Cromwell than Charles the Second.
Possibly if these Vines meet with a dread Sovereign whose Influence is so
gracious to them as to set up Presbytery by a Law, they will afford some
pleasing Juice; but if they Imagine not his Influence gracious, they will
degenerate into the Plant of a strange Vine; and he shall receive no fruit from
them but sour Grapes and the bitter Clusters of Gomorrha. They desire, it is
true, to dwell under the shadow of this Royal Tree, if so be they may
confidently promise themselves that under his shadow they shall live and thrive
among the Christian Sectaries and Heathen Consider, O Lord, that they are a
faction principally of some few Persons, as the Prelates, that have caused such
confusions in the Land; and will thou destroy the righteous with the wicked?
Far be it from thee, and even now do not thy people lift up strong cries unto
thee against their [Egyptian] Taskmasters and [Babylonian] Lords? So Brother
Burton's Holy Breathings, in the Consultation prefixed to his Reply to
Archbishop Laud's book against Fisher.
Prelatists. But if not, it is to be feared that Fire will come out of these
Brambles and devour the Cedar of Lebanon; that they will again pray and preach,
and when they have opportunity fight against him till the breath of our
nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord, Charles the Second be also taken in their
Pits. If his shadow prove as offensive to them as that of some Trees in Asia,
which Doves delight in, is said to be to Serpents, they will lop off all its
displeasing branches, and so make way for others to lay the Ax to the root of
the Tree.

[ Peradventure, p. 46. (56.) They would enervate Monarchy and render it too
impotent; surely I cannot find the rise of this objection, unless from hence,
that they are not willing to come under any yoke but that of the Laws of the
Realm, or to pay arbitrary Taxes levied without consent of Parliament.]

Certes this man talks sometimes as if he were newly come out of his mothers
womb; as if he were of yesterday and knew nothing, or else as if he hoped to
meet with no Readers but such as would be either so credulous as to believe
every thing he is audacious enough to say, or so ignorant as to be altogether
unacquainted with the Principles and practices of Presbyterians. But since he
sometimes seems to have heard of a thing called [ The Solemn League and
Covenant] and besides that, has probably seen and read it, yea and possibly
has been so unhappy as to take it; I desire to know why he could not there
find ground enough for that objection. Let him tell us, 1. Why they who swear
to endeavor the preservation of the Scotch Discipline and Government, which so
manifestly erects Imperium in Imperio, may not justly be looked upon as men
that would enervate Monarchy and render it too impotent, in Scotland? 2. Why
they who swear to endeavor to bring the Churches of God in England, Scotland
and Ireland to Uniformity in Discipline and Church Government, and consequently
to endeavor the Introduction of that Scotch Form of Church Government into
England, may not justly be looked upon as men that would enervate Monarchy in
England also, and render it too impotent by setting up there also Imperium in
Imperio? 3. Why they who swear the extirpation of Prelacy, that is,
Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops etc. may not justly be looked upon as
men that would enervate the power of that Monarchy which esteems that Form of
Church Government as a very considerable support and strengthening to it:
Witness the Aphorism of that wise Monarch King James, No Bishop no King, the
truth whereof King Charles found by sad experience. Dum Episcoporum
Jurisdictionem invadunt (Anarchae) caveant Principes. Site admodum monet
Poeta, Tunc tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet; ubi enim Episcoporum
ditio expugnanda obsidetur, ibidem proxime imo potissime in Regum Principatus
irruptio tentabitur. S. Clara Apolog. Episc. p. 20.
4. Why they who when they had power in their hands constrained our former
Sovereign to grant such Propositions as left him only a titular Kingship, may
not justly be looked upon as persons that would whenever it is in their power
again enervate Monarchy and render it too impotent? When he has given a
satisfactory answer to these Queries I may possibly trouble him with some more
of the like import; for I believe there are so many grounds of making this
objection that (in probability) the only reason why this Author could find no
other rise of it than what he mentions, was because he would not seek it.

That which he is pleased to mention (as the rise) is, [ That the Presbyterians
were not willing, 1. To come under any Yoke but that of the Laws of the Realm:
Or 2. To pay arbitrary Taxes levied without consent of Parliament.]

To the 1. (hoping that (whatsoever this Authors words imply to the contrary)
they were willing to come under the Yoke of the Laws of God also (at least such
of them as they thought would not lie too heavy upon their Necks) I answer, 1.
If they had been willing to come under the Yoke of the Laws of the Realm, they
would long ago have ceased to be Presbyterians; that is, shakers off of the
yoke of Prelacy and Ceremonies established by those Laws. 2. If they had been
unwilling to come under any other yoke, they would not have come under the yoke
of the Covenant, since it was not enjoined by any Law of the Realm. 3. They
have not showed themselves willing to come under the yoke of the Oath of
Supremacy, (imposed by Law) since they have been far from a practical
acknowledgment, that the King of England is the only Supreme Governor of this
Realm, and all other his Dominions and Countries in all Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical things or Causes; and that the reforming, ordering, corrrecting
of them, is by a Statute 1. Eliz. for ever united and annexed to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm; but on the contrary themselves usurpt the power of
reforming, ordering, correcting them without, yea, against his consent; and in
so doing they enervated our Monarchy, and rendered it too impotent in a chief
part of its Prerogative; nay, too many of them are so far from acknowledging
the Kings Supremacy in their actions, that they refrain even from a verbal
acknowledgment of it in their prayers; for when they pray for the King they
make a halt at the end of those words [ Defender of the Faith,] as if the
confessing him Supreme Head in all Ecclesiastical causes, and over all
Ecclesiastical persons, were either Error, Heresy, or a piece of Treason.

To the 2. I answer, by demanding, 1. Whether there be not as much (if not
more) Law for the Kings imposing Taxes (in some cases) without the consent of
Lords Temporal and Commons, than there is for [their] imposing them without the
Kings consent. 2. Whether the King and his Privy Council are not more competent
Judges of the exigency of times and cases (in reference to such impositions)
than Presbyterian subjects? 3. Whether any Law of the Land forbids the payment
of Taxes imposed by the King, without consent of the three Estates, ( viz.
Lords Spiritual, Temporal, and Commons?) 4. Whether it does not equally forbid
the payment of Taxes imposed by the three Estates (and much more by two only)
without the King? 5. Whether Presbyterians were not willing enough to pay
arbitrary Taxes to the Presbyterian Lords Temporal and Commons, though levied
without the Kings consent, and therefore without consent of Parliament? and
consequently, whether that be not false which this Author tells us, that they
were not willing to pay Taxes levied without consent of Parliament? 6. Whether
in so doing they did not abundantly manifest, that 'twas not the arbitrariness
of the Taxes, but either their being imposed by the King, or else their being
imposed to such ends as did not serve the Presbyterian Interest; that was the
main reason of their quarrelling with, and contending against those Imposition.
It Is therefore too evident, that the Presbyterians had a design to enervate our
English Monarchy; since, though they refused not to pay arbitrary Taxes to some
Lords Temporal and Commons, levied without the Kings consent, and on purpose to
carry on a War against him, yet they were unwilling to pay arbitrary Taxes to
the King, though levied for the defense of his person and Authority, because
levied without consent of Parliament.

Upon which pretense also their great Advocate Mr. Prynne would fain have
persuaded them to deny the payment of the Assessments imposed by those powers
that routed the Presbyterian Lords and Commons. That Author in his Reasons why
he would not pay Taxes, ( viz. to the Independent Lords and Commons) tells us,
p. 1. That by the Fundamental Laws and known Statutes of this Realm, no Tax,
Tallage, Aid, Imposition, Contribution, Loan or Assessment whatsoever may, or
ought to be imposed or levied on the Freemen and people of this Realm of
England, but by the will and common assent of the Earls, Barons, Knights,
Burgesses, Commons and whole Realm, in a free and full Parliament, by Act of
Parliament, all Taxes not so imposed and levied, though for the common defense
and profit of the Realm, being unjust, oppressive, etc. This is sound Doctrine,
it seems, when Independents domineer, but in the time of the Presbyterian
Tyranny Taxes might be imposed and levied by some Lords Temporal and Commons
only, without Act of Parliament, and yet not be accounted either unjust, or
oppressive, or inconsistent with the Liberty of the Subject. The reason was,
because Presbyterian ambition was cherished and gratified by those Taxes, which
it ceased to be when Independents had the chief power of imposing them.

And yet we are told in the next lines, that [ none more reverence their
Liberties, and value the native happiness of the Freeborn Subjects of England
(than Presbyterians.)] But what, I pray Sir, was in point of State Affairs the
native happiness of English men, (that had so much happiness as to be born
before Presbyterians began to domineer) was it not that they were born subjects
to a Sovereign to whom belonged the ordering of the Militia at all times, a
negative Voice in Parliament, the Supreme power in Ecclesiasticals as well as
Civils? and members of that Nation where the only legal Form of
Church Government was by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Chancellors,
Commissaries, etc. Where an excellent Liturgy was commanded to be used, and no
other Form of Divine Service permitted by Law? Where the Ceremonies of the
Surplice, Cross in Baptism, Kneeling at the Sacrament, were (for order and
decencies-sake) appointed by the Church-Governors, and the use of them enjoined
by Law? Is this the native happiness that Presbyterians valued? Or does the man
mean by [ native happiness] their receiving the temper of their bodies from
predominant choler, phlegm or black melancholy? and the complexion of their
Souls ( from Heaven shall I say? 'twould puzzle S. Austin himself to determine;
I confess I am somewhat apt to believe that presbyterians Souls are rather) ex
traduce; from the prolifical, assimilating virtue of the Parents spirit, which
being immersed in Hyle, and overcharged with ugly humors, is so far from
generating a Platonical Soul, made up of Harmony, that its offspring does more
resemble Galen's dull conceit of the essence of all Souls, and is of so base an
alloy, that it little differs from a vicious, malign temperament of body: I
confess, I think none do more value [ this] native happiness than [ these]
Freeborn subjects of England, but whether there are none that more reverence
their Liberties, let the world judge, by their frequent meriting severe
restraints for their seditious and schismatical breaches of the Laws of
England; by their paying arbitrary Taxes levied without consent of King, Lords
and Commons, ('it is an Argument good enough ad hominem) by their swearing to
submit their necks to the yoke of Scotch Discipline and Government, not allowed
of by any Law of this Realm; was this to revere their Liberties? or rather to
prostitute them to the lusts of those men, whose spirit breathed nothing more
than contradiction both to man's Law and Christ's Gospel; to Civil constitutions
and to the maxims of Christian Religion.

For whereas this Author, p. 47. (57.) talks of their true knowledge and sense
of the nature of Christian Religion, and that this makes a due civil Freedom
exceeding precious to them, 1. As I intimated before, it is not a due freedom
from illegal Impositions, that the Religion of these professing Christians
makes so precious to them; for to be inslaved to Presbyterian Impositions,
though illegal, is very grateful to them; but it is a liberty from Episcopal
Impositions and Royal Sanctions, and such Taxations (whether legal or illegal)
as are not designed for the advancement of their interest, which they so highly
value; and therefore it is manifest enough, they plead for such a liberty as
will enfeeble our English Monarchy. 2. I much question, whether their high
valuation of freedom from illegal Taxes, and their unwillingness to pay them,
can (in reason) proceed from any true knowledge and sense of the nature of
Christian Religion. For I desire to know of them, whether (at least in case our
Laws do not expressly sorbid our payment of Taxes, imposed by the King out of
Parliament) our Saviors precept, Matthew. 5. 42. Give to him that asks, and
from him that would borrow of thee, turn not away: and his own practice, Matthew.
17. 27. paying tribute for himself and S. Peter, merely lest he should offend
the exactors, who ought not to have demanded it of the children, v. 26. that
were all free, but only of strangers: I desire, I say, to know of them, whether
that precept and this practice do not oblige all English men that profess
Christianity, to pay Taxes quietly and patiently, though levied by the King
alone without Law? 3. On this occasion I shall take leave to question, whether
these Freeborn subjects had indeed a true knowledge and sense of the Nature of
Christian Religion in other particulars, as well as this; for if they had,
would not their practice have been more conformable to it? (if at least that
Axiom be true, Voluntas necessario sequitur dictamen Intellectus practicum,
which those among them that do not Arminianize hold for a truth.) But whether
their practices have been conform to the dictates of that Religion, let any one
who knows those dictates, consider and judge impartially. They speak such
language as this; Blessed are the meek, Matthew. 5. 5. (who rather would suffer
all injuries than revenge themselves) Blessed are the peacemakers, v. 9.
Resist not evil. Whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the
other also, v. 39. (rather receive double wrong than revenge thine own griefs)
Love your enemies; bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute you, v. 44. Judge not
that you be not judged, Chap. 7. 1. (be not curious or malicious to try out and
condemn your neighbors faults -- for Hypocrites hide their own faults, and
seek not to amend them, but are curious to reprove other men's.) Whatsoever you
would that men should do unto you, do you also unto them, v. 12. Beware of
false Prophets, which come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are
ravening Wolves, v. 15. Be you wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves, Chap.
10. 16. (not revenging, much less doing wrong) Render unto Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods, Chap. 22. 21. The
Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses's seat. All therefore whatsoever they bid
you observe, that observe and do, Chap. 23. 2, 3. Put up thy sword into his
place, (the exercise of the sword is forbid to private persons) for all that
take the sword shall perish by the sword, Chap. 26. 52. When you stand and
pray, forgive, if you have any thing against any man, that your Father also
which is in Heaven may forgive your trespasses, Mark 11. 25. Condemn not and
you shall not be condemned. Forgive and you shall be forgiven, Luke 6. 37, etc.
If Presbyterian actions had been conformable to these and other Christian
principles, their Pamphlets would have been freer from railing and reviling;
their Sermons from inflaming men's spirits, and kindling in them the fires of
disloyal Jealousy; their discourse from censorious judging and condemning
their brethren; and their understandings freer from pernicious errors, than for
ought appears by their pernicious actions, they were: They had neither run
themselves into danger rashly and unnecessarily at first, nor afterward by
unlawful means preserved themselves from a legal Trial, and the stroke of
Justice for those misdemeanors. But when resisting evil, and those that offer
it, can be reconciled with not resisting it or them, and with the suffering of
real and much more pretended injuries: When raising War against our Royal
Sovereign, and continuing it for several years, can justly be interpreted
making peace: When the applying, Curse ye Meroz, yea curse ye bitterly the
Inhabitants thereof, Judge. 5. 23. to those that came not forth to fight against
the King and his loyal subjects, can consist with blessing and praying for
those that are supposed despitefully to use and persecute us: when Dove-like
harmlesness and Wolfish cruelty cease to be contradictories: when to wrest the
power of the Militia out of the Kings hands, and to deny him his Negative
voice, is to render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's: when Covenanting
against Prelacy and our Church Discipline, and Orders, is all one with the
observing and doing what our lawful Governors require: when putting up our
swords into their sheaths, and loving, doing good to, and forgiving our
enemies, is compatible with reproaching their persons, with ruining themselves
and their Families, with turning them out of their legal possessions, with
plundering their Goods, sheathing swords into their bowels, and spilling their
innocent and loyal blood; then, and not till then will Presbyterian practices
be reconcilable with Christ's precepts, and agreeable to that Religion which
he taught the world, and which (as this Author well observes) is not variable
according to the will of man, but indispensably binds every Soul, and is
grounded upon an unchangeable, eternal Truth; (which if the English Independent
J. Goodwin, or Bucanan the Scotch Presbyterian had believed heretofore, they
had not made such an ugly Fanatic Apology as they did, for subjects taking up
Arms against and murdering their Sovereign;) De jure Regni, P. 50, 55.
and if the Presbyterian professors of this Religion, and of their own true
knowledge and sense of the Nature of it, had acted suitably to such a
profession, they had never thought it expedient to reduce his late Majesty to
such dismal straits at the Isle of Wight, where they constrained him to grant
them so much liberty, as miserably enfeebled the Monarchical and Legal power of
the Kings of England; whereby (whatsoever he cants in the following lines of a
King's ruling over a free people) Presbyterians have sufficiently taught us,
that they take more delight in making good Kings their slaves, than in
manifesting themselves to be good subjects. [ To be a powerful Monarch, says
he, p. 48. ever a free people, is the freedom and glory of our Sovereign Lord,
above all the Potentates of the Earth.] The more disloyal creatures were those
presbyterians, who in that fatal Isle treated with such a Sovereign Lord, and
once powerful Monarch, to such bad purposes; as to despoil him of his Royal
Freedom and Glory; and by their imperious demands to dwindle this potent and
glorious Monarchy into a slavish, ignoble, titular Kingship; whence we may
conjecture what a licentious, treasonable liberty it is, that such Freeborn
subjects breath after, and how insolently they will again exercise it (over our
Sovereign Lord the King) if by his Majesty's connivence and indulgence they
meet with the like opportune advantages of winding themselves by degrees into
the like power.

From which premises I conclude, that notwithstanding any thing produced here
by this Author to the contrary, this second Charge against the Presbyterians
[that they are Anti-Monarchical] is a true accusation, not a calumny.

The third Calumny (as he calls it) with which Presbyterians are loaded, is the
charge of Disobedience and Rebellion: [ and this, says our Author, were a
crying sin indeed] But yet he thinks it necessary to speak something
Apologetical, at least to mitigate the business, and remove prejudice; and
therefore, p. 49. he tells us, [ The Presbyterian party in England never
engaged under a less Authority, than that of both Houses of Parliament.] A. The
word [ engaged] is of dubious signification. 1. Did they never engage, that is,
subscribe the Engagement (to be faithful to the Commonwealth, as established,
without King or House of Lords) under a less Authority, than that of both
Houses of Parliament? 2. Did they never engage, that is, raise and foment
jealousies against the King, reproaches against the Bishops, or preach
Division, Sedition and Schism, instead of Union, Loyalty and Obedience, under a
less Authority than that of both Houses of Parliament? Nay, 3. Did they never
engage in fighting against the King under a less Authority than that of both
Houses of Parliament? Is he ignorant that two thirds and more of the Lords
deserted that house because of those frequent Tumults which drove the King from
London? and that the major part of the House of Commons left that House also
for the same reasons? and that new men See Judge Jenkins his Lex Terrae. p. 35.
were chosen in their places against Law by the pretended warrant of a
counterfeit Seal? Is he Ignorant that his late Majesty in a Declaration 1642.
(occasioned by the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons for the assessing men a
20th part of their Estates) has these words, Our good Subjects will no longer
look upon these and the like results, as upon the Counsels and Conclusions of
both our houses of Parliament (though all the world knows even that authority
can never justify things unwarrantable by Law) They well know how few of the
persons trusted by them, are present at their Consulations, of above 500 not
80, and of the House of Peers not a fifth part; that they who are present enjoy
not the Privilege and Freedom of Parliament, but are besieged by an Army, and
awed by the same Tumults which drove us and their Fellow Members from thence,
to consent to what some few seditious schismatical persons among them do
propose. Is to fight under the banner of such a minor part of both Houses or of
the superinduced major part illegally chosen, to engage under no less Authority
than that of both Houses of Parliament? nay, not only illegally but treasonably
chosen? for to counterfeit the great (Seal and by such a Seal they were chosen)
is Treason by the 25 of Edw. 3. 4. Suppose they had engaged, that is fought
against the King under the Authority of both Houses legally called, sitting in
their full number and remaining free, yet even then they had fought against
their Sovereign upon no higher Authority than Subjects could give them (which
was none at all to that end) for the two Houses (though consisting of all three
Estates, Lords Spiritual, Temporal and Commons) are no more than Subjects,
whatsoever this Author insinuates to the contrary in the following Lines. [ I
have read, says he, that the Parliament of England has several capacities; and
among the rest these two. 1. That it represents the people as subjects, and so
it can do nothing but manifest their Grievances and petition for relief:] By
the way I must tell him, that I have read in a Speech of King James's to both
Houses, March 21. 1609. these words, [ I would wish you (of the lower House
especially) to be careful to avoid three things in the matter of Grievances. 1.
That you do not meddle with the main points of Government. That is my Craft,
Tractent fabrilia fabri. To meddle with that were to lessen me; I must not be
taught my office. 2. Nor with such ancient Rights of mine as I have received
from my Predecessors possessing them more Majorum. -- For that were to judge me
unworthy of that which my Predecessors had, and left me. 3. I pray you beware
to exhibit for Grievance any thing that is established by a settled Law -- for
to be grieved with the Law, is to be grieved with the King, who is sworn to be
the Patron and maintainer thereof: -- In general beware that your Grievances
savor not of particular men's thoughts, but of the general Griefs rising out of
the minds of the people, and not out of the humor of the Propounder.] If these
Cautions had been carefully observed by the thing called the Long-Parliament;
it had not been it self the greatest grievance the Subject ever felt.

[2. I have read, says he, that by the Constitution it has part in the
Sovereignty, and so it has part in the Legislative power and in the final
Judgment.] I question whether he has read this thus expressed in any Book but
his own: I rather think it a mistake, and that he had read somewhere that the
Parliament has part in the Legislative power, and [so] it has part in the
Sovereignty, there being a Treatise extant wherein the Parliament's part in the
Sovereignty, is inferred from its part in the Legislative power, but none (that
I know of) wherein its part in the Legislative power is argued from its part in
the Sovereignty.

[ Now, says he, when as a part of the Legislative power resides in the two
Houses, as also a power to redress Grievances, and to call into Question all
Ministers of State and Justice, and all Subjects of whatsoever degrees in case
of Delinquency, it might be thought that a part of the Supreme power does
reside in them though they have not the Honorary Title.]

To which I answer. 1. It Is denied that either or both Houses have any power of
themselves to redress the Grievances of the Kingdom, or to call into question
any Delinquents. I have read (in his Majesty's forementioned Declaration) that
the House of Commons has never assumed, or in the least degree pretended to a
power of Judicature; having no more Authority to administer an Oath (the only
way to discover and find out Facts) to, than to cut off the Heads of any
Subjects. And in Judge Jenkins his Lex. Terrae, p. 116. That a Court must be
either by the Kings Patent, or Statute Law, or Common Law, which is common and
constant usage: The House of Commons has neither Patent, Statute Law, nor
Common Law, enabling them to be a Court or to give an Oath, p. 27. and 140,
141. or to examine a man, p. 65. as also that both the Houses can make no Court
without the King, p. 148. 122. that the two Houses by the Law of this Land have
no color of power either to make or pardon Delinquents the King contradicting,
p. 24. and 119. and that though it belong to the Lords to reform erroneous
Judgments given in other Courts (for that all the Judges of the Land, the Kings
Council, and the twelve Masters of the Chancery assist there, by whose advice
erroneous Judgments are redressed) yet when the writ of error is brought to
reverse any Judgment, there is first a Petition to the King for the allowance
thereof, p. 55. 106. I have read also (in the Hist. of Independ. p. 1. p. 61,
62.) That the House of Peers is no Court of Judicature without the Kings
special Authority granted to them, either by his Writ or his Commission, and
therefore in the trial of the Earl of Strafford, and in all other trials upon
Life and Death in the Lord's House, the King grants his Commission to a Lord
high Steward to sit as Judge, and the rest of the Lords are but in the name of
Jurors; and says J. Jenkins, p. 103. When the Lords had condemned to death by
an Ordinance Sir Simon de Beriford, a free Commoner of England, they afterward
better considered the matter, and that they might be acquitted of the sentence,
became suitors to the King, that what they had so done might not in future time
be drawn into President, because that which they had done was against Law; and
the Judge gives this reason against taking away men's lives by Ordinances,
because an Ordinance binds not at all, (but pro tempore, as the two Houses then
affirmed) and a man's life cannot be tried by that which is not binding, and to
continue for all times, for a life lost cannot be restored.

From which premises I conclude, that neither one nor both Houses, though
legally summoned and elected, have power to redress public Grievances or try
Delinquents without the King's consent.

And as for that part of the Legislative power which is said to reside in them,
and from whence their part in the Supremacy is thought fit to be concluded.] 1.
The two Houses, even when full and free, have so constantly acknowledged
themselves in Statutes and Acts of Parliament most loyal, faithful, and
obedient subjects to the King their Sovereign Lord, that from this alone it is
manifest enough they did not deem themselves to have any such part in the
Legislative power as might entitle them to a part in the Sovereignty. 2. I have
read in [the Rebels Plea examined] ( p. 12.) these words, [ Neither is it true
that the Legislative power is partly in them, (the two Houses) they are I grant
to consent to the making new and abolishing old Laws, but that is no cogent
proof of the partition of the Supreme and Legislative power:] for which p. 14.
he quotes these words of Grotius, c. 3. de jure Belli sect. 18. who says,
Multum falluntur qui existimant cum Reges acta quaedam sua nolunt esse rata,
nisi a Senatu probentur, partitionem fieri potestatis. They are much deceived
who think that the Supreme power is divided, if Kings will not account some of
their Acts valid without the approbation of the Senate. I have read also in the
Book called [ The Kings Supremacy asserted] by Mr. Sheringham, p. 96, 97. That
the concurrence of one or both the other Estates with the Monarch in the making
and promulgation of Laws is no good color or pretense, much less a sufficient
ground for such a coordination and mixture as is pressed. -- Although their
assents be free and not depending upon the will of the Monarch, yet that makes
them not coordinate with him in the Rights of Sovereignty. It Is the common
Assertion of Canonists, Civilians, Schoolmen, nor is it to my knowledge
contradicted by any, that the Legislative power is delegable; that such a
concurrence is no Argument of supremacy, or of such a mixture as some would
infer out of it. Some call it therefore apparens mixtura, because it seems to
destroy a simple Form of Government, and to make a mixture in the power it
self, but does not, though otherwise they acknowledge it to be such a mixture
as does remit the simplicity thereof. Grotius affirms to this purpose (de
Imperio sum. potest. circa sacra, c. 8. N. 11.) Illam legislationem quae alii
quam summae potestati competit nihil imminuere de jure summae porestatis. He
speaks this of Laws made by general Conventions, whose concurrence, he says,
does not in the least manner diminish the Rights of Majesty. Such a mixture of
the three Estates has been in other Monarchies, which all men acknowledge to
have been absolute in respect of power -- as in the Persian, which appears from
Dan. 6, 7, 8, 9. and the Roman Empire -- And not only whole representative
Bodies, but diverse particular free Cities have the same privilege, yet have
not supreme Authority. -- As for the enacting Authority attributed in latter
times to the Lords and Commons in the beginning of some Acts, he affirms, p.
101. That it is only a power of assenting; for it has been resolved by the
Judges, that this clause [Be it enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty,
and the Authority of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament] is no more
in substance and effect, than that which was used anciently [The King with the
assent of the Lords and Commons establishes:] the words [assenteth] and
[enacteth] being equivalent in this case; and p. 45. he tells us, that though
the two Houses have Authority granted them by the King to assent or dissent,
yet the Legislative power belongs to the King alone by the Common Law: the
Authority that animates (a Bill agreed upon by the two Houses) and makes it
differ from a dead letter, being in the King, who is the life and soul of the
Law: -- which was resolved also by diverse Earls, and Barons, and by all the
Justices in the time of Edw. 3. For one Hardlow and his Wife having a
controversy with the King, and desiring to have it decided in Parliament, a
reference being made to diverse Earls and Barons, and to all the Justices, to
consider of the business, it was resolved that the two Houses were not
coordinate with the King in the legislative power, but that the King alone made
Laws by the assent of the two Houses; that he had none equal or coordinate with
him in his Realm, and that he could not be judged by the Lords and Commons.

From all which it appears, 1. That that part which the two Houses have by Law
in the Legislative power is not a sufficient medium to persuade us, that they
have a part in the supremacy: and 2. That they have no share at all in any
power which may properly be called Legislative, (I mean in that sense in which
the words [Legislative power] are now adays commonly taken, viz. for a power of
making Laws. (For among the Romans, Legem far was no more than Legem ad
populum, -- in concionem -- quasi in medium afferre and proponere, and
Legislation was no more than Legis Rogatio a populo, the proposing the matter
of a Law to the Roman Citizens, and asking their assent in order to its
establishment.) I conclude therefore, that the supremacy is wholly in the King,
notwithstanding this insinuation to the contrary. For the proof whereof, if
this Author stand in need of more Arguments, I refer him to the Rebels Plea
examined, p. 11, 12. to Dr. Pierce's Impartial Enquiry into the Nature of sin,
Appendix. p. 210, 211, etc. To Mr. Sheringham's [ Remonstrance of the King's
Right, or, the King's supremacy asserted.] To Judge Jenkins his Lex Terrae, p.
7, 8, 9. Indeed this consideration alone is sufficient to evince it, that by
the Oath administered to all that sit in the lower House the King is
acknowledged the only Supreme Governor in all Causes, ( then in
Parliament-Causes, says J. Jenkins, Lex Terrae, p. 127.) over all Persons, (
then over the two Houses, (ibid.) which Oath every Member of the House of
Commons is enjoined by Law to take, or else he has no Voice in that House. (5
Eliz. c. 1. Lex Terrae, p. 67.) Therefore the King is by Law the only supreme
Governor, and consequently it may not be thought, that a part of the Supreme
Power does reside in the two Houses. Our Author goes on, [ And this part of the
Supreme Power is capable indeed of doing wrong, but how it might be capable of
Rebellion, is more difficult to conceive.] 1. Here he [ confidently takes it
for granted] that the two Houses are part of the Supreme Power, whereas in the
precedent words he spoke more modestly, and told us only [ it might be thought]
that a part of the Supreme Power did reside in them, not peremptorily inferring
that it does reside in them. And indeed he could not rationally have so
concluded, unless he had produced more cogent Arguments to make good that
conclusion. 2. Whereas he acknowledges the two Houses capable of doing wrong,
and tells us (only) that it is difficult to conceive how they may be guilty of
Rebellion. 1. Notwithstanding this Apology the Presbyterians that acted in and
by Authority derived from the two Houses may have been guilty of Rebellion,
since the difficulty of conceiving how they might be thus guilty will not
evince their innocence. 2. I demand of him, whether, 1. they are capable of
doing such wrong (to the King) as the Law makes Treason and Rebellion; whether,
2. if they do such wrong it be not easy to conceive, that they are guilty of
Rebellion and Treason. The Law of the Land (25 Edw. 3. chapter 2.) makes it treason
to levy war against our Lord the King in his Realm, or to be adherent to the
Kings enemies in his Realm, giving to them aid or comfort in the Realm or
elsewhere; and also to counterfeit the Kings Great or Privy Seal, or Money. The
resolutions of all the Judges of England upon the said Statute have been, that
to seize upon the Kings Ports, Forts, Magazines for War, is high Treason, Lex
Terrae, p. 77. as likewise to levy War either to alter the Religion, or any Law
established, p. 22. 40. or to remove the Kings Counselors, p. 22. Yea, these
things were acknowledged to be Treason, not only by Sir Edw. Cook in his
Institutes (printed by an Order of both Houses dated May 12. 1641.) but also by
Mr. Solicitor S. John, and Mr. Pym, in their speeches touching the Earl of
Strafford. Where, as J. Jenkins quotes them, Lex Terrae, p. 187, 188. they
likewise affirm it Treason to usurp the Royal power, to raise rumors, and give
out words to alienate the peoples affections from the King, to subvert the
Fundamental Laws, to impose unlawful Taxes, or new Oaths, to levy War within
the Realm without authority from the King. It Is confessed also by Sir Edw.
Cook, that no privilege of Parliament holds or is grantable for Treason,
Felony or breach of the Peace, (4. Institut. 25.) If not to any one Member
(says J. Jenkins, p. 15.) not to two, nor to ten, nor to the major part. Now I
suppose this Author is not either so ignorant or so perverse as to deny, that
the two Houses did levy War against the King; that they counterfeited the Great
Seal; that they seized upon the Kings Ports, Forts, Magazines for War; that
they usurpt the Royal power; raised rumors, and gave out words to alienate the
people from the King: imposed a new Oath, unlawful Taxes, and levied War
without yea against the Kings Authority. From which premises I discern not any
difficulty in deducing this genuine (though sad and dismal) consequence, that
those two Houses and the presbyterian party which adhered to them, and gave
them aid and comfort, were guilty of Disobedience, Treason and Rebellion. If
the major part of a Parliament commit Treason, they must not be judges of it;
for no man or body can be judge in his own cause, and as well as ten, or any
number may commit Treason, the greater number may as well, says J. Jenkins, Lex
Terrae, P. 15, 16.

[ In this high and tender point it belongs not (says our Author) to me to
determine.]

The main reason of which scrupulosity is most probably no other than this,
that he is so much a Presbyterian, that either his blind and deluded
understanding, or rather his disloyal and rebellious heart will not suffer him
to determine the Question on the Kings side. For if this Rector of Bramshot be
not mis-reported, he was heretofore a Preacher in a two-Houses-Garrison, and
Chaplain to the Governor of that Garrison, and at that time I presume this was
not looked upon by him as a point too, high and tender. But now tempora
mutantur -- and yet not so changed, it seems, but that this Author still dares
to insinuate Apologies for the former damnable Presbyterian practices of
fighting against the King: witness these following words, p. 50. (60.)

And as touching the much debated point of resisting the higher Powers, without
passing any judgment in the great case of England, I shall only make rehearsal
of the words of Grotius, a man of renown and known to be neither
Anti-Monarchical nor Anti-Prelatical, which are found in his Book de jure Belli
and Pacis, by himself dedicated to the French King, [Si Rex partem habeat summi
imperii, partem alteram populus aut Senatus, Regi in partem non suam involanti
vis justa opponi poterit, quia eatenus Imperium non habet. Quod locum habere
censco etiamsi dictum sit belli potestatem penes Regem fore. Id enim de bello
externo intelligendum est; cum alioqui quisquis Imperii summam partem habeat,
non possit non jus habere eam partem tuendi, L. 1. c. 4. sect. 13.] (which
Chapter, by the way, is proved to be dangerously Anti-Monarchical by the Author
of the [ Observations on the original of Government] p. 34, etc. but) Here I
demand, 1. Whether this Author can reasonably be imagined to produce these
words of Grotius to any other end than to justify the War of the Presbyterian
Lords and Commons against the King. 2. Whether therefore his pretending not to
pass any judgment in the great case of England in not sillily (and yet sadly)
hypocritical, especially considering, 1 That in the precedent p. he takes it
for granted, that the two Houses had a part in the supreme power. 2. That the
same Author, who insers their having such a part from their having (as he
fancies) a part in the Legislative power, quotes this very passage out of
Grotius, to justify the two Houses and himself, in fighting and encouraging
others to fight against the King; which Author (yet) ingenuously promises that
he will offer his Head (he meant, I suppose, his Neck) to justice as a Rebel,
when, it is proved that the King was the highest power in the time of the
divisions, and that he had power to make that War which he made. He here
implicitly confesses, says Dr. Pierce, (Impartial Enquiry, Postscript, p. 14,
15.) the King was once the highest power, and implies he lost it by the
divisions; but that he never could lose it, and that demonstrably he had it, I
have made most evident in the Appendix of this Book, which concerns Mr. B. as
much as Mr. H. ( at least as far as I have proved the supremacy of the King,
78.) And that the King had power to make that War which he made ( in defense of
pars sua, viz. the ordering of the Militia, his Negative voice in Parliament,
his right to the possession of all Castles, Ports, Ports, Magazines, within his
Dominions, etc.) is as clearly the opinion of Grotius in this passage, as it is
that the two Houses ( in partem non suam involantes) had power to make that War
which they made (to defend their own violation of the Kings Rights.) The truth
is, those words of Grotius are no argument of the justness of the late War on
either side, and therefore they are impertinently produced to such a purpose,
till these minors are well and soundly proved: 1. That the two Houses had
legally a part in the supremacy, which Grotius himself denies can be concluded
from that part which they had in Legislation. And 2. that the King did involare
in partem summi Imperii non suam, invade any such prerogative or part in the
supremacy, (for of that only Grotius speaks) as did by Law belong to the two
Houses. For though it could be proved, that the King did entrench upon some
privilege of theirs, yet if that privilege did not belong to them, quatenus
having a share in the Sovereignty, Grotius his words (though they should be
granted of infallible truth) will not justify their fighting against the King
upon that account. But this sly discourser was persuaded, it seems, that when
he had rehearsed this hypothetical major, Si Rex partem habeat summi Imperii,
partem alteram populus aut Senatus, Regi, in partem non suam involanti, vis
just a opponi poterit: Every Presbyterian that understood Latin, and had
engaged against the King under the Authority of the two Houses, would willingly
take the minor for granted, ( Sed Senatus ille (qualis qualis) partem habuit
summi Imperii, and in eam partem (non suam) involavit Rex,) and thence very
hastily and joyfully conclude, Ergo vis a Senatu isto (vel potius Senatus
quisquiliis and retrimentis) Regi opposita erat justa: even by the verdict of
Grotius, that man of renown. At this Presbyterian rate of disputing are
Arguments hudled up in the Book called [ The Covenanters Plea against
Absolvers,] the sophistry of some parts of which Book is scarce exceeded by
Knot's Volume against Chillingworth. In it several hypothetical majors are to
be met with, but the minors are either not mentioned, or else presumed to be
true without any attempt made to prove them so. Now Zachary Crofton tells us in
his Berith Anti-Baal, p. 62. that [ Ifs] are no proofs or demonstrations --
What good, duty, justice, morality, or religion may not be ruined, if a man's
fancied [If] be reason enough against it? This way of disputing as apparently
Jesuitical -- irrational, Machiavellian, barbarous.

The Rector of Bramshot thus proceeds [ with reverence to sovereign Majesty, I
crave leave to speak this word of truth and soberness.] Parturiunt Montes --
one would think some very sage and important Oracle should forthwith drop from
the Pen of this Reverend Dictator. [ In a knowing age, quoth he, flattery does
not really exalt or secure the Royal Prerogative.] Quid nascitur? Such a
Triobolary Truth as I believe there is scarce any Presbyterian so simple as to
be ignorant of it. But there is something suggested in it that I am afraid will
one day be found a notorious and fatal falsehood, viz. that this has been [ a
knowing Age] as to those parties who have opposed and sought against the Royal
interest; whereas I doubt it is far easier to prove, that in that respect it
has been either the most ignorant, (I mean of most grand, concerning Truths)
or the most maliciously wicked, profligated and debauched Age that ever
Protestant England knew.

[ The Authority of Parliaments being depressed and undervalued is the more
searched into and urged.]

By [ Parliaments] here it is evident enough he means the two Houses in
contradistinction, yea opposition to the King: But says Lex Terrae, p. 80. The
Lords and Commons make no more a Parliament by the Law of the Land, than a Body
without a Head makes a man; for a Parliament is a body composed of a King their
head, Lords and Commons the members, all three together make one body, and that
is the Parliament and none other. -- The two Houses are not the Parliament but
only parts thereof, and by the abuse and misunderstanding of this word
[Parliament] they have miserably deceived the people. And his late Majesty in
answer to their Declaration of May 19. 1642. and to that part of it wherein
they complain that the Heads of the Malignant party have with much Art and
Industry advised him to suffer diverse unjust scandals and imputations upon the
Parliament to be published in his Name] has these words, If we were guilty of
that aspersion, we must not only be active in raising the scandal, but passive
in the mischief begotten by that scandal: We being an essential part of the
Parliament. And we hope the just defense of our self and our Authority, and the
necessary Vindication of our innocence, and justice from the imputation laid on
us by a major part then present of either or both Houses, shall no more be
called a scandal upon the Parliament, than the opinion of such a part be
reputed an Act of Parliament. And we hope our good Subjects will not be long
misled by that common expression in all the Declarations wherein they usurp the
word Parliament, and apply it to countenance any resolution or Vote some few
have a mind to make, by calling it the resolution of Parliament, which can
never be without our consent. p. 5. Neither can the vote of either or both
Houses make a greater alteration in the Laws of this Kingdom -- either by
commanding or inhibiting any thing (besides the known Rule of the Law) than our
single direction or mandate can do to which we do not ascribe the Authority. --
And now let this Author search his Law Books with the exactest diligence and
skill he can, and then let him tell us by what Law the two Houses abstracted
from the King have any Parliamentary Authority. Indeed his own following words
do clearly enough imply that they have no such Authority. For p. 51. (61.) he
is so inconsiderately bold as to assert that [ Concerning the utmost bounds and
limits of Royal Prerogative and Parliamentary power, the Law in deep wisdom
chooses to keep silence, for it always supposes union, not division between
King and Parliament.] Whence all that I shall conclude is, that the power of a
Parliament truly so called, viz. King, Lords Spiritual, Temporal, and Commons
is not limited by Law; and thence I gather either that some Acts of Parliament
are no Laws; or that that part of some Acts wherein it is declared that any
following statutes contrariant to such and such preceding statutes shall be
utterly void, is vain and ridiculous. But 2. That the two Houses when they
usurped the power of a Parliament (as well as the name) and acted in opposition
to the King, had no Law on their side to justify their actings: For if the Law
always supposes union between King and Parliament, it speaks nothing of the
Rights and Privileges of the two Houses in case of their division from and
opposition to the King. And 3. That the Kings power and prerogative is
absolute, and notwithstanding all Law of this Nation infinite, for if the Law
be silent, and that in deep wisdom too, as to the utmost bounds of the Royal
Prerogative, it has very wisely lest it unbounded: which latter conclusions
(and the first also) are so prejudicial to the Presbyterian Interest and Party,
that I doubt they will conclude him either the veryest Fool (if indeed he knew
not that the Kings Prerogative was bounded by Law) or the most Malignant
Flatterer that this knowing Age has brought forth.

His next Argument to evince Presbyterian Loyalty is, that [ The subversion of
the Fundamental Government of this Kingdom could never be effected till those
Members of Parliament that were Presbyterian, were many of them imprisoned;
others forcibly secluded by the violence of the Army, and the rest thereupon
withdrew from the House of Commons.] An assertion so notoriously false, that it
puts me in mind of the proverb in the late War, that -- some men would not
swear but they would lie basely. The truth is, the subversion of the
Fundamental Government of this Kingdom both in Church and State was the great
work of the Long-Parliament, which they effected in the Church, by overthrowing
the Hierarchy and that Prelacy in which the Holy Church of England was founded
( Stat. of Carlisle, 25 Edw. 1. recited 25 Edw. 3.) in the State by passing and
pressing upon the King that Bill against the Bishops sitting and voting in
Parliament (who were in all Parliaments either personally or by Proxy since we
had any;) who were once of the States of Parliament, and in the Act of
Parliament 8 Eliz. c. 1. acknowledged one of the greatest States of this Realm:
all whose Liberties and Privileges, (and consequently that of sitting in
Parliament, to which they ought to be summoned ex debito Justitiae, Cooks
Institut. 4. c. 9.) are confirmed to them by Magna Charta, which was it self
ratified by 32 Acts of Parliament, and that inviolably by the 42 of Edw. 3.
enacting that if any statute be made to the contrary it shall be holden for
none (and consequently the Act of Parliament so called, against that Privilege
of the Bishops, was ipso facto null and void) by robbing the King of his
Negative voice, of his power in the Militia, by making Ordinances without him,
yea against him, and so practically denying what they verbally swore, that he
was the only supreme Governor in all Causes and over all Persons: By their
electing new members warranted only by a counterfeit Seal: By their taking upon
them to create new Judges, Justices, and other Officers without the Kings
consent. -- For Laws and Liberties, says J. Jenkins, p. 146. have not the
prevailing party in the two Houses destroyed above an hundred Acts of
Parliament, and in effect Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta, which are the
Common Laws of the Land? And p. 135. The Writ of Summons to this Parliament is
the Basis and Foundation of the Parliament; if the Foundation be destroyed, the
Parliament falls. The Assembly of Parliament is for three purposes: [Rex est
habiturus colloquium and tractatum cum Praelatis, Magnatibus and Proceribus
super arduis negotiis concernentibus, 1. Nos. 2. Defensionem Regni nostri. 3.
Defensionem Ecclesiae Anglicanae.] The King, says the Writ, intends to confer
and treat with the Prelates, Earls, Barons, about the arduous affairs relating
to 1. our Royal self, 2. the defense of our Realm, 3. the defense of the Church
of England. This Parliament, says the Judge, has overthrown this Foundation in
all three parts. 1. Nos, Our Royal self; the King they have chased away, and
imprisoned (at Holmbey) they have voted no Prelates, and that a number of other
Lords (about forty in the City) must not come to the House, and about forty
more are out of Town; the conference and treaty is made void thereby; for the
King cannot consult and treat there with men removed from thence. 2. The
defense of our Realm,] that is gone, they have made it [their] Kingdom, not
his; for they have usurped all his Sovereignty. 3. The defense of the Church of
England,] that is gone. By the Church of England must be understood necessarily
that Church that at the Test of the Writ was Ecclesia Anglicana; they have
destroyed that too. So now these men would be called a Parliament, having
quashed and made nothing of the Writ whereby they were summoned and assembled.
If the Writ be made void, the Process must be void also. The House must needs
fall where the Foundation is overthrown: thus he. And all this was done before
those Members of Parliament that were Presbyterian were many of them
imprisoned, and others forcibly secluded by the violence of the Army: So that
it is very wonderful how this Rector of Bramshot could be either so ignorant or
so impudent as to utter such an assertion, especially since in his own
following words (which it seems he fancied to be a proof of its Truth) a very
considerable Argument is suggested to evince it an egregious Falsehood. For,
quoth he,

[ They had voted the Kings Concessions a ground sufficient for the Houses to
proceed on to settle the Nation, and were willing to cast whatsoever they
contended for upon a legal security.]

Now in that very Treaty at the Isle of Wight the Presbyterian party wrested
such Concessions from the King, as did ( in their own nature) subvert the
Fundamental Government of this Kingdom, as is evident from the speech of Mr.
Pryn himself, concerning those Concessions, (3. Edit. p. 38.) wherein he
confesses, that the Kings of England have [always] held two swords in their
hands -- the sword of Mars in time of War -- the sword of Justice in time of
Peace. -- And p. 37. he tells us, that in those Concessions the King had wholly
stripped himself, his Heirs and Successors for ever, of all that power and
interest which his Predecessors [always] enjoyed in the Militia, Forces, Forts,
Navy, (Magazines, p. 36.) not only of England, but Ireland, Wales, Jersey,
Guernsey and Barwick too, so as he and they can neither raise nor arm one man,
nor introduce any foreign Forces into any of them, by virtue of any Commission,
Deputation, or Authority, without consent of both Houses of Parliament; and
that he had vested the sole power and disposition of the Militia, Forts and
Navy, of all these, in both Houses, in such ample manner, that they should
never part with it to any King of England, unless they pleased themselves. -- A
security, says Mr. Pryn, so grand and firm, that [none of] our Ancestors [ever]
demanded, or enjoyed the like -- nor any other Kingdom whatsoever, since the
Creation, ( for ought that I can find) and such a self-denying condescension in
the King to his people in this particular as no Age can Precedent. Thus the
sword of Mars (which themselves confess the former Kings of England always
held) was insolently wrested out of the late Kings hands, and consequently the
Fundamental Government of the Nation subverted in this particular. Besides,
some Parliaments, says he, p. 40. in former times have had the nomination of
the Lord Chancellor, some of the Lord Treasurer, some of the great Justiciary,
or some few Judges of England only; but never any Parliament of England claimed
or enjoyed the nomination and appointment of any the great Officers, Barons,
Judges or Treasurers places in Ireland; nor yet of the Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports, Chancellors of the Exchequer, and Duchy, Secretaries of State,
Master of the Rolls, or Barons of the Exchequer of England, yet all these the
King for peace-sake has parted with to us: And p. 41. we have the disposal (he
might have added, Horresco referens) of all these Officers in England and
Ireland, both Military and Civil; of his sword of War and Peace, his Justice,
his Conscience, his Purse, his Treasury, his Papers, his public Records, his
Cabinet, his Great Seal, more than ever we at first expected or desired. Thus
horridly was the sword of Justice also wrested out of his Majesty's hands, and
consequently the Fundamental Government of the Nation subverted in that
particular likewise. Another Concession was, that no Peer, who should be (after
that Treaty) made by the King, his Heirs and Successors, should sit or vote in
the Parliament of England, without consent of both Houses of Parliament, which,
says Mr. Pryn, p. 43. gives such an extraordinary new power to the House of
Commons as they never formerly enjoyed nor pretended to. By which provision, p.
44. the Commons are made not only in some sense the Judges of Peers themselves,
(which they could not try or judge before, by the express letter of Magna
Charta, cap. 29. and the Common Law) but even their very Creators too. And (if
the House of Commons might justly be termed any part of the Fundamental
constitution of our Nation) what was this but to subvert the Fundamental
Government? By other Concessions the Houses were enabled, p. 45. to make an Act
of Parliament (for raising of moneys and ordering the Militia) though the King
denied his Royal Assent, which power was never challenged by, nor granted to
both Houses in any Kings reign before, and takes away the Kings Negative voice
as to those particulars. To pass by other instances (for I am quite weary of
raking in such a stinking Dunghill) these are enough to manifest, what kind of
creatures Presbyterians were in point of loyalty, when they had power in their
hands to be ( impune) disloyal; and how willing to subvert the Fundamental
Government of this Kingdom, since by virtue of these propositions, which they
had the imperious confidence to tender to his sacred Majesty in that deplorable
condition to which they had reduced him; they denuded him of his Royal power,
and vested themselves with all the considerable parts of Sovereignty: and when
they had thus subverted the Fundamental Constitution of the English Monarchy,
and had passed that Vote (which this Author mentions) touching the Kings
Concessions, and were thereupon deprived by the Army of that power of imposing
on his Majesty and the Kingdom, which they had so Tyrannically abused; these
secluded and imprisoned Members wrote a Vindication of themselves from the
Aspersions cast upon them by the Army; in one passage of which Vindication ( p.
8, 9.) they give us reason enough to suspect, that if their own prosperity had
continued, they would yet more unworthily have insulted over his Majesty, and
have taken such a cruel advantage of those great infelicities (into which
themselves had cast him) as to tender and extort from him some more diminutions
(if possible) of that little power, and no greatness which the former had left
him; for, say they, by this Vote (viz. that the Kings Concessions were a ground
sufficient for the House to proceed upon to settle the Nation) the House did
not determine, as we conceive, the having no farther Treaty with his Majesty,
before a concluding and declaring of peace; nor were the Houses so bound up
thereby, that they could not propose any thing farther, wherein the Kings
Answers were defective, or from making any new Propositions for the better
healing our breaches, or more safe binding up a just and righteous peace.] It
seems then those Lords and Commons had some more such signal testimonies in
pickle of their Presbyterian loyalty, some more demonstrations, that when they
took and imposed the Covenant, they had no thoughts and intentions to diminish
his Majesty's just power and greatness. It seems they had some clearer
explications in their Budget of their meaning in those words in the preface to
the Covenant. [ Having before our eyes the honor and happiness of the Kings
Majesty's person and his posterity:] which words interpreted by their actions,
must signify, that they had it before their eyes, only as a mark to shoot at.
But God deliver us for the time to come from the Presbyterian reserves of such
a disloyal and corrupt majority; wherein they abundantly manifested how
tractable Scholars they were to Scotch Teachers, and how able and willing to
imitate, yea, transcend that ungodly pattern which they had set them, who, when
the King had before granted them more than was fit for such persons to receive,
had the insolent confidence to ask moreover such things as 'twas not fit for
the King to give. And thus the English Presbyterians by enlarging their desires
as Hell, filled up the measure of that Scorch iniquity, which he that runs may
read in his late Majesty's large Declaration of the Tumults in Scotland,
printed Ann. 1638.

Our Author proceeds thus;

[ In those times the Presbyterian Ministers of London, in their public
Vindication thus declare themselves: [We profess before God, Angels and Men,
that we verily believe, that that which is so much feared to be now in
agitation, the taking away the life of the King in this present way of Trial,
is not only not agreeable to the word of God, the principles of the Protestant
Religion, (never yet stained with the least drop of the blood of a King) or the
Fundamental Constitution and Government of this Kingdom, but contrary to them,
as also to the Oath of Allegiance, the Protestation of May 5. 1641. and the
Solemn League and Covenant; from all which, or any of which Engagements we know
not any Power on Earth able to absolve us or others.] To which I answer:

1. Though the Presbyterian Ministers of London were granted not guilty of [the
death] of the King, yet they might be guilty of [ disobedience and rebellion]
against him, which was the objection, p. 48. 58. to which objection therefore
this Apology is impertinent. 2. Nor is the Apology at all satisfactory as to
the taking away of the Kings life in [some other way of Trial] it being
designed only against that present way of Trial; for it is only with that
limiting specification that they vindicate themselves; for they say, that [ the
taking away the Kings life in this present way of Trial is not agreeable to the
word of God, etc.] Whence all that I can conclude in reason is, that they did
not imagine it agreeable to the word of God, or the principles of the
Protestant Religion, or the Fundamental Constitution of this Kingdom, or the
Oath of Allegiance, Protestation, Covenant, to take away his life in that way
of Trial, viz. by that High Court of Justice set up by the Independent party;
but notwithstanding this they might deem it consistent with the word of God and
the principles of the Protestant Religion, etc. to take away his life in a way
of Trial appointed and modelled by the corrupt majority of the two Houses, the
Presbyterian Lords and Commons: And if the Author of Clerico-Classicum deceive
us not, ( p. 35. of his Answer to the London-Ministers letter to the General
and Council of War, Jan. 18. 1648.) Mr. Pryn allows of a capital proceeding
against Emperors, Kings and Princes, in his Appendix to the fourth part of his
Sovereign power of Parliaments, p. 190. ad 194. It I am not deceived also, a
man called Mr. Christopher Love, who I think deemed himself a Minister of Jesus
Christ, I am sure he was a Presbyterian Minister of London, did in a thing
called a Sermon at Vxbridge Treaty, justify, yea, urge the taking away of the
Kings life in as bad a way of Trial; for in that Sermon having spoken of the
bloud-guiltiness of the King, yea intimated unnaturalhorrible-bloud-guiltiness
in him, and thereby made him the troubler of England, as Achan was of Israel,
he has these words, p. 32. 'Twas the Lord that troubled Achan because he
troubled Israel; Oh that in this, our State-Physicians would resemble God, to
cut off those from the Land who have distempered it! melius est ut pereat unus
quam unitas, Immedicabile vulnus Ense recidendum est. -- but yet more plain p.
37. men who lie under the guilt of much innocent blood are not meet persons to
be at peace with, till all the guilt of blood be expiated and avenged, either
by the sword of the Law, or by the Law of the sword. Mr. Love, says that
Author, will not say that the King was not guilty of much innocent blood, left
he should contradict himself; neither will he say that bloud-guiltiness can be
expiated but by blood, lest he should contradict the Scriptures; neither can he
say but the King was cut off either by the sword of the Law or by the Law of
the sword -- Whence I conclude that according to those Principles of Mr. Love,
the King's being put to death in that way of Trial was neither contrary to the
word of God, nor the Principles of the Protestant Religion, etc. but a work fit
and expedient to be done: and 'twill be well for English Presbyterians, if when
the secrets of all hearts shall be laid open, it be not revealed to the world
that the main reason why they deprecated the putting the King to death in that
way of Trial, was because he was not tried and condemned by Presbyterians, nor
for their advantage; but by those men who hated Presbytery and would not suffer
it to domineer any longer. For these very men could notwithstanding both the
word of God and the principles of the English Protestant Religion,
notwithstanding the protestation and Solemn League and Covenant, yea
notwithstanding the Fundamental Constitution of this Kingdom and the Oath of
Allegiance, I say maugre all these obligations to the contrary (if at least,
one of them be such an obligation) these very men could join with the
Presbyterian Lords and Commons in making War against the King, and send an Army
to shed his blood in the high places of the Field; and therefore if
Presbyterians be Protestants, and their Religion the Protestant Religion, 'twas
not their Loyalty but the divine goodness and providence wonderfully
interposing for the Kings safety, that in so many battles kept the Protestant
Religion from being stained with the blood of a King; especially as to
Edge-Hill-fight, if that be true which is affirmed in Fabian Philips his
Veritas inconcussa, p. 79. that Blague, a villain in the Kings Army, had a
great pension allowed him that he might give notice in what part of the Field
the King stood, that they might the better know how to shoot at him: who
accordingly gave notice of it, and if God had not had a greater care of his
Anointed than of their Rebellious pretenses, that Bullet from the Earl of Essex
his Canon which grazed at the King's Heels as he was Kneeling at his prayers on
the side of a bank had taken away his life; and the Presbyterian Religion,
(such as it is) had been stained with the blood of a King. And though the
Presbyterians (as the Apology for Bishops sitting and voting in Parliament
tells us, p. 69.) would excuse themselves that they never intended the Kings
destruction, yet that is a frivolous and foolish excuse: For as Sir Walter
Rawleigh says truly, Our Law does construe all levying War without the Kings
Commission, and all force raised, to be intended for the death and destruction
of the King, not attending the sequel, and so it is judged upon good reason; for
every unlawful and ill action is supposed to be accompanied with an ill intent.
The Lord Cook (as the Apologizer goes on, p. 70. speaking fully of all kinds
and degrees of Treason, 3 Institut. p. 12. says,) Preparation by some overt
act to depose the King, or take the King by force and strong hand, and to
imprison him until he has yielded to certain demands, is a sufficient overt
Act to prove the compassing and imagination of the death of the King: For this
upon the matter is to make the King a Subject, and to despoil him of his Kingly
office of Royal Government, and so it was resolved by all the Judges of
England, Hill. 1 Jac. Regis, in the case of the Lord Cobham, Lord Gray, and
Watson and Clark Seminary Priests; and so it had been resolved by the Justices,
Hill. 43 Eliz. in the case of the Earls of Essex and Southampton, who intended
to go to the Court where the Queen was, and to have taken her into their power,
and to have removed diverse of her Council; and for that end did assemble a
multitude of people, which being raised to the end aforesaid, was a sufficient
overt Act for compassing the death of the Queen. -- The Presbyterians, says he,
did offend in this kind notoriously, and therefore committed Treason
manifestly; for they imprisoned the King in diverse places, and at length in a
remote place in the Isle of Wight -- and all this done by them who were for the
most part Presbyterians, out of their design to compel the King to yield to
their projects, to overthrow the Bishops and to take their Lands and their
revenues. -- From this we may judge how agreeable Presbyterian actions were to
the Constitution and Law of this Kingdom; and how manifest it is that they must
in Law be reckoned King-killers as well as the Army; and if the Law of the
Nation damn them to such a guilt and punishment on earth, there is no Gospel
that I know of will save them from Hell without a repentance proportionable to
their Crimes, which (for ought I see) they are hitherto so far from thinking a
duty, that they rather go about to justify their former actings by returning
again (as far as they dare) to the same follies that ushered in their former
war and at first embrued the Nation in blood. Nor do I believe that they who
took away the Kings life in that way of Trial acted upon any more treasonable
and rebellious Principles, than are owned and taught by some Presbyterian
writers of the first magnitude, both French, Scotch and English. The truth
whereof I doubt will be very evident to him that can get and will peruse these
Presbyterian Scripts. Buchanan's de jure regni apud Scotos. Knox's Appellation.
-- Vindiciae contra Tyrannos (by Junius Brutus, supposed to be either Beza or
Hottoman.) David Paraeus his Commentary on Romans 13. (burnt at London and
Oxford, in King James his reign for its seditious Maxims. Goodman (an intimate
Friend as it is said of John Knox's) his book of the same nature and tendency.
Rutherford's Lex Rex. I find in Bishop Bancroft's Dangerous Positions, B. 1.
Chapter 2. (speaking of Calvin's reforming at Geneva) these words: Since which
time, as I suppose it has been a principle with some of the chief Ministers of
Geneva ( but contrary to the Judgment of all other reformed Churches (for ought
I know) which have not addicted themselves to follow Geneva) that if Kings and
Princes refuse to reform Religion, the inferior Magistrates or people by
direction of the Ministry might lawfully, and ought if need required, even by
force and Arms to reform it themselves. And Chapter 4. This Position is quoted out
of Knox, that the punishment of such crimes as touch the Majesty of God does
not appertain to Kings and chief Rulers only, but also to the whole body of the
people, and to every member of the same as occasion, vocation, and ability
shall serve to revenge the injury done against God. That the people are bound
by Oath to God to revenge to the utmost of their power the injury done against
his Majesty -- That if Princes be Tyrants against God and his Truth, their
Subjects are freed from their Oath of obedience. And out of Bucanan these, That
the people may arraign the Prince; bestow the Crown at their pleasure -- that
the Ministry may excommunicate him -- that an excommunicate person is not
worthy to enjoy any life on earth -- that it were good that rewards were
appointed by the people for such as should kill Tyrants -- And Chapter 5. To this
objection [ God places Tyrants sometimes for the punishment of his people] this
answer (given by the Reverend Bucanan) so does he private men sometimes to Kill
them. And this new Divinity, says the Bishop, of dealing thus with Kings and
Princes, is not held only by Knox and Bucanan, but generally for ought I can
learn by most of the Consistorians of chief name beyond the Seas, who being of
the Geneva humor, do endeavor by most unjust and disloyal means to subject to
their forged Presbyteries the Scepters and Swords of Kings and Princes, as
Calvin, Beza, Hottoman, Ursin ( as he comes out from Newstadt) vindiciae
contra Tyrannos. Eusebius, Philadelphus, etc. These also B. 2. Chapter 1. I find
out of Goodman. Evil Princes ought by the Law of God to be deposed; and
inferior Magistrates ought chiefly to do it -- It is lawful to kill wicked
Kings and Tyrants -- when Magistrates cease to do their duties, (in thus
deposing or killing Princes) the people are as it were without officers, and
then God gives the sword into their hands, and he himself is become immediately
their Head, for to the multitude a portion of the Sword of Justice is
committed. And out of him and a Book of Obedience, these: If neither the
inferior Magistrates nor the greatest part of the people will do their Offices
(in punishing, deposing, or killing of Princes) then the Minister must
excommunicate such a King; any Minister may do it against the greatest Prince.
God will send to the rest of the people who are willing to do their duty but
not able, some Moses or Othoniel. -- by the word of God a private man having
some special inward motion may kill a Tyrant -- Or otherwise a private man may
do so if he be commanded or permitted by the Commonwealth. Now if some
inferior Magistrate, a handful of the people, yea one man may kill a Tyrant,
an evil Prince, one that refuses to reform Religion, this implies that the same
person or persons may be a Judge or Judges, whether such or such a King be a
Tyrant, an evil Prince, a refuser to reform, and consequently one that deserves
death or no.

Upon such wicked principles as these (dictated and taught by Presbyterian
Oracles) in conjunction with this minor, that the late King was a person so
criminal as to deserve death, which they that ordered his Trial took upon them
to be Judges of, as they might well by these now mentioned principles, horrid
Regicide was pathetically recommended (to his Auditors at Vxbridge-Treaty) by
Mr. Christopher Love, a Presbyterian Minister of London; and long after that
perpetrated by Order of a part of the people, some Commons and the High Court
of Justice, who adjudged the King to be thus criminous; and apologiz'd for by
John Price, Citizen of London, in his Clerico-Classicum, as an Act agreeable
enough to the declared judgment of many protestant ( he means Presbyterian)
Divines, in testimony whereof he quotes several passages out of Presbyterian
Authors, p. 32. to 35. which pamphlet, if the Title Page deceive us not, may
serve as a brief answer to that Vindication of the London Ministers here spoken
of. And indeed it is a discourse so abounding with strong and rational Arguments
ad homines, that I doubt it is beyond the skill of a Presbyterian to give a
solid and satisfactory reply to it. From all which it follows, that either the
presbyterian Ministers of London must damn the now mentioned Principles and
Tenants of those their presbyterian Ancestors, and their own opinions also at
the Vxbridge-Treaty, if they were the same with Mr. Love's, one of their Tribe,
or else they must justify this inference, That the taking away the life of the
King in that (then) present way of Trial, was rather a duty than a crime: Which
though it be a wretched and Traitorous conclusion, yet is very regularly
deducible from those principles.

And I appeal to any intelligent and ingenuous persons, and desire them to tell
me, whether the murderers of the late King did infer that bloody Corollary from
any more treasonable and rebellious Theorems and Consectaries, than these which
I have now produced; and whether Independents did not in justifying that horrid
Fact, write exactly after those Copies, which Presbyterians both ancient and
modern had set them. And hence I think I may reasonably affirm, that those
principles of the Protestant Religion, which are contrary to King-killing, are
no otherwise owned by such Presbyterians, as I have now spoken of, than as most
Presbyterians say, that Papists own some Articles of our Faith, viz. damnably,
because they hold together with them other principles which consequentially
overthrow those Articles. And therefore 'twas but a vanity in the London
Ministers to vindicate themselves, by speaking of those principles as opposite
to that way of Trial: a greater folly was it to produce the solemn League and
Covenant, which in the third Article talks so loosely and crudely of defending
the Kings person and Authority, that Presbyterians might without offering any
violence to the words, plunder him of all his Authority; and both they and the
Independents take away his life, notwithstanding that Article, whenever they
should think fit to determine, that the true Religion and Liberty of the
Kingdoms could not be defended and preserved, unless the Kings person and
Authority were destroyed: But in the fourth Article there is as clear and smooth
a way opened to the commission of that heinous sin, as the most forward Actors
in it needed to desire; for there the Covenanters are bound with all
faithfulness to endeavor the discovery of all such as have been or shall be
Incendiaries, Malignants, evil Instruments, that they may be brought to public
Trial, and receive condign punishment, not only as the degree of their offenses
required or deserved, but also as the Supreme Judicatories (whether de facto or
de jure, we are not certified) of both Kingdoms respectively, or others having
power from them for that effect should judge convenient: So that since the men
who ordered the Trial of the King were at that time de facto the supreme
Judicatory of England; and since they looked upon him as an Incendiary and evil
Instrument, and therefore to be brought to public Trial, and the men empowered
by them judged it to be (at least) convenient to take away his life in that way
of Trial; their murdering of Him in that way was not contrary, but agreeable
enough to the Solemn League and Covenant: Yea, to imagine that by that League
Scotland was bound to rescue the Kings person from the Parliament of England,
because of their Voting, that no farther application or Addresses should be
made to his Majesty, under pain of High Treason, is called a slandering of the
Covenant in that humble Edenburgh-Remonstrance, p. 45. Nor is either the
Protestation of May 5. 1641. or the Oath of Allegiance, or the word of God,
more wisely or pertinently urged by those London Ministers against those
murderers, since all those obligations do as much forbid and condemn fighting
against the King, and dishonouring; and dethroning him, which Presbyterians
were abundantly guilty of, as they do putting him to death, which the
Independents did, ('it is true) but after the Presbyterians had first stripped him
of his honor, and Royal State, and so politically killed him.

All which considered, it is very admirable to me, that those Presbyterian
Ministers of London (especially Mr. Love) could so confidently talk thus in
vindication of their own Innocence, and in opposition to those Independent
malefactors, as also with what face they could (as our Author tells us they
did, p. 52-62.) warn and exhort men to pray for the King, that God would
restrain the violence of men, that they might not dare to draw upon themselves
and the Kingdom the blood of their Sovereign.] To use his own words, [ Let
prudent men weigh things in the balance of reason,] and tell us whether it were
not a piece of practical Nonsense and contradictious hypocrisy, for those
Priests who had employed themselves so many years together in cursing those
that fought not against the King, and blessing those that did, to warn and
exhort men (at last) to pray that God would restrain the violence of men, and
not suffer them to draw upon themselves and the Kingdom the blood of their
Sovereign. If they had exhorted men to put up such a petition in the time of
the Wars, would they not thereby have exposed themselves to the scorn and
derision of their Auditors? Yea, would not their own Lords and Commons have
treated them as Incendiaries, Malignants, evil Instruments; or were they so
sottish as to imagine that there is so great difference between a Camp and a
Scaffold, between an Army of Rebels, and a single Executioner, that 'twas a
duty to pray to God to protect the King from the danger of the one, but no duty
to pray for his safeguard from the assaults of the other? Or did they indeed
believe if the King had been mortally wounded in the Field (at Edgehill,
Newbery, or Naseby, by one or more of the Presbyterian Soldiers) that this had
not been violence, or that the Presbyterian Lords and Commons had not thereby
drawn upon themselves and the Kingdom the blood of their Sovereign? I seriously
profess, that the more narrowly I search into these things, the more reason I
have to fear (what indeed this very Vindication suggests) that had the Kings
life been taken away, either by Presbyterian Armies in the Field (the law of
the Sword) or by order of Presbyterian Judges on a Scaffold (the Sword of their
Law) for the advancement of the Presbyterian Interest, they would easily have
believed such a manner of death, or way of Trial agreeable enough to, and
consistent with all the obligations here spoken of, even the Covenant it self:
as to which, says Price in his Clerico-Classicum, p. 27, 28. We were bound to
preserve and defend the Kings person, when we first took this Covenant, and at
that time you (Presbyterian Ministers of London) know very well you stirred up
the people to fight against his Army, though his person was the leader thereof;
which presumes either, 1. That you persuaded the people against the dictates of
your own Consciences; or, 2. That you conceived, that though his Person should
be smitten into the chambers of Death, by those that aid fight against his
Army, yet they did not break the Covenant. If so, then there is a case wherein
the King's Person may be cut off without breach of Covenant.] Thus he, and
appositely enough, and therefore I say again, Let prudent men weigh things in
the balance of Reason.

Our Author goes on and asks, Is there any thing in the nature of Prelacy that
frames the mind to obedience and loyalty? or is there any thing in the nature
of Presbytery that enclines to rebellion and disobedience --? A. If he means by
the nature of Prelacy the principles of Prelatical Protestants, and by the
nature of Presbytery the principles of Presbyterians, I maintain the
affirmative in both Questions, and suppose I have already abundantly evinced
it, as to Presbyterians both Scotch and English; and as for Prelatical
Protestants, if this Author or any body else can produce any such enormous and
seditious principles out of their Writings, as I have here quoted out of
Presbyterian Authors, let those writings, by my consent, and together with them
Mr. Pryn's Sovereign Power of Parliaments, (by which word [ Parliaments] he
means the two Houses, without and against the King) undergo the same Fate with
David Pareus his Commentary, and the Presbyterian League and Covenant; and if
any of their practices have been suitable, let those men's persons also have the
odious character of Rebellion and Disobedience affixt unto them. But that any
such Prelatical Protestant can be produced, is more than I know or have any
reason to believe. Certain I am, that English protestant Prelatists profess
their assent to, and practically own those principles mentioned, p. 24, 25.
Which Principles do in their own nature, and where they are cordially enbraced,
frame the minds of English Subjects to obedience and loyalty; and therefore let
this Author prove, if he can, that since a Protestant Prelacy was erected among
us, our Kings have had any such tedious conflicts with Prelates, as he says
they had in ancient times, and for a series of many Ages. As for the Popes
Prelates, they are so near of kin to Presbyterians, that it is no great wonder
if they create trouble to Princes.

If, says he, Presbytery and Rebellion be connatural, how comes it to pass that
those States or Kingdoms where it has been established or tolerated, have for
any time been free from broils and commotions?] One would think there were a
sufficient answer comprehended in the words of the Question. For those
Presbyterians are rebellious with a witness, that will embroil even those
States and Kingdoms where their Form of Worship and Polity is either established
or tolerated; and yet the French Protestants are abused by a late Reflecter on
the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, if notwithstanding this they are not too
prone to Rebellion, and that on account of their Principles. What an exception,
says he (p. 42. of his Reflections) terrible to Princes, the French
Calvinistical Church has made in their Confession of Faith, speaking of
obedience due to the Supreme Magistrate, appears at least every Sunday in all
their hands in Print, where they acknowledge such Obedience due to them, except
the Law of God and Religion be interessed (on condition that Gods Sovereignty
remain undiminish'd;) which clause, says he, what it means, their so many and
so long continued Rebellions do expound.] What turbulent things Scotch and
English presbyterians have been, those very practices of theirs, which these
sheets have mentioned (to which many more might be added) are a competent
Testimony. But this Quaere shall not escape so, let us view it again. [ If
Presbytery and Rebellion be connatural, how comes it to pass that those States
or Kingdoms where it has been established or tolerated, have for any time been
free from broils and commotions?] A. 1. It may be 'twas because though their
minds were always inclined (by their principles) to rebellion, yet they had not
power and opportunity to act suitably to those inclinations, with hopes of
success. 'Twere a sad thing indeed, if Rebels should be able at all times to
put their traitorous Designs in execution. 2. It suffices (in reference to the
grand Question now disputed) if Presbyterian spirits are prone to Rebellion, in
case their way of Worship be not either est ablisht or tolerated. For they
deserve not to be so much as tolerated in any Kingdom, that will, when they
have power, rebel against Kings, if they be not tolerated. 3. If this Quaere
implies any good proof, that Presbytery and Rebellion is not connatural (by
which he means, I suppose, not usually conjoined) it does as strongly imply,
that Jesuitism and Rebellion are not connatural, since those States and
Kingdoms where Jesuits have been tolerated, have for some time been free from
broils and commotions. It follows:

[ Or how comes it to pass that Presbyterians have never disclaimed or
abandoned their lawful Prince?] As if (to let pass other Instances) English
Presbyterians did not disclaim and abandon the late King, when they denied him
to be in a condition to Govern, (H. of Comm. Decl. 28. Nov. 1646.) when they
denied him the exercise of that power in the Militia, which themselves
acknowledged did belong unto him: (Veritas inconcussa, p. 147. 168.) When they
affirmed that the Sovereign power resided in both Houses of Parliament; that
the King had no Negative voice; that whatsoever the two Houses should Vote, was
not by Law to be questioned, either by the King or Subjects; that it belonged
to them only to judge of the Law. (Declar. of May 26. 1642.) as if likewise
they did not make others to disclaim and abandon him, by making them swear that
they would neither directly nor indirectly adhere unto or willingly assist the
King in his War and Cause. But he proceeds.

[ How comes it to pass that they have never ceased to solicit and supplicate
his regards and favor? even when their power has been at the highest, and his
sunk lowest?] Whereas I read in Philips his Veritas inconcussa (his Book that
proves K. Charles 1. no man of blood) these words, p. 124. Indstead of offering
any thing which was like to bring peace, they (the Presbyterian Lords and
Commons) caused men and women in the first year of their war to be killed,
because they did but petition them to accept of a peace: And in the third and
fourth year of their war plundered and robbed them that petitioned them but to
hearken to it: And put out of Office and made all as Delinquents in the seventh
year of their war that did but petition them for a Treaty with the King, and
refused all the Kings many, very many messages for peace, not only when he was
at the highest of his success in the war, but when he was at the lowest, and a
prisoner to them, and conjured them as they would answer it at the dreadful day
of judgment to pity the bleeding condition of his Kingdoms and People, and
send propositions of peace unto him; and years and half-years, and more than a
whole year together after the battle at Naseby ( insomuch as their
fellow-Rebels the Scotch Commissioners did heavily complain of it) were at
several times trifled away and spent before any propositions could be made
ready. Was this perpetually to supplicate their lawful Princes regards and
favor? And p. 126. We are told they were so unwilling to have any peace at
all, as that 6 or 7 Messengers or Trumpeters could come from the King before
they could be at leisure, or so mannerly as to answer one of them: but this or
that message from the King was received and read, and laid by till a week or
when they would after. And p. 128, 129. When they did treat they desired the
granting of such propositions as were purposely contrived and stood upon to
hinder a peace; and were not to be asked or granted by any that could but
entitle themselves to the least part of reason or humanity, etc. And p. 68. The
King complains that although he had used all ways and means to prevent the
distractions and dangers of the Kingdom, all his labors had been fruitless,
that not so much as a Treaty earnestly desired by him, could be obtained
(though he disclaimed all his Proclamations and Declarations, and the Erecting
of his Standard as against his Parliament) unless he should denude himself of
all force to defend him from a visible strength marching against him. And when
the business of the Treaty (1647 as I suppose) came into discourse, the
Assembly of Divines quickly resolved (all of them but four) to be against it.
(See considerations touching the present Factions in the King's Dominions, p.
6.) And yet this Brazen-face would persuade us that Presbyterians never ceased
to solicit and supplicate the Kings regards and favor. It seems their voting
(1647) that they would receive no more messages from the King, and that no man
should presume to bring any from him, and that they would make no farther
applications and addresses to him, was so far from being a disclaiming and
abandoning him, that 'twas not so much as a ceasing to supplicate his regards
and favor ( statuimus i. e. abrogamus) what shall be done unto thee, O thou
false Tongue and ridiculous Flatterer? The other part of his Quaere is, [ How
comes it to pass that the Presbyterians suffered themselves rather to be
trodden under foot, than to comply with men of violence in changing the
Government?] A. 1. 'Twas because they were unable to make their parts good
against those men of violence (here intended.) Independents had cheated them
out of that power which before they had. 2. Themselves were the men of violence
that did first of all really change the Government by acting without and
fighting against the Kings Person and Authority. Independents took away the
name [King] but Presbyterians had long before destroyed the [thing.] 3. 'Twere
no great wonder if Presbyterians suffered themselves to be trodden under foot
(when they could not help it) rather than comply with those that would not
advance the Presbyterian Interest; but what is this to the objection of
Rebellion and Disobedience? Does it follow that they did not rebel against the
King because they suffered themselves to be trodden under foot by Independents?
but 4. It Is somewhat hard to understand what Presbyterians mean when they say
they suffered themselves to be trodden under foot. None can properly be said to
suffer themselves to be ill used, but those that are able to repel that ill
usage if they please, which Presbyterians being not able to do when
Independents had the power of the sword, they are very fond self-flatterers
thus to apologize for themselves, which I speak only on supposition that they
were ill used and trodden under foot, but that there is any Truth in that
supposition (thus indefinitely expressed) is more than I believe, unless they
imagined themselves trodden under foot and ill used because they were not
suffered to domineer over and still to rule the whole Nation as they listed; as
if all men were trodden under foot or cast out on the Dunghill (like unsavory
salt) that are not suffered to sit in the Throne and usurp the Scepter of
Majesty. For what else were Presbyterians deprived of when the Government was
changed? Did they not still enjoy their lives and (in a far higher degree than
Loyal Subjects) their Liberties? their Lands also and livings, and their
Sacrilegious Purchases? and besides all this were not Lay-Presbyterians
continued in and advanced to Civil offices and places of Trust: and were not
other Presbyterians Masters of Colleges and Halls in the Universities, and
continued in their Fellowships there? as likewise Presbyterian Parsons in their
fat Benefices in City and Country? and had they not the liberty to exercise
whatsoever spiritual power they pleased to claim and vindicate to themselves
over their Parishioners? Whence I conclude, that the meaning of those words
must (as to the generality of Presbyterians) be this: They suffered themselves
to be trodden under foot, that is, to live, to be kept out of prison, to reap
the profits of the Lands in their possessions, whether well or ill gotten,
whether by the robbing of God and his Church of their sacred Revenues, or
others of that which legally belonged unto them; to be Mayors, Bailiffs,
Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Constables, etc. And the Presbyterian
Ministers in the University, City, and Country suffered themselves to be
trodden under foot, that is, to be continued in those Headships, Fellowships,
Parsonages, Rectories, Cures, which by Law belonged unto, and were illegally,
unrighteously plundered from other men; and to enjoy the liberty of
excommunicating (in their respective Parishes) whom they pleased, and excluding
as many as they pleased from the privilege of both Sacraments. But sure if
Royalists had been so favorably used by Presbyterians as Presbyterians were by
Independents, they would never have been so ingratefully and nonsensically
querulous, as to say they were trodden under foot.] In a Pamphlet printed 1648.
called [The Pulpit-Incendiary] and directed against Mr. Calamy, -- Case, --
Cawton, -- Cranford, -- and other Sion-Colledge-Preachers, there are these
words, p. 45. You complain of your misery, bondage and slavery, of oppressions,
sorrows and troubles of the Church, that is doubtless of the Church
Presbyterian, and no other. What does ail you? what troubles you? who does
oppress you? Have you not Authority on your side? have you not all the
Church Livings in the Kingdom? have you not Declaration upon Declaration,
Ordinance upon Ordinance, Order upon Order, for to back you? Is there the least
show of oppression, sorrow or cause of complaint administered unto you, except
it be because you are not suffered to oppress, vex and gall your Brethren that
join not with you? Can you feed upon nothing but blood? yea the blood of your
Brethren? that though you have every thing else, (that only prohibited) you
complain of sorrow, slavery, oppression? Is this your slavery and captivity,
that you cannot enslave and lead into captivity? Is this to kill you with the
sword, that you cannot kill your Brethren with the sword? I add, Is this for
Presbyterians to be trodden under foot, that they cannot tread others under
foot? Besides, this Author has before intimated (p. 45, 55.) that the
generality of Presbyterians did at last comply with the men of violence in
their changing the Government; for they subscribed that Engagement which was
designed for the defending and maintaining of that change: The great, if not
only motive whereunto in all probability was, that they might still keep
possession of their Livings and livelihoods, and not be outlawed: and yet here
he would persuade us, that Presbyterians (indefinitely) suffered themselves to
be trodden under foot, rather than they would comply with those men of
violence. So true is that saying, Oportet mend -- esse mem -- Some (as he tells
us in that p. if we may believe him) utterly refused even to the forfeiture of
their Preferments, and the hazard of their Livelihoods. -- Notwithstanding
which words, 1. There were but some only that so refused. -- 2. Those very some
might afterward engage, rather than the forfeiture (occasioned by their
refusal at first) should be taken, or their livelihoods lost as well as
hazarded. I have heard indeed of one Presbyterian Doctor, who rather than he
would subscribe the Engagement publicly at Oxford, parted with a Headship of
about 80. l. per Annum; but yet the same man was so providently politic, as to
subscribe in the Country rather than suffer himself to be trodden under foot,
that is, to have a Living of six or seven hundred a year taken from him: and it
may be there were a few more Presbyterians ( that had Pluralities) who acted in
like manner. But this is no Apology for the generality of Presbyterians, who
did not so much as hazard their livelihoods, or render themselves liable to be
trodden under foot, by refusing to comply. And as for those eminent
Presbyterian Ministers and others, (spoken of in the same p.) who either
hazarded or lost their lives in combining to bring our Sovereign, that now is,
to the rightful possession of this Kingdom; it cannot reasouably be said, that
such men suffered themselves to be trodden under foot, since by those combining
attempts they opposed and endeavored to ruin and destroy those men of
violence that trod them under foot. Nor can they properly or justly be said to
suffer themselves to be trodden under foot, who do not suffer it meekly and
patiently, without railing at or reviling those that tread them under. Whereas
if the carriage of Presbyterian Ministers generally was like that which is
reported of the Ministers of London in 1648. (when they supposed that the men
of violence were about to change the Government) they made it their business to
inveigh against those men of violence in sharp and bitter language. For the
Author of the Pulpit-Incendiary tells us, that [ the London-Ministers (were so
far from suffering themselves humbly, peaceably, and patiently to be trodden
under foot, that their) Tongues were sharpened like Serpents, Adders poison was
under their Lips, stinging and poisoning the name and repute of the Army, p.
16. calling them a Rebellious Army, a generation of Vipers, a Viperous brood,
etc. And that on Sabbath Days and Fast-days in Preaching and Praying they still
girded at the Parliament (viz. the Independent majority) as men that declined
their Solemn League and Covenant, hindered reformation, minded nothing but their
own Interest. He tells us also, p. 14. That the morning Lectures which they
called the Ark of God in their frequent removals month after month, from
place to place, were so modelled and constituted, that in them a lamentable
slaughter was made of the sweet affections of love, kindness, gentleness,
goodness, patience each toward other, p. 2. That that Ark of theirs seems
frequently to be drawn -- by Bulls of Basan, -- tossing and goring the
Parliament, and Army, and their dissenting Brethren, from day to day,
maliciously fomenting contentions, strifes and divisions, p. 3. That the
London- Ministers did by conjunction of Counsels, and debates in Sion-Colledge
(London's, nay, England's distemper) conceive sinful resolution to engage and
tamper privately with chief Citizens in public places, as Common-Council-men,
etc. and publicly in Pulpit and Press stirring up the people by all possible
means, under the pretense of the glory of God, a blessed Reformation, the
keeping of the Covenant, etc. to set all together by the ears -- and raise a
new War, p. 18, 19.

From which premises, I may, for ought I see, well enough conclude, that this
Author instead of pretending that Presbyterians suffered themselves rather to
be trodden under foot, than to comply with men of violence in changing the
Government, should (in Truth and Justice) have thus represented them -- That
rather than they would comply with the men of violence, when they presumed they
were about to change the Government, they endeavored to prevent the being
trodden under foot by them, by imbittering men's spirits against them in their
preachments and direful Prayers, by sowing the seeds of contention and
division, and by inflaming men's minds to take Arms, resist and destroy them --
and when notwithstanding all such English and Scotch endeavors, Independents
had effected the change of those small remains and parcels of the English
Government, which Presbyterian violence had left unchanged, that Party
generally did by degrees so far comply, even with that change also, that rather
than they would be trodden under foot, outlawed and sequestered, they engaged to
be faithful to the Commonwealth of England, as then established by the men of
violence, without King or House of Lords; it seems they who thus act are said (
in the Presbyterian dialect) to suffer themselves to be trodden under foot. And
now judge whether statuimus must not here again signify abrogamus.

Let us (as our Author proceeds) further examine. Are the persons that adhere
to Prelacy more conscientious in duty to God and Man, than those that affect
Presbytery? Are the former only sober, just, and godly, and the latter vicious,
unrighteous, profane?] A. Though I could speak something to these Questions
from my own experience, having lived both in Episcopal and Presbyterian
Families and places, and being acquainted with diverse Persons, Ministers, and
others of both persuasions, yet because comparisons of this kind are odious, I
shall answer only in reference to the main thing in Question, that [ there is
more reason of State] for the pro ecting a drunken Royalist than a sober Rebel,
and yet I am fully persuaded, that neither of them so remaining have holiness
enough in this world to render them capable of happiness in the next. Nor do I
doubt, but it may be as much the lot of some Traitorous spirits to be sober, as
it is (if this Author tell truth in the following lines) of some that adhere to
Prelacy to be loyal; but whether I have not already said enough to prove, that
Presbyterian principles incline to Rebellion, and the principles of English
prelatists to Loyalty, let all impartial Readers judge. If this be not answer
sufficient to those Quaeries, I shall supply the defects of it with
transcribing (for this Authors sake) a passage or two out of the writings of
his fellow-Rebels. The first shall be out of William Sedgwick's [Leaves of the
Tree of Life for the healing of the Nations, p. 36.] Of the two it is more
strange to see that the Presbyterian, who the other day was oppressed by the
Bishop for his conscience in point of the Sabbath, etc. who could not (long
since) live without the favor of the Bishop, should now thrust out those under
whom he lived for not taking the Covenant, which is contrary to their
conscience; and show less favor to them than he received from them, and do
that which he condemned in others; and this upon weak and fleshly grounds,
admiring his own way, which is to pray and preach longer and more than another,
to be strict in repetition on Sabbath Days, and some such poor formal things;
to set up this as the power of Godliness and Reformation, to the ruin of
another, who it may be is a man of more justice, ability and wisdom, more
sobriety, more stability, more patience and constancy in suffering, etc.

The other shall be out of J. Price's Clerico-Classicum, p. 40. Have we not
cause to judge better of many of the Prelatical party (who being men of
learning and conscience, and never so violent against their opposers in Church
and State as your selves (you Presbyterian Ministers of London) making no
distunbances, rents, divisions, Factions by Pulpit and Press as you do, from
day to day, (as all men observe) that being conscious to themselves of the many
Oaths, Vows, Covenants that they have made of subjection and obedience unto
Bishops, the then established Church Government, Book of Common Prayer,
Homilies, Canons, etc. cannot take the Solemn League and Covenant, and rather
choose to lose their Livings and Livelihoods, committing themselves, Wives and
Children to the mercy of God, having no visible means of subsisting, than to
break the peace of their Consciences, by taking an Oath, Vow or Covenant
contrary to all their former Oaths before satisfaction received) than of you or
some of you that presently turned Presbyterians, cast away Episcopacy, took the
Covenant, and having taken it, turn it and wind it, wring it and wrest it,
making it to look East and West, North and South, as your Interest works with
King, Parliament or Army, or against them all? And this, says he, is not my
saying only, but it is vox Populi, the late King, the Lords, the Commons, the
City, the Country, the whole Kingdom observed it.

To these I shall add some passages of the like import out of Dr. Owen, in his
[ Mortification of Sin in Believers] p. 29. There is indeed, says he, a broad
light fallen upon the men of this generation, and together therewith many
spiritual gifts communicated, which with some other considerations have
wonderfully enlarged the bounds of Professors and Profession -- Hence there is
a noise of Religion and Religious duties in every Corner preaching in
abundance; and that not in an empty, light, trivial, and vain manner as
formerly, but to a good proportion of a spiritual Gift; so that if you will
measure the number of Believers by light, gifts and profession, the Church may
have cause to say, who has born me all these? But now if you will take the
measure of them by this great discriminating Grace of Christians, perhaps you
will find their number not so multiplied: Where almost is that Professor who
ows his conversion to these days of Light, and so talks and professes at such a
rate of spirituality as few in former days were in any measure acquainted with
-- that does not give evidence of a miserably unmortified heart? If vain
spending of time, talents, unprofitableness in men's places, envy, strife,
variance, emulations, wrath, pride, worldliness, selfishness be badges of
Christians, we have them on us and among us in abundance. The same Dr. in his
Book of Temptations, p. 64. asks this Question, would any one have thought it
possible that such and such professors in our days should have fallen into ways
of self, of flesh, of the World; to play at cards, Dice, revel, dance, to
neglect family, closet duties, to be proud, haughty, ambitious, worldly,
covetous, oppressive? or that they should be turned away after foolish, vain,
ridiculous opinions, deserting the Gospel of Christ? in which two lies the
great temptation that is come on us the inhabitants of this world to try us.
But does not every man see that this is come to pass? and may we not see how it
is come to pass? Some loose empty Professors that had never more than a Form of
Godliness when they had served their turn of that began the way to them; then
others began a little to comply, and to please the flesh in so doing; this by
little and little has reached even the Topboughs and branches of our
profession, until almost all flesh has corrupted its ways, and he that departs
from these iniquities makes his name a prey if not his person. And p. 55, 56.
How full is the world of specious pretenses and pleadings? as -- the liberty
and freedom of Christians delivered from a bondage-frame -- This is a door that
in my own observation I have seen sundry go out at into sensuality and
Apostasy, beginning at a light conversation, proceeding to a neglect of the
Sabbath, public and private duties, ending in dissoluteness and profaneness,
and then there is leaving off public things to providence -- These and the
like considerations joined with the ease and plenty, the greatness and
promotion of professors have so brought things about, that whereas we have by
providence shifted places with the men of the world, we have by sin shifted
spirits with them also; we are like a plantation of men carried into a foreign
Country, in a short space they degenerate from the manners of the people from
whence they came, and fall into those of the country whereinto they are
brought; as if there were something in the Soil and the Air that transformed
them. Give me leave a little to follow my similitude: He that should see the
prevailing Party of these Nations, many of those in rule, power, favor, with
all their adherents, and remember that they were a Colony of Puritans, whose
habitation was in a low place, as the Prophet speaks of the City of God,
translated by an high hand to the mountains they now possess; cannot but wonder
how soon they have forgot the customs, manners, ways of their own old people,
and are cast into the mould of them that went before them in the places
whereunto they are translated. I speak of us all, especially of us who are
among the lowest of the people, where perhaps this iniquity does most abound,
what were those before us that we are not? what did they which we do not?
Prosperity has slain the foolish and wounded the wise. Thus the (then) Dean of
Christ-Church.

Let Us now return to the Rector of Bramshot.

[ Their principles, says he, p. 54. 64. whose cause is now pleaded, if
faithfully received and kept, will make good men and good Christians, and
therefore cannot but make good Subjects; when men have learnt to fear God they
will honor the King indeed, and none are more observant of Righteous Laws than
they that are most a Law to themselves; yea, their pattern and practice will be
a Law to many others, and consequently a main help to Civil Government in a
Christian Nation.]

If all this be true, then English Presbyterians have not faithfully received
and kept Presbyterian Principles; for I am sure they have not been good
Subjects because Traitors and Rebels against their Sovereign Lord: and
therefore I shall make bold to conclude from this Author's premises, that they
have been neither good Christians nor good men: I am sure they dishonored the
King, for as his Majesty complained in his Declaration concerning Levyes, his
Authority was despised by them and as much as in them lay taken from him; and
reviled in Pulpits and Presses by Persons immediately under their protection,
and of their recommendation. And the London-Pulpitmen (if John Price speak
truth in his Clerico-Classicum, p. 53.) told the people that the King was a man
of blood; and took hold of all whispering, hearsays and probabilities of his
wickedness to make him odious to the people: And therefore by this John
Corbet's good leave, I shall conclude that they had not then learned to fear
God. That they were a Law to themselves I easily grant, but 'twas just as
Traitors and other Malefactors use to be, who trample under foot the righteous
Laws of a Nation, because inconsistent with their rebellious, ambitious, and
ungodly designs; and are resolved to follow the Law of their own wills; and in
this Presbyterians were patterns to many others, and consequently a main help
to the Independents in their destroying those remnants of the Civil Government
of this Nation which themselves had ( for want of time to finish their
mischievous enterprises) left undemolished. But this Egregious Parasite has not
done yet; for he would fain delude his Reader with another Apologetick in
behalf of his Party. [ Whosoever they be that teach blind obedience,
Presbyterians teach Faith and Holiness; as also Obedience active in all lawful
things, and passive in things unlawful enjoined by the higher Power.]

A. I do not understand or believe that there is any such diametral opposition
between blind obedience on one hand and faith and holiness on the other, but
that the same Persons, Presbyterians as well as Jesuits may teach both. I
rather believe that blind obedience in matters prescribed by and agreeable to
the word of God, will sooner bring a man to heaven than all that Faith and
Holiness which too many Modern presbyterian Boutefeaus have taught either by
their Doctrine or Practice. But the latter clause [ that they teach obedience
active in all lawful things, and passive in things unlawful enjoined by the
higher power] may justly make an impartial Reader that reflects upon their
actions for several years together to wonder what this man means by [ the
higher power] by [ things unlawful] by [ obedience active and passive.] If in
the days of the Long Parliament, Presbyterian Doctrines and practices in this
point were suitable and correspondent, the words must be thus paraphrasad:
Presbyterians taught obedience active in things unlawful enjoined by the two
Houses (whom Mr. Herle's (as it is reported) seditious invention made (only)
coordinate with the King) and disobedience active even to bloody Rebellion in
things lawful enjoined by the King, whom by Oath they acknowledged to be the
only Supreme Governor of this Kingdom. I have read in Philips his Veritas
inconcussa, p. 23. that (in 1642) Presbyterian Pulpits flamed with seditious
invectives against the King, and incitements to Rebellion, and that the people
running headlong into it had all manner of countenance and encouragement, but
those Ministers that preached obedience and sought to prevent Rebellion, were
sure to be imprisoned and put out of their places for it.] Was this for
Presbyterians to preach either Faith or Holiness, or Obedience active to the
King? or were those men so good Subjects, so good Christians, as either
actively or passively to obey his Majesty, or preach such obedience, when they
took themselves and exhorted others to take that Solemn League and Covenant,
which the King in his Proclamation against it calls a Traitorous and Seditious
combination against himself and the established Religion and Laws of the
Kingdom? [ We do therefore, says his Majesty, strictly charge and command all
our loving Subjects of what degree or quality soever, upon their Allegiance,
that they presume not to take the said seditious and traitorous Covenant. And
we do likewise hereby forbid and inhibit all our Subjects to impose, administer
or tender the said Covenant, as they and every of them will answer the contrary
at their utmost and extremest peril.] What therefore was the taking of this
Covenant and tendering of it to others? was it obedience? either active, or
passive, to the King? No, but on the contrary, 'twas active disobedience to his
Majesty's command; and the taking up Arms against the King in prosecution of
this Covenant thus taken, and cursing those that did not, was Treason and
Rebellion by the Laws of the Land, and damnable resistance by the Law of
Christ. And these and other Presbyterian practices were such a palpable
contradiction to the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, that in some late
reflections on those Oaths, it is admired with what face presbyterians can now
either take or urge them. It Is a wonderful mystery, p. 41. how it should come
to pass, that our English Presbyterians, etc. should (especially now of late)
with so much willingness and greediness themselves swallow these Oaths, and so
clamorously urge them on others. Is it because the Oath of Supremacy has so
peculiar a conformity to their principles, and that of Allegiance to their
practices? or that they are so ready and pressing to disclaim and condemn all,
that themselves have done these last twenty years? -- And a little after: Who
ever heard or knew to flow from the Tongue, or drop from the Pen of a
Presbyterian, so Christian a Position as is sincerely avouched both by English
Protestants and the general body of Roman Catholics, viz. that even in case a
Christian or Heathen Prince should make use of his Civil Power to persecute
Truth, that power ought not upon any pretenses to be actively resisted by
violence or force of Arms, but though they cannot approve, they must at least
patiently suffer the effects of his mis-used Authority, leaving the judgment to
God only? If this Rector can answer this Question in the affirmative, and then
prove it true of any one Covenanting Presbyterian, Scotch or English, within
the compass of this last twenty years, let him, I shall be glad to see it.
Whether he can do so much or no I doubt, (as I do likewise, whether that
Reflecter can prove that that Position, as he has worded it, is owned by the
general body of Roman Catholics;) but that he cannot do it of Presbyterians
generally, or any considerable number of them, I am pretty well assured: if he
can, 'twill follow that the generality of Presbyterians, or a considerable
number of them most wretchedly detained that Truth in unrighteousness, and for
several years together acted most horrid things contrary to their Light,
Knowledge and Conscience. But it is observable, that this crafty Impostor
instead of [ proving] that Presbyterians teach obedience active in things
lawful, and passive in things unlawful enjoined by [the King's Majesty]
[affirms only] that they teach such obedience in things enjoined by the [
Higher power] not telling us, whether they mean the higher power de jure, or de
facto only; nor whether their Doctrine will not comprehend the higher power de
facto, though themselves acknowledge it no power de jure, if so be that power
will in the main comply with the advancement of the Presbyterian Interest. What
the presbyterians meant by the higher power in the late divisions, was too
evident by their practices, viz. that parcel minor, part of the Long Parliament
which favored Presbytery, which opposed the King and made War against him,
which elected a multitude of new Members, by virtue of a counterfeit
(treasonable) Seal. Prove that the King was the Higher power in the time of the
Divisions, says Mr. Baxter, (Pref. to his Holy Commonwealth, p. 23.) They
declared May 26. 1642. that the Sovereign power resides in both Houses of
Parliament; as the Author of Veritas Inconcussa quotes them, p. 29. who also p.
91. informs us, That the Parliament could not be called a Parliament, when they
had driven away the King, who is the Head and Life of it; nor they be said to
be two Houses of Parliament, when there was not at that time when they first
raised a War above a third part of the House of Peers, nor the half part of the
House of Commons remaining in them; and what those few did in their absence,
was either forced by a Faction of their own, or a party of Seditious Londoners;
for indeed the War rightly considered, was not betwixt the Parliament and the
King, but a War made by a Factious and Seditious party of the Parliament
against the King, and the major part of the Parliament.] So that a factious,
seditious part of a parliament was heretofore owned by Presbyterians as [the
Higher power.] Nay, the chief Presbyterian Advocate was such a learned man,
such a good Subject and Christian, he did so fear God and honor the King, as
to be able and willing to distinguish between the supreme Governor and the
supreme Power of this Nation, (Sover. power of Parl. p. 104.) and to teach,
that the King was indeed the Supreme Governor, but the Parliament (by which he
understood those two Houses) was the Supreme Power: (which is very strange,
says Judge Jenkins, for who can govern without power? p. 57.) Whence all that I
shall conclude is, 1. That this part of the Authors Apology is rather an
implicit confession and proof of the crime objected than an Argument of
Presbyterian Innocence. And 2. That it concerns his Majesty, before he resolve
to protect and encourage Presbyterians, to catechize them very particularly and
strictly, touching those Loyal principles which this J. C. pretends to be
embraced by them, that so it may appear, whether when they take the Oath of
Supremacy, they do it not with that Jesuitical, or more than Jesuitical
Equivocation just now mentioned, or with such a mental reservation, as will
infer their approving (now as well as in the late Wars) of that Treasonable
distinction between the King's personal and politic capacity, and that
damnable and damned opinion (as it seems Cook's Reports call it, B. 7. in
Calvin's Case) that Homage and the Oath of Allegiance, was more by reason of
the Kings Crown, his Politic capacity, than by reason of the Person of the
King: whence they inferred these detestable consequences: 1. If the King demean
not himself by reason, his Leiges are bound by Oath to remove him. 2. Seeing
the King could not be reformed by Suit at Law, that it ought to be done per
asperte, by force. 3. That his Leiges are bound to govern in aid of him: all
which were condemned by two Parliaments, one in the reign of Edw. 2. and the
other 1 Edw. 3. chapter 1. (See Sheringham's Remonstrance of the King's right, p.
75.) And yet all these three damnable, detestable and execrable consequences
are the grounds whereupon the present time (of the late Wars) relies, and the
principles whereupon the two Houses found their cause, says J. Jenkins, p. 10.
For ought I know Presbyterians own these principles to this day, and so are
prepared in mind again to teach men actively to disobey the King, yea, and to
dethrone his Majesty, by acknowledging two such Houses (and obeying them as)
the Higher power, whenever they can by their disturbing Arts and Influences
(in raising and countenancing barbarous, and seditious Tumults) divide the King
from the Houses, the Loyal part of the Houses from the Disloyal, and then patch
them up again by Treasonable Elections, and so pack together a company of men,
whom they will be bold enough to call a Parliament. If all Presbyterians are of
the same belief with Zachary Crofton (in his Berith Anti-Baal) they are still
of opinion, That the Covenant-imposing and taking Lords and Commons were a most
lawful, rightly called, and constituted Assembly, the Princes and principal
Rulers of the people, (though themselves swear that the King is the only
supreme Governor) ( p. 7.) that they were the Princes, [yea more] the body of
the people, p. 30. That their Oath (Covenant) was the most positive authentic
repeal of any Laws obliging to the contrary, p. 31. 51. This, says he, Mr.
Crofton and all rational men do believe, That succeeding Parliaments are bound
to repeal those Laws which establish the thing which those Lords and Commons
had sworn to extirpate, p. 31. That their swearing those things as the
collective body of the Nation, binds all posterity, who shall any way succeed
into that national capacity. It Is no reason of State for the King (when he is
able to suppress and reject them,) to protect and encourage any Party of men
thus principl'd and disposed: and therefore reason of State will put his
Majesty upon a curious and diligent enquiry, whether Presbyterians and others
retain these and the like principles, ( as that the Long Parliament is yet in
being, which is favored also, p. 52.) and will oblige him to deny them
protection and encouragement, till they renounce and abjure all such damnable
and pernicious maxims.

In the following Lines, p. 55-65. this Author would fain persuade us that
Presbyterians must needs be good Subjects to a Christian King, because [
Profaneness, intemperance, revellings, outrages, and filthy lewdness were not
at any time in the memory of the present Age held under more restraint than in
the late distracted times; the special reason whereof was because a practical
Ministry was more thick set throughout the Nation, and the places where
Presbyterian Ministers had the greatest influence were most reformed and
civilized, and the orderly walking of Religious Persons did keep others more
within compass.]

Which is no better than non causa pro causa, for it is evident enough that that
(supposed) effect must be attributed to Presbyterian Ordinances not Sermons,
and (the Executors of them) Presbyterian Magistrates, (I mean Mayors, Bailiffs,
Justices of the peace, Constables, illegally chosen) as the special principal
cause, without whose coercive power presbyterian Ministers might have preached
their hearts out before they had wrought the Reformation here talked of,
especially considering 1. That himself p. 65. pleads for the annexing of some
temporal damage and penalty to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; because spiritual
censures (and then say I much more Sermons) pertaining only to the Conscience
may be too little regarded. And 2. That 'twas easy enough for many filthy,
profane, intemperate persons thus to bespeak many of those practical
Ministers, (as S. Paul did the Pharisaical Jew:) Behold thou art called a
Presbyterian, and restest in the Bible, and make thy boast of God, and
know his will, and approvest the things that are excellent, being instructed
out of the Law, and art confident that thou thy self art a guide of the Blind,
a light of them who are in darkness, an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of
Babes, who have the form of knowledge and of the truth in the Law: Thou
therefore who teach another teach thou not thy self? Thou that preachest
a man should not steal, do thou year after year reap the profits of that
Living which by Law belongs to another, who was plundered of it by illegal
violence? and that because he was a more loyal Subject than thy self? Thou that
abhorrest Idols, do thou justify and approve of the committing Sacrilege?
the robbing of God as well as man? Thou that gloryest in the Law (of the first
Table at least,) by breaking the Law (of the second Table) dishonourest thou
God? Know thou not that he that said, Thou shall not commit adultery, said
also, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, Thou shall not Kill nor Steal, nor bear
false witness, nor covet other men's goods? Thou thunderest out rebukes and
threatnest damnation against us that are Adulterers, Fornicators, Unclean,
Drunkards, Revellers, and yet thou thy self art notoriously guilty of those
(other) crimes which (together with these) are usually and equally forbidden
and condemned in the same or the next verse, and the doers of them sentenced to
Hell. When we lewd, profane, and intemperate persons read in the Old Testament
that Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and
Idolatry: And in the New Testament, that covetous Persons, revilers,
extortioners are in the number of those unrighteous men that shall not inherit
the kingdom of God: that they also who are guilty of idolatry, witchcraft,
hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife, fedition, murder, shall be excluded
the kingdom of Heaven, as well as adulterers, fornicators, drunkards: and when
it is evident to us from your practices, that you presbyterian Ministers have
for many years been (in a Scripture account) Wizards and Idolaters, because you
have behaved your selves stubbornly and rebelliously against the command and
Authority of God and the King, contentiously, wrathfully and seditiously
against the inferior Governors sent by him as the supreme, that you have born
false witness against those that were loyal and obedient Subjects as Traitors,
Incendiaries, etc. And then have manifested your selves so insatiably covetous
of their goods and legal possessions, that some of your party have enjoyed
plundered goods, and sequestered livings, legally belonging to honest Royalists;
and besides all this you have prayed for the prosperity of Presbyterian Armies,
and encouraged them to fight against the King, and cursed those that did not,
and the more of the Kings Friends your forces killed, the more heartily you
gave thanks to God, and by such approving compliances are guilty of the blood
of thousands of the Kings Loyal Subjects, and consequently of so many murders.
To kill any man in war without Authority derived from him or them that have
legal power to make war, being murder; and that your Presbyterian Lords and
Commons had no such power (as to that war which they made and you abetted) is
evident enough from this, that a Law of the Land, 25 Edw. 3. c. 2. makes it
Treason to levy war against the King in his Realm, or to be adherent to the
Kings enemies in his Realm, giving them aid or comfort in the Realm or
elsewhere: Since also it is no better than murder to kill or put those men to
death, whose lives (as well as goods, lands, etc.) the Law has taken special
care to preserve, you are by your approbation partakers of their sin who
murdered such men. That you approved the taking away their lives who adhered to
the King in the late wars, we presume you will not deny (yea you covenanted to
do them mischief under the Notion of Malignants, Incendiaries, and Evil
Instruments.) That the Law of the Land saves them harmless, is evident from 11
Henry 7. c. 1. Wherein it is declared to be against all Laws, Reason and good
conscience, that Subjects going with their Sovereign Lord in Wars, attending
upon him in his person, or being in other places by his commandment within this
land or without, should lose or forfeit any thing for doing their duty or
Service of Allegiance. Wherein likewise 'twas enacted, that no manner of person
or persons whatsoever -- that attend upon the King and Sovereign Lord of this
Land, for the time being, in his person, and do him true and faithful service
of Allegiance in the same, or be in other places by his commandment in his wars
within this land or without, that for the said deed and true duty of
Allegiance, he or or they be in no wise convict or attaint of high Treason, nor
of other offenses for that cause by Act of Parliament; or otherwise by any
Process of Law, whereby he or any of them shall lose or forfeit life, lands,
tenements, rents, possessions, hereditaments, goods, chattels or any other
things, but to be for that deed and service utterly discharged of any vexation,
trouble or loss: And if any Act or Acts, or other Process of the Law hereafter
thereupon for the same happen to be made contrary to this Ordinance, that then
that Act or Acts or other Process of Law whatsoever they shall be, stand and be
utterly void. Now you Presbyterian Preachers being thus guilty, with what face
can you reprove our profaneness, or judge us to Hell for those vices which are
but motes in comparison of those beams which an ordinary sight may discern in
your own eyes? and tell us if you can why these practices of yours do not give
us just cause to suspect that either you are very scandalously ignorant of the
most material and concerning portions of holy Scripture, or that you do not
give any credit to them (and then why do you seek to affright us from our
intemperateness and lewdness with such mormo's as your selves are too sturdy to
be scared with?) or else that you have some Salvoes and comfortable reserves
which might keep us from despair, and make us presume (upon Heaven) as well as
your selves, if you would please to acquaint us with them? And therefore till
your selves are more reformed and civilized, and walk more orderly toward God
and the King, toward the Laws of Nature and Scripture, and this Nation, you
cannot (in modesty) expect that your Sermons should prevail upon us to restrain
our debauchery, or convert us from dissoluteness and disorder. And now let this
Author prove if he can (as strongly as he boldly affirms) that the men whom he
pleads for (who are such bad Christians) must needs be good Subjects.

But p. 56. The man goes on to prevaricate and abuse his Readers into a good
opinion of Presbyterians.

[ Neither are they wandering stars, a people given to Change, fit to overturn
and pull down but not to build up; they do not hang in the air, but build upon
a firm ground; they have settled principles consistent with the Rules of Stable
Policy. Contrariwise Fanatics (truly, and not abusively so called) do build
Castles in the Air, and are fit Instruments to disturb and destroy and root
out, but never to compose and plant and settle, for which cause their Kingdom
could never hold long in any time or place of the World. Upon this ground
Presbytery, not Sectarian Anarchy has been assaulted with greatest violence by
the more observing Prelatists; against this they have raised their main
batteries: This appeared formidable, for it is stable and uniform and like to
hold if once settled in good earnest.]

From which heap of words I gather, 1. That the Presbyterian Lords and Commons
were Fanatics truly so called, since they manifested themselves (for several
years together) fit instruments to disturb and destroy, and root out the Order,
Governors, and Government established by Law; but when they had so far
disturbed things, as to destroy by Force and Arms, that Form of Policy in
Church and State; when they had done fighting against the King, and had gotten
him into their clutches, instead of showing their skill in composing, planting
and settling, they employed their time in building Castles in the Air, till the
Independent Fanatics outwitted them, and cunningly jugled that power out of
their hands which they had by force and violence wrested from the hands of his
Majesty and the Laws. -- 2. I gather that the principles of the Anarchical
sectarians are more consistent with the Rules of Stable-policy than those of
presbyterians, because their Kingdom and Tyranny lasted much longer than that
of Presbytery. 3. I gather that Prelatists had more reason to oppose Presbytery
than sectarian Anarchy, because (if this Author be in this particular a
tell-troth) presbytery was like to produce a more firm and rooted Schism
against the Bishops, and a more formidable, because more durable rebellion
against the King, than sectarian Anarchy. 4. I conclude, that therefore we have
great reason to bless God, that the Fanatics routed the Presbyterians, and put
a period to the dominion of Presbytery, since, if it had once been settled in
good earnest, it would either have kept out his Majesty much longer than
sectarian Anarchy did, or else have introduced him upon such uncivil, insolent,
and imperious terms, as the Scotch Presbytery brought him into that Nation, and
would (in probability) have forced him to rest content with an
Isle-of-Wight-titular-Kingship. But 5. I gather that Reason of State forbids
the protecting and encouraging of Presbyterians, since they are not fit to
overturn only, and pull down, but also to build up a stable and uniform Tower
of Babel, in defiance to the Laws of God and the King; such an one as 'twill
concern Heaven it self to take cognizance of, and to secure its own Sovereignty
and Supremacy by exerting its wisdom, power, and goodness, in defeating their
Counsels, controlling and confounding their ambitious designs. It follows:

[ This Party does not run so fast, but they know where to stop: they are a
number of men so fixed and constant as none more; and a Prince or State shall
know where to find them.]

Whereas, 1. The Presbyterian Lords and Commons declared April 9. 1642. that
they intended to take away nothing in the Government and Liturgy of the
Church, but what shall be evil and justly offensive, or at least unnecessary
and burthensom; and yet afterward they wholly extirpated the Government of our
Church, and abolisht its Liturgy: (things burdensome, it seems, to them at last,
though not justly offensive:) and yet these men are so fixed and constant as
none more. 2. His late Majesty, in his Declaration occasioned by the
Presbyterian Ordinance, for assessing the Twentieth part of men's Estates, has
left on record some notable examples of that Parties fixedness and consistency
with themselves. We have not, says the King, lately heard of the old
Fundamental Laws, which used to warrant the Innovations. This Ordinance needs a
refuge even below those Foundations. They will say they cannot manage their
undertakings without such extraordinary ways; we think so too; but that proves
only that they have undertaken somewhat, which they ought not to undertake; not
that it is lawful for them to do any thing that is convenient for those ends. We
remembered them long ago, and we cannot do it too often, of that excellent
speech of Mr. Pym's, [The Law is that which puts a difference between good and
evil; between just and unjust; if you take away the Law, all things will fall
into a confusion; every man will become a Law to himself: which in the depraved
condition of humane Nature must needs produce many great enormities; Lust will
become a Law; and Envy will become a Law; Covetousness and Ambition will become
Laws; and what Dictates, what Decisions such Laws will produce may easily be
discerned.] It may indeed, says his Majesty, by the sad instances over the
whole Kingdom. But will posterity believe, that in the same Parliament this
Doctrine was avowed with that Acclamation, and these Instances after produced?
that in the same Parliament such care was taken, that no man should be
committed in what case soever, without the cause of his Imprisonment expressed;
and that all men should be immediately bailed in all cases bailable; and during
the same Parliament that Alderman Pennington, or indeed any body else but the
sworn Ministers of Justice, should imprison whom they would, and for what they
would, and for as long time as they would? That the King should be reproached
for breach of Privilege for accusing of Sir John Hotham of High Treason, when
with force of Arms he kept him out of Hull, and despised him to his Face,
because in no case a Member of either House might be committed or accused
without leave of that House of which he is a Member; and yet that during the
same Parliament the same Alderman should commit the Earl of Middlesex ( a Peer
of the Realm) the Lord Buckhurst ( a Member of the House of Commons) to the
Counter without reprehension: That to be a Traitor, which is defined, and every
man understands, should be no crime; and to be called Malignant, which no body
knows the meaning of, should be ground enough for close Imprisonment: That a
Law should be made, that whosoever should presume to take Tonnage and Poundage,
without an Act of Parliament, should incur the penalty of a Praemunire; and in
the same Parliament, that the same Imposition should be laid upon our Subjects,
and taken, by an Order of both Houses, without and against our Consent? Lastly,
That in the same Parliament, a Law should be made to declare the proceedings
and judgment upon Ship Money to be illegal and void, and during that
Parliament, that an Order of both Houses shall, upon pretense of Necessity,
enable four men to take away from all their Neighbors the Twentieth part of
their Estates, according to their discretion? Thus his Majesty. And yet these
are the men whom a Prince or State shall know where to find. I might instance
in more particulars of the same or worse complexion, as to Lay-Presbyterians;
but I must not pass over in silence some of the Presbyterian Ministers of
London, to whom Price in his Clerico-Class. p. 53. speaks thus: If doubts arise
concerning resisting Kings and Rulers, especially in case of Oaths, Vows or
Covenants, touching preservation of the person of the King, (as there did from
the Solemn League and Covenant) then you are ready to give satisfaction, and to
tell the people, that that clause in the Covenant is to be understood not
simply, but relatively, that is, is not a single, but a complex engagement, not
an absolute, but a conditional clause (with many such distinctions.) It is for
the Kings person in the preservation of our Religion and Liberties; and though
the King should be destroyed by you, you have notwithstanding kept your
Covenant. But, p. 54. when the War is ended, the Enemy vanquished, the
Liberties of the people recovered, etc. if they bring not the spoil of their
victories, and lay them down at your Feet; and if they that sit at the stern do
not lay aside all other business, and do nothing else but build your Palaces --
then, p. 55. you temper your Sermons, and turn your Tongues, your Lines, your
Language for the Royal Interest -- and, p. 27. fly to that part and Article of
the Covenant, engaging for the preservation and defense of the King's Majesty's
person and Authority: and, p. 35. plead it against the Parliament and Army for
purposing to bring the King to Trial: -- when, p. 55. nothing serves but the
Army prevails, the King is brought to -- Prelatical Presbytery shall not be
suffered, what pathetick cries and moans, sighs and groans are heard in your
Pulpits, wringing your hands in bitter complaints, that the Land is stained
with the blood of our Prince, etc. when alas! the Royal party, and many
judicious men with them, cannot believe, but that the root of all this
bitterness is, that your Crown of Classical Jurisdiction is fallen to the
ground. And, p. 17, 18. where as you speak so much of resisting Authority, and
fill the ears of your Auditors from day to day, with rebellizing the Army for
their late proceedings against the Members, mustering up the same Scriptures,
teaching and pressing duty to Authority, which the Prelatical party did
formerly urge against you, as that of Solomon, Fear thou the Lord and the King;
put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers. Let every Soul be
subject to the Higher powers, etc. Yet we heard not of these things from you,
when the mutinous Apprentices and others offered violence upon the Houses,
1647. No noise then of such Scriptures; no putting men in mind to be subject to
principalities and powers, -- as if those Scriptures were added since that
time. Can you presume that men are so blind, dull and sottish, as not to
observe such partial and crafty handling of the Scriptures, Word and will of
God? Do not these practices of yours settle and establish Atheism, irreligion
and profaneness among men? making them to look upon Religion, the Gospel, the
Word of God, as upon a mere piece of juggling, cheating and deceiving the World;
and should we take your counsel which you give us from the words of Solomon,
Meddle not with them that are given to change, we should all turn Separatists
from you and your ways, who have been as full of changes as the Vanes of your
Steeples, one while stirring up the people against the King, and for the
Parliament; writing Books, answering objections, and using all manner of
endeavors that way (that so the Bishops may be dethroned and you advanced;)
witness many of your Sermons preached before the Houses and elsewhere; another
while stirring up the people against the Parliament and for the King (lest the
Independents should hinder your advance) as you did of late in your prayers and
preaching, expressing greater malignity against the Parliament and their party,
and greater zeal for the King and his Interest, than those very Ministers whose
places you possess, they being sequestered and cast out for the Tenths of that
Anti-Parliamentary malignancy, which you have vented -- Have you not been for
Bishops and against Bishops? for Common Prayer, for Ceremonies and against
them? Have you not sworn and subscribed? and subscribed and sworn over and over
again and again conformity and subjection hereunto, and yet cast away all, and
entered into Vows and Covenants against all? -- p. 24. Making your vicissitudes
and turnings up and down the subject matter of scorn and contempt and derision
both of your persons and function; and yet these are the men that a Prince or
State may know where to find. In the Pulpit Incendiary, p. 7. I meet with this
story touching one Mr. Edmond Calamy of Aldermanbury London: That in the times
when the Bishops did bear rule he obeyed their Laws, Canons, Injunctions,
Orders and Ceremonies, (we say not wearing the Surplice, reading the
Service Book, and Crossing in Baptism, etc. which many honest and Godly
Ministers in those dark days did likewise perform, but) reading the second
Service at the High Altar, preaching in a Surplice and Tippet, bowing at the
Name of Jesus, and so zealous an observer of times and seasons, that being sick
and weak upon Christmas Day, yet with much difficulty he got into the Pulpit,
declaring himself there to this purpose, that he thought himself bound in
conscience to strive to preach on that day, lest the stones in the street
should rise up against him: And yet upon the wonderful turn of the times,
Ejection of Episcopacy and advance of Presbytery, did presently and without
delay not only assert the same, but instructed the people in Presbyterian
Principles after such a rate of confidence and skill, as if his Education had
been some Superintendent among the Presbyterian Provinces of the Reformed
Churches beyond Sea, and not such a notorious conformitant unto and notable
stickler for the Prelates Fooleries (as the Author of that Pamphlet is pleased
to speak) in the County of Suffolk, in the Kingdom of England. The same man
gives us this observation, p. 7. That as the Constitution of public Affairs
varies among us, so the constitutions of these men's Sermons do alter and
change; one while we find them all for moderation and Christian accommodation,
and forbearance one of another; another while all for Reformation again, that
is, Presbytery in the rigid sense thereof, that is, that all power may be in
the Ministers hands, and the Magistrates engaged to put their Orders, and
Edicts, wills and pleasures into execution; one while pleading for and pressing
the setting up the Government of Christ in the hearts of men, minding them to
be zealous for the great things of the Gospel, Faith, Repentance, and love
among Brethren, and not to contend so strenuously for the Mint and Cummin,
Discipline and Government, etc. Anotherwhile calling with might and main for
Reformation, Reformation, putting the Crown upon the Head of Christ, and the
Scepter into his hand, pleading for the Government of Jesus Christ, that is,
the exalting themselves above their Brethren; and yet these are the men so fixed
and constant as none more. The truth is, these and other Testimonies which
might be produced, do abundantly evince that Presbyterian Principles alter
according to the variation of the Presbyterian Interest. And that the same
Principles which men of that temper exclaim against and condemn, when made use
of to the prejudice of their Party, or in defense of Prelatical Government,
have notwithstanding been approved of, and reduced into practice by them, when
the doing so tended to the promotion and advancement of their Interest. Bishop
Bancroft has long since manifested to the world by the several instances
produced in his Survey of the pretended Holy Discipline, c. 26. There is
nothing, says he, more usually objected against the present State, Superiority
and Authority of Bishops, than that of S. Peter, 1. Pet. 5. Not as though you
were Lords over the Clergy. And Luke 22. 26. But you shall not be so. And
'twill not be admitted in any wise that we should expound those places of
ambitious affectation, of Tyrannous practice, or of the abuse of such
superiority, or Jurisdiction: But if you will speak of the Right, Authority,
and Jurisdiction of their Elderships, the case is altered. There are some as it
seems beyond the Seas, who seeing the Pride of the Consistorian Government do
affirm that the Power of the Church is only Spiritual, and not any External
Exercise, Practice, and right of any Authority, Power and Government: With this
opposition so much derogating from the dignity of their Elderships, Danaeus is
moved and answering that conceit, says, that although the power of the Church
ad animarum salutem sit comparata, be instituted for the health of Souls, yet
notwithstanding it has necessarily annexed unto it, an indissoluble band, an
external exercise, practice and use, Juris and Gubernationis, of Law and
Government, De Potest. Eccles. c. 3. Against this answer reply as it seems is
made with the same places mentioned that are urged against our Bishops;
whereupon Danaeus to make all things clear, adds these words to his former
Answer and publishes the same from Geneva [ whereas it may be objected out of
Peter, Not bearing Rule, etc. It Is easily answered, Damnatur enim partim
abusus, non usus illius potestatis; partim illius cum civili confusio; for
partly the abuse is condemned, not the use of that power, and partly the
confounding of it with the civil power.] Which is the very answer that we make
and approve (being extorted from them by Gods good providence) for the stopping
of our men's mouths, who upon pretense of those places, have opened them so wide
against the lawful authority of our Bishops. Another example of the like nature
we have in the same Chapter: It is a thing too manifest, says he, with what
libelling and railing the Form of our Service, of our Ceremonies, of our
Ornaments, of our Apparel, etc. has been depraved and shamefully slandered; as
that our Communion Book was culied out of the Popes Portuise -- this was abused
in Popery -- that is papistical. -- Whatsoever comes from the Pope comes first
from the Devil. -- If of the Eggs of a Cockatrice can be made wholesome meat to
feed with -- then may also the things that come from the Pope and the Devil be
good, profitable and necessary to the Church. Against these speeches answer
has been made, that it is lawful to try all things and to hold fast that which
is good; that we must distinguish between the abuse of a thing and its lawful
use. -- that as good men sometimes devise that which is Evil, so Evil men may
sometimes devise that which is profitable: But all these answers are misliked,
denied and condemned by these our Factioners. Howbeit upon occasion the stream
is turned, and they themselves are driven to make the very same Answers for the
justifying of their own proceedings, and for the maintenance of certain
particular matters which they do urge and allow of. It has been laid to their
charge, that for all their goodly pretenses of Reformation, yet indeed the
course they held did smell most rankly of Anabaptism, Donatism, and of a new
kind of Papism; as where they disquiet the peace of the Churches already
reformed, rail upon our Ministers and their Calling, affirm that our Sacraments
are not sincerely ministered; that there is no Church as it should be but those
that they like of; that our Ceremonies and Orders are all unlawful; that we
have no lawful Ministers or Bishops; -- that Princes may not deal in causes
Ecclesiastical, etc. These and many such like points being laid to their
charge, Cartwright ( as though he had never dreamed of any thing to the
contrary) frames this general answer in the name of all his fraternity. (T. C.
B. 2. Ep.) If among the filth of their Heresies (viz. of Papists, Anabaptists,
and Donatists,) there may be found any good thing (as it were a grain of good
Corn in a great deal of darnel) that we willingly receive not as theirs, but as
the Jews did the holy Ark from the Philistines, whereof they were unjust
owners: For herein it is true that is said, the Sheep must not lay down her
fell, because she sees the Wolf sometimes clothed with it; yea it may come to
pass that the Synagogue of Satan may have some one thing at some time with more
convenience than the true and Catholic Church of Christ: Such was the Ceremony
of pouring Water once only upon the Child in Baptism used with us and in the
most reformed Churches, which in some Ages was used by those of the Eunomian
Heresy.] Much more of the same strain is legible in that chapter touching the
mutability of the ancient Presbyterians, when the changing of their Opinions
would render their Interest more considerable. And is there no example think
you, to be met with of the like mutability in our Modern Presbyterians? Judge
by what follows whether they have not contradicted their own Principles, yea
and those of their Presbyterian Ancestors. For the proof of the latter, I refer
the Reader to a little Book called, [ Beams of former Light] written (by Mr.
Nigh as it is reported) on occasion of that Ordinance made by the Secluded
Members at their Readmission into the House of Commons (1660.) imposing on all
Ministers the Assemblie's lesser Catechism under the penalty of their being
ejected as scandalous p. 101. if they neglected to use it though but 10 Sundays
in a year (unless on a cause approved of by two Justices) against which
impositions those Beams of Light, (discovering how evil it is to impose doubtful
and disputable Forms on Ministers under penalty of Ejection) were darted. In
which Book the Author heaps up the Arguments of the old Presbyterian
Nonconformists against the new ones, and that injunction of theirs, and
endeavors to manifest it more harsh and severe than the former Episcopal
Impositions (p. 104, 105. 77.) and yet that there was more reason and necessity
for those than this, p. 107. he throngs together the same Scripture-proofs
against this, that were formerly urged against those, and speaks as
superstitiously against a Catechism-Book, p. 37, 38. as the men of the
Presbyterian strain were wont to speak against a Prayer Book, and an
Homily-Book. From which discourse it appears that those men did for the
advancement of their Interest contradict the Principles [ of their
Nonconforming predecessors.] And that they have upon the same score
contradicted their own Principles, I shall evidence partly from this John
Corbet's affirmations concerning them, partly from their late Book called [ The
Covenanters Plea against Absolvers.] In which last piece I observe that though
they did not well understand, p. 6. what good thing can be assigned which falls
under no divine Precept, (and consequently they did not understand how any good
thing can be indifferent and uncommanded) yet p. 10. they grant that the matter
of a Promise, Vow, Oath or Covenant, may be something (not necessary or
previously required of us by some divine Law, but) free and indifferent, not
determined by the divine Law; And that rational and religious Acts (for such
they affirm Oaths, Vows and Covenants to be (Chapter 2. Sect. 3. -- Chapter 3. p. 11.)
yea sacred Invocations of the name of God, preces of divine Worship, Chapter 2.
Sect. 3. p. 5. and p. 6. S. 3.) may be exercised about matters left indifferent
(not enjoined by the Divine Law:) and moreover that by an Oath (imposed by a
Lawful Magistrate) that which before was free and indifferent, is made
necessary to the takers, p. 65. S. 19. and that the obligation of an Oath thus
imposed results from Divine Institution, p. 62. S. 11. from God's Law, p. 64.
Sect. 13. By which Concessions they do not only condemn all those
Nonconformists, who refused compliance with Episcopal Impositions, because
(forsooth) their Christian Liberty in things left indifferent by God, ought not
to be prejudiced and restrained by man; but also they overthrow, 1. that
principle, That nothing is a duty, especially in Gods worship, which is not
commanded by God; and 2. that principle, that no part of worship is lawful
which is not commanded of God; and yet both these principles are owned by
Presbyterians, if this Author deceive us not, p. 88. 98. where he tells us they
hold, that Scripture only is the Rule of instituted worship, wherein both
addition and diminution is alike forbidden; and p. 84, 85. that whatsoever
instituted worship is not ordained of God is unlawful; whence it sollows, that
men ought not to swear or Covenant for or against any thing that is left
indifferent in the Divine Law; not for any thing which God's word commands not,
nor against any thing which it does not forbid. For so to do is to worship God,
by taking such an Oath, and entering into such a Covenant as is not ordained by
him, but is only of humane Institution and determination. Now the Solemn League
and Covenant was not either instituted or imposed by God in his Law, either of
Nature or Scripture, (even by their own confession, who on Saturday Aug. 5.
1648. affirmed in the House of Commons, that the Covenant it self was not jure
Divino, though the keeping of it being taken was, Hist. of Independ. 1 Part p.
125, 126.) but only by men; and it is acknowledged by those pleaders to have
been a Vow only (freely and voluntarily entered into, and not by virtue of any
Divine command) in the first takers and imposers; and therefore (since it is
owned also as a sacred, religious Act of worship) 'twas in them and others, not
only a piece of Schism against the Church of England, and of Sedition against
the King and Laws of England, but also a solemn piece of superstition and
will worship (as that signifies, in their own dialect, a worshipping God in
such a manner as himself has not prescribed in his Word,) and therefore (on
the score of Presbyterian principles) an Act of high and heinous disobedience
to the Law of God; and therefore their taking an Oath thus imposed, was to
violate their principles for the advancement of their Interest: and yet these
are the men that are so fixed and constant as none more. Besides, this Author
tells us, p. 85. that Presbyterians hold, that that Ceremony which is
instituted by men, (not by God) which is of mystical signification, and (though
it may naturally, yet) does not actually signify without humane institution,
and is by men appropriate to Divine worship, is (upon that account) a part of
Divine worship: and p. 88. 98. they hold, that all such sacred Ceremonies (not
commanded by God) are neither good nor lawful. But say I, this was the very
case in the taking of the Covenant; for the Ceremony with which the Covenanters
did take it, viz. lifting up the hand, was appropriate to that Oath, (which
they deemed a piece of religious worship.) It did not actually signify that
the Takers did swear, either by Divine, or Natural, but by Humane Institution,
and that novel too: the usual Ceremony of taking an Oath in this Nation,
(before) being tactis sacrosanctis Christi Evangeliis, laying the hand upon,
and afterward kissing the holy Evangels; to which indeed that Covenant was so
contrary, that it is no wonder the Covenant was so contrary, that it is no wonder
the Ceremony was altered and exchanged for that of lifting up the hand, which
is not of Divine Institution, or prescribed by God the Father in the Old
Testament, and much less by God the Son in the New, whom yet Presbyterians hold
to be the only Master of ordaining Ceremonies for the Christian Worship; and
some of them, it seems, are yet to learn, that any examples oblige them, but
those of Christ and his Apostles, (and consequently no Old Testament examples,)
Discourse of Liturgies, p. 60. And that that Ceremony was of mystical
signification I prove by that medium which this Author himself makes use of, p.
87. 97. to prove the Cross in Baptism such a Ceremony, viz. It is used as a
sealing sign of our obligation to Christ, and therefore it is in that respect
Sacramental: so say I was the lifting up of the hand (in the swearing the
Covenant) used as a sealing sign of the Covenanters obligation to God and
Christ -- Although indeed and in truth by that Covenant sealed with that
Ceremony they dedicated themselves to the disservice of him that died on the
Cross, to a real and practical defiance of Christ the King of his Church, and
his Vicegerent in this Nation, King Charles. Thus a Ceremony of humane
(Presbyterian) institution for the ratification of a seditious Covenant,
ordained and imposed against Law by an illegal power, for the satisfying of the
Scotch appetite, and promoting the Presbyterian Interest, is a Camel easily and
greedily swallowed by the capacious throat of a Presbyterian Covenanter, who
yet at the same time can either blindly or perversely strain at the Gnat of a
Ceremony instituted by lawful Authority, established and enjoined by the Laws of
the Land and Constitutions of the Church. If I had some Books about me (fit for
such a purpose) I believe I could add some sheets of pertinent instances (to
Bishop Bancroft's Collection in that 26. chapter of his Survey) of Presbyterian
Levity in opinion, and inconsistency with themselves, and with others of their
own Faction, when self-interest prompted them to such variations. I shall at
this time mention only one proof more. It Is a repeated principle of the
Covenanters in their Plea, and their discourse of Liturgies, that neither the
Parliament nor any power under Heaven, can discharge them from the obligation
of an Oath. This is good Doctrine it seems, when applied to the Covenant, and
understood in a sense advantageous to Presbytery: but when the Question was
about the obligation of the Oath of Allegiance (wherein they swore, that they
would defend his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, to the uttermost of their
power, against all conspiracies and attempts whatsoever, which should be made
against his or their Persons, Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any
Sentence or Declaration of the Pope, [ or otherwise;] and that they are in
conscience resolved, that neither the Pope nor any person whatsoever has power
to absolve them of that Oath, or any part of it;) I say, when this was the
Question, then Presbyterian practices manisested, that they accounted the
contrary good Doctrine, viz. that those two Houses (who were far enough from
either deserving or being capable of the Title of the Parliament of England)
might discharge men from the obligation of this Oath; for they imposed the
Negative Oath, and made men swear, that they would not directly or indirectly
adhere to, or willingly assist the King in his War against the Forces of the
two Houses; which Negative Oath being contrary to that of Allegiance, could not
with any color of reason or conscience be imposed or taken, unless the
imposers and takers were persuaded of the truth of that principle, viz. that
the Presbyterian Lords and Commons had authority to discharge men from the
obligation of that Oath; and yet these are the men that are so fixed and
constant as none more: and so settled in their principles, that a Prince or
State may know where to find them; words that, for ought I see, have no Truth
in them at all, unless understood in this sense, that a Prince may be sure to
find Presbyterians constant to their self-Interest, though not to their
Principles, and fixed and diligent in designing methods, and carrying on
contrivances in opposition to legal establishments, for the thrusting up
Presbytery into the Throne, and the forcing of Majesty and Prelacy to embrace a
Dunghill.

It follow, p. 57. 67. [They do not strain so high, but they consider withal,
what the Kingdoms of the world will bear, and are willing to bring things to
the capacity of Political Government.] I suppose the man's meaning is this: That
Presbyterians are somewhat cautious and circumspect for their own safety.
They Will venture their Ears before they hazard their Necks; and contenting
themselves with deserving a Dungeon only at first, will take heed of meriting
the Gallows, till they are able to safeguard themselves from the sword of
Justice by unsheathing that of Rebellion. They Will consider whether the Kings of
the world have indeed the power of their (respective) Nations in their hands or
no; and whether (if they have it) it is probable they will bear the sword in
vain, or execute vengeance with it on them that do evil: In order whereunto
they will feel their way, it may be, step by step, first by talking seditiously in
private Conventicles; then by railing and reviling Loyal subjects in the
Pulpit; then by slandering inferior Governors, and rendering them contemptible
and odious unto the people; and afterward by raising jealousies and envious
malicious passions in men's minds against the Supreme: and if he let the sword
of Justice rust in the scabbard, till by the predominancy of a tumultuous
rabble, aided and abetted by some seditious, malignant spirits among the
Nobility and Gentry, he is disenabled from drawing it, either at all, or to any
purpose; then those pawns and Rooks will strain so high, as to give checkmate
to Majesty, and demonstrate to the world how imprudently those Pearls of Royal
patience, lenity, and condescension were cast before such Swine, whose brutish
temper inclines them to turn upon and rent their Benefactors; like traitorous
Judas's, to reward them evil for good, and hatred for their good will. [Mr.
Martin (says the Hist. of Independ. p. 97.) was expelled the House for words
spoken against the King -- because spoken unseasonably, when the King was in
good strength; and the words, whether true or false, were, in strictness of
Law, Treason; lest the whole House might be drawn within compass of High
Treason for conniving at them -- but afterward the King growing weaker, and the
Parliament stronger; the House restored Mr. Martin, and thought fit to set
every man's Tongue at liberty.] It seems the Political Government was then
brought to a capacity of bearing such crimes. Bishop Bancroft in his Book of
Dangerous Positions, p. 98. tells us of a Book of Discipline subscribed to by
some presbyterian Brethren in those days, which they promised, as God should
offer opportunity, and give them to discern it so expedient, by humble suit to
her Majesty's honorable Council and the Parliament, and by all other lawful
and convenient means to further and advance, so far as the Laws, and peace, and
the present state of the Church would suffer it, and not enforce to the
contrary. One Mr. Littleton being examined upon his Oath, what the last words
should mean, answered, That he himself, Mr. Snape, Mr. Proudloe and others, did
agree to put that Discipline in execution and practice, so far as the peace and
the present state of the Church would suffer, and not enforce to the contrary,
that is, till the Magistrate did enjoin them or enforce them to leave the
practice of the said Discipline -- Now, says the Bishop, what if by the secret
practices (to draw away the peoples hearts from the present Government of the
Church) they could have procured such strength and number to have followed
them, as that no reasonable restraint or force of the Magistrate had been able
to have encountered and suppressed them? I do but ask the Question, says he, p.
101. and I answer it thus: If they had been of the same Rebellious humor with
our modern Presbyterians, they would, when they had brought things to that
pass, have appeared in Arms, and raised a bloody War, and by force have set up
their holy Discipline, and strained so high in contradiction to all legal
Authority, as to have subverted the constitution of our English Monarchy, and
turned our Government in Church and State Topsiturvy.

He goes on: [ They can have no pleasure in commotions, for Order and regular
Unity is their Way, and therefore stability of Government and public
Tranquillity is their Interest:] Which has something of Truth in it, if
understood of Presbyterians, when they are got into the Saddle themselves, and
are well settled in an usurped Dominion, but till then (for ought I see) they
take as much pleasure in commotions and alteraons as Jesuits do, and will
disturb the public Tranquillity, and subvert all legal Order and regular
Unity, rather than suffer their own Interest to be rejected and depressed;
witness their late Wars, and their Solemn League and Covenant, and a series of
other actions, whose direct tendency was to the destruction of our English
Polity, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, as is before manifested.

[ It Is most unreasonable, says he, to object that the late wild postures,
extravagancies, and incongruities in Government were the work of Presbytery or
Presbyterians; his reason is, because the Nation had never proof of Presbytery,
for 'twas never settled.]

A. If it should be granted that the Nation had never proof of Presbytery,
what is this to Presbyterians (whom the objection speaks of as well as
Presbytery?) Had the Nation never any proof of such kind of Creatures? nay had
we not such proof of them for several years together, as we have great reason
to lament even to this day? And I much fear that the satal Influence of those
wild postures and extravagancies which Presbyterians, (such persons as himself
described, p. 20. 30. by their main and rooted Principles) were the Authors of,
is not yet exhausted; but will work us more mischief, and be very prejudicial
to those initials of Order and Tranquillity, which at present we (through
mercy) enjoy. The words of our late Sovereign quoted p. 58. 68. are no proof of
that which this Author asserts and would prove by them, viz. that Presbytery
was decried and exposed to prejudice by those that were in sway [in the more
early times of the late Wars] for those words speak rather of the conclusion of
the Wars; for 'twas then and not in the more early times that [ Military
success discovered to several Factions their particular advantages and invited
them to part stakes;] but they are a considerable proof that it is no such
unreasonable thing (as this Author pretends) to object that the late wild
postures and extravagances were the work of Presbytery: For they inform us that
[Presbytery was the great Master of the lesser Factions, Independents,
Anabaptists, etc.] Which Factions were so well disciplined and documentized by
that Arch-Faction, that (being some of them also men of quick apprehensions)
they speedily and thoroughly learnt the Presbyterian Arts of dividing and
dissipating; yea those Factious Scholars made such zealous, diligent, and
sagacious Improvements of those Factious Principles which the great
Presbyterian Faction had inculcated into them both by Doctrine and Practice,
that they became twofold more the children of Hell than their Teachers, and so
extravagant and unruly at last as to whip their great Master out of that
seditious and Tyrannical School with Rods of his own making, and to rout
Presbytery in the strength of those very principles by which [Presbyterians]
had before routed Prelacy first and then Majesty.

[ Neither, says he, can Sects or Schisms with any Truth or Justice be reckoned
the Offspring of Presbytery] If he mean by Presbytery [exact Presbytery] ( p.
44. 54.) and that Scotch Form of Ecclesiastical Polity (59. 69.) where there is
no presiding Bishop, he contradicts Father Hierome, who (though Presbyterians
account him their great Friend) testifies in several places, that Episcopacy
was instituted ( unus caeteri praepositus -- superpositus --) for the
preventing of those Schisms which were begotten by Presbytery: In Schismatis
remedium factum est, ne unusquisque ad se trahens Christi Ecclesiam rumperit,
(Ep. ad Evagrium.) ut Schismatum semina tolerentur. -- and those studia in
Religione which happened when the Churches were governed communi Presbyterorum
consilio, (in Ep. ad Titum. c. 1.) ut dissentionum plantaria evellerentur
(ibid.) Nay in his Dialogue against the Luciferians, he tells us that Ecclesiae
salus in summi Sacerdotis dignitate pendet; cui si non exors quaedam and ab
omnibus eminens detur potestas, tot in Ecclesiis efficientur Schismata quot
Sacerdotes. The welfare of the Church depends upon the dignity of the chief
Priest, to whom if some extraordinary and supereminent power be not granted,
there will be as many Schisms in the Churches as Priests: Yea he contradicts
Mr. Calvin who acknowledges also that Episcopacy was agreed upon, Ne ex
aequalitate ut fieri solet, dissidia nascerentur, lest equality among Ministers
should, as it is wont to do, produce division. I may conclude therefore with a
late writer; that if any Presbyterian Churches do keep themselves entire from
the Gangrene of Sects and Schisms, that Unity springs from some other Fountain
and is the effect of some collateral cause which has Antidote enough in it to
preserve those Churches from the venomous contagion of [Exact Presbytery.]

[ A wide breach (if he speak truth) was once made in the Netherlands by
Arminius and his followers, but after some years conflict 'twas healed by the
Synod of Dort.] I discern not why this Author should produce this instance to
prove that Schisms cannot truly or justly be reckoned the offspring of
Presbytery, unless 'twere because he was either ignorant or had forgot that the
men who, as he says, made that breach ( viz. Arminius and his Followers) were
Presbyterians (as vehement and resolute maintainers of the Ministerial parity,
as any that concluded or accepted the Judgment of that Synod) say the British
Divines there present in their [ Joint attestation, etc.] men that though they
were not so presumptuous as to condemn our English Hierarchy as unlawful, or so
contentious as to fancy with our Puritans, See their Exam. Consure Leyd. Fol.
232.
Brownists and others, that they ought to divide and separate themselves from
our Church because governed by Prelacy (if so be Prelates did not degenerate
into Tyrants) yet they (not only deny that the superiority of one Minister
above another is by divine right, but also) seem unwilling that that form of
Government should be introduced into the Netherlands; and yet they produce a
pregnant Testimony from Bishop Carleton's book against Bishop Mountague's
Appeal, that the chief of their Belgic adversaries at that Synod were desirous
of enjoying a Form of Church Government modelled according to the English
pattern: And when that Bishop of Chichester had openly in that Synod declared
against that parity of Ministers spoken of in the Belgick-Dort confession as
instituted by Christ, and manifested that imparity among Ministers, and
superiority was ordained by our Savior, and challenged any there present to
prove the contrary, he was answered only with silence: And when afterward he
did in private conference with several of the best learned in that Synod
maintain, that the cause of all their troubles was the want of Bishops, by
whose Authority turbulent and contentious Novelists might be checked, censured
and suppressed; they did not deny it, but answered that they did very much
revere and honor the good Order and Discipline of the Church of England, and
would heartily and gladly receive the same into their own Churches if the state
of Affairs among them would permit it; but that could not be expected, and
therefore they hoped that God would be merciful to them if they did what they
could, since they could not do what they would: Which answer of theirs the
Bishop looked on as a sufficient Apology, in that they did not openly defend
that Anarchy and popular confusion which Presbyterian parity tends to.

Well, it seems that wide breach was after some years conflict [healed] by the
Synod of Dort.

Set certes if this Rector had a wide breach made in his body, and if his
Physicians should in order to his cure handle him in such an inhumane and
imperious manner as those Synodists treated the Remonstrants, (yea and some
moderate men of their own Party) he would be loath to call it [ Healing.] His
most virulent enemy could not easily wish him a greater torment on earth than
to have a Bogerman for his Doctor, a Sibrandus or Gomarus for his Surgeon.
Let him read the brief account of the Synod of Dort, annexed by Tilenus to his [
Result of false Principles] (lately published) or those letters from Mr. Hales
and Mr. Balcanqual out of which it is extracted, or the Acta and Scripta
Synodalia Remonstrantium; and then tells us how he likes those methods of Cure,
or (if he thinks these too partial Relators) let him peruse the Acta Synodalia
contra-Remonstrantium with an attentive and impartial spirit, and if that Book
does not sufficiently prejudice him against those Physicians, 'twill not have
so good an influence upon him as to my knowledge it has had upon one who was no
friend to Arminian Tenants. Though some moderate men were against the
Remonstrants in all five Articles in substance, yet if they differed but in
manner of speaking from the rigid Synodists (who were the major part) they
would not hold him sound; Does he call this Healing? There was a plot laid ex
composito by the fierce Party for the disgracing of the Breme Divines who were
more temperate, and the British Divines drew the indignation of the
Provincials upon themselves, by sweetly interposing to allay their contentions;
Does he call this Healing? When the Remonstrants seemed to yield, the foreign
Divines could not be heard for the continuing them in the Synod; their voices
indeed were asked hoping they would have been answerable to the Provincials
design, but finding it was otherwise, without so much as laying their heads
together for consultation, they published a Decree of dismission which was
written before they came into the Synod; ( The trick was a little too palpable,
says Mr. Balcanqual) Does he call this Healing? The Canons were drawn up in
private, and as 'twere dictated by the President, just as those of the Council
of Trent are said to have been by the Pope, (which occasioned that reflection,
that the Holy Ghost (to whose aids the Tridentine Synodists pretended so much
in their Decrees) was sent from Rome to Trent in a Portmantue;) Does he call
this Healing? And says Mr. Balcanqual, they would have their Canons so full
charged with Catechetical Speculations as they will be ready to burst. -- and
methinks it is hard that every man should be deposed from his Ministry who will
not hold every particular Canon; never did any Church of old, nor any Reformed
Church propose so many Articles to be held sub poena excommunicationis; Does he
call this Healing? If the present Convocation at Westminster should apply such
remedies to the wounds and breaches made by Presbyterians in Churchaffairs, I
doubt he would not call it an healing Synod. But since he seems to approve and
take pleasure in the exercise of such severities as degradation, sequestration,
excommunication, etc. toward these that could not in conscience subscribe to
the dictates of that Synod; I wish him and his Party so much happiness as to be
treated with the like severity by our Governors, Civil, and Ecclesiastical, in
case they will not subscribe to the Articles and Canons of the Church of
England, that so after many Conflicts those wide breaches which these
State-Arminians have made among us may be healed, and which in all probability
had never proceeded to that degree of malignity, if such gangrened members had
been cut off according to Canon, deprived of the profits of their Benefices,
and the privilege of Church Communion. I wish also that our English Bishops may
make them and others feel the smart of that method of Discipline, which (it
seems) is very effectual to prevent the broaching of error, viz. censuring
every aberration in Doctrine and practice; imposing silence upon Ministers as
to doubtful and disputed opinions, till a Synod shall determine; which censures
and impositions, if impugned and disobeyed, I presume are backed with the
Excommunication of such refractory persons. These courses are esteemed good and
laudable in Dutchland and Scotland, and may be called Healing, when made use of
by Presbyterians: but if our Bishops and their presbyters should deal thus with
the disobedient presbyterians here in England, Excommunication would be called
persecution, and the imposing of Canonical subscription a yoke of bondage, an
unneasonable thing, and what not? Witness this Authors language and discourse
in this very Book, where (forgetting what 'twas he had called Healing in this
p.) he affirms, p. 94, 95. (104, 105.) that Canonical subscription lately
imposed is a yoke of Bondage, which he supposes to be removed by the Kings
Declaration, and therefore (though his Brethren in their Discourse of
Liturgies, p. 60. ingenuously confess, that that Declaration cannot dissolve
the obligation of a Law,) would not have that yoke laid on men's necks any more;
since it is in his opinion both unnecessary, unprofitable; and unreasonable;
which last he proves against Prelatists by as weak an Argument as White (as
it is suspected) brings, in the latter end of Rushworth's first Dialogue, to
prove (against protestants in general) that it is unreasonable for them to hold
any point certainly true, and consequently to require any subscription to
Articles, viz. because they profess themselves fallible; as if they who confess
they might have been deceived, may not yet be confident (upon good grounds)
that they are not actually deceived; and upon that account require subscription
to them. The other two he proves also by such Arguments as will render all
Synods, Presbyterian as well as Episcopal, useless things; and which will prove
the Dutch, French or Scotch imposition of Articles, and Canons as unnecessary,
unprofitable, and unreasonable as the English; and yet Bishop Bancroft assures
us in his Survey, p. 311. that if the best and the learned man in Christendom
were in Geneva, and should oppose himself to any thing that the Church there
holds, if he escaped with his life he might thank God, but he should be sure
not to continue a Minister there -- No man shall ever persuade me, says the
Bishop, but that the word of God does give as free liberty to the Church of
England for the repressing of such Schismatics, as either to Geneva or any
Church whatsoever: Thus he. And if Prelatists had been as diligent and severe
in enquiring out, and punishing; dissenters from the publicly received
Doctrine, and oppugners of the Laws of our Church, a greater unity might have
been procured, and our sad divisions and breaches, in all likelihood,
prevented: I mean, on supposition that the Civil Magistrates had in their
several places respectively, firmly adhered to the Ecclesiastical, and
prosecuted their Canonical Censures, if contemned, with the addition of Civil
penalties upon the refractory and contumacious: without which it is not probable
that the Dort Assembly would have proved an [Healing Synod,] nor the
Scotch-Discipline a sufficient preservative against Sects and Schisms: which I
am apt enough to believe severity will suppress, though exercised by
Presbyteries, if the Civil Governors act their part in abetting and promoting
the just severity of Ecclesiastics.

[ Whence therefore, says he, p. 60. should this charge of Presbyteries
begetting Sects and Schisms arise? Peradventure some Presbyterians have turned
Sectaries. Surely it would be taken for a weak arguing, to say that Prelacy is
the way to Popery, because some Prelatists have turned Papists.]

A. I acknowledge that arguing weak; but what if they that make the objection
be found to frame their Argument (in reference to our modern Presbyterians) in
this manner? Multitudes that embraced those Principles, which Presbyterians
owned in the days of their calamity and depression, turned Sectaries and
Schismatics afterward, and yet still retained those Principles, and by
rational deductions pleaded them, in order to the justification of their
Schism; therefore those principles do in their own nature produce Sects and
Schisms. If the case be indeed thus, the objection is strong; and for the proof
of the Argument and Antecedent, I Will undertake, if this Author shall deny
either, or evince that the like objection may, upon the like ground, be urged
against the English prelacy. In the mean time we will content our selves with the
affirmation of Charles the First, that Presbytery was (in the late times) the
great Master of lesser Factions in Religion.

The truth is, says this J. C. Sectarianism (both Presbyterian and Independent,
say I) grew up in a Mystery of Iniquity (good, for 'twas by opposing and
exalting it self above all that was called God in this Nation) and
State Policy, (good again; claw me and I Will claw thee, was the politic Dialect
of Presbyterians at first toward Independents,) and it was not well discerned
(by the Presbyterians, whom interest and reason of State persuaded to shut
their eyes and wink at the Independents, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries,)
till it became almost triumphant by Military successes; but after that its
growth did manifestly appear (prejudicial to Presbyterian ambition) Presbytery
began to struggle with it, (to frown upon and oppose those whom it before
countenanced and caressed,) and so continued, until by the power of the Army it
was enforced to sit down, but never to comply, (unless 'twere by taking the
Engagement at last,) whereupon the Tongues and Pens of Sectaries were employed
against none more than Presbyterians, (viz. because they thought the prelatists
more conscientious adherers to Prelatical Principles than Presbyterians were to
their dividing and dissipating maxims.) And I should be glad to hear of such
bitter Invectives of the Papists against the Prelatists. It seems the man has
neither seen nor heard of S. W's. Scripts against the Right Reverend Bishop
Bramhall, and the Reverend Dr. Hammond, or else he does not judge them bitter
Invectives: but it had been too palpable hypocrisy (as well as a piece of high
Ingratitude) for Jesuits to have inveighed bitterly against our modern
Presbyterians, who were so zealously employed for several years together about
Jesuitical work, and who had so industriously acted the Powder-Traitors part,
that they very effectually blew up both King and Parliament: and at the Isle of
Wight-Treaty were very busy in destroying Kingly power, and in accomplishing
the design of Campanella and other Papists, viz. of changing our Monarchical
Government into a Commonwealth-Form, by placing all the considerable Authority
and prerogative, which before belonged to our Kings, in some Lords Temporal and
Commons.

[ And verily there is no greater bar against Fanaticism, than the right
Presbyterian principles, as 1. not to sever but join the written Word and
Spirit for direction. 2. The Spirit and use of Ordinances for edification. 3.
To erect a Stated Church Order and Discipline. 4. To allow to the Church a
directive, and to every Christian a discretive judgment. 5. To insist only upon
Divine Scripture-warrant, and to wave humane Authority in matters of Religion.]
To which I answer briefly, That the four first of these (as he has worded them
in very general terms) are as much Prelatical as Presbyterian; nay, they are
owned by Independents and Anabaptists as well as Presbyterians; and therefore
if these Sects are Fanatics, there must be some greater bar against Fanaticism
than those Principles. But the Fifth [ To insist only on Divine
Scripture-warrant, and to wave humane Authority in matters of Religion] is so
loosely and crudely delivered, that it is rather the main Original of all
Fanaticism than a bar against it; forasmuch as the Religion of the most sober
Independents and Anabaptists, as also of Enthusiasts and Quakers, is founded
upon this principle, all of them waving humane Authority, and insisting only on
Scripture-dictates, and that Divine warrant which thence they plead for their
modes, forms and opinions, for their walking according to the light connate
with them, springing up within them, or darted into them from above.

[ But of all the prejudices and scandals (says this Author, p. 63. 73.) taken
against this way, (Presbytery) there is none greater than this, that it is
represented as Tyrannical and domineering, and that those that live under it,
must, like Issachar, crouch under the burden.]

A. It seems he thinks Tyrannical domineering over Inferiors to be a greater
crime than disobedience and rebellion against Superiors, or else he would have
accounted their being represented as Rebels, a greater prejudice against
presbyterians, than their being represented as domineering persons: but he
Apologizes for them, by retorting the charge on Prelatists, and telling us,
that Presbytery is not more severe in censuring the breach of God's
Commandments, than the Hierarchy in censuring the breach of their own
Constitutions, which passage looks as if the man had a mind to insinuate, that
Presbyterian severity is exercised only on the Transgressors of God's Commands,
and Hierarchical severity only on the offenders against Episcopal
Constitutions. Whether he had such an ugly meaning in those words or no, I am
not certain, though to him that considers the egregious partiality of this
discourse hitherto in favor of Presbyterians, 'twill be very probable he had.
If he had (leaving him to prove the truth of them as to the Hierarchy,) I shall
by and by make bold to disprove them as to Presbytery.

In the mean time we will pass on to the next words. [ Or is the offense taken
upon pretense, that Presbyterians affect and arrogate an arbitrary power, would
rule by Faction, and exercise a rigor to the stirring up of animosities and
unquiet humors?]

A. No; the offense is not taken upon pretense, as that is contradistinct to
proof, but upon sufficient evidence, that they are arrogant, factious persons,
and very prone to stir up and foment unquiet humors by their disciplinarian
rigor; and though the Nation generally has not (through the mercy of Divine
overruling providence) experimented that discipline, yet they say the
Londoners had such proof of it in a little time, as made them quite weary of
Classical-lay-Elder-Tyranny. If the goodness of an Almighty power had not
prevented it, we may well suppose that Presbytery would have proved as
imperious and domineering here in England, as Bishop Bramhall tells us, it was
in Scotland. Toward particular persons, says he, (Fair warning, chap. 11.)
this Discipline is too full of rigor, like Draco' s Laws, that were written in
Blood; in lesser faults inflicting Church Censures upon slight grounds, as for
an uncomely gesture, for avain word, for suspicion of covetousness or pride,
for superfluity in raiment, either for cost or fashion; for dancing at a
wedding, or of servants in the streets; for wearing a man's hair a la mode --
for using the least recreation on the Sabbath, though void of scandal, and
consistent with the duties of the Day. -- What digladiations have there been
among some of their Sect about Starch and Cuffs? etc. just like those grave
debates which were sometimes among the Franciscans, about the color and
fashion of their Gowns; they do not allow men a latitude of discretion in any
thing. All men, even their Superiors, must be their Slaves or Pupils. It Is
true, they begin their censures with admonition; and if a man will confess
himself a Delinquent, be sorry for giving the Presbyters any offense, and
conform himself in his hair, apparel, diet, every thing, to what these
rough-hewn Cato' s shall prescribe, he may escape the Stool of Repentance,
otherwise they will proceed against him for contumacy to excommunication. By
this let the Reader judge, whether Presbyterians censure the breach of God's
Commandments only; nay, whether they are not more severe than Prelacy, in
censuring the breach of their own Constitutions. Where has God commanded men to
abstain from dancing? and yet Bishop Bancroft (in his Survey, c. 26.) informs
us, that Mr. Calvin hearing of that horrible sin (forsooth) committed by
certain persons at Widow Balthasar' s house in Geneva, procured them all, both
dancers and beholders, to be called before him and his Elders in the
Consistory. They denied the matter at first, whereupon Calvin judged it meet,
that they should be put to their Oaths, and so compelled to confess the Truth.
(An Oath ex officio, it seems, is allowable at Geneva.) They excepted against
that way of proceeding; and one Henriche a Minister, who did by way of
supposition (if any such dancing had been) take upon him to defend it, as not
being a matter to keep such a stir about, alleged the very same place that
Cartwright did in the Consistory of S. Paul' s, and that which all the rest of
that brotherhood do commonly allege, viz. Against an Elder receive not an
accusation, but under two or three witnesses. Calvin laughs at this exception,
and termed it a pleasant jest, and for all this, sworn they were, and so
confessed the Fact, whereupon they were all cast into prison, Henriche was
deprived of his Ministry, and one of the four Syndick^ (or chief Magistrates)
of the City (who had the ill luck, it seems, to be in the company) was removed
from his office, till he had given some testimony of his Repentance. Other
pretty circumstances there are of this story in that Chapter, to which I refer
the Reader, and return to Bishop Bramhall, who tells us, That the Scotch
Disciplinarians will by hook or crook bring all crimes whatever, both great and
small, within their Jurisdiction: that in greater crimes, trial for life is no
sufficient satisfaction to these third Cato' s, that to satisfy their own
humor they care not how they blemish publicly the reputation of the
Magistrate upon frivolous conjectures. Add to this the severity and extreme
rigor of their Excommunication: after which sentence no person (his Wife and
Family only excepted) may have any kind of conversation with him that is
Excommunicated: They may not eat, nor drink, nor buy, nor sell with him: They
may not salute him, nor speak to him, except by the license of the Presbytery:
His children begotten and born after that sentence, and before his
reconciliation to the Church, may not be admitted to Baptism, until they be of
Age to require it, or the Mother, or some special Friend, being a member of the
Church, present the Child, abhorring and damning the iniquity and obstinate
contempt of the Father. -- Upon this Sentence Letters of Horning, as they use
to call them in Scotland, do follow of course; that is, an out-lawing of the
Party, a confiscation of his goods, a putting him out of the Kings protection,
so as any man may kill him and be unpunished. -- When a man is prosecuted for
his life (perhaps justly, perhaps unjustly) so as appearing and hanging are to
him in effect the same thing; yet if he appear not, this pitiful Church will
Excommunicate him for contumacy; as if the just and evident fear of death did
not purge away contumacy. And Chap. 12. he certifies us, That if their
Discipline be admitted in England, the Nobility and Gentry shall not be
exempted from these rigours, -- but subjected to the Censures of a raw, heady
Novice, and a few ignorant Artificers. -- They shall be bearded and mated by
every ordinary Presbyter. -- It Is nothing with them for a Pedant to put himself
into the balance with one of the prime and most powerful Peers of the Realm. --
Parents shall lose the free disposition of their own children in marriage, if
the Child desire an Husband or Wife, and the Parent refuse to consent, either
for lack of goods, or if the other party is not of birth high enough. -- Yea,
Presbyteries will compel the wronged Parent to give that child as great a
portion as any of his other children. -- The common people shall have an high
Commission in every Parish, and groan under the arbitrary Decrees of ignorant,
unexperienced Governors; who know no Law but their own wills; who observe no
Order but what they list; from whom lies no appeal but to a Synod, which for
the shortness of its continuance can afford, which for the condition of the
Persons will afford them little relief: Thus he. Whence it is evident enough
that they who live under Scotch-Presbyterian-Discipline, (and that Discipline
the English Covenanters swore to endeavor the Introduction and advancement of
in this Nation; which it concerns us frequently to call to mind, that so the
signal mercy manifested in blasting those endeavors may be the more magnified)
must like Issachar crouch under a grievous burden, and either submit their
Necks to such heavy yokes as imperious arrogance shall affect to lay upon them,
or else resolutely shake off those yokes, by giving vent to those animosities
and unquiet humors which will be stirred up in them by Presbyterian rigor: as
the Scotch Shoomakers did who were most interessed in the Monday Markets at
Edinburgh, which were upon a time abolisht by a Kirk-Enactment, but they by
their tumults and threatenings compelled the Ministers to retract, whereupon it
became a Jest in the City, that the Souters could obtain more at the Ministers
hands than the King. (Fair warning, Chapter 7.)

But there are remedies at hand, says our Author, to prevent the Abuse of any
Government that is of it self lawful and laudable. Certainly the wisdom of the
King and Parliament, with the advice of grave Divines, may prescribe sure and
certain Rules of Discipline.] A. Very true, But if I am not mistaken,
Presbyterians have a faculty of controlling and disobeying the most certain
Rules and commands of their Governors if not suitable to their own fancies and
determinations. Bishop Bramhall tells us in his 7. Chap. that the Kirk in
Scotland assume a power to abrogate and invalidate Laws and Acts of Parliament,
if they seem disadvantagious to the Church. Church Assemblies (says one of
their Books of Discipline) have power to abrogate and abolish all Statutes and
Ordinances concerning Ecclesiastical matters that are found noisome and
unprofitable, and agree not with the times, or are abused by the people. The
Acts of Parliament 1584. at the very same time that they were proclaimed, were
protested against at the Market Cross of Edinburgh by the Ministers in the name
of the Kirk of Scotland. The general Assembly of Glascow 1638. impugned
Episcopacy, and Perth Articles although ratified by Acts of Parliament and
standing Laws then unrepealed. And if Presbytery should chance to be
established in England by a Law, what shall assure us that English
presbyterians also would not prove unruly and disobedient Subjects against both
King and Parliament that shall prescribe any Rule to them in order to the
preventing of their arrogant Tyranny? Not their Oaths, unless they had kept
those of Supremacy, Allegiance, and Canonical obedience better. But this Author
has another remedy.

[ Moreover, quoth he, to cut off all occasions and prevent all appearance of
domineering, all political coercive jurisdiction in matters of Religion may be
withheld (if need require) from Ecclesiastical Persons, and that mere spiritual
power alone (by which he means Admonition and Excommunication) may be left to
their management.] The man sure would persuade us that (he thinks) there can be
no occasion of domineering afforded by the granting, nor appearance of it in
the exercise of power merely spiritual, and then there is some hopes that he is
not in the number of those who imagine that the Prelates heretofore did
Tyrannically abuse that power. But for all this he is unwilling that
Presbyterians should have only spiritual power at their command, and be wholly
divested of political, and therefore what he takes away with one hand, he gives
with the other in the following words.

[ And because spiritual censures appertaining only to the Conscience may be
too little regarded when no temporal damage is annexed unto them, there may be a
collateral, civil power always present in Ecclesiastical meetings, to take
cognizance of all causes therein debated and adjudged in order to temporal
penalties.] From which words we may gather, 1. That the man is loath that all
occasion of domineering should be cut off from Presbyterians, and all
appearance of it prevented. 2. That he can well enough digest prelatical power,
and as many Ecclesiastical Courts in a County as there are Ecclesiastical
meetings, if so be Presbyterian Priests and Lay Elders may have the management
of that power and sit as Judges in those Courts; which is another indication
that ambitious affections (rather than an impartial judgment) make
presbyterians exclaim so much against Prelacy; viz. because they are not
allowed to exercise that dominion themselves which they condemn in others as
Tyrannical.

[ Upon the whole matter, says he, aforegoing we firmly build this position,
That the Presbyterian Party ought not in Justice or Reason of State to be
rejected and depressed, but ought to be protected and encouraged.]

And upon the answer to that matter contained in these Papers, I firmly build
this contradictory Position, That the Presbyterian Party ought not in Justice
or Reason of State to be protected and (much less) encouraged, but to be
rejected and depressed; unless they will renounce the practices and principles
here objected and laid to their charge; and will disclaim that Covenant, which
otherwise will engage them in such turbulent and seditious practices, as can
never be justified but by such rebellious Principles.

THE END.
A Summary OF THE CONTENTS.
The Question proposed,

WHether in Justice or Reason of state the Presbyterian Party should be
rejected and depressed, or protected and encouraged?

The Character given of Presbyterians is considered, and manifested to be very
imperfect, and deceitful, p. 4, 5, 6, etc. Of their zeal, p. 13. their
resembling the Anabaptists in Germany, p. 14. their being called Fanatics, p.
15. Of their varying from themselves, p. 20, 21. their multitudes, p. 24, 25 Of
the great things for which they are said to contend, p. 26, etc. Whether the
Protestant Doctrine by Law established in the Church of England be owned by
Presbyterians, p. 29, etc. Of the pure spiritual heavenly doctrine which they
ought to be actuated by if they expect to be encouraged, p. 33, etc. Of
Principles striking to the heart of Popery, p. 37. Which sort of men are more
pernicious in a Commonwealth, Jesuits or Presbyterians, p. 40, 41, etc. Whether
Presbyterians ought to be protected and encouraged because of their averseness
from Popish Idolatries and Innovations, p. 44. Whether they erect Imperium in
Imperio, p. 47, etc. Whether their principles and Government are
Anti-monarchical, p. 53, etc. Of their unwillingness to come under any yoke but
that of the Law of the Land, p. 66. and to pay Taxes levied without consent of
Parliament, p. 67, etc. Of their valuing the native happiness of freeborn
English Subjects, p. 69. Whether they have any true knowledge or sense of the
nature of the Christian Religion, as it refers to the question discussed, p.
71, etc. Whether they were not guilty of rebellion in the late wars, p. 76,
etc. Whether the Fundamental Government of this Kingdom was not subverted by
the Presbyterian members of the Long-Parliament, p. 95, etc. The London-
Ministers vindication of themselves in reference to the Kings murder
considered, p. 104, etc. The murderers of the King acted therein suitably to
such principles as are owned by Presbyterian writers, p. 109, etc. and to the
fourth Article of the Covenant, p. 114. Of the Presbyterian Ministers exhorting
men to pray that God would not permit the King to be put to death, p. 115, etc.
Whether Presbyterians disclaimed their lawful Prince, p. 120. Whether they
suffered themselves to be trodden under foot, rather than they would comply
with Republicans, p. 123, etc. Whether they were more conscientious in their
duty to God and man than Prelatists, p. 130, etc. The Plea, that Presbyterians
teach obedience active in all Lawful and passive in things unlawful enjoined by
the Higher power, considered, p. 137, etc. Whether the restraint of
profaneness, intemperance, etc. in the late times ought to be attributed to the
doctrine and orderly walking of Presbyterian Ministers, p. 145, etc. Of the
inconstancy of Presbyterians, their inconsistency with themselves, and their
unfaithfulness to their principles when their Interest tempts them to a change,
p. 153, etc. In what sense they are willing to bring things to the capacity of
political Government, p. 170. Whether Sects and Schisms may justly be reckoned
the offspring of Presbytery, p. 175. Of the Synod of Dort, and its healing the
breach in the Netherlands, p. 176, 177, etc. Whether Presbytery is unjustly
represented as Tyrannical and domineering. p. 187, ad fin.
The ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 29. read, particulars. p. 11. l. 15. r. p. 1^. p. 28. l. 25.
leave out So. p. 32. l. 26. r. approves. p. 35. l. 18. r. to do your own -- p.
55. l. 9. r. Turner (printed 1647.) p. 56. l. 28. r. checked. p. 78. l. 8. r.
the great Seal (and. p. 81. l. 18. r. de Bereford. p. 94. l. 25. r. shall
conclude is, 1. p. 99. l. 25. r. president. p. 106. l. 26. r. sending, p. 115.
l. 3. r. in the humble Edinburgh Remonstrance (of March, 1. 1648.) p. 118. l.
16. r. mentioned p. 29. 30. p. 121. l. 14. r. In stead. p. 159. l. 1. r. p. 17.
l. 2. r. constitution. l. 3. r. Sermons alters and changes. p. 165. l. 8. r. p.
63. l. 21. r. 99. l. 25. r. 96. p. 166. l. 29. after 85 add 96. p. 167. l. 31.
r. 98. p. 175. l. 29. r. rumperet. l. 30. r. tollerentur.

The inconvenient distance of the Author from London, has occasioned some
Errata's more than ordinary to pass the Press, which I shall desire the Reader
to amend with his Pen.

R. Royston.

Lately Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in Amen-Corner.
THE Estate of the EMPIRE: or, an Abridgment of the Laws and Government of
Germany; farther showing what Condition the EMPIRE was in, when the Peace was
concluded at Munster: Also the several Fights, Battles, and Desolation of
Cities during the War in that EMPIRE: And also of the GOLDEN BVLL. In Octavo.

The Sycillian Tyrant: Or, The Life and Death of AGATHOCLES: With some
Restections on our Modern Usurpers. Octavo.

The ROYAL MARTYR, and the Dutiful Subject, In two Sermons: By Gilbert Burnet.
In Quarto.

The Generosity of Christian Love; Delivered in a Sermon, by William Gould.
Quarto.

The Witnesses to Christanity: By Sy. Patrick, D. D. Octavo.

D^ctor Dubita^tium: Or, Bishop Tailors Cases of Conscience. The Fourth
Edition. Folio.

The Life and Death of K. CHARLES the First: By R. Perenchief, D. D. Octavo.

A Modest Plea for the Church of England. Octavo.

The Spiritual Sacrifice, or Devotions and Prayers fitted to the main uses of a
Christian Life; by a late Reverend Author. In 12o.

Chirurgical Treatises: By Richard Wiseman, Serjeant-Chirurgion to his MAJESTY.
Folio.


