REMARKS ON THE PREFACE TO THE Protestant Reconciler: IN A LETTER TO A FRIEND.

LONDON Printed by J. Wallis, for Joanna Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1683.

SIR,
HAving Read and Considered the Preface to [ The Protestant Reconciler] I now
send you these Remarks upon it.

The Author professes Page 58. (of that Preface) That he does from his heart
Conform to all that is required by the Church of England; and yet a great part
of the Preface is employed in producing Testimonies against the Lawfulness not
only of [the Imposition it self] but also of [the things Imposed;] we are told
p. 25. out of Beza's Epistle to Bishop Grindal, That Men so often do grievously
Sin, as they do introduce into the Church of God any Ceremonies significative
of Spiritual things, and that all Symbolical Rites should be entirely excluded
from the Christian Church; And this (forsooth) must have a Hand set over
against it in the margin, as if it ought to be taken for some very precious and
valuable Truth.

We are told also by the same Divine, p. 26. That the Right of Crossing is not
to be reckoned among things Indifferent, but (as a thing) rather to be
destroyed than the brazen Serpent of Hezekias. That they do best of all who are
as diligent in the Abolishing the Rites of Crossing in Baptism, and Kneeling at
the Sacrament, as they would be in Abolishing open Idolatry. And this also is
thought fit to be Printed in another Character, and to be marked out with a
marginal Hand, as if 'twere a Maxim of Infallible Truth.

A great many other Reproaches of our Ceremonies and their Imposition, are
transcribed into the following Pages; as p. 27. That the Imposing our English
Ceremonies, is a falling back to worse than the Ceremonies of Moses; to the
Trifles and Refuse of human Traditions. That Queen Elizabeth was carried with a
Zeal not according to Knowledge, in Commanding the Use of them. Page 28. And
that by that Imposition, the Fire of Contention was to the incredible offense
of the Godly, as it were raised from Hell. That the white Linen Garments
required to be Used in Divine Service, are at the least signs of Idolatry, and
Popish Superstition. -- with the Use whereof Ministers defile themselves, and
give offense to the Weak by their Example. -- That to retain those Garments is
to destroy the whole Body of the Church -- That they ought not be Imposed (Page
30.) because all things are to be abandoned which may any way* either by
themselves or by accident, desile Gods Worship, -- because they are contrary to
the Purity of the Apostolical Worship, and smell of Popish Superstion; and are
neither available to the Edification of the Godly, nor to Order, nor for
Ornament, except that which is Whorish. -- Because all Godly men will be
offended with the Decree concerning Apparel. -- And, it may much further
Ungodliness, and at least give occasion of many Evils, and very grievous
Superstitions: and the very Occasions of Evils are to be shunned, -- because
it is God's Will (p. 31.) That after the Death of Christ, all Garments of Aaron
and Levi should be Abolished. -- That the Lord himself Commanded that all
Ungodly and Vain Ceremonies should be driven away, when he charged utterly to
destroy all things which appertained to those who should give Counsel to follow
strange Gods; and to burn their Garments and all their Stuff, with Fire, that
they might be an execrable thing unto the Lord. -- Because the Imposing them
ministers Offense to the Consciences of Weak Believers, -- which to do is very
grievous and distastful to the Holy Spirit: and that Paul's Example of
resolving always to abstain from Flesh rather than offend his Brother, gives a
general Rule taken out of the Doctrine of Christ, (viz.) That no Indifferent
thing is to be admitted, and yielded to, much less to be Urged upon others, and
least of all to be Commanded by Decree, if in the Admitting, Urging, and
Commanding of it, the Minds of Good Men, and Consciences of the Faithful be
Offended.

Now this Prefacer did either look upon these kind of (paultry) Argumentations
against our Ceremonies, and their Imposition, and these and a great many other
Censorious Reproaches of them, as Valid Arguings, and Justifiable Reproaches,
or he did not; if he did not, to what end has he taken the Pains to Transcribe
them? unless he had a Fanatic Design of rendering our Church and
State-Constitutions, odious by so doing? But if he does really judge them Valid
and Justifiable, he is a strange Man that can from his heart Conform to all
that is required by the Church of England, and yet imagine not only [the
imposing and requiring] the Use of its Ceremonies to be both without and
against the Command of God, but also [the things required and impos'd] to be
some of them Signs of Idolatry, and Popish Superstition; that Ministers defile
themselves with the use of them, -- that they are only for Whorish Ornament;
and such as whereat the Minds of Good Men, and the Consciences of the Faithful
are Offended; and that such things ought not, for that very reason, either to
be Imposed, or so much as Admitted, or Yielded to.

Besides, if he has Transcribed them as Reproaches, in his own Opinion
justifiable, he has by quoting those Passages out of other Writings, made them
his own; And he has too plainly done so in his re-capitulation, p. 43. where he
expressly Affirms, That judicious Beza [ truly] says, that these things (viz.
Ceremonies required by the Church of England,) are not only unnecessary, but
profitable for little if a Man use them aright. And (as if this were not
Reproach enough) this Prefacer has no more Wit nor Judgment than to Add, and
when they [Accidentally] do minister to Schisnt and all its fatal Consequences:
and then again to Approve it as truly said by Beza, That to impose such
Ceremonies, is to labor about Hay and Stubble, or rather, things more vain
than they: And himself Affirms, That sad Experience shows, that they bring no
Profit, but many Evils to the Church: and that it is our Duty to shun the
Occasion of those Evils. By which Approbation of, and Compliance with these
Censures of things required and imposed in our Church, I humbly conceive he has
incurred the Penalty of Excommunication, which is Decreed by Can. 4. against
those who Affirm that the Form of Gods Worship in the Church of England,
Established by Law, and Contained in the Book of Common Prayer, and
Administration of Sacraments, is a Corrupt, Superstitious, or Unlawful Worship
of God, or Contains any thing in it that is repugnant to the Scriptures. By
Can. 6. against those Who Affirm that the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of
England, by Law Established, are Wicked, Antichristian, or Superstitious. By
Can. 10. Consequentially, For that Canon Excommunicated those Separatists from
the Church of England, who take upon them the Name of another Church, and
presume to publish that this their pretended Church has a long time Groaned
under the Burden of certain Grievances, imposed upon the Members thereof, by
the Church of England. And it is the drift of this Man's Preface and Book, to
load the Church it self with the Burden of this Reproachful Complaint.

Besides the Opinion which this Prefacer owns as true, That the Ceremonies
required in the Church of England, do bring no Profit, but many Evils to the
Church, is a flat Contradiction to the Doctrine of the 30th. Canon, touching the
Use of the Cross in Baptism, ( viz.) That the Christians shortly after the
Apostles Time, used it in all their Actions, thereby making an outward Show and
Profession, even to the Astonishment of the Jews, that they were not ashamed to
Acknowledge Him for their Lord and Savior, who Dyed for them upon the Cross.
And this Sign they did not only use themselves with a kind of Glory, when they
met with any Jews; but signed therewith their Children when they were
Christened, to dedicate them by that Badge to His Service whose Benefits
bestowed upon them in Baptism, the Name of the Cross did represent; and this
Use of the Sign of the Cross in Baptism was held in the Primitive Church, as
well by the Greeks as the Latins, with one consent and great applause: at what
time if any had opposed themselves against it, they would certainly have been
Censured as Enemies of the Name of the Cross, and consequently of Christ's
Merits, the sign whereof they could no better endure.

And what must this Prefacer then be counted, who in compliance with Father
Beza, Father Zanchy, and Father Calvin, (as he pretends Page 23.) Censured this
and other Ceremonies as Fooleries, and the endeavoring to uphold them, as
Laboring about Hay and Stubble, or rather about things more vain than they:
and brands them as things bringing no Profit, but many Evils to the Church:
whereas this Canon you see, expressly teaches the contrary; and though it
Acknowledges that in process of time the sign of the Cross was greatly abused
in the Church of Rome, especially after the Corruption of Popery had once
possessed it, yet withal it affirms that the Abuse of a thing does not take
away the Lawful Use of it. Nay so far was it from the purpose of the Church of
England, (says the Canon,) to forsake and reject the Churches of Italy, France,
Spain, Germany, or any such like Churches, in all things which they held and
practiced, that as the Apology of the Church of England confesses, it does
with reverence retain those Ceremonies which do neither endamage the Church of
God, nor offend the minds of Sober Men. In which respect, among some other very
Ancient Ceremonies, the sign of the Cross in Baptism, has been retained in the
Church. For the very remembrance of the Cross, which is very precious to all
them that rightly Believe in Jesus Christ, and in the other respects mentioned,
the Church of England has retained still the sign of ^^in Baptism; following
therein the Primitive and Apostolical Churches, and accounting it a Lawful,
Outward Ceremony, and Honorable Badge, whereby the Infant is Dedicated to the
Service of Him that died upon the Cross.

In the next place I observe that this Prefacer confesses, Page 9. that the
Bishops themselves have no Power to dispense with the Laws [for Uniformity] or
to make any Proposals for the healing of our Breaches: and if they have no such
Power, I wonder upon what grounds this Author assumes to himself the Power of
making such Proposals; and such as would destroy the Act of Uniformity, and
Metamorphose the Common Prayer Book, into a Directory.

I know he has produced the Testimony of King James, King Charles the First,
and King Charles the Second, to justify the design of his Book; but with how
little Reason, Candor, and Ingenuity he has done it, I shall leave you to judge
when you have considered the reflections I have to make upon them.

As to that of K. James, it may suffice 1. To remember that notwithstanding
that excellent determination (as the Prefacer styles it) his Majesty was so far
from changing, or antiquating, or so much as dispensing with the Ceremonies of
the Church of England, that he ratified them anew, and gave those Divines who
appeared against them at the Conference at Hampton Court, a Severe Reprimand
for scrupling Conformity to them upon such inconsiderable Reasons as were then
urged for those Scruples; and this Establishment he continued all his Reign.

2. To take Notice that whereas this Writer calls that which Casaubon
represents as K. James his Opinion [ a golden Sentence] and which fully
justifies all which he pleads for; the words of that Golden Sentence as quoted
by himself, do only affirm, That those things which by the Constitutions of Men
without the Word of God, were for a time received into the Church of God, [ may
be Changed] Mollified, Antiquated. And this too is so far from being there his
Majesty's peremptory Determination, that it is only said, his Majesty [ Thinks,
Conceives, Believes] they may be antiquated. Whereas this Writer is not content
to think our Church-Consti^utions May be, but the whole scope of his Book is to
prove they Ought to be altered and antiquated.

3. That which his Majesty is said to Believe, does in the quotation refer not
to All, but only to Most Ecclesiastical Observations, and therefore it is not
evident from that quotation, That our Church-Ceremonial-Observations, are in
the number of those which the King Conceived might be antiquated.

For which reasons this first quotation signified little to this Writers
purpose, supposing it a Candid and Impartial quotation, which because I have
not that Epistle by me, I have not at present the opportunity of examining.

But if this Prefacer has treated King James, in this Testimony, no more
heartily and ingenuously than he has. King Charles in the next, he has in plain
English played the Knave with two Kings. For happening to have the [ Exact
Collections] by me, I consulted the Kings Answer to that Remonstrance of the
State of the Kingdom, and there found ( p. 26. of that Collection) immediately
after the words by him quoted, these following: -- Provided that this Case be
attempted and pursued with that modesty, temper, and submission, that in the
mean time the Peace and Quiet of the Kingdom be not disturbed, the Decency and
Comeliness of Gods Service discountenanced, nor the Pious, Sober, and Devout
Actions of those Reverend Persons, who were the first Laborers in the Blessed
Reformation -- scandalized, and defamed. Which Proviso being added, does so
cramp and consine the Condescension spoken of in the former words, that they
are on that account rendered insignificant to the Writers design; and so they
are upon another. For they only say, That his Majesty would willingly comply
with the Advice of a Parliament, for the making a Law to Exempt
Tender-Consciences from Punishment or Prosecution; but does not say, either
that 'twas [ the duty] of a Parliament to give him such Advice, nor that [ it
was his own duty] to comply with it when given: and yet nothing less than this
will suffice to make this, or any other Testimony pertinent and adequate to
this Authors attempt.

For which reason therefore his next Testimony from the Declaration of King
Charles the Second, is as insignificant to his purpose as this: For neither in
that from Breda, nor in the other concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, does his
Majesty Acknowledge it his Duty at that time not to impose the use of the
Ceremonies on Tender Consciences: nor if he had, would it thence follow, either
that it is, or that his Majesty thinks it his duty [ now] to gratify them by
such an Indulgence: and yet even this also is requisite to make Testimonies
pertinent to our Authors design; which (as himself words it p. 4. of his Book)
is to prove that things indifferent which may be changed and altered without
Sin, or violation of Gods Laws, ought not, especially under our present
Circumstances, to be imposed by Superiors as the Conditions of Communion: or as
Conditions without which none shall minister in sacred things.

Besides, who that has any sense of the measures and obligations of Loyalty, or
so much as Civility, can think it tolerable in any man, (especially in a
Churchman as this Author is said to be) to treat the King at this rate, and to
urge this Declaration in the behalf of Dissenters now, when it is so well known
that his Majesty himself thought fit to vacate it within two years after its
publication, by consenting to the Act of Parliament for Uniformity: which Act
acquaints us that his Majesty had duly considered the Book of Common Prayer, as
then framed (which re-imposed the use of the Ceremonies) and had fully approved
and allowed the same, and recommended it to that Parliament, that the said Book
-- should be Appointed to be used -- under such Sanctions and Penalties as the
House of Parliament should thing fit -- From which Approbation and Consent of
his Majesty, we ought to conclude that he was then made very sensible how
unworthy the Dissenters were of that Liberty which he at first designed them,
and how mischievous 'twould prove to the Concerns both of Church and State: and
that 'twas neither just nor reasonable it should be allowed them. And
accordingly that Act assures us, that nothing conduces more to the settling of
the Peace of this Nation -- nor to the honor of our Religion, and the
Propagation thereof, then an universal Agreement in the Public Worship of
Almighty God.

An excellent determination this! and a very golden sentence! and yet this
Gentleman pretends humbly to conceive the quite contrary ( p. 8.) and to think
that the united Judgment of the whole Nation cannot frame a better or a more
unexceptionable Expedient for a firm and lasting Concord, then the Liberty
indulged by the Kings Declaration, which required neither Ceremonies, nor
Subscription, nor Oath of Canonical Obedience.

But I confess he speaks there of an Expedient for a firm and lasting Concord
of these distracted Churches] by which expression what the man means would
perhaps be worth the knowing: and the rather because the word [ Churches] is
printed in a different Character. A suspicious man may reasonably enough
conjecture that he honors the Conventicles of Separatists with the Name of
Churches, in opposition to Canon 10. before cited; if not, what Churches in
England are so distracted, as to render his unexceptionable Expedient necessary
to their Concord?

But is not that a very pleasant Question which he puts ( p. 9.) If as the
Kings Royal Word assures us, the Reverend Bishops in the Year 60. did think
such Concessions made by his Royal Person, and Authority, to allay the (then)
present distempers very Just and Reasonable, and cheerfully would conform
themselves thereunto, why should we now conceive they should be of another mind
in 82?

To which Question I Answer seriously,

1. That the Kings Royal Word, as quoted by this Writer ( p. 6.) does not
assure us that the Bishops [ did] then think so, but only that his Majesty had
not the least doubt but that they would think so. However, on supposition he
had quoted the Kings Words truly p. 39. I Answer, 2. We may well conceive it,
because his Majesty himself was of another mind in 62. and appears now to be of
the same mind he was then, being so far from indulging, that he commands the
Laws to be vigorously executed against Dissenters.

But does this man indeed fancy that the Case and Reason of things, is the same
now in 82. that those parts of the King's Declaration which he has quoted,
represent it to have been in 60? Has he the Simplicity to believe himself, or
the Confidence to desire others to believe, that the Dissenters are as innocent
now, as that Declaration acquaints us, his Majesty then found those whom he
Conferred with?

Can he tell us where these Presbyterians are now to be met with, who show
themselves (as it seems those did at the time there spoken of) Persons full of
Affection toward the King, or Zeal for the Peace of the Church and State, and
neither Enemies to Episcopacy, nor Liturgy, but modestly desire such
Alterations in either, as without shaking the Foundations, may best allay the
present distempers? or can he tell us, where those men of other Persuasions are
now to be found, who all approve Episcopacy, and a set Form of Lyturgy? (p. 6.)

Nay, have not the Leaders of several Parties sadly demonstrated themselves to
be men of a quite contrary temper, since the discovery of the Popish Plot? some
employing the best Reason, some the best Wit they had, others the most ungodly
Arts that a lying, slandring, spiteful, malicious humor could supply them with,
to the prejudice of our Church and its Constitutions, and to the rendering not
only its Ceremonies, but also its Episcopacy and Lyturgy, Odious and Ridiculous.

But whatever others may possibly think of our Bishops, and their averseness
from condescending in matters of Ceremony, this Prefacer, p. 9. prosesses to
think with the Reverend Dean of Canterbury, that we have no cause to doubt, but
the Governors of our Church are Persons of that Piety, and Prudence, that for
Peace sake, and in order to a firm Union among Protestants, they would be
content, if that would do it, not to insist on little things, but yield them up
to the infirmity, or importunity of those that differ from them.

Which Passage having been long since ingeniously descanted upon (in a
Polio-Pamphlet, whose Title I cannot now call to mind) I shall let it pass, but
not without this Profession, that I hope there is now no one Bishop, nor [
would-be-Bishop] Living, who would yield, and yield, and yield up so much of
the Church-Constitutions to Dissenters, till he has left the Dissenters nothing
to yield up to the Church.

In p. 10. the Learned and Judicious Judge Hale, is brought in as a Favourer of
Condescension to moderate Non-conformists; and as one who drew up a Bill for
Comprehension of some, and a limited Indulgence to others. And this we are told
upon the Credit of Dr. Burnet, whose Testimony Valeat quantum valere potest.
Nay, he is brought in as one who declared it his Judgment, That the only means
to heal us was a new Act of Uniformity, which should neither leave all at
Liberty, nor impose any thing but Necessary -- And this we are told upon the
Credit of Mr. Baxter, who, I doubt, may say as the Dr. aforesaid does of
himself (in the Preface p. 8. to his History of the Rights of Princes) I know
this will not be the more believed for my saying it.

Now that it is not naturally Impossible that such words should be spoken by
Judge Hale, who can deny? but that he did actually declare his judgment in
those Terms, who can believe, that is at all acquainted with the Parts and
Intellectuals of that Great Man?

For sure he had more Wit than to call that an Act for [Vniformity] which would
leave men at Liberty, as to the Order, Modes, Circumstances, and Ceremonies of
Public Worship; and more Consideration than not to reflect that an Act which
imposes nothing but what is Necessary, will certainly leave men to that Liberty;
and a Person of more Skill in the measures of Government, and the needs of
Human Society, than to propose That, as the only means for the healing the
breaches of this Nation in matters of Religion, which was never yet made use of
for the Cementing of any National Society of men, or the effecting Union and
Concord among them.

For I dare Challenge this Author (if I had the opportunity) to show me where
there is, or ever was such a Society, whose Union, Order, and Government, was
conserved or designed to be conserved by the imposing on them nothing but
necessary things: meaning by [ necessary things] such only as God's Word has
made so, and as are contra-distinguish'd to all things in their own nature
Indifferent; and so this Prefacer must understand this Testimony, if it be
pertinent to the design of his Book.

The 16. 17. and 18. Pages are taken up wi^h Dr. Stillingfleet's Opinion
touching this Affair; which because I had occasion to consider soon after that
Book of his [ the Unreasonableness of Separation] was published, I shall now
impart to you the result of that consideration; which was

1. That if any one should affirm That that Preface of the Doctors had
destroyed what he had said for our Church in his Book: And 2. That it has
effectually destroyed that Church of England, which he had taken pains to
defend in his Book: I did not see how the Doctor could purge himself from the
Accusation.

In the third Part of the Book, and twenty sixth Section, the Doctor defends
our Churches Terms of Communion, and proves that there is no Unlawfulness in
them; particularly not in the sign of the Cross, Kneeling at the Communion, the
Religious Observation of Holidays, the constant Use of the Lyturgy, nor the Use
of Godfathers, and Godmothers in Baptism. The Lawfulness of all which* except
that of the constant Use of the Lyturgy, which he Acknowledges-done very well
to his hand by Dr. Falkner, he defends by Answering whatsoever was urged
against them by his Adversaries. Page 332, 333. etc.

And yet in the Preface, p. 83. he represents it as most advisable, either
wholly to take away the Sign of the Cross, or to leave it Indifferent as the
Parents shall desire, or not desire: besides which he would have Kneeling at
the Sacrament dispensed with as to those that scruple it -- and several
Alterations made in the settled Practice of our Church, as to the Use of
Godfathers and Godmothers in Baptism. And to justify this changing of our
Church-Constitutions, he makes use of such a Motive and Argument, as the truth
is, if it prove any thing, proves those Constitutions unlawful, and therefore
that they ought to be abolished.

For, 1. What less than this can reasonably be inferred from these words of
his, p. 82. I do think it would be a part of Christian Wisdom and Condescension
in the Governors of our Church, to remove those Bars (that is, the matter of
the Dissenters scruplings and excep^ings against the Sacramental Offices) from
a freedom in joining in full Communion with us.] The most obvious and
pertinent meaning of which words is, That it is such a part of Wisdom and
Condescension as Christianity obliges our Governors to; and if they are obliged
to it by virtue of the Christian Religion, it is certainly their duty to be so
Wise and Condescending.

But 2. in the immediately preceding Lines, he urges this Argument for that
Condescension; ( viz.) because the Use of Sacraments in a Christian Church
[ought] to be the most free from all Exception; and they [ ought] to be so
Administered, as rather to invite, than discourage scrupulous Persons from
joining in them. Which Argument, if valid, will effectually destroy, not only
the prescription of those Ceremonies, but several other things of the like
kind, which the men of Scruples are, or shall be pleased to except against;
particularly, 'twill be as valid against the Use of a set Form of words in
those and other sacred Administrations, because even that, discourages
abundance of scrupulous Persons from joining in any of the Public Services of
our Church; all which therefore will be effectually destroyed by that
Argumentation.

Besides which, he mentions p. 92. several other mutations for the satisfaction
of the scrupulous, which p. 93. he thinks reasonable to be allowed in order to
an Union, As the explaining or amending some more doubtful and obscure passages
in the Common Prayer Book; the use of the New Translation of the Psalms, (in
Parochial Churches at least) the charging of the Apochrypha-Lessons, for
portions of Canonical Scripture; the leaving at liberty those Expressions in
the Office for Burial, which suppose the good Estate of the Person buried: the
restoring the Rubric about the Salvation of Infants, to its former place in
the Office of Confirmation, and so removing the present exceptions against it:
by which last I confess, I do not well know what he means; because I do not
discern how the placing it in the Office of Confirmation, will remove the
present scruples against it; those scruples being about its truth; and the
Proposition contained in that Rubric will certainly be no truer in one Office,
than in the other.

Now since it is plain that the Preface does thus endeavor to undermine and
destroy so many of our Church-Constitutions, which yet the Book endeavors to
uphold and maintain; and since he does it by an Argument which if rational and
cogent, does as plainly infer the continuing those Constitutions, especially
those of them that belong to the Sacraments, to be no part of Christian Wisdom
and Condescension in our Governors, but inconsistent with it, and with that
freeness, from all exceptions, which ought to be the constant Attendant of
those Administrations, I think it is evident that the Preface does, at least
virtually, and consequentially, destroy, and render unlawful what the Book
defends as lawful.

Nay I do not discern what consistency there is between one part of the
Preface, and another part; between the allowing the forementioned mutations as
reasonable and necessary, (Page 82. and 93.) and this passage, Page 89. which
implies they are neither necessary nor reasonable. For there he says, [ we do
heartily and sincerely desire Union with our Brethren, if it may be had on just
and reasonable Terms; but they must not think that we will give up the Cause of
the Church for it, so as to condemn its Constitution, or make the Ceremonies
unlawful which have been hitherto observed and practiced in it: if any
Expedient can be found out for the Ease of other men's Consciences, without
reflecting on our own; if they can be taken in without Reproach, or dishonor
to the Reformation of the Church, I hope no True Son of the Church of England
will oppose it.]

Now whether the forementioned dispensings with, and Retrenchments of our
Church-Orders and Practices, upon the forementioned Reason and Argument for
the sake of Union with them, whom he is pleased to call Brethren; be not so far
a giving up the Cause of the Church, as to condemn its Constitution, and to
make the Ceremonies unlawful, which have hitherto been observed and practiced
in it, I leave you to judge; as also whether the taking in Dissenters upon such
Terms, will not necessarily reflect reproach and dishonor upon the Reformation
of that Church, which at her first Reforming thought fit to retain and impose
those Constitutions and Ceremonies as just and reasonable, and as such has
ever since continued them, without imagining that continued Imposition,
inconsistent with Christian Wisdom, or with any regard that is justly due to the
Scruples and Exceptions of troublesome men, relating to the Administration of
Sacraments in a Christian Church. To which troublesome Men the Dr. is pleased
to give the Title of [ Brethren] more than once in the later end of the
Preface, which is it self, in my Opinion, too absurd a contradiction to that
Book, whose main design is to prove them Schismatics.

He tells us Page 364. That 'twas the great Wisdom of our Church, not to make
more things necessary as to Practice, than were made so at the Settlement of
the Reformation; but whether there be sufficient reason to alter those Terms of
Communion, which were then settled, for the sake of such whose Scruples are
groundless, and endless, I do not (says he) take upon me here to determine.

And I wish he had not taken it upon him in the Preface; especially to determine
it, so much to the Reproach and Dishonor of our Church, as to imply she has
hitherto been guilty of Transgressing the Obligation of Christianity, in not
making those Alterations for the sake of Union, with such Persons whose
Scruples are groundless and endless, and which (as himself Affirms p. 372.)
might be removed by a little Impartiality, and ^lue consideration; -- there
being no depth of Learning, no subtilty of Reasoning, no endless quotation of
Fathers necessary about them; but the dispute lies in such a narrow compass,
that men may see light if they will.

And why ours, or indeed any Church should be Reproached as Defective in
Christian Wisdom, for not complying with such humersom Persons, or not altering
her Constitutions for the sake of such wilfully blind and perverse Dissenters,
I confess I do nor understand.

Now these Premises being duly considered, do I think abundantly justify the
first charge, and make it too reasonable to adhere to this conclusion, that the
Doctors Preface has destroyed what he had said for our Church in his Book.

And in reference to the other charge, that the Preface has effectually
destroyed that Church of England which the Doctor had taken pains to defend in
his Book. The same premises do really contribute so much to the making it good,
that (for ought I see) no more need to be added to that End, than the bare
application of them to that Censure, and to the Doctor's own Notion of the
Church of England. For he asserts p. 249. of his Book, that the National Church
of England diffusive, is the whole Body of Christians in this Nation,
consisting of Pastors and People, agreeing in that Faith, Government and
Worship, which are Established by the Laws of this Realm. -- And Page 302. All
Bishops, Ministers, and People, taken together, who profess the Faith so
Established, and worship God according to the Rules so Appointed, make up this
National Church of England. And this is [the Church of England] which the
Doctor has taken pains to defend in his Book.

If therefore the Church of England takes its denomination not only from the
Profession of that Faith, but also from its consent in Worshipping God,
according to such and such Rules, he that would destroy those Rules, will
consequently destroy that Church, which is denominated such, and diversified
from other Churches, by its embracing and adhering to those Rules. But it
appears from the premises, that the Doctor's Preface would have several
considerable Alterations made of those Rules, and that upon such an account,
and for such reasons, as do consequentially destroy that Order, and those Rules
of Worship that are Established by Law; and therefore that Preface does
effectually destroy that Church of England which he had taken pains to defend
in his Book.

These are all the things, (says the Dr.) which appear to me reasonable to be
Allowed in order to an Union: and which I suppose may be Granted without
detriment, or dishonor to our Church; And (says this Writer) these are all I
plead for in this Book.

But 1. there is this little difference between these Authors; The Reverend
Dean supposes they [may be] Granted, but this Author endeavors to prove they
[ought] to be Granted.

2. Though that Author mentions only such and such things as appearing to him
reasonable to be Allowed, yet to make them appear so to others, he urges an
Argument which will infer it as reasonable to dispense with a great many other
things not mentioned. And so though this Author pretends that these are all he
pleads for in his Book, yet the Arguments he makes use of, if they prove any
thing, prove it the duty of our Governors to dispense with a great many more
Constitutions; even all that enjoin any Indifferents, whereby our Brother is
offended. ( Chap. 3.)

And therefore whereas he adds here: As for those who deny the lawfulness of
Lyturgy, and the right Constitution of our Churches, and who would be exempted
from the Jurisdiction of their Bishop, and set up Congregations separate and
independent upon him; I know not how to plead for them, without pleading for
Schism, Confusion and Disorder.

I doubt his Arguments will, if they prove any thing, prove it as unlawful for
Governors to impose a Lyturgy, and require Obedience to Episcopal Government,
as to impose Ceremonies. For I am confident he is very sensible that a great
many whom he seemed to account weak Brethren, are mightily offended with those
Constitutions also: And I doubt himself is not so strong and hardy, as to
affirm that our Lyturgy and Diocesan Episcopacy, are things founded on a Divine
unchangeable Law. And if they be not, his Arguments will conclude against them,
as well as against the imposition of Ceremonies.

As for the Testimonies which follow page 23. 24. etc. my Remarks on them are
these:

1. Some of them I confess seem to speak home to this Author's design: and
pretend that our Ceremonies ought to be abolished: but if this Man's Book be
fraught with no better Reasons to prove it than those mentioned by him, out of
the Epistles of Judicious Beza, and Learned Zanchy, I Will be bold to say that it
is good for little, but to prove the Author a very weak Brother.

2. He showed himself too near of kin to such a^ Brother, in pretending page
23. That Calvin styled our Ceremonies Follies, but owning that affirmed them
Tolerable Follies, and then writing a great Book himself to prove them
intolerable. But as to that Censure which Calvin is said to pass upon our
Ceremonies, see Durell's [Vindiciae Ecclesiae Anglicanae] Cap. 12. where he
makes it more than probable, That that Censure was not meant of our Ceremonies,
nor of the English Lyturgy as it wa in it self at that time: but as it was
knavishly represented to him by the English Sectaries of those days.

3. I observe that several of his Testimonies page 38. etc. seem not to speak
of the duty of the Governors, of this or that particular Church, to bear with,
and indulge the Members of their own Church, in matters indifferent, but of the
Duty (only) of one Protestant Church ( page 40. 41.) toward another: viz. That
if both Churches agree in Fundamentals -- their differences in other matters
may be Tolerated. (page 38. 40.) The Reformed Churches, say the Geneva-Doctors,
( page 40.) ought to maintain a Brotherly Affection toward one another, etc.
-- The Protestant-Churches, says the Transylvanian, ( page 41.) are to be
moved, notwithstanding their differences, to exercise Moderation, Compassion,
and Mutual Toleration -- And so the Professors of Aberdeen, (page 42. 43.)

The possibility of this Exception the Prefacer himself was aware of, and
therefore endeavors to enervate it, page 57. by Asking, What reason can be
given why these conditions of Communion betwixt Reformed Churches, should not
obtain amongst the Member of the same Christian Church? And page 58. Why that
Agreement in Fundamentals, which is sufficient to preserve Communion betwixt
Churches disagreeing in Rites and Ceremonies, and Doctrines of inferior moment,
may not be sufficient also to preserve Communion among the members of the same
Church, though disagreeing in like matters?

As if there where no difference, between two Societies, neither of which is
subject to, or dependant upon the other, nor have any Governor common to them
both; and the members of the same Society, or several Societies united under,
and subject to such or such a Governor, or Governors. Where two Societies are
independent one upon another, there being no common Governor to take care of
Order, and the things relating to it among them; each of them is left to the
management of its respective Governor or Governors; and to them the care of
the Public Worship to be performed by that Society belongs; who therefore
ought to see that it be performed in an orderly, decent, and reverent manner,
and to constitute such Modes, Rites and Ceremonies, as they judge most
convenient to that End: And when they have so done, what has any other Church,
which, in the Case supposed, cannot justly pretend to any superiority over
them, I say, what has such a Church to do to call in question their
Constitutions? in any Authoritative way, I mean. And therefore to talk of its
being the duty of one Protestant Church to [ tolerate] another, that is
Independent upon it, and differs from it in matters of outward Order, is, at
least, a very improper way of speaking. If by [ tolerating] those Testimonies
mean only that they should not Censure and Condemn the other Church that so
differs from them, and if this Writer be of the same mind in this with the
Authors of those dictates, (and if he be not, why does he quote them as
Testimonies favoring his pretensions?) then himself ought to pronounce Beza
and Zanchy, a little too pragmatical in quarrelling the Governors of the
Church of England, for their thinking fit to retain such and such Ceremonies.

But what does this Prefacer mean by [ Conditions of Communion] and [
Preserving Communion] in these questions? Does it follow that because these
Testimonies make it the Duty of one Protestant Church so far to Accord with
another, that agrees with it in Fundamentals, and differs from it only in Rites
and Ceremonies, or other matters extra-Fundamental, as [ not fastidiously to
reject, or Anathematise that Church. P. 43.] on Account of any such difference,
that therefore they make it the duty of each Church to admit the members of the
other Church, to [ all sorts] of Communion merely because they agree in
Fundamentals? If he fancy that to be their meaning, let him instance if he can
in any one Protestant Church, that will receive others to Sacramental Communion
merely because they hold the Fundamentals of Christian Faith.

This Man has undertaken to maintain, That things Indifferent ought not to be
imposed as Conditions of Communion, or as Conditions without which none shall
partake of the public Ordinances; but does he imagine that if he go to Geneva,
he shall be admitted to the Communion there without submitting to the
Ceremonies of Reception, there enjoined? in particular, that they will give it
him unless he [stands] when he receives it? I am sure Durell in the
forementioned Vindiciae, Cap. 22. where he defends the Church of Englands
imposing Kneeling on all Communicants, tells us that in that it challenges no
greater a Power to it self, than other Reformed Churches do. ( page 235.) And
that as the Churches of the Lutheran Confession will give the Communion only to
those that Kneel; so the French, and Geneva Churches will give it to none but
such as Stand in the Act of Receiving.

Whereas therefore this Author would gladly know ( page 58.) Why that Agreement
in Fundamentals, which is sufficient to preserve Communion betwixt Churches
disagreeing in Rites and Ceremonies -- may not be sufficient also to preserve
Communion among the Members of the same Church, though disagreeing in such
Matters?

I Answer, That the Communion which his own Testimonies speak of as preserved
thereby, is only (for ought I see) that which consists in not Censuring and
Anathematising, or Disowning them as True Churches, though differing in such
matters; which as it scarce deserves the Name of Communion, so it is too far
removed from the Nature of that Communion which this Book pleads for, to make
these Testimonies pertinent to that Plea.

And whereas he pretends in the same Page, that the reason why Christian
Churches which do thus differ, should be received and owned as Christians, and
Brethren of the same Communion with us is, because these differences do not
hinder their being real Members of Christ's Body, I Answer, by denying that to
be the true, and adequate Reason; for the true Reason is, because in the Case
supposed of two Churches independent one on the other, and not subject to any
Common Governor, the one Church has no Power to impose Rites and Ceremonies on
the other, and consequently no sufficient ground to quarrel with it merely for
disagreeing from it in matter of Ceremony: but if any of the members of one of
the Churches refuse to submit to the Rites appointed by their own proper
Governors, their Agreement in Fundamentals is no sufficient ground why either
their own, or the other Church, should receive them to Sacramental Communion.

He says indeed, that those Differences do not hinder their being real Members
of Christ's Body:

But 1. does he hold that every one who is really a member of Christ's Body,
ought eo nomine, to be admitted to all the Privileges of Christian Communion?
if he does, he must either deny that any real member of Christ's Body can do any
notorious wrong to his Neighbor by word or deed, or else he must condemn our
Church for requiring the Minister of each Parish to repel such a Person from
the Communion, till either he makes actual recompense for the Injury, or
declare himself fully resolved to do it when conveniently he may. If not, then
the mere consideration that such a man is really a a member of Christ's Body
does not oblige any (in whose Power it is) to admit him to all those Privileges.

2. Does he hold that mere agreeing in Fundamentals is all that is required to
the being a real member of Christ? If not, then neither is that sufficient to
qualify a man for all the Privileges of Christian Communion.

3. I suppose he will not deny that there are Practical as well as Speculative
Fundamentals; and I presume he is of Opinion, That Obedience to our Lawful
Governors, in things Lawful, is one of the Fundamentals of Practice. If he
denies the former, he contradicts the Doctrine of some of his own Testimonies;
which affirm* That there are Fundamental Articles of Faith; without which,
Christian Faith cannot subsist, nor. Everlasting Life be obtained: and That
there are (also) Fundamental Heads of Discipline. (p. 56.) and that those are
so which promote and maintain the means of Salvation, and without which we
cannot live a Christian Life. And that whosoever perishes, must be separated
from the Foundation by some Fundamental Error in Doctrine, or in Practice: which
supposes that there are Fundamentals of Practice, as well as Belief.

As to the latter, he confesses ( page 187. of his Book) That in those matters
which are not apparently forbidden by the clear Word of God, men ought to yield
Obedience to the Commands of their Superiors; and if he will own that they
ought to do so on pain of Damnation, as I hope he will, then it is a Fundamental
Duty, even in his own account. That Christian therefore that does not think it
such a Duty, is by this Doctrine guilty of a Fundamental Error in reference to
Christian Practice; and he who does think it his duty, and does not Act
accordingly, is guilty of a damnable Neglect.

Now I desire to know of this Author

1. Whether mere agreeing to Fundamentals, whether of Belief, or Practice, that
is, assenting to them, will constitute, and continue a man a real member of
Christ's Body, without, at least, resolving to Act accordingly, if there be not
time for more, and the performance of that Resolution if there be?

2. Whether differences in the Fundamentals of Practice, will not hinder men
from being real members of Christ's Body?

3. Whether though they agree in the Fundamentals of Practice, that is, own and
assent to them, as matter of necessary Duty in order to Salvation, yet if they
persist in the Neglect of any part of such Duty, they ought to be owned by the
Church, either as real members of Christ, or as Persons, to whom belong all the
Privileges of Christian Communion? If he says they ought, I desire to know

4. Why they should be acknowled'gd as Persons rightly qualified for the
Privileges of Christianity here, or its Rewards hereafter, who are either so
Ignorant as not to know, or so negligent as not to Practice, that which
Christianity has made Fundamentally necessary to Salvation, to be both Known
and Practiced?

Particularly I would willingly be informed by this man, whether account the
preservation of the External Unity of the particular Church, whether National,
Diocesan, or Parochial, of which men are members, a Fundamental of Practice, or
no. If he does, how can he account those Persons real members of Christ's Body,
who are so far from preserving that Unity in either of those Churches, that
they industriously destroy it in all of them: not submitting themselves to the
Rules of Order and Government, appointed for either of them? If he does not,
then why does he 1. expressly Acknowledge, That Schisms and Divisions, do
apparently dissolve the Church-Vnity? And 2. (by asking those questions, page
28. of his Book) implicitly Acknowledge, That Persons become Schismatical by
refusing to be One with us in Discipline, and by renouncing Communion with us
in our Public Worship, supposing there be nothing Evil in it? And 3. pronounce
all Separate Congregations Schismatical, for their not being subject to the
Government of our Diocesans? p. 59. And then 4. Acknowledge the Sin of Schism
to be an heinous, destructive, and pernicious Evil: one of those fleshly works,
which they who do, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. (Chap. 2. page 24.
25.) It must follow therefore from his own Principles and Concessions, That
they who are guilty of Schism, are guilty of Erring in a Fundamental of
Practice.

Now since Schism is by his own Confession so pernicious an Evil; since by his
own Confession, also refusing to be One with the Church of England, in
Communion with its Public Worship, is a Breach and Dissolution of
Church-Unity, since also refusing subjection to the Government of our Diocesan
Bishops, is dissolving the Unity of Discipline, and therefore Schismatical; and
since all separate Congregations in this Nation, are in his own Opinion, guilty
of Schism, it is evident*

1. That the members of those Congregations, either do Not Agree in all the
Fundamentals of Practice, or else do Not Act suitably to that Agreement, but
are so far from it, that they persist in Schismatical Practices, contrary to
the dictate of their Judgment and Conscience.

2. That they are not of the same Communion with us, and

3. That the Pleas which this Prefacer makes use of in their behalf, page 58.
(viz.) Their Agreement in Fundamentals, and their being real members of Christ's
Body, are very insufficient, because by dissolving (as much as in them lie,)
the Unity of the Church of England, and its Discipline, they practically differ
in a Fundamental of Christianity. And by being Schismatics they disown
themselves to be Persons of the same Communion with us, nay are guilty of a
capital Error, and a customary Crime, which excludes men while impenitently
persever'd in, from the Kingdom of Heaven; and therefore they ought not while
in those circumstances, to be accounted persons of the same Communion with us,
or real members of Christ's Body.

I have now considered several things, which I thought fit to be taken notice
of in this Preface, and in the many Testimonies quoted by the Prefacer, as so
many justifications of the design of his Book. But how ill they are suited to
that purpose, at least for the generality of them, is I think apparent enough
from the Reflections I have here made upon them. But I wish heartily I had been
in or near some Library, where I might have had the opportunity of examining
the quotations, and consulting the Authors quoted; for then possibly I might
have discovered much more impertinency in the quotations, and insincerity in
the quoter.

It Is plain the Author has engaged himself in a very bold Attempt. He has
undertaken to prove, That things indifferent, which may be changed and altered
without sin, ought not, especially under our present Circumstances, to be
imposed by Superiors as the Conditions of Communion, or of ministration in
Sacred Things. And consequently he has undertaken to prove, That all Churches
or States, who have so imposed Indifferents, have by that Imposition, been
guilty of violating the Law of God.

To Excuse which Attempt from the prejudice of Singularity, he pretends page 3.
to strengthen it in his Preface, against that and other prejudices, by the
concurrent suffrages of many worthy persons, both of our own and other
Churches, who have declared themselves (as he would persuade us) to be of the
same Judgment, and have pursued the same Design.

Now besides all that has been already objected to those Suffrages, if I had
the opportunity of doing it, I would challenge the Author to evince, that any
tolerable number of the Suffrages which he has produced, are pertinent and
punctual to his design, as worded by himself.

That design consists of Two Parts, one more general; That things indifferent,
which may be altered without Sin, ought not to be imposed as the Condition of
Communion, or ministration in Sacred Things. The other more particular, That
especially they ought not to be imposed under our present Circumstances, as the
Conditions of Communion with us (of the Church of England.)

The Suffrages produced to rescue this design from the imputation of
Singularity, (amount in the Contents of the Preface) to about 35. Now let him
manifest if he can,

1. That so much as one of those Suffrages speaks particularly of our [present]
Circumstances here in England. I mean those Circumstances, that were present to
the publishing of his Book.

2. Let him manifest if he can, That among his 35 Suffrages, there are so many
as five that affirm it unlawful to make Indifferents, which are Alterable
without Sin, the Conditions of Church Communion, and Ministration. Nay I doubt
he cannot manifest that so much as one of them comes fully up to this design of
his Book: But if the major part, or two parts in three of the Testimonies be
impertinent, what shall we think of that man who has the confidence and
conscience to write at such a rate, and pretend so much when the proof falls so
intolerably short of the pretense?

Besides, if my memory fail me not, I have seen a Book heretofore, which
Answered Cressy, against Dr. Pierce's Sermon, merely by quoting passages out of
Authors extant before that Book of Cressy's, which contained sufficient Answers
to the most material parts of it. And I believe that this Author could have
done the like in reference to this Preface; I mean, that he could have heaped
up as many and as pertinent Testimony, out of the Writings of single Persons,
and Acknowledgments of Church-Societies, in favor of this Position, That it is
lawful to make things Indifferent which may be altered without Sin, the
conditions of Church Communion and Ministration, as he has pretended here in
favor of the Contradictory; and if he could, I leave it to you to judge with
what sincerity he could profess ( Pref. page 1.) that he was most unwilling to
do the least dis-service to the Church of which he is a member, when he has in
this Preface done it the grand dis-service of heaping up such a multitude of
(pretended) Testimonies against the lawfulness of her Practice, and omitting
the much greater number of pertinent Suffrages, which I have some reason to
believe himself could have as easily produced in defense of that Practice.

But this Profession of his is very obnoxious upon another Account; for if he
were at all sincere in making it, what ailed him 1. to Print his Book at such a
time? And 2. in English, At such a time? when he Acknowledges ( page 9.) that
the Bishops themselves have neither any Power to make such Concessions, as his
Book would have to be made, no nor any Power to make any Proposals for the
healing of our breaches, till by his Majesty's Authority they meet in
Convocation, for that end; And I do not think that this Gentleman had any
prospect of a Parliaments being called soon after the publication of his Book;
or that it is an Article of his Faith, that his Majesty may summon a
Convocation to meet to that end, out of Parliament, and then what could the
publishing of such a Book at such a time be, but the promoting on his part,
that which has been of late the grand Fanatical Design of such weak Brethren as
Baxter, Alsop, Troughton, etc. viz. the rendering our Governors both in Church
and State, odious by representing their Constitutions as unlawful, and
attempting to prove them contradictory both to the Commands and Example of
Christ and his Apostles? But what ailed him 2. to compose and print his Book in
English? was it because he expected either a Parliament or Convocation, whose
major part should be made up of Clergymen, or Gentlemen so ill bred as not to
understand Latin? or did not the Author understand it himself so well as to
write a Book in it? or did he publish it in English for the sake of the weak
Brethren, and the devout Sisters, that they might be furnished with Arguments
against Ceremony-Imposing-Laws, from one end of the Gospels and Epistles, to
the other? For he has showed himself so dexterous in discerning and multiplying
prejudices, and exceptions against such Constitutions, that it is to be hoped a
little more improvement of his Topical Parts, may gain him Parker's faculty of
Espying in those Impositions in general, as he did in the Use of the Cross in
particular, a contradiction to all the Ten Commandments.

Now for a man to put forth such a Book against those Impositions for the sake
of illiterate English men, who 1. have no power at present to retrench, or
null, the Impositions; nor 2. are ever like to have: who 3. are like to make a
most mischievous use of it, to the dishonor, and prejudice of the Church, and
yet to pretend himself most unwilling to do the least dis-service to the
Church, is so palpably Protestatio contra factum, that hardly any thing can be
more so.

But why talks he only of doing dis-service to [ the Church?] as if that only
were concerned, when the contents and design of his Book, cast as great a slur
upon, and tend as much to the reproach and disparagement of [ the State] as of
[ the Church;] for he knows well enough, that the Laws enjoining Uniformity,
and imposing our Ceremonies, are made by the King, and that with the Consent
not only of the Lords Spiritual, but Temporal also, and the Commons, so that
this Author in thus attempting to prove those Laws repugnant to the Law of God,
and inconsistent with so many of the grand momentous obligations of
Christianity, is so far from showing himself unwilling to do dis-service to the
Church, that he has spent a great deal of time and pains, and employed (as one
may guess) the utmost of his Art and Industry, to do as great a dis-service to
that, and the State both, as (for ought I know) he could possibly do it with
his Pen; for what greater dis-service can there be done in that way to any
Government, than to Assert and Maintain a Position, from which it follows by
undeniable consequence; That the Governors of this or that Nation, have for
multitudes of Years successively agreed, in Enacting Laws contradictory to the
Practice and Commands, the Exhortations, Arguings, and Examples of both Christ
and his Apostles?

For this is the immediate consequent of this Position, and his manner of
proving it, That Superiors ought not to impose things Indifferent and
Alterable without Sin, as the Conditions of Church Communion, and Ministration.

Besides, what greater Affront could be offered to the King himself, then to
publish such a Book, at that very time when His Majesty gave such demonstration
of his Resolutions to uphold and defend the Act for Uniformity, and of his Zeal
for the Church, by requiring a strict and vigorous Execution of the Laws
against Dissenters?

This man's undertaking therefore thus managed, in contradiction to the Laws of
the Land, at a time when the King himself and inferior Magistrates were more
industriously zealous in executing those Laws, than they have been for many
years, is in my Opinion such a daring and impudent pragmaticalness, as ought to
be encountered and chastised with a Punishment as notorious as the Crime.

Especially since, as was before intimated, I doubt not but this very Writer
could have filled as many sheets as this Preface contains, with Testimonies
justifying the Constitutions of our Church and State in matters indifferent;
and I am confident, had I had but my own Library about me, three parts whereof
are still at Oxford, I could have done so my self. But in some of the few Books
I have here, I meet with such passages, as abundantly confirm me in that
Confidence; and withal make me very much suspect this Prefacer's sincerity and
ingenuity, in quoting. For whereas he has in this Preface quoted Beza as an
Enemy to all Symbolical Rites, ( page 25) and affirming that they should be
entirely excluded from the Christian Church; and Zanchy as an Enemy to our
Ceremonies -- and besides pretended page 35. That 'twere endless to set down
all that Bucer, Calvin, Chamier, Daneus, Farel, Povanus, Vrsin, and Zipper,
with many others; have said against the Use and Imposition of them, and [pag.
36.] that Cassander testifies (without telling us where he so testifies) that
most have conceived them fit to be condemned and abolished as foppish,
ludicrous, ridiculous, yea as noxious and pernicious. Durell has given us such
a different Account of things, as is very opposite to this Prefacer's
pretensions.

For in his forementioned Book, Cap. 17. He Affirms that the Christian Church,
from the Apostles time to this day, was never without, nor in the judgment of
the most Learned and Famous Protestants, either can or ought to be without some
significant Ceremonies, page 182. to which purpose he quoted the sentiments of
Luther, Melancthon, and Calvin, page 186. and then said: I could here produce
very many more of the most Learned, and Renowned Persons in the Reformed
Churches, of the same Opinion with Luther, Melancthon and Calvin, in this
point. Nor says he, do I remember to have read any Reformed Writer of any Note,
especially of those who were at the beginning of the Reformation, (whose
Judgment and Authority is principally to be attended to in this dispute) who
Condemns significant Ceremonies merely as such, if so be no supernatural virtue
be attributed to them, for the producing Spiritual Effects; nor Religion placed
in them, nor Merit, or Justification expected from the use of them. Out of
which number he does not except Beza himself: but proceeds to Vindicate him as
to that very Passage which this Prefacer has quoted out of his Epistle to
Bishop Grindal, (as if it were for his turn) and manifests that it ought not to
be understood of such Symbolical Rites as are designed to signify only men's
duty, but such only as are meant to signify and exhibit Spiritual Privileges,
and the Divine Grace. And in his Sixteenth Chapter, he largely Answers that
Epistle of Zanchy, quoted at large by this Prefacer, page 28. etc. against
imposing Linen Garments, and most of his Answers are taken out of Calvin,
Bucer, P. Martyr, and Zanchy himself.

And as to our Churches retaining the Use of the Cross in Baptism, its
Thirtieth Canon Acquaints us that That resolution and practice has been
allowed and approved -- by the Harmony of Confessions of later years.

Now this Assertion of the Composers of that Canon, and those other of Durell
as to the number of Persons approving the Imposition of Ceremonies, makes me
very much suspect this Author's ingenuity, and honesty in quoting.

And I doubt he has contented himself with quoting many Testimonies (besides
those out of Gesselius,) page 38. etc. only by Retale, and at second hand from
others, without examining the quotations himself, and consulting the passages
as they lie in the Original Authors; which is an intolerable Neglect in any man
that undertakes to Write and Publish a Discourse and Preface, of this Nature
and Consequence.

And one quotation which makes me suspect this, is that Page 45. and 46. out of
Baxter's Disput. of Human Ceremonies. Chap. 24. (it should be 14.) Sect. 3. R.
2. where he says: It Is shrewdly Argued by Mr. Baxter (against our Ceremonies)
-- This seems to be coming after Christ, to amend his Laws, correct his Works,
and make better Laws and Ordinances for his Church, than he himself has done;
for if Christ would have such Rites imposed on the Churches, he could better
have done it himself, than have left it to man; for these Rites are equally
necessary, or unnecessary throughout all Ages, and in all Places where
Christianity obtains. If Crossing, Kneeling, Surplice, he needful to be used in
the Church of England, why not in all the Churches of the Saints? If they are
needful or expedient, for Order, Uniformity, for Reverence and Decency in this
Age; Why not in that in which our Lord and his Apostles lived, and through all
subsequent Ages of the Church? If therefore Christ did neither by himself nor
his Apostles, who formed the first Church, and delivered us his mind, institute
and impose these Rites, then either the imposing them is needless, or else you
must say that Christ has omitted what was needful to the due performance of
his Worship; which seems to imply* that either he was ignorant what to do, or
careless and neglective of his own Affairs: which cannot be Asserted without
Blasphemy.

A shrewd* Argument I confess, in the consequences of it; if allowed for a good
Argument, but it is really so pitiful a Ratiocination, as to this Prefacer's
design in quoting it, that I believe Baxter himself has Wit and Reason enough
still left him, if still living, to laugh at any man that should be wheedl'd by
it into a persuasion that it is unlawful for any Church or State, to impose
such and such Rites and Ceremonies, as it thinks most convenient for Order,
Uniformity, Reverence, and Decency, Because those Ceremonies were never imposed
by Christ, or his Apostles.

But that which I mention it for is this, to manifest what kind of quoter this
man has shown himself.

Any Reader who views the quotation, and the lines of it marked each of them
with two little hooks, may justly think that the lines so marked consist only
of Baxter's words, and in the same order as disposed by Baxter himself in that
Chapter, Section, and Reason: but it is so far from being so, that

1. These words [ This seems to be coming after Christ, to amend his Laws,
correct his Works, and make better Laws and Ordinances for his Church, than he
himself has done, are not Baxter's words (in that Paragraph of that
Disputation, as Printed with the other four in 1659* which I believe is the
only Edition of those Disputations of Church Government) but this man's own;
unless he has quoted them at second hand from some falsifyer of Testimonies.

2. Whereas in the quotation it is, If they (viz. Crossing, Kneeling, Surplice)
are needful or expedient for Order, Uniformity, for Reverence, and Decency in
this Age, why not in that in which our Lord and his Apostles lived, and through
all subsequent Ages of the Church? this Clause also and Question, is not Mr.
Baxters, but this man's own or some body's that has imposed upon him.

3. Whereas the Prefacer concludes the quotation with these words [ which
cannot be Asserted without Blasphemy] Baxter's words are (only) [ which are not
to be imagined,]

Now 2. Neither of these variations are allowable in any Testimony that is
published as a just and exact quotation, as any Reader would guess this to be,
by the manner of printing it. But

3. The second Clause is such an addition, as is altogether intolerable; for
Baxter does not there dispute against the Ceremonies of Crossing and Surplice,
considered as expedient for Order, Uniformity, Reverence, and Decency. But as
(things pretended by him to be) Mystical, Symbolical, Sacramental Rites; and
his reasoning (such as it is) is there directed against them only under that
Notion: for this Author therefore to quote him as there applying that reasoning
to our Ceremonies, considered as Needful or Expedient for Order, Uniformity,
etc. is not to quote but to invent and falsify, and therefore

4. If the rest of this Gentleman's quotations which I have not the opportunity
of examining, are of the same complexion with this, he must in all reason be
concluded either a Knavish quoter himself, or a quoter at second hand, from
some body that was so.

But supposing Baxter had reasoned so simply (as for ought I know he may in
some other part of his writings) as this Prefacer makes him to do in that
Paragraph, against men's appointing such and such Ceremonies, as needful for
Order, Uniformity, Reverence, and Decency, I shall annex an wholesome
Testimony-Antidote against the venom of it, which I find quoted to my hands
from Mr. Calvin (I hope with more honesty and fidelity than this is Mr. Baxter)
by Dr. Hook (in his judicious Answer to Baxter's Petition for Peace, page 150.
in these words.

Let us hold thsi, That if we see in every Society of men some Policy to be
necessary, which may serve to nourish common Peace, and to retain Concord; if
we see that in the doing of things there is always some Orderly Form which is
behoveful for public honesty, and for very humanity not to be refused, the
saine ought chiefly to be observed in Churches which are both best maintained
by a well-fram'd disposition of all things, and without Agreement are no
Churches at all. Therefore if we will have the safety of the Church well
provided for, we must altogether diligently procure that which St. Paul
commands, That all things be done Comely, and according to Order. But
forasmuch as there is so great diversity in the manners of men, so great
variety in minds, so great disagreements in judgments and wits, neither is
there any Policy steadfast enough, unless it be Established by certain Laws, nor
any orderly usage can be observed without a certain appointed Form; therefore
we are so far off from condemning the Laws that are profitable to this purpose,
that we affirm that when these be taken away, Churches are dissolved from their
sinews, and utterly deformed and scattered abroad; for this which St. Paul
requires, That all things be done decently and in Order, cannot be had, unless
the Order it self and Comeliness, be Established with observations adjoined as
with certain Bonds.

But this only thing is always to be excepted in those Observations. That they
be not either believed to be necessary to Salvation, and so bind Consciences
with Religion, or be applied to the Worship of God, and so Godliness be reposed
in them. -- But (page 152.) it is good yet to define more plainly what is
comprehended under that Comeliness which St. Paul commends, and also what
under Order. The end of Comeliness is partly that when such Ceremomies are used
as may procure a Reverence to holy things, we may by such helps be stirred up
to Godliness: partly also, that the Modesty and Gravity which ought to be seen
in all honest doings, may therein principally appear. In Order, this is the
first Point, That they which Govern may know the Rule and Law to Govern well,
and the People which are governed may be Accustomed to Obeying of God, and to
right Discipline. Then, that the state of the Church being well framed, Peace
and Quietness may be provided for. Verily because the Lord has in his holy
Oracles both faithfully contained, and clearly set forth both the whole sum of
true Righteousness, and all the parts of the Worshipping of his Divine Majesty,
and whatsoever was necessary to Salvation, therefore in these things, he is
only to be heard as our Schoolmaster. But because in outward Discipline and
Ceremony, his Will was not to prescribe each thing particularly what we ought
to follow, because he foresaw this to hang upon the state of Times, and did not
think one Form to be sit for all Ages, herein we must flee to those general
Rules which he has given, that thereby all those things should be tried which
the necessity of the Church shall require to be Commanded for Order and
Comeliness. Finally, forasmuch as he has therefore taught nothing expressly,
because these things are not necessary to Salvation, and according to the
Manners of every Nation and Age, ought diversely to be applied to the Edifying
of the Church, therefore as the Profit of the Church shall require, it shall be
convenient as well to Change and Abrogate those that be used, as to institute
New. I grant indeed, that we ought not rashly, nor often, nor for light Causes to
run to Innovation, but what may hurt or edify, Charity shall best judge, which
if we suffer to be the Governess, all shall be safe.

Now it is the duty of Christian People, to keep such things as have been
ordained according to this Rule with a free Conscience, and without any
superstition, but yet with a godly and easy readiness to obey, not to despise
them, nor to pass them over with careless negligence: so far is it off, that
they ought by Pride and Obstinacy openly to break them. What manner of Liberty
of Conscience, will thou say, may there be in so great Observation and
Wariness? Yes, it shall stand excellently well: when we shall consider, that
they are not steadfast and perpetual stayed Laws whereunto we are bound, but
outward rudiments for the weakness of men, which though we do not all need, yet
we do all use them, because we are mutually bound to one another, to nourish
Charity among us.

Thus, says Dr. Hook, Mr. Calvin delivers his judgment directly contrary to
yours, (meaning Mr. Baxter's, as expressed in that Petition for Peace) I add,
and directly contrary to that which our Prefacer here quotes as his shrewd
Argumentation, but) perfectly consentient to the Church of England, and we find
his practice according with his judgment; he put the Yoke of Discipline upon
the Neck of the Senate and People of Geneva, and bound them to it with an Oath:
and he declares for a Form of Prayers and Ecclesiastical Rites, from which it
may not be lawful for the Pastors to depart in their Function. --

You see hereby how far Calvin was from the Opinion, That Churches either
should be governed without Ceremonies, or indeed can be governed, if nothing be
imposed on their Members, but what is necessary.

I know it is easy to dictate as some men are said to do in this Preface, That
all necessary things are so plain in Scripture, that men may soon agree in what
is necessary, and conclude the no-necessity of agreeing in more. page 12. --
That all things necessary to be believed, are done in order to acceptance with
God, are fully and perspicuously contained in Holy Scripture, and therefore
it is unreasonable to exact further of our Brethren, that which is confessed
unnecessary, and which neither our Savior, nor his Apostles imposed on their
Disciples, (page 46.) That necessary points (page 20.) may and will by [all
honest people] be known and determined by the clear Testimony of Scripture, by
consent of Fathers, by general Tradition. -- (As if all honest People could
find out the consent of Fathers, or be so familiarly acquainted with general
Tradition.) and other points need not to be determined. -- That all Confessions
of particular Churches should be abolished (page 53.) and one public Symbol
agreed on, which should be expressed only in the words of Scripture, and want
nothing which is necessary to Salvation, to be known or done, nor contain any
thing which is not thus necessary to Salvation. -- and in unnecessaries there
should be a mutual bearing one with another -- That consent in Fundamentals
ought to be carefully maintained, but in other things neglected. (page 55.)
That there should be nothing in our Ecclesiastical Constitutions, that may give
any plausible pretense for Separation or Nonconformity -- (page 21.)

Now these, I confess, are several of them, very sine Aerial Speculations; such
as is no very difficult thing for Mercurial Wits to light on; and it is as easy
for any Melancholy, Contemplative Man, to warm his Brains into a conceit of
their Truth, Worth, and Excellency. But loquere ut videam: I would fain see the
Man that either has proved them, or can prove them to be Practicable Notions. I
mean, such as may be prudently applied to the constituting or continuing of
Societies, or to the maintaining of a public consent, or a common order and
decorum among 'em. It may be a great Truth that all things necessary to
Salvation are plainly and clearly revealed in Scripture; but that they are all
so plain that all may soon agree in what is necessary, or that all honest
People may know and determine all such points, or that only such should be
agreed in and enjoined, I shall conclude to be very unpracticable Notions, till
this Gentleman or somebody for him, can tell me First, What Person, or Persons,
have so much as pretended to give an exact List and Catalogue in particular of
all those Fundamentals which in general we profess to Believe, plainly
contained in Scripture. 2. Where that Society of Christians is to be met with,
which is governed only by union and consent in things absolutely necessary? Or
3. where that Protestant Church is to be found, where nothing of Ceremony is
imposed either for Order, Decency, or Uniformity?

If no such instance can be produced, it is a pregnant evidence that such
Theories and Principles, are inflexible to the measure and ends of Government,
incompatible with the duty of Governors, and with the necessities of the
Persons and Societies that are to be governed; and therefore they seem
calculated only for the Meridian of Vtopia, or Cracovia, and may serve
indifferently for all Latitudinarian Regions, and Anarchical Routs.

You see, Sir, by this Packet how great a trouble your generosity in sending me
[ The Protestant Reconciler] has drawn upon you; no less than that of reading
several Sheets of Animadversions on the Preface; but you may comfort your self
with believing that your Trouble will end here, as mine does. For having not my
own Books by me, scarce any of them I mean, that might be serviceable for such
a purpose, 'twill be a vanity for me to attempt the Confutation of the
Prefacer's Book; especially since he has been pleased to interess Dr. Womock (a
much more considerable Person, and still living I hope) in the Contents of it,
insomuch that if he shall think fit to make any Reply to him, his Book will, I
believe, neither require, nor deserve any other or better Confutation, than
will result from that Defense. It was but the beginning of this Month that I
received it from your kindness; and having since spent all this pains about the
Preface, you cannot imagine I have so much as read the Book; But however, I
have so far considered the Contents of its Chapters, and glanced upon so many
parts of the Book, that I conjecture the main stress and turn of the Cause lies
in the fourth Chapter, which therefore whosoever solidly Answers, will
effectually baffle the design of this Writer, and may let the rest of the Book
take its course; and permit the weak Brethren to make the best Advantage they
can of it. When you have perused these Papers, I hope you will impartially
communicate your sense of them to

Your Cordial Friend, and Humble Servant, S. T.
Febr. 28. 1682 / 3.

