A THIRD DIALOGUE BETWEEN THE POPE AND A PHANATICK Concerning AFFAIRS in
ENGLAND.

By the Author of the First and Second, who is a Hearty Lover of his Prince and
Country.

LONDON: Printed by J. P. and are to be sold by William Oliver in Norwich, 1684.

AN EPISTLE TO THE LOYAL OBSERVATOR.
WHat, Sixty Eight years old, and yet an Observator? Well, Live, and Write on,
outlive the damned Old Cause, and when you have made your being here
impertinent, then leave us, and converse with Intelligences: In the mean time I
find Men widely differ in your Character, some count you as a Plague, and
others take you for a Prodegie. For my part, I dare tell the World, I Love and
Honor you. But the other day I chanced into a CLAN of WHIGS, and TRIMMERS,
where your Name was the subject of their Wit and Malice; one who seemed most
modest and demure, did gravely style you one of the chiefest Agents of Satan;
another of a warmer Tongue and temper, would have you to be Prime Secretary to
the Pope and the Devil, he said, your Pen did smell of Fire and Brimstone, and
thought it was unquenchable too; they all agreed you were as much a mischief to
the Nation as the last great Frost, or the Summers Drought. I sat and heard
these Harangues with great impatience, not out of Pity but of Loyal envy; For
why should you have a Monopoly? --

A THIRD DIALOGUE BETWEEN THE POPE AND A PHANATICK.
Pope. HOLD Brother, hold; why such have? pray stop a while.


Phan. Oh, Sir, I am flying for Life, Liberty, and Property, pursued by the
Kings Bloodhounds Rouge Croix, The Titles of the Kings four Pursuivants at
Arms.
Rouge Dragon, Portecullise, and Bluemantle; besides whole packs of Furies and
Tories.


Po. Come, I will show you into a close retirement, where the Sun it self shall
be no evidence against you, where you shall be as secure as if you were landed
upon terra incognita.

Come, Now pray tell me what is the matter; for you look like a Spectre, as if
you were all Spirit indeed: So wonderfully changed since our first conference,
that I should not have known you, but only by that Cainish mark in your face,
by which you are distinguished as plainly as St. Peter's by the Cupola.

Why do you gaze thus?


Ph. I spy within the Niches of the wall, two Antic Statues; methinks they
look so like Observators, that I dare not speak my thoughts; for I protest,
Brother, my fears are so great, and my affairs so nice, that I dare not trust
the shadow of a man, and I have heard so many miracles of your Romish Images,
that I am afraid they are not all dumb Idols.


Po. Why? these are the Statues of honest S. Peter, and S. Paul, who you know
were men of Primitive Integrity; and if they could yet Preach and make
Orations, I hope you might trust them at a Consult.


Ph. Peter, and Paul, they were Old Evidences against me, I would sooner trust
the Pagan Image that fell down from Jupiter; I would not speak True-Protestant
Treason before their two Sculls, in S. John de Lateran; why, they were two Tory
Apostles, that taught the world the slavery of Passive Obedience; and were such
fools, to be Martyrs, when they had the power of working Miracles; they preached
up the Supremacy, and the Divine Right of Monarchs, and I wonder you allow them
a shrine among your Romish Teraphims; I should have more veneration for the
Pictures of Judas and Barabbas; they were brave Hero's and understood the
Bravery and Gallantry of Treason, and Insurrection.


Po. Well, I will so far comply with your superstitious fears, as to remove
into a private apartment, where there shall not be one Picture of a Saint,
besides you and I.

Now we are enclosed within so many Walls, that we are secure from all humane
notice, except it be your Titus Thaumatergus, and I am told, that if he lay his
Ear to the Lobby of a Presbyterian House of Commons, he can, by virtue of that
Acousticon, hear at Westminster what is whispered in the Vatican; but I think
of late he has lost his senses; therefore pray begin, and give me some account
of your affairs.


Ph. Ah, Sir, undone to all my intents and purposes: My Oracle is ceast, my
Demons are fled, my Principal Members cut off, my Elect of London are
reprobated, and I am afraid of a Quo warranto against Magna Charta; in short,
the Devil of Discovery has ruined us, and to speak truth, Discovery and
Disappointment, are the two greatest Devils I fear in the World.


Po. What, has my name lost its ancient Infallibility? I thought the Theatrical
Thunder of the Popish Plot must have done more certain execution upon the Fort
Royal, than Ten Thousand Quintals of Turkish Powder.


Ph. Truly Sir, I had dressed up the Mormo of the Popish Plot, with so much
popular and artificial horror, that I had almost frighted the people out of
their wits, and you know that nothing more serves the Interest of our Sober
Party, than the madness of the People.

When I observed a fit juncture to put the Nation into a flame, I first kindled
the fire with those Brimstone Matches, the fears, and Jealousies of Popery, I
had then the mighty advantage of a Presbyterian House of Commons, who were at
that time the Representative Lungs of the Nation: Their popular breath blew up
the flame into so fierce a rage, that the City was cooler in the fire of
London, than it was in the heat of the Popish Plot; and when I had procured a
Printed Resolve, and prefixed it to a Fast-book, that there was a Damnable
hellish Popish Plot against the Life of the King, and the Government, I thought
I had been secure both of the Government and the Life of the King: But, oh,
that fatal flight from Oxford! It was ten times more unfortunate to us than the
Kings escape from Worcester; for then he only fled with his own Life, and left
us to share his Fortunes, but now he carried his Crowns and Kingdoms with him;
and left us nothing but Prisons, and Pillories, Jayles, and Gibbets.


Po. I should have triumphed as much in the destruction of the English*
Monarchy, and Hierarchy, as the Grand Vizier would have done in the Ashes of
Vienna, and if your Popish Plot had effected the design, I would have made my
silent advantage of the Ruin, and dissembled the affront to my Holiness and
honor; but since it failed of success, I think it my Interest to disown it.

The Doctrines of Depriving, Deposing, and Murdering of Kings, I thought
Politic Divinity some Hundred years ago, but the Circumstances of Christendom
are strangely altered since the days of King John; I have for many years been
forced to lay aside my thunders, and saw it my Interest to Court, and not
Assassinate; I dare not in this nice Crisis be so bold with Lewis of France, as
I was of old with Ludovicus of Germany.

When your Sultan Oliver brought the King to the Bar, I would not have had One
Papist upon the Bench for a Million of Crowns, for then I had lost all hopes of
the Royal Blood, and eternally ruined my whole interest in England; I c ^nfess,
my continued Intrigues for Indulgence, and all the softer methods of
insinuation, to propagate my Religion, but as for those daring adventures of
Treason, and Regicide, they are All your own, and therefore I declare in spite
of Satan and Salamanca, that I knew no more of a Plot against the Life of the
King, then the Groaning-board.


Ph. Alas, Sir, you never yet had an Act of Oblivion, and therefore your
Parisian, and Irish Massacres, your Smithfield Fires, and your Gunpowder
Treason, though acted long since, are more fresh in memory than my late Murder
of Charles the First; and if I Swear you Guilty, all the Tongues of Men and
Angels cannot persuade the people that you are Pope INNOCENT.


Po. Well, I do hope that Time or the Gallows will give you Grace to confess
the Cheat; in the mean time, I must tell you, that if you had charged me with a
Plot of any Honorable contrivance, or plausible Perjury, I should have
pardoned such a meritorious forgery; but to bring me upon the Stage in a
Fools-coat and Cap, to make my Nobles, and Priests, to act the parts of
Bedlams, this was a Sham, and Effrontery, that must be resented.

You know that the Court of Rome has been more famous for Policy, than
Divinity, and I have, by finess, and artifice, ruined more Kings than ever you
knew; and can it be reconciled to common Reason, or Interest, that we should
trust the Arcana of our Roman Empire, and those Sacred endearments of Lives and
Fortunes, to the Mercy and Management of a Company of Banditi, Renegadoes, and
Lazarillo's, whose Iniquity and Indigence must certainly betray us?

Had you told the people, that there was a mighty Spanish Armada seen at Anchor
on Salisbury Plains, it had been as probable a Romance, as your Forty Thousand
Pilgrims from Spain.

And as for the Murder of Sir E.B.G. It fell out unluckily, the laying of the
Scene in Somerset House, for it looks a little odly, that the Thames gliding by
the walls of that Palace, the Murderers of that unfortunate Gentleman should
not in that Critical juncture have endeavored an eternal concealment of the
Murder, especially there being at hand, so easy and so safe a conveyance to
the Thames, where with less weight than a Millstone, he might have been sunk
'till Doomsday; but the overseeing this ready advantage, and the exposing his
Body above ground, nigh the passage to an Imperial City, looked like Frenzy
beyond all the extravagancies and costacies of Bedlam; you might as well have
reported that I had cut my own Throat, or leapt off the Monument: And it is a
miracle to me, how you could gain a belief of so wonderful a Proceeding.


Ph. Why, Sir, the very word Pope, is Enchantment; and has a prodigious power
of Infatuation upon the people of England: For suppose I should Invent a Plot,
as dark, and confused, as the first Chaos, whose Monstrosities could outdo all
the Fables of Talmud and Alcoran: Allow me but the Harangues of a Presbyterian
One-and-Forty-Parliament, to Echo the noise of a Popish Plot, and the People
would believe it as great a Truth, as the Pharisees Conspiracy against Jesus;
but to conclude this; Sir, I spoke the Prologue to the Popish Plot before the
Parliament at Westminster: And at Oxford, the King unhappily spoke the
Epilogue; and so FINIS and FITS-HARRIS.


Po. But Brother, you know that the Good Old Cause, which is our Common
Interest, amounts to no less than a Supremacy over all the Kings of the Earth;
and that is so Sweet, and Glorious a Sovereignty, that I hope you will never
give over your designs for That fifth Monarchy, or Kingdom of Christ, as you
wisely phrase it.


Ph. Never suspect it, my zeal is too warm and obstinate, to be discouraged by
a Disappointment; and as long as my Numbers can merit the name of Legion, or
Association, so long I will have the grace to persevere; and therefore having
shed a little blood by a falsifying blow, but missing my chief aim in the
Popish Plot, I still pursued the same design, only shifting the Scene from
Rome, to Geneva.

And now enter Anthony and the Giant Ferguson, with Six Trumpeters attended
with Forty brave Sons of Anak, Armed with Sword and Blunderbus, followed by a
mighty train, tied together with Green Ribbands. Now Sir, you know that the
Saints have diversity of Gifts, and difference in Operation: My Presbyterian
was for destroying the King after the English fashion, by the more generous,
and Religious procedure of a Civil War, or the Popular Authority of a High
Court of Justice: My Independent Zelots were for Killing the King, Alamode de
France; and like your St. Clement, and Raviliac, resolved upon the surest, and
shortest method of Assassination; Your Jesuit Mariana and My Junius Brutus have
resolved the Case, that if a Prince invades our Religious Rights or Civil
Properties, he is, by your Divinity, and Mine, decreed a Tyrant: And then we
are agreed on both sides, that a Tyrant is a State-Behemoth, and to kill such a
Beast of Prey, is not only Justice, but Merit: What Sainted our George, but the
killing of a Dragon? and when David slew the Lion, and the Bear, and cut off
the head of the Uncircumcised Philistine, he was a Hero but no Assassin.


Po. I grant that if a Prince affront our humor or Interest, we have an
ancient privilege to censure him for an Her ^tick or a Tyrant; But in this Age,
I dare not own the Consequence of Assassination; not that this Modesty proceeds
from any nicety of Conscience, but Policy, and Interest oblige me to dissemble
that Grim Divinity.

And whatever you pretend, I know the Duke has a greater Endearment for his
Brother, than he has for the Pope, and I do easily foresee, that if the King
should fall by the hand of a Papist, the Duke would, in abhorrence of the Fact,
declare himself a Protestant, nothing would appease his revenging mind, but a
Massacre of the Papists in England, or the Ashes of Rome.

Indeed if I were again Lord Paramount of Christendom, and had Crowns for
Styrrups; and could mount my horse upon the back of Kings, as formerly I have
done: Or if my Numbers in England were as great as yours, I should then no more
scruple the hard words of Association, or Assassination, than you do; but in my
present Circumstances, I can only dance in a Court-Mask, with Caress, and
Complaisance; But I must leave You to Act the rougher Scenes of Tragedy.


Ph. Nay, I am satisfied, that your present temper is but Politic
dissimulation, for I am certain, as long as you are Pope, you must be of my
opinion, in the matter of Princes; and so long I will own you for a Brother:
But if ever you dwindle into a Bishop of Rome, and an Apostolic slavery to
Crowns Imperial, I shall hate your Episcopacy, and scorn your Alliance.

But what did you mean by that sneakish Anathema in the Council of Constance?
to reprobate that Heroic Thesis, Tyrannum posse and debere occidi a quocunque
subdito non aperta vi modo sed etiam per insidias and frauds.
that any Subject whatsoever, not only might, but was obliged to destroy a
Tyrant, either by open violence, or by any private ambush or artifice.


Po. This Decree was occasioned by the Impudence of your Rebel Ancestors, the
True Protestant Hussites of Bohemia, who declared it as an Article of their
reforming Divinity, that if a Prince were a Criminal, he did by his crimes
forfeit his Crown, and any one might with impunity despoil him of that
Authority, Principes quocunque crimine admisso principatu cadere posseque
potestate quam injuria occupabant a quocunque impune Spoliari.
to which (in their opinion) he had then no Title.

Now you must know that the Golden Trade of disposing Crowns and Kingdoms was
the Monopoly of Rome, and I only claim the Prerogative of Religions Regicide;
and therefore when your Hussites and Taborites became Interlopers, it was my
Interest to decree, that none should destroy Kings but my self. But, to speak
truth to a Brother, there was at that time Three Heads, that did pretend to the
Triple Crown; and the Church of Rome being under that distraction, might pass
that Canon as a Complement to the Emperor, who had the chief influence and
management of That Council; but I cannot find that Pope Martin the fifth, or
Eugenius, or any of their Roman Successors, did ever Ratify that Anathema, and
therefore, it having no Pontifical sanction, I have left my self as much power
and freedom to destroy and depose Kings, as ever I had before the Council of
Constance; and if ever the Stars be again Popishly-affected, you shall see me
reassume my Thunders with a Non obstante.

I grant that we must assert the Papal, and Popular Supremacy, by maintaining
our deposing, and Assassinating Divinity; for this will be a mighty awe upon
Princes, and without this, we can never propagate our Good Old Cause; but the
Cavaliering Clergy of the Church of England have cursed arguments against this
our Common Principle, and in my opinion, my Jesuit Mariana has not answered
them with sufficient satisfaction, and I would gladly hear how your Sophistry
can respond to those desperate objections; but at this time I will only mention
their Argument drawn from Antiquity: They tell us that the Christians of the
first three hundred years, had a greater advantage of understanding the Laws
and Temper of Christianity, than we can pretend to, at the distance of sixteen
Centuries; and though these Christians lived under Emperors, who were Pagans,
and Tyrants too; yet they quietly suffered all the Invasions upon their Lives,
Liberties, and Properties, that a Tyrannick malice and power could contrive or
execute, and yet in the History of those Ages, we Read of the Noble Army of
Martyrs, but not of One Rebel, or Assassin among all the Christian Legions.


Ph. Do you account this such a formidable Argument?


Po. Yes indeed in my opinion it looks severely, and if you can take it off,
you deserve to be Superior to the whole order of Jesuits.


Ph. Well then, First I answer, that it is very probable, it was a Christian
Soldier that Murdered Julian in his Persian expedition, and that Soldier was
the only True-Protestant or Papist in all the Roman Army.

But if a mere probability have not weight enough, then I grant them the
opinion of some of their admired ancients, that Julian was slain by an Angel;
now it cannot be fancied, that an Evil Angel should smite an Apostate Brother,
for it could not be the Interest of the Devil to destroy such an eminent Devoto
to his Empire: And if he were dispatched by Gabriel, or Michael, or any other
of the Heavenly Host, then we have a precedent from Heaven, for the killing of
Tyrants upon Earth; and why should not the Saints be Assassins, as well as
Angels; especially considering that those flaming Spirits are made the pattern
of our Zeal and Devotion?


Po. This I confess may be plausible to the Vulgus, but the Malignant Divines
will unluckily rejoyn, that Angels were no Subjects of the Empire; under no
obligation of Allegiance to the Emperor Julian, and that the destroying Angel
had a divine Authority, or a special warrant for that execution: But they will
tell the world, that every humane Soul is obliged to be Subject to the Secular
powers, and therefore conclude, that the Assassination of Tyrants must be left
as the peculiar service of Angels, but it is beyond the Commission of Saints.


Ph. Well then, Grant that Julian fell by a Persian dart, and that there is not
one instance of Rebellion, or Regicide in the first three hundred years, what
is all this to you and I? For I return them their own argument in the Case of
Cathedrals, and Ceremonies; what though the Church in her Infant weakness knew no
such Glorious or Solemn practices, must they therefore be unlawful to the
Saints, who are arrived to the full heat of blood, and bravery? They might
argue by the same Logic, that because Innocent Adam went naked, therefore no
Saint must wear a Coat of Maile; and because Abel knew nothing of the Invention
of Guns, therefore it is unlawful for the race of Cain to fire a Blunderbus.


Po. I acknowledge this answer to be fine and popular, but it will never
silence the Clergy of England, those disputers of this world.


Ph. Sir, if you and I can compose such a System of Politic Divinity, as to
persuade the People, that the Saints, and the Senate, have the Supreme
disposing of Princes, our business is done by that popular delusion, and we may
laugh at all the Learning and Arguments of Cambridge and Oxford. For we have
this advantage, that our Proselytes will sooner Read the Alcoran, than the
Writings of the English Clergy, and have no more value for Their Canons, than
they have for the Votes of a House of Commons. But as for the Tory Divines, it
is as much impossible for us to convince them, as it is for them to convert us,
for they are such blind adorers of the King, that they honor him even to
Idolatry, and wish his Kingdom might be everlasting.

I dare engage they should sooner believe the Miracle of the Mass, than the
momentous mystery of Assassination; and might with more ease be tempted to
Worship the Eucharist, than to Murder the King.


Po. Well, we have spent too much time in this speculative discourse, pray
proceed to the practical part of this destroying Divinity. What success had
you, when you Acted in your Own Property, without the Mask of a Popish Plot?


Ph. Ah, Honey soit qui mal'y pense.
Sir, I hate that damned cursed French, that encircles the Royal Arms, I
believe it is some Charm or Conjuration, for we cannot design a little mischief
against the King, but it will fall upon our own heads; my Presbyterian
Republicans were agreed upon a General Insurrection, and this would as surely
have put the Nation into a flame, as the last Conflagration: My Atheists, and
Independents had assigned the Persons, the Arms, the Time, and the Place, for
the Assassination of the King and the Duke; but in the Interval, the fire fell
upon that Little Sodom, Newmarket, and some Tory Angel conducted the King to
Zoar, and that untimely slight disappointed the Plot, and the Blunderbus.

That fire at Newmarket was of such prodigious consequence to the King, and
Kingdom, that I am afraid it was more than chance; and begin to suspect there
may be a God and a Providence, and that some of the Old Horsemen of Israel have
Listed themselves in the Kings Lifeguard.


Po. Though I could never believe you to be a very good Christian, yet I have so
much Charity as not to think you an Atheist.


Ph. Can you suppose that I would ever have profaned Temples, Ravished the
Revenues of the Church, and shed the Blood of the King, if I had believed,
there had been a God, who could have required Restitution for the one, and
Vengeance for the other?

If I were persuaded of the Existence of a God, I must grant by consequence,
that a Bloody, and Malicious Perjury were as bold a defiance of Omniscience as
a plain God-damme; but I must confess I looked upon the Devil as a mere Sign to
a Tavern, and the bugbear of Damnation, as Politic a sham as the Popish Plot,
and therefore to me, Oaths were never a part of Religion, but of Interest.


Po. Indeed he that well considers your Annals, from Forty to Sixty, and your
desperate management of the Popish Plot, will find Villains enough to make you
suspected for an Atheist; but yet who ever talked more, of God, and Providence,
than You?


Ph. Alas, Sir, these were excellent Words in Popular Cant and delusion, and
therefore I used them to serve my Interest; but I never thought them more
Divine or Almighty, than the Name of Pope, Protestant, and Parliament; for
these made as great a noise, and did as much service, as the other.


Po. But however I should think it your Interest to be a Christian, at least in
Masquerade; and therefore I can discern no policy in your late good wishes for
the Turkish Army, for that was too broad a discovery of Irreligion; sure you
cannot think that the Grand Vizir did fight the Lords Battles; but yet I
suppose, that you are of the opinion of your great Apostle, Luther, for I
remember that Sultan Solomon and Martin Luther, did infest the German Empire in
the same Age; and Martin had so great a Friendship for Mahomet, that he and his
followers taught the people in public Harangues, that it was a mortal Sin to
fight against the Turks, Luthero y sus sequaces, predicavan, y hazian entender,
a la probre gente Tudesca que pelear contra Turcos era peccado mortal, tanto
como restir sia la voluntad de Dios, que los embiava para castigar al Papa, y a
los Principes Christianos que eran catorze vezes peores que Turcos. De Illescas
pontific. Hist. in Span. Tom. 2. Fol. 292.
it being a plain affront to the divine will, because God had sent the Turks to
chastise the Pope, and the Christian Princes, who were four times worse than
the Mahometans. And indeed when I observed that your Caballers chose the Green
Ribbon for their Livery, I did suspect your favor for Mahometanisme, That
Color being the most Sacred in the Turkish Religion.


Ph. Vengeance begins to enquire for the Blood of Charles the First, and My
Plots and Perjuries are so plainly detected, that I am now of opinion, there
may be a God; but I am sure there is no Idolatry in the Church of Mahomet, and
Coffee is a more sober drink, than Lachrymae Christi, and I don't know but a
man may be as nigh Heaven at Meccha, as at Mount Olivet, and there may be many
Chapters in the Alcoran, as much jure divino as the 13th. of the Romans. You
see the Turk is possess't of Jerusalem and the promised Land, the ancient seat
of the Elect; and is made Lord over the Seven Churches of Asia; and besides he
is so complacent, as to allow his dominions the Natural Civility of a
Toleration; what though he propagates his Religion by Fire and Sword? It is a
method far more divine and generous than Penal Laws, and Spanish Inquisitions,
and therefore I have taught my Proselytes, that Mahomet is a Greater Prophet,
than the Pope: Nay, that Paganism is a more Natural Religion than Popery; Nay
I believe they have a more favorable opinion of the Devil, than they have of
the Pope, for the Devil has taken the Covenant and the Engagement, and
endeavors the extirpation of Monarchy and Hierarchy, as much as we, and
besides he is a Prince so far from Tyranny, and Arbitrary Power, that he would
have no man governed by Laws, or Canons, nor confined to any Orders or Modes of
Religion, but allows every man to gratify his passion and appetite, and to
follow his own private fancy, and humor.


Po. I do believe that your Proselytes would sooner Worship the Devil, than
fall down to the Pope, but I can see no reason why you should so adore the
Turk: For grant, that I have added some Superstitious Superstructures to the
Apostolic Foundation, yet sure that great Fundamental, that Jesus is the
Christ, is a more hopeful Title to Salvation than all the Mohammedan Creed. And
therefore any man that believes the Gospel to be more divine than the Alcoran,
must think it more eligible to be a Christian Papist, than a Turkish Puritan.


Ph In the matter of Salvation, the Turk and I have more infallible security
than you. For we believe eternal felicity to be our Fate, and not our Merit:
And all the priv ^ledges of Paradise were settled upon us by the Charter of
Election, many Ages before Christ was born: And there is no Quo Warranto from
the Court above


Po. About two years since, you thought the Charter of London, as much
unalterable as your Decree of Elections: But without a mighty change of
manners, you will find your self as much deceived in the one, as you were
mistaken in the other. For the Jews had once as large a Charter of Election as
ever you can pretend to; but yet you see, upon their misdemeanors, there was a
Quo Warranto brought against the whole Body of Israel, and judgment entered
against them, and they have been disfranchis'd above this 1600 years. And if
Perjury and Regicide, Murder and Malice, Rapine and Sacr ^ledge, Sedition and
Treason, Envy and Hypocrisy, be no Bars to Salvation; the Gate of Heaven must
be as wide as the Portico to the Turkish Paradise: Where the Alcoran tells us,
there are Apartments, not only for those minuter Animals, as Abraham's Ram,
Moses Heifer, Solomon's Ant, the Queen of Sheba's Parrot, the Seven Sleepers
Dog: But the Passage is so Broad, that Mahomets Camel and Jonahs Whale, have
made their Entra into that Turkish Elysium. Therefore I would advise you, to
Sail directly for the Hellespont, and become Mohammedan: For that Religion which
allows a Heaven for the Dog, and the Leviathan, can give you the best hopes of
future felicity: But I fancy if you were designed to turn Mohammedan, the Mufti
would not admit you for a Musselman; for he is wont to say, that an Ill
Christian will never make an Honest Turk.


Ph. This is very pleasant indeed, as if your Holiness had not committed as
much iniquity as mine. Were not you as much Antichrist as the Turk, or the Jew,
and more than the Devil, when you vented that blasphemous saying, O quantum
nobis profuit haec fabula Christi! I confess the Kingdom of Christ was the
Title to my Holy War, but I never gained so much by that Name as you have done;
alas, what were the Spoils and Plunders of three Kingdoms, compared to the vast
Revenues of your Triple Crown?

Well, I don't question but in this Age to see the downfall of Rome. And though
the Grand Visir was the last year unfortunate, yet remember, that your Peter's
Cathedral has a Cupola, after the mode of the Turkish Moschs, and it may yet
follow the Fate of Sancta Sophia.


Po. If Rome be Mystical Babylon, or the chief seat of the Beast, (as the
Heretics phrase it) My comfort is, that the Turk and You, are the Half-moons,
and Outworks of Antichrist, You must be first battered down, before the fall
of Babylon. But I am weary of this raillery, let us return to your unfortunate
Conspiracy.

Did Your Martyrs go off with as much Gallantry as mine? Those Roman Heroes,
whom you offered up in Sacrifice to your Moloch, though they were persons of
different Education and Tempers, yet had so clear an innocence, that with dying
Vows they disowned the whole Scene of the Popish Plot: The Lord Stafford's
Speech looked like the plain meaning of dying innocence, and not like the
Artificial composure of any Northern Jesuit.


Ph. Your Doctrines of Equivocation, and Mental Reservation, have possessed the
People with such an inveterate prejudice, that the Papists can have no method
of Credibility.

Suppose the Lord Stafford had outdone the Legend of your St. Dennis, and
after the Axe had given the fatal blow, should have leapt upright and taken his
Head under his Arm, and walked in solemn Parade from the Scaffold, to the House
of Commons, and with the Tongue of Men and Angels should have spoken his
innocence: I could easily have shamm'd the Miracle, and persuaded the people it
was no more than one of the deceivable works, or lying wonders of Antichrist.
These. 2. 2.

For I have this advantage, that the Populace will believe a Presbyterian, as
much as Moses, and the Prophets, but they will not be persuaded that a Papist
spoke true, though he rose from the dead.


Po. But were none of your Martyrs, Conf ^ssors?


Ph. Truly Sir, I begin to have a very favorable opinion of Auricular
Confession; for I see no public mischief in those private whispers; but as for
that loud Confession from Carts, and Scaffolds, before Guards and Lictors, and
throngs of Observators, this is base, Unpolitick and Treacherous; but the fatal
discovery forced me into a nice dilemma; for there was so much honorable
Evidence against me, that if I had denied the whole matter, I must have been
suspected for an Atheist, and if I had confess't the whole Plot, I must have
been Branded for a Fool; therefore to avoid the Imputations of Atheism, and
Imprudence, I advised my Protomartyrs to make such cloudy confessions, and
mystical denials, that the Tories thought there was enough confessed, to believe
the whole conspiracy; and my Whigs, and Trimmers, thought there was so much
denied, as they saw reason to believe there was no Plot at all.

But alas, Sir, though popular delusion be an easy Art, yet I find it
impossible to put a Sham upon the King, or the Blazing Star; I cannot impose
upon the wisdom of the one, nor escape the influence of the other.


Po. But what, have you no Crutches for the Good Old Cause, to support her in
her decrepit Age, but will you suffer her to drop, and dye?


Ph. Truly I begin to despond, for in the days of Charles the First, our
designs met such a prosperous and prodigious success, that I thought Providence
it self had taken the Covenant; but now fortune runs counter to all my Old
Stratagems, as if the Stars were turned Tories, and all the Angels, Abhorrers.

When first my Scottish Brethren took Arms, and Covenant, in defense of Kirk,
and Conscience; and Charles the First marched down with a Potent Army, able to
have swallowed any thing in Scotland, but the Covenant, then he was Graciously
pleased to make a civil Pacification with my Pious dissemblers, and that peace
was the first piece of his Scaffold; but now when my Field-Conventiclers of
Scotland, Preached up their Natural Religion of Reb ^llion upon the head of a
Drum, and for an use of Terror, took Sword and Musket to assert their Champain
Divinity, presently Charles the Second sends express order to fight them, and
which is worse, he beat them too.

Charles the First was so confiding, that he trusted the Parliament with those
Royal trifles, Magazines, and Militia. But Charles the Second, like the
Politic Philistine, has disarmed the people of the Lord, and would not have
one Sword nor Sphere found in all the hands of Israel; but as for himself, he
is so far from being unguarded, that White Hall looks more like a Garrison,
than a Palace, and the Tower more formidable than your Castle of St. Angelo,
and if his Exchequer were as full as his Magazines, and his Plate-fleet were
proportioned to his Men of War, he would affright both Rome, and Carthage,
Monsieur, and Mahomet.

Charles the First did grant us that mighty power to dissolve the King, and
perpetuate the Parliament, but now I am afraid this King will live for ever,
while Parliaments, like Mortal Creatures, are exposed to the frailties of
Prorogations, and Dissolutions, and the fainting fits of Trienninal Intervals.

There was a time, when Charles the First was so contemptible, that we looked
upon him as the mere Sign of the Kings Head, and then, my Heroic Commons
could pass that daring Vote of Non-addresses; but the Life and Honor of this
King is valued at such a Rate, that we are plagued with Addresses from all
Quarters; and such Addresses too, as tend more to make him a Sultan, than a
Sacrifice, for a long time our Gazets were so crowded with County, and
Corporation-Addresses, that there was no room for the Imperial Army, or the
French Troops; nay the Turk, and the Dutch, were excluded, as if there had been
no business in the World but Addressing; we had nothing but Lost Dogs, Straied
Horses, and Renegado's, to bring up the rear of the Tory Addressers.

In our prosperous days the very Tail of the Commons could whip off the Head of
a King, but now the hand of the King has taken off the Head of the Commons;
thus my fortune is reverst, and I fear I shall be forced, either to repent or
despair, and those are both desperate extremities.


Po. I remember that in our first conference, you made your Critical remark
upon that Crucifying Lesson, which by the course of the English Calendar falls
upon the 30th. of January, and next upon the 29th. of May; and did conclude
upon this unforeseen appointment, that Providence had designed you to act over
the same Tragedy again; but I did then interpret that notable accident to a
contrary Sense, and told you that it might rather indicate that Charles the
Second, was Born to revenge the Blood of the First; and now I believe you will
find me a truer Prophet than your dear Mahomet, and be made sensible of my
Infallibility; truly Brother I begin to fear, that Monarchy will at last prove
more jure divino, than you and I.

But notwithstanding your droll upon the Throng of Addressers, yet I look upon
that proceeding as a very Politic Stratagem; for they have rendered the King
Great and Formidable, and have firmly established that Church, which you and I
have labored to destroy; you may remember that your flourishing Address to
Oliver, in LIII. did help to make him as great as the Mogul, for those
Magnificent Strains and Titles awed the people into as great an opinion of
Cromwell, as if he had been Brother to the Sun, Kinsman to the Moon, and Cozen
German to the Stars; and therefore sure this public artifice of Popular
Addresses must have as Glorious an effect upon a lawful Prince, as it had in
the Case of an Usurper; for I am afraid the King has Listed more men by the
Rolls of Addresses, than ever you did by the Musters of Petitions.


Ph. Give me, once more but a Rampant and Sitting-house of Commons, and I will
not value all the ranting Addresses of England, for many of those men, who now
adore the King, as the Pagans did their Jupiter, would then Worship our God
Mercurius, and fall down before the chief Speaker of the People.

I know several in the List of Addressers, who inserted their names in a mere
Trimming compliance to Tantivy Times; but if ever occasion serves, will with
more cheerfulness subscribe a Petition for a Parliament, than ever they did an
Address to the King.

And besides, there are many of these promising Addressers, who are men of so
little and narrow Souls, that they value their Blood, and their Gold, at the
same rate; and would not part with three Drops of the one, nor three Scruples
of the other, to save the King and his Three Crowns; and what an empty
Complement is the promise of Lives and Fortunes, from Cowards, and Misers!

But I will grant, that there are vast numbers of Addressers, who are men of
Resolution, and such Simplicity of Conscience as to think themselves obliged by
their promise, to Sacrifice both Men and Money in defense of the King; but
suppose we had dispatched the King and the Duke at the Rye, and there had been
no right Heir to the Crown, within the compass of the four Seas; then all the
Addresses would have been Impertinent extravagancies, for you know that he, who
destroys the King, dissolves the whole Militia; and in this Case, the
Addressers would have demurred upon Punctilio's of Law, and would not have
dared to beat a Drum and Rendesvouz'd without Commission; but by virtue of our
Covenant, and Association, we should have had the grace to have taken Arms, and
embodied, without, and against Authority, and thus in that Critical
Interregnum, we would have possess't our selves of the Kingdom, and Massacred
the Divided Addressers, before ever they could have agreed upon a method of
defense.


Po. I confess this would have been a very difficult dilemma, especially if you
had noised it for a Popish Plot, for if you had reported, that the Assassins
were Papists, that rumor would have amuzed the Addressers, and so alarmed the
Vulgus, that you might have effected your designs before the discovery of the
Cheat.


Ph. You may be sure we would have used that customary Artifice.


Po. But upon further Consideration, I fancy, that the Addressers having
engaged in defense of the Monarchy, and Lineal Succession; and knowing their
Lives and Fortunes were at Stake, in such a desperate Crisis, would have had
the wisdom to Arm, and Unite, and secured their respective Counties, 'till the
quiet Inauguration of the next Successor, and though this proceeding had been
Illegal, yet they should have hoped that the Merit of the Service would have
pleaded their Impunity.

You know that in the Hurricane of the Popish Plot, the Commons resolved that
if the King had been Assassinated, they would have revenged his Blood with a
Massacre of all the Papists in England, and now your Conspiracy is so
notorious, that should the King dye by Violence, the Vengeance might fall upon
your own heads, and Enraged Addressers would cry in your own Language, Down
with them, Root and Branch.


Ph. Indeed if it could be supposed, that ever the Cavaliers could be wise and
resolute, I must despair, but oh! that London were as nigh Constantinople, as
Larissa, I would soon persuade my Turkish Brethren to take the Covenant, and
Court the Sultan into the Association, I would soon send Charles to visit the
Seraglio, and the Duke to the Dardanels, Paul's should be a Mosquee, and brave
Ferguson, a Mufti.


Po. But can it be reconciled to any Christian pretensions to make a League
with Infidels?


Ph. Why, did not your most Christian King make a League with the most Turkish
Solomon against Charles the Fifth? and why might not I, by the same Christian
Policy make an Alliance with the Turk against Charles the Second? does not the
Turk frequently confederate with Christians, to serve the Ottoman Interest? and
I have heard of a Pope, who made a League with the Devil, to gratify his Romish
Ambition; and why should a True Protestant have less freedom to serve his
Interest, than the Pope, the Turk, or the Devil? Come, come, say what you will,
Interest is the greatest Sultan in the World, and has a larger dominion than
Religion.


Po. I confess that what you have said is so severely True, that I will not
dispute your Right to a Turkish Alliance; but however, it is unpracticable; and
distance denies you that advantage, for it is a long journey from Edghill to
Mount Olympus: But I would gladly understand, what hopes and Intrigues you have
at home, to prop a declining Cause.


Ph. This last Age has been a mere Game at Chesse, between the King and the
Punies; the Crown and the Commons; and I have made my advantage of every
motion; but Charles the Second has moved with so much caution and judgment,
that we must have yielded the Game if the Two Dukes had not --


Po. Hold, have a care, don't whisper the least Scandalum Magnatum.


Ph. This is very pleasant indeed, that You, whose Title and Frontispiece is
Blasphemy, should caution me against Humane Scandal.


Po. I shall not now dispute, who looks most like the Blaspheming Beast in the
Revelations, you or I; but I am sure, You may Blaspheme God and the King at a
Cheaper rate, than touch the honor of a Peer; you may with more indemnity,
Steal the Crown, than Spit upon a Coronet; Remember that Scandalum Magnatum
amounts to more than 20 l. a Month, and will more certainly ruin you, than all
the Poenal Laws.


Ph. Well, I thank you for the caution, for I confess I have spoke more
affronting words against the King, than I dare speak of a Peer.


Po. But Dukes and Peers apart; What hopes have you in a Parliament? I know you
have been used to Worship the Gods of the Valley, and if the Numen's of the
Lower House deceive you, you have nothing to expect but Ruin.


Ph. It is not long since, that I was as much afraid of a Parliament, as ever
you were of a General Council; for the first discovery of our Conspiracy filled
the Nation with so much noise, and horror, that all my Esquadron Volante, of
Neuters and Trimmers deserted me; and I was forced to live in Chimnies, and
Grott's; and wished my self in Coal-mines; and if the King had called a
Parliament at That juncture, I durst not have appeared in Elections; and all my
Patriots had such a Panick fear, of Carts, and Scaffolds, that they could not
have been persuaded to mount the Chair, in that unlucky Crisis; but since that
storm is so happily blown over, I Am even resolved for England again; and when
the Law of necessity shall oblige the King to Summon a Parliament, to cry, To
your Tents O Israel; and if it be in the power of Purse or Perjury, I will take
such a course, that the Blood of the Commons, shall be Inquired for, without
giving one Penny to the Crown.


Po. But do you think the King will ever give you the advantage to sit at
Westminster?


Ph. Alas, our Old seat at Westminster, is now no great advantage, for the
True-Protestant part of the City is grown so Tame, that they could see their
Charter condemned, without the Gallantry of a Tumult, though the passing that
sentence was a greater Judgment than the Plague. London has lost her Old brave
Cries of Justice, Justice, no evil Counselors; Will you buy any Crown and
Bishops Lands? The City Trained-hands, (as the Case stands now) would be more
ready to Guard the five Members to the Tower, than to secure them in the Town.

My only hope is in another House of One and Forty; for Stephens Chapel is as
Sacred to me as the Chapel of Loretto is to you; It has been Anciently the
Shrine of the Good Old Cause; and like the Senate House at Rome, it has been
Consecrated with the Blood of Caesar: Here has been so much Breath exhaled in
Popular Harangues, that the inner Plaster of the Walls is nothing but
Congealed Treason, and hence proceeds that Magical power, that the very Air of
the Old-house has left a Republican Tincture behind it, and no Member can
escape that Influence, but such as are drunk with Elixir Regale.

I have known several Gentlemen in former times, who, when they were first
chosen Members of Parliament, could discourse of nothing but Monarchy, and
Prerogative; but after they had breathed a few months in this Temple of our
Diana, they returned, with as cool, and popular a temper, as if they had sat in
the Stadthouse at Amsterdam.

But I am much concerned at the decays of this House, I am afraid it should
presage the declining of the sovereignty of the Commons elsewhere, and the
ruin of the Good Old Cause, and therefore I intend to advise my
Representatives to vote the Repair of those dilapidations, for fear the walls
should drop, and Stephen should Stone the Elders.

But if the Majority of the next house of Commons should be adorers of the
Crown, and Church, I might be ruined by my own precedents; for such a House may
pack a Tory Committee of Elections, and I have taught That Divan in former
Times, such an Arbitrary way of proceeding, that they had got a Trick to Elect
and Reprobate, whom they pleased, without any Appeal from their supreme
judgment; and so, by my own method, all my Members would be excluded, and not
one Saint left in the Sanhedrim; but there are so many mischievous
consequences, of a Cavaliering House of Commons, that I dare not fancy the
Possibility of such an Assembly.


Po. Well, I see but small hopes of effecting our designs in this Age; but
pray, Study some Arts to keep up the Good Old Cause, that it may not sink into
its Primitive Nothing, but may be preserved in being, 'till a more fortunate
juncture; for as the Good Old Cause can never prosper in England, without the
Name, and Noise of Popery, so Popery cannot work without the Fanatic Tools of
the Good Old Cause.


Ph. Never fear, I don't question but to continue the Existence of the Good Old
Cause, as long as you can maintain your Succession to the Triple Crown; for I
have many Artifices to this purpose.


Po. Pray, let me understand your Arts.


Ph. First then, in all that Noble Science of Popular Delusion, there is not a
greater charm than Religious Cant; for you know, the greatest part of Mankind,
are most influenced by Passion, and Fancy, and there are few such Sages as to
regard the dull Oracles of Truth and Sobernesses; for suppose I should teach my
Disciples, that the great design of Christianity was to teach the World the
serious pursuit of Peace and Holiness, and that a holy, and peaceable Temper
would best serve the quiet of our own Minds, the Interest of Society, and
Government, and would be the most Rational Preparation for that Life and
Communion of Angels; alas, Sir, such solemn Divinity as this, spoken with an
Apostolical Gravity would have no more effect upon the Crowd, than the Kings
Speeches have had sometimes upon the House of Commons; but by my Theatrical
Arts and Enthusiastic Divinity, I can Preach the Throng into Raptures, and
Extacies, and mount their Souls three Stories higher than Paul's; and then with
One sad Grimace, and Lureing Tone, make them Stoop in a Moment; I can, when I
please, Preach them into Conflagrations of Zeal, or Inundations of Tears, or
howl them into Hurricanes and Storms of Sighs and Groans, and all this by a
mysterious Screw of the Face, and the Eccho's of a Passionate Noise.


Po. I have heard that you do equal, if not excel my Jesuits, in this Art of
Popular Enchantment, pray give me the diversion of a short Essay of this nature.


Ph. Well then, first for the true set of the Face -- D' you mark the
Semicircles of the Eyes; the Triangles and Parallelograms of the Mouth and Face?


Po. Ha, ha, ha, bring your Face to rights again, for I shall laugh loud enough
for a discovery. But now let us have a taste of your Canting.


Ph. Be not troubled in mind, Jo. Collings Cordials for the fainting Soul. part
2. p. 165.
to be sad and sorrowful is the sign of an ill-thriving Christian, Crying is a
Childish trick, a Christian out of long Coats would be ashamed on it

Do but wait a while, Cordials 2d. part, p. 169.
the day is coming, when Christ shall play no more at hide and seek with his
Saints, when all Christ's business beyond Sea shall be done.

When he shall say, Cordials 2d. part, p. 87.
come Jaylors, bring all those my Enemies before me, Prelates, Malignants,
Kings, Nobles, Gentry.


Po. This Cheat must do, I see that Canting will move a passion as well as a
Crucifix; but methinks your Charity is very narrow to allow none to be saved,
but your selves and the House of Commons.


Ph. You and I may differ in some matters of Faith, but I am sure we are
Brethren in the measures of Charity, for we are both agreed to damn all the
world but our selves; the only difference is, that I am for plain right-down
damming, but you are for the Ceremonies of Malediction, and must Curse with the
Superstitions of B ^ll, Book and Candle.


Po. But how can your Conscience dispense with so much profane Burlesque, to
serve a Popular Interest?


Ph. I think your Conscience is as well matched as our Charity; your Jesuits
first taught me the art of Canting, nay and to Cant too upon the very Canticum
Canticorum; for you know, the Virgin Mary is the great Goddess of Rome, as the
Good Old Cause is the Diana of Geneva, and you have been guilty of more
Blasphemy in Devotion to the One, than ever I Canted in the service of the
Other.

Your Jesuit Poza, in his Elucidarium Deiparae, lib. 2. p. 477. has told the
world, that, excepting the Hypostatical Union, the Conception of the Virgin was
more miraculous, than that of Jesus, and that the Virgin may be called, not
only the Mother but the Father of Christ, p. 485. he would make us believe,
that her Body had such a perfection of Beauty and Symmetry, that her formation
was the work of Forty Ages, lib. 3. p. 939. and thus the Heavens and the Earth,
which, at most, took but six days in framing, must be thought the slight and
careless dash of Omnipotence, but the Creation of the Virgin Mary must be the
only Elaborate work and design of Infinite Wisdom.

And though Paul has told us, that we must all be Changed, before we can be
fitted for that Celestial State, yet Poza excepts the Virgin, and tells us, her
Natural Beauty was so Angelical, that she shall suffer no Alteration, and that
God himself Non enim Virginia mortuis resurgenti addi potuit a Domino corporis
pulchritudo. Lib. 3. p. 947.
can add no greater Perfection to her at the Resurrection of the dead.

And that her Stature was as prodigious as her Beauty, he proves by this
Argument: The Virgins Smock, which Charles the Great Lodged in the Cathedral of
Aquisgran, at his return from Constantinople, A. D. 810.

Ex qua mensura certum est, Mariam fuisse proceram, nam si supra ulnas duas
addas caput Deiparae, planum facies illam fuisse altissimam: nam and
considerandum venit Sacrum illud indusium terram non contigisse. P. 962.
Was more than Two Else Long, and then making allowance for her Head, and
considering that Sacred Linen did not touch the Ground, and it is as plain as
any demonstration in Euclid, that she was wondrous Tall.

The Beauty of some particular Parts he draws from the Canticles, as that her
Eyes were of an Olive-green, appears from Canticles, 7. 4. Thine Eyes are like
the Fish-pools in Heshbon: Now because the Text is not clear at first sight,
therefore it is enlightened by an Ingenious Gloss, that the Fishponds of Heshbon
are Green by reflection of the Verdant Banks and Trees, and then it is as
Evident, as your Supremacy from Genesis 1. 16.

That her Nose was strong and placed true as a Meridian, in the Midst of her
Face he Learnedly proves from Cant. 7. 4. Thy Nose is as the Tower of Lebanon,
which looks toward Damascus.

That her Lips were of a pure Vermilion is past dispute, from Cant. 4. 3. Thy
Lips are like a thread of Scarlet.

That her Teeth were White and Well-set, is put past question, from Cant. 4. 2.
Thy Teeth are like a stock of Sheep, that are even shorn, which came up from
the washing.

That her Neck was Long and well shaped, is demonstrated from Cant. 4. 4. Thy
Neck is like the Tower of David, etc.


Po. You must know that the Italians, Spanish and French are Nations of an
Amorous Temper, and therefore an extravagant delineation of the Virgins Beauty
does much contribute to the devotion of that people, and what you think
Ridiculous in England, is Religious in Italy.


Ph. And what you think Ridiculous in Italy, will pass for Religion in England,
I understand the English Temper, as well as you do the Italian; and don't
question but My Mode of Canting will prevail as much in London, as Yours does
at Rome, if I can procure Stages.


Po. I do grant that you are well accomplished in this charming Science, and
that your Incantations must be effectual upon the Vulgus; but what Other Arts
have you to propagate the Good Old Cause?


Ph. That no power may ever cut off the entail of the Good Old Cause, we are
resolved to give the Covenant to our Children, from Generation to Generation,
as the dying Laplanders bequeath their Familiars; and by this politic method,
We and our Brethren in Lapland shall perpetuate the Succession of Rebellion,
and Witchcraft.


Po. This Policy may make the Cause Immortal, but what is the reason we have
seen so few Popular Pamphlets of late? for though the times will not allow you to
draw the Sword, yet your Covenanting hand is obliged to employ the Pen in
defense of the Good Old Cause.


Ph. I know that Seditious Pamphlets are excellent Hand-granadoes, and with
these I have often fired the Tinder of the Town, and all the Chaff and Stubble in
the Country, but now I am haunted with Old Nobs the Bellman, the Varlet dogs me
at every corner, and as soon as ever I give fire, he flies upon the Squib with
his Extinguisher; and this is not all the mischief neither, for when he spies
the first spark, he cries, fire, fire, and the Villain has got such a Speaking
Trumpet, that his voice is heard from Dan to Beersheba, and so the Nation is
Alarmed and my designs defeated.

This is he that Expounded all the Algebra of Algernon, and the Riddles of
Russell's Speech.


Po. Pray, what is this Nobs?


Ph. He is Founder of a New Popish Order, called Observators, and his business
is to be the Kings Spectacle-maker, for by the help of his Glasses, every
Poreblind Tory can plainly read my Plots, and Intrigues, though close set in a
Geneva Print.


Po. I have heard of this pestilent fellow, and have reason to believe him as
much my Enemy, as yours, and if he be not silenced, he will do us more mischief
than all the Guns in the Tower; I wonder you don't plant him upon
Primrose-hill, or however, methinks your Guinny Company might bring over a
Couple of Blacks to accuse him for a Roman Censor, and Swear they saw my
Nuntio, pay him a Pension of a Thousand Guinny's.


Ph. I knew this would be the most Infallible Method to blast his Reputation,
and therefore I did accuse him of Popery, but could not find one Believer in
all the Privy Council.

But I hope the Northern Stars will take the Covenant again in spite of
Gadbury, and if ever I come to wear the Law by my side, and Magna Charta in my
Pocket, I Will mount Old Momus upon the top of the Monument, he shall dye like
himself and hang with the most Universal Observation.


Po. I am convinced that it will be impossible to inthrone the Good Old Cause,
without those mighty Engines of Popular Pamphlets, and Parliaments, and
therefore, pray proceed in your methods of Propagation, for that is the utmost
we can hope for in this Age.


Ph. Well then, I consider that the Cause can never be maintained by mere
Mechanics, and should we send our Youth to Universities, they would be taught
Obedience to Statutes, and wear off the Natural Abhorrence of white Linen and
Liturgy; and thus being disciplined in those Seraglio's, they would become a
kind of Janisaries, and be taught to destroy that Religion into which they were
Born, and this we have found by fatal experiments.

And therefore to prevent this mischief, we have erected our Private Gymnasia,
and in these Seminaries, we Read to our Youth the Politics and Divinity of
Geneva; here they are taught the Natural Philosophy, and all the Liberal Arts
and Sciences of Sedition, and Rebellion.

These Gymnasia are our Spiritual Artillery-Grounds; here my Veterane Champions
instruct their Young Volunteers in the management of Tongue and Face, how to
fire a Mouth-granado, how to beat all the Points of War upon the Pulpit-drum;
when to lie in Ambuscade, and when to raise their Batteries against the
Government, how to Undermine a Throne, and Sap the walls of a Cathedral.


Po. This Essential Policy, for neither Popery nor Presbytery can be Propagated
without Seminaries, and therefore I suppose the design of your Gymnasia was
borrowed from Doway and St. Omers, which places my Cardinal Bentivoglio
ingeniously styles Military Stations, Questi Seminarii sono come gli
alloggiamenti militari, o ^c apprendono calor disciplina soldati spirituali
c'nanno dopo a disender l ^ causa cattolica in Inghilterra. Card. Benti.
Relatione de prove. ubl. de Flandria, p. 209.
where my Spiritual Soldiery are disciplined in the Arts of Holy War, and are
drawn out from thence to defend the Catholic Cause in England: Now you and I
may every year send forth our several Detachments from these Spiritual
Garrisons, and so we may beleaguer the Church of England on Both-sides; the
only fear is that Lewis should beat up our Quarters in Flanders, and Charles
should dismantle your Cittadels in England.


Ph. Besides these Artillery-Companies, I have a Flying Squadron of Neutral
Clergy, quartered within the Lines of the Church of England, and these, by
their whispers in the Desk, and Noise in the Pulpit, do me more service in the
Church, than all my Doctors in the Synagogue; for you know, one piece of
Ordnance within the Ship, whose mouth is directed to the keel, if it be well
charged, and fired, must do more fatal Execution, than a thousand shot at two
mile distance.

These men teach their people to clamor against the Canonical Clergy, and the
Heights of Hierarchy, and dispose them for an easy Compliance to the Model of
Geneva; and therefore upon the first revolution, they and their whole Brigades
will come over to our Triumphant Banners.

These men Resemble that Asian Sect, which the Turks call the Raphasis, who are
neither Zealous Musselmen, nor devout Christians, but according as their humor
and Interest move them, can Worship, either Christ, or Mahomet, and go
indifferently, in Pilgrimage, to Meccha, or Jerusalem.


Po. These Ecclesiastic Neuters, and Lay-trimmers must do you excellent
Service; and therefore I advise you to Court, and admire these men, as the
Greater Saints and Wiser Subjects; for they must be Zealous Loyallists, who
uphold the Height, and Honor of a Government, but men of Cold, and Trimming
Tempers will betray it with Indifferency, and Moderation, and look upon its
Ruin with half a smile.

What were they, who ruined my Authority in England, in the days of Henry the
Eighth, but Trimming Papists? What were my Gibellines, that shaked the Papacy,
in the Thirteenth Century, but Prudential Catholics? And those Bishops in the
Council of Constance, and the Basilisks of Basil, who usurped the Prerogative
of deposing Popes, and Decreed Me Inferior to a General Council, were all
Romish Trimmers, and therefore why should not the Church of England suffer by
Trimmers, as well as the Church of Rome?


Ph. Sir, Let me alone to make my advantage of these men's Tempers: But to
proceed,

My most Infallible art, to continue the Reputation of the Good Old Cause, is
the Eminency of a Politic Sanctity, and Si vis fallere Plebem; finge Deos --
is as good Latin in England, as ever it was at Rome.


Po. Pray, Let me know wherein your Sanctity consists?


Ph. In Sabboths and Sobriety; for as for Faith, That relates to things not
seen, and is a Virtue of it self, Invisible; Obedience to Superiors is mere
Human Courtship and Slavery; and therefore does not become the Privilege and
Freedom of Saints; Meekness, Humility and Charity are all but Good Nature: But
to be Sober and keep a Sabbath, are the most Popular signs of Grace and
Sanctity.


Po. This is as gross a Cheat, as the Tears, and Bleeding of a Romish Image,
for if Sobriety be the Grand Essential of Religion, Mahomet was a diviner
Prophet than Jesus, for he was so far from Turning Water into Wine, that his
Alcoran has Turned Wine into Water, and not only denied his Disciples the whole
Firkins, but does not allow them the juice of one single Grape.

And if to keep a Sabbath, be the Great Character of a Saint, the Jew is as
much a Christian as you.


Ph. Alas, this is too fine and Metaphysical for the Pia Matters of the
Unthinking Crowd, and notwithstanding these reasons, the Cheat is popular and
must prevail, a Stanch and demure Assassin will pass for a greater Saint in the
opinion of the Vulgus, than a Damning Carowsing Cavalier, and he, who like the
Pharisee, can spend the whole Sabbath in Synagogues, and Long-prayers, may Plot
against Caesar, and Rob Widows Houses for six days after, and yet keep the
Reputation of a Saint.


Po. I know that a Reserved soberness must command the Peoples Veneration; but
I most admire how you can Impose upon them that Melancholy Imposture of
Sabbatizing.

Your Turkish Brethren, when the Prayers of their Mosques are ended, can upon
their Sabbath return to their common business, without the least charge of
Profanation.

The Jews in Barbary, after their devotions of the Synagogue, do spend the rest
of their Sabbath in the utmost Gaiety, and briskest festivity.

Your Dutch Brethren make no more scruple of Taverns, or Tables, upon a Sunday,
than they did in burning the ships at Chattam.

The whole Catholic Church did never look upon the Sunday as a Jewish Sabbath,
but a Christian Festival; indeed they always took care for the Solemnities of
public Religion, but when those Devotions of the day were ended, it did never
forbid any Innocent Mirth, or diversion, but thought that Agreeable to so great
a fesival.

Docemus ut in die solis quisque abstineat a mercatura, etc.
Your ancient Canons under King Edgar, did enjoin, that upon the Sunday all
people should abstain from Trade, or Merchandise; they thought there was too
much busy Care, and Uneasiness, in those affairs, to consist with the cheerful
diversions of a Festival; and it was wisely provided by the Law of Canutus,
Nemo die Dominico morti objicitor.
that no Criminal should be put to death upon the Lords day; for such
Executions of Justice, were Acts and Spectacles, too sad and severe; and would
have sowred the pleasures of a Feast.

But those harmless diversions which only tend to the promoting of health,
friendship, or pleasantness of mind, were never prohibited by any Law or Canon
of the Catholic Church.

I am sure you have neither Precept, nor Precedent, from Christ, or his
Apostles, for your Sabbatical Severities.

As for the Jews, they were a people so Base and Earthy, that they would have
allowed no time for solemn devotion to God, or diversion to their domestics,
and therefore God was pleased, next to his own honor, to provide for the ease
and relaxation of the Jewish Laborers, for without the Laws of Sabbaths, the
Jewish Servants had been as great Slaves in Israel as their Forefathers were
in Egypt, and would have found no Jubilee, but the day of Death, and no Rest,
but a Bed or a Grave: Therefore it is evident, that God did design the Sabbath
to be a Cheerful Mixture, of devotion, and diversion, for if that whole day
must have been spent in the Strictest Offices of Religion, that Restraint would
have been more tedious to the youth and Servants of Israel, than the Plough,
and the Spade, and would have looked more like the Rigor of a fast, than the
favor of a Festival.

However, That Law of the Sabbath was a peculiar Sanction to the Jews, and no
more obliges the Christian World, than the Sacrificing of Bulls and Rams; now
what I have said in this case, I have not spoke as a Pope, but the sense of a
Common Catholic, and in the General defense of Christian Liberty, for in this
matter, Rome is no more concerned than Rotterdam.


Ph. I consider that if the people should be allowed their Sunday-diversions,
it would give them such a Gaiety, and Pleasantry of humor, that they would not
have Malice enough to be Rebels, nor be sullen enough, for Schismatics; and
therefore to gain the Reputation of Extraordinary Sanctity, and to continue the
divisions in England by a Censorious, and morose Temper, I have preached up the
Superstition of the Sabbath, both from the Pulpit and the Gallows.


Po. Pray tell me by what Sophistry you persuade the people into this delusion.


Ph. I tell them, that we Christians are bound to do God as much Service as the
Jews, and shall the Jews keep holy the Sabbath day, and we Christians profane
it?


Po. It Is true, we are obliged to worship, fall down and kneel, in our solemn
Addresses to the Divine Majesty, and to do this with as much Humility and
Reverence as the Jews did in the Tabernacle, or Temple, though your Ruder Modes
of Religion look more like Affront, than adoration.

Nay, I grant that we have as much moral reason to observe the Lords day, as
the Jews had for the observation of the Sabbath; but yet I cannot think that
howling and whining, sadness and sower Faces should be essential
Sanctifications of a Festival; Indeed the honor of God ought first to be
consulted, by the solemn homage of Public Religion, but when that service is
devoutly performed, I see no profaneness in harmless and healthful diversions.

When God enacted those Jewish Feasts of Weeks and Tabernacles, Mirth and
Recreation was made an essential part of those Festivals, Every Feast called,
was called Sabbath among the Jews.
they were as much obliged to rest from their Servile Labors upon those days,
Exodus 34. 21.
as they were upon the Sabbath, Deuteronomy. 16. 10.
and to keep them as Solemn Feasts to the Lord; no doubt but they did repair
upon those Feasts to a Holy place, and there did pay their Religious Homage to
the Lord of the whole Earth; there they made a Solemn Commemoration of his
peculiar providence, and offered up their first Fruits and Thanksgivings for
the prosperity and harvest of Israel; but when these Religious parts were
accomplished, the rest of those Festivals were to be spent in Mirth and
Jollity, and that too, by Divine Command, Deuteronomy. 16. 14. And thou shall rejoice
in thy Feast, thou and thy Son and thy Daughter, and thy Manservant, and thy
Maidservant, and the Levite, the Stranger and the Fatherless, and the Widow,
that are within thy Gates: And that there might not be the undecency of a Sigh,
or a sad Thought, to profane those Festivals, God repeats the injunction at the
end of the fifteenth verse, Thou shall surely rejoice: Now why the Jews should
be allowed, nay enjoined to be Merry and Pleasant, upon their Festivals, and we
Christians should be sad, and severe, upon Ours, I cannot understand; and
therefore your Sabbatarian delusion is to me one of the greatest Miracles of
Geneva.


Ph. But I tell the people, that we are bound to design and endeavor
perfection, and are always obliged to do that which is most Religious: Now
certainly to Read the Bible is better than to play at Football; to repeat
Sermons is more Religious than to Dance in a Circle; and sure Prayers, though
shot at Rovers, are fitter weapons for the Sabbath than Bows and Arrows; and
singing of Psalms is a more Sanctified Music than ringing of Bells.


Po. Whether those persons whose Heads understand little more than their Feet,
will not do less mischief with Footballs than with Bibles, is a great question
at Rome, and whether the extravagance of your Random-prayers have not more
wounded Religion, than all the Sunday-Bows and Arrows, may be doubted too; and
whether ringing of Bells be not as solemn melody as singing of Psalms, may
admit dispute, especially in those places, where there are Musical Bells and
Mad Voices.

But your whole argument is a mere Sophisme, and is founded upon a false
Postulatum, for we are not always bound to do that which is most Religious;
indeed in matters which have a moral contrariety, there we are always obliged
to do that which is good, and avoid that which is evil; but in two actions,
where neither is evil, we may in due circumstances, do that which is Innocent,
though not so great an Office of Piety as the other.

Thus St. Paul tells us, that Virginity is a purer State than a Married Life,
but yet if all Christians should think themselves obliged to this Angelick
Perfection, and should neither Marry, nor be given in Marriage, because it is
most Pious not to Touch a Woman, Christendom would be totally lost in the next
Century, and the whole Earth become the habitation of Gog and Magog.

To Pray, and to Worship God, are undoubtedly greater Acts of Religion, than to
Plow and to Trade, but if all Christians should therefore desert the Shop, and
the Field, and spend their days in Clossets and Temples, Christendom must be
fed by Miracles; and such superstition would look more like Frenzy than
Devotion, and therefore, though to Pray be a more Pious office than to Plow, yet
it is as Lawful in just Circumstances, to Plow, as it is to Pray: Thus though
Preaching and Praying be more Religious services, than Sport and Pastime, yet
such recreations as have no Moral Evil, and are not prohibited by any Divine or
Civil Law, are certainly Innocent, and when the Public Devotions of the Sunday
be duly performed, no man can offend by such diversions.

But though you use this argument for Popular seducement, yet this is not your
Rule of Practice: No question but to Pray and Worship God is far more
Religious, than to Shed Blood, but yet you forgot this Divinity at the Battle
of Edg-hill, and made no scruple of Murder, and Rebellion, though it was upon
that day, which you call the Sabbath.

For Subjects to make Prayers and Supplications for Kings, and all in
Authority, and to live a Quiet life in all Godliness, and Honesty, and to leave
it to the Lord of the whole world to influence the minds of Princes, and to
dispose of their persons and Crowns; no question but this is far more
Religious, than to usurp the Divine Prerogative, and set up whom we fancy, and
pull down what Prince we please, but yet you and I don't think our selves
obliged to this height of Perfection.

But how did you resent the September Thanksgiving?


Ph. Ah! Sir, it was to me a more melancholy day, than the Parliament-fast in
the Popish Plot.


Po. The appointing that Thanksgiving upon a Sunday, was in my opinion a
Politic design of the English Court, to cure the Nation of that sullen
distemper of Sabbatizing, by that cunning Essay of Mirth, and Dominical Triumph.


Ph. I declam'd against those profane Bonefires, as Sacrifices to Moloch, and
making the Children pass through the fire: The Author of the Practice of Piety
has recorded so many remarks of divine Vengeance upon Sabbath Breakers, that I
did hope those unhallowed fires would have made some Cities like unto Sodom and
Gomorrah, and left some Towns in Ashes; I did expect that the Gunpowder would
have Sabbatized, and would not have been so Diabolical, as to have flasht into
Fire and Brimstone: However I thought the Cannons might have proved like the
fiery Furnace, and have destroyed those men, who kindled the Flame: But those
Triumphing Prophanations being not revenged by any fire or Thunderbolts from
Heaven, I have lost my argument from Providence, and the Tories will fancy,
that the fire and smoke of that day was a kind of Incense and Burnt-offering.


Po. I am afraid that the English Nation will become so wise and Ingenious, as
to see through this Cheat, and recover their ancient Freedom and Generosity;
and the want of Puritanick Scruples will be a mighty disadvantage to the Cause.


Ph. I grant that the Supererrogating Superstition of the Sabbath, is the
Principal Foundation of Puritanisme, but I am secure of this advantage; for the
Church of England it self does contribute to this delusion; for though Paul tell
us, that the Ministration written in Stone is done away, yet Moses is read
every Sabbath day in the English Churches, as well as in the Jewish Synagogues;
and when the Minister (as if he came just from Mount Horeb) proclaims with a
loud voice, Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day, it is impossible the
people should forget to Sabbatize, and by this frequent Repetition of the
Fourth Commandment, the word Sabbath must be continued in its popular vogue,
and Sunday will be thought Profane, and Paganish; and hence it is, that not
only my Disciples, but the undiscerning Proselytes of the Church of England, do
commonly style the Lords day the Sabbath day, and do mistake it for the very
Sabbath in the Fourth Commandment.


Po. I see the Church of England was resolved to have the Reformation according
to Law, and after the Pattern of the Mount; but I wonder they are not ashamed to
Charge me with the Doctrine of Equivocation, when they themselves do every
Sunday Equivocate both with God and Man: For the people are enjoined in express
terms to observe the Jewish Sanction of the Sabbath, and to keep Holy the
Seventh day, and yet all this time, the First day of the Week is only Intended,
and when that Law of the Sabbath is fully pronounced, the people are taught to
Pray, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep THIS Law: So that
the best sense, which can be put upon that mistaken Ejaculation is this, Lord
we pray thee to give us grace to keep the Seventh day, but thou know we mean
the first.


Ph. My Rabbi's tell me, that the Ten Commandments being a Peculiar Sanction to
the Jews, were never received into any ancient Liturgy of the Greek or Latin
Churches; but the inserting them into the English Service was a very Fortunate
Innovation, and I shall improve the advantage; for the Church of England is now
under an inextricable Dilemma; if they continue this Mosaical Sanction, as part
of their Christian Service, it must perpetuate the humor of Judaizing: If they
should alter or expunge the Laws of Moses, it would cause such Popular
Outcries, that they dare not adventure the consequence.

It is the opinion of some, that the Evangelical Beatitudes were designed to
answer the Ten Commandments, and therefore like them were delivered from the
Mount; But yet if the Convocation should place those Beatitudes, and the whole
Pandect of Christian Laws, in the room of the Two Tables, it would not amount
to popular Satisfaction, for the Common people have as much, if not more,
veneration for Moses, than they have for Christ; for they do not murmur against
the Pictures of Moses and Aaron* though exposed in their holy places; but if
these two Jewish Saints were removed, and the Pictures of Christ and his
Apostles introduced into Churches, the people would clamor against the change
as rank Popery.


Po. Well, you have abundantly convinced me, that a Judaizing Puritanisme must
continue in England, as long as the Ten Commandments are continued in the
Common Prayer Book; but have you no other Stratagem to propogate the Good Old
Cause?


Ph. Truly at present I have no more in prospect, but only the hopes of a
Toleration; to have our Religious exercises confined to Private Families, is
like the restraint of Simple Marriage, and will never propagate with
expedition, but a Toleration is a kind of Spiritual Polygamy, and if I can once
again but espouse the Teeming Crowds, we shall Multiply like Jews, and bring
forth Captains of Fifties, and Captains of Hundreds, and Captains of Thousands.


Po. If ever you have an Indulgence, you must thank Rome for the favor; but
you can never expect it upon the account of your own Merit, for all your Plots,
and Associations, your Insolences, and Conspiracies, are dated from the Last
Indulgence, and though the King might forget that you denied his Father the
favor of his own Chaplains, yet he cannot but remember, how you abused his
Grace, and what where the mischiefs of the Late Toleration; and therefore I am
afraid you will be deceived in the hopes of a Second Indulgence.


Ph. To give the King his due, he is a Prince of great Humanity and good
Nature, and his anger being appeased by a few bloody Sacrifices, I hope he may
be persuaded that a freedom of Conscience in matters of Religion is the most
Sacred Right, and Liberty of the Subject, and that such an Act of Grace would
produce an Universal Calm, and force Assassins to adore him; I know he cannot
long endure to hear the Groans and Doleful complaints of ruined Families, who
pine under the pressure of Poenal Laws, and since it is no time to affront him,
I am resolved to appear as Patient as a Primitive Martyr; and thus I do hope
that by the Intercession of mighty Friends, and the artifice of a feigned
Humility, I may at length attain the Jubilee of a Second Indulgence, and then
--

But pray tell me, what is your Opinion concerning Toleration?


Po. I have a very good Opinion of a Toleration in England, but I will never
allow it at Rome, for I am of the same mind with your Presbyterian, that if the
Devil were to beg a favor, he would petition for an Universal Toleration, for
beside the ill consequences of State-factions, and fierce Animosities, an
Allowance of so many Divisions and Varieties in Religion, must occasion an
Indifferency in looser minds, and make them dispute the very Fundamentals, and
therefore I believe that a Toleration tends more to Atheism, than the Spanish
Inquisition.

But now I must leave you, and consult with the Imperial and Venetian
Ambassadors concerning that grand Affair of the Turkish War; and since you are
resolved for England again, I wish you a Short Voyage, and a Long Parliament.


Ph. Undone! undone! I spy an Englishman of War under full Sail, Top and Top
Gallant, and he seems to pursue us.


Ital. Seamen. Well, what if it be? we are not Conscious to our selves of any
Affront to the King of Great Britain, we will not pretend to flee, we will Furl
our Sails, expect and Salute him.


Ph. Oh! that I had seen a Flag with Mahomets Half Moon, it had been a far more
pleasing prospect than the Ensign of the Cross: I had rather be a slave in
Argiers, than a Prisoner in London.


Cavalier and a Guard. Gentlemen, is there not an English Phanatick, who under
some Tuscan Disgnise has stolen into this Italian Bottom?


Ital. Seamen. Signore, we have on Board a very Sullen Melancholy Passenger,
and he is now couched upon the Round Top, but we know nothing of his Religion,
whether he Worship God or the D ^vil, Christ or Mahomet; we are very willing to
part with him, for we have lost many of our Ships Company by a Bloody Flux, and
have been tossed with Storm and Tempest ever since he imbarq'd with us.


Caval. Come Soldiers, down with him, away with him, Disarm him, and clap him
under Deck.


Ph. Is this Great and Generous, to Triumph over a naked Man, and not leave me
a Sword to cut your Throat?


Cav. When the King shall think it Prudence to make Bedlam an Armory, and all
those Lunaticks Granadeers; then you may expect he should return your Sword,
and Trust you once more with his Militia and Magazines, but 'till then --


Ph. Oh! oh! oh! Spirits, Apparitions --


Cav. What Is the matter?


Ph. There appears a Murdered King and Two Archbishops, the Ghost of Strafford,
and one thin ghastly Ghost that looks like the shadow of an Umbra: Oh! oh! here
comes whole Troops of Malignant Specter, with Axes and Halters, Chains and
Wounds.


Ph. [He Rages.] Fire! fire! the Devil Tavern is all on fire! O the Cause! the
Cause! the Otes and the Votes, all in Flame in Brimstone!

The Kings Head has devoured the Dragons Tail!

Visions! Visions! The Half Moon is drowned in a Pipe of Greek Wine, and the
Head of Titus discovers the whole Plot upon the Top of the North Pole!

The French Bombs, thunder in the Vatican, and Charles's Wain drives over the
Bear and the Scorpion!

Now all is Dark, black as Egypt! Boy fetch me the Tinder-box of Aetna or
Strombolo!


Cav. Ho, Soldiers, our Renegado is raging Mad, in a very high Distraction,
Chain him quickly, for fear he fire the Ship, and leap over board.

Well, now lash him, give him Forty stripes and one more.


Ph. Furies, Tories, Devils, Tormentors, oh --


Cav. Come, call the Surgeon, we must Bleed him too.


Surgeon. What Quantity Sir?


Cav. If his Veins were as large, and as full as the Channels of the Nile, and
the Rhine, every drop could not expiate for his profuse Effusions of Sacred and
Loyal Blood, but bleed him Eight and Forty Ounces.

Well, now I wish, that this just method might reduce him to a sober mind, and
to a quiet and Governable Temper, 'till then I will leave him in Irons, and he
that gives him liberty, as long as he is a Phanatick, must have madness enough
to be intitl'd to his Chains.


FINIS.

