The UPRIGHT Lives of the Heathen Briefly Noted: Or, Epistles and Discourses
betwixt Alexander the Conqueror AND DINDIMUS King of the Brachmans Giving an
Account what sort of People they are, their Divinity and Philosophy, with their
manner of Living, etc.

Collected together, and Published for a general Service.

Pythagoras says, God resembles Light and Truth: God himself inhabits tho
lowest, highest and middlemost; there is no being or place without God.
Socrates said, God is so great, as that at once he sees all, hears all, is
every where, and orders all. Philo, a Jew born, yet a very noted Philosopher,
says, How should the Soul of a man know God, if he did not inspire her, and
take hold of her by his divine Power? Who after Death, reach the heavenly
plain,
Become like God, and never dye again*
The Golden distick of the Pythagorians, as it has been called.

London, Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul, at the Crooked-Billet in
Holy-Well-Lane, near Shoreditch.

1. Dindimus King of the Brachmans, his Letter to Alexander the Conqueror.

KING, We have heard of thy Battles and Victories, but what shall suffice thee
whom all the World suffices not? Riches we have none for thee; why then
should thou war on us? All our Goods are to common us: Vile things and scarce
we have, instead of Gold and great Array: Our Women be not arrayed to please; for
great Array is counted naught with us; not highness nor fairness: Our Women
desire no more Fairness than they have by kind; dry Ditches and Dens stand us
in double stead, for Harbor while we live, and for Graves when we are dead. If
we have sometimes a King, it is not to do us Right; for Honesty by kind will do
that: We have amongst us neither Doom nor Plea, for we do nothing that needs
Redress, either by Doom or Plea: We desire no more than Reason and Kind asks;
we hold that needful which we know is measurable: Our People have one Law, and
do nothing against this Law of Kind: We use no Trade to make us covetous: We
shun and forsake soul Sloth and Leachery. We do nothing that needs Punishment.
It is unlawful to us to wound the Hills with Coulters, or the Ax: We use no
glutting or outragiousness of Meat or Drink, therefore we be not sick: We dwell
in the dry Ditches; Heaven finds us a Covering, the Earth a Lodging: We be not
Warriors, we make peace with good living, not with strength: We seek not
plentious Gain; for it is right liking to us to behold the Firmament and Stars
of Heaven: We be men of single Speech, its common to us all not to Lie. The God
of all Grace is our God; for he has liking in our words and deeds, by our
manner of speaking; he is a Word, a Spirit, Love and Thought, and is not
pleased with worldly Riches, but with holy Works and thanks for his Grace.

Upon this King Alexander answered with Taunts and Jeers, as if Dindimus
despised Gods Benefits, counting all Handicrasis sinful; and also say, That
they are Gods, and so have envy to God, and blame his fairest Creatures.

But Dindimus answered, We be not at home in this world, we come not to dwell
here, etc. we be not aliend with charges of Sin, but without each manner of
charge, we draw near to our own Houses, and lie fast homewards; we say, Not we
be Godds, but we say, we will not abuse the goodness of God Almighty: we say,
things are seemly which are lawful; God has put the use of things into men's
freedom; then he that leaves the worst, and follows the best, is not God,
but is made Gods Friend. When ye swell in Wealth, and Pride has blown you up,
ye forget that ye are Men, and say that God reekons of Mankind. Ye build
Temples to your selves, in which ye shed men's Blood; and therefore I call you
Wood (or Mad) for ye wot not what ye do; and if ye despise Gods writing, then
ye hold in the Sacrilege.

Then Alexander writes this Epistle to him again, with many Taunts and Jeers,
comparing them in their Sacrifices to them that were in Prison, saying, The
cause why they tilled not the ground was because they had no Iron: And their
Women not costly arrayed, is no marvel, because they have not wherewith.

Dindimus answered, Ye make wars and Battles, and war outwardly against men,
because ye have not overcome the Enemy Within; but we Brachmans have overcome
the inward Battles in our Members, and rest secure, and have no Battles
outwardly; we behold the Firmament of Heaven, her Birds singing; we be healed
and fed with Leaves and Fruits of Trees; we drink Water, and sing Songs in
Worship of God, and take heed, and think of the Life coming. We be approved
with few words, and even still, and hold our peace. Ye say what shall be done,
and yet do it not: Your Wit and Wisdom is in your Lips; ye hunger after Gold,
ye need Houses and Servants, ye want Reverence and Worship, etc.

II. Of the Ambassadors sent by Alexander to Dindimus, with his Reply to them.

After that, Alexander sent Ambassadors to Dindimus, requiring him, and
charging him, To come to him without delay; promising him great Gifts and
Rewards if he obeyed, which if he did not he should loose his Life; and all
this in the Name of Alexander, the King of all men, and Son of the great Godd
Jupiter.

But Dindimus singling at this vapor, and not moving his head from the Leaves
he lay upon, and lay still, and answered after this manner, Soth fast, God, the
great King, gives man right, and does no man Wrong; he never begot Injury, but
Light, Life, Peace, the Water, Body and Souls, which he also receives when they
have finished their course; nor was he ever the Author of Lust: This is my Lord
and only God, who as he hates Murder, so he wageth not War, nor raises
Strife. The things I seek, I easily attain to; those things which I regard not,
I am not to be driven to; if therefore Alexander take my Head, and slay me, he
shall not destroy my Soul, which will return to the Lord, while the Body, which
was taken out of the Earth, shall thereunto return; for I being made a Spirit,
shall ascend unto my God, who included us in the flesh, and placed us upon this
Earth, to try us, whether we being gone forth from him, would live unto him, as
he has commanded, who demands an account of those that depart; for he is a
Judge of all Injuries: and the Sighs of those that are injuriously treated,
become the pain of those that injure them. Let Alexander then threaten them
that love Silver and Gold, and fear Death; neither of which have place amongst
the Brachmans, who do neither fear the one nor love the other. Go therefore and
tell Alexander, Dindimus wants him not, and if he wants Dindimus, let him come
to him.

III. The Conference betwixt Alexander and Dindimus.

Which being reported to Alexander, he was the more desirous to see the single
old man, that could conquer him after he had conquered so many Nations, and so
left all Pomp and Boasting, comes to him, and said, I come to hear a word of
Wisdom from thee, whom I hear do converse with God.

To whom Dindimus replied, Why distrubest thou our Peace: very willingly would
I administer to thee, the words of the Wisdom of God, had thou but place in
thy Mind, to receive the Gift of God administered; but thy Mind being filled
with various Lusts, unsatiable Avarice, and devilish Desire to Rule, which
fight against me and my designs of drawing thee off from destroying Nations,
and shedding humane Blood, are in all things contrary to the Wisdom, by which I
and the Brachmans are led, who worship God, love Men, contemn Gold, despise
Death and slight Pleasures; whereas Alexander and his fear Death, love Gold,
covet Pleasure, hate Men and despise God; adding, How can I speak unto thee the
words of the Wisdom of God, whose Cogitations are so filled with Pomp,
Ostentation and inordinate Lusts, that a whole World is not able to satiate
thee? How then shall I suffice thee? And further, God has made thee little,
and thou desire all the World; yet need thou have as little Land at last,
as thou see me lie upon, or thy self sit upon: If thou learnest Wisdom of me,
it is all thou shall have, etc. I know God's Secrets; for God does will that I
be partaker of his works; then whether, say thou, is most right, to misbid
men, or to defend them, and do them right? to shed and kill, or to keep and
save? If thou slay me, I go to God.

However, he refused not to give Alexander that counsel, which as he confessed,
was convinced in his heart, was good, but could not follow, viz. to cease
warring against men without, and engage himself in another warfare, against the
Enemies within himself, his Lusts, Affections and Desires, if he desired to be
Rich indeed, and to be a true Victor; assuring him, that all his Power, all his
Hosts, all his Riches, all his Pomp, would at last not avail him any thing; but
(says he) if thou will hearken unto my words, thou shall possess of my Goods,
who have God to my Friend, and whose Inspiration I enjoy within me -- Thus thou
shall overcome Lust, the Mother of Penury, which never obtains what it seeks;
thus thou shall with us honor thy self, by becoming such as God had created
thee. Adding, though thou slay me for telling thee these profitable things, I
fear not; for (says he) I shall return to my God, who created all things, who
knows my cause, and before whom nothing is hidden. I know not, says he,
whether thou shall be so happy as to find thy self persuaded by my words, but I
assure thee, if thou be not, when thou art departed hence, I shall see thee
punished for thy Actions, and hear thee lament with deep and sharp Sighs, the
Misery thou have put many to, etc. viz. when thou shall have no other Companion
than the Memory of the Evils thou have heaped upon thy self; for, says he, I
know the Pains justly inflicted by God upon unjust men. Then thou shall say
unto me, Dindimus, how good a Counselor were thou to me, etc!

These things Alexander heard (as its said of Herod concerning John Baptist)
not only without wroth, but with a placit Countenance, and replied, O Dindimus!
thou true Teacher of the Brachmans, thou come of God, I have found thee the
most excellent amongst men, by reason of the Spirit that is in thee: I know all
thou have spoken is true; God has brought thee forth, and sent thee into this
place, in which thou art happy and rich, wanting nothing, enjoying much rest
and peace* But what shall I do, who cohabit with continual Slaughter? I live in
great Dread, and am afraid of my own Warders; I dread more my Friends than my
Enemies; I may not leave them and trust others. At days I grieve other men,
and am at night grieved my self: If I would live in the Desert, my Lieutenants
would not suffer me; and though they would, being in this state, it is not
lawful for me to quit them; for how shall I defend my self before God, who has
assigned me this Lot. But thou Reverend old Man, and Servant of God, for these
words of Wisdom, wherewith thou have helped and rejoiced me, dehorting me from
War, receive thou my Presents, and despise me not; I am affected with Kindness,
honoring Wisdom: And so commanded his Servants to bring forth Gold and Silver;
Bread and Oil, and several sorts of Array; which Dindimus beholding, laughed,
saying to Alexander, Persuade (if thou can) the Birds about the Woods to
receive thy Gold, or sing the better for it; but if thou can not persuade
them, nor shall thou ever persuade me to be worse then they; I therefore
receive no unprofitable Present, which I can neither eat nor drink; nor do I
serve Soul-hurtful Riches, etc. Here is nothing in this Desert to be bought
with Gold, for God gives me all things freely, etc. selling nothing for Gold,
but freely bestowing all good things, and even the Mind on those that freely
accept it, etc. but for that I will not grieve thee too much, I will receive
the Oil of thee; And he walking about the Wood, gathered some sticks, and
kindled a Fire, he said, The Brachmans have all things, being fed by
Providence; and into the Fi^^ he poured the Oil, till it was all consumed, and
sang a Hymn to God Almighty, as follows:

O God Immortal! I give thee in all things Thanks; for thou rulest* in all
things, giving all things abundantly to thy Creature for their Food. Thou
creating this World, do preserve it, expecting the Souls which thou have sent
into it, that thou may, as God, justify those that have led a Pious Life,
and condemn those th^^ have not obeyed thy Laws; for all Righteous Judgment is
with thee, and Life Eternal prepared by thee, who with Eternal Goodness show
Mercy unto all.

Lastly, Now as concerning the Brachmans of India, Suidas tells of one Brachman
that prescribed their Rites and Laws, etc.

Of the Indian Philosophers, or men learned and Religious, the Brachmans obtain
the first place, as being nearest in sect to the Greeks. These are, after their
manner, Nazarites from the Womb: So soon as their Mother is conceived of them,
there are learned men appointed, which come to the Mother with Songs,
containing Precepts of Chastity: As they in years, they change their Masters;
they have their places of Exercise in a Grove, nigh to the City, where they are
busied in grave Concerns: They eat no living Creatures, nor have use of Women,
live frugarly, and lie upon skins; they will instruct such as will hear them,
but their Hearers must neither sneeze, spit nor speak. When they have in this
strict course spent thirty seven years, they may live more at pleasure and
liberty, in Diet, Habit, proper Habitations, and the use of Gold and Marriage;
they conceal their Mysteries from their Wives, lest they should blad them
abroad: They esteem this Life as Man's Conception, but his Death-day to be his
Birthday unto that true and happy Life, to him which has been rightly
Religious, [A worthy Sentence!] The Brachmans hold the World to be created
corruptible, round, ruled by the high God Water they imagine to have been the
beginning of making the World; and that be^^des the four Elements there is a
fifth Nature, whereof the Heavens and Stars consist: They hold the Immortality
of the Soul, and of the Torments of Hell, and that the Souls of the Righteous
go to God.

Megasthenes commends Mandanis (one of the Brachmans) saying, That when
Alexander 's Messengers told him, That he must come to the Son of Jupiter, with
Promise of Rewards if he came, but if otherwise, menacing Torture. He answered,
That neither was he Jupiter's Son, nor did possess any great part of the Earth.
As for himself, he neither respected his Gifts nor feared his Threatenings; for
while he lived, India yielded him sufficient; if he dyed, he should be freed
from Age, and exchange for a better and purer Life: whereupon Alexander both
pardoned and praised him.

Clemens Alexandrinas speaks of their Fastings, and other austere Courses, out
of Alex. Poly. Hist. de Ru^us judicis, The Brachmans (says he) neither eat any
quick thing, nor drink Wine, but some of them eat every day, as we do; some
only every third day: They contemn Death, nor much est^^m of Life, believing to
be Born again. Clem. Alex. storm. l. 3.

Suidas tells of a Nation called Brachmans, inhabiting an Island in the Sea,
where Alexander erected a Pillar, with Inscription, That he had passed so far.
They live an hundred and fifty years, and have neither Bread, Wine, Flesh,
Metal nor Houses, but live of the Fruits and clear Water, and are very
Religious, etc. These slay no Beasts in Sacrifice, but affirm, that God
accepts unbloody Sacrifices of Prayer, and more delights in Man his own
Image.

To Alexander did the Indian Magie (so does Arianus call their Brachmans) say,
That he was but as other men, saving that he had less Rest, and more
Troublesome, and being dead should enjoy no more Land than would serve to cover
his Body; and every man (said they) stamping with their feet on the ground,
has as much as he treads on. Arian. lib. 7.

Eusabius writes out of Braedsanes Cyrus, That amongst the Indians and
Bactrians were many Thosand Brachmans, which as well by Tradition as by Law,
worshipped no Image, nor eat any quick Creature, drank no Wine nor Beer, only
attending on Divine things; whereas the other Indians are very Vicious, yea,
some hunt men, sacrifice and devour them, and were as Idolaters. Eusebius. depres.
Evang. lib. 6. cap. 8.

Heurnius reports, That they have Books and Prophets, which they allege for
Confirmation of their Opinions; and that they have in their Writings the
Decalogue, with the Explication thereof; that they adjure all of their Society
to silence, touching their Mysteries; and that they adore the God which created
Heaven and Earth, often repeating the Sentence, I Adore thee, O God, with thy
Grace and Aid forever. When they wash themselves (which is often) they lay a
little Ashes on their Foreheads and Breasts, saying, That they shall return
unto Ashes. Heur. indic. cap. 3.

There was a malabar Poet, which wrote nine hundred Epigrams against their
Pago-gods, each consisting of eight Verses, wherein he speaks many things
Elegantly of the divine Providence of Heaven, and the Torments of Hell, and
other things, agreeing to the Christian Faith, That God is present every where,
and gives to every one according to his estate; That Celestial Blessedness
consists in the Vision of God; That the damned in Hell shall be tormented
Millions of Years in Flames, and shall never dye.

Aristotle in his Ethics, lib. 10. cap. 4.7. said, They that did these things
did them not as men, but as having something Divine, or of God in them.

Those that desire to read more of their Divinity, Philosophy, and manner of
Living, are referred to a paper lately published entitled, A Dialogue betwixt
an East Indian Brachman, and a Christian, price 1 d.

THE END.

