THE Third Part OF THE AMORS OF Messalina. WHEREIN, The Secret Intrigues of
the Four last Years Reign are Completed. AND THE Love Adventures of Polydorus
King of the Gauls, AND THE Late Queen of ALBION, Made Public.

By a Woman of Quality, a late Confidant of Q. MESSALINA.

LONDON: Printed for John Lyford, 1689.

THE Bookseller TO THE READER.
THE Promised, and long Expected Third Part of the Amors of our MESSALINA, is
here at your Service: And though some Critics I am informed (and indeed my
Sale tells me as much) have not put an equal value on the two foregoing Parts,
the Second lying under the Repute of much Inferior to the First: My Historian
makes no other Apology, than that the Fair Messalina had so many Engines at
Work, in turning that great Hinge of the Pagan Glory, Her Warming-pan Plot; and
her Hands and Head so full of Politics on that Important Occasion, that She
then wanted Leisure for Intrigue and Amor; which indeed being the main Delight
of the Generality of my Readers, might perhaps lessen the Satisfaction expected
from the Second Part. But since her Majesty's Departure from the Heretic
Albion, has Translated her to a more agreeable and natural Element, the Pagan
Court of Gothland; her heavier and sullen Business she begins to shake off, and
resumes the lighter Air of Love and Pleasure. And accordingly we dare, without
Vanity, assure our Kind Reader, That the former Defects are supplied in the
Entertainment of this Third Part of her History. An Amorous Polydorus, little
less famed under the Banners of Cupid, than the sometimes Glorious Britomard
himself, lying at the Feet of the Adored Messalina, affords a little mre Matter
of Adventure and Diversion. With this Recommendation to our little Volumn of
the Great Messalina, We beg your present generous Acceptance. And if you find
your Messalina warm with any extraordinary Spark for the Imperial Polydorus;
you are to consider, that the Sanctuary and Glorious Reception she meets in the
Court of her ever firm Friend, the King of the Gauls, have Inspired her with no
small Gratitude to that MOST PAGAN Hero, and Champion of her Altars.

The Third PART.
LOVE could no longer brook this intefering Business in the Court of Albion;
for seeing with Indignation, how Ambition daily had entrenched on his
Prerogative, he reassumes his long neglected Darts, and vows severe Revenge on
his Rebellious Subjects. And now Messalina's haughty Heart, which vast aspiring
Hopes had long engaged, softens again in Gentleness and Love: She had seen the
Languets of her Charming Count, and heard his gentle Murmurs with Compassion;
she knew the great restraint he forced upon his Heart, when by reason of her
numerous Attendants, and Visitours, he had not opportunity to breath his Love;
sometimes a Wink, an Amorous Look, or Sigh, she would by stealth return; or
otherwise, in some Ambiguous Words, she would discover her Concern and Care,
for his endearing Passion; but in such dumb shows alone, as there were more
than Three Weeks spent, e're she could possibly engage, or speak with him
alone. During which time, her Beauty, with the Satisfaction of her Mind, was
much improved; and that forced Abstinence, which her pretended Childbearing
had made her undergo, conduced as well to carry on the Cheat, as to revive some
fading Glories in her Face, caused by the Fears and Apprehensions of
Miscarrying. Now, in Triumphant Wise, she would Walk, and Look, and with Disdainful
Jests, among her Confidents, Laugh at the weak dull Christians of the Court.
Come Dear Aspasia, would she say, let us no longer doubt of good Success; let us
every Year bring forth a Son, and stock the Kingdom with a Race of Pagan
Princes; shall my aspiring lofty Soul, stoop to the nice Destructive Rules of
their insipid Morals? One flight of Pagan Fancy quite out-strips their heavy
tedious Motions; and till now, our Fears alone have been our Bugbear
Apparitions: With how much ease, did we Contrive and Finish, what some faint
puny hearted Creatures thought impossible? Oh how I am pleased to think how
naturally I managed the Intreague: Did thou observe, how gravely some would
sland; and when my feigned Groans and Cries, would reach their Ears, how then
Officiously they would shake their Heads, devoutly lifting up their Hands, and pray
for my Delivery? Then, when my seeming Pains would make me faintis^, with what
Concern they would Sigh and Whisper, while I would gently grasp, and turn to thee,
and smile at the Success of our Invention. Come, Come, let us see this Darling
of our Hopes, this Groundwork of our Everlasting Joy; long Live, and Live to
Reign, my little blooming Life, and Live to be the Scourge of our Cursed
Christian Foes; I Will swear thee, like another Hambal, their Mortal Foe; each
drop of Milk thou suck'st, shall breed an Age of Malice in thy Heart; A
Christian's Name shall grate upon thy Soul, and thou shall prove the Plague of
their Profession; I Will breath my Spirit through thy tender Pores, and make thy
hatred of them Everlasting; Down, down ye Pagans, to your Great Deliverer;
Adore your Mighty Prince, and your Redeemer: See how the base dejected
Christians shrink; see how they Tremble at his Awful Frown: Albion is once
again Redeemed, Aspasia, and now my Crown sits firm and easy on my Head. Thus
in Vain Raptures would the Queen break out, and boast her Promises to be
Prophetical; but soon, alas, she found her self deceived, and all her Glorious
Promises vanish of a sudden. Anaximander, and the Princess Artemisia, while
Licogenes, and his Pagan Counselors, continued only to make some small
Encroachments, and Breaches on the Laws of Albion, seemingly designing, for no
more than a small Toleration of the Pagan Religion in Albion, kept themselves
within all bounds of Modesty and Submission, to the King their Father; only in
some small Remonstrances, they did Declare their Unwillingness to appear
Parties in the Annulling, or Dispensing with those Laws, made purely for the
Security of the Christian Religion, against the Practices and Contrivances of
the Pagans; but when they plainly saw, their Own, and the Kingdoms Interest,
resolved to be made a Sacrifice to the Ambition, and Covetousness of a small
Party, that by the known Laws of the Land, were declared the irreconcilable
Enemies of the Christians; they thought it then high time to look about them,
and though they paid all the Reverence imaginable to the King, their Father;
yet they could not resolve to yield their Rights and Inheritance, and hold
precariously their Estates, at the Discretion of an Antichristian packed
Council; besides, by several Remonstrances and Petitions from the Chief of the
Nobility and Gentry, they had been solicited to take them into their
Protection, and to endeavor a Redress of their Grievances, and heavy
Oppressions* Anaximander, being a Prince of a Vast and Generous Spirit, was
easily induced to condescend to their Relief; for, besides his proper Interest
in the Crown of Albion, which by the common Principles of Nature, he was
obliged to Maintain and Defend; he often would revolve on the Glory of the
Action, and how Heroic and God-like it would show, to appear the Great and
Glorious Champion of the Christian Religion, which by a Secret League, between
Polydorus King of the Gauls, and the King Licogenes, was resolved to be wholly
Extirpated, and Routed out of Europe. Upon these Considerations, the Prince
Anaximander immediately imparts his Desires and Resolutions to the High and
Mighty Lords and States of the Low-Lands, desireing their Lordships Advice and
Assistance in a Matter of that Importance, to the Security of themselves, as
well as all other Christians; which upon due Considerations, they with all
Alacrity imaginable Grant: And now the Prince having a Gallant, though small
Fleet, equipped with all the speed that could be, makes for the West of Albion,
and with such prudent Secrecy were all things managed, that Lycogenes had not
the least Intimation in the World of his Designs, till his Fleet was ready to
Sail. Messalina had, that Night the satal News arrived, assigned Count Davila
to meet her at St. Jaques, and the Marchioness de Tomazo in the Absence
especially of Aspasia (who a while before was gone over to her Husband Latroon,
Governor of Iberia) being her chief Confident, was ordered to attend. The
Count, who had once or twice been Tardy in the Hour appointed, thought now by
early Diligence to make amends, so that by Twilight he was gotten up into the
Bedchamber, being a private Retirement for Messalina, during the King's
Absence at any Time, or her Indisposition; where sitting down near the Bed, he
waited with Impatience for the Queen; and in the mean time, was contemplating
on the Happiness of his Enjoyments; by this time, Darkness had o'er-spread the
Earth, and the Marchioness being to give the Orders for the Candles of that
private Apartment, especially at that season, the Count found himself for some
time very solitary, and without Light, and being about to make to the Door, he
heard some stirring and breathing on the Bed, when drawing the Curtain softly,
he could just perceive by her Clothes, it was a Lady fast asleep; the Count was
mightily amazed at first, but recollecting himself, he thought it doubtless was
the Queen, who had retired thither before the Hour appointed, and had prevented
even his Diligence in coming; so without scruple, throwing himself on the Bed,
he clasps the supposed Messalina in his Arms, and having in his first
Transports run with his curious Hand over all the private Recesses of her
Charms, he was just preparing to attack the Fort, mingling with his Kifles, his
short Amorous Sighs, foretelling Transports, Ecstasies and Dyings; when
Messalina hastily comes in with a small Taper in her Hand, and calls: Tomazo,
is not my Dear Count yet come, Tomazo? The Marchioness at the very Instant,
whether the Amorous bustling of the Count had operated on her waking Fancy, or
whether by the Impression of some pleasing Dream, she was thereto incited,
Cried passionately out, "Make haste my Dear Antonio, make haste, the Marquess
will be here and Ruin us. The Queen who had heard her speak those last Words,
by this Time had opened the Curtain, and there discovered the Count, raised on
his Knees between Tomazo's Legs, and in a posture which plainly discovered the
drift of his Intentions; never were Three Persons (for by this Time the
Marchiones had waked) so severally astonished and confounded; the Queen with
Shame had shown her Face glowing Red, and then with Anger straigt grown Pale;
the Count, though in that awkward Posture, was so much confounded, he could not
move himself, nor had the Sense to cover the Marchioness, or his own Nakedness;
but between Wonder, Anger and Fear, was wholly bereft of even Sense or Motion:
The Marchioness, whose Age and Experience had rendered her familiar with the
same or the like Adventures, was not so much Ashamed of being seen in that
Condition and Posture, as Apprehensive of the Queen's Resentments, if, as was
probable, she should suppose any Amor between her and the Count, her Lover,
and whom she had but that Night appointed, and designed for her own Use and
Service. In such distracted Thoughts and Manner, did they for a great while
stand and gaze, and wonder at one another, without one Word between them, till
at last the Queen, whether heightend in her Fancy, with the pleasing sight and
intended Action of the Count, or upon due consideration, believing and judging,
by the Words she had heard the Marchioness utter, that it was wholly a mistake
on all sides, burst out in Laughter, and turning her Face a little, told the
Count in Drollery, the Weather began to be Cold, and therefore he would do well
to take care and cover his Mistress and himself. The Count with this short
reprimand was thoroughly waked out of his Trance, and slipping off the farther
side of the Bed, was bustling a long time to put himself in order, while the
Marchioness, half distracted, rises and pulls the Curtains close about her;
which the Queen seeing, She calls out to her: What Tomazo! You are resolved
then to keep the Count to your Self this Night; and making to the Bed, She
threw the Curtains again open, and discovered Tomazo in a fresh Confusion: By
this time the Count had gathered a little more assurance, and coming from
behind the Bed, he strait threw himself at Messalina's Feet, humbly asked her
Pardon, and told her, he hoped she was not insensible of the fatal mistake he
had like to have fallen in; and consequently, he doubted not of her favorable
Interpretation; he was sorry he had first appeared in so indecent a Posture,
and his continuance therein, She could not but believe the consequence of his
Astonishment. The Queen, who upon a just consideration of the Circumstances,
was sufficiently satisfied of his Innocence, was so ^ar from being angry or
disturbed, that after two or three fits of Laughter, She threw her delicious
Arms about his Neck, and with Ten Thousand Kisses Sealed his Pardon: then
turning to her dear Tomazo, She would Laugh, and say, Make have my Dear
Antonio, make haste; O Dear, my Husband comes! Alas, What shall we do? we are
ruined Dear Antonio. Thus did She Droll on the poor Marchioness, 'till the
Count putting her in mind of the time of the Night, they were retiring to the
Closet to Converse, when a Messenger from Alba Regalis, comes in haste, to give
an account of an Express, Lycogenes had received from the Belgian Lowlands,
giving an Account of the Preparations and Designs of the Prince Anaximander, to
come and redress the Grievances of the poor Christians of Albion: the Queen
(who was no otherwise read in the Politics and Affairs of State, than as
Father Pedro, the Count, or some other of her Priests upon particular occasions
had Instructed her) was not at first so apprehensive of the Danger as the
Count, who was so vehemently startled at the News, that without any more
Complement than Bowing to the Queen, he descends and takes Coach for Alba
Regalis; where he was no sooner Arrived, but he found the whole Court Alarmed;
and Lycogenes in Solemn Council was gone to Debate the Business: The next Day
the News was confirmed by another Express, and then all was in an Uproar;
Lycogenes in a great Fright comes to Council, tells them his apprehensions of
Anaximanders Design, requires their best and speedy Advice, puts them in Mind
of all the Breaches he had made in the Laws for their Sakes; and that now,
without speedy Assistance, he was likely to be ruined, and the Pagans Hopes
throughout Albion to be utterly lost. Such dreadful Words as these, and coming
from a Prince that had been in every Panegyric cried up and applauded for his
Constancy of Mind, and Invincible Courage, did so amaze and terrify his
Counselors, that they could not in a long time set their Hearts on any serious
Consultation; some of them withdrew, then in again; presently others that had
been absent, came Posting to understand and enquire into the Business; some
would relate it as terrible as their Fears, and represent the numbers of the
Princes Ships and Men double; here you should see a haughty Stiffnecked Priest,
come humbly fawning to a Christian Noble, as if confessing past Mis-carriages
and Crimes, he wished for good Conditions: Some would be packing up their Goods
and Treasure, their guilty boading Consciences foretelling their forced Flight
and Ruin* But Pedro and Poliorchetes, the Chancellor, who were sensible they
were likely to share the sum and substance of all unhappy Revolutions, thought
it now no longer time to dally, or spend the precious Minutes in useless idle
Fears, but to apply the most healing Medicines, that the present bleeding Wound
would bear; and accordingly persuade Lycogenes to re-call several Edicts, that
by their Instigation and Council had been promulg'd against the Interest and
Safety of his Christian Subjects: And Father Pedro calling a Convocation of his
Inferior Priests, makes them Dis-robe, and in disguise to mingle among the
Christian Assemblies, in the Forum, Burse, Temples, and other public
Meeting-Places, and there with Confidence to utter false Reports, to lessen the
Strength of Anaximander, to cry up the miseries of a Civil War, to Extol the
Loyalty of the King's Christian Subjects, to make comparison between young
Perkin's Expedition and this, and thence to conclude positively of the like
success: The Court party also of Renegado Christian Divines, were ordered to
Preach up the necessity of Obedience and Loyalty, to withstand the Prince in
his Attempts, and to brand his Expedition with the horrible Title of Invasion.
These, and many other Arts were used to take off the Edge of Anaximander's
Sword; sometimes they would Brand His Royal Person with base and ignominious Names;
other times they would think to terrify the Rebels (as they would call all
that should assist him) with the Exemplary Punishments, inflicted by the
Chancellor Polyorchetes, in his bloody Western Campaigne: But all would not
do, the Christians knew the Pagan Punick Faith, as well as Inhumane Cruelty,
they saw their Laws, their Liberties, and Lives at Stake; and that now was the
only time to assert and recover them; the Pagan Priests had often mocked the
King out of his most Solemn Promises, and Messalina had endeavored to entail
their Slavery upon them to all Posterity. Nothing therefore could stagger their
former Resolutions, but like the Adder, they were Deaf to all their treacherous
Charms, and false Insinuations: Notwithstanding, Messalina's dauntless Pride
could not 'till the Princes Landing stoop to the apprehension of any material
Danger; she would often chalk out time and place to see the fond weak Prince
brought bound to Troynovant; She Would Laugh and Jeer at his few puny Forces, and
would in every Table Talk defeat his whole Battalions; sometimes She Would call her
Melancholy Lover, whose deeper apprehensions, now had changed his usual Mirth;
sometimes, I say, She Would call him to her, and reproach his needless Fears: What?
would She say, Can Davila suspect or fear, when Messalina 's Heart is free? Can
thy so much applauded Courage stoop to what a poor weak Woman's Soul can stand?
Stand did I say? By all that is good, this Hand shall how the Neck of that poor
Spirited Prince, that weak presumptuous Wretch, that dare Invade my Husbands
losty Crown: What my Dear Davila, can thou lament? Have thou a Diadem to
loose, a Throne to be pulled down, Subjects and Slaves to be destroyed before
thy Face? These may create a Monarchs doubts and fears: What then should thy
Eyes swell with needless Tears? Remit, remit, alas, thy useless apprehensions!
I sure am the Center of thy Thoughts: In me thy utmost Wishes are determined;
while then I stand secure, What need'st thou fear? Cheer up, cheer up, my dear
loved Count; let us not lose our present happy Minutes, for vain weak doubts of
future Cares and Sorrows.

The Count both wondered and rejoiced at the great Heroic Heart of his beloved
Royal Mistress; and though he knew, and was perfectly sensible that her words
were rather the effect of her dauntless Spirit, than of a solid Consideration;
yet he saw so much Love expressed in her frequent concernment for him, that he
could not but in common Gratitude and Honor, make her the same, or suitable
returns; he therefore told her Majesty, That his apprehension of being
separated from her, was without doubt, a sensible affliction to him; but above
all he deplored his great unhappiness, in not being able to afford more than
his own personal assistance, to repel her own, and their great Prophet's
Enemies; that he cordially wished the Prince Anaximander's undertakings might
prove as frivilous and ineffectual, as she had declared them; that his great
care of her Majesty's Safety and Honor, was the only Foundation of his Fear;
that he did indeed object the worst to himself, but did not believe he had yet
any reason to despair of the best; that he was sensible her super-eminent Merit
had rendered her Obnoxious to the Slanderous reproaches and envy of the Wicked
Christian Albionites; that the King her Husband's Zeal, in a good and pious
Cause, had incurred the wicked Malice of his rebellious Subjects; and that if
his Affairs (which Heaven sorbid) should happen to fail, it would be the total
ruin and destruction of his Life and happiness, to think she should fall into
the Hands of her Enemies, or be lessened in her Fortune or high Station; that
therefore it was his humble and hearty request, that she would suffer himself,
and some other select Friends to consult and lay before her such measures for
the security of her Person and Honor, as should appear to be most convenient;
that providing against the worst would be no hindrance of her enjoyment of the
best; but above all, that she would give him her resolution and firm promise to
let himself accompany and wait on her in all, and every Misfortune that
possibly could befall her. Messalina was ravished with this so zealous and
tender demonstration of her Dear Counts Love, and in a loving transport
catching his Hand and Arm, she pulled him to her on a Couch whereon she sat,
where with unspeakable Raptures she would Circle her Snowy Arms and Hands,
about his Neck and Wast; Oh! how she would such his Amorous ruddy Lips and Cheeks,
and with her Balmy melting Hand stroke, and press, and play with his Manly
Neck, and Face, "Oh! could thou think Dear Cruel Heart, said she, that e're
my Panting Soul could yield to part with thee, the Dearest, blessed Fountain of
it is joy; Fortune, indeed with rude or Impartial hands may catch and grasp my
Shaken, Tottering Crown; but sure my Heart and Will, are still my own; and
being mine, who Dare Pretend to Stop, or Claim what I resolve to Share, to
Give, to Keep for only Thee. No, no, my Life, my Davila, continued she: "If
Fate or Cursed Inconstant Fortune have decreed my Separation from this Ill-bred
Isle, Thou like my better Genius shall attend me, thou like my happy Star
shal't lead the Way: where e're we come we'll be each others Heaven, and in thy
Bosom will I place my Land of Joy, and Rest. With these last words they fell
together on the Couch, and tired with busy Love and Rapture, soon dropped into a
gentle Slumber. Faithful Tomaso, in the mean time was hovering about the
Out-Guards to prevent surprise, and to diver the access of any suspicious
Persons: She had waited half an hour or little more, when comes a Messenger
from King Lycogenes to Messalina, which brought account, the Prince was now at
Sea, and with a numerous Fleet was making all the Sail he could for Albion: the
Marchioness receives the Message, and all in Tears repairs with open Mouth to
the Queens Closet: the Queen waking abruptly at the Noise she made, starts up,
and with a sudden Shriek alarm's the Count; Anaximander comes, Dread Sovereign
cries the Marchioness, he comes with Speed and Power and Swears to Unravel all?
O Mighty Operations! the Count who had hardly yet recovered himself, was
looking about when he had heard the Marchioness declare he was come, and
putting himself on his Guard, swore he would Defend his Royal Mistress to the last;
Oh! that his Single Fate, Cries Mesalina, were to be opposed to thine: Inspired
by Love and my auspicious Prayers, how would thou crush his Puny Soul. Soon
should thou nip these daring Christians hopes, and with one happy blow
secure our Pagan Friends and Interest for ever. In the mean time Lycogenes in
late and early Councels, was contriving how to stop this overflowing Current of
the Princes designs; he had observed an unusual blithness in all his Christian
Nobles Faces, and was sensible that the Prince Anaximander could not presume to
attack the Alhionites, without very good Encouragement from the Grandee's:
however, with all his industry he was not able to learn out who were
Anaximanders Abettors in this hold design; Father Pedro and others of his
Antichristian Council were advising him to lay hold on, and secure all that he
could but in the least suspect; but this being controverted was found too
Violent, and more than the present Circumstances of affairs could bear; others
suggesting the doubtful Loyalty of the great City of Troynovant, 'twas thought
advisable to secure the Citadel, in some Peculiar trusty hands, and thereby to
scare that Populous and Powerful Place into a just Obedience: this was found
good and Feazable, and strait a new Commander is ordained, with secret orders
how to manage things to the best advantage. In the mean time, the Prince
Anaximander, steers away, and without any let or hindrance, in a few days
arrives safe at a convenient Haven, in the West of Albion; and now the Thread
of Poor Lycogenes his Fate began to crack, now he could plainly see the errors
of his Government, and when it was unhappily too late, might Curse the base
designs of his pernicious Counselors: now was he forced to stoop that
Glorious Lofty Heart, which dauntless hererofore had braved the mightiest force
of Europe. How was he changed, alas, from that brave Invincible Lycogenes, that
did through Clouds of Smoke and Fire, Charge through the Belgian Fleet, and
with fresh Laurels Crowned, returned in Triumph to his joyful Country: now
every little Western breeze that heretofore did serve to blow and kindle up his
flaming Courage, like some cold Pestilential air damps his Misgiving Soul; now
Poor, forsaken of himself he stands, Conscience alone of Ills past done remains
his tiresome guest: Attend ye cursed race of wicked Jebusites, see the
Prodigious effects of your Pernicious Councels, ye Cloggs to Crowns, and bane
of Power.

Empires to Shake, and Monarchs to Dethrone,
Cursed Race of Loyala's thy Work alone.
Kings, Crowns, and States over thrown! no more? alas;
Those Records fill not half thy Leaves of Brass.
What need those stored up Coals (scarce worth Heavens while)
For mighty Doomsday, Nature's Funeral Pile:
Let Thee but loose for the Universe over turning,
Thy Single Brand would set the Globe a Burning.
The Prince Anaximander no sooner appeared with his Fleet, but the Christians
all about the Country flocked to the Shore, and with loud shouts and all other
demonstrations of Joy, welcomed the arrival of their great Deliverer: and
several with Boats stocked with fresh Provision put off and dispersed them
about the Fleet, for the refreshment of the Seamen and Soldiers, and having
provided before small Bridges and other conveniences for the Landing his Army,
and his Carriages, he found himself in a condition within three days to draw up
and muster his Men, who had by this time heartily recovered the Fatigue of
their Voyage. Lycogenes in the mean time, though very much dejected, had taken
care to Levy a Gallant Army, and it was one while thought a very doubtful
thing, to which, to ascribe the Victory* Anaximander had not brought with him
above Fourteen Thousand Horse and Foot, but those indeed Experienced Veterane
Bands, very Completely Armed; besides, Lycogenes before the Prince landed, had
at least Thirty Thousand well appointed Soldiers, so that when he began
thoroughly to compute his own strength, and his Enemies weakness, he thought to
take heart, and resolved for the greater Encouragement of his Men to appear at
the head of them himself, and withal speed to give his Enemies Battle, and
hinder their further Progress into the Country; but alas, while he was
flattered and amused with the strength and bravery of his own Army, Anaximander
was mustering and entertaining the Choice Young Men of all the Western Country:
for the People considering the Cause, and that their Liberties and Lives, were
now their only last stake, they came flocking in so fast to the Prince, that he
had in eight days more Substantial choice Men than he could handsomely make use
of; besides, the Major part of Lycogenes his Army, being Christians, they could
not but be sensible that those Swords that they should draw against their
Brethren in the West, would at the long run be employed against their own
Throats and Lives; and therefore, being already weary of submitting their
Freeborn Souls to the Bondage and Tyranny of their Pagan Officers, they
associate and take Council together how to free themselves and their Country,
by either, laying down their Arms, or going over to the Prince Anaximander, and
now the fatal Period of Lycogenes his Reign drew near, for first whole
Companies, Troops, and Regiments of his Army revolt from him, and then his
Friends and Near Relations, touched with the sense of deeper obligations due to
their Country, their Religion and their God: Thus the Trump being turned, the
Pagans quickly find their disadvantage of the Game, and in Confusion, like
distracted Men fling up their Cards, and scamper to secure themselves from
payment. Messalina also to her Sorrow sees what hitherto she never would
believe; now Pedro finds the fallacy of his conclusions, while Polyorchetes,
Sunderania, and others of that wicked Grue curse their unlucky Stars, and seek
in every corner for some place of refuge: Poor Lycogenes flies in confusion
from his distant Foes, not able to endure even the report of their approach: He
that like another Xerxes saw himself begirt even with a world of Guards, now
flies bereft almost of necessary Attendance: He no sooner arrived at his old
Palace of Alba Regalis, but in have he calls a Secret and Solemn Council of
all his few remaining Friends, and after such Debates as the time would afford
and permit, they resolve to send proposals to the Prince, who like a Swelling
Tide had now over spread the Country; and the danger being grown beyond
recovery, Messalina, at last thinks it high time to prepare for her retirement,
and with all speed provide for her Security; the Young Child also by the advice
of the Council was to be nicely taken care of, being likely to prove a very
good after Game. The Queen therefore immediately sends for the Count to a
private Conference, who as greedily comes, in hopes to persuade her to a speedy
Flight: Just as he approached the Closet Door, the Queen all in tears gets up,
and not being able for a while to speak, leans on his Neck, and after many
growing Sobs and heavy Sighs, falls Fainting in his Arms: never was Lover in so
sad distress as was the Count at this unhappy accident; call out he dare not,
for fear of any Suspicion or ill interpretation of his being with the Queen
alone; to go and leave her Dying as he thought, his Soul could never agree to;
how to assist, what remedy to use, where to get any thing to apply he knew not:
distracted thus he Tore himself, and Raved, and Cursed his misfortune, then
would he kneel by the Couch whereon he had laid her, and kiss, and sigh, and
Pray, and call, till at last the Queen coming to her self opened her dying
Eyes, and casting a Languishing look at her Dear Count, who was now in a bitter
Agony of Sorrow, and hardly able to support his oppressed Spirits, she raised
her self a little on the Couch, and in a Sorrowful manner lifting up her Hands
and Eyes, recounts a fresh the sum of her Misfortunes: All, all, is lost, Dear
Davila, said she, my Hopes, my Peace, my Joy, my Glories, my All. And if I have
ought left me worth the Thought of Life, it is, that I enjoy thy Love. That
Coronet's my own, though my Crown's lost. Messalina is now driven to the Fatal
Period of her Grandeur in Albion, a shock so dismal, that the Agonies of such a
Fall, to such Soaring Ambitition as Mesalina's, are only to be conceived by
those that feel them. In her fit of Desparation (for 'twas almost come to that)
she is Mrs. however of Reason enough still to provide at least against the
Worst of shames, and Last of Miseries, her falling into her Enemies Hands, the
Christians, a Danger at that Time much threatened; the united Murmurs of Albion
looking up to no other Fountain, and Original of the Woes and Calamities, of
the Pittyed and Deplored Lycogenes, then the Hot Counsels, or rather
Enchantments of Messalina, and her Pagan Abettors. And how heavy the weight of
such an Inquisition would fall, even her Flatterers are but too sensible. Her
Flight therefore, being now the last Plank she has to lay hold off to escape
sinking, she prepares a small Diminitive Yatcht, and hires (command she could
not, so feeble is Sovereignty without Hearts) a handful of Select Seamen, all
well bribed, and well sworn, privately, to waft her safe to Gothland, the only
Sanctuary. (Such Universal Enemies had her Politics pulled down) the World
could yield her. Oh Zeal, Zeal, mad Zeal! what Humane Distresles, Miseries,
Ruins are Thine, and Thy only Creation? -- Nay, is there scarce that one
Conflagration, that ever set whole Nations in a Flame, that has not been
lighted by a Cole from an Altar? Unfortunate Messalina, and deservedly so, the
late Royal Partner, to no less than Neptune's Sovereign, the Oceans Lord, and
the still Terror of the World, had not Zeal, Infatuating, Destroying,
Dethroning Zeal, blazed out; Poor misguided, deluded, hard-fated Lycogenes!
This very Messalina, of all those Floating Castles, the late attending Pageants
of her Triumph, all those once Impregnable Famed Walls of Albion; lest Mistress
of no more than a poor Cock-boat! Instead of glittering Flaggs, and flowing
Streamers, ushered by all the Tritons of the Main, and as She past, Saluted by
all the Ecchoing Thunder from the Shore; now to Steal away by Night, Skulk like
a Fugitive, obscured by Shades and Coverts! Yes, Destiny and Zeal have so
Decreed it! For Sea therefore (such her Equippment, and such the hastening
Cause that called her) She prepares; and takes with her, her Tomaze,
Sunderania, Count Davila, Sebastian, and Pedro, and some others of her Cabinet
Friends; the last Three only being a little Transformed, by Disguises of Buff,
Scar let and Feather, metamorphosed into downright Militants: For indeed her
Ecclesiastic Confidents, especially Father Pedro, were grown so notoriously
Infamous, that they durst not trust themselves in their own Shapes, even with
Sworn Hirelings and Mercenaries; not Gold it self being sufficient to purchase
Trust or Safety. The Queen had but very little lest, to save and carry with
her, except her Jewels; for truly in spite of all that good Husbandry, that
eminent and singular good Quality in Lycogenes; yet what with Standing Armies,
and no Taxes (for he neither loved or pleased Senates enough, for any new
Donations from them) and from the continual daily Dreine, he received from
those innumerable Spiritual Horse-leeches, that hung upon his Purse-strings,
his Exchequer was but low. Messalina's Jewels therefore, being all the Treasure
she could save; those by Father Pedro's particular Advice, were committed to
the Charge and Custody of an Italian Priest, recommended to her by him, as a
Heavenly minded man, a Recluse from the World, and who as a Person under a Vow
of Poverty, of a Character and Profession above any Temptation, was the only
man she could best repose that Trust in. Thus Embarked, with their best Sails
to their small Frigate; with a Fair Wind, and Prosperous Gale, they arrive at
Gothland: for indeed the just Ordaining Powers, that had punished her with the
loss of a Crown, after so heavy a Wreck at Land, thought fit to bound their
Indignation there.

From her Arrival in Gothland, the Scene begins a little to Change: For the
Pagans there, with no small Homage and Adoration, resound her Welcome. The
Entertainment she received, as peculiarly influenced by the Commands of
Polydorus, was every where Splendid and Magnificent: I dare not call it his
Bounty, or Generosity. For truly, all the utmost Services, Respect,
Obligations, Protections, or Assistance; and indeed, all, and more then
Polydorus has, or can do for Lycogenes, or Messalina, so near a part of him;
are but poor and faint Returns, to compensate those Miseries and Sufferings, in
which his own private Leagues and Cabals, and the too prevailing Gallick
Councels and Measures in Albion, have involved the ruined Lycogenes. With a
Noble Train of Persons of the Highest Quality, and a Band of Guards, a truly
Royal Rerinue, is Messalina Conducted to the Gothic Court; whilst Polydorus
himself, with that solemn State and Grandeur, comes to meet her, and
Congratulate her Arrival; paying her all that Humble and Profound Respect, and
Awful Attendance, as if she came not from Quitting, but to the Possessing of a
Diadem: So Pompous was her Entry, that scarce an Antique Roman Triumph could
exceed it. And indeed she came to Triumph, the very first Sally of her Eye,
bringing her back no less a Trophy, than the Heart of Polydorus. To give her
her Right, even without Flattery; never was Conquest so Expeditious: No sooner
was the very Lightning seen, but the Bolt had Executed. So Dazzling were her
Charms, to the surprised Polydorus, that he truly dated his entire Vassallage,
from the first Moment he saw her. His once Adored Dear Vestal Divinity, or his
Haughtier Montezania's Charms, were nothing to the Influence of Messalina: so
unaccountable is the Archery of the Blind God: For Messalina had been no
Stranger to Polydorus: when before her Marriage with Lycogenes, in her Travel
from her own Italick Duchy, to the Kingdom of Albion, she took the Court of
Polydorus in her way; yet, then her Beauties, though in their Younger bloom,
could be beheld without half the present Fatality. For, whether his then
Regnant Vestal Mrs had so filled his Soul, as had left no Room for any other
Guest, or for what Reason else; a common Veneration was all the Offering he
made her then; when Sighing, Desiring, Languishing, Dying, whole Hecatombs are
all too little Sacrifices now. In fine, so Caprieious an Ascendant had his
present Governing Planets, that that very Polydorus fated for the Dethroning of
the Unfortunate Lycogenes; the same Matchivilian Part, before Practiced against
his Crown, must now be Acted against his Bed. For from this Hour, Friendship,
Honor, Hospitality, (Obligations not the first time dispensed withal by
Polydorus) and all other ties quite cancelled; the Possession of Messalina,
though at the price of a Kingdom, is his whole and sole Ambition. For Messalina
he Burns, and were her Virtue a Rock of Ice, (which for ought he knows it may
be); for though indeed he was no Stranger to all other her Intrigues and
Affairs, however in her Curtai^ Arcana, her Amors, he was no Cabinet
Counselor) he resolves to melt it down; and that so far from a scruple at the
Undertaking, that he should account it not only the sweetest, but the most
glorious of all his Achievements. For setting all other Considerations apart,
what Polydorus once but willed, he could not will unjustly; his Ambition was
Commissioned of his Conscience's High Chancellor, whilst to Desire was to
Determine; and whatever but once Determined, took the immediate Stamp of Right
and Equity to pass it into an irrevocable Decretal; insomuch, that the very
Dethroning of a God, if once thought practicable, to desire it was enough to
render it justifiable.

As there wanted no Magnificence in all her Entertainment from her first
Landing, even before the Captivity of the enamored Polydorus, you may imagine
no excesses of the highest studied Gallantry were omitted now. The Adored
Messalina is Lodged in a Palace so Glorious, as might have fitted the
Reception of a second Cleopatra in all her Pride; and which her Anthny, the
then Competitor for Universal Empire, and in all that Love that lost him the
World for her, could not have furnished out more rich and Splendid: Nor did the
Brightness and Richness of her Palace consist only in the outside Wealth and
Beauty of her Shining Beck, Embroidered Canopys, the richest of Tapistries,
Cabinets, Scruitores, etc. The unseen Treasures, outvy^ the glittering
Frontispiece: In this Drawer of a Cabinet Forty, 'tother Fifty, a Third a
Hundred Thousand Pieces of Gold; a Fourth, Lockets (...) Diamonds, a Fifth,
Ropes of Pearl, etc. And all to mean a Tribute to his Sovereign Messalina. And
truly now we talk of Pearl and Diamonds, her own Cargo of Jewels, committed to
the true and trusty Italian Priest aforesaid, were under Suspicion of
miscarriage; both the Treasure and the Treasurer being at present Invisible: We
dare not surmize so unkindly, that Avarice, or filthy Worldly Lucre, could
prevail upon so Sanctified a Recluse from the World, under a particular Vow of
Poverty; and above all, thought worthy (as we told you) of the peculiar
recommendations of Father Pedro, could make Him tardy in such a Case. But
whether, on the more charitable side, by some impulse of Religion he reserved
them for Holy and Pious Uses; as to present them to the Shrine of the
Lorrettian Diana, to implore from her Celestial Benediction, her Albion
Majesty's Conception of a Duke of Eborac, to her Prince of Cambria; or for any
other like Dedication to Holy Mother Church, so it is, that he was no sooner
gotten on Shore, but modest good Man, he withdrew, and was never seen after it.
And notwithstanding Polydorus published an Edict, promising a very ample Reward
to that Person that should find him, and recall the Wanderer: Either his Divine
Contemplations, and sublimer Meditations, had rapt him above the listening to
humane and mundane Proclamations; or else his Devout Pilgrimage had carried him
beyond the hearing of them, so that his Recallment is utterly Despaired of;
insomuch, that unless her Albion Majesty be content to take out their Price in
Dirges for her Soul, it is thought for any other Restitution or Payment, she now
hopes but little. Polydorus now begins his approach to Messalina, resolving an
immediate vigorous Siege, with all the Forces he can bring to lie down before
her: His daily Visits, Observance, and constant Attendance, which at first
carried only the Face of common Gallantry, and looked upon by all Eyes as no
other than the Generous Treatment of a Royal Hospitality to Greatness in
Distress, and under his Protection; are now both by his Looks, Behavior, and
Address, so Industriously managed, that Messalina (unless she wanted Eyes) must
find that in the Assiduous Polydorus, there was something more then a kind
Host, viz. an Adoring Slave.

The Queen now fully satisfied how great a Vassal her Eyes had won her, begins
to consider the Wise Management of so Important a Conquest. Polydorus's Address
and Personage, even abstracted from his Imperial Character, and the Luster of a
Crown, were such as always stood fair in the Female Eyes, and rendered his
Heart no dis-acceptable Present to the very Proudest and most Disdainful
Beauty. And our Messalina who was neither the Coyest, or most In-sensible of
her Sex, already felt a Commiseration about her, that told her the Sighs of so
Royal a Languisher must not go unpittied. Time, Assiduity, and Application, she
plainly foresaw, would at last inevitably prevail; and therefore fancying it no
less then the Absolute Ordainment of her Fate, she has no farther Thought then
an entire Resignation to Immutable Decree. However, though the Stake must at
last be lost, yet the Playing her Game out Politickly, and managing her Cards
to her best Advantage, are in her own Choice and Power. Yes, that, and that
only takes up all the business of her waking, and indeed sleeping Thoughts.
The Terms and Conditions of a Surrender; What Parley and Capitulations first;
what Resolution and Obstinacy (for the Victory must not be Cheap) she must hold
out with, before the White Flag is at last to be hung out. Her Meditations on
this subject had one Evening led her alone from all Company into an Inner and
Private Walk of the Garden; When Polydorus, whose unresting Soul had led his
Body abroad too with much the same Contemplations, fortunately meets her. This
opportunity as it gave him the Blessing of a more Private Interview, then
before he had met, so it inspired him with the Courage of making a more ample
and particular Declaration of his Love, then all his hitherto fainter and
distant Addresses had made. Accordingly throwing himself at her Feet, in the
Tenderest and most Passionate Expressions (the never wanted Eloquence of Love)
he told her how entirely the Soul of Polydorus was subjected to the Eyes of
Messalina: Nor did he more heighten the Progress of her Victories, and Power of
her Charms, then the Fatality of them; that without a Return of Pity his Death
was Inevitable, whilst his Peace, Happiness and Life were absolutely in her
Hands. The Queen, whose part was now to Play, with a seeming Amazement, rather
than a listening Attention, gave him the Liberty of finishing his whole
Declaration; when as Wakeing from a Frightful Dream, or Starting from a
disturbing Vision, Good Gods, she cried, are not your Quivers Empty yet? Have
ye more Shafts reserved still for the unfortunate Messalina? Is it not enough
that your Persecuting Powers have Ravished an Empire from me, and Driven me out
an Exile, a Wanderer of the World; but I must yet fall lower; low as the most
abject of my Sex, when my Chaste Ears must be Profaned with the Rude Sounds of
Lawless Love; Oh! Polydorus, Cruel Polydorus, has Misery and Ruin made the
fallen Messalina so little, so despicably little -- No, Glorious Madam,
(Passionately replied Polydorus) so Great, so Divinely Great, that the Gods
have singled you out to Weild their Thunder, whilst there is not one Bolt of
Heaven that Strikes with Fate but Messalina 's. Oh! Madam, if ever Compassion,
Mercy, Charity, Entered the fairest Temple that ever Lodged a God, have Pity on
the Adoring, Kneeling, Dying Polydorus. My Life, -- alas, my very Soul depends
upon no other Doom but Messalina 's; for if the Deaf, the Cruel, the Inexorable
Messalina must not, cannot, will not Pity me, to Die is but half the Tribute my
Despair must pay her: The Transports of a Passion like mine are such, that when
I lose all Hopes of one kind Smile from Messalina, she leaves me abandoned to
that Wild Torrent of unbounded Horrors, that less then the Abjuring of
Humanity, the Execrating of Providence, and Cursing the very Author of my
Being, will be the fatal Consequences of my irresistible Desperation; a
Desperation so hideous, that when I fall a Victim to her Scorn, will shut me
out at once from Earth and Heaven. Messalina, not at all Displeased at so
Passionate a Declaration, however to continue the Masque of a most Rigid and
Obdurate Virtue, Reprimands him with all the Severest Resentments imaginable,
desires him, nay, Conjures him for ever to Cease a Suit so Fruitless, and a
Thought so Impious, a Language that her unblemisht never shaken Virtue can so
little hear, that rather then liv^ within the Air of so much Guilt, her wounded
Innocence must be forced to Fly a Cruel Court, and seek a Resuge in some kinder
and more Hospitable Desert. Ah! Madam, replied Polydorus, Then you have Decreed
Mankind must be undone! Shall Empires, Nations, People, have Peace, when I have
none! No Madam, it is resolved that Messalina Hate, Scorn, Loath the Unworthy
Polydorus. Yes, his Destruction, his Irrevocable Destruction's Sealed; and by
the Malice of my Stars, the World shall Groan as I do. He was once more falling
at her Feet, when a Princely Train of the Noblest Quality of the Gothland Court
appearing in the Garden, interrupted him. He had scarce recovered Reason enough
to suppress the too visible concern and disorder, that appeared in his Eyes,
much less the Load that lay at his Heart, when one of his Generals Advancing
from the rest of the Noble Company, threw himself at his Feet, telling him, He
was immediately in Obedience to his Royal Commands, setting forward to the
General Randezvous on the Banks of the Rhine, and came in Duty to Receive his
farther Commission and Orders. Commission and Orders! Answered Polydorus; Why,
Burn, Ravage, Ruin, Destroy; make Nations waste, and Kingdoms Desolate; spare
neither Age nor Sex; but above all, where ever thou meetst that loathed
detested Thing, that calls it self a Christian, double thy Fury there, Banish
all thoughts of Pity or Remorse; be Bloody and be Canonized: Remember the
Christian Pride is swelled to Vlceration; and it is the Glory of our Sword to
Lance it. And if thou meetest a Temple, lay the Accursed Consecrated Roof in
Ashes; the God that sills it is my Enemy; and it is but Just my Vengeance
Battle Heavens. If thou make Treaties or Capitulations, my Orders are, you
break 'em all. Betray and Conquer. Heaven never kept Faith with me, and it is
but Reason, we the Vicegerents of the Gods should Copy their own everlasting
Falsehood, and Reign Immortal Infidels like themselves. You have my Orders; to
your Post; Obey and Prosper. The General upon the Kings Command, makes his
Humble Obeisance to the King, and Retreats, Ruminating with some little
Surprise on the severity of his present rough Commission; which however, on
what unknown occasion that had transported him into such Vehemence and
Bitterness in the expressing himself, he nevertheless knew to be the true and
constant Sense of that Great Monarch; and all his former Orders, though perhaps
something gentler and softer worded, carried in reality the same Contents and
Mandats; and accordingly in all Duty prepares to Execute.

But to return to our Polydorus, whose Tormenting Reflections on the Cruelty of
Messalina had, withdrawn him from all Company to his Closet; In all the Agonies
of defeated Love, he could not yet entirely yield to Despair: Were her Virtue a
Rock of Adamant: Nay, were she possibly as Deaf, as Pitiless, and Remorseless
to all his Bleeding Sighs, as himself to a Dying Christians last Prayer, he
will not quit the Siege yet. Accordingly not a day, nor scarce an hour passes
that he does not Visit, Court, Sue, Plead, and spite of all Denials, all her
Pleas of Virtue and Chastity, that Mountain Honor shall not block his way.
Sometimes he Woes her with the Promised Restoration of her Albion, the
Re-instating her in all her former Grandeur; and if the Crown of Albion will
not purchase a Smile, he will throw his own in, to make up the Sum. In short, No
Gallantry, Address; no Protestations, Vows or Oaths, though never so
Extravagant, are wanting to pursue the Coy Disdainful Messalina: till one
Morning in her Walk in the same Garden, his succesaful Rhetoric prevails; or
rather Messalina thinks she has now held out long enough to yield with Honor:
For after his Repeated Protestations of the Crowns and Scepters he would lay at
her Feet, and the Vassal World he would make her Mistress of; He told her, If
Messalina would but Condescend to Crown his Love, he would pay his
Acknowledgment of so Divine a Blessing, with no less a Sacrifice then a hundred
thousand Christian Lives. A hundred thousand Christian Lives! my Generous
Polydorus, replied Messalina. Such Merit, such Transcendent Merit! An Offering
of that price enough to Court a Saint, and Win a Goddess. Such Eloquence is
irresistible; nay, the name of such a Sacrifice so pleased her, that had the
strongest Bonds of Conscience held her, that single Thought had burst the
Feeble Manacle; and the offering of so much Heretic streaming Blood, were such
an Atonement, as would not only expiate but consecrate the very Sin it self. So
pleased and so conquered, she generously tells the Ravished Polydorus, That she
will expect him at Vesper-time, when she will send all her Retinue to the
Mosque to their Devotion, and Attend his Company in her Closet.

Polydorus being now Arrived at the Haven, just upon entering the Inland of
Paradise; the Hour, the Place, the Means and Opportunity all assigned for the
Consummating of his. Happiness; and what heightened the Charm, his Divine
Messalina her self the generous Designer of the whole Scene of Felicity; the
Plot, the Introduction and Conduct to this more then happy Meeting, so much her
own, that possibly, our Amorous Monarch could not conceive more Rapture at the
Queens Concession of her Highest Favors themselves, then at the Endearing
management of the blessed Minute to bestow them; even the Portal to Happiness
being oftentimes with Lovers no less Ravishing, then the very Temple of Bliss,
to which it leads. -- In short, All things contributing to make him the
Happiest Prince in the World; whether a Soul, so unbounded, as that of
Polydorus, whom the Empire of the Universe ('it is very well known) would hardly
satisfy, had the Transports of his Passion, at exalted as those of his
Ambition; and was thereby elevated above the Common Height of an ordinary
Lovers Ecstasy; let it suffice, his Joy, his unexpressible Joy was such, as
burnt in his Face, and glowed in his very Eyes; and the expected Enjoyment of
Messalina was at that Moment a Trophy above all the Conquests that either his
Sword, or his more Victorious GOLD ever won him. But to leave our Royal Lover
to all his Furious Longings, Impatient Expectings, and Restless Burnings, those
Amorous crowding Attendants, that always make the Leading Cavalcade to the
Coronation of Love: My Reader must be entreated to interrupt his Expectation of
the success of this Grand Scene of our two Imperial Inamorato's, by the
interposing of a little Comical Intrigue of Lactilla, the Cambrian Princes
Nurse; which, whether by a Frolic of Fortune, for some particular Diversion of
that Fickle Deity, or by mere common chance, it matters not; casually
intermixing it self in this Sublimer Amor, must make up a part of our History.

It is not unknown to the World what Artful Tenderness our Messalina has all
along expressed for that dear Infant. But indeed, 'twas the subtlest part she had
to Play, and therefore it must be Acted to the Life. In the late Storm that
drove her from the lost Kingdom of Albion, and cast her on the Gallick Shore,
however that darling Infant, with all the Tenderest Care, was preserved from
the Universal Shipwreck, and not only the honest Bric-kill Nurse that Suckled
it, was carried over with the Queen, and her Cambrian Nursery; but also the
very Warming-pan Midwife too, crossed the Hering-pond with her Royal Mristress;
and as some think very timely and prudently, for fear of that Inquisition from
the Grandees of Albion, had she ventured to have staid behind, that possibly
would have put her to that Test her Circumstances would not well bear; though
truly for a fairer Face to the World, 'twas Industriously given out, That her
Majesty was with Child again, and therefore the Midwife's Attendance being her
Majesty's special Command, 'twas her Duty to wait on her Royal Mistress to what
part of the World soever her Misfortunes should carry her.

The Amor of Messalina with Polydorus, etc. (since Lycogenes Retiring to
Ibernia,) swelling so big, we are forced to make the Completing of the History
the Subject of a Fourth Part.

FINIS.

