The Third Part OF THE CRY OF THE INNOCENT FOR JUSTICE.

Briefly rela(...) Proceedings of the Court of Se(...) Baley, the 11, 12, and
13. days of (...)th, toward the People of God (...)d particularly concerning
the Trial and (...) of Edward Buroughs, with about thirty P(...) more.

Also relating the Proceedings of the Court of Sessions at Hickeses Hall, in
the Month aforesaid, toward about fifty of the said People, who were taken
and Imprisoned in the County of Middlesex in New Prison. With diverse other
things of concernment about the People aforesaid.

Published for satisfaction to all.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662.

A Brief Relation of the Proceedings, etc.
THE First day of the Sessions, being the 11th. of the sixth Month, eleven of
the People called Quakers, were fetched out of Prison, and led before the
Judgment Seat at Old Baley, and immediately were called by Name and set to the
Bar, and the Indictment was read against them on this wise (viz.) For being at
an unlawful Tumultuous meeting, with force and Arms, to the Disturbance of the
Peace of the King, and in contempt to him, and to the terror of the People,
and to the evil example of all others in the li(...)ffending, etc. And then it
was demanded of them (...)ly to Answer, Guilty or not guilty; and one (...),
that he was taken up in the Street, and not g(...) any part of the Indictment;
and another person be (...) to Answer, demanded a Copy of his Indictment, which
was denied him, except so much money were given for it; And D. Baker answered,
that he was both innocent and guiltless of the Manner or Tennor of the
Indictment, and his innocent Soul and Life did witness against the same; and
furthermore he said, That they expected Justice and Equity, and for them to
give Righteous Judgment, they being Innocent People; But Alderman Brown upon
the Bench, mocked with a whining voice, as if it were the sound of a Dog or
Cat, and not like a man, especially one that is set to Rule over men, who
should be as men of God; and D. B. said, It becomes not a Magistrate to scoff
or mock at the Prisoners; and R. B. denied, and said he did not mock, but
surely he did so, for thereby the Multitude were provoked to lift up their
voices in laughter at his Lightness and Folly, in which he sported himself as
his manner is, and he said, D. Baker did Cant, and such like scoffing words;
But he answered, saying, I spoke in the Fear of the Lord, and I would that the
same were set up, not only in the Hearts of the Magistrates but also in the
hearts of all here present this day; And it was demanded of him, whether he
were ready to receive his Trial, and he said, he was ready to receive Justice
and Judgment, and they seemed to be displeased at his Reply; and it was put to
him by the Court, whether he would be Tried by a Jury, and he said on this
wise; He supposed there were men upon the Bench that might be sufficient to
hear and determine the matter without a Jury, as to the Particulars in the
Indictment; and they therefore turned him by, and others of the Prisoners did
give their answer accordingly, and one said, That he was guilty of what was
Truth, and not guilty of the contrary in the Indictment; And the Court said,
That if the Prisoners were guilty of one part, they were guilty of the whole;
To which was replied, Not so, for as it was Matter of Conscience to them to
bear witness for the Truth, so it was Matter of Conscience to bear witness
against the contrary; and it was said p(...)ure, there might be some words in
the Indictment (...) themselves might be true; and others of the (...)eas to
the Indictment they accepted of, for not (...) and others because they did not
plead so in their Form and manner of Terms, they would not allow of their
pleas for not guilty. Albeit, one was nothing at all concerned in the matter,
being taken up as an innocent man in the street, without the breach of any Law,
either of God or Man, and had then suffered more then thirty days
Imprisonment, and been before the Judgment Seat twice, at two several
Sessions, and not tried, nor his Innocent cause pleaded, nor he set at Liberty,
but with many more have been thus taken too and fro, and hurried to Prison and
from Prison, to the Judgment Seat, and from Judgment to Prison again, but the
Lord God of Judgment will be eased of his Adversaries, and plead the Cause of
Innocence, and Recompense Vengeance in his sore displeasure upon the Head of
his Enemies in one day; Behold, behold, it hasteneth and comes to pass.

And so because they could not try them all, they said they would try none of
them till next Sessions, and so sent them all to Prison again, but as the
Jaylors was hurrying of them away, D. Baker spoke the words of Christ, saying,
If ye had known what this means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, ye
would not have condemned the guiltless.

And the next Morning he wrote a few Lines to Alderman Adams, to the end he
might move it to the rest of the Magistrates upon the Bench, that they might be
called to a Trial, seeing they had dealt so with them the day before; and
forthwith the Marshal of the City was sent, to demand of them or move them to
it, (viz.) If that they would confess to him that they were at a Meeting, and
at such a Meeting as was mentioned in the Indictment, they should go and be
Tried, and favored it may be, with a small Fine, he said; But in the Fear and
Name of the Living God he was withstood, and the Prisoners kept out of the
snare, and they let him know that his Message did tend to so much, as if he
should come to persuade innocent men that they were thieves, and confess it to
him when they were guiltless; And he said, What Answer shall I return the
Court? After we had debated the Matter, we said again and again, That if we
should confess that we were not at all at a Meeting, then we should not confess
to, but deny the Truth; for its true, we were at a Meeting, and it was a
Meeting of the Innocent, Harmless People of God, to Worship Him; But we denied
and witnessed against such a Meeting spoken of in the Indictment, of which we
were wholly Innocent and Guiltless, after this manner we spoke to him, and he
went his way, saying, Its in vain, then all would be to no purpose, and such
like words; and nothing further was done in that matter.

The twelfth day of the Month, being the third day of the week, first about
twenty of the Prisoners were fetched out of Newgate by their Keepers, and led
to the Sessions House, where were sitting on the Bench, the Mayor of the City,
Alderman Adams, Alderman Brown, and Counselor Howel, who sat Judge at Law of
the Court, as Deputy Recorder; And E. Buroughs was presently called by Name to
the Bar, with about eight persons more of them called Anabaptists; and being
set at the Bar, the Jury men were called and Sworn, the same who had served the
day before, and at the second person laying his hand upon the Book, E. B. moved
the Court in these words; Desiring to know what privilege the Law of the Land
allowed the Prisoners in making exceptions against the Jury men, this he
desired to know of the Bench he said, because he did not know the particular
points of the Law in that case; To which the Deputy Recorder answered, they
might make exceptions if they had good reasons for it; but the Persons being
strangers to all the Prisoners, they made no exceptions, having no knowledge of
the men, and so could not well except against any of them. The Jury been sworn,
the several Indictments were read in the Court, E. Buroughs the first of all,
according as the Prisoners stood Indicted at the Sessions about five weeks
before, a Relation of which Proceedings, with the Indictment Verbatim, ye have
in our Second part of the Cry of the Innocent for Justice, lately published,
though for our more orderly manifesting the Truth to the perfect knowledge of
all men, it is necessary that we insert again in this place, the said Indictment,
which is as follows, (viz.)

LONDON, ss.

THE Jurors for our Lord the King (...)sent upon their oath, that Edward
Buroughs late of London, together with diverse other persons to the said Jurors
unknown, to the number of a hundred persons, the first day of June, in the
fourteenth year of the Reign of our Lord King Charles the second, of England,
Scotland and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. With Force and Arms, etc. in
London etc. To wit, in the Parish of Saint Ann and Agnes, in the Ward of
Aldersgate, London aforesaid, Under pretense of performing Religious Worship,
otherwise then by the Laws of this Kingdom of England, in this Kingdom is
established, Unlawfully and Tumultuously did Gather and Assemble themselves
together, to the great Terror of his Majesty's People, and to the disturbance
of the Peace of our now Lord the King, in contempt of our said Lord the King
and his Laws, to the evil Example of all others in the like Case offending, and
against the Peace of our Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity, etc.

This being read by the Clerk, he proceeded to give the Jury their Charge, on
this wise, That whereas the Prisoner at the Bar stood Indicted for an Unlawful
and Tumultuous Meeting, under pretense of Worship, contrary to the Law of the
Land, as in the Form of the Indictment they had heard, and had pleaded not
guilty of the said Indictment; Therefore according to their Oaths, they were to
make true inquiry between our Lord the King, and the Prisoner at the Bar, in
the case for which he stood Indicted, and without favor or affection to try
the matter, and give their verdict according to their evidence, whether the
Prisoner were guilty in Form and Matter as he stood Indicted. This was the sum
of the Charge given to the Jury. This being done, E. Buroughs in particular
was set to the Bar, and three men called by Name for to give evidence (to wit)
William Branch, Thomas Glover, and Henry Walker, all of them of the Parish of
Mary Maudlyn's Old Fishstreet, all of whom took their Oath according to form,
That they should speak the Truth, and nothing but the Truth concerning the
matter inquired of them, as God should help them; And having taken their Oaths,
they were bid to look upon the Prisoner, and speak what they could say
concerning him as to the matter for which he stood there Indicted; Accordingly
the first began to speak on this wise, That whereas he being an Officer in
Captain Coulchester's Company, was commanded by his Captain on a certain day
(being the Sabbath day as he said) to go with three files of Musketeers to the
Bull and Mouth, where the Quakers were met, in Order to break their Meeting as
he was commanded; and then and there he found the said people met together, to
the number of about three or four hundred, as he might suppose, but justly he
could not tell how many, and amongst them this same Mr. Buroughs (said he) now
at the Bar, this same person was standing upon a place, and speaking amongst
them, speaking, yes, Preaching to them in their way, (said he;) and further, he
commanded his party to martch up the Meeting to the place where this Person
(now at the Bar) stood, and he bad him come down and cease speaking, but he
would not, but made some resistance; whereupon he commanded his men to pull him
down by force, which accordingly they did, and then took him out of the
Meeting, and he and his men guarded him to Paul's where their main guard was,
and he delivered him (this same person now at the Bar) to his Captain, and this
I testify upon my Oath, said he, etc. This done, the second person was called
to speak what he could say in that case concerning the Prisoner at the Bar; to
which he said, he could say to the same purpose that the person before had
testified, That whereas he was one of that party commanded to go to the Bull
and Mouth where the Quakers were met together, and there they found this same
Edward Buroughs now at the Bar, Preaching amongst the People, and according to
command they pulled him down, and took him away to their Captain, and this was
all he could say. Then the third evidence was called, and he was asked by the
Court what he could say in the Case concerning the Prisoner, his answer was,
That he had only to say what the other two before him had said; That whereas
he was one of the party of Soldiers commanded to go to the Quakers Meeting,
and there was this man (now at the Bar) standing up and Preaching amongst them,
and they pulled him down, and took him away to their Captain, and he had no
more to say; Thus the evidences gave witness, and this was the sum of what was
said by them all. Then the Deputy Recorder asked of them, if they were certain
this Prisoner was the self same man, and how many people they thought were at
the Meeting; to which they all answered yes, they were sure this same person
was the man, and there might be some hundreds at the Meeting, but how many they
could not justly tell.

Then the Court spoke to E. Buroughs, and asked him, What he had to say for
himself in this matter he stood there Indicted, and had pleaded not guilty, and
he had heard the Witnesses against him, and if he had ought to say he might now
speak. To which he began to speak on this wise, That he was glad he was
permitted to speak in defense of his Cause, and he hoped they would fully hear
him in what he had to say; He was no Lawyer, and therefore unskilled in the
particular points of the Law, and should not take in hand to proceed as such a
one, but in as much as God had given him a measure of Reason, and a property of
Justice, and a principle of Equity, to discern of different things, he should
make use of the same, to defend the Innocence of his Cause, against the Charges
falsely laid against him in the Indictment; and therefore he desired their
patience to hear -- but while going on in this Discourse, to moderate the
Court, and to prepare their minds for Audience, and that he might come
discreetly to the matter; the Judge of the Court stopped him, and interrupted
his Speech, and told the Prisoner, That he must be pertinent and brief, for
they had much to do, and could not be held in long discourses.

To which the Prisoner replied, his Cause was weighty, and desired time of
deliberate hearing, in order to sound Judgment; and he now was to plead on the
behalf of his Life and Liberty, for ought he knew, it might prove so; but he
should (God willing) be as brief and pertinent in what he should say, as the
Case in hand would permit; yet could he not be bound up to so many words, nor
to such a moment of time; but now he would proceed to make his exceptions,
which was as to the Witnesses, that they were not competent Witnesses, for --
About this time the Judge interrupted again, and asked the Prisoner, What
Country man he was; To which was replied by the Prisoner, Let the Court take
notice (said he) how that but a very little before, thou desired me to keep
close to the matter, and to be pertinent to the purpose, and now thou have
interposed a question altogether by the business, to lead me from the occasion
in hand, and as it were, to pervert my speech from what I was going upon, and
this is not very fair; at which words the Judge seemed highly displeased, to be
so taxed in the Face of the Court by the Prisoner; and told him, It was not fit
for a Prisoner to give such words at the Bar, and the reason why he asked him
his Name, was because he had said, he knew not the Laws of England, and
therefore could not tell whether he was an English man, for every English man
must needs know the Law of the Land; To which E. Buroughs replied, he only
said, he knew not the particular points, or every particular point of the Law,
and not that he knew nothing at all of the Laws; and as to his Country, he had
been for the most part at London for this diverse years, and did pertain to this
City; and desired he might be permitted to go on in his defense of his cause,
and to show his exceptions against the Witnesses, which the Court gave him
leave to do: And then he did assert, that the said persons were not competent
Witnesses in this Case, and therefore their evidence ought not to be taken,
against him, for they were a party against him, and not indifferent men, and
they could not Justly and according to right, be both Party, Prosecutors and
Witnesses against him; That they were a party, it was manifest by their own
words; in as much as they had testified, they took him so and so, in the
capacity of Soldiers, by force of Arms, which was not by due prosecution of
the Law of the Land by civil Officers, by Warrant from some Civil Magistrate,
or by Constable, etc. And the Prisoner further testified in these Words, That
these men who now appeared against him as Witnesses had themselves violated the
Law of the Land, and done violence unto the Laws and Government of England, in
that by force of Arms, and not by due process at Law, they had seized upon his
person, contrary to Magna Charta, which says, No man shall be taken, or
imprisoned, or disceized of his freehold, but by the Law of the Land; And also
the Kings late Proclamation, of the eleventh of January, 1660. (which then he
held in his hand at the Bar) wholly prohibiting such manner of seizing upon
men's persons as he would show them, by reading the very words of the
Proclamation if they would permit him; and therefore, in as much as these three
Persons now witnesses against him; had done thus contrary to the Law of the
Land, and against the very form and force of the Kings Proclamation, in
apprehending and imprisoning of him by force of Arms, by reason of which they
were liable to an Action at Law, if he pleased to bring it against them, for
such their illegal seizing upon him, and this both the Court and Witnesses
themselves knew might be done, and therefore to Justify themselves in such
their unjust Action, and to save themselves from what danger they were liable
to for the same; they did now come witnesses against him, and their now giving
Testimony against him was to their own advantage, and to justify themselves in
wrong doing, and to preserve themselves from that danger which might justly
come upon them; And upon this reason he did except against them as not
indifferent men, nor competent Witnesses against him in this Case, -- Hereabout
the Judge spoke to him, and told him this was not to the business, and he must
be short, for they would not suffer him to make such a flourish before them,
nor to Preach and Prate to them in the Court, and he must prove, That these men
had seized upon him contrary to Law; to this purpose he spoke, and seemed to be
much offended at what the Prisoner had spoken.

To which E. Buroughs again replied, That these three persons themselves had
out of their own mouths proved what he said, they had told the Court, how they
were sent in files of Armed men, and how they seized upon him by force thereof,
and led him away Prisoner; and they had neither lawful Warrant from any Justice
of the Peace, neither was there any Constable came with them, which he did
assert was an illegal apprehending of him, and contrary to Magna Charta, and he
would but read the words of the Kings Proclamation to them (which he still held
in his hand for that purpose) and that would make it more plain, -- Hereabout
the Court stopped him again, and denied him Liberty to read the Proclamation,
saying, that was nothing to the purpose, and the Judge said, He should not
overruled the Court, and do not ye see (said he) how he flourishes, and he
would delude all the people, take him away Jailer, he must not be suffered to
speak thus; Then some attempt was to take him away by force, but it was not
then done; But the Prisoner kept close to his matter still, telling the Court
and Jury, that these men were not fit persons to witness against him, in as
much as they had so unjustly and illegally taken him, etc. without any warrant
from any Justice of the peace, or due process of the Law of the Land, etc.
Hereupon Alderman Brown stood up, and said, He would justify their taking of
him, and some say, he was heard to say on the Bench, he sent them to the
Meeting to take him, and it was lawful enough, etc. And Alderman Adams said,
that seeing Sir Richard Brown had sent him to Prison, and sent his men to take
him, it was Lawful; for, Sir Richard Brown was a Justice of the Peace; To which
the Prisoner replied, That though Alderman Brown was a Justice of the Peace,
yet in the capacity of Major General of the City Regiments, he sent his
Officers and Soldiers to take Friends at their Meetings, and not in the place
as he was a Civil Magistrate, for then he might and should have sent his
Constables, or such Persons, by Warrant under his hand, and not rude Soldiers
in such a war like posture; and therefore his being apprehended by these
persons that had witnessed against him in the capacity of Soldiers, still made
it appear, they were not competent witnesses in this Case against him, for they
were a party, and violaters of the Law themselves, etc. Here again the Court
interrupted him, and the Judge told him, That their evidence was good enough,
and that if they had wronged him, he had his liberty of the Law against them,
and might do what he would in that case, but their evidence the Jury might
take; To which was replied again by the Prisoner, that if their evidence was
taken, and he thereupon brought in guilty, and so condemned, and upon that cast
into close Prison there remaining, how should he be capable to help himself in
any prosecution of the said men, if he had a purpose thereunto, and also the
Judgment of the Court against him upon their evidence, would justify them in
what violence they had done against him, and therefore now only was the time
for him to except against the insufficiency of the men and their evidence, or
else never; And therefore he desired the Court and Jury to consider the matter
well ere they determined it, and also affirmed that he had Law and Reason and
Truth of his side, and if they brought him in guilty it was not justly done, --
Here again the Judge interupted and said, He was not to be suffered to prate in
that manner at the Bar, and cried take him away, we will not hear him; and he
would delude all the People, and he should not overruled the Court, etc. And
hereupon he was taken by force from the Bar, and then he cried out he should
appeal to the Mayor of London for fair dealing in his Trial; and will not the
Court hear, will they not hear me in defense of Truth? whereupon the Mayor
stood up, and called to E. Buroughs, and desired him to speak moderately and
not offend the Court; To which he made answer, he was never yet reputed an
immoderate person, and he spoke as moderately as his Cause would permit, and
desired not to offend any; now the reason of the Court being offended, was at
the manner of the Prisoners discourse; which was with a force over them
undauntedly and confidently, and so boldly as if he had not been in the
capacity of a Prisoner at a Bar, and sometime acting with his hands stretched
out, and his arms abroad, appealing to the whole people to justify the truth
of what he spoke, and it is supposed that for such cause, the Judge and Court
took offense at him, for they said often, he was peremptory, and such like.

But after a little stop, the Prisoner began to speak to the matter again,
still urging the Court and Jury, that the Witnesses were altogether
insufficient persons, and told them, he would once more lay it before them, and
then leave it to their considerations; Then the Judge interrupted, and said on
this wise, telling the Prisoner that he had nothing to say, but to these two
things; First, Whether he could prove by Witnesses upon Oath, that he was at
any other place that day and time mentioned in the Indictment, if he could do
this, his Witnesses should be heard; Or secondly, If he was at that Meeting,
then to show some lawful Warrant, by the Authority of the Land, for his so
being, if he could do either of these, it would be heard, and might avail him,
else he had nothing to say, and the Court would hear no other matter.

To which E. Buroughs replied, He should now cease his Plea of the
insufficiency of the Witnesses, and leave what he had said to the Jury, and
commit it to their Consciences, and also should now proceed to the Matter
contained in the Indictment, for he had not yet spoken to that, and he had much
to say, to show the falcity of almost every line in it, and he had a Copy of it
there in his hand for that purpose, to plead to it; And first of all he should
move this to the Jury, as to state the point directly to them, whereupon the
issue of the Case lies, as thus; The Case to be sought into and determined by
the Jury is not (says he) whether I was at a Meeting at all; but whether I was
at such a Meeting for which I now stand indicted (that is to say) Such a
Tumultuous, Riotous Meeting, by force of Arms, etc. This is the point
determinable, for (said he) I confess in my judgment, I own this Practice of
Meeting together for the Worship of God, and I my self have been at hundreds of
such Meetings, -- To which Richard Brown quickly replied, So shall you never be
at any more; but said the Prisoner, I never was in all my days at any such
Meeting as is mentioned in the Indictment, and for which I am now upon my
Trial, and therefore (said he) I desire that the Jury would observe this very
thing; and in Conscience upon their Oaths Judge upon this point, whether they
find not whether I was at a Meeting, but whether I was at such a Meeting for
which I now stand upon my Trial, specified in my Indictment; and this I shall
leave with the Jury, said the Prisoner.

To which the Judge replied, That he had said lately, he knew not the Points of
the Law, but now he had found out a strange Point, but it should do him no
good, for the issue lay not there, but if he was at a Meeting, it was
sufficient; and Richard Brown also said the same; and therefore said the Judge,
If ye have any thing as to the two particulars I have mentioned, ye shall be
heard, but nothing else will we hear.

After a little stop, E. Buroughs spoke again to the Court, and told them,
That this common Law (which they had said was not written) but lay in the
Breasts of the Judges (this was said both then and the Sessions before) he was
not well knowing in, neither the extent of it, nor the penalties of it; but the
Parliament had lately made a Law in particular on purpose against Meetings, and
it might be supposed that their intent was by that Law, to abate the force of
all other Laws, which might any ways take hold upon any for Meeting together;
and the occasion of that Law lately made was on this wise; The King at and
since his late coming into the Land, had made diverse promises to us for the
tolleration and allowance of Liberty of Conscience, which promises they might
expect the fulfilling of, -- Here the Judge again interrupted and told him, He
should not be permitted to speak on that wise, nor to overruled the Court, and
they could have no longer patience; and he spoke somewhat to the Jury, telling
them, they had heard the Witnesses against the Prisoner, and they might
proceed, and cried, Take him away Jailer, which accordingly was done, and they
pulled and haled him by force from the Bar, though the Prisoner kept on
speaking, and desired that the Court would hear him yet a little further, for
he had not done, and he should offer both Law and Reason against the
Indictment, and he supposed it was his right by the Law, to speak the last
words to the Jury (in the mean time of this Discourse, the Keepers were haling
of him from the Bar) and it was a hard matter (said he) not to be permitted to
speak for himself in his Cause, now when his Liberty was at the stake, and his
Life too it might be, for Alderman Brown had threatened him so and so as they
had heard, and he knew not but that it was to destroy him, and therefore of
right he claimed liberty to plead his Cause to the Jury, who were his only
Judges in matter of Fact, and not the Court, -- At which the Court seemed
offended; but by this time the Prisoner was haled quite away from the Court,
and set by, and not suffered to speak one word more to them in defense of his
Cause.

Then next of all were set to the Bar some persons more of them People called
Anabaptists, and their Indictment was read to the Jury, and a Person was called
to Evidence against them, who testified upon Oath, that the Persons there
Prisoners at the Bar, were at such a day and in such a place met together, and
he was one of the Party sent to apprehend them, which accordingly was done, and
these were the very Persons; and this was the sum of the Evidence given against
them. Then they were asked one by one, what they had to say for themselves? To
which one of them answered, He had little to say but what had been said by the
person last at the Bar; and he for his part saw that they would not hear
Reason, and he thought they were purposed already to do what they would,
whatsoever could be said; which the Court took as some reflection upon them,
though by the effect it was proved true, That they intended to keep them in
Prison, whatsoever their Cause should appear to be in the Trial: Another of
them answered, As for meeting together to Worship God, it was his judgment so
to do; yet their Meetings were peaceable, and not unlawful nor tumultuous; and
to this purpose most of them answered, only one Person told the Court, he
confessed he was at their peaceable Meeting, and it was his judgment and
Conscience to meet together among his Friends separate from that Public way of
Idolatrous Worship set up; at which words the Court took great notice, and was
much offended, and Alderman Brown cried to the Goalers, Take him away and lay
him up, for he shall be tried for his life for those words; they are seditious
words, and he shall be tried for his life for them; and the Court cried, Take
him away, which accordingly was done, and he sent into the Goal again: This is
the substance of what is remembered concerning them, only they pleaded much
there was but one Witness against them, and they ought not to be Condemned by
one Witness; and thus much shall suffice, for it is supposed some of themselves
may make a more exact Relation of the particulars concerning themselves.

The Court and Jury having heard their Defense, or at least a little of what
they had to say for themselves, they were set by; and next were called about
twelve Persons more of the People called Quakers, and set to the Bar, and their
Indictments read to the Jury; Then a Person was called to give Evidence, who
when he had sworn, said, I am now upon my Oath, and do testify that I saw all
these persons at a Meeting at a House in Tower-street on such a day, we being
sent (said he) by our Captain to that place, a party of Musketeers went to
that House, and we found them met together, and one Preaching among them, and
we seized upon them and brought them away, and these are the Persons, and this
is all that I can say, said the witness; Then the Judge said he must mention
in particular by pointing at each man in particular, and say that he saw him
there; to which the Witness said, he had their Names in a Paper, and he would
look upon that, for he might not know all their Faces, and these men's Names he
thought he had there, and looking upon his Paper, he said, The 27th day of May
these persons were taken out of a Meeting, and he himself was one that took
them, etc. Upon which one of the Prisoners, an ancient man, Robert Craven by
name, looked upon the Witness, and asked him in these words, Did thou see me
there at that Meeting? and the Witness being a little struck in his
Conscience, said Nay, I did not see you there, though before he had said upon
Oath he saw them all there: Also one William Newill asked him also if he saw
him there that day; and the Witness said Nay, he did not see him there; yet
presently afterward said he did see him there; which put a damp upon the
Court, perceiving the Witness so to contradict himself, in saying and
unsaying, and stammering as he did very confusedly; and the Auditors hissed at
him, and some whispered shame that such a man's Evidence should be taken against
honest men. And another of the Prisoners moved the Court to take notice of the
falsenesse of the Evidence in this particular, whereas he had said it was the
27th day of May that the Meeting was at which they were taken, and the
Indictment signified the 25th day of the Month, and here was a contradiction
between the Indictment and the Evidence, and desired the Court and Jury that
they would take notice of it; To which the Judge replied, speaking to the Jury,
There was seemingly some color of Exception against the Witness to make void
his Evidence from that man's Exception, yet there was little in it for them to
take notice of, for if it was the five and twentieth day of the Month as
specified in the Indictment, then it must needs be the seven and twentieth day,
for the Law (said he) supposes the Fact to be done the 25 day, and every day
since, and so the 27th day; and thus the Judge of the Court (viz.) the Deputy
Recorder in diverse other words to this effect, seemed to justify the Evidence
that was so false and contradictory and unsound, as was manifestly apparent to
the whole Company that were then present, who did many of them well observe how
Justice and true Judgment were turned backward, and Truth and Equity could not
enter, but whatsoever poor men's Case appeared to be in Trial, and how innocent
soever they were found, yet it appeared the Court was resolved to go on against
the Prisoners, and to send all back to Prison again.

Another of the Prisoners being asked by the Court what he had to say? He
answered, that the Witness had sworn falsely, 1. In that he had said he saw all
the Persons named in the Indictment at that Meeting. 2. After he had so said
upon his Oath, yet he confessed that two of them he saw not there. 3. In that
he had said there was one Preaching among them when they were taken in the
Meeting, this was a Lie. The Mayor spoke to the Prisoner, and bad him Confess
he was at the Meeting, and he should be dealt favorably withal: To which the
Prisoner replied, I am not guilty of being at such a Meeting as is mentioned in
the Indictment, but meeting together in the fear of God for his Worship, I own
and am content to suffer for, if it be the loss of my natural life; but the
Witness (said the Prisoner) has sworn falsely, and he that will swear will
lie, according to the proverb; and he bad the Jury do in the case with him, as
they would be done unto.

Another of the Prisoners looked upon the person, who Witnessed against them,
and he asked him, Art thou sure thou saw me at the day and place at that
Meeting; The witness answered, Yes, I am sure I saw you there; and said the
Prisoner again to him, And did not thou then see also how Richard Brown did
beat me, and kick me, and strike me under the Chin when I was before him at his
House the same time I was sent to prison, which was a shame to any Magistrate
to do so with any if never so great a malefactor; Well, but said the Prisoner
further, I confess (said he) I was at that Meeting, as my duty to God it was
so to be; and I am persuaded the time will come, and that I shall live to see
it with these same bodily eyes, that we shall meet together at that place, when
you will not be there to disturb us. At which words the Court seemed not to
take much notice, only the Judge told the Prisoners, and partly directing his
speech also to the Jury, That there was nothing to be said by the Prisoners,
that the Court or Jury could regard, as matter of weight on the Prisoners
behalf, saving the two things beforementioned, (to wit) First, Whether they
could prove by good evidence, that they were at any other place that day and
time mentioned in the Indictment, if this could be done, they should be heard.
Or, Secondly, if they were so met together, then to show some lawful warrant
for so doing, by the Authority of the Land; to either of these two things they
should be heard, else not to say any more, for they would not hear them; to
which some of the Prisoners began to say somewhat, but were not permitted by
the Court, and then the Goalers took them away and set that Company by.

Then was called to the Bar about 8 or 10 Persons more of them called
Anabaptists, and their Indictments were read to the Jury, and a Person called
and Sworn to give Evidence against them; who gave his witness on this wise,
That whereas he was Commanded by his Captain to go with a party of men to
Beech-lane, where they were informed these People were met together;
accordingly he and his Party marched to that place, where he found these
Persons now at the Bar in a Meeting, and such a one of them Preaching, and he
and his Soldiers did take these men out of the Meeting, and brought them away
to the Guard; and this was the sum of his Evidence: Then the Prisoners were
asked by the Court, what they had to say for themselves. To which some
answered, the Indictment was false every line of it, and as many lies in it as
lines, which the Court seemed offended at; Another of them said, that for his
part he saw it was to no purpose to say any thing, for they would not hear
Reason, and therefore he should be silent; Another said, That whereas it was
said in the Indictment, they were met together by force and Arms, This was
false, for they were neither in force nor arms, to which the Judge replied on
this wise, That was only matter of form in Law, in that it was said, by force
and Arms, and the Law supposed, that whatsoever act or thing was done contrary
to the Law of the Land, it must be concluded by the Judges of the Law, that
that Act and thing was done by force and Arms, because contrary to the Law;
Thus the Deputy Recorder Howel, the present Judge of the Court, spoke to
satisfy the Jury, as if that notwithstanding every word in the Indictment was
not absolute true in the plainest sense, yet one way or other by such gloss and
interpretation it might stand true; but how this could satisfy the Jury-mens
Consciences, I know not, for I perfectly observed, that the charge to the Jury
was in these words, to make true enquiery whether the Prisoners were guilty in
form and matter of the Indictment; but in the proceedings, the form is made
nothing; for Richard Brown diverse times said, If they were at a Meeting, if
this was proved it was enough; and it appeared to be the Judgment of the Court
also, that if the Prisoners were proved to be at a Meeting, and a Meeting under
pretense of the Worship of God, whether such Meeting was peaceable or with
force of Arms, it was not material; if they were Meetings either under pretense
or really for the Worship of God; Tavern Meetings, and Playhouse Meetings, and
Whore-House Meetings were not Inditable, at least no mention was made against
the evil of such Meetings at that time, but only where they met under pretense
of the Worship of God; if so, and that this was seemingly proved, it was enough
for the Jury to find guilty, and the Court to Sentence; Well, but to return
again to the present matter, The Judge spoke to the Witness, and asked him if
he was sure that these were the persons that were taken at the Meeting, and he
might point to them particularly, and say, He saw this man, and this man there;
To which the Witness replied to the Mayor and Court, My Lord (said he) I do not
remember the faces of all of them, nor do I know them by Faces, but I have a
list of these men's names, (and looked upon it) said, these men's names I have
which were taken at that Meeting, etc. The Court made a little stop, thinking
this was not a very perfect evidence, and many people were seen to wag their
heads in contempt of such doings, and that such evidence should pass; for it
may be truly considered, that though he had such Names in a list, yet there are
many and diverse men in this great City of one and the same name, and what
evidence could that be against persons whose faces he did not know nor
remember, as himself said, let honest men judge in the Fear of the Lord; Well,
but the Prisoners excepted against the Witness, and because but one Witness;
mentioning that Text, some of them, that under the mouth of two or three
Witnesses every thing should be established, much objecting against the
insufficiency of one Witness, but that had no entertainment with them, only
the Deputy Recorder, spoke to them, as he had done to others before them, That
they had nothing to say, saving to the two things before mentioned; First,
Whethey could prove they were at any other place that day, and not at that
Meeting for which they stood Indicted; Or Secondly, If they were at that
Meeting, then what Warrant by the Authority of the Land they could show for
their so Assembling together; If they could say any thing on this behalf, they
should be heard.

To which one of the Prisoners replied to this purpose, that the King had
promised Liberty to tender Consciences, and to him in particular he did promise
at such a time that they should have their Meetings quietly, if they would live
peaceably; The Court took little notice of what he said, only asked if he had
any Witness of it, the Prisoner then said, not present here, but mentioned one
of the Howards, that was then present with the King when such promise was made;
and also the Prisoner said, It Is a general Maxim concerning the Law, That no
man whatsoever can dispense with any Law of God, nor no Authority ought to
command any thing, contrary to the Law of God, and I am sure (said he) our
Meetings are according to the Law of God, and desired to ask the Court a
question, and they gave him liberty. I desire to know (said he) whether the
Laws of England, be contrary or according to the Laws of God. The Judge
answered, That the Laws of England were according to the Laws of God, God
forbid else (said he.) To which the Prisoner replied, Well then (said he) If
the Laws of this Land be according to the Laws of God, as ye say they are, then
we have sufficient Warrant for our Meetings, from the Laws of the Land, because
our Meetings are according to the Laws of God, and justified thereby; and being
warranted by the Law of God, we are Warranted by the Law of the Land also, if
they are agreeable, and not contrary one to the other, as ye say; And said he,
ye may read in the Scripture, that the Apostles met together in an upper
Chamber, both men and women; and at another time were met together, to the
number of 120. persons. -- Hereabout the Court stopped his Discourse, and would
not suffer him further, and told him, That was in the infancy of the Gospel,
and the Rulers were then Heathen, and persecuted the Christians, etc. Not much
more the Prisoners were suffered to say that is now remembered, but all taken
away from the Bar, and the Judge spoke to the Jury on this wise, That they had
heard the Matter, both what the evidence could say, and also what the Prisoners
had said, and now they might proceed; and the Jury arose up off their Seats,
and went out to seek their Verdict, and as they were a going, E. Buroughs
spoke to them, and told them, he hoped they would be more just, then to pass
upon him, and not hear him first to the utmost of what he had to say, as they
knew he was not permitted to speak for him self, what he would have done in
defense of his Cause.

Well, the Jury staid out about half an hour, and returned to their Seats at
the Bar; and the Clerk asked them if they were all agreed? they said, Yes; He
asked them who should speak for them? they said, their Foreman; Then the
Prisoners were called by name, E. Buroughs the first, and set to the Bar, and
the Clerk bad the Jury look upon the Prisoner, and give their Verdict, whether
he was guilty or not guilty of the Fact whereof he stood Indicted. The Foreman
answered, Guilty. Thus they did by all the rest, and every man was returned
Guilty by the Jury, save Rob. Craven and W. Newil, about whom the Witness made
such a stammering contradiction, as before ye have heard; and one of the
Prisoners at the Bar, when the Jury pronounced him guilty, he made answer in
these words, I would not (said he) for a hundred pounds, but be found guilty of
Meeting together to Worship God. When the Jury had pronounced the Prisoners
guilty (in the very time of doing it, came Sir Orlando Bridgeman on to the
Bench, and sat down) E B. spoke to the Court, Saying, He desired to know the
Names and places of the Jurymen, and of the three persons who had given
evidence against him; and he desired them three might be there the afternoon,
and he should prove them false Swearers, as he could have done in diverse
particulars. And also spoke aloud to the Court, That he should appeal to Judge
Orlando Bridgman for better Justice, and should move him and the Court the
afternoon in arrest of judgment, for he would have the matter heard over again.

And he spoke to diverse of the Jurymen, telling them, They had done injustly,
and while he had a Tongue to speak and a Hand to write, he should not spare to
show their unequal proceedings, who had condemned him, and not heard him to the
utmost. It was observed by a Person in the Court, after all the Prisoners were
gone, that some of the Jury spoke to the Court as they were passing away, that
E. Buroughs had threatened them; What should they do? Answer was made to them,
Do not heed what he says, for we will stand by you, and more words to the same
effect, which the Informer could not well hear nor remember; and what may be
judged of this by wise men, but that there was an agreement between the Court
and Jury against the Prisoner.

The Court immediately adjurned till after dinner, and all the Prisoners were
led and driven back to Newgate again

The Afternoon of that day none of the same Prisoners were had down to the
Sessions, but some others were of the same People, in order to Trial; and some
were tried, and others were called over, but no man appeared as to Accuse them,
nor Witness against them; so the particulars that passed in the Court that
afternoon, we have not yet had a Relation of, and so in this place must pass
it, and pass on to the proceedings of the Court the next day, which was as
follows.

In the Morning early, all the said Prisoners that had been Tried the day
before were had down to the Court, and also Four Women that had been taken at
the Bull and Mouth about a Week before, who were the first Called, and their
Indictments read for being at an unlawful and tumultuous Meeting, etc. as they
say; and it was demanded of them, Guilty or not Guilty? to which the Prisoners
pleaded after some few words betwixt them and the Court, Not Guilty; then they
were set by. Next was Called E. Buroughs and set to the Bar, and so after him
every man by Name was called and set to the Bar that had been tried the day
before; and the Clerk of the Court read a Paper, which pronounced every man
Fined so much, some more and some less as the pleasure of the Court was; when
they had read all over each man fined so much, and to lie in Prison till
payment.

E. Buroughs spoke to the Court, and told them, He had not heard his Sentence;
the Clerk told him over again, he was fined one hundred Marks, and must lie in
Prison till payment. To which he Replied again, he looked upon this way of
passing Sentance, not to be just, nor yet according to their own Custom; for
he expected they would have asked him (according to their usual manner in that
case) what he had to say for himself, why Judgment should not pass, for he had
much to say on that kind, and bad the Court remember that yesterday he moved
them and Orlando Bridgman, one of the chief Judges of the Land, in arrest of
Judgment, and did now again move the same, and that Judgment might be staid for
a time, till the next Sessions, or if they would not give him time till then,
then but till the afternoon, he desired to arrest Judgment, and in that time he
would produce diverse Statutes contrary to the Form of which these proceedings
toward him were; He said he was no Lawyer, and therefore could not now
nominate to them the particular Chapters of the Statutes which he desired to
insist upon, and therefore desired time till the next Sessions, or but till the
afternoon. Alderman Brown made answer and told him he should have time; but the
Recorders Deputy (Judge of the Court) told the Prisoner he could not have
longer time, they could not admit it: To which E. B. replied, If they would not
give him time in arrest of Judgment, then they denied him both Law and Equity;
for themselves knew it was very usual in many Cases for Persons after Verdict
given in, to have time allowed them in arrest of Judgment, and particularly
himself had once at a certain place a false Verdict brought in against him, and
he did move the Court at that time in arrest of Judgment, and it was allowed
him by Sergeant Hatten, who was then Judge of that Court, and he hoped he might
have the same now.

To which the Judge Replied, He knew Sergeant Hatten well, but his practice was
no example to them, for do you think (said the Judge to the Prisoner) that we
can give you time for you to take the Indictment and Consult with Lawyers, and
seek this occasion and the other against it, this we will not do (said he) but
if ye have any matter or point of Law now to move we will hear you, but we
shall give you no longer time: To which E. B. again Replied, Then he should say
it was a surprizal of Judgment, and very hard to be so dealt withal, not to
have time till the afternoon, that he might give in his Exceptions against the
false Verdict brought in against him; and what if he had a mind to Consult with
any Lawyers in the Case that knew the particular points of Law better then
himself; why should he not do this, his Fact was not so Criminal, nor of so
large extent, but that the Law would allow him Counsel if he had a mind to use
it, for if he were Attainted of Treason (which his present Case was not
comparable too) yet in some cases of Treason, he thought the Law would allow
Counsel, and therefore he knew not why such exceptions should be made against
him, as if he could not be admitted Counsel in his Case, if he had a mind to
use it; Hereabouts the Judge interposed, and told him, He should not be
suffered to overruled the Court, and (said he) Ye think to overruled the Court
to day again; And do not ye see how he flourishes, I tell you (said he) ye must
not have time longer, but if ye have any matter now to except upon, we will
hear you, or tell us what point ye would insist upon if time were given you. To
which E. B. Replied, It was but yesterday since he was Tried, since which time,
he had scarce opportunity thoroughly to consider and state the Matter, for he
was with many more of his Friends, thrust up into such holes, and so thronged
together, that he believed they would hardly suffer their dogs to lie as they
were forced to lodge, and therefore he desired a little more and better time,
to look over the Statute of Magna Charta and other Statutes, which he should
peruse in the Case; and for one thing first of all, he should insist upon the
Matter and manner of his being Illegally Apprehended, and by force, and not by
due process at Law brought to his Trial, which by the Laws of the Land ought
not to be; and this is clear from Magna Charta, said he, which says, No man
shall be Imprisoned nor deseized of his freehold, but by the Law of the Land,
and if any be apprehended and brought to Trial, and not by due process at Law
it shall he holden for nothing; The Judge made Answer, he was mistaken, this
was not said in Magna Charta, though the first part of the words are, but the
second part of them for substance, is in a Statute of Edw. 3. Further the Judge
said, They could not hear him any longer, and they would not give time, and he
should not be suffered to prate there, and seeing (said the Judge) you are so
peremptory and stubborn, the Court takes notice of you, and thinks good to add
upon you this Sentence further; Ye are also (if ye do pay your hundred Marks)
to find sufficient sureties for the good behavior before ye are released, and
take him away Jailer.

Then E. B. spoke aloud to the Court, and appealed to the Mayor of London by
Name, and to Alderman Adams, and Alderman Brown by names, is this fair dealing
said he, to deny me Law and Equity at the bar? and I appeal to you to do me
right, and to let me have time, before Judgment be passed, that I may show you
my Reasons grounded upon the Laws of the land against the verdict given in
against me; and said he, Alderman Brown thou have promised me I shall have
longer time, fulfill thy promise to me, what will thou go back from thy word on
the Bench? Let all take notice, I am denied Law and Custom at the bar, if ye
deny me this motion of Arrest of Judgment. Then Alderman Brown spoke to him in
these words, This is all ye shall have, and print it (said he) if ye will
through the Land; To which E. B. again replied, that he was no very great
Printer, yet he thought it his duty to publish these things to as many as he
could, that all the World may know the Proceedings; in the mean time the Court
cried take him away, away with them all Jailer, and then they began to hale
them all away into Prison again; and as they passed away, some of the Prisoners
told the Court, that the Lord would remember them in his day, and render unto
them according to their doings, and the hand of the Lord was lifted up, and
would deliver his people from all their enemies, etc.

Here follows diverse exceptions for Arrest of Judgment which would have been
brought in against the proceedings in E. Buroughs Case, if they had allowed
him time for to draw them up, and to present them, as sufficient reasons why
Judgment ought not to have been passed against him; but seeing arrest of
judgment was denied him, and no time permitted him to present his Reasons,
therefore they are suitable on this occasion here to be asserted, that all men
may see he had Law, Justice and Truth of his side, though contrary to the same
he was condemned.

EXCEP. I. Concerning the manner of his Imprisonment, and of the Proceedings.
1 INasmuch as he was Apprehended and Imprisoned by force of armed men, and so
without due process of the Law of the Land forced to a Trial, even contrary
thereunto, as may appear by the 29. Chap. of Magna Charta, no freeman shall be
taken or imprisoned, or diseized of his freehold or liberties, or free
customs, or any other ways destroyed but by the Law of the Land. These words
the law of the land are explained by the statute of 37. E. 3. Chap. 8. where
the words by the Law of the Land are rendered without due process of Law; Also
see the Statutes of 28. E. 3. Chap. 3. 42. E. 3. Chap. 3. No man is to be taken
or Imprisoned, or be put to answer, or brought upon trial without presentment
before Justice, or matter of Record, or by due process or Writ original
according to the old Law of the Land; And if any thing henceforth be done to
the contrary, it shall be void in Law and holden for error. By all which it
plainly appears, that the manner of his person being seized and Imprisoned was
contrary to Magna Charta and the ancient good Law of the Land; And his being
indicted and arreigned, and put to answer and caused to plead, were all
contrary to the Law of the Land, and on a wrong foundation as well appears; And
seeing it is so, then good ground and reason had he, and fully backed with
diverse Statutes, to move the Court in Arrest of Judgment; and that Judgment
should not have been passed at all upon him, for it was impossible the
Judgment could be just and true, and according to Law, when the proceedings in
order to Judgment from first to last, were directly contrary to the Law; and
the words of the Law themselves shall judge the Case, seeing what has been
done from first to last in his Case, is contrary to both meaning and intent and
letter of Law, as by the form of diverse Statutes is visibly apparent. The
Judgment given upon him, is void in Law, and holden for error by the Law, and
this is true Judgment.

Also in a Book called the Mirror of Justice, fol. 138. it is rendered a
sufficient exception not to be brought to Judgment by a right course, in these
words, the Defendant may say in exception of Bill or Indictment against him,
That he is not bound to answer hereunto, forasmuch as he is not brought to
Judgment by a right course, which is the very case now in hand, this Prisoner
was not brought to Trial by a right course in due Process of Law, but contrary
thereunto, and that was matter of exception in Law against the passing of
Judgment. To this add the very words of the Kings late Proclamation of the
17. of the eleventh Month, 1660. The King Commands That no Officers nor
Soldiers do presume to apprehend or secure any person or persons, nor to
search any houses without a lawful warrant under the hand and seal of one or
more of the Lords of the Privy Counsel, or Justices of the Peace in their
respective Liberties; and we will that the said warrants be directed to some
Constable or other known legal Officer, and we do declare that all those who
shall hereafter be so hardy as to offend against this Our Proclamation, shall
not only not receive countenance from us therein, but shall be left to be
proceeded against according to Our Laws, and incur Our high displeasure, as
persons doing their utmost to bring scandal and contempt upon our Government,
etc. By all which it is apparent, the manner of E. B. his apprehending and
imprisoning was contrary to both ancient Law of the Land and late Proclamation
of the King; and inasmuch as the Foundation (to wit his imprisonment) of his
Trial, and so of the Judgment, was so false and illegal, and directly contrary
to the mind of the King and the form of Law, how was it possible the Judgment
should be just, that was laid on such a foundation of proceedings, so illegal;
and this was E. B. his case, the manner of his taking and imprisonment (in
order to Trial and Judgment) was illegal, and the Judgment passed upon him in
such order and proceedings must therefore needs be illegal also; and he ought
to have had an arrest of Judgment not only for a time but for ever.

EXCP. II. Concerning the incompetency of the Witnesses.
2. INasmuch as the witnesses against him, (whose evidence was the immediate
cause of the Virdict, and so of the Judgment,) were the very persons that had
thus violated the Law of the Land, and had themselves apprehended him, seized
upon him and imprisoned him contrary to the Law, (as in the first Exception is
showed) and because thereof were liable to an action at Law which might be
brought against them for such their seizing upon him, and violence done to him.
Therefore it must needs appear to be in just, unreasonable and contrary to the
equity of the Common Law (which is said to be by the Ancients, the Law written
in the heart) That the very Persons, who had so violated the Law, even Magna
Charta it self, in such seizing upon him, should be the witnesses too against
him, and their evidence taken as the only evidence in his trial, upon which
virdict, and so Judgment was procured upon him; for inasmuch as what evidence
was given against him by the said persons, was to their own advantage, and to
justify themselves in their illegal dealing, and what they spoke to the
prisoners disadvantage was to their own profit, which proves sufficiently that
they were not Competent witnesses against the prisoner, nor in Justice and
Equity could their witness be received against him, being the party themselves
against him, and fully concerned in the case, either to get the Prisoner
condemned by their Testimony against him, that themselves might be justified in
the wrong they had done him, or else to be left liable to the justice of the
Law, for their violating of it; and it must needs be against the very reason of
the Common Law of the Land, (upon which this Trial was) That parties in
unlawful acts of violence against a Person, should be permitted to be witnesses
in the Prosecution and Trial against the same Person; this was the very case of
E. Buroughs; wherefore his ground was good to move in arrest of Judgment, and
backed with the reason and equity of the Common Law; for it is also said in the
Book called the Mirror of Justice (a piece approved by the Lawyers of England)
fol. 251. It is an abuse (or unlawful) to suffer a man that is a companion to
be a witness.

This truly considered the witnesses against him were incompetent and
insufficient, also besides the malice and enmity of the men against the person
of the prisoner, which out of envy (or mixed therewith at least) it is possible
they might give such their evidence, and the Law allows not such men's evidence
in Judgment; and that these persons were such men, as sought the ill fare of
the prisoner, nothing less does appear in their transactions from first to
last of this business; and the Judgment given upon such men's Testimony, the
case thoroughly considered, could not be just Judgment; therefore of right he
ought to have had arrest of Judgment.

EXCEP. III. Concerning the proceedings of Court in time of Trial.
3. INasmuch as the proceedings in Court against him, were disorderly and not
duly in the moderate method of Law prosecution, in this particular of his being
debarred and not permitted to speak to the utmost what he had to say in his own
defense of his Cause, which right was manifestly denied him, by the command of
the Court, and action of the Goalers, who did violently hale him from the Bar,
and would not hear him, nor suffer him to speak his mind to the utmost, nor to
read the Kings Proclamation of the 17. of the 11th. Month, 1660. which was
pertinent to defend his cause in diverse particulars, and he ought to have been
heard to the utmost, before the passing of Judgment, according to 28 Edw. 3.
chap. 3. in these words, No man is to be imprisoned, disherited or put to
death, without being heard what he can say for himself, which was not granted
to the Prisoner, for he was haled away before he had spoken to the particular
parts of the Indictment, which he proffered to do, and that he would allege
both Law and Reason against it, but was not suffered; wherefore he had Cause
enough grounded upon Law and Reason, both upon Common and Statute Law, to move
in arrest of Judgment; for in common Equity obvious to every man's view, no man
can in Justice be sentenced without a full hearing, which was this Prisoners
case; nor can the Judgment be just upon any person, who is not heard to the
utmost in his own Defense, and therefore an arrest of judgment should have been
allowed him.

EXCEP. IIII. Concerning the Law it self against which it was said, the offense
was committed, and by which he was tried and sentenced.
4 INasmuch as the offense was only for being at a Meeting, and a Meeting only
in the worship of God, and nothing said or acted at that Meeting, but what was
good and just; and all this, both meeting together and such practice in the
Meeting according to the Law of God, and the Holy Scriptures and example of
Saints in former ages; therefore Judgment ought not to have passed against
him, but might lawfully be Arrested; and that more especially because it is a
general assent by all Christian men, and used as a maxim among Lawyers that no
Law of God can be dispensed withal; and it is said in the Common Law, as
appears by Doctor and Studient, Cha. 2. Speaking of the Law written in the
heart of every man, Teaching him what is to be done and what is to be fled, and
because it is written in the heart, therefore it may not be put away, nor is it
changable by diversity of place or time, and therefore against this Law,
Prescription Statute nor Custom may prevail, and if any be brought in against
it, they be not prescriptions statutes nor customs, but things void and
against Justice, and all Laws of men ought to be grounded thereupon; and Cha.
4. every man's Law must be consonant to the Law of God, and therefore the Laws
of Princes, the Commandments of Prelates, the Statutes of Commonalities, are
not righteous nor obligatory, but as they are consonant to the Law of God; Also
by Statute Law the same is apparent, 28. Hen. 8. 7. Where it is expressly said,
that no man of what Estate, Degree or Condition soever he be, has power to
dispense with Gods Laws, as all the Clergy of this Realm, and the most part of
the Universities of Christendom, and we also do affirm and think. These things
truly considered, it may appear Judgment ought not to have passed against the
Prisoner, in as much as the pretended Law it self, according to which this
Trial and Judgment was given, is contrary to the Law of God, and Condemning
such Principle and Practice which are Justified by the Law of God, Holy
Scriptures and Example of Saints in former Ages, as may at large be proved by
the Scriptures of Truth, in the Acts of the Apostles and elsewhere, and the
keeping the Law of God, and the practices of Christianity according thereunto
by any person, cannot justly be Condemned by any Law of man; and this was the
very case of E. B. he was Apprehended, Tried and Sentenced for meeting together
with Gods People only to wait upon and to Worship him, which is according to
both the Law of God in the Letter, and to that written in the Heart, and
against such practice: So according to the Law of God, Prescription, Statute,
nor Custom, ought not to have prevailed, even the Laws of Princes, and
Commandments of Prelates in such a case, are void and against Justice; for no
man whatsoever can dispense with the Laws of God, as has been showed;
wherefore the Prisoner was excusable and justifiable from all Laws of men
whatsoever, and ought not to have been Condemned into any Penalty or
Imprisonment by that Law, which is contrary to the Law of God; not for his
Worships sake, nor for Meeting together to wait upon him in his fear.

Thus it is plain, he had just Ground of Exceptions against Judgment and
evident Reasons from both Common Law, and Statute Law, why Judgment should not
be passed against him in this Case; 1. From the manner of his being taken and
imprisoned and prosecuted to Trial without due process of Law, which is held
for error, and against Justice by the Law. 2. From the incompetency of the
Witnesses who were parties concerned in the Case, and what they testified to
the prejudice of the Prisoner, was to their own advantage. 3. From the
proceedings of the Court in time of Trial, who suffered not the Prisoner to
speak in full in his own defense. 4. From the Law it self by which he was Tried
and Judged, which Law is proved to be contrary to the Law of God, and therefore
the Judgment of that Law ought to have been arrested; And now last of all in
brief, Judgment ought not to have passed against him.

5. Because in common Reason and Equity, Justice cannot condemn a man to any
personal suffering, for the exercise of his Conscience to God-wards, in the
practice of being Assembled together, only in and for the Worship of the
Living God, according to the very persuasions of the Spirit of God in the
heart, and to the example of Scriptures and Primitive Christians; which
practice of meeting together was not in its self, nor in its effects, any way
disadvantagious, or prejudicial to any person upon earth; I say, Common Reason
and Equity amongst men cannot with any Face of Justice Condemn any person to
any suffering, in such a Case; inasmuch as such supposed offense for so meeting
together is not any offense against any man, but against God only, if it be
really an offense, and that because of ignorance or error in Judgment and
Conscience, which is only punishable by the Judgments of God, as pertaining
to his Conscience, for such offense against him; and not to be punished by
Temporal Rule^s, with Temporal punishments, because it is a spiritual
transgression, and the Spiritual Law of God, has jurisdicton over the offender
in such a Case, and not Temporal Courts; This is proveable by the Laws of this
Land, as it was ordained in the days of Hen 8. by Act of Parliament, when the
people were nominally divided into two Bodies, named Spirituality and
Temporality, and two Jurisdictions appointed over the people, respecting the
nature and kind of the offenses committed, every offense Temporal against man,
in wrong dealing between man and man, the cognizance of this was pertaining to
the Temporal Courts and Judges, to Hear, Judge and Determine, and every offense
respecting the Church in point of Faith, Doctrine and Worship, was pertaining
to the Spiritual Courts, to be heard and Judged by their Spiritual Officers and
Judges; thus it was in times past in our Nation, as Judged by the Rulers in
ancient days, reasonable and just thus to do; and here fell out a like case, a
Person taken and accused, and brought to Trial, as an Offender, for and because
of being at a Meeting in the Worship of God, which is of Spiritual concernment,
a matter of Spiritual Worship and Exercise of Conscience, relating only to the
spirituality in hearing and determination; Yet was this persons Case (though of
Spiritual Cognizance and Jurisdiction, and not properly pertaining to
Temporality by the very ancient Laws of the Land) brought to Trial, and judged
in Temporal Jurisdiction, and by Temporal Judges, which had no power properly
to meddle of such a Case; and how could that Judgment be just brought forth by
Temporal Judges in a Spiritual Case, a Case the Judgment of which properly
pertained to another Jurisdiction; a Judgment passed by such persons in a Case
of Conscience, out of whose Cognizance and Jurisdiction the Case properly was;
A Temporal Judgment, given in a Spiritual Case; And this was the very Case of
E. B. wherefore he had all just Ground and Reason to move for Arrest of
Judgment, and in Justice, Judgment ought to have been suspended in that Court,
and either wholly averted, or else he and his Cause transmitted into another
Court, where Court and Judges had been capable of Hearing and Determining a
Spiritual Case; for this is Common Reason amongst men, that every reputed
Offender have Law and Judges, according to the nature of his offense, and not
contrary thereunto; an offense in Matters and Cases Spiritual cannot justly be
Tried and Judged in Courts Temporal, and by men only Carnal; These exceptions
were before me in my view, to have contracted and so presented them to the
Court, but not being permitted time for an hour, I was not then capable to
present them formally, nor to produce the Statutes and Authors, to Authorize my
exception to the Court, but since that time I have drawn them up, and do here
offer them to the view of the World.

E. B.

Here follows the Trial of Esther Biddle, and three women more.
FIrst, They being called by names, and brought before the Bench, where the
Clerk read the Indictment, and said, they disturbed the King's Peace, and the
Peace of the Nation. Esther Biddle said, She had not broken the King's Peace,
nor the Peace of the Nation that is good; Then the Judge asked, Whether she was
guilty or not guilty; she asked him what evil she had done? then he said, take
her away. Then she was taken out of the Court, and she desired the Keeper to
let her stand still; He asked her if she would plead; she bid him let her go in
again, and she should say what was in her heart. Then the Judge called for her
to come up to the Bar, and the Power of the Lord rose in her heart as a fire,
and an Hammer, and she said, Fear the Lord who is Judge of all Judges, and will
give you your Reward according to your works. We are brought hither for
Justice, and you are set under God to do justice, and it is Justice we require.
The Judge said, They should have Justice, and said, Woman, Your Counsel is
good. He asked if she would plead guilty or not guilty; she said, In the
dreadful day of the Lord which is at hand, you shall know who are guilty and
not guilty, you, or we, of all the Innocent Blood that has been shed: The
Judge told her, she was to plead; she told him, If he would show her what evil
she had done, she would answer to it. He said she was taken in a Riotous
Meeting, and an unlawful Assembly contrary to the Laws of the Nation. She asked
him what Religion was used in Olivers days, and in years past, and whether our
Meetings were contrary to the Laws of the Nation then; and he said no, our
Meetings were tolerated, and indeed (said he) all things were common; She
asked him, If our Consciences were to change as the Laws and Governments of the
Nation changed; He said, We must be obedient to the standing Laws of the Land;
He said, she must plead; She asked for her accusers; Then stood up one whose
name was Lovel a Vintner, the Judge asked him, whether he took this woman out
of the Meeting, and what she was doing: Lovel said, He took her upon a form
speaking; and the Judge said, What a woman speak! The Jury and some other of
the Bench said, They never heard of a Woman to speak before; She asked them, If
they had not read the scriptures, she told them, Phaebe was a Prophetess, and
Phillip had four Daughters that prophesied, and Paul wrote to his Brethren that
they should take care of the women that were fellow laborers with him in the
Gospel. The Judge said, That was a great while ago; she told him, It was when
the Church was in her Beauty and Glory, but since darkness has covered the
Earth, and gross darkness has veiled the Kings and Rulers, so that it is
become a strange thing to the Apostates to hear of a Daughter to prophecy; she
told them also, that they might read in the Acts of the Apostles, and in the
book of Joel, That God had promised to pour out of his Spirit upon Sons and
Daughters, in the latter days, etc. The Judge said, She should ask of her
Husband at home; she said, If her Husband should be a Drunkard, or a sot, what
should she learn of him, to be wicked as he was? R. Brown asked, If her Husband
were so? she said, No, but if he were so, what could she learn? But Christ is
my Husband, and I learn of Him (said she.) Alderman Brown said, she had left
her Husband two years, and went with a young man into other lands; she told
him, That was not his business to judge at this time, nor was it fit for him to
accuse her, but she went with three Women as she was moved of the Lord.

The Judge asked the Witness, whether there were but five in the Meeting; The
Witness said, He did believe there were about two or three hundred, but he
could not bring them all; but said, he did pretty well clear the room: She told
the Court, That this man came into our Meeting (said she) where we were quiet
and still, more like a madman, then a sober-man, with his Sword drawn, and a
Cane in his other hand, and so he came up where I stood, and set his Sword
toward my Face, and plucked me down (said she.) Then said R. Brown, It seems
you were up then; Then she said, she was never in such a Meeting mentioned in
the Indictment; but she was in the Meeting, and she should never deny it, but
shall stand for it whilst I have breath said she; and this man gave his
Soldiers charge of me, and he laid on with both hands upon our Friends; they
thrust me to the door, and threw me down, and trod upon me, and if the power of
the Lord had not preserved me (said she) they might have killed me; And she
asked them, Whether they owned that? And R. Brown said, If they had handed her
up, they had served her well enough: And she said to him, Thou art a wicked
judge; Thou said to me when I was at thy house (said she) that the best work
thou could do, was to persecute such a wicked Generation as we. And then she
said, Why should thou sit there as a Judge? He said, It was the best work he
could do yet; And he said, If he has done you any wrong (meaning the
Witnesses) you may sue them at the Law, and write in your Indictment against
them, That they pulled your Tongue out by the roots: She told him, That was a
Lie, and asked him if he would have her be a liar? They said, Take her away:
And then they called Sarah Cobbet, and Frances Cole, and Elizabeth Sartyn, and
John Ratten; S. C. was asked whether she was guilty or not guilty: Afterward
the Judge asked her whether she was in the Meeting or no? She said she was
moved of the Lord to go thither: She was asked what she did there? She said,
She was Commanded of the Lord to speak: then said R. Brown, and I command you
now to be silent. Then they called Frances Cole, and asked her whether she was
Guilty or not Guilty? She said she was not Guilty. Then the Jury brought in
their Verdict that they were Guilty. Then Esther Biddle again desired to know
what they had done; R. Brown told them, they were in an unlawful Meeting: Then
she said, Richard, Do not thou remember that thou Prayedst in the Camp by
Abingdon, and was that an unlawful Meeting? was not that a good Day with thee?
I am afraid thou will never see such another. R. Brown said, He had no other
Place then, but now he went to Church, and so must ye too, said he; She told
him, The day was at hand, wherein God would destroy the Temples and the the
Worshippers thereof, unless they repented. R. B. asked her, if she meant her
own Temple? And the Judge asked her if she meant Temple Bar. She said she had
been in many Nations, and before Judges and Benches, but never was before such
a wicked Bench as this. R. Brown replied, And many Nations have been in you.
They said, She had said enough, and then bid the Keepers take them away. Then
she was pulled away to go to Prison, and after a little time she went up to the
Bar, and said, Friends, I desire to know what you have done with me? Then the
Judge said, Woman, you are young, and the Court has considered you, and we
hope you will be of another mind, and so we have put a small Fine upon you: To
which she replied, This is not the way to make me of another mind; then it is
sign that liberty of Conscience is ceased within these few years; Then she
said, Friends, keep to that pure Principle which drew you forth at first from
the Idols Temples and Idolatrous Worship, if you do not, the Lord will sweep
you away with the Beesom of destruction into the pit of everlasting perdition.
One upon the Bench said, She remembers us of the Old Cause. And then the Judge
bad the Jailer take her away to Prison; She said, There is Mercy with the Lord,
but there is little with men; So she was had away: Lovel (who Witnessed against
her) whispering to the Jailer, bad him have her to Bridewel; Whereupon she
stepped back to the Bar, and said, Friends, have you Ordered me to be sent to
Bridewel? They looking one upon another, the Judge said, No: Then she said,
This Witness is an envious man; for he bad the Jailer take me to Bridewel, and
for ought I know he stands here to suck my blood (said she:) The Judge said,
It did not concern my life: Then she said, If it were not the mighty power of
the Lord that preserves us (who has the hearts of Kings and Rulers in his
hand, and turns them as a River of Water which way he pleases) you would
murder us all. Then they were fined 13. s. and 4. d. a piece, and so carried
away to Prison, to lie till payment.

ABout this time There was diverse of the Prisoners sick, of violent Fevers and
distempers, by reason of that Exceeding throng which they were forced into, so
many together in narrow Rooms, that they had scarce liberty to lie down one by
another, which brought many great Inconveniences upon them, and occasioned
dangerous sicknesses; insomuch that many lay sick at one time; and though some
recovered, yet many died, to the number of Eight honest Persons, who were two
and two together in one week carried to their Graves from Newgate, which made
the people cry out, It was pity that these things should be, That honest men
for their Conscience sake should thus perish in Prison; and no doubt but the
knowledge of these things, That many were sick and diverse died, and being
publicly seen carried from Newgate two and two together in a week, made many
stand amazed, working dislike in the hearts of people against these
proceedings; and though the prisoners laid their case (of want of prison-room,
and the dangerous distempers that were occasioned amongst them thereby, and
that diverse died because thereof) before the Rulers of the City who had power
to redress these grievances, yet notwithstanding no notice was taken of it, no,
though above twenty of the prisoners Friends went to the Mayor and Sheriffs of
the City, to Reason the Case soberly with them, of the great straits,
inconveniences, and dangers that the Prisoners (their Brethren) were liable
unto, especially in the Summer Season, by being so many thronged up together in
noysom places; and also proferred body for body, and that a certain number of
them would become prisoners and go into their places, for the relief and
comfort of so many of their poor afflicted and sick Brethren, that they might
not perish in prison, according as in The second part of our cry of the
Innocent for Justice, is more at large published) yet no bowels of Mercy not
pity could be found, nor could the humblest proffers penitrate into their
hearts to grant relief to the oppressed, but lie in close prison they must,
whether they would die or live, as if they deserved no pity of any. Well, for
some weeks every day some fell sick, and in particular that good man of God
Richard Hubberthorne, unto whom in this place it is not unseasonable to give a
Testimony, as of duty we are bound.

The same Person was born in the North part of Lancashire, and was of very
honest Parents, his Father was a Yeoman of the Country, and had a good Report
of his Neighbors, for uprightness in all his dealings; and Richard was his
only Son, who was Inclinable from his youth upwards to Religion and to the
best way, always minding the best things, and following the company of good
men, and was never known to be addicted to any vice or malignity, nor ever
followed any evil course of life from his Childhood, but feared the Lord and
walked uprightly before him, and was faithful according to the Light and
knowledge received in all things; and his natural disposition and temper was
meek and lowly, and loved peace among men; he was brought up with his Parents
in good education, according to the custom of the Country; and in the time of
the late Wars, he was disposed to go into the Army, and was in Scotland most of
the time till the Land was reduced; and he had some office in a Regiment, and
did sometime preach among his sincere and sober Companions that loved him well,
according to his knowledge and judgment at that day; and he obtained a good
Report amongst such as were lovers of Religion.

And when it pleased the Lord God everlasting to raise us up to be a People in
the North parts, (and through great Tribulations and extreme distresses within
and without, which we passed through were we raised up of the Lord to be a holy
and chosen People) This same Person was one among the first of us whose heart
the Lord touched with the sense of his Power and Kingdom; and amongst us he had
the mighty operation of the Power of God experienced in his heart; Great
afflictions and tribulations for many weeks was he exercised in, through the
dispensation of the Grace and Spirit of Christ Jesus; he was in that state, and
while therein exercised for many days, a wonder to all that beheld him, as one
passing out of the body, as one under the deep sense of the hand of the Lord,
under the operation of his Power, thus it was with many of us, and particularly
with him; Till such time as the same Power that killed made alive, as wounded
also healed, as brought down also raised up, and then being raised up in the
holy Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ he was made a Minister of the Everlasting
Gospel, to preach Repentance, Conversion, Salvation and Remission of sins; and
accordingly went forth in the Name and Power of the Lord Jesus the Savior of
mankind; and was a Minister of the glad Tidings of Salvation, in many parts of
this Land and elsewhere, to the conversion of many Souls to God; for his
Ministry was made effectual by the Almighty Power of the Lord, to turn many
from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to God, and there are
thousands who can in the Spirit of the Lord bear Testimony to the power and
verity of his Ministry, in many Countries where he traveled; for he labored
much in diverse places, and was very diligent and faithful in the work of the
Lord, and suffered imprisonment diverse times, and was hardly dealt withal, and
persecuted in Chester, Cambridge and in Norwich prisons and other places and he
was found faithful in all his Trials among his Brethren, and always ready to
do his service in what he was called unto with a willing mind, being truly in
body, soul and spirit given up to the service of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, a
dispensation of which was committed unto him, that he might serve the Lord in
his Generation; and though he now has finished his Testimony in this World,
yet the remembrance of him lives with us in the Spirit of Jesus, and he is
accounted among the faithful Sufferers, a Martyr for the witness of the Truth
which ever lives. And for the space of nine years he labored and traveled in
the work of the Gospel aforesaid, in most of the Counties of this Nation, and
was well known for his faithfulness among the Churches of Christ; He was but
little in stature in his outward man, and of weak Constitution of body, and was
slow of speech, and often more ready to hear then to speak; he made little
appearance in the manhood of Excellency or Authority, but was contemptable
among men, yet he was very wise, and knew his season when to speak, and when to
be silent; and when he spoke, it was with much discretion and deliberation, in
weakness of words many times, yet reached perfectly the matter intended by
him, and his speech was with Grace, and in the fear of God, and had Authority
in the Spirits of men, and was of savor and sound judgment, though in
weakness of the manhood expressed; for he answered not men's Wisdom in
excellent style of words, but the witness of God in sincerity of speech; he
was a Person of sound judgment in divine Mysteries, and of good experience in
the operations of the power of God, and knew the passing through diverse
conditions of the inward man, and was able to speak to many estates of man
passing under the dispensations of the Grace of God; he could well inform the
mind of a person in an afflicted and tossed state of terror and judgment; and
his Ministry was often savoury and seasonable; and felt in the pure life,
though his words were plain and homely, and no beauty in them to man's Wisdom;
and God made him and his service a blessing to many who shall speak for him in
their own Consciences; He was of a loving, gentle and good disposition, and
acceptable was his Company to them that knew him and were like-minded; a good
Companion in all Conditions, not soon moved into passion of either grief in
Adversity, or of joy in Prosperity; nor had he a Spirit taking offenses upon
light occasions against any, but watched for Good over all, and not for Evil;
He was a man of peace, and loved it, and walked peaceably among his brethren,
in honest kind familiarity; And I am persuaded in my Soul, according to the
experience I had of him for many years, he abhorred dissension and strife among
Friends, and was never the real occasion intendedly by himself, of any
difference and dissension among brethren; and what further is Truth of him, I
leave it to the just God, whose testimony is true and never fails.

Among many others that were taken from Meetings and sent to Newgate according
as ye have heard, This same Person of whom I am now treating, was in like
manner rudely and violently taken on the 22th day of the 4th Month last, out of
a Meeting in the Bull at Aldersgate, and carried before Rich. Brown, who used
violence to him with his own hands, in pulling his Hat down upon his head so
that he brought his head near the ground, and then he Committed him to Newgate,
where he remained till the Sessions, and was then Indicted among the rest, for
being at an unlawful Meeting, etc. as it is said; and he being thronged up in
Prison among the rest of us, it pleased the Lord to visit him with sickness
of body, and in 10 days space (always growing weaker and weaker in that time)
he disceased and laid down his body in peace; About two days before his
departure, some of his dearest Friends went to visit him, and sat by him a
space, and spoke somewhat to him, and asked him if any thing was upon his
Spirit, he might now speak it to his Friends? His answer was, That there was no
need to dispute matters, for he knew the ground of his Salvation, and was
satisfied for ever in his peace with the Lord God, and we know (said he) one
another well, and what each of us can say about those things, and spoke no
further: And the 17th day of the 6th Month he departed this life, and was
gathered up to his Fathers, the Generation of the Just; and though he be gone
in that bodily appearance, and his person removed from us, yet is his new-Name
written among us, and his Memory can never die, for his Spirit still lives to
praise the Lord, and the life which breathed forth through that vessel cannot
be removed far away; for it is the Infinite, Immortal, Eternal Life, which
dwells in Sons and Daughters now upon the Earth; and though his outward man be
put off, yet he lives always in Spirit, for he was a Servant of the living God
upon Earth in his day.

In about six Weeks time, there died of the Prisoners that suffered for
Conscience sake in Newgate, these Persons named as follows, who were honest
sincere men of truth that loved the Lord, and served him with their upright
hearts, and gave up their lives for the Testimony of Jesus, as faithful Martyrs
and Witnesses for him; And it is verily believed, their close and thronged
Imprisonment in the Summer Season, was the occasion of their sickness and
violent distemper, and so consequently of their Death, which amounts to
innocent blood, being men whose lives were destroyed causelessly, by reason of
the wickedness and Persecution of ungodly men, and their Death will be
inquired into by the Lord, when he comes to judge all men according to their
deeds, and gives unto them after the fruit of their own doings; John Stanton,
Thomas Kirby, Richard Hubberthorne, Anthony Skellington, John Giles, William
Watson, John Shutt, William Eldredge, Richard Bradley: And Humphrey Bache, and
Humphery Brewster died in a short time after their Release. These men laid down
their lives for the Testimony of Jesus Christ, and suffered for Conscience sake
till death, and left good Testimonies behind them, spoken on their deathbeds;
One of them said, This body of mine must go for the Truth, this body must be
laid down for the Testimony of Jesus Christ, as a Witness against this
persecuting Generation; and he rejoiced in the same at the point of death.
Another of them said, The terrible day of vengeance is at hand upon the wicked,
Woe unto the persecuting Rulers of this City, the Lord is nigh unto them in the
stroke of his Judgments. etc. Another on his deathbed Exhorted earnestly all
Friends to be faithful, to be bold and valiant for the Truth of God, and to
suffer patiently to the end, till deliverance come, which the Lord will bring
unto his people in dispight of all their enemies, etc. These and such like
Testimonies were given by these Servants of God on their deathbeds, which will
be fulfilled in the Lords season, for the words of dying men are serious and
certain; Oh! that this City would take notice of the same, That the Rulers and
People thereof would Repent and turn unto the Lord, ere his wrath break forth
against them for their wickedness, which is great this day in the fight of the
Lord, and before him, for which his wrath is kindled to burn as a flame, and it
will reach unto the high and lofty, and all flesh shall feel the indignation of
the most high; Oh! that men would remember the long-suffering of the Lord, and
Repent, and return before it be too late, for nothing can save this City and
her People from the Wrath of the Lord, except speedy and true Repentance, and
returning with all the Heart, and with all the Soul; wherefore let the people
become Meek, and Humble, Lowly, and Poor, Holy and Just before the Lord, let
them break off their sins by Repentance; The day of the Lords sore Judgments
are at hand, and Breaking, and Destruction, and Misery will surprise the
Workers of Iniquity.

Concerning the Imprisonment and proceedings of the Court, and release of above
fifty of our Friends in the County of Middlesex.
THere were taken out of several peaceable Meetings, while they were humbly
waiting upon the Lord in his Fear and Worship, above fifty of our Friends in
that County, and at diverse times committed into the New Prison, all of them
saving a few persons by the Lieutenant of the Tower, being taken by Soldiers,
and violently seized upon in such their peaceable Meetings, and not according
to Law, and brought before Lieutenant Robinson, who sent them all to New Prison
without much examination of them; and there they were kept Prisoners many of
them three Months, and never brought to Trial, only about thirty of them a
fortnight after their Commitment were had to the Tower, and the Oath of
Allegiance was proferred them, by the Lieutenant in these words, Will you take
the Oath, will you take it, will you take it; And for refusal, they were sent
back to prison again, though he was so hasty in asking them about, that diverse
of them had not time to speak to him, nor to treat with him in sober discourse
about the lawfulness of the same, which some of them desired to have done, but
little was said; But will you take it, will you take it? And they were all
continued Prisoners till about the twentieth day of the sixth month, at which
time there was a Sessions at Hickeses Hall for that County, to which place
diverse of the said Prisoners were brought, first of all sixteen persons who
were there Indicted at common Law, for being at an unlawful Meeting, etc.
according to the form, as before is showed; and they were asked, Guilty or not
guilty: to which most of them pleaded not guilty, and were returned back to
prison again, supposing that same Sessions they should have been Tried. Next
after them were seven more Persons called into the Court, and Indicted also,
and demanded to plead Guilty or not guilty, but they refused to plead in their
Form of Terms, though they all said, they were Innocent and Clear from such a
Meeting as was mentioned in their Indictment, and in substance and effect
pleaded not guilty, though not in the very form of the Courts proceedings; but
they were condemned as Mute, and the Indictment taken pro Confesso; and they
presently sentenced them so much fine a piece, and sent them Prisoners to
Newgate, there to remain till payment.

About this time there was a Sessions kept at the Old Baley, to which place it
was verily expected many of the Prisoners in Newgate would have been brought
for their Trial, for there was about 140. of the said People now Prisoners in
that place, besides the fifty in New Prison (before mentioned) and though
diverse of them had been led out of the Prison to Old Baley seven times already,
yet was never Tried, nor any thing charged upon them to this time; Yet not any
of the said Prisoners were called this Sessions, the occasion thereof was this;
There being at this time near 200. of our Friends, besides many of the Baptized
People, in the Goals for London and Middlesex, most of whom were all taken by
Soldiers, and force of Arms violently, out of their Meetings, where they were
waiting upon the Lord, in his Fear, according to the practice of the Primitive
Christians, and example of Scriptures; and being so apprehended, were all of
them committed at diverse times into the said Goals; and some were tried, others
not, some fined, others not, and in several Capacities of Prisoners, they were
yet all continued strictly in Prison, to their great danger and inconveniences
by reason of so strait Imprisonment as ye have heard; And the King knowing of
these things, and that many were now in Prison, and it is hoped, he took into
good consideration, the sad estate of his Subjects, he was pleased to send His
Letter thus directed, To the Mayor of London, and other his Commissioners and
Justices for the Goal delivery of Oyer and Termin^^, and of the peace in the
City of London and County of Middlesex, which was read in the open Sessions at
Old Baley, the twenty second day of the sixth month, signifying the Kings
pleasure for the release of the people called Quakers, and others of the
separation, upon that occasion of the Queens first coming to the Kings Palace
at the City o^ Westminster; his pleasure was, that all such persons should be
discharged then in the Goals for London and Middlesex, except Ringleaders, and
Preachers, and such as were indicted for refussing the Oath of Allegiance, etc.
According to which Letter, most of the said Prisoners were discharged, except
some few excepted, who yet remains; Only the Goalers (which is a common
property pertains to the men of that calling) greedy of Gain and Money, would
not set at liberty the prisoners without paying Fees, but kept them about six
days after, and then let them go without Fees, which for Conscience sake they
could not pay, for these Reasons.

1. Because Fees in themselves are an imposed oppression and exaction upon
Prisoners, and we are bound in Conscience to bear witness against such
imposition, by denying to pay Fees, which is an evidence against it, and we
cannot uphold such Oppression and Exaction, but do witness against it, by
denying to pay any Fees; for ceasing to uphold any oppression by denying it, is
the greatest witness against it, and so is it in this case; and seeing it is an
oppression (even this very matter of Fees) we rather choose to suffer, then to
uphold it and maintain it, by paying any; and this is one Reason why we deny to
pay Fees.

2. Because we are Innocent, and not imprisoned for any evil doing or breach of
any just Law, therefore we may not pay Fees, and thereby render our selves to
the suspicion of guilt, when we are guiltless; for paying the impositions of
Fees to Clerks and Goalers does partly render men's clearness and innocence to
the evil surmise of evil minds, as if they were guilty, and because we are
clear and innocent both before God and men (in this case of being sent to
Prison for Meeting together for the Worship of God) we may not pay any imposed
Fees; for if any Fees be due, they are due from Transgressors as an Imposition
deservedly upon them for their offense, and not from the Innocent who are
wrongfully imprisoned, and of right ought not to be imposed upon by any, much
less by the Goalers, who are but inferior servants.

3. Because there is no Law of the Land commanding and injoyning us to pay such
exacting Fees as is usually demanded of us, but only a traditional custom got
up in the Land, and by custom of time long continued, now it is claimed as due
and debt from Prisoners, which is not due by any Law of the Land, but Imposed and
Exacted by long custom without Just Law; and therefore we do refuse to pay such
Imposition, which is come in by evil custom, and not by good Law, which we are
bound to Witness against by the denial of it; who cannot in good Conscience
uphold any thing but what is rooted and grounded upon Justice, Equity, and
Truth, and not that which is grounded upon evil customs, and is in it self
Exaction and Oppression.

4. Because we are a free people, born free of the Seed of God, and are
spiritually of Abraham, and cannot be subject to the wills of men, to feed the
Oppressors after their desires; though it is our Principle and Practice to be
subject to every Authority by doing or suffering, according to established Law,
yet we do refuse subjection to impositions grounded upon evil customs, and
without any Law; and that because we are a free people, and cannot be bound by
vain and formal Traditions in any case, but do deny to uphold any thing of that
nature, and do also travel and suffer for the end, to correct and rectify
every such abuse in the world, that every Yoke of bondage may be broken, and
all people may come to the free Spirit of the Lord, to be led and ruled
thereby, and not bound under every formal Custom of men; so for these Reasons
do we refuse to pay, exacting, extorting, and oppressive Fees, and not out of
Covetousness nor Penury; for it is our property in the free Spirit of the Lord,
to show kindness to them that are kind; though we cannot buy courtesies, nor
fee men aforehand for their love, yet no man has occasion to say of us, they
are covetous, nigardly, and disrespectful to such that show favor to them; we
are not of that spirit, that flatters men with fees aforehand, neither of that
spirit that can bow and bend to pay fees, for fear and terror of the threats
of men; but we are of that free, liberal, bountiful and grateful spirit, that
can do good, and be liberal to all men in the free spirit, without flattery or
fear; but to be bound by impositions contrary to our Consciences our souls do
hate, rather then to be subject on that kind, we can suffer the loss of all,
till the Lord arise and make us free outwardly from all cruel and hard
impositions of men, as his Power and Spirit has freed us inwardly from the
bondage of sin and death, for which we wait, according to the Promise of the
Everlasting God.

Concerning the late Imprisonment of diverse of the People of God called
Quakers, because for Conscience sake they have refused to go themselves, or
send out men in the Train Bands; With some Reasons showed for such their
Conscientious Refusal.
BY diverse ways and means, and upon diverse occasions and pretenses, has the
long and cruel Persecution been inflicted upon the People of God, against whom
many occasions have been sought and taken by their Adversaries on purpose, that
they might fulfill their envious Wills upon them, and destroy them by
Imprisonment, and every way else; And when one Means and Way would not effect
their desired aim in that particular, then they have found out some other way,
wherein to persist and travel on to bring to pass the ruin and overthrow of
the Heritage of the Lord, if it were possible for them so to do; yea, such is
and has been the zeal, and madness, and cruelty of that birth born of the
Flesh in all Ages, against the meekness, humility, and virtues of that birth
born of the Spirit, as it is even at this day, that he has left no way
unattempted to effect his desired end, even to destroy and overturn the
righteous Seed which God has blessed; and of this we have experience in our
Age, who are feeling Witnesses of the cruel hand of Persecution upon us, for
and because of that Truth and Righteousness which we hold forth in the World,
by sound Doctrine and good Conversation.

And among the many occasions sought out against us, now of late diverse have
been Committed to Prison for the Cause aforesaid, (to wit) because upon
Invitation of men in Military Power, they have not gone out themselves, nor
sent men in Arms, to do that Service which they have by their Officers been
Commanded unto, as hereafter more at large is signified; and that all the World
may know, such Persons so refusing to go out, are not wilful and obstinate, and
have so refused, as Persons wholly unreasonable and contemning Authority, upon
peevishness, and their own wilfulness, etc. with which calumnies in many cases
they are traduced; Therefore here are some Reasons amongst many that may be
given in the case, presented to the World for their so refusal, and because of
which some suffers in Bonds this present time.

First, Because it is contrary to the very Law of Nature (as the case stands
in this City) for the very work of the Train Bands in this City of late have
been to Beat, Abuse, Knock down, Imprison and Persecute us; and this have they
done, and been commanded to do by their Officers, which shows the Truth of the
Reason; for every man by the Law of Nature is bound to preserve himself and his
own life from mischief and destruction; and it is absolutely contrary to the
very Law, for a man to destroy himself, or be accessory thereunto, by himself
or by any other; It is against the Law of Nature and Reason, for men to be any
way helpful, to beat, and imprison, and knock down, and persecute themselves;
And so is this very Case, if any of us should go out or send a man on this
occasion, it were to aid and assist, and endeavor (if not personally to act
with our hands) to hale to prison, or to beat and persecute, it may be, kill
our selves or our Friends; and so to be Helpful and Accessory to our own
suffering, if it were to death; and this the very Law of Nature restrains us
from, and we cannot do it, for it is natural to mankind, and to every Creature,
to be helpful to preserve it self; and contrary to nature, to be a means by it
self (wittingly and willingly) of its own destruction, no man may in reason
rise up against himself to his own death, which is the case; so this is one
reason taken from the very Law of Nature (which enjoyneth to preserve our own
lives, and not to destroy our selves nor our Friends and Neighbors, neither by
our own hands, nor others through our means; wherefore we refuse to go or send
our men in Arms on that occasion.

2. It is contrary to all equity and reason to be put upon us, and expected
from us (as we are Inhabitants of this City) Inasmuch as we are daily a
suffering and persecuted people, and commonly reputed (though falsely) as the
very enemies of the Peace and good of the Land; and upon that pretended Reason,
daily haled to prisons, indicted as great Malefactors, and fined in great sums
of money, and many hard impositions put upon us; and seeing we are thus dealt
withal, and restrained of the lawful enjoynments of common Freedom and Liberty,
and our rightly due privileges, as other inhabitants have, we cannot be
permitted our Freedoms and Privileges in our callings, and to follow our
employments, as we are men, nor yet our liberties as Christians, in the
exercise of our Christians duties, according to the persuasions of our
Consciences, and example of Scriptures, but are imprisoned and persecuted, and
all our rights (both as we are men and Christians) violated, and taken from us;
Seeing it is thus, how can it in common equity and reason be put upon us, or
expected from us, that we should be charged with any such service and duty, or
perform the same, either in our persons or estates? there is no equity nor
reason in it, that men should be charged with a service for the good of the
City, as this is professed to be, and yet not permitted to enjoy any portion of
the end of such a professed service, but quite the contrary imposed, and this
is our case; It is professed that the Trained Bands are raised, and goes out
for the good and peace of the City, and we are commanded to join with them for
that good end; and yet we are debarred and restrained of every part of that
end, and quite the contrary end is made our portion, and therefore it is
unequal and unreasonable in our selves, as well as in them that expect it from
us, that we should join in such duty and service, like as if a person should
adventure to Sea such a sum of money in the hand of a Merchant, trusting him
with the improvement of it, for the end to bring in gain, and at the return,
the Merchant keeps both Principle and Produce from the Adventurer, and not only
so, but he makes use of the said money, to put the man to as much more needless
charge and expenses; Would not all men say it were contrary to both equity and
reason, that such Adventurer should ever credit such Merchant more, and much
more unreasonable that such Merchant should put such Adventurer in Prison,
because he will not give him credit and trust him with more stock; This
Parable shows the truth of our Case, and proves the truth of both the Reasons
aforegoing.

First, That it is contrary to the Law and Principle of Nature.

Secondly, It is contrary to common Equity and Reason (as the case stands)
for us to go out our selves, or send men on the occasion mentioned, and for
these Reasons we do refuse to do it.

Also let it be rightly considered how unreasonable this thing is that we
should now Suffer for not going forth in Arms, and yet diverse of our houses
have been searched for Arms, and taken away from us where any were found, and
we threatened to be sent to Prison, for having any Arms in our houses, if but an
old Sword, and yet now must Suffer because we will not keep Arms, and go out in
a Warlike way with them; Also how unequal it is, that we are sometimes
threatened to persecution, because we are feared to fight, and at other times,
threatened and made to suffer because we will not go out with carnal weapons to
fight; and thus are we made to suffer on the one hand and on the other, and
afflictions are our portion on every side, from the men of this Generation, and
many are our Troubles, till the Lord deliver us out of them all.

3. Because we are true Christians, and Redeemed, and Restored, and Sanctified
by the Lord Jesus Christ, and are men of Peace, and Love, and good Will toward
all men, and lives in it, and seeks after it, and are not men for War, and
Strife, and Debate, but are Redeemed out of that Spirit which is in the fall
from God, and delivered from the working of such works; and now we cannot war
with carnal Weapons our selves, nor uphold it in others, but do give witness
against it, by such our refusal to rise up and go out with Carnal Weapons, for
all such things are in the fall from that estate in which God placed man in the
beginning, and wars and fighting are in the enmity and Spirit of Iniquity,
which is contrary to God, as says the Apostle, Wars and fightings do arise
from the lust that wars in the members, Jam. 4. 1. and from that estate of
enmity in the fall, and out of these works are we Redeemed and Sanctified by
the Lord Jesus Christ, and do walk in his Doctrine, who has exhorted us to
love our Enemies, to do good for evil, and to reward no man evil for evil; but
when we are smitten on the one cheek to turn the other, and to be reconciled
with our Neighbors; these and many such exhortations we have in the Scriptures
to the true Christians, which we desire to be found walking in; and therefore
we do deny to go out with Carnal Weapons to war against any, much less against
our own selves and our Friends as this case is, as before is showed; And we are
come to the Spirit of Christ Jesus, and to the Son ship to be heirs of God, and
Joyntheirs with Jesus Christ: Which State is greater then the State of the
Kings of Israel, who sometimes went out to war, and were Righteous men, and
justified of God in so doing, yet that State was short of the State of Christ,
who was the Heir of God, to which State in measure we are come, and so are
Redeemed from wars and fightings with Carnal Weapons; not only in their worst
State, but in the best Estate of such Wars, not only in an evil and wrongful
quarrel we cannot war, but in the best kind of quarrel, we refuse out of
Conscience, to war our selves, or to send others for us, to war with Carnal
weapons and that because we are true Christians, and believes in Christ Jesus,
and abides in his Doctrine, and loves peace with all men, and can do good to
them that hate us, and are come to the end of wars, and would have men's lives
saved and not destroyed, and are of the Spirit of Christ Jesus which warred
with Spiritual Weapons against the evil lusts and evil affections within, and
against that spirit of transgression in men's hearts, that he might kill and
destroy that Spirit, and save the Bodies and Souls alive; and such war do we
make this day with the Weapons of the Spirit of God, that sin may be slain, and
unrighteousness destroyed in men's hearts, and that Body and Soul may live; but
other kind of war we cannot make for the Reasons aforesaid, therefore we are
excusable in the sight of the Lord, in refusing to go out with carnal Weapons,
though yet we suffer Imprisonment, and are persecuted because of the same.

If from hence it be Objected by any, That this principle and practice of
denying to fight at all, is dangerous and of evil consequence; and if all were
of this principle and practice, then we might be exposed to ruin and
destruction by other Nations, who would come upon us and take our Country from
us, and enslave us, and all this while we deny to fight against them, and will
not defend our selves by the use of carnal Weapons, etc.

To which I answer; 1. If all the People in the Land were of this Principle and
Practice, to deny to fight, or rise up with Carnal Weapons at all; this would
prevent all Insurrections at home in our own Land, and all the Fears thereof
would be wholly removed, and without doubt we should be in Peace, and no
occasion of Fears of Wars among our selves in our Country; and if all the
People of the Land were of this Principle and Practice, this good Consequence
would naturally follow; we should be in perfect Peace in our own Nation, and
without all Doubts or Fears of the contrary: But,

2. And if this same Spirit, and Principle, and Practice were in all things
believed and obeyed by all People, such would be the virtue of the effect of
it, in the peace, and love, and comfortable union and fellowship that would
flow forth among all people in our Land by such Spirit and Principle, and also
to other Peoples through the World, that occasion would not be administered to
any other Nations, to invade or destroy us by rising up against us; but such
would be the virtue of such a Government, wherein perfect peace were among the
People in obedience to that Principle and Spirit, that all the Earth would be
engaged toward such a Government in love and obedience, and would fear and
tremble before the Lord to offend it; yea, such would be the Majesty and Power
of the Lord God for such his People, and would so appear for them against their
enemies, his People only trusting in his power and arm of strength, renouncing
all the Confidence in the arm of Flesh; the God of Heaven would appear for them
in his Salvation round about them spiritual and temporal; If (I say,) men were
all come to the Principle and Practice; of Righteousness and Truth, of Justice
and Mercy, and to renounce all the contrary, and could deny all carnal Weapons,
and would trust the Lord only to defend them, and would in all things rely
upon him, such a People would be happy and blessed among themselves, and also a
happiness to all the World, and a joy and yet a terror to all Nations; and the
God of Heaven would defend them in all their ways, from the Fury and Wrath of
the Wicked; and if the Lord were wholly trusted to, and depended upon by all
people, his eternal power would be seen always in preserving of them, for no
man nor People ever yet trusted to the Lord, and was failed in their hope and
confidence.

3. But to come into the belief and practice of that spirit and principle which
cleaves only to the Lord and trusts in him, and altogether depends upon him
for defense and preservation, and renounceth carnal Weapons; this is only the
work of the Lord in man's heart, to beget People into the belief and obedience
of the same, it is God only by his Power and Spirit that must bring all men to
this estate; It cannot be taken upon a Person or a People if they will, or who
may be of this Principle and Practice that will, this is not the way, it is not
thus come by, no man can mould himself into such a frame as to believe and obey
God in all things, and so to trust the Lord as to renounce carnal Weapons, but
it is he alone that persuades the Heart and Conscience into the Faith and
Practice of this; So we enjoin no man nor People unto it, we may not persuade
any man to lay aside all Carnal Weapons upon the penalty of damnation, nor bind
any such thing upon him with a Curse, till God persuade his Heart. And as it
was God that wrought the same in us, even to deny all carnal Weapons, and never
to fight more with them, but to trust the Lord altogether, and that upon the
penalty of damnation, so we leave it to him to work the same in others,
according to the Counsel of his own Will.

Lastly, In full Answer to the Objection thus, We are convinced in our
Consciences by the Spirit of Christ, of the unlawfulness to our selves of
going out to War with carnal Weapons against any man in any case, and we cannot
do it but we sin against God, yet we leave all People to do, or not to do in
that Case as they are moved and persuaded by the Spirit of Christ Jesus in
their own hearts, and may not persuade any man to, or against this thing
contrary to their own Consciences; but as for us, we being Convinced that we
ought not to go out to War with carnal Weapons, we must be obedient to the Lord
in this matter, and must follow the Lord in his leadings according to the light
of Faith which we have received from him, without respect to what may be the
Consequence of the same, we must not follow the Lord with respect to what
effects may follow (as of Peace or Trouble, Joy or Heaviness) to our outward
man, but we must be obedient to the Lord absolute, and not measure our love and
faithfulness, and obedience to him, by either objected or real Consequences
which may follow; for we must, and do trust the Lord in whatsoever may follow
upon our outward man for our obedience to him; so we are not further careful in
any thing what the Lord may do, or suffer to be done in any Case, only it is our
duty to stand in his Counsel, and to walk in his Fear, and to follow his
Teachings, and then we are certain nothing will come to pass as any
Consequence thereof, but what will be for our good and the glory of the Lord in
the end; for he has given us hearts to trust in him, and we do rely upon him
for defense and preservation in all cases, and are made of him to trust our
souls and bodies with him in our obedience to his Will, commending our selves
into his hand of power, to live or to die in our subjection to him according to
his Heavenly Will; and our Souls do desire that the same mind and heart were
found in all People, that they would obey him in all things, and trust in him
only, and commit the Consequence thereof to him; Oh! then should the day be
blessed, and the whole Earth made happy, and the People rejoice in the
Salvation of the Eternal God; Then should the Heavens sing for joy, and the
Saints and Angels rejoice together, when God alone is exalted in the midst of
his People, and all Faith and Obedience given to him by all the Sons of Men.

THE CONCLUSION.
WE are and have been a Suffering and persecuted People by the powers of this
World, who have all risen up against us from time to time to destroy us, and
have taken many occasions against us, and used many ways and means for that
end, but the Lord God everlasting has hitherto preserved us, and kept us alive
in his Name and by his Power, and not only so, but he has enlarged us and
increased us, and made us to grow in strength, in courage, in boldness, and in
number also, through all our Afflictions, Sufferings and Persecutions; and this
is the Lords doings, and it is marvelous in our eyes, that even the same way
which our enemies have taken, and thereby thought to destroy us, by that very
way and means has the Lord advanced us, and promoted us, raised us up, and
strengthened us, and increased us, and this is to his Praise and Glory, that
all Flesh and the Wisdom thereof may be confounded, and its purposes turned
backward, which is intended against the Lord and his Heritage; we have seen the
power of the Lord God often appearing in us and for us, and we are evident
Witnesses of his deliverances which he has wrought, and we cannot but sit down
astonished in the remembrance of the things which our God has done for his
People in our age.

And though multitudes should rise up against us, either in open, actual,
furious Opposition, or in more secret Contention by Arguments, or what way else
soever to overthrow us, yet we have one Witness against them all to withstand
them, we have one Testimony wherewith to oppose them if multitudes should come
against us in one day; which Witness and Testimony, in which our Strength and
Confidence lies, is that of the Spirit of Christ Jesus in our own hearts, which
bears witness to us, that we are the People of the Lord, and he has chosen
us, and he will defend us and preserve us, and be with us unto the end for
ever. And this Witness is sufficient for us against multitudes of Enemies, and
we cannot fear


