THE Independent-Agent: Or, William Haworth's Malice, Outrage and Slander
against the People called Quakers (in his late Book, falsely styled, Jesus of
Nazareth not the Quakers Messiah) Rebuked.
Jer. 48. 30. I know his Wrath, but his Eyes shall not so effect it. Romans 1.
29. Being filled with maliciousness, full of envy, murder, debate, deceit.
FOrasmuch as on the occasion of our Answers and Replies to William Haworth's
Books and Pamphlets against the People called Quakers, he gives us occasion to
charge his Miscarriages and Abuses upon you of the Independent Party, not only
in these words, viz. [The Notes of my Antidote were viewed by one learned in
Christ's School, and I had his Approbation; he did judge it sound, and
encouraged me to print it, (but also he says) You may well say, that you have
all this while waged War not only with single W. H. but with all the
Independent Party in England -- I need not fear but I shall have their Prayers,
and Encouragment to stand by one in Christ's Cause, etc. p. 38, 39.

Now Independents, behold your Agent, who after diverse manifest Abuses,
Perversions, false and unfair Citations, Variations and Corruptions on many
serious Passages in our Books, to make our words look with as deformed and ugly
a Face as he can, he thus charges the Quakers with preaching, That the
Ordinances of the Gospel are vain, and cease; for this he cites William Penn
lately (which W. P. flatly denies, as none of his Words or Doctrine) That it
was the Devil that suffered without the Gates, etc. That Mary was a Whore and
Christ a Bastard; for this he cites James Naylor at York; with this additional
and more general C^arge annexed, viz. THESE ARE THE QVAKERS DOCTRINES -- Here
are enough to turn any Christians Stomach (says he) And to aggravate the
matter against the People called Quakers, If he had preached such Doctrine, he
had deserved to have been dealt with (in case that Law should now take place)
as a Blasphemer, that is, be stoned to death; see his last Book, Jes. of Naz.
p. 45.

To all which in the sight and presence of the holy God we answer, We are
confident his Charge is horribly false in and upon the particulars, and certain
that it is an abominable Slander in that general Charge upon the Quakers; and he
has most infamously abused us in this matter, in saying, These are the Quakers
Doctrines, which we testify against, as so gross and abominable that nothing
like them ^ath entered into our Hearts even to imagine, much less to preach for
Doctrine, viz. That it was the Devil that suffered without the Gates, etc. and
that Mary was a Whore, and Christ a Bastard: and yet he tells the World, These
are Quakers Doctrines. What abominable wickedness is this! thus to make
infamous a People who abhor such Blasphemy, But what! Independents, is his and
your Envy so great, that you would have u^ stoned to death? would you exceed
your Brethren in New England, who brought the innocent Blood of some of our
Friends upon them? It Is a wonder you do not sor shame stop this your Agent, who
appears full of Passion, Envy and Revenge, makes no Conscience to write Lies
and Slanders, a proud insolent Boaster, no Credit nor Grace to you Independents
or your Cause, who are chargeable with his abuses, till you have cleared your
selves of them. Why have you slandered and abused a People thus? will nothing
less satisfy you then to have us stoned to death for Blasphemers? and why do
you treat u^ with such Language as, mere Juglers; Deceivers of the People; the
Quakers downright Socinians; Heretics; nothing but deceit in these men; they
never had any credit among godly men; Enemies to the Cross of Christ;
downright Knavery; Not eat, nor drink, nor keep company with them, but abhor
their Society as of a Jew, Turk or Heathen -- John C^ook' s impertinent
foribling, juggling, equivocating, like a man, yet no man, the ugliest of all --
their great Goddess Diana, the Light within -- seared Conscience, rotten
Opinion -- A company of Cheats -- The rankest Jesuit at Rom^ could ^ot have
more wicked insinuations then the Quakers.

These, with many more Slanders and Revilings are dispersed throughout W. H's
last Book; who notwithstanding he has given such absolute Judgment against the
Quakers, as denying the man Christ, setting up a false and fained one; calling
them Juglers, D^ceivers, C^^ats, etc. yet now he reckons, there is ground of a
shrewd SUSPICION, that they do not believe Jesus Christ to be a real man in the
Heavens, p. 1. and begins to be JEALOVS of us, whether we do but think that any
thing at all was taken of the Virgin, p. 5. and that one would THINK, and he
BELIEVES that the Quakers are of the same mind with Apollinaries, holding, that
Jesus Christ had not a Living Soul, p. 14. and would fain be SATISFIED that we
are real when we say [the same Jesus] p. 12. That according to us, till we
fu^ther EXPLAIN our selves, Jesus Christ neither is now, nor ever was a true
real man, p. 14. And he APPREHENDS, that we nullisie both, that is, Christ's
Flesh and Blood, p. 18. And he FEARS that monstrous Opinion of the Ranters is
amongst the Quakers, of being Deified and Christheaded, p. 23. And he is
JEALOUS that our Opinion is, that when God breathed into Adam the Breath of
Life, and man became a living soul, that this is the forming of Christ in every
man, and entreats us to explain our selves, p. 36, etc.

Observe now that he has censured and judged us in these matters from his own
Suspicion, Jealousy, Thinking, Apprehension and Fears: and in the presence of
God we deny these his false Jealousies and Surmisings, as well in these
particulars cited, as in many other things not here cited; and we cannot expect
he will have any good thoughts of us, while his Envy is so great as to judge us
Juglers, Cheats, Deceivers, etc. Donyers of the man Christ Jesus, etc. But now
how uncertain and doubtful is this man; his high Charges, Clamours and
Outcries against us are turned into Suspicion, Jealousies, Thoughts and Fear,
etc. for want of further explanation, and would sain be satisfied that we are
real, etc. But his saying that he fears that mons^rous Opinion of the Ranters
is amongst the Quakers, etc. is a very gross Lie to be sure; for he is so far
from fearing it, that he seeks to make us as monstrous and ugly as he can in
our Opinions, telling the World, that these are the Quakers Doctrines
before-cited, viz. That it was the Devil that suffered without the Gates; That
Mary was a Whore, and Christ a Bastard; intimating that we deserve to be stoned
to death. Oh most malicious Liar and Slanderer! We dread at the recital of
these Blasphemies. Well, God will smite thee and mark thee out for these most
horrible and abominable Slanders.

And as for thy deeming it high time that our Nest at Hertford were broken up
by a constant writing and disputing against our Errors (as thou call them)
Thy writing and publishing gross Lies will not do it, we are sure. But why our
Nest at Hertford broken up? do thou envy our Liberty and our Meetings?
would thou disturb us, and pull thy House about thy Ears, like the clamorous
Woman? would thou be so dealt by? do not bark too loud at us: why do thou
belch out thy Malice thus? we fear thee not thou malicious man and implacable
apostate-Persecutor (who have confessed, thou have been Ten times a Quaker, p.
46.) Could thou not find in thy heart to take up the first Stone, and become
our Executioner) if thou had Power and License, as well as endeavor to
possess the world, that we teach such Blasphemies as deserve stoning to death?
Is this your Independent-Religion and Christianity? what say you Independent.
Teachers and Pastors, John Owen, Matthew Mead, T. Brooks, Jo. Collins, and the
rest? will it grace your Cause to suffer such an Agent as W. H. to be your
Representative, for all the Independent-Party in England? not doubting of your
Prayers and Encouragement, etc.

In the next place we demand of William Haworth, or any of you, to quote our
Books and the Pages (and cite them in our own words if you can) where he or you
have read these passages, ^n which much of his Book and Inferences depend, viz.

1. That what was taken of the Virgin has now no Being, which (he says) he
has read in our Books, p. 5. l. 8. We challenge him to produce those Books and
Pages where these words are; for we deny the Assertion.

2. That when we say, the same Man ascended to Heaven, and i^ glorified in
Heaven, it is no more th^n this, viz, that the Light within is lifted up,
exalted and glorified in the hearts of men. And that by [his ascending to
Heaven] we mean the Globe, which we call the Earth] p. 15. clause last. A
notorious Perversion and Falsehood: for by [the same Man ascending] (in our
Testimony) we meant simply the visible Asce^sion of the Man Christ Jesus, as we
have told him, viz. We could not more plainly and historically have signified
our meaning, then we did from these Scriptures, Acts 1. 9, 10. Luke 24. 50, 51.
see our Vindication, page 15.

3. He bids the Reader take notice, that here is not a word against that
meaning that be ascribed to the Quakers words They debt not but that they do
mean this of the Light within, p. 16. l. 1, etc.

Which is a gross Lie; see page 15 and 16. of our Vindication in the very same
passage, viz. where we have plainly declared, That the same Man Christ that
suffered and was put to Death in the Flesh, was raised by the mighty Power of
God, ascended into Heaven, ascended, that is, both as to the change of place
and state of glory, etc. That the Mystery of Christ in Spirit no ways opposes
the History of Christ in the Flesh. -- See how plain our words are

4. That the Quakers say the Soul is turned into i^mensity, p. 32. l. 32.

Where do the Quakers say these words? let him show us without his inference:
For it is matter of Fact charged that they say so.

5. That he remembers one of G. Fox's Interpretations, that when it is said, he
took upon him the Seed of Abraham, that Seed was the Light within, p. 37. l. 6,
7.

Where does G. F. so interpret that Scripture; for we do not believe he ever
did so.

6. That we say in our Books, that the Light within that Body was crucified, p.
37, 38.

Pray let us have the Book and Pages cited; for we deny that we have so said, or
so construed Christ's dying on the Cross.

7. That now the Quakers say, that what Paul says in Romans 4. 6. is contrary to
what David says in Psalm. 32. 2. p. 8, 9.

Pray, where do the Quakers say so?

8. That he would fain be satisfied that we are real, when we say, [the same
Jesus] but how can he when we unsay it again in our 1st and 2d Book, p. 12. l.
19.

That we unsay it again, is a notorious Falsehood. We challenge him to cite our
own words, without his own Perversions, Meaning or Co^sequencess, to be
considered by Persons more ingenuous and less malicious then himself.

9. That William Bates faith, he is ONLY SORRY for his Weakness and Oversight
in giving him such an Answer, p. 10.

A Forgery; for he adds, only sorry; and makes himself work on this Lie.

And what is the man's Intent in all these, but to pursue his false Title and
Charge, viz. That Jesus of Nazareth is not the Quakers Messiah, etc. or that
they deny him to be the Messiah; and that they did deny the Manhood of Christ;
and so to render us as not owning his real outward Birth, Sufferings, Resurre
on, etc with his whole Manifestation in the Flesh: Wherein he has abominably
abused us; For the Man Christ Jesus, the Messiah, the Anointed of God, we have
confessed unto, and faithfully believe, according to the Scriptures of Truth,
viz. those of all the holy Prophets and Apostles, who gave testimony of him,
the true Messiah. Wherefore let our Adversary confess the Man Christ Jesus, in
plain Scripture-terms, and leave us to them, or else he may be silent. For we
value not all his Cavils and Scribbling, etc. especially unless some of his
eminent Teac^ing Brethren appear in print to own this his last Book, and the
rest of his Work against us: and therefore we challenge him to produce his
Deputation for this his undertaking against us under the Hands of some of the
chief Pastors of the Independent* Congregation, or otherwise we shall
absolutely look upon his Work as the Fruit of his own silly Presumption and
Usurpation.

We have also a Collection of a great number more of W. H's Lies and
Perversions in a more particular Answer, which as yet we reserve; the su^stance
of his Book about Christ's Manhood being more fully answered in a Book styled,
The Way cast up, and the Stu^bling-blocks removed, by Geo. Keith.

Reader, We have taken notice of W. H's Doctrines more at large in our Answer
which we yet reserve, and of these amongst others, viz.

1. As concerning his justifying his Brother Powel's blasphemous Doctrine, and
yet cunningly leaves out the words, to wit, That JESUS CHRIST WAS THE GREATEST
SINNER IN THE WORLD, page 10.

2. Concerning some of them saying, That the Creator was and is a Creature by a
Figure, which he is fain frequently to make use of in his Book, page 2.

3. Concerning his Unscriptural and Socinian assertion, That the Soul of the
Son of God's manhood (that is to say, the Soul of the man Christ) was created
upon the first Conception of the Body in the Womb of the Virgin. On which we
ask, If he was not a Mediator before that Conception and Birth, even from the
Beginning?

4. Concerning our Consequence drawn upon him, of his allowing Satan more Power
or Liberty to tempt the Saints, then the Man Christ to help them, by so much as
extending his Spirit unto them as Man, though beyond measure endued with divine
Power; because he calls the Soul of the Man Christ a finite Creature, that
cannot be in two places at once, p, 29. and yet con^esseth Satan to be an
Angel, yet but a Creature, (p. 36.) and notwithstanding that he is here on
Earth to tempt the Saints, because he is not yet bound up in Hell; so that
still he allows Satan more power to tempt the Saints (though in many places at
once far distant) then the Man Christ to relieve them, though he be their
Mediator and Head; and yet g^ants, that the Man Christ is virtually present on
Earth, page 20. How then does not his Soul extend to the Saints, and yet not
leave the Body dead in Heaven, as he vainly argues, p. 35.

5. We observe that his Doctrine destroys the Order of the Mediator, and
Christ's Headship over h^s Church, where the Head of every man is Christ, and
the Head of Christ is God; for he allows his Spirit only as God, but not as Man
to extend unto them; and yet how apparently he is confounded, and his Cause
oveturned, by his confessing, that the Deity perfects all good in it, but then
the Humanity is in union with it, and acts with it, and they must not be put
assunder; and Antidote, page 28.
that the Deity acts in it or through it as an. Organ or Instrument, Page 26,
27. But how can this be in perfecting all good in us, if this Instrument, as
such, does not at all reach to us? and his similitude in this case [that the
Sun in the firmament can send forth light and heat throughout the Hemispire,
etc. and that this similitude falls short very much] this also tends to destroy
his Cause, and to invalid his Objection (to wit. That the Humanity (or Manhood)
is not in all places where the Deity is] unless it be a good inference, that
therefore it cannot extend to men on Earth, but is far short of the Power and
Influence of the Sun which extends to us; and yet this similitude is very much
short of the thing he brings it for too; for Christ's very Body in Heaven he
has confessed to be brighter then a Thousand Suns, Antid. How evident is it
that this man is still drowned in Confusion and Darkness.

And thus we have given him one sheet in answer to his fix sheets and an half,
not judging him worthy at present of the publication of our larger Answer, by
reason he is such an abominable Slanderer of an innocent People.

Hartford, the 10th of the 9th month, 1677. Richard Thomas, H. Sweeting,
Richard Martin, Edw, Plumstod, Henry Stout.


THE END.

