THE Mammon of Unrighteousness Detected and Purified IN A SERMON Preached in
the Cathedral Church OF WORCESTER: On Sunday the Nineteenth of August, 1688.

By the right Reverend Father in God, William Lord Bishop of Worcester.

Aude Hospes contemnere opes, and te quoque dignum Finge Deo. --

LONDON: Printed for Sampson Evans Bookseller in WORCESTER.

Imprimatur.

December. 18. 1688. Hen. Wharton. RR. in Christo Patri ac Domino D. Wilhelmo
Archiepisc. Cant. a sacris domesticis.

To the Reader.
I Had no Design to expose this Sermon to Public Uiew and Censure in this
Critical Age, and Climate; but being Preached in a Languishing Infirmity of
Body, rendering my Voice not audible to the greatest part of a Venerable, ample
Congregation; I have been solicited to transmit it to the Press for Expiating
the Defailance of Eloquution in the Pulpit, that those Religious Advertisements
which vanished in the Air, perished in their Birth in the Temple, may be
retained, revived, in the Closet, that they may, by the Divine compassionate
Grace, conduce to promote a Heavenly Conversation on Earth.

It has been required of me as an Equitable Reparation to the Eye, (the more
exact diffusive Test) for the disappointment to the Ear.

The God of Mercies and Purities grant that it may take deep Impression in the
Hearts of those who shall vouchsafe to Read it; to excite them effectually to
resist the Impulse of Covetous Affections, to dread to decline the too little
resented, yet too much practiced plausible Impiety, darling Idolatry of Mammon.

Luke 16. 9. I say unto you, make to your selves Friends of the Mammon of
Unrighteousness; that when ye fail, they may receive you into Everlasting
Habitations.
MY Text is Verbum Diei, it is part of the Gospel for this Day, it is the Cloze
and the Luster of a Parable, (the Style of the primitive Eastern Rhetoric for
Instruction.) The Structure of the Parable holds resemblance with that of the
Temple of Jerusalem; for the Porch, the outward and the inward Court.

The Introduction is not the Porch of Solomon, but of Christ, he said to his
Disciples in Ver. 1. This Gate of the Temple may truly venerably be called
Beautiful.

The three Parables, recorded in the immediate precedent Chapter, of the lost
Sheep, the lost Groat, and the prodigal Son, were molded for the Scribes and
Pharisees, to lance their Bosom Imposthume of Spiritual Pride and Arrogance,
who, in being imaginary Saints, became real Miscreants. The Parable of the
unjust Steward recited in this Chapter is calculated for another Meridian, not
for the Judaical Synagogue, but the Church of Christ.

An Advertisement for his select Train, his signal Disciples, who like Eagles
soaring aloft did cast a glance on the Prey below; whilst their Professions
were raised to heavenly Enjoyments, their Affections were somewhat deprest by
Earthly: Though pure Bullion from the Ore, yet not yet entirely refined from
the Furnace, not without an Alloy of Dross, a Mixture of Rubbish. To cure this
spreading Malady, Christ enwraps his Dose in a Parable.

To unveil the Narration of the Parable; Commentators understand the certain
Rich man in the first Verse to be Christ, (verus a true, though not merus Homo
a mere man, in St. Austin's Expression) the sole Proprietary, the Lord
paramount of all the Treasures of the Earth, and of Heaven, also that
illustrious City resplendent with Streets of Gold and Gates of Pearls.
Theophylact and Euthymius expound the Steward in the first Verse to be a
wealthy personage, improved in Fortune, yet not enfranchised, not discharged
from his dependence, not so properly endowed as entrusted, impeacht he is for
his Talent misemployed; it is a Bill of Wast, (...), in Ver. 1. scattering,
imbezeling his Masters Goods. The Accusation is recited, but the Accusers
concealed: Satan who is a smooth Tempter to suggest, to solicit Guilt, becomes
a sharp Orator to charge, to aggravate it.

Every humane Offense calls for, in some cases, importunes, clamors for the
divine Judgment. The Offenders perhaps last, yet not his least Accuser is his
own Conscience, this secret Whisper is more terrifying than a Clap of Thunder.

The Accusations are varied, yet Christ arraigns, examins, before he dooms: not
like Augustus, precipitate Sentence without the Traverse, without the Method of
Indictment, against the Inhabitants of Perusium; Moriendum, they must die. It
suits not with the Track, the Custom of the Israelitish, not of the Roman Pagan
Justice, to condemn any Joh. 7. 51. Acts 25. 16.
one unheard. Christ affords the Person charged in this Parable Liberty to
assay to vindicate himself in Ver. 2. Give an account of thy Stewardship, of
thy Fortune, of thy Office, thy Knowledge, thy Talent whatsoever; as some run
varieties of Descants on this Note.

Every Stroke of Affliction, every lash of Conscience is a kind of Reckoning
betwixt God and Man for each of these: God righteously deprives men of those
Talents, those Enjoyments, which they unrighteously manage. It is a
disconsolate Sentence pronounced in Ver. 2. Thou can be no longer Steward.
Some determine this to be executed at the Hour of Death.

Before the fatal time of Dissolution, God may reduce the wealthiest Personages
to Penury, the greatest Potentates to Impotency, the most subtle politic
Statists, the most accurate Artists, to Folly, to Infatuation Albertus the
great was bereaved of his great Stock of Knowledge three years before he died.
The Steward sentenced in the Parable was at first dampt and chil'd, staggered
in Perplexity of Mind; he was too nice and delicate to be a Labourer, (dig he
could not) he was too haughty and arrogant to be a Petitioner, (to beg he was
ashamed) however he is not long destitute of an unholy Clue to wind him out of
this Labyrinth. He lays an Obligation on his Masters Debtors by his own
Transgression, ingratiates and depraves himself, contrives his Iniquity to be
his Support; and yet the Lord commended the unjust Steward. It sounds a Riddle,
that he whose Injustice was his Design, his Artifice, that he who was
injuriously bountiful, dishonestly liberal, should be extolled by that Master
whom he had defrauded.

To dispel this Cloud; The Lord commended the Subtilty, not the Integrity of
this false Steward, his Wit not his Grace. For the Children of this World, are
in their Generation, wiser than the Children of Light. Ver. 8.

It is not (...) more wise, but (...) more wily, more crafty, serpentine, (the
Serpent devoured the Dove.) Wisdom, not only in the Judgment of S. Austin, but
of Aristotle also, is the Knowledge of divine Perfections; Philosophers
decipher it to be speculative, the Fathers state it to be active. It is
Sapientia, quasi sapida scientia, says Gerson, Wisdom is a Savory Science, not
contemplative but affective, not seated in the Brain, but in the Heart, which
is best discerned by the Pulse of the Hand.

Prudence is of a lower Size, Cunning is of a courser Metal, less refined and
sublimated. They who are addicted, devoted to secular Interests, may challenge
a Pre-eminence in this Faculty, they are wiser in their kind, in genere suo, as
Beza renders it, more exact Intelligencers in their Orb: But it is an
excentrick Orb; more expert in their Way, but it is a dark a crooked Way;
better Sophisters, smoother Parasites to set off corrupt Actions, like tainted
Ware with fair Colors, with false Varnishes. They are wiser for an Age, not
for Eternity; it is not (...), in their Generation as we render it, but (...)
for their Generation, succession, also to entail, to secure their Revenues to
their Families, Posterities, to derive, to fix the Issues of their Sins to the
Issues of their Loins.

The Minions of the Earth, the Sages of the World, are more circumspect,
diligent to preserve, to enhance their Estates, than the Candidates for Heaven,
than the Disciples of the Sanctuary are to improve their Virtues, to save their
Souls. Least we split on this Rock, Christ himself becomes our Pilot to steer
our Course in a right Channel to a Port of Bliss. Make to your selves Friends
of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you into
everlasting Habitations.

My Text brancheth it self into a Precept, and a Reward: The Precept describes,
regulates our Duty: Make to your selves Friends of the Mammon of
Unrighteousness. The Reward animates, crowns our performance: That they may
receive you into everlasting Habitations. The former Part is an Introduction to
the latter, for the Disciples of Jerusalem, as the Temple of Virtue was a
Passage to that of Honor, for the Votaries of Rome. In the first General I
shall by divine Assistance offer at a distinct view of the Engine to be
employed. The Mammon of Unrighteousness; and of the Employment it self.

To make your selves Friends of it; this transforms a Poison to a Medicine, it
extracts an Antidote out of a Viper, a Viper that stings an unsanctified Soul,
envenoms it to Death. My first Task is the consideration of the Engine it self,
set out in a black Hue, in a branded Character: The Mammon of Unrighteousness.

Divines Ancient and Modern have varieties of Conjectures touching the name and
nature, the Phrase and Importance of Mammon. I shall not spend time nicely and
critically to discuss whether Mammon be of an Hebrew, Chaldaick or Syriack
Extraction; most probably it is of a Syriack Stock, being not extant in the
Hebrew Original, or in the Chaldee Paraphrase of the old Testament. Tertullian
interprets Mammon Money, St. Austin Gain, Hesychius Treasures, the marginal
English Illustration renders it Riches. It is Lombard's Observation that Mammon
denotes Wealth and the Devil, both clad in the same Dress, shadowed out in the
same name. It is Satan's magnificent Title of Grandeur, The Prince of this
World: when he presented Joh. 12. 31.
to Christ the Kingdoms of this World, whether it were in a distinct discovery
to the Eye or the Fantasy; whether it were in the Prospect of a Map or Globe,
or in the Flourish of Language, however it was his ample Overture. Luke 4. 6.
All this Power will I give unto thee, and the Glory of them, and to whomsoever
I will, I give it. I shall not disprove the apparent Invalidity of his Title,
his Interest: I shall only observe the Sophistry of his Tender. He produces the
Dignities, the Pomps, the Gaieties, the Resplendencies of the World; but
conceals the Troubles, the Iniquities of it. It is the doom of Adam, Genesis 3.
17. Cursed is the ground for thy sake. Liable it is to a Curse of Emptiness,
Unsatisfiedness, wherein an abundance, a surplusage comes short of a
Sufficiency; liable it is to a Curse of Profaneness, it depraves many that
possess it; the name of the first Reprobate Caitiff recited in the Scripture,
Cain, denotes Possession: the Treasures of the Earth are the Borders of Hell,
the Mines of Gold and Silver are at a great Distance from Heaven; the choicest,
those of Havila, are the remotest from the Church.

The Moon is the Emblem, the Representative of the Church, which is Eclipsed
byothe Interposition of the Earth: Religio peperit divitias, and filia
devoravit August in.
matrem, Religion brought forth Wealth, and the Daughter devoured the Mother.
The Jewels of the Egyptians proved Snares to the Israelites, they afforded
materials for their Idolatry: Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked, Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
Plenty became a fertile womb of Intemperance and Arrogance; (...), says
Euripides; it is ingrafted in those that are rich, to be leavened, to be
swelled, and to be imbittered also. It is the Apostles Interrogatory; Do not
rich men oppress you? Jam. 2. 6. It was Salvian's pathetical complaint of his
Gallican Contemporaries, decernunt Potentes, quod solvunt Pauperes, the
heaviest Pressures of Taxes are laid on the weakest Shoulders.

These meditations wrought effectually on Agur, an Oracle of Israel, singularly
qualified for Prudence and Integrity, who much conversed with Solomon, even
Solomon himself in disguise, of that name, in the Judgment of some Jewish
Doctors. This consideration swayed, transported him so far, that he dreaded,
deprecated Wealth, which is courted, homaged by most; Give me not riches, lest
I be full and deny thee, and say who is the Lord? Prove. 30. 8. 9. I was at
ease, says Job 16. 12. it is Opulentus fui; in the vulgar Latin Translation, I
was rich. Ilay a Stumbling Block before him. Ezekiel. 3. 20. Vatablus glosseth it,
I make him to prosper. The Fullness of the Sodomites did despumare in libidinem,
(in Tertullian's Expression) foam unto Lasciviousness, did melt into impure
Dalliance; their Riots and Lusts were the bitter Fruits of a delicious Soil.

Josephus asserts that the Sadduces who disclaimed the Resurrection of the
Body, and the Immortality of the Soul, gained most Disciples among the
wealthiest sort of Jews, who being furnished with the Revenues, corrupted with
the Sensualities of this life, discredited, disregarded the Felicities, the
Glories of the next.

When Philip King of Macedon transmitted a grand sumptuous Present to Phocion,
Phocion demanded why he, rather than any other Athenian, was selected to be
obliged by so ample a Boon? The Messenger replied, because he was reputed most
upright: I will then (says Phocion) persist in my Penury, that I may not
forfeit my Integrity. The most renowned heathen moral Worthies; Socrates,
Aristides, Epaminondas, Fabricius were destitute of Riches. Among others the
learned pious Father Lactantius was scanted for necessaries. St. Peter, the
prime Apostle ((...) Mat. 10. 2.) for priority of Order for distinction, though
not for superiority of Power for jurisdiction (in the Romish strain) professed,
Silver and Gold have I none, Act. 3. 6. Neither Sun nor Moon of Alchymist
shined on him. Christ himself, as Son of Man, appeared in a state of Distress,
of Indigence, who was at the charge of a great Miracle to defray a small
Tribute, a Fish being his Treasurer. It was a severe doom pronounced by him,
Luke 6. 24. Woe to you that are rich, (to wit, in Treasures, not in Graces) for
you have received your Consolation. It is not (...) but (...), you have your
Reward, for whatever claim you can pretend to Innocence; that you have your
Consolation, that it is present, transitory in this Life, not future, not
stable, perpetual in the next, is the sting of this Woe.

It is St. Chrysostom's critical descant on that passage of Abraham to the
damned rich Caitiff: Thou have received thy good things, Luke 16. 25. Thy good
things, to wit, in thy estimate; it is not (...) but (...), thou have received
them as Recompenses for all thy good Actions.

Gregory the Great, that first and best of that name, of the Sea of Rome, being
enriched, dignified, was chilled with Fear, damped with Anguish, lest God had
thereby requited his Fasts, his Prayers, his Sermons, his Vigils and Alms, and
all other Virtues. Euthymius expounds that forementioned Woe, recited by St.
Luke, to be the pensive Expression of Christ, (a Mirror of Candor) condoling,
commiserating, rather than condemning the Rich. Tertullian determines it to be
woven with a mingled Thread of Advice and Menace. Not to hover too long in
Generalities. It is the Mammon of Unrighteousness, because too frequently,
injuriously, unconscionably achieved, ungraciously, uncharitably detained, or
else riotously, profusely squandered, as if Men were at variance with their
Wealth, and would not dispose, but discard it. Thus, without the Divine
restraining Grace, we are too prone to bane, to curse our selves, with what God
does otherwise bless and prosper us. It is the Psalmist's dismal Imprecation;
Let that which should have been for their Wealth, be to them an occasion of
falling. This lapse is a Precipice, an occasion of Perdition. Not unlike to
Heliogabalus, who did contrive Cords of Gold and Silver to be strangled with,
who laid up Poison in Boxes of precious Stones to be destroyed with.

The indirect Toils, and Mazes of Designs of the Sages of this World, are but
elaborate solemn Sacrifices to Mammon, the Idol Paramount, like Bell among the
Assyrians, whereto all the rest vail and do homage.

It is related, when a timorous Patient suspected a Medicine of Paracelsus, as
if it had a Grain of Magic for an Ingredient, Paracelsus resented it with
Indignation, What mattereth thee if thou be recovered, whether it be by God or
the Devil? Some are as indifferently disposed to be enriched, whether it be by
the Influence of Heaven or Hell. Yet not to brand Riches with unjust
Imputations; the Charge is justly to be laid on our corrupt Minds, which, like
foul Stomachs, taint and transform the most wholesome Provision to Crudities,
Diseases. The Unrighteousness consists not in enlarged Treasures and Incomes,
but in unsatisfied Desires, in unsanctified Pursuits and Enjoyments. Wealth, in
its own Nature and Constitution, is not virtuous or vicious, not morally good
or evil, which is, bona bonis, mala malis, (says St. Austin) Good to good Men,
bad to evil: Like Rufus's Shield, that had God on one side, Satan on the other,
with this Motto of Inscription, Prepare for both. It is like the Red Sea,
destructive to the Egyptians, preservative to the Israelites.

Riches, as Viands, turn to that Humor which is most predominant; to one they
nourish Piety, Godliness; to another, Prodigality, Profaness; to some, the
supports of Riots, and Debauches; to others, of Alms and Graces. They are the
Wings of Salvation, and the Plummets of Perdition; they are the Rounds of the
Ladder, whereby some ascend to Heaven, others descend to Hell; they are the Oil
to kindle the burning flame of Satan's Furnace, and the Oil also to preserve
the shining Lamp of the Sanctuary. Wealth, like a Scorpion, affords a Cure for
its own Sting; it is by making you Friends of it: which conducts me to the
Management of the Mammon of Unrighteousness.

The two Expedients of this Sacred Friendship in my Text, the Flames not of the
Hearth, but the Altar, to refine the dross, to purify the pollution of Mammon,
are Equity and Charity: Equity, like Janus, has a double Aspect, it looks
forward for Possession, and backward for Restitution; the one is a Branch of
Innocence, the other of Repentance; the one prevents the Unrighteousness of
Mammon, the other redresses it. It is with Equity, as with Physic; the
Medicine which secures from a Malady, is more precious than that which heals
it. That Justice which declines an Injury, challenges a Pre-eminence of regard.

The Equity of Possession is derived from just, lawful Owners, by justifiable,
lawful means; by Donation, by Gift, by Succession, Inheritance, by Acquisition,
by Contract, which spreads it self to many Branches; these are the ordinary,
equitable, warrantable Conveyances.

To omit the Extraordinary; by right of Occupation, (the Tenure of a first
Seizure) the Booty of a War rightly empowered, and uprightly managed, as also a
judicial Forfeiture. The Israelites special Coin had the Impression of a Lamb.
What our English Translation renders a hundred pieces of Money, Genesis 33. 19.
the Septuagint express (...) Lambs, because they were stamped with the Image of
a Lamb, a Lecture of Innocence; not with the Figure of a Serpent, to be
compassed with a fraudulent Contract, to be like Dan; An Adder in the Path,
Genesis 49. 17. It is not like Benjamin's Portion, Genesis 49. 27. to raven as a Wolf
in the Morning, to devour the Prey, and at Night to divide the Spoil. When
Violence hews its way for a Subsistence, Cruelty becomes a Patrimony,
Oppression an Inheritance, Mischief a Salary, a Revenue. When Houses are
buttress'd with Injustice, cemented with Blood; when Fields are watered with
Tears of Widows and Orphans. The Giants in the Sixth Chapter of Genesis are by
some expounded to be Grandees, not for Stature, but Power, exerted by Rapine,
by vast dimension of Extortion. (...), says St. Basil the Great. When the
Oppressed are smaller Morsels in the wider Jaws of the Oppressor, Eating up the
People like Bread, in the Psalmist's Phrase, Psalm. 14. 4. It is St. Austin's
Observation, that to eat like Bread, denotes a Constancy of Repast; other
Provision we vary, but to eat like Bread imports not to be rarely feasted, but
continually fed; not banquetted, but dieted with Iniquities. Manducant in
terris, says St. Bernard, They eat, they devour in Earth what they digest in
Hell. Are not the Contracts of many Tenants and Debtors more pinching, galling
than the Manacles of Prisoners? whose state of Vassalage is a Task and a Toil,
a Penance and a Torture, a Living Death and a Dying Life; as Calphurnius was
treated by Tiberius; not so much ingratiated as to have their Misery expedited.
It is a Work of Darkness, written with the Sunbeams, yet has gained the
repute of Prudence, of Masterpiece of Wit, (though sullied, blackned with Vice.)

Let me here inoffensively express it to this Venerable Assembly, being like a
weight of Lead upon my Conscience till I disburthen it.

It becomes us to treat Tenants and Debtors, especially such as are Industrious
and Frugal, with such Equity and Candor, as would be acceptable to our selves,
were we reduced to the same Exigencies: We know not how suddenly, how strangely
the Scenes of Fortune may be shifted. Riches, whilst they appear fixed by
irreversible Conveyances and Entails, yet frequently prove really winged to fly
away in the height of imaginary Plenty and Security. It is according to the
Syriack Translation of my Text, The Mammon of Deceitfulness. It will quit,
desert us, or we must quit, desert it. Men may enhance their Estates and their
Crimes, they may rack their Revenues and their Consciences, making the
Necessities of others to minister fuel to their Superfluities, to maintain
their Pomps, their Gayeties, the Excesses of their Riots, Debauches, the
Impurities of their Dalliances, not only by the Sweats of their Brows, but the
Groans of the Souls of others, to frolic it by their Anxiety, to surfeit it by
their Famine, ut sentiant se mori, in Caligula's Doom, That they languish
before they perish.

If in these, or any other Instances, the Equity of Possession be neglected,
violated, it ought to be repaired, expiated with that of Restitution. There are
two Sisters, like Rachel and Leah: The one, like Rachel, has the more amiable
Feature, the first Love of every true Israelite: The other, like Leah, is
blear-eyed, blemished, by wrong presupposed; it has unhappily the Fate of
Leah, to be too little affected or regarded; yet every Son of Jacob, who is
bereaved of Rachel, the Equity of Possession, he ought to espouse Leah, to
embrace the Equity of Restitution. It is the Dictate, not only of Christian
Theological, but of Heathen Political Righteousness; the Civil as well as Canon
Law enjoins it. The Constitutions of all Nations not tainted with the Lees of
Barbarism exact it. To deny the Necessity of it is not Heresy, but Frenzy,
says Soto. Before the Law, it was the Injunction of Jacob, tho he had a
specious Plea to evade it, Genesis 43. 12. Carry back the money that was brought
in the mouth of the sack. Under the Mosaical Law, the Equity of Restitution was
professed by Samuel, as the Vindication of his Justice, 1 Samuel 12. 13, 14.
Prescribed by Nehemiah with a solemn Admonition, a sharp Execration, Chap. 5.
v. 11, 12. Ezekiel clusters it with the choicest Fruits of a spiritual,
effectual, remorse of Conscience, Chap. 33. v. 15. Without this signal
Certificate, Repentance, Non agitur sed fingitur, says St. Austin, is not
acted, but counterfeited. Under the Gospel, they who will not directly,
uprightly, restore what they indirectly, injuriously attain, do not only
deviate, swerve from the commendable Practice of Zacheus, (Luke 19. 8. I
restore fourfold) but come short of Judas's Religion, who came short of
Salvation, that (...) in St. Chrysostom's Phrase, a Merchant of his Salvation
and of his Savior also, who brought back the thirty pieces of Silver, his vile
Rate of the most precious Inestimable Jewel.

It is an infallible Maxim in the Canon Law, borrowed from St. Austin, Non
remittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum, The Trespass is not remitted
unless the Damage be restored. Wherein the Proportion, the sure, is not the
least difficulty in the Sentiments of Casuists; for the determining whereof, I
shall distinguish the Penitential and Penal part of Restitution: The
Penitential part is fixed, limited, adequate to the Offense, to the Detriment
sustained: The Penal part is to be varied, enlarged, according to the
Circumstances, Consequences; to wit, in due consideration of Cessation of Gain,
and Emergencies of Loss; wherein every Man's Conscience is a Judge to determine
where the Law does not, where it is defective, or diminutive.

Among the Israelites there were several gradual Alterations; a twofold, a
fourfold, a sevenfold Restitution. The Obligation of this Duty of Restitution
extends further than the Actors themselves; even to the Inheritors, the
Executors, that reap the Fruits. St. Chrysostom is too candid, indulgent, to
acquit, to discharge the Heirs of Oppressors. The most Conscientious Casuists
exempt, disengage them from transient, vanishing Acts of Injustice, which
escape their Discoveries; but not from such as are knowingly, lineally
perpetual, that pass from Generation to Generation in the Incomes, Commodities.

There is a Tincture of Injustice, as in compassing, purloining another's
Interest, so in enjoying, withholding of it. It is the same crime, though not
the same degree of Guilt. In the nice Discussion of the Schoolmen, the one
formally consists in the Punctilio, the Mode, the manner of Acquisition; the
other materially consists in reference to the advantage, whether acquired, or
continued. Two grand impediments are started by Satan's Sophistry, set out in a
multiplying Glass, panick terrors to divert, to scare us from the requisite
Practice of Restitution; to wit, the double train of Penury, and Infamy, the
Loss and Shame that accrue from it: As for the damage alleged, it is the
Tempters Subterfuge in disguise, it is less incommodious to impair thy Fortune,
than to wound thy Conscience, and to forfeit thy Soul; it is our Saviors
staggering, unanswerable Interrogatory; what shall it profit a man, if he gain
the whole World and lose his own Soul? Mark 8. 36.

It is an unprofitable, and, in the end, an execrable State, that bottoms in
sin; it is a depraved, accursed Possession in Earth, that lays its Foundation
in Hell. But thou hopest, (presumest rather) that thy exercise of Repentance,
thy Sorrow for sin will commute, will countervail for the defect of
Restitution; so it may, by divine Goodness, in case of necessity, disability
for discharging of it. In that only the Contrition of thy heart may be
accepted, for Satisfaction of thy Hand; but where there are Sinews for real
performances, the most formal Expresses of grief are mere hypocritical
Varnishes of repentance. The Profession thereof, is but a Collusion, a Mockery,
a Nullity of Duty.

-- Stat magni nominis umbra. As for the second Scruple of Shame, to deterr us
from the Justice of Restitution, it is a Shame for to recite it; there is no
deformity, no blemish in the exercise of any virtue. Zacheus his Restitution
was not his Brand, but his Renown, not his Stain but his Ornament; it was the
robe of a sacred Convert, the perfume of a penitent Publican, the Fragrancy of
exemplary Equity for all succeeding ages. When a lascivious Youngster slinking
out of an unreputable House started back, being espied by Diogenes, the
Philosopher advertised him, that his recess, his withdrawing thence, need not
put him to the Blush or Damp; but his entrance thither.

Restitution does not breed an Ulcer, but cure it. If it be objected, that it
does light a Torch to manifest the festered Sore, which before was obscured,
concealed: I answer this Discovery is the Luster of Repentance, the Honor, the
Trophy of it; at the worst it is but the Scar of a healed wound, after the
Victory of a Battle; however if it be interpreted an Infamy, it is in the
Gloss, the Censure of depraved men, suggested by damned Spirits, it is a
Dignity in the estimate of the blessed Saints and Angels. Phocion apprehended
the Elogy, the Praise of a vile Person, a lewd Caitiff, to be a Reproach, a
Scandal.

To dismiss this vain Cavil; a little Ingenuity, the least tincture of Prudence
will divert, will realy conduce to steer aloof from the grand imaginary rock of
Disgrace. The equity of Restitution may be so covertly discharged, that neither
the Injury be revealed, nor the Party who acted it.

Hitherto I have viewed but one Wing of the sacred Friendship in my Text, a
Wing, not of the Eagle, a creature of Prey, but of the Dove, to wit Equity;
there is requisite another Wing, to wit Charity, to aspire to the heavenly
Mansion, to flee away, and be at Rest. It was esteemed ominous at Athens, not
to be a Votary in the Temple of Mercy; it suits less with the Discipline of
Jerusalem. It ill becomes us to degenerate to Serpents, to twine, to circle
within our selves.

The Philosopher deciphers man to be a sociable, (...) communicative Creature,
who ought not to make himself or his Family the Center, and the entire
circumference of the management of his Wealth. The Apostle professes not to be
an Instructor but a Monitor, a Remembrancer only in so necessary a Duty; Forget
not to communicate. Heb. 13. 16. this Oblivion were a double degradation, not
only to be unchristian, but inhumane; it corresponds not with the dictate, the
Impulse of Nature, much less with that of Grace.

Charity is entitled Grace, 2. Cor. 8. 7. it is the Symptom, the Evidence,
the Certificate of Grace, without which, Grace is a mask, a varnish: Charity is
described to be the service of God, in Ver. 4. of the same Chapter. It is
signally emphatical in the Original (...), the communication of the Ministry,
even of the Liturgy, as if the charitable man were the Minister, the Priest;
the Poor, the Altar; the Dole, the Oblation: With such Sacrifices God is well
pleased. Heb. 13. 16. The vulgar Latin renders it promeretur, is promerited, in
the Rhemish Translation, as if hereby we merited at Gods Hands.

Salmeron hence takes the Cue to raise his Crest in defiance of reformed
Divines. Obmutesce Haeretice, (says he) be dumb O Heretic, as if the question
of Merit was hereby put out of all question; whereas he insults before he
vanquishes, triumphs before he conquers; the vulgar Latin Translation whereon
he bottoms, is a loose, tottering Foundation, it is as great a Solecism in
Divinity as Grammar.

The Original exhibits not the least accent of Merit, it is (...) God is well
pleased. However Alms are to be acknowledged Pious, if rightly performed;
though not in themselves meritorious. Earthly Mercies exhibited, are to be
accounted the Conducts to Heavenly Glories. They are the Road of Bliss, tho not
the Purchase: They are not causa regnandi, yet via ad regnum, in St. Bernard's
Expression. They are the Passage, the Chariot, to convey us to the true Supreme
Paradise; though they cannot deserve, or challenge the Delicacy, the Felicity
of that Mansion. The smallest Charity is not destitute of an ample Recompense;
but it is not (...) the Dignity of the Work performed, but (...) (in St.
Chrysostom's Phrase) the Dignation, the Candor of Christ, who accepts Mites,
rewards them with Talents. It is to be ascribed to the Virtue, the Bounty of
his Promises, not to the Value, the Luster of our Accomplishments.

But I forbear to dilate this Meditation, lest I seem to forget my self, and
not to consider the Uncharitable Age wherein we live. Our Judgments herein need
not so much to be informed in the state of the Controversy, as our Affections
to be warmed, to be inflamed for the discharge of the Duty. There is no Duty of
Religion more indispensably enjoined, none more abundantly encouraged; and yet
none more familiarly disregarded, more unexcusably spurned at. Most Men are
herein not only practical but speculative Infidels, accounting Charity the Flux
of Prodigality, the Product not of Religion but Indiscretion. They who are not
Scepticks to dispute, to boggle at this Duty, who are not a sort of Atheists to
reject the Precept, to deride the Performance; yet become Critics to censure
the Iniquities of others, when they should be Almoners to relieve their
Pressure. Let us not be more Inquisitive than Compassionate, to sharpen our
Invectives against Men's Offenses, which have procured their Miseries, rather
than to enlarge our Bowels toward their Miseries which invite our Supplies.

It is God's part to Doom, ours to Succor. Indeed some are to be selected,
preferred in their Calamities, such as are more sanctified, nearest related,
most necessitated; yet none to be absolutely waved, but such as are Vagrants,
Loyterers, whose Debility, Exigency in their Estates, may be repaired by the
Vigor, Strength of their Limbs; to endear, to engage these to be our Friends
by our Alms, were to be their Adversaries and our own. The Vinegar of Justice
to such, is a better Restorative than the Oil of Mercy; whereby they may be
rescued from their Necessities, and reclaimed from their Vices: That our
Streets be not defamed by such Pests, that an Eminent City be not dishonored
by such Obloquies, Scandals; I shall recommend, not only the Ancient pattern of
Jerusalem to your Imitation, but also the Modern of Paris, wherein for many
years, not only the scandalous Beggary of particular Persons has been
prevented, but the Public Revenues have been promoted. The Apostle obstructs,
blocks up the Effluxes of our Charity only to such, whose Indigence proceeds
from a voluntary omission of Diligence. He that will not Labor, let him not
Eat, 2 These. 3. 10. As for others, if we debar our Charity, we forfeit our
Christianity.

How rationally (as we presume) do we Object? May I not dispose of my own
Inheritance, or my own Purchase, as my own genius shall prompt me? Must I
expose my self contracted, and multiplied; the Consort of my Bosom, the Issue
of my Loins to future Encumbrances, and Exigences, to supply the present of
others? Shall I invite, attract Distress in the Lees of my declining Age, by an
Imprudence of Bounty in the Flower, the Vigor of my Days? These specious
Pretenses are but fallacious Arguments, like our first Parents Fig Leaves, to
cover our Spiritual Nakedness, false Varnishes to beautify carnal Wickedness.
Let us not mistake our Tenure, it is not Primitive, but Derivative in our
Fortunes. Our Interest is a Deputation, a Stewardship in the genuine scope of
this Parable. We are not Proprietaries, but Usufructuaries of Riches. These
Talents are to be managed according to the Rule, the Dictate of God's Sacred
Word, not according to the bent, the swinge of our own corrupt Hearts. God
might have allotted an equal Proportion of Enjoyments of this World to all
sorts of Men, to be all levelled; but then (in the Observation of St. Basil the
Great) there had been wanting a Test, for the Munificence, the Bounty of the
Rich, and for the Patience, the Humility of the Poor. Christ has ordained some
to be Wealthy, to exercise their Fidelity, to discharge the part of Almoners,
to be Treasurers for the Poor, nay, for himself, who sues for Succors in his
distressed Members; and interprets Neglects of these, as Indignities against
himself. In that you did it not to the least of these, you did it not to me,
Mat. 25. 45. Quis ad tonitru hoc non expavescit? (says St. Austin) Who is not
scared with this Thunder? They who shrink not, dread not to prevent, to decline
this Doom, shall droop, shall sink to sustain it. The Rich Man in the Gospel,
(Luke 16.) was not condemned because he was unjust, but because he was
unmerciful, not because he oppressed Lazarus, but because he relieved him not.
A numerous Issue is no plea at God's Bar to vindicate a covetous Heart, or a
tenacious Hand. A plentiful Progeny, is a powerful Topic, (at least it ought
to be a persuasive Argument) to excite us to obtain, I had almost said (with
due Reverence) to oblige Christ to be the Guardian of our Children, unless we
would surrender them to the Tuition of the Tempter, rather than the Redeemer.
He, who is uncharitable upon the account of his Family, his Posterity, offends
doubly in the Judgment of St. Cyprian. First, In that he does not provide for
his Children the Protection of the Heavenly Father, preparatory for the time
when they are to be bereaved of the Earthly. Secondly, In that he does not
discipline them in Exemplary Piety, to prefer God before Mammon. Willing or
unwilling thou must surrender thy Treasures, thy Incomes, to the Divine
overruling Providence. Lastly, Charity is inconsiderately objected to be the
rise of Penury.

I shall not press St. Cyprian's florid Argument in changing the Scene;
Pauperior seculo opulentior Deo; Whilst more empoverisht to the World, thou will be more enricht to God. Not to recede out of the same Orb, not to swerve
from the same Station: There is no Virtue more animated with assurance of
Temporal Prosperity. The Italian Vulgar Phrase of Begging is Charm of
Rhetoric; Faite a voi been, Do well to your selves. Thy Alms in the Bowels of
the Poor, are like Grains of Corn in the Bowels of the Earth; they seem to
putrify, to perish, but they come up with a specious Advantage. There is who
scatters, and yet increases, Prove. 11. 24. who Thrives by Diminution,
Multiplies by Substraction; a Contradiction in Arithmetic, but a Perfection in
Grace.

Such was the Primitive St. John, called, Eleemosunary. The Estate of a
Charitable Person is like the Widows Cruise of Oil, communicated, and not
diminished, imparted, and not impaired; nay, improved. No Duty does more
vindicate us from Hypocrisy. It was the disconsolate Remark of St. Basil the
Great, that he observed many zealous Professors his Contemporaries, Eminent for
Devotion, for Mortification, for Sobriety, Chastity, and other Moral
Endowments; and yet Tenacious, Uncharitable; which, like a venomous blast,
tainted all the Religious Performances. I wish it were a Scandal to revive, to
apply this mournful Resentment to the Age wherein we live. By our melting
Bowels, our stretched out Hands in Charitable Supplies, to make us Friends with
the Mammon of Unrighteousness, is not an Evangelical Counsel, but Precept; not
Arbitrary to be embraced, caressed; or waved, rejected, as a Serene, Candid, or
Morose sour Humor shall bear sway. To render the Violation of this Charge the
more inexcusable in a black Criminal Hue.

There is an Obligation of Equity riveted in Charity it self. Not to relieve
the Distressed, is in effect injuriously to Rob him, at least covertly to
purloin from him. Let not this startle you as a Paradox, it is Solomon's
Orthodox Divinity, Prove. 3. 27. Withdraw not good from them to whom it is due.
From the Owners thereof in the Marginal Interpretation, which best corresponds
with the Original. The Context vindicates it as pertinent, apposite to this
Subject. It is the Phrase, the Eloquence, the Charm of a Jewish Petitioner in
his Exigency; give me the Precept. As there is a Grain of Justice or Equity, so
there is a Tincture of Piety in merciful Performances. This renders Mammon it
self a Proselyte of Religion, devotes and Consecrates it as an Utenfil of the
Temple.

The Jewish Doctors assert, that the Royal Prophet David gave Alms every day;
it was his constant Quotidian Practice, but more especially as preparatory to
his public Solemn Devotion, when he resorted to the Synagogue, darting out this
Ejaculation; I will behold thy Face in Righteousness, Psalm. 17. 15. It is the
Psalmists Authentic Record to rescue this Doctrine from Disputes and Cavils.
He has dispersed, he has given to the Poor, his Righteousness endures for
ever, Psalm. 112. 9. Christ himself sets out the diffusive, operative
Transcendency of this Virtue: Give alms of what things you have, and all things
shall be clean. Luke. 11. 41. this is no Elegancy of an Irony, no smart
Sarcasm, no taunting Scoff, as some expound it; but a sacred Lecture, taking
off the Pharisees from a superstitious vain their Platters, to a truly
religious Charity, to purify their Hearts and their Hands also. It is all
things shall be (...) pure, their dross refined, themselves rendered undefiled,
unfullied.

Our compassionate Succors, as they have a sanctifying Cleansing; so also a
dignifying exalting Influence. A charitable Person has the Honor to be
reputed a Benefactor to his Creator, a Creditor to his Redeemer: He who gives
to the Poor, lends to the Lord, Prove. 19. 17. it is (...) in the Translation
of the Septuagint, he lends upon Usury.

On this account a Duke of Guise was not branded, but renowned, in being styled
the greatest Usurer of France; in this Notion, (if sincere) the noblest, and
the holiest. As there is an outward Esteem and Honor, so there is an inward
Solace and Delight accruing from charitable Performances, that transcends all
sensual Pleasures. God repays beyond humane Interest; in this World a hundred
Fold, in the next everlasting Life. Mark 10. 30. A Recompense which no humane
intellectual Faculty can apprehend, no Eloquence, but angelical, can express.
Were there not an Impression of infidelity in the hearts of men to boggle at
the truth of the divine Promise and Providence, how would our desires be
kindled, our affections inflamed in pursuit of so inestimable a Merchandise; we
would resolve to practice as Apelles did profess to paint, to Eternity: which
transmits me from the Precept in my Text, (make you Friends of the Mammon of
Unrighteousness) to the Compensation; that they may receive you into
everlasting habitations.

Bellarmine in a strain of Confidence alleges this Guerdon, this Reward as a
valid Proof of Purgatory. Whereas in a general Consideration, parabolical
Scripture is not argumentative; in a special Consideration, this Gloss corrupts
the Text, not only eclipses the Luster and unsinews the Force of it; but
renders it a contradiction of Collusion, transforms an amiable Lure to invite,
to attract to a dreadful Topic a dissuasive Argument, to avert, to deter;
whereby a Reward degenerates into Punishment. Neither the Phrase nor the
Importance of the Text admits any degree of consistence with the Notion of
Purgatory. The Text denotes the Period of a Temporal Life, to be the punctual
Rise of an Eternal, to be the immediate Transport to Heaven for a charitable
Soul.

Not to insist on the controversial disquisition, I shall prosecute the
practical; wherein who the Friends are to bestead us is an apposite inquiry. S.
Ambrose unveils them to be the holy Angels being the Guardians of merciful
Souls for their Tuition on Earth, and Chariots for their Translation to Heaven,
being ministering Spirits in both capacities. Some Divines expound these Friends
to be the sacred blessed Trinity. A charitable Man is ingratiated, indeared to
God himself: Abraham, whose Charity was as conspicuous as his Faith, was
honored to be entitled the Friend of God: Isaiah 41. 8. not only advanced,
dignified in his Court, but embraced and embosomed in his Closet. It is a Ray
of divine Perfection to be (...) a Benefactor.

Theopyhlact, Euthymius, and others understand the Friends in my Text, to be
distressed Persons, succored by our Supports; though the Obloquies, the
Reproaches of the World, though the Dirt, the Scum of the Earth; yet being
sanctified the Privadoes of God, the Favorites of Heaven, the Procurers of our
admission thither: Christ who accepts of Benefits extended to them, as
exhibited to himself, upon their Account will enfranchise, inthrone us in that
Jerusalem that is above; whereby we shall be translated from a Desert to a
Gity, from being Sojourners, Pilgrims, to be Denisons, Princes. How precious in
our Estimate, in our Regard ought such to be, however despicable in Dress in
appearance; who can raise us to such illustrious Preferments? As the substance
of the Reward is remarkable, so is the Circumstance; when you fail: According
to the Syriack Translation, when it fails; to wit, our Mammon, our Wealth;
which in the greatest Plenty and Security may vanish like a Shadow, whilst we
imagine to grasp, to fix it; exposed it is at Sea, to Tempests, to Piracies, to
Wrecks, and on the firmest Shore, to the Rapines, the Violencies of men, more
fierce and savage than the Waves, the Surges of the Sea.

Treasures and Fabrics have their Decays and Periods, in revolution of Times
and Emergences, they are reduced to Dust and Ashes as our selves. All these
things shall be dissolved; says the Apostle. 2. Pet. 3. 11. reflecting on the
Earth and the Works thereof; to wit, the Endowments, Accomplishments thereof
recited in the Close of the immediate precedent Verse. They are Lusitilia in
Suetonius's Phrase, obnoxious, liable to Dissolution. The Original sets it out
more pregnantly, significantly; (...) all these things being dissolved: It is
no less ascertained than if already effected, being in their Nature, and by
Gods Decree, corruptible.

Though our Lands our Houses are not, in the legal distinct construction,
Movables; yet our Titles, our Interest, our Selves are. It is in our English
Translatition, when you fail: It is yet more critically diminitive in the
Original, not (...) but (...) when you utterly fail; afflicted with infirmities
of Body, complicated with imbittered Anxieties of mind, assaulted with the
Terrors of Satan, who makes his strongest Assaults when we are weakest, whose
last reserve of hostile Malice is to bruise the Heel. Genesis 3. 15. S. Bernard
expounds it at the Close of Life: When you shall be unsinewed, unspirited, like
wasted dim Tapers in an unsavory Snuff; when the most amiable Features shall
become Spectacles of Dread and Horror, when the Eyes, those Casements of
Vanities, shall be shut up, when those Pandors of Impurity, those Luminaries
shall be extinguished, when an Apoplexy shall seize those Brains which have
been Anvils for indirect Wits, Mazes of ungracious Contrivances. When we shall
be neglected, deserted by Comrades and Consorts, by all Associates and Friends,
except those in my Text. We readily entertain Balaam's Option; (to die the
death of the righteous) and Number. 23. 10.
that our last end may be like his.

-- Sic, sic juvat ire sub umbras. We all yearn to recede, to withdraw from the
Stage of this World, in a State of Innocence, like Demetrius, after a continual
Vassalage of life to the brink of death, yet was fondly importunate to expire,
to vent his last Gasp in a State of Liberty. But if our Lives have corrupted
our Minds, with the Influences of Mammon, the Hour of death will not release
but exchange our Fetters to be more firmly manacled, to be fierccly tortured in
a dungeon of utter darkness.

To sum up what I have enlarged, to close with every Soul in this venerable
Assembly with an applicatory Meditation. I have dissected my Text to a Precept
and a Reward, resembling the Incense Altar and the Mercy Seat of the
Tabernacle: In the Precept, I have viewed the Engine to be employed, and the
Employment it self; the Engine being the Mammon of Unrighteousness, not to
brand ample Treasures or Incomes, but ungracious practices in atchieving or
managing them: Mammon being like the Chymicks Mercury, as it is differently
tempered, either medicinal to heal, to help, or fatal to corrupt, to bane;
fatal it is when criminal, darting its Taint not only to Merchandise, but to
Judicature, to Religion. Neither the Tribunal nor the Temple is a Sanctuary for
secure Exemption from this Pest; it wrought, vitiated Balaam to be a false
Prophet, Judas to be a false Apostle, and Felix to be a corrupt Judge.

I have discussed the managing the Engine, the Mammon of Unrighteousness, by
two effectual expedients of the purest Friendship; by Equity and Charity, being
the Supporters of Riches, as Aaron and Hur were of the Hands of Moses. I have
distinguished, sorted out a double Equity, of Possession and Restitution, the
one being preservative of Right, the other compensative of Wrong. Both are to
be abetted, even bedecked, embellisht by Charity of Compassion, distribution:
thereby to endear blessed Angels, whilst we oblige distressed men, thereby to
be ranked as Compeers in being befriended by those glorious Spirits; Amicitia
pares vel accipit vel facit, Friendship either finds or makes Equals. To
cajole, even to conjure so amicable a Duty, I have conducted your attention
from the Precept to the Reward; wherein I have observed the Substance and the
Circumstance of it; the Substance of it importing a Translation from the
transitory accommodation of an Inn, to the first Station of a Dwelling, of
everlasting Habitations, to exchange a Tabernacle for a Temple; a Temple for
Stability and Sanctity founded and consecrated by God himself. Those indigent
Persons that are relieved by us, become our Factors to negotiate for us, to fix
our Bank in Heaven; to take up our Treasure by a Bill of Exchange in another
World; they are our Harbingers that we may be furnished with Heavenly Mansions,
when we are to be bereaved of Earthly.

I have pointed out the remarkable Circumstance of this incomparable Bliss;
when it fails, to wit, Mammon, being like a Strumpet that shifts her Minions,
her Favorites: When our Souls are upon the Wing of flight from our Bodies, in
extremities of Agonies, resigning them to be Inmates with Worms, to be
putrified together, when there will remain nothing to him who unrighteously
manages the Talent of Mammon; but a dismal account to inflame his reckoning
with a corrosive Remorse of conscience, not like the Serpent that twined about
the Head of Cleomenes when he died, but this Snake will wind it self about the
Soul, to pierce it with anguish and horror; No Friendship then either will or
can bestead us, but this in my Text. Prosperity is a Loadstone to attract
Friendship; but Misery is a Rock to split it. It was Socrates's experimental
complaint in Adversity; (...) there is no Friend, none indeed extant in the
lowest Ebb, none indeed of Athens, but of Jerusalem only.

My Text sets the Life the Luster of Friendship, in the Umbrage of Death, by
the poor extended to the rich. Damascene vails this truth in an Apologue of a
wealthy Person who owned three Friends; two whereof endeared as his Soul, nay
more tenderly treated in their distinct concerns, more sollicitously regarded;
the third least estimated, yet not quite rejected: Whereas being summoned to
appearance before a dreadful Judge, he made his Addresses to his several
Friends: His first Friend affords him the Formality of some Accoutrements at
his departure; to wit, insignificant for Solace or Advantage; his second Friend
ceremoniously accompanies him to the first Stage; his third inseparably adheres
to him to the end of his Journey, vigorously assists him before the dreadful
Tribunal.

To withdraw the Curtain of the Apologue to a wealthy Person, as Nathan did to
David, thou art the man thus befriended, (vetus Fabula per novam Histrionem; in
the Comedians Phrase.) Thy first Friend is the World, this affords, at thy
recess from it, a Winding Sheet, a Coffin, a Hearse-Cloth; Ornaments specious
as to the sight of others, not in any degree commodious to thy self. Thy second
Friend is the Consort of thy Bed, the Mate of thy Bosom, or thy Issue which
attends thy Hearse to the first Stage of thy Corpse, the Grave; (if the
Punctilio of State, or retired disguise of Mourning will vouchsafe it) however
this Friend takes there a final adieu, the Funeral Solemnity being celebrated,
accomplished. Thy third Friend is the despicable, miserable Person, whom thou
relievest, whose Interest cleaves to thee, (fidus Achates) even to the Period
of thy Journey, becomes an Advocate to plead for thee at the Bar of Justice,
effectually prevails for Mercy.

Were there not an Enchantment in Avarice, who would not with ready Alacrity
distribute temporal Comforts to others, to ascertain eternal to himself?
Unmerciful Persons forfeit and bereave themselves of those Treasures they seem
to retain, whereas the merciful retain those Treasures they seem to be bereaved
of; their works, especially their Alms follow them, their riches are preserved,
nay augmented to them; though not formally in kind, yet virtually in value,
transcendently in a superlative Compensation.

To rescue us from the Fascination, the Witchcraft of covetous desires, the
grand Impediments, the utter Defiances of charitable Acts; there is requisite,
a divine auxiliary Grace, earnestly to be implored for, wherein let us not
disdain to be disciplined by a modern Pattern, the Honor of our Nation, (Mr.
Sutton) not illustrious for Titles but Graces, dignified by unparalleled Alms,
by the renowned Monument of a munificent Hospital; Preparatory whereto, he
frequently, vehemently supplicated; O Lord thou have given me a plentiful
Estate, give me a merciful Heart to dispose it to thy Glory. This pious
Ejaculation, reiterated in his own Garden, was overheard in another adjacent to
it, as it is attested by a modern Ecclesiastical Historian.

To encourage this Duty of Charity, to fortify the Stress of it against all
the Attacks, and Stratagems of Satan; I have mustered up the holy Auxiliary
Forces, the puissant motives of the strictest indispensible rule of Justice, of
the most undefiled, unfeigned exercise of Piety, of the brightest Luster of a
serene pure Reputation, of the most commodious innocent Traffic, of the most
delicious bosom Satisfaction: I have signalized these confluences of the
choicest present Attractives, and Allurements of this World; by the future
Reserve, the Staple Requital of the Beatitudes, the Glories of the next. To
conclude, God has not endowed any of us with wealth, to be tainted with Vice,
but to exercise, to promote Virtue, not to defray the profuse Expenses of
Varieties, of gay, modish, sumptuous Habits (the Banners of Pride and Vanity;)
not for Sacrifices to our Palats, to administer Fuel to Flames of Luxury and
Debauchery: nay not to raise our Families, not for Grandeur but Grace; not for
to render our Posterities great, but our selves good, and them also, in the
Track of our Examples, in consecrating, in perpetuating our Riches, by pious
charitable Uses; to repair, to adorn Fabrics, dedicated, set apart for sacred
Ordinances, that God may be worshipped with the Beauty of Holiness.

Let it not be a Reproach to the best reformed Religion, that in some places,
where Personages furnished with ample Revenues, bedecked with Gallantry of
Clothes, inhabit; Gods Houses should be less decent, less august and splendid
than their own: that many rural parochial Churches hold Resemblances, both for
the Structure and the Furniture, with Barns rather than Temples; Windows
unglazed or shattered, the Floors unpaved, deformed with Pits, the Roofs
ungarnished even unceiled, in a Rudeness of Profaneness; the Walls defaced
with Gashes, hung with Cobwebs instead of Tapistry, I wish from my Soul it were
a Calumny to assert it. This is not solemnly, awfully to reverence, to adore,
but contemptibly, contumeliously to dishonor, to affront the most High. It
has an Aspect of an Indignity obtruded toward the supreme divine Sovereign:
(Churches being anciently dignified to be entitled, to be reputed Basilica,
Palaces for Kings, even for the King of Kings:) Whatever is in any degree
related, appropriated to God, is degraded, desecrated, being in a mean Dress,
exposed to Disesteem and Scorn.

A cheap sordid Performance of religious Duties, is not to be interpreted the
Service of God, but of Mammon; the refinement of which dross, the purifying of
the Pollutions and unrighteousness thereof, cannot be effected, but by acts of
Piety and Charity; in the one in reference to inanimate Piles, the other in
reference to animate, the living Temples of the everliving God; being enriched,
deputed, enjoined, obliged we are by a special Obligation, to relieve the
distresses of our indigent Brethren, appointed we are as Trustees for Supplies
in their Exigences; if this Trust be uprightly discharged, our Fidelity herein
will qualify us to be interested in the Solace the Sentence of Absolution of
the last day. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you from the Foundation of the World. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me
meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in:
naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and
ye came unto me: Math. 25. 34, 35, 36. Of this superlative, inestimable
Recompense of Piety and Charity; (to be admitted to everlasting Habitations in
the Phrase of my Text) which cannot enter into us to understand, till we enter
into it to possess it, the Lord of his infinite Mercy make us Partakers, for
the merits of his blessed Son, by the Influences of his holy Spirit; to which
sacred Trinity, be ascribed Glory, Honor, Might, Majesty and Dominion, this
day, and for ever.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately published: The Mirror of Martyrs: the first and second Part:
lively expressing, in a short view; the Force of their Faith, the Fervency of
their Love, the Wisdom of their Sayings, the Patience of their Sufferings, with
their Prayers and Preparations for their last Farewell.


