THE Bishop of Worcester HIS LETTER TO THE CLERGY OF HIS DIOCESE.

LONDON, Printed for Sampson Evans, Bookseller in Worcester. 1689.

THE Bishop of Worcester HIS LETTER, etc.
Salutem in Domino. My Reverend Brethren,
HAVING to my great dissatisfaction received advertisements that in most
Parishes of the Diocese, there is a notorious Omission of public Catechizing,
(though strictly enjoined by Authority Civil and Ecclesiastical) whereby a
Sluice has been opened to streams, to torrents of novelties of Tenets; to
impieties, enormities of Practices; I apprehend it strictly incumbent on me, as
my Pastoral duty, to excite, to importune the speedy redress of this scandalous
neglect; to be like Origin, (...), that the younger sort whose precious Souls
you are accountable for (within your several Precincts) may not be like Clouds
whiffled about with every gust of Error; and whilst undisciplined, prostituted
to the approaches, the lures of all defilements, exposed to the taint, the
contagion of every modish Vice; but that they may by your sedulous
conscientious Care be timely seasoned with a tincture of Grace, the more firmly
to retain the impression of it, that they may be Orthodoxly principled in point
of Piety toward God, Loyalty to the Sovereign Powers, of Temperance to
themselves, of Justice and Charity toward others.

I presume you will alledg, that the Pulpit has herein abundantly supplied the
defailance of the Desk, of the Reading Pew; that your Sermons have reiterated
those Lectures, though not in the formal Catechistical dress, and method.
Whereas when humane laws are not repugnant to Divine; the solemn Maxim,
Obedience is better than Sacrifice is a safe Rule, not only in pious, but
prudential considerations; it being an influence of Judgment to suspect our own
Judgment, not to overween our Intellectuals, but to allow that our Governors
in their well weighed Constitutions, and Canons, may be as wise, as upright as
our selves.

I shall not set sacred Ordinances to clash with each other, which ought to be
Buttresses for mutual support; I shall not discountenance, nor depretiate the
indispensably requisite Exercise of Preaching; it being no panick terror of a
dismal menace, not appropriated to the Apostle himself only, but extended to
the whole Priestly function; For necessity is laid upon me, yea woe unto me if
I preach not the Gospel (1 Cor. 9. 16.) This Woe is a gloomy doom of utter
darkness, (i ipsa brevitate foecundan Tertullian's phrase) fraught with fullness
in conciseness: yet this duty of Preaching is no supersedeas to the Catechism,
one can give no legal Bill of Divorce to the other, but ought to be as a meet
help in a conjugal link, the umbrage, the disparagement of the one as
unsinewed, ungarnish'd, will add no force, no luster to the other; Preaching
without the auxiliary Catechistical preparation may prove like to sounding
Brass, like a tinkling Cymbal.

This condescension of instruction by way of Dialogue is more smoothly
insinuating, more effectually edifying; whereby the principles of Religion are
more easily imbibed, less nauseated, disrelish'd by Palates naturally
corrupted, whereby the first rudiments of Divinity are more readily chewed by
Novices, by Babes in Christ, whose Flock consists of Lambs to be fed, as well
as Sheep. Gerson the famous Sorbon Doctor Chancellor of Paris, being aspersed,
as if being a Catechist to Children, he had eclipsed his Splendor, sullied his
Reputation in a derogatory degenerating disguise of humility; with a judicious
candor he vindicated himself, not retaliating any virulency, or acrimony of
Censure; that he might otherwise teach Disciples, pomposius, more pompously,
instruct more floridly, more eloquently in the continued harangue of a Sermon,
but not, fructuosius, more fruitfully, as to the information of the
Understanding, as to the sanctification of the Heart, in greener years, though
less plausibly acceptable to the itch of* curiosity in the attention of the
Ear, wherein by an exemplary integrity he designed to advance Gods Glory,
whilst he despised his own. Amongst my Brethren you, that are most eminently
qualified for Arts, and Languages (Talents you are entrusted with, that must be
awfully reckoned for at the Audit of the last day) ought not to disdain to
stoop to the Catechistical task (solidly, perspicuously laying the foundation
of Christianity) which requires a mature knowledge* an indefatigable diligence,
a discreet regular Zeal. Lewis the 9th of France did not apprehend it an
indignity derogatory from his Royal grandeur to catechize a Scullion, upon the
account of the dignity of his Soul equally interested in the Excellency of
Christ's ransom with his own.

This Province however contemptible in the common estimate in later corrupted
times, (it being with Seasons as with Vessels, the dregs draw downwards) yet it
has not been spurned at, not waved by the most renowned Fathers of the
Primitive Church, Eastern and Western.

Not to insist on instances of a more transcendent Station, of an Evangelist of
St. Mark at Alexandria, of an Apostle of St. Paul at Corinth, where his
Planting has been anciently expounded Catechizing.

This has been the prime ingredient for preserving, and propagating the
stability of Truth in Doctrine, of the beauty of holiness in conversation in
the best and purest Ages of the Church.

It is the signal observation of the most Accomplished modern Prelate Bishop
Andrews, When Catechizing was left off in the Church, it soon became darkened
and overspread with Ignorance: the Papists therefore acknowledge that all the
advantages the Protestants have gotten of them has come by this exercise, and
it is to be feared that if ever they get ground of us, it will be by their more
exact and frequent catechizing (...)

I may innocently though (I presume) not inoffensively) with that the over-rise
disuse of this Ordinance be not rather varnished, than justified by the
subterfuge of an Apology, by the specious excuse of some of my Brethren, in
shifting the Scene of guilt, entirely transferring it from their own
remissness, to the refractoriness of Parents, in behalf of their Children, not
to be cajold, by any invitations, and overtures.

Whereas no paint of Pretense, no artifice of palliation, can deceive the
Scrutiny, can evade the Justice of the All seeing revenging God.

I must mournfully acknowledge, that many Parents are alienated from this
Discipline, being depraved by the fascination of erroneous Sentiments, or
deluded by prejudice of Education, or diverted by profane supine inadvertences;
so that there may seem requisite the Constitution and practice of the Helvetian
Reformed Churches, established also in a Gallican Synod, that none be admitted
to a Matrimonial State till first qualified by the Catechistical Discipline;
yet before any such expedient can be expected, I question not but by the
blessing of God on the Devout Addresses, the active endeavors of my Brethren
of the Clergy, by the vicissitudes of public and private lenitive persuasive
Arguments (experimentally found successful) some Parents even of obdurate
tempers may be softened to melting bowels, for the spiritual concerns, no less
than the temporal of their nearest Relations, the transcripts of the Originals
themselves, multiplied, set out in lesser Editions; left otherwise they be
branded in Saint Bernard's expression to be peremtores, not parents. Not
considering that the minority of Age, the blossoms of years are not exempted
from the blasts of Fate, from the period of Death, according to the Jewish
Proverb, There are Sculls of all Sizes discernable in Golgotha. It was their
prudential cautionary Piety, that the first Characters to be imprinted in the
minds of their Children should be religious Advertisements, whereby Nature it
self might be insensibly cultivated, transplanted to Grace, and pious Acts
without difficulty and anxiety improved to Habits.

It is the sage encouragement of a Sacred Precept, Prove. 22. 6. Train up a
Child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it.
The intellectual faculties are best receptive, most retentive of the first
Tincture of literature. Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem Testa diu.
--

It Is also with Tenets as with Viands, an Error in the first degree of
Concoction is not easily corrected in the second or third. The Babes of the
Israelites were Textuaries, versed in the Principles of Divinity before they
were instructed in the rudiments of Grammar. The Church of Christ in the
Primitive luster did not degenerate from this Mosaical Pattern. Saint Jerome
asserts, that the first word Children were prompted to assay to utter, was
Halleluja composed of Halelu and jah. Praise the Lord.

As when in a lower in a lesser Orb, being for many years confined to a
Parochial distinct limit, I could not with tranquillity of mind, with peace of
Conscience indulge my self to decline the Catechistical performance; so being
placed (however unworthily) in a higher Sphere for a more diffusive inspection,
(your selves the Shepherds, in a figurative Notion; being my Flock.) I cannot
without perfidiousness to my Pastoral Charge, connive at any, who shall reject
this Initiatory Exercise, not recommended only as arbitrarily to be pursued, or
baulked, according to your own fancies, but required unavoidably to be
observed, as necessary, necessitate praecepti, though not medii.

In discharging this Duty you are not left at liberty for option in choice of
Novelties of Catechisms to gratify your own selfish opinionative Sentiments,
or the different Shibboleth of others, as if our Saviors Compass for Religion
had as many Points to vary as the Mariners for Navigation. The Arrian Creed was
taxed by S. Hilary to be as changeable as the Moon. In due submission to
Authority the Catechism enjoined in the Church of England ought to be
expounded, not exploded. It is highly approved by foreign reformed Divines. Mr.
Dally a bright Luminary in his Sphere (in the Gallican Protestant Church)
magnifies the Purity, the brevity, Dallaeus in l. 2. Confer.
the perspicuity of it, Orthodoxly reduced from the Oracles of Scripture.

I shall further implore your sedulous Care in admonishing the Parents of
Children Catechized, not to neglect the opportunities of Episcopal
Confirmation, as soon as they are in a competent Age, a degree of apprehension
of understanding: not barely capacitated by a promptness of memory, of
elocution, for recital, to be disciplined only like Parrots.

Let not the disuse excite a disesteem of Confirmation, though not to be
dignified to be a Sacrament in the strictest notion, yet it is to be admitted,
celebrated as a Sacred Ordinance, extending it is beneficial influence to both
the signal, the formal, Evangelical Sacraments: like Janus it has a double
aspect, it looks backward, as additional auxiliary to Baptism (inverting the
Scene of the Votaries of Christian Piety by Proxies, by Sureties, to an
immediate personal professional Obligation) Confirmation also looks forward, as
a proper preliminary to the Eucharist precisely antecedently requisite for the
practice, at least the desire of it in the judgment of the Church of England.
It is generally retained, solemnly observed in the Lutheran Churches in the
venerable track of the purest Primitive.

Not to insist on the Canons, the Sanctions of Councils: Beza in a higher Key
of Advancement exalts it to be an Apostolical Institution in the phrase of
Imposition of Hands ( Heb. 6. 2.) Calvin vindicates the ancient exercise of
Confirmation, not tainted with the Lees of the Modern Romish Superstition, (as
it is refined in the Church of England) deplores the omission; yerns, pleads
for the restitution of it, amplifies the emoluments of it for preventing
new-started Errors, for tuning the jarring Strings of contentions to a
melodious Harmony, for an uniform Stability of religious Principles and
judicious Methods.

Major esset in populo Christiano fidei consensus, non tanta multorum inscitia,
Calv. l. 4. Inst. cap. 19.
non adeo temere quidam novis and perigrinis dogmatibus abriperentur, omnibus
denique esset quaedam velut methodus doctrinae Christianae. Mr. Baxter expressly
acknowledges that the not practicing of Confirmation has brought us into
confusion, and that it must be the practicing of it that must restore our
Church to order, and heal most of our divisions.

Dr. Jackson pathetically resented the defailance of a strict inquiry in this
concern, both in Episcopal and Archidiaconal Visitations. Not to dilate an
Epistle to a Volume, I shall conclude with a paternal Monitory Advice, which
being tendered with the right hand, (with a sincere respect) let it not be
received with the left, (with a sinister construction.)

Toward the younger Sort, Let not your grave Discourse be destitute of the
Efficacy, though it be of the Formality of a Catechism; Maxima debetur pueris
Reverentia. Toward the Elder Sort, Let your Conversation be a daily Sermon; in
a Pastoral precedence of Conduct, after the mode of the Eastern Countries; to
lead your Parochial Flocks by a Constancy of Orthodox Doctrine, ( Fidei regula
being irrefragabilis, immobilis, says Tertullian) and by the integrity of a
regular Deportment; Not to be like the Roman Cassius Severus, Maleficae vitae,
sed orandi validus, (in the Historian's Character of him) eloquently persuasive
in Language, profanely execrable in Life.

This were to present the Devil in Samuel's Mantle, to cover the blackest,
vilest deformity, that of Wickedness, with a specious white Ephod. The
Infirmities of others are our Crimes, our Crimes Enormities, Prodigies. In the
Mosaical Law as large a Sacrifice is required for the Priest, as for the whole
Congregation.

It besteads, beseems you in all the emergencies, difficulties of the times, to
acquit your selves wise as Serpents (not to be deluded) harmless as Doves (not
to be depraved, not envenomed, embitter'd) The candor, moderation of Bucer, was
too rigidly, if not morosely charged to be his Crime, even by some worthy
reformed Divines his Contemporaries.

The most sedate tempers, the most pacifique Spirits are least impure whilst
most offensive; It being the Observation of Livy, Media via nec parit amicos,
nec tollit inimicos. Being unleavened with Animosities in Controversies, in
Debates let your Prudence calmly guard your Innocence, and your Innocence
uprightly sanctify your Prudence. (If the salt be unsavory wherewith shall it
be seasoned?) Let it be an unsullied, unbiast, unscanted Innocence. The Law of
God is not disjunctive, but copulative in the decision of the Schoolmen.

The desertion, the detestation of one Vice is no warrant, no privilege for the
pursuits, the embraces, the caresses of another, though more popular, set out in
a more fashionable Dress, and Varnish.

St. Austin complained of some Divines, whose keen reproof had but one Edge,
extended not to both the extremes of iniquities; their Zeal being like
Ephraim's Cake, Dough unbaked of one side.

Let not your Spiritual Interests in any transactions truckle to Temporal. let
all recesses from the deliberate conviction of Judgment, the clear dictate of
Conscience (though smoothly palliated) be piously dreaded.

It is the disconsolate Maxim of St. Bernard, Qui agit contra Conscientiam
aedificat ad Gehennam.

Wherefore follow not Examples against the reluctancies of Conscience, but
listen to the Excellent Admonition of the son of Sirach, Accept no Person
against thine own Soul, and let not the Reverence to any man cause thee to
fall. Ecclesiasticus 4. 22.

I cordially, constantly recommend you to the Divine Guidance, Solace, and
Protection, earnestly requesting your devout Offices in the behalf of

Your very affectionate Brother, and faithful Servant in Christ W. WORCESTER.
Worcester, June 1. 1689.
FINIS.

