PEREZ VZZA.

Or, A SERIOUS LETTER Sent To Master Edm. Calamy January the 17th 1663,
TOUCHING HIS SERMON AT ALDERMANBVRY, December the 28th, Intimating his Close
Design, and dangerous Insinuation against the Public Peace; with some (...) he
is to Answer, for the Satisfaction of the World.

Nulla CONCIONE excitatum (...) quis Novit.

Tully Orat. LONDON, Printed for George Bisaker, 1663.

PEREZ VZZA. OR, A SERIOUS LETTER Sent to Master EDMUND CALAMY January the 17th
1663, etc.
Sir,
BIshop Ridley, and Bishop Latimer, two good Men, good Bishops, godly
reformers, and holy Martyrs (O Sir, Bishops were employed by the Lord as
Instruments to deliver us from Popery, and (which I never heard any of their
adversarles did) freely offered themselves as Martyrs against Popery) could not
agree in the way, though they were Brethren, yet they agree in the end, though
they were adversaries. (O in the end all sober, modest and, pious dissenters in
the World will be of one heart, of one mind; then shall we see a gracious
return of our Saviors prayer; (and that God heard him in that which he prayed
for:) that all Christians are one in Christ, Ioh 17.23.
as the Father is in Him, and He in the Father; that they are one in the Father
and the Son: and then the World which by our many Religions, is tempted to an
unbelief of all; will own one pure Religion and undefiled, and will believe
that God sent Christ into the World to teach it.

2 You and I who never fell out in the way, but were of one mind in those
things whereunto we had already attained; and in other things waited patiently
until the Lord revealed them unto us; in an unhappy variety of opinion,
retaining a Christian Unity of affections, the many things we agree in having a
greater power to unite us, then the few things we differ in have ^o divide us;
so that in things necessary we came up to an holy Uniformity, in things
indifferent we retained a Christian liberty: in all things we maintained a
Gospel charity; I say you and I who never fell out in the way, must now differ
when we are come within view of that end you and I look for, you and I hasten
unto; (for you must, I may:) I knew indeed you entertained other thoughts then
I did, of the ancient, Primitive, Apostolic and Gospel Government of the
Church; of its pure and decent Worship and Devotion, of its decent order and
innocent Rites and Ceremonies: but I knew withal how to pity you as one
subject to the like infirmities; as well persuaded -- that we know but in part,
-- that something will be lacking to our Faith; -- that our God divides to
every one severally as He will a measure of the gift of Christ; -- as though we
had not already attained, or were already perfect but did follow after -- I
knew you allowed your self another practice of the same Religion answerable to
your thoughts then I could; and I that could come up to the use of some
harmless things enjoined despised not you who could not as I hope you who
could not come up to the use of them, To 14.3.

judged not me who could: I think him happy who allows not himself the use of
what he condemns, and he much happier who condemns not himself in the use
of that which he does, or may allow: I knew your different practice from the
grand establishment of the Nation rendered you incapable of those
encouragements which are allowed by no Nation to any that oppose its public
constitution, (as what Government will maintain them that oppose it) I pittyed
you now under discouragement under this frame of Government which you cannot
approve as I hope you would pity me if I should be, and did pity those many
Orthodox and good men that were under discouragement under the frame of
Government you do approve: when I heard that your conscience guided by some
singular apprehensions peculiar to those of your way, persuaded you not to do
some things which you have done formerly, and think others may do now as things
indifferent, decent orderly and harmeless enjoined by the power ordained of God
over you, which you are to obey for conscience sake; I was sorry and said, O
that any gracious soul should suffer it self to be so ensnared as to be under a
sad necessity either of going against his conscience, which is dangerous; or of
going against Authority; which is sinful when I heard that your conscience
guided by the general principles of Christianity where you could not cheerfully
obey obliged you patiently to suffer; (the truth after Godliness in this case
which good men professed -- was this (I cannot obey though I die, I can die
rather then disobey) I rejoiced and said (...) Mr. Calamy (...) serve God
passively, I must serve God actively, I am appointed to glorify God by
obedience, he must glorify Him by patience: even so O Father because so it
pleases thee.

When I heard of your meekness and modesty, your candor and ingenuity, your
humanity and charity, your piety and humility under this late dispensation
which rendered you with the reverend Doctor Bates, Doctor Jacomh, Doctor Manton,
Mr. Watson, etc. eminent and honorable in their eyes that differ from you, --
( virtus vel in host -- really we pity what we see of man, and we love what
we see of God in you) I said cum tales sint, utinam nostrj essent -- my
thoughts sometimes (for here is more freedom for thoughts in this innocent
solitude (a Paradise in all things, but that here are no Serpents, no
temptations,) then in your throug of interests, passions, and men:) represent
you unto me as serious as that man in the 10th of St. Mark -- asking, what
shall we do that we may inherit eternal life? and you are answered, honor,
reverence, and obey your Superiors, honor Father and Mother; live honestly
and peaceably with your neighbors: -- defraud not, thou shall not, etc. You
answer and say -- all these have we endeavored to observe from our youth; as
it was said of our blessed Savior there, that beholding the Man, he loved him,
etc. so I seriously reflecting upon you, cannot choose but love you, only one
thing you lack: -- O go your way, part with all the esteem, reputation, and
interest you have gained, and devote it to the public welfare and peace of
Christendom: -- Have you liberty to do or to forbear some indifferent things,
O use it not (this rich Jewel) for the offense of the weak below, nor the
contempt of the strong above you, (...) so as upon the same grounds any man may
make it a cloak of maliciousnesses Are you possessed of the precious Jewel of
a tender conscience? be fully persuaded in your own minds apart from all
opinion, fancy, prejudice, interest, what part of the will of God by which you
must be judged, you and your conscience, those things you scruple at are
against? what forbids white any more than black Garments, kneeling any more
then standing, etc. If they are against no Law, every one of them apart, how
are they against a tender conscience that has always an eye upon a Law, (and
peace be upon them that walk according to this rule) if to read a good
Prayer Book be no where forbidden, how is it a sin; and if it be no sin, how
does it trouble a tender conscience: -- deny your selves -- and you shall have
complacency and satisfaction enough to your thoughts and wishes in Heaven; if
you should be as that man, sad at this saying, and go away grieved; O then
submit at least to our Saviors last Lesson to the man, Take up the Cross, and
follow Me. --

Sometimes I think, (and it is no little pleasure to observe the innocent
emanations of our souls, and the harmless springing of our thought, pure as
the morning, clear as the first dawn of day, when we are composed, with quiet,
tranquillity, and peace with our God, our conscience, and with all the World
(...)) sometimes I think I hear you a sked by sober men, as Agrippa was by
Saint Paul, believe you the Prophets, believe you the Scripture that enjoyes
obedience to Magistrates, and those under them in Church and State, for (...),
under and peace; do you believe the primitive practice of the Church of God
lead by the spirit of God in all ages; do you believe the decrees of Counsels;
do you believe the holy sayings of the Fathers: we know you do believe them,
and you considering how near we come to what the Scripture teaches concerning
obedience, decency, and order, and edification; what the Catholic Church,
before Popery was heard of, practiced; -- say as Mr. Vines, etc and others
would say, -- you have almost persuaded us to an uniformity, to order, to
decency, to obedience; (for if ancient History may be believed, and if humane
evidence may be of any use (which it must be of, or else we have nothing sure,
for if Laws were not as we are told they are by men, our estates are lost; if
deeds are not such as they are witnessed, our Lands are forfeited; and if we in
the World live only to deceive and be deceived, we are undone --) the
Catholic Church before Popery kept up two things that were its glory,
uniformity, and sincere obedience, -- and if honest and knowing men may be
believed, the reformed Churches keep up an uniformity among themselves, and
obedience even to their Popish Princes --) and methinks I hear the sober men
say as Saint Paul, we would to God not only you but all Christians this day,
were not only almost but altogether such as we are, except only our
unhappiness that we are looked upon as enthralled our selves, and as those
that would enthrall others; whereas we desire only that all men may be free
from all prejudices, interest, and partiality to know what they ought to do and
to do what they know: we desire only that Kings may be free to command
according to their conscience; subjects may be free to obey according to their
conscience; and that none may persuade the World that Kings sin, commanding
what they think in their conscience is good; and that Subjects sin in doing
those things when commanded, which they think in their conscience are not in
themselves evil.

As we would all the truths of God were received not in Word but in Power; in
the holy ghost, and in much assurance, so we would that great truth of
obedience, which our Religion teaches with most evidence, Inforceth with most
motives, and presses with most power of any Religion in the world, viz. of
obedience and uniformity were owned among us so freely that Christian Kings and
Princes might entertain our Religion as their interest, and all Christian
people might entertain it as their peace, and composure. This is all the harm
we wish; this is all the evil we think, we are thus harmless, thus innocent in
our thoughts toward you: Amidst these pleasing thoughts of you at once, my
duty and delight (that I might not know that undisturbed calm here below which
I look for above) behold an unpleasing message is brought me this week (and I
know not by what correspondence whatever you speak or do is suddenly spread
abroad throughout the Kingdom) that you had 1. In contempt of the authority of
a full and free Parliament, which you once cried up as the only power of God
ordained in this Nation. 2. To the disturbance of a quiet Government, under
which we began to lead peaceable and quiet lives, in all godliness and
honesty. 3. To the offense of a gracious Sovereign many ways indeared to you.
4. To the grieving of many a poor soul which expected you of all men should
show a pattern of humility, meekness and obedience: and the misleading of more
who have that reverence for your person, that by your example may be induced to
your miscarriage, to the great trouble of your Dtocesan, who is hereby in a
straight betwixt the sad choice of either seeing you punished, so as not
becoming a man of your Coat and Order, or of winking at you against the grand
establishment of the present Parliament (and you know what it is to protect
delinquents from Justice) you preached, I am afraid, by making use of that way
to incense the people (for it is observed that preaching and printing undid)
you will provoke the Magistrate to do as King Edward the sixth did, who
ordained, that whereby of late by reason of certain controversious and
seditious Preachers, his Majesty out of the love he bare to the quiet of his
Subjects, inhibitted all men from preaching in any open audience, unless they
were licenced by the Lord Protector, or my Lords Grace of Canterbury; yea, by
bringing the abomination of sedition that makes desolate into the holy place,
you will make the Magistrate as much afraid to open the Church doors to you, as
to open Janus his Temple, as much afraid to hear the Gospel as the Israelites
were to hear the Law: equal the terror, the thunder, the fear under both,
Christian Princes will look upon Lords days as days of Sabbath of Hosts, and
armies and noise than of Sabbath of rest and peace: and when preachers truly
lift up their voices like Trumpets to tell people of their former
transgression, but to incite them to commit new ones: I am afraid that you
call, cause men by these courses to abhor the service of God; and so by your
fault the Word of the Lord be precious in our days: and there be no open
vision: You preached, I hear Mr. Calamy, the 28. of December, when the Kings
thoughts were full of favor toward you, and all your friends were resolved of
obedience and patience, that in so doing they might put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men, where the Nobility and Gentry had their eyes upon
your carriage and behavior in order to a further clemency or severity: O Mr.
Calamy, a wise man knows time and judgment, and the men of Issachar had
understanding in the times; knowing what Israel ought to do: O there was a time
to keep silence, and there would have been a time to speak.

Your Text I hear was, 1 Samuel 4.13. where methinks I no sooner hear of the Ark,
but I call to mind that passage, 2 Samuel 6.6, 7. And when they came to Nachons
threshing floor, Uzzah put forth his hand to the Ark of God, and took hold of
it, for the Oxen shook it; and the anger of the Lord was kindled against Uzzah,
and God smote him there for his error. The Ark may be in danger, and yet you
have no call to uphold it; the Ark may seem to you in danger unless you put
your hands to it, and you may be in danger if you meddle with it.

Now consider your call; you were there by Law made a hearer, O how durst you
but abide in that calling wherein you were called! Why did not you study to be
quiet, and to follow your own business? and if you must speak a word of
Exhortation to the people, why did you not assure them, that you and they must
needs be obedient to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, and to submit
for conscience sake! Why did you not desire them to go home, and consider what
that means: If the spirit of the Ruler rise up against thee, stir not out of
thy place, for yielding pacifieth great offenses? Eccl. 10.4.

Object. 1. I hear you observed, that the threatenings of the second and third
Chapter, and the terrors of the fourth, were denounced and inflicted, Because
he did not restrain his wicked sons from their lewd courses. You have given his
Majesty and his Parliament fair warning, to persist in their severe restraints
of all licentiousness, and not to hearken to that indulgence which may be
their ruin that they grant it to, and their own that grant it: To indulge men
in a wrong way, is to undo them and our selves too; Government is not so firm
when it prevariously depends upon the private humors of Subjects, as when it
is eternally established upon the public resolutions of Authority. An able
Prince that would establish a troubled Government must have two things eminent,
power and virtue; he ought to have virtue to preserve his dignity, and power to
check others insolence; power begets fear, and fear makes Gods, and Kings. And
really it is high time for discipline to awake, when by a sad liberty offenses
are grown so impudent as to control it, and so potent as to venture the
suppressing of it. Oh! Ely may beget Phineas, Phineas may beget Ichabod.
Remissness may beget profaneness, and profaneness may beget the departare of the
glory. Irresolution loosens all the joints of State; a good nature may be a
good companion for a private person, but for a Prince to be so is mischief to
himself and others. Remissness and connivance are the ruin of unsettled
Kingdoms. Let us satisfy our selves in the best Principles of Religion and
Government, and keep close to them, and leave the success to God. Ely must not
let his sons escape, nor Magistrates their people, with a why do you these
things? for I hear of your evil dealings by all this people: nay my sons, for
it is no good report that I hear. Upon the whole matter I appeal to your own
Conscience, whether the establishment of great rules of piety, worship, order,
and obedience, against which no man must appear (all men being publicly
restrained by just penalties from saying or doing any thing scandalous to, or
derogating from the true Religion, which is esteemed, and so settled, the best
and most holy) be not a better way to preserve the Ark, then to allow loose men
Liberty to do what they please sometime.

I know you think you may be indulged in your opinions, though Ely's Sons were
not to be indulged in their Practices: -- You know these are damnable heresies
as well at damnable practices; and though I cannot say your Opinions are such,
yet upon the same ground that the Church allowed such Moderate men as you are,
Liberty of Conscience, it must allow all men Liberty that can but pretend to
Conscience: Besides, you have Liberty of Opinion (for the Government takes no
notice of your opinions: but you must not have Liberty of practice, especially
where your Practices has been such, that their ears tingle that have heard of
it.

Now some there are that would make comparisons between your Practices and the
Sons of Ely.

The Sons of Ely were sons of Belial, i. e. that endure not the yoke.

2. They altered the custom, by taking too much to themselves.

3. And if any one said, Let them not fail to burn of the fat presently, and
thou shall take as much as thy soul desires; then they would answer him, Nay,
but we will have it presently, or we will take it by force.

4. They made men abhor the Sacrifice of the Lord.

1. Would the world did not observe of you that you cannot endure the yoke.

2. You altered a Custom in the Church, yea all the Customs of the Church,
and have taken too much upon you.

3. If any one said unto you, be contented, let the great things of Government
and obedience take place, and then you may do what you please: (for true
Liberty to do good, and good Government, may very well contest together) then
you answer, Nay, but we will take it presently, or we will take it by force.

4. And you have made men abhor true godliness, and serious holiness, because
you did such strange things, who usually practiced it.

We cannot now own being holy, unless we own a suspicion, at least, of
disloyalty too. O Sir, the good ways of God have been evil spoken of through
you, and many a man was afraid of being serious, least he should be suspected
seditious; and many a poor soul applauded his very profaneness, because it was
loyal and honest; and despised Religion, because he saw you made it disloyal
and turbulent. And indeed, give me that Religion that is most charitable to all
men.

Object. 2. I hear you observed that the Israelites confessed the Lord had
smitten them: Though we know all evil of punishment is from the Lord; yet we
repine at men; we murmur against the Magistrate that discharges his
Conscience; we exclaim against our Pastors who perform their duty; we complain
of Parliaments, who enact according to the published reason: we entertain hard
thoughts of the Magistrates that execute Justice and maintain Truth; whereas if
we suffer any thing by these men performing their several duties, we are to
look upon it as the hand of God upon us, and to say with old Ely, It is the
Lord, let him do what seems him good.

I am informed, that you observed, that they thought they were safe by the
presence of the Ark, but therein they were miserably mistaken.

Object. 3. And I have often observed of you and those of your way, that you
confine your Religion, Worship, Church and safety to a few opinions and
persons, equally modern, which if you can but secure, though the Catholic and
Apostolic Faith, once delivered to the Saints, be endangered, though the
public Worship be neglected, though all Order, Discipline and Decency be
overthrown, though the ancient succession of Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers be
interrupted, though the Word and Sacraments, that make and support the Church,
be laid aside, you can call the saddest times that ever we saw Gospel Times,
and you can say, that you enjoy in purity and plenty the Ordinances of Jesus
Christ. But if that new way which Mr. Calvin in the year 1535. set up at
Geneva, be rejected, as a novelty of an hundred years continuance, by those
that desire to live and die in that Christianity, which has been practiced by
all good men in all places these 1600. years.

If every Minister be no a Bishop in his own Parish; If a few ignorant, but
devout souls, shall not bear sway over all the 1 Neighbors, as Lay Elders,
admitting whom they please to, and turning whom they please from the Sacrament:
If every man be not at liberty to utter what words he please before God, and
neglect the wholesome form of sound words, commended by the Church: If a
Minister must wear a linen Ephod, a harmless garment. If a man must rather
kneel humbly, then stand untowardly, in his devotion to God. If men must repent
of, and so renounce their former rebellion: If a few troublesome men be
silenced, and if they that oppose the Church be not preferred by it; You say
the Ark is removing; the glory is departing: the safety of Israel indeed was
not in the Ark, but in an uniform and constant obedience to the eternal Law of
God kept in the Ark: and our safety lies not in any peculiar formality,
opinion, or in any singular persons, but in a sincere profession of the ancient
Truth that has upheld the Church in all ages, in all places, and in all
conditions.

Object. 3. We hear that you should say: That the Ark of the Covenant would not
preserve those that had broken Covenant with God; no privilege secures them
that neglect their duty: the best man that does as a malefactor must suffer so
too. And Sir I pray consider, that Religion cannot preserve you if you live not
according to the known principles of Religion, that it, if you in conscience
cannot resist authority, yet speak against: if you who have taken an oath to be
true to your Governors, will yet oppose them, The word of the Lord came unto
me saying, says Ezekiel, say now to the rebellious house, that by the keeping
the Covenant, that is, your oath of allegiance to the king of Babylon (mark it
to the heathenish king of Babylon) and not any Covenant against him the
kingdom may stand: but you rebelled against him, i. e. your King to whom you
had sworn allegiance, shall he prosper? shall he escape that does such things?
or shall he break the Covenant, i. e. his oath of allegiance to the King, and
be delivered? In the place that the King lives (whose oath he has taken)
says the Lord to the king of Israel) he shall dye: the holy discipline cannot
preserve them that have broke the oath of Allegiance, the Oath of Supremacy,
the oath of Canonical obedience, and the protestation, and all the public
oaths they have taken before God and men. I know you think you have been very
tender of the Covenant of God, and of any Covenant you have made with God, I
hope you have. But as to that solemn League and Covenant, I must needs say:
that I think you cannot keep your Covenants with God if you keep it. How can
you keep your Covenant before God in the oath of allegiance to the King, if you
keep that Covenant by which you fought against him? How can you keep your
Covenant before God in the oath of Supremacy, if you keep this Covenant by
which you oppose the Kings Supremacy? How can you keep your Covenant before God
in the protestation you made 1641. to defend Religion, as it was then
established, if you keep that Covenant wherein you swear to alter the Religion
established: as the Ark secured not them if they kept not their Covenant with
God: so all the tokens of Gods presence among you cannot secure you if you
break your many oaths of allegiance, Supremacy, Canonical Obedience,
Protestations made in the presence of God: nay let me tell you further (for I
freely open you my heart) that I doubt no token of Gods presence, which you may
imagine you have among you may secure you, if you stand to the Covenant you
have made against the Kings authority and will, whose subjects you are, against
the established way of the Catholic Church members whereof you are: against a
government of Apostolical institution which has been continued with such an
universal, uninterrupted, unquestioned succession in all the Churches of God in
all kingdoms that have been called Christians throughout the world, fifteen
hundred years together against all principles and rules of Government. You
cannot be safe until you have sincerely endeavored to lay aside all the new
humors, opinions, and practices which have been of late brought into the
Church, and trouble your selves and others no longer with any unquiet
singularities, but return peaceably, meekly, and humbly to the Communion of the
universal Church, standing soberly in the paths, and seriously considering
which is the old way of the people of God in all ages, and walk therein, that
you may find rest to your souls.

Object. 3. And Eli sat, etc. says the Text: Eli you know was his priest: for
you need not be told that there were first Levites, secondly priests, thirdly
higher priests among the Jews, as there were 1. disciples, 2. the seventy, 3.
Apostles among the first Christians, and then by the Apostles institution with
universal approbation, 1. Deacons, 2. Priests, 3. Bishops and Archbishops:
among us now, as 1. the people, 2. the Levites, 3. the priests did abide in
that calling wherein they were called, whether the care of their families their
own affairs and souls, or ministry they waited on their ministry, or they that
teach on teaching, or they that exhort on exhortation, and they by prayer
committed public affairs to the providence of God, and the care of Governors
and Judges, meddling not with things too high for them: Only the high Priest
the Governor (for in those days the Clergy had the care of civil affairs,
and the Commonwealth was not deprived of their excellent worth, parts, and
usefulness in government, and the Jews having any matter against others, went
not to law before the unjust, but before the Saints. And know ye not that we
shall judge Angels. How much more them of this life. Eli I say the high Priest
and Judge who had the government on his shoulder sat in the way, and trembled
because of the Ark, his head only was full of thoughts, his heart only was
full of care for the public, other poor people studied to quiet, and to follow
their own business: So the honest people, 2. the Deacons, 3. we the inferior
may set our heart at rest, and leave the public cares to public breasts,
wrapping up our selves within an innocent privacy, and looking to our selves
and the flocks, over which the holy Ghost has made us overseers while our
Elies, our Prince, our Rulers, our Archbishops and Bishops have many sad
thoughts of our Church openly threatened, and secretly undermined by the old
practices of Papists, and the new attempts of some of the separation, though we
here hug our selves here in peace, quiet, and great content, committing the
world to the care of God and his servants, and attending only on that part of
it, hereof we have a care, and not without call looking further.

Object. He sat alone thinking with himself he had that peace within which he
wanted abroad, that composure and quiet he wished in the kingdom, he enjoyed
in himself: he went not among the vulgar to incense them against the
misgovernment, who were of themselves apt enough to be untoward and troublesome
to stir them up to add the misery of domestic sedition to a foreign war, here
he suits and confines his thoughts to his own breast, and if any man has a
faith of this nature, the evidence of things not seen, he ought to have it to
himself. Vi more quod sua natura tranquillum sit ventorum vi agitari atque
tribori, sic and populum sua sponte placatum hominum seditiosorum vocibus, ut
violentissimis tempestatibus citari, Tul. Orat. cap. 1. fol. 14 sect. 46 Really
Mr. Calamy, I blessed my self in the late calm and serenity of the Church after
its great settlement in Law, when upon a sudden this attempt of yours raised
the usual storms of murmuring, complaint, whispering, speaking evil of
dignities, fears, jealousies, and discontent, and that general discomposure,
for which you will be one day sorry. When the people hear evil tidings they
murmur.

Object. 6. Exodus 33.2. A Text they say quoted by Mr. Calamy.
They say you observed that the old man was not troubled what became of his
sons so the Ark was safe. O Mr. Calamy, if he was so careful of the Church, as
to neglect his own as indeed Mr. Calamy we are not to seek our own opinion,
esteem, or advantage, but the good of the Church, how much more careful ought
we to be of the Churches peace, in in which our own is involved. In the peace
thereof you shall have peace, how much more careful ought we to be that we
disturb not the peace of the Church in whose trouble we are sure to be ruined.
O Sir, if not for our own, yet for our childrens sake; for alas! what have
these done: yea for their sakes that are yet unborn, let us follow the things
that make for peace.

He took more care of his children, etc. O if you will be so unnatural to your
wives and children as to part with their livelihood, and maintenance rather
then with your own singular opinions and imaginations, learn from your own
observation of Eli, not to disturb the peace of the Church, that you may come
again to a capacity to provide for the necessities of your families, then and
not till then shall I see the peace of the Church, when we have all learned to
deny our selves our own wisdom, honor, and interest, and seeks his own but
all the great things of public peace and good.

Object. 7. I hear you observed that the Ark was an holy place for Gods
presence, and now I hope poor souls will learn from you if not from us, that
some things may be holy with a relative holiness, i. e. so dedicared to an holy
service, that they may not be profaned to a common use (what is separated unto
God that call not thou common or profane) and that our God who is every where
by his presence, in heaven by his glory, in hell by his justice, in the world
by his providence, in the consciences of men by his law and fear, in the hearts
of his people by his grace and Spirit, was in the Ark as you say in the
Tabernacle and Temple, as the Scripture says, is in our Churches too by his
presence and blessing. And now I hope you will persuade your people that these
places are holy, and that they are no other than the houses of God, that they
may take heed to themselves when they come to the House of God.

And as they do well in keeping the Sahbaths, times dedicated to God, so they
would do well in reverencing the Sanctuaries, the places devoted to his
service. Now I hope Sacrilege may be a sin and it may be accounted once again
a sin to devour that which is boly, and after vows to make enquiry. And I hope
none of you will any more repine to see the Lord served in the beauty of
holiness. When you say the Ark was holy, I hope you think places of Gods
special manifestations of himself are holy too, and that we ought to compose
our selves to Reverence in those places where we set our selves as in the
presence of God.

Object. 8. This holy Ark, you said, (as I am informed) was the Type of the
Church; for as the Ark, so the Church preserves the Scripture, and is the
pillar and ground of truth. And I hope you will hear the Church therefore; and
you will teach your people that if they heard not the Church, they are (as the
Scripture says) as publicans and sinners. O Sir, away with all private
suggestions and opinions, and submissively yield to the Rules the Church
delivers as it delivered the Scripture. If the Church took care to preserve the
Scripture, oh fear not that she will enjoin any thing contrary to the
Scriptures, and if you believe her not for her own sake, yet believe her for
the Scriptures sake which she preserves. Oh charge her not too rashly with
error, whose care (as you say) it is to preserve the truth; the Church
preserved the truth five thousand years before Presbytery was heard of, and it
may preserve them many years more when Presbytery shall be heard of no more.

Object. 9. The Ark, I am told you said, was a Type of the Ordinances of
Christ; for as God communicated himself then by the Ark, so he does now by the
Ordinances. O then why do those of your way separate themselves from the
Ordinances? why are the Congregations in London so thin as I am told they are?
It may be you say because their Ministers are removed into corners. O did they
come formerly to hear men, or did they come to hear God? Did they come to hear
the Word as it was the word of this or that man, or did they come to hear it as
it was and is still the word of God. I hope they did not go to hear men, and if
they went to hear what God would say unto them, is not he the same, as
yesterday, so to day as for ever: and granting (though I hope you do not think
so) that Ministers are now weaker then they were, must we hear in faith of man's
power, or rather must not we hear in the faith of the power of God, whose
strength is most apparent in weakness. Ah! will some poor souls say, precious
Mr. Watson, Mr. Calamy, sweet Mr. Venning, etc. what is Paul, what is Apollo:
what is Mr. Calamy, what is Mr. Watson, but Ministers by whom they believe:
even as the Lord gave to every man: you plant, others water, God gives the
increase: so then neither is he that planteth any thing, nor he that waters,
but God that gives the increase; tell me seriously whereas there is among you
envying, and strife, and divisions, are you not carnal, and walk as men: for
while one says I am of Paul, and another I am of Apollo, and another I am of
Cephas, are ye not carnal? O you can never receive the Word of God in the holy
Ghost, in power, and in much assurance, while ye have men's persons in
admiration, and receive the faith of God in respect of persons.

Object. 10 I am told you discoursed of the danger of loosing the Ordinances
and Ministry of the gospel. You know, Mr. Calamy, we are in danger of loosing
nothing, but what we never had until these twenty years: there is no more
danger that I see, then that we are like to loose those novelties with which we
have been troubled of late, that we may gain that ancient way, in which we have
been happy, as you say, these hundred years (for I am told, that you said,
England has enjoyed the Gospel this hundred yeas:) Had England the Gospel in
the Episcopal, or in the Presbyterian way? after the Common Prayer, or after
the Directory? with order and decency, or in disorder and confusion? Let all
the world judge. Came the Gospel from you to us, who all know are of yesterday?
or came it not unto you from us? We dare not make our selvas of the number, or
compare our selves with some that commend themselves; but they measuring
themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves among themselves, are not
wise 2 Cor. 10.12, 13, 14. We boast not of things without our measure, that is,
of other men's labors, only we hoped your ingenuity would have acknowledged,
that the Gospel Ordinances are not in any danger by your late removal; for you
know you found Gospel Ordinances here, when you came into the world, and, I
hope, they may be found here after you are gone hence and are seen no more. O
do a few Ministers think, that their removing is the removing of the Gospel!
that it should enter into a few men's hearts that they uphold the Church: O if
King Charles could say (when he was advised to grant what he could, to save,
upon which he Church depended) God forbid that the Church of God should depend
upon a mortalman: O how much more may you say, that you were nourished and
brought up by the Church, and depended upon it, rather then it upon you: some
indeed preach Christ out of contention, some you will say for gain
notwithstanding Christ is preached, and you may rejoice.

Ob. 11. One reason they say you gave for Christians care for the Ark was their
love to the place of Gods presence, but do your people love the habitation of
Gods house, or rather this or that person that ministre^h there; do they desire
to dwell in the house of God, to see the beauty of the Lord, or to hear a
friend judge you? oh these things ought not to be: If they love the Church, it
is as it was these many years, if they love a party, we know what you mean by
the Ark.

Obj. 12. You said, as Mr. Cartwright used to say, for Sion sake I will not
hold my tongue: O alas! Mr. Calamy, when the Government of the Church, to which
you they say, swore obedience, was subverted, when 3000. Orthodox men were
silenced, sequestered and undone; when the ancient worship of God was abolished
which you once used, (for you know you and I were once of a judgment and
practice) when the Church was in the greatest danger that it has been since
the Reformation you were silent: now a few opinions of yours about a few
garments, gestures, words, and other small formalities, are not allowed, a few
men wedded to these opinions will not preach because they are not allowed; you
cannot be silent, be not deceived, God is not mocked.

Obj. 13. They say you said, a child of God was careful of the Ark because of
his interest therein; by his care we might know the children of God: here Mr.
Calamy I am afraid poor souls may wrest the Scripture to their own damnation:
if you mean by the Ask of God, the Church of God with his Ordinances, after the
primitive and universal, all good take care of it; and the King and Parliament
at this time take care to establish it: If you mean only your own way (as every
party cry up their own way for the only way of God) and the way of others of
the separation, and make it a sign of a Child of God to be careful of you. O
Sir, what a stone of stumbling do you cast before all the ages of the Church,
where there was one that knew, much less was careful, for this way. But I hope
you will not say, Then it is a certain sign there were but few or none that
were the children of God in those ages. O Sir, to be of a Religion that saves
only a party, is not a sign of the Child of God, but of a man of contention. O
let me live and die in that Religion, which (if not neglected) may save the
world.

Object. 14. You said I am informed, That the Ordinances of God are the
treasures of a Christian, and the loss of them cannot but trouble them. The
Ordinances of God are Reading, Hearing, Sacraments and Prayer. Common prayer in
a wholesome form of sound words, to which all could say Amen; was neglected for
men's private notion, to which very few could say Amen: Reading was quite
disufed, preaching the Gospel was turned to the preaching of Opinions and
Parties, and the Sacrament of Baptism allowed to few, and that of the Lords
Supper denied almost to all (O Ely would have trembled at these things) the
ways of Sion, God knows, mourned, the ancient Ministers of Christ were driven
into corners, and were you troubled? did you lay it to heart? these are
restored, what alles you now?

Object. 15. Christ Jesus you said is the joy of Christians, and therefore when
Christ is departing they cannot but be much troubled at it. O Mr. Calamy, take
heed of persuading people, that the advancing of this or that party is the
advancing of Christ, or that the discountenancing of them is the departing of
Christ. If any man say ^o, here is Christ, or there, or here he is departed, or
there. O teach poor people, not to believe them, for there shall arise false
Christ's, and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch
that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the very Elect. And I pray teach
them wherefore if they shall say unto you, behold, he is in the desert, go not
forth, behold, he is in the secret chambers, or meetings, believe it not.

Object. 16. The people of God you said were much troubled because of the
misery of a nation when the Ark is departed. A Gentleman to whom words of this
nature were communicated, and I am loath to write this of my self, that where
is you said ^o be to that nation when the Ark is gone, said, woe be to that
nation where the Ark of Presbytery, for its followed and attended with war,
sedition, blood, ruin and confusion, and O that sad experience did not confirm
this in England, Scotland, and other places. Insomuch that the foreign Churches
the men of Ashdod of the Ark say, this way shall not abide with us, let it be
carried about to Gath to other Churches, as Scotland, and in those places it
was attended with very great destruction, and they send it to England, and the
English cried out, they have brought this way hither to slay us, and our
people: and the King, Lords, and Commons in Parliament say, send this way to
its own place, that it slay us not, and our people, for there was a deadly
destruction throughout the whole Country that came along with it, and the hand
of God was very heavy here. And the cry of the Country went up to heaven,
destruction and misery, says he, is in their way, and the way of peace have
they not known.

Obj. 17. I was glad indeed to hear you say, That the people of God must needs
tremble when the Ark is in danger, because of their accessariness to the
loosing of the Ark; for to deal plainly with you, is the Church in danger? your
disturbances cause it: does Popery break in upon us? the breaches you made upon
Law and Government open the way to it: does profaneness prevail? O you have
made serious holiness odious by goodly pretenses and unworthy practices: does
not the Magistrate watch over Papists? Its because your dangerous attempts
makes him wholly intent upon you: does he indulge them? you say men must have
liberty of conscience: do we want Ministers? why did you withdraw your selves?
is the nation divided against it self? who has occasioned it? have we lost our
first love? why do you by depraving the first Reformation cause us to loose our
first love? Do the people run beadlong to the Garlic and Onions of Egypt? you
mean Popery: and have not you forced them to do so, by crying down every thing
that was established for Popery, that the people have nothing upon which they
may settle themselves, but Popery: if they stay with us, they are in Babylon,
say your party: if they go over to you, you are antichristian say the poor
Libertines: where ever they are in an orderly established way, they are in
Popery: and if all that is orderly and settled be Popery, to hear Papists we
will go: if all decent worship, and regular Government be Popery, the Popish
people shall be my people, and their God shall be my God; where they die, I
will die and there be buried: do poor discontented souls desire to return to
the Church of Rome Is it not because they of the separation say there is no
true Church in England.

Object. 18. But you were plain it seems at last, and told them it must not be
denied, but the Arc was in danger to be lost, -- If you mean Presbytery,
which we never had established, there is no harmedone, -- If you mean the
Church of England with her Doctrine, Discipline, Worship, Rites and Ceremonies
as established by Law, it is well you have forewarned us, the King and
Parliament I hope will take you at your words, and will take care to secure the
Church upon such foundations, as the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against;
well Sir I leave with you that of Eccl. 3.11. with you; He has made every
thing beautiful in his season, yea he has set the World in thine heart, so
that no Man can find out the work that God makes from the beginning to the end,
who know what is good for a Man in this life, all the days of his vain life
which he spends as a shadow, for who can tell a Man what shall be after him
under the Sun; the thing that has been it is that which shall be; and that
which is done is that which shall be done: and Sir there is no new thing under
the Sun, is there any thing whereof it may be said be hold this is new? it has
been already of old Time which was before us: Mr. Calamy I know whatever God
does it shall be for ever; nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from
it; and God does it that men should fear before him. That which has been is
now, and that which is to be has already been, and God requires that which
was past.

Object. 19. I was informed you told your people that in their own concernments
they were very sensible: But in the concernments of Religion very careless.

If you intended to raise a sedition (which I hope you did not, I am sure the
providence of God never called you to it) you could not take a better course
then to add to civil grievances which you know the people murmr against
Religious jealousies and fears: O when Religion which should restrain the
multitude provokes them to sedition, to what excess of riot do they run; (...)
Naz. inde furor vulgo -- its natural for men to think nothing little in the
case of Religion; so that they can hardly persuade themselves, they can be
angry enough in the case of a Diety -- a discreet man will never stir up the
people in the defense of any point of Religion, -- for their force when stirred
up will destroy all religion: you know the late popular tumults were not so
easily ellayed as they were raised by you; you know when the multitude had
served your humors in pulling down Episcopacy, they served their in
overthrowing you. --

It Is more proper to tell the people of their duty then of their danger: our
business is to discover to the people the state of their souls; let those that
are in Authority show them the state of the Government as who attend upon this
very thing; and for the people -- let them stand still, and see the salvation
of God; -- let them peaceably walk with God, and God will watch over them --
let them keep Religion every one in his heart, and Religion will keep its self
in the Church. --

Object. 20. I hear you said We had enjoyed the Gospel these hundred years
and above? It Is true we enjoined the Gospel these 1400. years (as we can make
it appear against the Papists from the several men that in all ages were
eminent for their adherence to the Word of God, and to the Testimony of Jesus:
And truly I would not have the Papists hear that we have a Gospel only of an
hundred year old;) but it is as true that you were never contented under the
Gospel.

We have had the Gospel these hundred years, and yet we have had admonitions,
supplications, warnings, prophesyings, -- remonstrances ever since -- you have
never been contented since we left Popery; and if you gone complying with the
Popish underminings whose great design is by our divisions to bring us back
again; you will never be quiet until we return to Popery again.

Object. 21. When I was told how you challenged any Scholar to show where any
Nation enjoyed the Gospel for an hundred years together; it put me in mind of
a witty Gentleman's answer to one that asked, what if a Papist should ask a
Presbyterian where his Religion was 200. year ago? he might answer I know no
more where it was two hundred year ago, then where it will be two hundred year
hence: but (not to allow my self even a sober mirth on so sad an occasion) this
puts me in mind of Bishop Halls solemn offer: That if any man living can show
any one lay Presbyter that ever was in the World till Farell and Viret, or any
Presbyterian Discipline till Mr. Calvin set one up, -- let me (says he)
forfeit my reputation to shame, and my life to justice. --

Object. 22. A wicked, profane, drunken Ministry you say will never settle the
Arc -- you say; others say an envious, ambitious, seditious, unlearned,
factious, will never settle the Arc, you would not hear the one, O speak not
the other: if you had known any such, you had done well to tell them of it that
they might amend; and not the people that they might be incensed, this public
censuring and backbiting may provoke those that do amiss, it will never
reform them; -- this had been better told the Magistrate who might regulate
the Ministry, and not the people, who (as you know and have at other times
complained) being too much prejudiced against them which take this occasion to
have them the more: would to God (Mr. Calamy) you could bear with us a little
in our folly; and indeed bear with us: I demand in the (...) of the English
Clergy who have been so distrusted, so disconntenanced, so dejected, so
despised, so desolated, so depressed, wherein did they come short of the best
of Presbyters, were Presbyters good Preachers so were they before them; were
Presbyters able Writers -- they more; were Presbyters devout Men, so are they;
were Presbyters zealous opposers of Popery so were they; were Presbyters of
unblamed lives so are they; -- were Presbyters Martyrs -- they more; were
Presbyters Instruments in the first just and orderly reformation they more;
were Presbyters hospitable and charitable, they more; -- who was more
downright then Bishop Latimer? more holy then Hooper? more severe then Farrar;
more Grave then Archbishop Parker; more pious then Grindall; more candid and
charitable then Whitgift; more pious and prudent then Bankroft; more holy and
moderate then Abbat; more public spirited then Laud, who was more Venerable
then Bishop King; who a greater Scholar and better Man then Bishop Andrews;
who more virtuous and judicious then Bishop Lake; who more profound then Bishop
White; who more moderate then Bishop Overall; who more exact then Bishop
Davenant; who more useful then Bishop Field; who more honest then Bishop
Bilson; who more Saintly then Bishop Fetton; who more devoutly then Bishop
Carleton; who more conscientious then Bishop Finhouse; who more meek and
peaceable then Bishop Hall; who more innocent then Bishop Patter; who more
honest then Bishop Winniffe; who more renowned then Bishop Usher; who more
excellent then Dr. Himmond; who more meek, holy and judicious then Mr. Hooker;
who more Heavenly then Mr. Lyford, etc. who more compleit then Bishop Brownrig.
Not the thousands more living and dead in our memory; some spots we have among
us and so have you; some miscarrages, and they that have not let them throw the
first stone at us.

Object. 23. You added (I am told) these expressions to the rest, O that God
would encourage our Nobles and Magistrates, that they might be solicitous to
settle the Ark: -- Your meaning here Mr Calamy is as the Arc under a covering,
-- the King and his Nobles in Parliament have settled the Arc, Ordinances, the
Church, would you have the Nobles unsetle them again, -- the Government is
settled, would you have the Nobles oppose it? what a Barons War, we never
heard of a settlement these hundred years that you were satisfied with; O when
will it once be? -- yes, you would be contented, but that the Ark is set in the
House of Dagon, whom you call Dagon we worship, as the God of our Fathers in
the Lord Jesus Christ's as for the Dagons of Popish Images, and of new
Imaginations, with which indeed our Ark is encompassed, we hope to see them
fall down suddenly before the Ark; the English Church, Orthodox in Doctrine,
devout in Worship, orderly in Ceremonies, strict in Discipline, and safe under
Authority; and here we set up our Pillar of gratitude with the sacred
Inscription, Hitherto the Lord has helped us, only I shall leave with you
these Questions to be resolved as in the light of God for the satisfaction of
your conscience, which you have by this action at least discomposed, and of the
Nation, whose peace and tranquillity you have disturbed.

1. Quest. Whether you do not think in your conscience (as you have often
declared) that the Church of England is a true Church, enjoying all Ordinances
and Privileges necessary to men's salvation.

2 Quest. If so, (as you all confessed) whether the Ark, which you say is a
Type of the true Church, be not a Type of the Church of England?

3 Quest. The Ark being a Type of the Church of England, whether it be now in
danger, being newly established by public Authority.

4 Quest. If it be in danger as now established, whether this danger proceeds
not from your open opposition, and private endeavors against it; and whether
it be just in you to create the Churches danger, and then increase it by
suggesting to the people fears and jealousies of its being in danger? --

5 Quest. Whether or no you ought in Conscience to put us to these dangers only
for few opinions, which none own but your selves, and your selves understood
not an hundred year ago; or against a few Ceremonies and points indifferent,
which your selves submitted to twenty years ago.

6 Quest. And indeed whether the Church of the Living God does so depend upon a
few mortal Men, such as you are who lately left the Ministry, that upon the
removal of a few singular Men it is in danger of being lost; or if it does so
far depend upon them, whether they could in Conscience hazard the ruin of the
Church, rather then declare that they disown the former miscarriage, and they
would lead peaceable and quiet lives under the present Government; If there had
been enjoined a great thing, would they not have done it? much more when they
were commanded only to Wash and be Clean? and to serve God (as some of them
had done) as decently and orderly as their Brethren. --

7 Que. Whether now with twenty years fears jealousies, and imaginations, we
have been almost run out of all Religion, Church, Ordinances, and public
Tokens of the visible of God, the Nation had not best resolve to lay aside all
private suggestions, and to proceed to such a stable settlement, as that we may
say Return to thy Rest O Lord with the Ark of thy strength.

Well Master Calamy, there will come a time when three words uttered with
meekness and charity shall receive a far more blessed reward, then three
thousand Volumes written with disdainful sharpness of wit, and with malicious
partiality; you are a man Master Calamy, you may err and mistake, your
discipline may be suppressed, some opinions of yours may be disowned; you may
be laid, and yet the Church of God stand upon the Foundation of the Prophets,
and Apostles, and Pastors, Jesus Christ himself being the Cornerstone: --

Thus much I thought became the respects I always beared you, and the kindness
I had for your far former sobriety and moderation; for indeed Sir I am

Your affectionate Friend in our common Savior, O. Vdall.

FINIS.

