PANTOPONOANON: OR, A peculiar PROMPTUARY of TIME; Wherein (not one instant
being omitted since the beginning of motion) is displayed A most exact
DIRECTORY for all particular Chronologies, in what Family soever:

And that by deducing the true Pedigree and Lineal descent of the most ancient
and honorable name of the URQUHARTS, in the house of CROMARTIE, since the
Creation of the world, until this present year of God, 1652.

London, Printed for Richard Baddeley, and are to be sold at his Shop, within
the Middle-Temple-gate, 1652.

To the READER.
SOme few months after that amongst other Papers of the Author's of very great
concernment and knowledge, which were totally lost in the Pillage ensuing the
fatal Blow given to the Royal party at Worcester, This ancient Pedigree, from
amongst the regardless fingers of the promiscuous Soldiery, was, by a
surpassing honest and civil Officer of Colonel Pride's Regiment, most
opportunely rescued from the inexorable rage of Vulcan, to whom by a file of
Musquettiers it was consecrated, to afford smoke to their pipes of Tobacco; it
falling by mere chance into my hands, and after perusal perceiving it to be
exceeding useful and ingenious, I thought my self, in duty to the Public,
obliged (lest at any time hereafter it should incur the like hazard of
imbezelling) faithfully to commit it to the Press. Which design I the rather
undertook, that the Author, whose Genealogy it is, has* already been highly
esteemed of for his literature and other qualifications; whereof by Treatises
long ago ev^lged, and actions of more then ordinary virtue, he ha^h at several
occasions given many ample testimonies. And albeit the condition wherein for
the present he stands with the State* in matter of his charge and deportment in
the Regal Army, appear not, in the judgments of those have taken his
examination, to be (as I am informed) so desperate, as that he thereby will be
much endangered: yet, leaving these mysteries to whom they are competent, and
meddling with no more then what by a common obligation to learning, and
excellent endowments of the interior faculties, where ever they be found, I am
tied unto; I will only make bold to speak a word or two in behalf of the
Author, and in all humility submit the censure thereof to the judicious
construction of the State, whose prisoner he is.

It being here every way perceptible, by the Chronology of his house, in this
little tractate so punctually deduced, that providence has been so favorable
to that his family, as to preserve it amidst the many various revolutions, and
almost innumerable changes of Monarchies and Estates, wherein it was in several
nations very often interessed: it is humbly desired, and (as I believe) from
the hearts of all that are acquainted with him, that the greatest State in the
world, stain not their glory by being the Atropos to cut the thread of that
which Saturnes sith has not been able to mow in the progress of all former
ages, especially in the person of him, whose inward abilities are like to
produce effects, conducible to the State, of as long continuance for the
future. And although (as Christians) we be not obliged to assert the truth of
that Philosophical position, whereby the future is always maintained to be for
duration equal with what is past: yet would his mind (by all probability) if
cherished with encouragements, emit for utility, pleasure, and honesty, such
fruits ^f goodness, as might reach the ^ne ad post, with no less extent of
space, then ab ante, fortune ^ath conveyed the other; so that to make use of
Aristotle's ^ther division of good, taken from its threefold variety of ^ubject,
to which it owes its ^nexistence: the Authors mind and fortune will
conjunctly (by appearance) be able to dilate themselves over the whole ^ourse
of time, provided his body, now in the custody of the ^tate, may (of their
Grace) ^eceive that enlargement, together with other favors thereunto
concomitant, the wan^ whereof would quite dash, an^ utterly overthrow the other
two aforesaid Branches of tha^ Trichotomie in his person, to the great
prejudice of the Commonwealth; which truly considering, how formerly h^ has
been a Mecaenas to the Scholar, a Patron to the Soldier, a favourer of the
Merchant, a protecter of the Artificer, and upholder of the Yeoman; it were a
thousan^ pities, that by the austerity o^ a State which depends in bot^ its
esse, and been esse, upon the flourishing of these worth^ Professions, effects
so advanta^ous thereto, should by not ^^ferring deserved courtesies ^^ him, be
extinguished in the ^^ry brood. This, out of my ^^ty to the State, and
affection ^^ the Author, I have thought ^^ to premise, as it becomes the
^^eaders well wisher

G. P.

Praenoscendum.
THe Figures in the rows above (...) Proper Names, are to be unders^^^^ thus:
The first denotes the ye(...) the world, wherein such a one was b(...) to
which effect, at the top of the page, (...) above that figure are set down the
let^^^^ A. M. designing Anno Mund^. The ^^cond shows their number, or Series,
in ^^der from their first fore father, and to (...) effect the word Series is
placed abov(...) a^ the upper end of the Page. The th(...) signifies the
difference of years betw^^^ any two predecessors, as they follow (...) another;
for which cause the (...) Common difference is posited abov^ at the beginning
of the Page; it b(...) termed common difference for no other reason, but that
by adding, and abstracting it from the Epochs of the world, and incarnation, in
the nativities of any one of the List, it will afford the true foresaid Epochs,
in the birth of his successor. Lastly, the fourth number expresses the Epoch
of Christ, either before, or after the incarnation; and to this purpose are
supraposited the words Ante Chr. Anno Christi. As for example, Esormon, was
born in the year of the world, 1810, was the sixteenth from Adam, he was 32
years younger then his father Pasiteles, and lived 2139 years before the
incarnation, etc.

THe Reader may be pleased to Correct with his pen these ensuing Errata's
before he fall upon the perusal of the Treatise,

Pagina. Linea. Errata. Emendata. 1 4 Vrquarts, Vrquhart. 29 4 ^h, He 35 4 cl.
cla 39 2 Branata Bramata. 42 4 King of of King.

The true Pedigree, and Lineal descent of the most ancient and honorable Family
of the URQUARTS, in the house of Cromartie; since the Creation of the world,
until this present year of God, 1652.
GOd the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, who were from all eternity, did, in time,
of nothing, create red earth; of red earth, framed Adam; and, of aribout of the
side of Adam, fashioned Eve. After which: Creation, Plasmation, and Formation,
succeed the Generations, as follows.

An. mundi. Series. Common difference. Ante Christum. 1 1 3948

Adam married Eve.

He was surnamed the Protoplast; and on his wife Eve begot

SETH.
An. mundi. Series. Common difference. Ante Christum. 130 2 129 3819

Seth married Shifkah.

He was the father of the Righteous, and such as called upon the Name of God:
and his wife Shifkah was his own coenixed sister; on whom he begot

ENOS.
An. mundi. Series. Common difference. Ante Christum. 235 3 105 3714

Enos married Mahla;

And on her begot

CAINAN.
An. mundi. Series. Common difference. Ante Christum. 325 4 90 3624

Cainan married Bilhah;

And on her begot

MAHALALEEL.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 396 5 71 3553

Mahalaleel married Timnah;

And on her begot

JARED.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 460 6 64 3489

Jared married Aholimah;

And on her begot

ENOCH.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 622 7 162 3327

Enoch married Zilpah.

This Enoch was translated alive unto the heavens, and was the first that gave
occasion to the Apotheosis of the Greeks. On Zilpah he begot

METHUSALAH.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 687 8 65 3262

Methusalah married Noema.

He lived till he was full 960 years of age; and on Noema begot

LAMECH.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 874 9 187 3075

Lamech married Ada;

And on her begot

NOAH.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 1056 10 182 2893

Noah married Titea.

In the Six hundredth year complete of Noah's age, occurred the universal
Deluge. His wife Titea was the daughter of Tubal-Cain, the son of Iubal. On her
he begot

JAPHET.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 1557 11 501 2392

Iaphet married Debora.

To Iaphet's inheritance befell all the Regions of Europe. On Debora he begot

JAVAN.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 1700 12 143 2259

Iavan married Neginothi.

For his portion, being Iaphet's eldest son, he had all the territories of
Greece. His wife Neginothi was the daughter of Arphaxa^ the son of Sem,
Iaphet's second brother, and elder then Cham. After him, for many hundreds of
years together, the Grecians were called Iavanites. On Neginothi he begot

PENUEL.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 1730 13 30 2219

Penuel married Hottir.

This Penuel was a most intimate friend of Nimrod the mighty hunter, and
builder of Babel. On his wife Hottir he begot

TYCHEROS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 1751 14 21 2198

Tycheros married Orpah.

Of this Tycheros, Orpah the daughter of Sabatius Saga, Prince of the
Armenians, made choice to be her husband, because of his gallantry and good
success in the Wars. On Orpah he begot

PASITELES.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 1778 15 27 2171

Pasiteles married Axa.

This Axa was the daughter of Samothee King of the Gauls, on whom he begot

ESORMON.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 1810 16 32 2139

Esormon married Narfesia.

He was Sovereign Prince of Achaia. For his fortune in the Wars, and affability
in conversation, his subjects and familiars surnamed him (...), that is to say,
fortunate, and well beloved. After which time, his posterity ever since has
acknowledged him the father of all that carry the name of Urquhart. He had for
his Arms, three Banners, three Ships, and three Ladies, in a field Dor; with
the picture of a young Lady above the waste* holding in her right hand a
brandished sword* and a branch of myrtle in the left, for his Crest: and for
Supporters, two Javanites after the souldier-habit of Achaia, with this Motto
in the scroll of his Coat Armor, (...): that is, These three are worthy to
behold. Upon his wife Narfesia who was Sovereign of the Amazons, he begot

CRATYNTER.
An. mun. Series. Com. diff. Ante Christ. 1837 17 27 2112

Cratynter.

He was likewise surnamed (...), ever since have been all the male-race of
Esomon. He was a victorious Prince; yet all his issue male dying before
himself, there succeeded to him in his inheritance his brother German

THRASYMEDES
An. mun. Series. Com. diff. Ante Christ. 1841 18 4 2108

Thrasymedes married Goshenni.

On Goshenni he begot

EVIPPOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. diff. Ante Christ. 1873 19 32 2076

Evippos married Briageta.

On Briageta he begot

CLEOTINUS.
An. mun. Series. Com. diff. Ante Christ. 1899 20 26 2053

Cleotinus married Andronia.

This Andronia was the daughter of Egialeus Ruler of the Sicyonians. On her he
begot

LITOBOROS.
An. mun. Series. Com. diff. Ante Christ. 1930 21 31 2019

Litoboros married two wives, Pusena. and Emphaneola.

Yet had he, besides these two Ladies, several other both wives and concubines,
as the fashion was over the whole world even then, and for the space of above a
thousand years thereafter: yet, in matter of the Genealogy of this home, no
other women are collaterally placed, but such as have been mothers of the
Chiefs thereof; or if there be any mentioned, it is only here and there the
most especial, without naving regard to any of the rest. Litoboros o^ Pusena
begot

APODEMOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 1961 22 31 1988

Apodemos.

Although Apodemos was begot on Pusena the daughter of AEmathius Prince of
Macedonia; yet to him succeeded his half brother Bathybulos, begotten on
Emphaneola the daughter of Tyrus ruler of Thracia.

An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 1962 23 1 1987

Bathybulos married Bonaria;

And on her begot

PHRENEDON.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 1991 24 29 1958

Phrenedon married Peninah.

This Phrenedon was in the house of the Pa^riarch Abraham at the time of the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha. On Penina (...) begot

ZAMELES.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. ^023 25 32 1926

Zameles married Asymbleta;

And on her begot

CHORONOMOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2055 26 32 1894

Choronomos married Carissa.

He on Carissa, who was sister-in-law to Istaevon King of the Germans, begot

LEPTOLOGON.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2083 27 28 1866

Leptologon married Calaglais;

And on her begot

AGLAESTOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2114 28 31 1835

Aglaestos married Theoglena;

And on her begot

MEGALONUS.
An. mun. Series. Com. diff. Ante Christ. 2143 29 23 1806

Megalonus.

He having no children by his wife Primilla, there succeeded to him his uncle

EVEMEROS.
An. mun. Series. Com. diff. Ante Christ. 2120 30 6 1829

Evemeros married Pammerissa.

Here is to be remarked, that we are not to regard the difference betwixt the
ages of Megalonus and Aglaestos, which is 29; nor yet that betwixt Megalonus
and Evemeros, which is 23: but the difference only 'twixt Evemeros and
Aglaestos, because it retrogrades not the time, but continues in an even
outright course upon the track thereof. This Evemeros was six years younger
then his brother Aglaestos: and on his wife Pammerissa begot

CALLOPHRON.
An. mun. Series. Com. diff. Ante Christ. 2150 31 30 1799

Callophron married Floridula;

And on her begot

ARTHMIOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2183 32 33 1766

Arthmios married Chrysocomis;

And on her begot

HYPSEGORAS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2207 33 24 1742

Hypsegoras married Arrenopas.

On Arrenopas, who was the daughter of Hercules Lybius, he begot

AUTARCES.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2234 34 27 1715

Autarces married Tharsalia.

On Tharsalia, who was the sister of Spartus that built Lacedemon, he begot

EVAGES.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2266 35 32 1683

Evages married Maia;

And on her begot

ATARBES.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2295 36 29 1654

Atarbes married Roma;

And on her begot

PAMPROSODOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2326 37 31 1623

Pamprosodos married Termuth.

On this Termuth, who was that daughter of Pharaoh Amenophis which found Moses
amongst the bulrushes, and brought him up as if he had been her own child, he
begot

GETHON.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2355 38 29 1594

Gethon married Uegeta;

And on her begot

HOLOCLEROS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2384 39 29 1565

Holocleros married Callimeris.

On this Callimeris, who was the daughter of Si^eleus the Sovereign of those
Countries in Spain which now are called Galicia, Andaluzia, Murcia, and
Granada. He begot

MOLIN.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2415 40 31 1534

Molin married Panthea.

This is he that came with Gathelus from Egypt into Portugal, and of whom are
descended the Clanmolinespick in Ireland. His wife Panthea was the daughter of
Deucalion and Pirra, of whom Ovid makes mention in the first of his
Metamorphosis. In that part of Africa which after his name is till this hour
called Molinea, by cunning and valor together he killed in one morning three
Lions, the heads whereof, when in a basket presented to his Lady Panthea, so
terrified her, that (being quick with child) for putting her right hand to her
left side, with this sudden exclamation, [ O Hercules, what is this!] the
impression of three Lions heads was found upon the left side of the child as
soon as he was born. How Portugal was so called, after Gathelus; the Scots,
after Scota; and that the Scotobrigants were the race of Molin in Spain, is
clearly set down in the ample story of the House. Molin on Panthea begot

EPITIMON.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2446 41 31 1503

Epitimon married Gonima.

This Gonima was the sister of Hiber (after whom Ireland was called Hibernia)
and daughter of Gathelus, begotten on Scota; in honor of whom, Epitimon (she
being his mother-in-law) after her name, called his second son Scotus; of whose
progeny, shortly after, the surname of Scot* took its beginning, together with
the Arms which Molin (...) by his valor had acquired on the coast of Africa,
and which upon the left side of Epitimon by nature were imprinted from his
mothers womb, as has already been sufficiently enough glanced at in the
description of Molin. Then began the old Arms of Urquhart in the house of
Esormon (viz. three Banners, three Ships, and three Ladies) to be exchanged
into three Lions heads. Epitimon on Goniwa begot

HYPOTYPHOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2474 42 28 1475

Hypotyphos married Ganymena;

And on her begot

MELOBOLON.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2503 43 29 1446

Melobolon.

His wife Actosa was the daughter of Chusan Raschataim, whose male-issue
Melobolon surviving, there succeeded to him his Cousin-germane Propetes, who
was begotten by Nepenthes the brother of Hypotyphos, on the Lady Thespesia.

An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2509 44 6 1440

Propetes married Hypermnestra.

This Hypermnestra was the choicest of Danaus fifty daughters; and on her
Propetes begot

EUPLOCAMOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2539 45 30 1410

Euplocamos married Horatia,

And on her begot

PHILOPHRON.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2567 46 28 1382

Philophron married Philumena;

And on her begot

SYNGENES.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference Ante Christ. 2598 47 31 1351

Syngenes.

His wife Accorta bearing him no children, there succeeded to him his uncle

POLYPHRADES.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference Ante Christ. 2581 48 1368

Polyphrades married Neopis.

This Neopis was the sister of Amphion ruler of Thebes, on whom Polyphrades
begot

CAINOTOMOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference Ante Christ. 2627 49 29 1322

Cainotomos married Thymelica.

Here is only set down the difference between the ages of Syngenes and
Cainotomos, which is 29; and not that of Polyphrades to either of them, as has
been formerly observed in Aglaestos, Magalonus, and Evem^ros; because
Polyphrades, though p^sterior in succession, is elder in years; and therefore
to regard his difference, would but entangle the progress of our Chronological
Genealogy. This Cainotomos took to wife Thymelica the daughter of Bacohus, in
recompense of his having accompanied him in the conquest of the Indies.
Cainotomos in his return from thence into Greece, passed through the
territories of Israel, where being acquainted with Debora the Judge and
Prophetess, he received from her a very rich Jewel, which afterward by one of
his succession was presented to Pentasilea, that Queen of the Amozons that
assisted the Trojans against Agamemnon. On his wife Thymelica he begot

RODRIGO.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference Ante Christ. 2656 50 29 1295

Rodrigo married Ephamilla.

This Rodrigo being invited by his kindred the Clanmolinespick into Ireland,
bore rule in that Country all the days of his life, with so much applause and
good success, that of him is descended the Clanrurie, of which name there were
26 rulers and Kings of Ireland, before the days of Ferguse the first King of
Scots in Scotland. On Ephamilla he begot

DICARCHES.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2685 51 29 1264

Dicarches married Porrima.

His marriage with Porrima the sister of C^^^enta, Evander's mother, was made in
(...)unger years, when he traveled from Ireland into Italy; and on her begot

EXAGASTOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2713 52 28 1236

Exagastos married Lampedo;

And on her begot

DENAPON.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2750 53 37 1199

Denapon married Teleclyta;

And on her begot

ARTISTES.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2775 54 25 1174

Artistes married Clarabella;

And on her begot

THYMOLEON.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2806 55 31 1143

Thymoleon married Eromena;

And on her begot

EUSTOCHOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2834 56 28 1115

Eustochos married Zocallis;

And on her begot

BIANOR.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2864 57 30 1085

Bianor married Lepida;

And on her begot

THRYLLUMENOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2893 58 29 1056

Thryllumenos.

His wife Metacer as was the daughter of Calcedo the Tyrian that founded
Carthage: but he having no sons by her, there succeeded to him his own
brother-german

MELLESSEN.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2900 59 7 1049

Mellessen married Nicolia.

This Nicolia, before she was married to him, traveled from the remote eastern
Countries to have experience of the wisdom of Solomon; ^^d by many is supposed
to have been the Queen of Sheba. Mellessen nevertheless ^^^t some of his
children to Ireland and Britain to be brought up with the best of his own
father and mothers kindred: the name of the eldest son Mellessen begot on
Nicolia, was

ALYPOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2930 60 30 1019

Alypos married Proteusa.

Proteusa was the sister of Eborak who founded the City of York. In the time of
this Alypos was Scotland named Olbion; ^ afterward by an AEolick Dialect
termed Albion: the Castle of Edinburgh built (for that Ethus King of the Picts
did build it, is fabulous) and the Promontories at Cromartie, called the (...),
vulgarly Soters. Alypos on Proteusa begot

ANOCHLOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2951 61 21 998

Anachlos married Gozosa;

And on her begot

HOMOGNIOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 2981 62 30 968

Homognios married Uenusta;

And on her begot

EPSEPHICOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3012 63 31 937

Epsephicos.

He begot on his wife Oncumena several sons and daughters; but the sons not
living, there succeeded to him his N^phew EUTROPOS, begotten of his brother
Pherenicos, on Prosectica.

An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3045 64 33 904

Eutropos married Delotera.

On Delotera, who was the daughter of Agesilaus, he begot

CORYPHAEUS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3075 65 30 874

Coryphaeus married Tracara;

And on her begot

ETOIMOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3104 66 29 845

Etoimos married Pothina.

On this Pothina, who was Niece to Lycurgus, and sister to Cabrilaus, he begot

SPUDAEOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3132 67 28 817

Spudaeos married Cordata;

And on her begot

EUMESTOR.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3163 68 31 786

Eumestor married Aretias;

And on her begot

GRIPHON.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3190 69 27 759

Griphon married Musurga;

And on her begot

EMMENES.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3219 70 29 730

Emmenes married Romalia;

And on her begot

PATHOMACHON.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3248 71 29 701

Pathomachon married Orthoiusa.

On Orthoiusa he begot

ANEPSIOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3279 72 31 670

Anepsios married Recatada.

This Recatada was the daughter of Simon Brek, who was the first crowned King
of the Scots in Ireland: and on her Anepsios begot

AULOPREPES.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3308 73 29 641

Auloprepes married Chariestera;

And on her begot

COROSYLOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3337 74 29 612

Corosylos married Rexeno ra;

And on her begot

DAETALON.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3365 75 28 584

Daetalon married Philerga.

This Daetalon was agnamed Char, the reason whereof is set down in the
voluminous history of the house, as likewise of the agnames of many of
Daetalons predecessors; which, for compendiousness sake, must needs be here
omitted. Upon Philerga he begot

BELTISTOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3395 76 30 554

Beltistos married Thomyris.

This Beltistos was agnamed Chonchar, for which cause, a certain progeny
descended of him, is till this hour called the generation of the Ochonchars; a
race truly of great antiquity and renown in the dominion of Ireland. Beltistos
founded the Castle of Urquhart above Innernasse; which being afterward
completed by his posterity, has ever since been called the Castle
Vickichonchar. On Thomyris he begot

HORAEOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3426 77 31 523

Horaeos married Uaronilla;

And on her begot

ORTHOPHRON.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3449 78 23 500

Orthophron married Stranella;

And on Stranella begot

APSICOROS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3480 79 31 469

Apsicoros married AEquanima.

On this AEquanima, which was the sister of Marcus Coriolanus, and daughter of
Volumnia, he begot

PHILAPLUS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3510 80 30 439

Philaplus married Barosa;

And on her begot

MEGALETOR.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3531 81 21 418

Magaletor married Epimona;

And on her begot

NOMOSTOR*
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3560 82 29 389

Nomostor married Diosa.

This Diosa was the daughter of Alcibiades, and Hipparete. Nomostor, after the
lamentable decease of his father in Law, whom his native Country had so
ungratefully used, took his farewell of Greece; and after many dangerous voyages
both by Sea and Land, arrived at last at the harbor of Ochonchar, now called
Cromartie, or Portus Salutis, first found out by his predecessors Alypos and
Beltistos, agnamed Chonchar, inhabited by many of his kindred at the time of
his landing there, and thereafter all the days of his life honored with his
presence, as Prince of the race. On Diosa he begot

ASTIOREMON.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3588 83 28 361

Astioremon married Bonita,

And on her begot Phronematias. He ma^ied afterward Aretusa, and on her begot
Lutork. This Astioremon, by killing the ^utlandish King Ethus the first, and
first King of the Picts, in Duel, before the face of ^oth Armies, gained the
great battle of Far^u^, fought within a mile of Cromartie; the ^eliques of that
stranger-King's Trenches* Headquarters, and Castramentation of his whole Army,
being till this day conspicuous to any that passes that way. He likewise for
his ^alour, honesty, and Eloquence, made proof of at that time, was induced to
change his old Motto, and embrace this: (...) that is to say, Mean, speak, and
do well; which device, till this hour is kept in the scroll of the Coat-armor
of the house of Cromartie. The Lady likewise made use of for a Crest, in ^tead
of a Myrtle branch which before that time she in her left hand carried, from
thence forth ^ore a Palm; which in the Urquharis Arms of the foresaid house is
as yet observed. To Astioremon succeeded his son

PHRONEMATIAS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3607 84 19 342

Phronematias.

This Phronematias agnamed Choncha^ dou, had to wise one Panagia; of whom
n^vertheless, having no male-issue that lived (...) any perfection, there
succeeded to him his h^^ brother Lutork, begot on Aretusa.

An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3614 85 7 335

Lutork married Bendita.

Ferguse the first, at his coming into Olbio^ after he had in honor of his
predecessor G^thelus* given unto his landing place the na^^ of Argile, and
called the whole country (...) was to possess, Scotland, after the
Scotobrigants (by Seneca in his Satyrs called Scutobrigantes, by a Dorick,
dialect for Scotobrigantes, from Brigansa a town in Galici^ now called
Compostella, which the Scots (...) old both built and inhabited: he likewi^^
gives them the epithet of Caerulei, becau^^ (in my opinion) the most of the
inhabitan^ there, were accustomed, even then, to the wearing of Blew caps)
after the Scotogall^ (of whom our Scots-Irish language is terme^ Galick, as
they from Galicia) and lastly, after ^^ose that had the surname of Scot without
^^y other designation. e Hgave in marriage to ^utork (...), the Captain General
of all ^s forces, because of his dexterity both in the ^acedonian and Romish
discipline of war, ^^s own sister Bendita; for which cause, the ^iver upon
whose bank the promise was ^ade, has ever since been called Urquhart, ^^d the
valley or Glen (as they term it there) ^here the marriage was consummated,
Glen^rquhart, or Glenurchi, and that in honor ^f the Odocharties, Ochonchars,
Clanrurie, ^cotobrigants, Clanmolinespick, and Esor^on, who were all of them
Lutork's predeces^^rs, and surnamed Urquharts. This Lutork, ^esides his own
ancient inheritance from Cro^artie to Castle Urquhart, inclusive and se^eral
other Lands successively derived to him ^^om Nomostor, took possession then of
the ^hanedom of Lochaber, with many other ter^^tories of a large extent. On
Bendita he ^egot

MACHEMOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3637 86 23 312

Machemos married Regaletta.

This Machemos was agnamed Chonch^^ Roy, and on Regaletta (who was the daug^ter
of Daephron Gramus, the first of the na^^ of Grame, father of the honorable
family (...) Montrose, and founder of the old Town of the title now corruptly
called Monross) begot

STICHOPAEO.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3668 87 31 281

Stichopaeo married Isumena.

And on her begot

EPALOMENOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3697 88 29 252

Epalomenos married Antaxia;

And on her begot

TYCHEROS the second.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3726 89 29 223

Tycheros married Bergola.

He was called Tycheros the second, b^ first that was chief of the name of
Urquhar^^ was agnamed Titus; and on Bergola, who was the daughter of Getus King
of the Picts, begot

APECHON.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3755 90 29 194

Apechon married Uiracia;

And on her begot

ENACMES.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3784 91 29 165

Enacmes married Dynastis;

And on her begot

JAVAN the second.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Ante Christ. 3825 92 41 124

Iavan married Dalga.

He was named Iavan the second, but first nevertheless so called amongst the
heads of the family of Urquhart. On his wife Dalga, (the daughter of Conan
Captain of the Brigants, and after whom ever since the River running along by
Cromartie has been called Conan) he begot

LEMATIAS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference Ante Christ. 3853 93 28 96

Lematias married Eutocusa;

And on her begot

PROSENES.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference Ante Christ. 3883 94 30 66

Prosenes married Corriba;

And on her begot

SOSOMENOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference Ante Christ. 3914 95 31 35

Sosomenos married Praecelsa;

And on Praecelsa begot

PHILALETHES.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference Ante Christ. 3945 96 31 4

Philalethes married Plausidica;

And on Plausidica begot

THALEROS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference Anno Christi. 3976 97 31 27

Thaleros married Donosa;

And on her begot

POLYAENOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference Anno Christi. 3995 98 19 46

Poly^nos married Solic^li^;

And on her begot

CRATESIMACHOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference Anno Christi. 4025 99 30 76

Cratesimachos married Bo^ta^o^a;

And on her begot

EUNOEMON.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference Anno Christi. 4056 100 31 107

Eunoemon married Calliparia.

This Calliparia was the daughter of Rodrigo Captain of the Morrays, and first
Morray that ever came into Scotland: on whom Eunoemon begot

DIASEMOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference Anno Christi. 4084 101 28 135

Diasemos married Creleuca.

On this Creleuca* who was the daughter of Ardgudus Captain of Argyle, he begot

SAPHENUS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4114 102 30 165

Saphenus married Pancala;

And on her begot

BRAMOSO.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4142 103 28 193

Bramoso married Dominella.

This Bramoso, agnamed Timothy, on Dominella begot

CELANAS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4173 104 31 226

Celanas married Mundula;

And on her begot

VISTOSO.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4212 105 39 265

Uistoso married Pamphais.

This Vistoso, agnamed Gabriel, on Pamphais begot

POLIDO.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4242 106 30 295

Polido married Philtrusa.

This Philtrusa was the daughter of Clarence, brother to Findok King of
Scotland: on her, Polido begot

LUSTROSO.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4274 107 32 327

Lustroso.

This Lustroso married Glycerina the daughter of Fincormacus King of Scotland;
of whom nevertheless he having no children at all, there succeeded to him his
own brother

CHRESTANDER.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4276 108 2 329

Chrestander married Meliglena;

And on this Meliglena begot

SPECTABUNDO.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4305 109 29 358

Spectabundo married Philetium.

On this Philetium, who was the daughter of Nectanus King of the Picts, he begot

PHILODULOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4337 110 32 390

Philodulos married Tersa;

And on her begot

PALADINO.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4368 111 31 421

Paladino married Dulcicora.

This Paladino, agnamed Nicolas, upon Dulcicora begot

COMICELLO.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4399 112 31 452

Comicello married Gethosyna;

And on Gethosyna begot

REGISATO.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4427 113 28 480

Regisato married Collabella;

And on her begot

ARGUTO.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4456 114 29 509

Arguto married Cucn^ma;

And on her begot

NICARCHOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4487 115 31 540

Nicarchos married Tortolina.

On this Tortolina, who was the daughter of Arthur of Britain, he begot

MARSIDALIO.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4518 116 31 571

Marfidalio married Ripulita;

And on this Ripulita begot

HEDOMENOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4546 117 28 599

Hedomenos married Urbana;

And on her begot

AGENOR.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4575 118 29 628

Agenor married ^ampula;

This Agenor, agnamed Ibraim, on Lampusa begot

DIAPREPON.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4607 119 32 660

Diaprepon married Uistosa;

And on her begot

STRAGAYO.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4634 120 27 687

Stragayd married Hermosina;

And on this Hermosina, who was the daughter of Natasil Thane of Athol, be^ got

ZERON.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4661 121 27 714

Zeron married Bramata.

This Zeron was agnamed ^acchus, and ^^ he in whose old age for his supposed
hospitality to Donald of the Isles, his ancient and mo^ sta^ely Castle of
Urquhart was demolished and himself forfeited of his whole inheritanc^ by
Eugenius Octavus King of Scotland Zeron nevertheless on the aforesaid Branata
begot

POLYTELES.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4690 122 29 743

Polyteles married Zaglopis.

On this Zaglopis, who was the daughter of Cutbert, ruler of the Westsaxons, he
begot

VOCOMPOS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4720 123 30 775

Uocompos married Androlema.

This Vocompos, for his valor and gallantry in the field, was by King
Solvatius restored to that part of his Land which is called the shire of
Cromartie, together with other parcels of his old inheritance in the Counties
of Buchan and Ross, and invested him with more privileges and immunities, to
be derived to his posterity, then he had done to any other subject in that
dominion, in compensation (as it were) of thrice as many more Lands, which
Eugenius Octavus, father to the said Solvatius, had taken from his Grandfather
Zeron, An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4720 123 3 775 and which
the said Solvatius was unwilling to cause restore to Vocompos. He had to his
second brother, one named Phorbas Urquhart, and Hugh to the third; of whom some
few hundreds of years after that, the names of Forbes and Macky had their
beginning. What Holinshed out of Hector Bo^ce relates of the origin of the
name of Forbes, is spoken at random, without other ground then the mere
ambition of the said Boece, for the honor of his own name. That Forbes (by
true Orthographie (...), of which name there was a King of Athens, and several
second brothers of the predecessors of this family, of whom, some mention is
made in the Chronological legend thereof, it being a name in Greece as commonly
made use of, as (...), or such like) should of a name, which then it was,
become afterward a surname to the successors of Phorbas the second brother of
Vocompos, occurred merely by reason of the Aphaeretical and Apocopal curtaling
of the Syllables, Mack* ap* and son, for the quicker and more expedite
deliverie in the expression of those, that, without regard An. mun. Series.
Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4720 123 3 775 of surnames, were pleased to
design men by their patr^^ymical tides: by means of which scurvy custom; too
much che^ished, as yet, in many parts of both Scotland and Wales, the Forbeses
since they began to have two several Lords of that name besides many other very
especial Knights and Gentlemen of good estates and fortunes) becoming almost
forgetful of the stock from whence they descended, would se^ up a Genarchie by
themselves, although, by the ordinary rules of Heraldry, their very Arms do
sufficiently declare their cadency. Nor need we think strange, why they are
called Phorbas, or Forbes, and not Mack. Phorbas, Ap. Phorbas, or Phorbasson;
because, for the reason before deduced, not only it, but likewise very many
other more vulgar names, such as George, Henry, Alexander, Andrew, Wat, Tom,
Gib, Dick, Peter, James, etc. pass for surnames, over the whole Isle of
Britain, in the mouths of all; of whom not any, for the proper and peculiar
designation, of several thousands of its inhabitants, is able to afford any
other cognominal denomination. Vocompos was the first in the world that had the
Bears heads to his Arms^ being induced to exchange, by the instigation King of
Solvatius, his Arms of thre^ Lions heads, for the three Bears heads razed^
because of the great exploit, in presence of the King, done by him and his two
foresaid brothers, in killing one morning three wild Bears, in the Caledonian
Forest: the supporters were also changed into two Greyhounds, the Crest and
Impresa remaining still the same a^ it was since the days of Astioremon.
Vocompos, upon Adrolema the daughter of Sciol^^ Douglas, who was the first of
that most noble family, begot

CAROLO, the godson of Charlemain.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4749 124 29 802

Carolo married Trastevole.

This Trastevole was an Italian Lady, and daughter to William, brother to
Achai^ King of the Scots. On her Carolo begot

ENDYMION.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4780 125 31 833

Endymion married Suaviloqua;

And on her begot

SEBASTIAN.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4810 126 30 863

Sebastian married Francolina;

And on her begot

LAWRENCE.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4839 127 29 892

Lawrence married Matilda;

And on her begot

OLIPHER.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4868 128 29 921

Olipher married Allegra;

And on her begot

QUINTIN.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4897 129 29 950

Quintin married Winnifred;

And on her begot

GOODWIN.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4925 130 28 978

Goodwin married Dorothy;

This Goodwin, agnamed Cordat^, on Dorothy begot

FREDERICK.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4960 131 35 1013

Frederick married Lawretta.

He had to his first wife, Castisa the daughter of Banco, Than^ of Lochabber:
but she had no sons to him. To his second wife, he took Lauretta, the daughter
of Patrick D^mbar, Thane and Earl of March; And on her begot

Sir JASPER.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4989 132 29 1042

Sir Jasper married Genivieve.

This Jasper, agnamed Soldurio, was the ^^^enth son begot betwixt Frederick and
Lauretta, without the intermixture of a fe^^ale, and was said to, have had the
dexterity, by a single touch of his hand, to cure the dis^^^^lately called the
King's Evil. He was, for ^^^ valou^, dubbed Knight, by Malcol^^ (...), at
Forfar, in the year of our Lord 10^8: in whose reign, began the surly An. mun.
Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 4989 132 29 104^ names, even of those
Scots that were originally Albionites, by an express command from the King, to
be more heedfully regarded the^ formerly they had been; and that by
dis^^volving the preposited names of the respective owners, from that
patronimical confus^^^ which till this hour is observed in the Highlands of
that Nation, under the designation of Mack before the fathers name (as the
Welsh men use their Ap) in saying Mac-Donald, Mackie, Mackain (and so ^orth,
through all other names, which, either at christenings, or lustrations, have
accordingly been given to their ancestors of the male-kind) for which,
translatitiously, both in England, and the Low Countries of Scotland, we by an
inveterate custom derived from thence, do say as yet, Donaldson, Hughson,
Iohnso^, etc. vicecognomentally distinguishing such persons, by an especial
syllable in the rear of the word, that represents the Sire or prog^^^tor; not
much unlike to the manner of the Greeks, whose fashion was to denominate the
successors of AEacus, Philippus, Hercules, etc. by those Petronymicals,
AEacedes, Philippides, Herculides, and so forth. He on his wife Genevieve begot

Sir ADAM.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 5018 133 29 1071

Sir Adam married Marjorie.

This Sir Adam, agnamed Ardito, was first of the name of Adam that was chief of
the family of Urguhart. He was Knighted by King Edgar at his Coronation at
Scone, anno 1101. On his wife Marjorie who was the daughter of Grissin Prince
of Wales, he begot

EDWARD.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 5047 134 29 1100

Edward married Jane.

This Edward, agnamed Philotimos, begot on Jane, (the sister of Sir Alexander*
Caron who was the first that ever was called Scrimjour) a son, named

RICHARD.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 5075 135 28 1128

Richard married Anne.

This Richard; agnamed Dichoso, on Anne begot

Sir PHILIP.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 5105 136 30 1158

Sir Philip married Magdalene.

This Sir Philip, agnamed Periergos, was knighted by King William (agnamed for
his animosity The Lion) in the year 1186. On his wife Magdalene, who was the
daughter of Gilcrist Earl of Angus, he begot

ROBERT.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 5134 137 29 1187

Robert married Girsel.

This Robert, agnamed De nova sede, upon Girsel, the daughter of Keith Marshal,
begot.

GEORGE.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 5162 138 28 1215

George married Marie.

This George, agnamed Organder, had on Mary the daughter of Crawford Lindsay, a
son named

JAMES.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference Anno Christ. 5191 139 29 1244

James married Sophia.

This James, agnamed A^ol^stanas, beg^^ on his wife Sophia, the daughter of
Ma^du^ Earl of Fif^,

DAVID.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference Anno Christ. 5219 140 28 1272

David married Eleonore.

This David, agnamed Polydorus, on Eleonore, a daughter of the house of Seaton,
begot

FRANCIS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference Anno Christ. 5246 141 27 1299

Francis married Rosalind.

This Francis, agnamed Philogynes, bego^ on Rosalind, the daughter of Gilbert
Hay of Arrol, a son named

WILLIAM.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference Anno Christ. 5261 142 15 1314

William married Lillias.

An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 5261 142 15 1314

His first wife was Lillias, the daughter of Hugh Earl of Rosse: to his second
wife, he took Violet Cumming, the daughter of John Cumming* Earl of Buchan, and
Lord of Straboghie, at which marriage Hugh Earl of Ross, was so incensed, that
he begged of King Robert the Bruce, the gift of his forfeiture; because the
Cumming had been disloyal to him, whatever the Kings facility was, this William
Urquhart carried himself so lovingly toward King Robert, that when almost all
Scotland was possessed by King Edward's faction, and his Lands at Cromartie
altogether overrun by them, and his house Garrisoned and victualed, with three
years provision of all necessaries for one hundred men, he by a stratagem
gained the Castle, and with the matter of forty men, keept it out against the
forces of Edward, for the space of seven years and a half, during which time,
all his Lands there were totally wasted, and his Woods burnt; so that having
nothing then he could properly call his own, but the mote-hill only of
Cromartie, which he fiercely maintained against the enemies; he was agnamed
Gulielmus De monte alto, at An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 5261
142 15 1314 last William Wallace came to his relief (but, as I conceive, it was
the brothers son of the renowned William) who in a little den, within two miles
of Cromartie (till this hour called Wallace den) killed six hundred of King
Edward's unfortunate forces. Afterward raising the siege from about the
mote-hill of Cromartie, by the assistance of his namesake, the other William,
the shire of Cromartie was totally purged of the enemy: and shortly after by
King David, son to the said King Robert, confirmed upon Adam, son to the
aforesaid William, with all privileges, royalties and immunities, that to the
said William formerly did belong, which the Earl of Ross consented unto, upon
whose daughter, Lillias by name, the said William bagot

ADAM.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 5288 143 27 1341

Adam married Brigid.

This Adam, who was Adam the third, but second amongst the chiefs of the house
of Urquhart was agnamed Philalbianax, because of his love to the King of Scots.
On Brigida, the daughter of Robert Fleeming of Cummernald, he begot

JOHN.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 5312 144 24 1365

John married Agnes.

This John agnamed Aroimon, on Agnes, the daughter of Sir Alexander Ramsey of
Dahousie, begot

Sir WILLIAM.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 5341 145 29 1394

Sir William married Susanna.

This Sir William, being the second of that name, was Knighted by King Robert
the second (who before his Coronation was named John) in the year of Christ
1416. On his wife Susanna, the daughter of Forbes of that ilk, he begot

WILLIAM.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 5386 146 45 1439

William.

This William, the third of that name took to wife one Elze, the daughter of
Pitstigo, but having no issue male of her, there succeeded to him his own
brother German

ALEXANDER.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 5392 147 6 1445

Alexander married Catherine.

This Alexander, the first of that name, was agnamed Ab imo clivo, before he
attained to be chief of the family of the Urquharts, from this Alexander's
second son, is descended lineally, that learned and valourous Gentleman,
Colonel John Urquhart, now in Germany, who for many years together, most
faithfully discharged the duty of Lieutenant Colonel to the Queen Regnant of
Swedeland. Upon his wife Catharine, who was a daughter of the house of
Finlatour, he begot

THOMAS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 5423 148 31 1476

Thomas married Helen.

He was agnamed Paterhemon, because he had of his wife Helen Abernethie, a
daughter of my Lord Salton, five and twenty sons, all men, and eleven daughters
all married women; seven of those sons were killed at the battle of Pinckie, and
of some of those others of them that traveled with great gallantry to Foreign
Countries, is descended (as I am informed) that worthy Knight in Devonshire;
called Sir John Urquhart, who both for his considerable fortune, and far
greater merit, is highly renowned in the south parts of England, as likewise
several families near Carlisle, designed by the name of Urquhart, of such
estimation there, that (as I was told) some of them not long ago, have been
Majors of the City, and Sheriffs of the County, to this Thomas, succeeded his
son

ALEXANDER.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 5445 249 22 1498

Alexander married Beatrice.

This Alexander, the second of that name, was called Obrimos, the fourth son of
this Alexander and the foresaid Beatrice, named John, who afterward was better
known by the title of Tutor of Cromartie; was over all Britain renowned for his
deep reach of natural wit, and great dexterity in acquiring of many Lands and
great possessions, with all men's applause. Upon this Beatrice Innes, daughter
of Achintoule, he begot

WALTER
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 5482 150 37 1535

Walter married Elizabeth.

This Walter, who was agnamed Exaftallocrinas, because he judged of other men
by himself, upon Elizabeth Mackenzie daughter to Seaforte (then designed
Mackenzie of that Ilk) begot

HENRY.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 5502 151 20 1555

Henry married Elizabeth.

This Henry agnamed Acompos, on Elizabeth Ogilvy, daughter of Bamf, begot

Sir THOMAS.
An. mun. Series. Com. difference. Anno Christ. 5532 152 30 1585

Sir Thomas married Christian.

This Sir Thomas the second of that name, was Knighted by King James at
Edinburgh, in the year 1617. And upon his wife Christian Elphinstoun, who as
yet lives, and is the daughter of Alexander Lord Elphinstoun, he begot

Sir THOMAS. agnamed Parresiastes.
This Sir Thomas who now lives, and is the third of that name, chief of the
honorable house of the Urquharts, was Knighted by King Charles in White Hall
gallery, in the year 1641 the 7 of April. and is in line, and by succession to
his most remarkable predecessors, the same in number orderly as is set down in
the subsequent Table, the first figure denotes the line, the second the
succession.

The said Sir Thomas, is By Line By succession* From Adam the 143 153 From Noah
the 134 144 From Esormon the 128 138 From Molin the 108 114 From Rodrigo the
100 104 From Alypos the 91 94 From Char the 76 79 From Astioremon the 68 71
From Lutork the 67 69 From Zeron the 32 33 From Vocompos the 30 31

This Genealogy was deduced
Anno Mundi 5598 Anno Esormonis 3789 Anno Molini 3184 Anno Rodrici 2943 Anno
Alypo^ 2669 Anno Chari 2202 Anno Astioremonis 2011 Anno Lutorci 1986 Anno
Christi 1651 Anno Zeronis 937 Anno Vocompotis 878

SUBDICTIS.
BY the chief of the Family, Sir Thomas Urquhart by name, the History of the
lives of all these his predecessors is already broached, he making account to
finish it how soon the amicable influence of the State (in dependence whereupon
his fortune is involved) will, by acquitting him of his Parole (wherein to them
he stands engaged) be pleased to release him, and in giving him full enjoyment
of his own, allow him the leisure to go about it, and other things of greater
importance.

The History being continued from the Creation of the world, till this present
time, will contain many specious Synchronisms, worthy of remark, and as it
comprehends all the time thatis past, so shall few actions of moment, or
persons of either sex, that have been illustrious for any commendable quality,
escape the tract of that his Pen, which treats of their contemporaneans.

POSTILLA.
IN the great Chronicle of the house of Urquhart, the aforesaid Sir Thomas
purposes (by Gods assistance) to make ^^ention of the illustrious families
from ^^ence descended, which as yet are in e^^eem in the Countries of Germany,
Bo^^mia, Italy, France, Spain, England, Scotland, Ireland, and several other
Nations of warmer climate, adjacent to that famous territory of Greece, the
lovely mo^^er of this most ancient and honorable ^^em.

How by the iniquity of time, and con^^sion of languages, their Names have ^^en
varied, their coat Armor altered, ^^d as new sians transplanted unto another
soil, without any reference almost to the stock from whence they sprung.

And how many Towns, Castles, Churches, Fountains, Rivers, Nasses, Bays,
Harbors, and such like, have from the name ^^ Urquhart received their
denomination.

He likewise intends to omit the nominating of no family wherewith at any
tim^ the foresaid house has contracted allianc^ which for more compendiousness
has i^ the contexture of this epitomie been of ^^^ purpose left out.

As also to set down the Branches of the foresaid Name in order as they sprung
from the root, together with their alliances, exploits, and other notorie
things; delectable even to those that have no interest i^ the family.

Why the Shire of Cromartie alone; ^^ all the places of the I Will of Britain
has the names of its Towns, Villages, Hamlet^^ Dwellings, Promontories,
Hillocks, Temples, Dens, Groves, Fountains, River^^ Pools, Lakes, Stone heaps,
Akers, and s(...)forth; of pure and perfect Greek.

And finally, For confirmation of the truth in deriving of his extractio^ ^^^m
the Jonian race of the Princes Achaia, and in the deduction of all ^^^
considerable particulars of the whole (...)y, is resolved to produce
testimonies of ^^^abick, Greek, Latin, and other writers of ^^^ch authentic
approbation, that we may (...)ldly from thence infer consequences of no (...)
infallible verity, then any that is not ^ounded on Faith, by means of a divine
illu^^ination, as is the story of the Bible: or on ^^ason, by virtue of the
unavoidable infe^^ce of a necessary concluding demonstra^^^^, as that of the
Elements of Euclid, which being the greatest evidence that in (...)y Nrrration
of that kind is to be expe^^^d, the judicious Reader is bid farewell, ^^^m whom
the Author for the time most ^^mbly takes his leave.

FINIS.

