A LETTER To a Member of the CONVOCATION OF THE UNIVERSITY of OXFORD:
Containing the CASE Of a Late Fellow Elect of University-College IN THAT
UNIVERSITY.

LONDON Printed, and to be Sold by John Nutt, near Stationers' Hall. 1699.

A LETTER TO A Member of the Convocation OF THE UNIVERSITY of OXFORD.
SIR,
YOU may remember, I was Elected Fellow of University-College in December last,
but disapproved of by the Delegates of Convocation (for such, and not Visitors,
I must crave leave to call them) the Reverend the Vice Chancellor, Doctors of
Divinity, and Proctors; Whereupon, as the Statute-Book and Register of that
College Directed me, I proceeded to Appeal from that severe Sentence of theirs,
to the Judgment of our Supreme and Primary Visitors, the Convocation: The
Appeal I then lodged, I now design to Prosecute; and in order thereto it will
not, I think, be improper, or unnecessary for me to Premise these Two Things;

1. To make out to you, and, through you, to the Convocation in general, my
Right of Appealing, and the Convocation's of Receiving and Determining my
Appeal:

2. To Propose, and Answer those Objections the Master urged against me, before
Mr. Vice Chancellor, Doctors of Divinity, and Proctors to prevent their
Approbation of me: That, to remind them of a Power, their Ancestors formerly
did, and they still may Exercise, and this, to incline them to make favorable
use of it to the Redress of my Grievances.

To manage the First of these Two particulars aright, will, I foresee, require
more Law, more knowledge in the College Register and Statutes than my
Misfortunes have yet taught me; therefore I shall leave that part to a Friend,
who is able to set off your Title to much better advantage: But to Answer to
the Crimes alleged against me, as it cannot properly be expected from any
other, but immediately from my self, so it is a Task which, notwithstanding all
my Troubles, I hope, I need not be afraid to undertake; since Innocence asks
only the simplicity of Truth, and not much Subtilty, or Law to defend itself.

But before I enter upon what I have already proposed, give me leave, I pray,
to acquaint you a little with the Usage which I have all along met with from
the Master, especially, for some time before the Election; that in the end you
may be the better able to judge, Whether all that Heat, and Vehemence which Dr.
Charlett has of late prosecuted me with, did not arise rather from somewhat
else, than any Crimes which I have been guilty of.

You must know then, I had not lived much past Two Years in University-College,
till, to my no small trouble and discouragement, the Master began to discover a
particular dislike of, and aversion toward me; upon every slight occasion,
slight indeed, if I had not given it. He was pleased to Sconce, Cross, or
Impose me (for these you know are the several Punishments we have in Colleges)
expressing at the same time such Anger and Resentment, as that it could not be
long doubted whether of the Two he intended more, to Torment the Person, or
Punish and Correct the Offender. This Mr. Hudson my Tutor very well knows, who
has often expressed both his wonder, and concern at it; and so do all my
Contemporaries who have often pitied and condol'd my Misfortune: But why, the
Master was pleased to be thus Severe upon me, more than any other Scholar
besides, neither could they, nor I ever at any time learn. That I used to
frequent Prayers and Sacraments, duely-perform and attend the Exercise, and
other ordinary Duties of the House, I hope, I shall hereafter sufficiently
prove to you; and he never thought fit to upbraid me with any particular
Misdemeanour to my Face, or otherwise privately Admonish me of any by a Friend;
and if he had known me guilty of any, how little soever he cared for me, he
would so far, sure, have endeavored my amendment, as to have told me of my
Faults. There Is one Passage, which, because it was the first occasion the
Master had to be angry with me, I must not omit to mention: It Is a Custom the
Scholars observe in our Chapel, to Rise, out of respect, when the Master comes
in, and to continue standing till the Reader begin; this piece of Ceremony I
always performed, as duly and constantly, as any of the rest, saving once,
when the Reader happened to stay a pretty while after the Master, I was so
negligent as to fit down, whilst others were so careful as to keep standing;
this the Master unhappily observed, and severely Reprimanded me for it; and it
was the first pretense he had to find fault with me, and the only time he ever
charged me with Disrespect; but whatever notice the Master might take of this
neglect at present, it was too small and trifling for him sure, to remember
long: And therefore, I was often told, and greatly suspected myself, that a
certain College-servant, whom for very substantial Reasons I could never agree
with, used ever to feed and increase with false Stories and Misrepresentations,
the Prejudice the Master at first took against me; but certainly, the Master
would not give more credit to the Report of an infamous College Servant, than
to the Testimony of the Fellows; therefore I ask his pardon if, while I am
guessing at the hidden cause of this strange, and unaccountable Partiality
toward me, I happen to assign a less honorable one. Whatever the matter was,
as he had begun, so he was pleased to continue his Severity upon me, till I
came to about Four Years standing, i. e. till I took an occasion to go into
Cumberland, a considerable distance from him; but I had not stayed there much
past half a Year, till my Tutor writ to me very kindly to come up in all haste,
and appear a Canditate for a Fellowship which was at that time Vacant: I came
up accordingly, took my Degree, and stood for the Fellowship, but happened, if
some of my best Friends have not since Complimented me, to come up at that time
a little too late to succeed in my Atempt: However the Gentleman who now enjoys
that Fellowship so justly deserves it, and is so very well beloved in the
Society, that, whatever Troubles my Success at that time would have prevented,
which have since fallen upon me, I cannot be so injurious to the College, as to
wish my self in his Place.

But to return: Now that I had had the Hardship to be turned by the Fellowship
(for my Tutor used ever to call their Electing a Stranger before me at that
time a Hardship upon me) I was in hopes the Master would in Compassion abate
somewhat of his wonted Rigor and Severity toward me, and suffer me to live
more easily and quietly under him; nevertheless he began to treat me again at
the same or worse rate than formerly, and, as far as I could ghess, was
resolved so to continue; for as my Friends, as well Fellows, as others, have
often told me, wherever they happened to mention me to any advantage (for some
there ever were who from the beginning designed me better Things than what has
befalen me) there would he be sure to Express his uneasiness, and divert the
Discourse with a Frown. And indeed this particular Aversion of the Master's
toward me, which as I could never learn the cause of it, so I was never any
ways likely to abate, did so far affect and discourage me in my Studies, That,
though I was ever designed for Divinity, and had spent some Years, and taken a
Degree in order to it, yet, as my Tutor may very well remember, I advised with
him about quitting the University, though I had fewer Friends any where else, and
did not well know what other Calling to betake my self to. My Tutor was very
much against my leaving the University, but quickly after was convinced of the
reasonableness of my leaving the College; and it was upon this memorable
Passage which, because I once thought it had happily ended in the confusion of
some malicious Slanderers, and a perfect understanding for the future betwixt
the Master and me, it will not be amiss to relate to you at large; The Master
was pleased this Year to order me to speak a Speech, a Custom we Annually
observe on St. Simon and Jude's Day, in Commemoration of our Founders, but
happened to give but about a Fortnights warning to make it in: Hence it was
that my Thoughts and Studies being otherwise necessarily engaged, I was not at
liberty to fit and prepare my self for the Holy Sacrament which in the mean
time came to be Administered; nevertheless the Master crossed my Name, and
appeared extremely offended, I heard, at my missing the Sacrament; and when I
waited upon him to remind him of the business I had in my Hands, the short
warning I had to do it in, and the necessity of finishing it by such a time, he
discharged me in a great Passion from speaking the Speech, and sent me away
with many bitter Reproaches of Impudence and Confidence; whereupon my Tutor,
who knew how busy I was all the Week long, and even Sunday too, in composing
and writing a Speech, which was to be repeated Memoriter on Wednesday
following, and therefore the more excusable for missing the Sacrament, told me
there was no living quietly for me in this College, and advised me to resign my
Scholarship (for by this time I had been Elected Scholar of the House) and
desire a Decessit; And go, says he, enter your self at Oriel-College, and he
was pleased to add, where you need not doubt of a Fellowship; I went
accordingly, resigned my Schollarship, but was for some days denied my
Decessit: In the mean while came the day of Solemnity when the Fellows thought
fit to wait upon the Master, and desire that I might have his leave to speak
the Speech: The Master returned, and therein gave the true reason of all his
Wrath and Indignation against me upon this occasion, whatever he was pleased to
pretend about my missing the Sacrament, That he was informed I had a design to
abuse him in it, a Crime as far from my Thoughts as it would have been impudent
and intolerable; whereupon my Speech was immediately sent for, read over, and
returned back to be spoken without any Corrections: After this, the Master was
pleased to send for me and deliver me my Decessit, which he before had denied
me: But meeting with some Friends, who seemed sorry to part with me, and my old
Acquaintance being desirous of my stay, I was at last persuaded to wait again
upon the Master, and beg leave to continue in the College; and here it was that
I began to hope that the Master would forget the Prejudice some secret
Whisperers had hitherto fomented in him against me, and leave me a fair way to
pursue his Favor in for the future; for taking occasion to express how sorry I
was that I should have the misfortune to fall under his particular Displeasure,
and promising, That, if he would be pleased to discover to me what it was in my
Behavior that so offended him, I would with diligence seek to amend: He was
then pleased to answer (for I very well remember the Expression because it was
the only one of its kind I ever received from him) Well! well! it is no matter;
mind your business and I shall look forwards and not backwards. But for all
this, though I do not know that he has thought fit to upbraid me with any
Misdemeanor whatever from this very time down to this Second Election, i. e.
for a whole Year and more last past (for the Crime he charges me with last did
not appear to him, he says, till a Week before the Election) you shall hear how
kind he has been pleased to be to me since.

Though I was Senior, and, as you may observe, had once already been turned by a
Fellowship, and a Senior, you know, they are seldom, or never so unkind as to
disregard, especially, when he happens to lie under the discouragement of a
former Repulse, Nevertheless, as soon as this Fellowship, which we now Dispute
about, sell Vacant, he was pleased to declare in behalf of Mr. Denison, my
Junior, and begun to talk of appointing an Election out of hand, to fill up the
Vacany: But when he understood that the Fellows discovered more Favor for the
Senior than what he either wished for, or expected, he then thought fit to
suspend it, till in the mean time he might one way or other, engage a Majority
of them against me; and this he endeavors no less earnestly by the Interest,
and Intercession of Friends, than his own Solicitations; insomuch, that there
was scarce a Day past, wherein some or other did not Speak, or Write in favor
of my Competitor; the Master all this time, to facilitate his own, and their
Endeavors, either quarrelling at, and despising my Scholarship, or else
traducing my Morals, cruelly aggravating every the least Fault, which once in
Seven Years time I had happened to commit, into a gross Crime, and Enormity:
Nay, so fully was he bent to prevent my Success, that, when during the time of
this Vacancy, he might have Recommended Mr. Denison, my Competitor, by the
Joint-interest of his own, and that of the Fellows, to have been Preferred
either at Oriell, or Lincoln Colleges; yet, contrary to all their inclinations,
he would have him stay to oppose me; whereas I on the other side, either at
that time, or any time else, was capable of appearing but at one other College
in the whole University besides our own, nor that indeed with any probability
of Success: for the Master had showed too great a dislike of me, to leave me
any hopes of obtaining his Recommendations; or if he, and the Fellows had both
been so kind as to have agreed together to set me out with a good Character it
is not probable it would have availed me very much, when they themselves had
thought fit to turn me by a Fellowship once, and were ready to do it again,
especially at such a time when it might have been supposed, I had a fair Claim
to that Vacant One of our own by the Right and Privilege of Seniority: And
what is worse than all this, he was pleased to deny me the common favor of a
Commutation of Terms, which all the rest of the Chancellors's worthy Delegates
thought sit to allow me; whereby he has not only deprived me a present of the
Benefit and advantage of my Degree (a thing the University is with good reason
so tender in as nothing more) but has since found out Means, I am afraid, to
debar me of it for ever.

When he saw that all, which he had hitherto done, was likely to prove
ineffectual, and that after Examinations were over, every Fellow in the House,
except Mr. Smith, was pleased to Approve of me, he then betakes himself to a
foolish, ridiculous Story, which Wanly the Servitor, not without the advice and
contrivance of my Competitor, and his Two intimate Cronies Mr. Woods, and
Pricket Butler, as I shall more probably suggest to you, by and by, some Days
before had thought fit to inform him of; and what this was, you will best
understand, after I have told what past in the Master's Lodgings, when to my
great surprise, I was Summoned thither, before the Master, and Four of the
Fellows the Day before the Election (for then, and not till then, did I hear a
Syllable of this Objection against me, though, it seems, it has for some
considerable time been referv'd for a Pinch.)

1. Mr. Woods [A. B.] came and told them, That about a Year and a half agon, he
heard me frequently for near a Month together, say, That the Master was a
Familiar with such a Gentleman, naming him, as he was with Mr. Tanner, and he
took the Word Familiar, to be there meant in a Carnal Sense, for the Young
Gentleman who sat at the Table with me at the same time, blushed nnd asked me,
If I was not ashamed to talk so? With this, the Master turns hastily about, and
asks me in a passion, What I could say to all this? I told him, I never
thought, or said such a thing of him, as Mr. Wood saggested, in all my Life.
Again, he asked me, Whether I ever I hud heard such a Story of him, or no?
After some pause, I answered Yes, I could not say, but I had once heard such a
Story of him (for Mr. Woods had now renewed that in my Mind, which probably, I
should never have remembered of my self) but what I had heard was a foolish
Jest, told me near 5, or 6 Years ago, of the Master and Editors, and not of Mr.
Tanner, or any other Person in particular; and upon further Examination, I at
length told him of whom, and in what manner I heard it.

Next comes in Mr. Grenwood, [A. B.] and after him Wanly the Informer, each of
them in order told their several Stories, which, since they do not affect me,
it is not necessary here to repeat.

All then, that was Alleged against me at this time, was, That I used to tell
a Young Gentleman, That the Master was grown as familiar with him, as he was
with Mr. Tanner. But by next Morning, which was Election-time, Mr. Woods had
very much improved his Story; it was now no longer the Master was as familiar
with such a Gentleman, as he was with Mr. Tanner, That happened to be a more
soft and modest Expression of his own, but the Master used to Ride such an one,
and make him a second Tom. Tanner. With this improvement, the Master Read it to
the Eellows when they were met together to Elect, who thought it very odd, that
the Gentleman should vary thus in his Evidence, and since he was such a
particular Friend of Mr. Denison's, did not know, but the whole might be a
Contrivance to promote his Interest; which they did the more justly suspect,
because it was trump'd up the very Day before the Election, was not delivered
upon Oath, and whether under his Hand they did not know; for the Master, when
they desired to see it, refused to show it them; and when they would have
Examined the Witnesses in his presence, he absented him self, sent for them to
his Lodgings, and ordered them to give the Fellows no Information; nay, when
Mr. Greenwood, thinking that too great a disrespect to be shown to the Fellows,
ventured to come and tell them that little which he knew of the Matter, he
forthwith sent for him, and fell to Threaten him again at the same Rate as he
had before done when he found him backward to come in a Witness against me,
telling him, He would pluck the Gown over his Ears, and Expel him the College:
I say, notwithstanding the Fellows thought, that they had hereupon good reason
to give no credit to Mr. Woods's Story, and judged themselves not civilly
Treated, yet, because they would preserve the Peace of the College, if
possible, and pay what Respect was due to the Reputation of a Person in his
Station, they offered the Master, That I should ask his Pardon in what manner
he pleased, or submit to any Punishment he would inflict for the Crime he
supposed me Guilty of. After repeated offers of this kind to no purpose, they
made him this further Proposal, That if he pleased, they would agree to the
putting off the Election till the Gentleman, to whom Mr. Wood said, the Words
were spoken to, could be sent for, and that if he, who was equally Reflected
upon with the Master, and had the most reason to remember them, would confirm
Mr. Wood's Testimony, that then, not a Man of them would any longer appear for
me, but deliver me up, and leave me to his Mercy. So different was the
Behavior of the Fellows from that of the Master upon this Occasion, tho the
Power in that College is equally in their own Hands, and all Things are to be
Determined there by a majority. After several Adjournments that Day, the Master
at last seemed very desirous to have the Election put off for one half Hour
longer; which when the Fellows had agreed to, he sends for Mr. Hinckley, and
tells him, he had another Witness, Mr. Denison, and he would Swear to the same
purpose; if he thought this material, he might Communicate it to the rest of
the Fellows, if not he should keep it secret. Mr. Hinckley returned, and with
very good reason too, That he did not take a Competitor's Evidence to be very
material, and for his part should not regard it. The Fellows therefore, knowing
me clear from all other Exceptions, and laying no stress upon what Mr. Woods
alleged without the concurrent Testimony of the Gentleman to whom the Words
were spoken, at the next Meeting did me the Honor to Elect me.

Thus have I given you a brief Account of the Master's good Inclinations
toward me, from the time I was Two Years standing, till the time I was Elected
Fellow: Come I to what I at first chiefly intended, namely, To Propose, and
Answer those Objections the Master urged against me, before Mr. Vice
Chancellor, Doctors of Divinity, and Proctors to prevent their Approbation of
me.

The Election being over, and Mr. Vice Chancellor, Doctors, and Proctors being
met together the Day following in the Master's Lodgings, in order to approve,
or disapprove the Party Elected, Dr. Bouchier, the Master's Advocate, Read a
long and black Indictment against me, setting me forth, As a notorious
neglecter of Prayers, a scandalous despiser of the Holy Sacraments, and an
infamous Noctivagator; one who was obstinate and contumacious in his Temper,
deaf to all Advice, and proof against Correction; one who had wilfully and
deliberately Perjured himself in the Face of the University, and lasty, had
uttered scandalous Words against the Master, Words too gross and heinous to be
repeated. And indeed, if they could but once have made out what they so
furiously alleged, Mr. Woods [the Master's Second Advocate] might then with
great Justice have inferred, That I was neither fit for that Society I was
designed for, nor for any Society at all. But the Proof, it seems, which was
brought to make good all the Hard Names Dr. Bouchier was pleased to call me,
was such, that I have since, to my comfort, heard, several of the Reverend
Doctors should say, They were, notwithstanding very well satisfied with my
Character; and Mr. Smith, the only Fellow who opposed my Election, was so kind
as to confess to me, that very Morning I took my leave of him, That my Friends
had bore that Testimony of me, in answer to all other Objections, except that
one relating to the Master, that he thought I could not justly be upbraided
with them hereafter: But because the Master, and his Friends have,
notwithstanding, since been very Cruel in their Misrepresentations of me, at
other Places, as well as at Oxon, threatening, To make all the Bishops in
England deny me Holy Orders, I ask you pardon if I enlarge a little upon so
just and necessary a Defense.

And here, I must readily own, and confess to you, That in all these Seven
Years, I have sometimes mist Prayers, at one time or other absented myself from
Sacraments, and sometimes been abroad after Nine a Clock; but that I have been
so far Peccant in any of these Instances of my Duty, as to come short of those
who stand the fairest in the Master's favor, or to lose at any time the
Character of a Regular Student: This I hope you will as readily allow me, when
I have told you, that the Reverend Mr. Naylor, Mr Hinckley, and the Honorable
Mr. Bertie, did all Three bear ample Testimony before the Delegates to my
Regular Observance of these several Duties; and, if those Gentlemen had
pleased, they might have heard all the rest of the Fellows to the same purpose,
except Mr. Smith, and he, which is Testimony sufficient, can say nothing to the
contrary.

But I pass on to the Charge of Stubbornness and Contumacy. The Instances they
bring of this untoward temper of Mind, are Two. The I. Drawn from the manner of
resigning my Scholarship. The II. From my not asking off Sconces.


In answer to the first of these, I need only refer you to what I have already
set down Page 5, 6. where you may observe, I did not in a bravading manner
throw up my Scholarship, but with the advice of my Tutor resign it; and that
too, upon a very prudent Consideration, in hopes, after some proof given there
of my Manners and Behavior, I might succeed in a Fellowship at Oriel-College,
since, according to the Usage I met with from the Master, I could not expect
one in our own. But I happened to make use of a Word in my Resignation, which I
understand since, gave some offense: It seems I called my Scholarship
Portiuncula exhibitionis, and the reason was, because that same Benefaction
used to be held formerly entire, and given all to one: But the Fellows upon
discovery of the Donor's Will, saw reason to divide it, and gave one Half,
which was Fifty Shillings a Year to me, and I thought I had hit upon a very
proper Word to express the half of a Scholarship, though I am very sorry to find
that the propriety of the Word should be misconstru'd resentment.

2 dly. As to the second Instance of Stubbornness, my not asking off Sconces.
For the first Two Years, or more, I believe, I was never Sconced at all; and
afterward, as I remember, the Master and Dean used always to give them out to
the Poor, lest they should be troubled every time with this and the other Scholar
asking off his Penny and Two Pence; and so say all my Contemporaries; some of
whom, never asked off a Sconce in all their time. Of late, since the Master has
expected it, I have for the most part ventured to go and ask them off, though I
was sure, when ever I went, to be very roughly received. Some few times indeed,
I have forborne to ask them off, choosing rather to lose my Sconces, than to
remind him of them, to his, and my own uneasiness.

Since the Master has forgot it, I crave leave to remind him of another
Instance besides of my Stubbornness and disobedience toward him, which is
this: Soon after I had succeeded in this Scholarship, which I a little before
mentioned, there was another fell Vacant, better than the former, and the
Master fore seeing that I was likely to be Advanced to it, sends for Mr.
Hinckley, whom he suspected wuo'd prove my Friend, and tells him; There was a
Young Gentleman, naming him, in the College, whom he had a great kindness for,
and asked him, What he thought of Electing him into this Scholarship? My Friend
was pleased to make kind mention of me at that time, saying, I was Senior, and
he thought, the Fellows could not well deny me, if I should happen to stand
sor't: But, added he to the Master, here are several North-Country Fellowships
in the House, and if you will please to be so kind as to give him any hopes of
obtaining your Favor, when in time he shall become capable of one, I suppose,
he will for the present be glad to recede, and give place to whom you think
fit. This he agrees to, and word was brought me, of the fair opportunity I had,
of engaging the Master under promise hereafter to be kind to me. Which you may
he sure, I was very glad to embrace, dreaming of nothing, but of the
North-Country Fellowship the Master was to help me to, and little thinking, he
would prove the only means to turn me out of one, and afterward Expel me, into
the bargain. But after all this stubborness, and contumacy, the Master was
pleased to upbraid me with, I hope, he cannot say, but I carried him readily
all the Impositions he ever thought fit to set me, and that too, when others,
who were Imposed at the same time, were never called upon for theirs; and that
I waited upon him duly, and submissively upon all occasions, though I have often
gone Three or Four times before he would allow me to see him: And Lastly, I
Appeal to the several Officers of the College (whom I have had occasion now and
then, to appear before) who are all ready to deliver a much different Character
of my Temper.

I proceed to that heavy and black Crime of wilful and deliberate Perjury, a
Crime which they themselves, to be sure, must needs distrust the proof of, else
I do not see what occasion they had to trouble themselves any farther. It seems
they produce you a Letter from a Country Attorney, who tells them, That My
Father died in such and such Circumstances, and left me an Estate of one
Hundred and Twenty Pounds per Annum: This Estate they say I made away with upon
taking my Degree, to avoid the Charges of Compounding, and so they fetch about
the Crime of Perjury. Perhaps word might be sent this Attorney, that I was
courting a Fortune instead of standing for a Fellowship, which made my
Countryman give such an Honorable Account of my Estate; how ever a Person of
Quality, whose Honorable Father was my Guardian, and therefore he may very
well be supposed to know my Circumstances somewhat better than their Country
Attorney, upon notice given him of this Objection against me, sent the Fellows
a much different and truer account of my Fortune; so that, there remains
nothing for me to add more, but to leave them to answer for the
uncharitableness of their Censure.

I have gone thus far in the Indictment, and I hope cleared myself too, as far
as I have gone, of the Aspersions cast upon me; and now to give you a
sufficient Testimony, once for all, of my Carriage and Behavior, in opposition
to all other Exceptions, as well as these. Be pleased to consider, that the
Fellows were so well satisfied with it, that not a Faction, or a Party, but
every Fellow in the House, except Mr. Smith, declared on my side, as well those
who were absent, as those who were present; nay, those very Fellows, who were
otherwise willing to oblige the Master, could not by all his Solicitations be
drawn from me, till their last Objection was raised against me, and then only,
to suspend their Votes, not to give them against me; and this is more, I hope
you will pardon the Vanity of the Observation where it is so necessary, than any
Candidate in our House, who was once ever opposed, can boast of.

Come we now to their last and greatest Objection namely, The Words said to be
spoken against the Master; but because the Master did not only prefer these
Words as an Objection against my Manners and Behavior, and thereby got me
tum'd by the Fellowship; but, when that was done, for the very same Words
commenced his Action against me in the Vice-Chancellor's Court, and procured my
Expulsion, and that too, whilst an Appeal was depending; and since the Evidence
given in against me before the Reverend the Delegates, happened to be repeated
afterward in Court, not without some Alterations and Additions, as well as
fresh Witnesses produced, I shall for the present wave what was Sworn
concorning this Particular in the Master's Lodgings, and hasten to Examine
their Proof, where I find it delivered at large: only before I go any farther,
give me leave to say a Word or two to what the Master it seems was pleased to
tell the Delegates, about his denying me my Degree, and his Admonishing me one
time about my missing the Sacrament;

1. He was pleased to tell the Vice Chancellor Doctors and Proctors, that the
reason why he denied me my Degree was, because I went about to get a Letter
without first acquainting him with it, a Reason very different from what he was
pleased to give me; for not mentioning a Syllable of my going to get a Letter
without first acquainting him, he told me, As I had stayed so much longer than
I needed to have done Undergraduate for my own pleasure, so I should be forced
to stay as long Batchellor for his. But how I behaved myself upon this
occasion, I shall here punctually relate to you. When I became standing for my
Master's Degree (which was in Michaelmas Term last) I waited upon Mr. Smith,
the Senior Fellow (for the Master was at that time absent) to desire leave,
that the Terms which I had kept supernumerary to my Batchellor's Degree should
be transferred, and accounted to my Master's (a favor every day asked, and as
commonly granted in the University) Mr. Smith seemed very well satisfied but
withal told me, It would look more respectful to wait the Master's return, and
take his leave; accordingly, as soon as I had desired the Register to draw me
up a Letter, and lodge it ready in Mr. Sherwin, the Beadle's Hand, I stayed and
expected the Master's return; The Master being come, I waited upon him,
desiring of him the same Favor, as I had done of Mr. Smith: He neither granted
nor denied it me, but took time to consider of it; whereupon I went straight to
Mr. Shewin, and ordered Him to have a care not to present my Letter to the
Delegates till further notice: Mr. Sherwin accordingly, as he was going to get
other Letters Subscribed ready for the Convocation, calls to know what he must
do with mine: I promised to come an Hour after and tell him: Whilst I went to
learn the Master's Resolution, Mr. Sherwin, whether to save labor, or
presuming more upon the Master's Favor than I durst do, gives my Letter
amongst the rest to be Signed, and when I came to bid him lay it aside, I found
it to my surprise Subscribed by all the other Delegates; however, I did not
offer to make any Use or Advantage of it; and what the Master can quarrel at in
all this, I cannot imagine, unless it be for coming officiously to ask his Leave
to commute my Terms, which no Body, it seems, is obliged to do; But however
Things have since happened, I am loath to repent of any respect which I have
paid him.

2ly, He says, He one time sent for me, and cordilly admonished me about
missing the Sacrament, and withal, was so kind as to give me Archbishop
Tillotson's Discourse concerning frequent Communion to read over: I returned
soon after, delivered back the Book, and told him very pertly I did not like
the Doctrine.

I very well remember about Six of us (amongst whom were the two Evidences, Mr.
Wood, and Mr. Denison,) mist Sacrament once; the Master sent for us, and
ordered us for our Punishment, to Translate the Treatise abovementioned into
Latin; in some competent time I finished the Translation, and carried it (which
by the bye, none but Mr. Laurence and I ever did) but that the Master was
neither so kind, at that time, as to admonish me about missing the Sacrament,
or recommend that Book to me, any otherwise than the bare ordering me, amongst
the rest, to Translate it might imply, all those Six can bear me witness; and I
solemnly declare, That neither upon that occasion, or any other, did I offer to
express to the Master my like or dislike of the Doctrine there delivered in any
manner whatever, as I remember; and if I had done it, as the Master pretends, I
am apt to believe he would have given me good cause not to have forgot it.

This being said, I pass on to tell you, That after the Delegates had thought
fit to disannul the Election, I little thought then of Appealing from their
Sentence: I comforted myself in my loss, as well as I could, with the Zeal and
Affection my Friends had openly showed me upon this occasion; and was more
sorry to think I was to live apart from a Society, which appeared to love me so
well, than any thing else: but when I heard the Master of Arts, from whose
Voices I expected relief in Convocation, talk compassionately of my Case, and
Dr. Charlett, not satisfied with the loss of my Fellowship began afresh to
threaten me with Expulsion; and when I saw Mr. Denison, who from a Friend and a
Competitor had turned my Accuser, going to be Elected by the Master, and Four
of the Fellows, into that very place he had before Sworn me out of I was then
either encouraged or provoked to Appeal: And indeed I dare almost put it upon
any one to say, whether in the like case he would not have done, as I have;
for, to put the matter as they would have it, Mr. Denison heard me now and then
make merry with some odd Words at Table, which he interpreted to imply Scandal
upon the Master, but it seemed so light a thing to him at that time, that he
did not think it worth his time, either to advise his Friend to forbear, or to
inform the Master of the Abuse; about Two Years after I was likely to carry
away a Fellowship before him, he calls to mind this old Affront past upon the
Master, and though he did not go and inform the Master of it, he set Wanly to
do it, and came in himself for a Witness; or else, I pray, what should make
Wanly so busy with it just at this time above all others, he had heard this
Story a Year and a half ago in a very gross manner from Mr. Bruch, but
nevertheless did not think it worth his time to take notice of it? Or how at
last could he tell the Master that I was concerned in it, since he had heard
this matter from another, and never at any time from me? Why now Mr. Denison, I
suppose had told him, as he had done Mr. Greenwood a little before the
Election, That I had likewise said, that the Master B -- Tom. Tanner, (for so
it seems he made me speak) and if the Master did but know this of me, I should
never come in Fellow. This made Wanly go, about a Month before the Election,
very considently to desire Mr. Elstob to inform the Society of this Objection
against me, and this occasioned that Wise Debate, Prickett confessed in Court,
Wanly and he held, whether was the properer Person of the two to discover this
ridiculous Story to the Master; and lattly, this occasioned those dark and
secret Cabals, Mr. Wood, Mr. Denison, Wanly, and Prickett the Buttler used to
hold frequently before the Election in the Cellar, and elsewhere, which, the
Batchellors an all tell you, I ever expressed my Fears and suspicions of: and
indeed this Club was resolved, it seems, whatever came on it to secure Mr.
Denison the Fellowship; for when Mr. Greenwood, after I had been reprobated,
began to talk of standing for it, Wanly told him in a very menacing manner, He
had not best think of any such thing, for they would soon rout him out as they
had done the other before him. It was not then out of any duty or obligation,
that they informed of these words of mine (for then they must have informed of
them as soon as they had heard them) nor out of any injury they saw done to the
Master's Reputation (for what Injury could be done the Master's Reputation by
Words, which no body remembered but themselves?) no, but they wanted a
sufficient Objection to turn me by the Fellowship to make room for Mr. Denison;
and some such Story would they have trumped upon Mr. Greenwood, if he had
succeeded: Well then might I Appeal and try, if happily I could regain my
Right, which I had for no other reason been bereft of, but because Mr. Denison
should have it.

The Appeal being lodged, and the Master not thinking fit to condescend to any
Terms of Accommodation, or indeed, give me any assurance of Pardon, not so much
as privately, and by a Friend, in case I would wave my Appeal and submit (I say
assurance of pardon in case I would have submitted, for hints and items to
submit, I confess, I had many, but withal I could get no private Promise, or
security made me of pardon if I would have submitted) and I on the other side
being very loath to forego the advantage of my Appeal, and entirely trust to
his mercy, who, as he had before resolutely refused all tenders of
Satisfaction, how great soever, when the Story was private, and within our own
College, much more I thought would he do so, when it was become the public
Talk and News of the Town, and the Votes of the Heads of Houses had past in his
favor: The Master, I say, not thinking fit to send me any private assurance of
pardon, in case I would submit, and I without such assurance, justly fearing
lest my Submission should be misconstru'd a Confession, and subject me to some
further inconveniency, Matters were for some time at a stand, till on the 15th.
of Ian. 9 8/9 I was Summoned to Appear in the Vice-Chancellor's Court, at the
Suit of the Reverend Dr. Charlett, and the Reverend Mr. Tanner. And here, in
the first place, I have good reason to complain, That Dr. Bouchier, who
Prosecuted me so earnestly before the Delegates, and with all the Aggravations
the Zeal of so Learned and Eloquent an Advocate could suggest, should,
nevertheless, sit as my Judge, and give Sentence upon a Charge which he
himself, but some Days before, had managed and dressed up against me; but with
all due regard to so great Character, and without reflection upon the Justice
of his Proceedings, I shall fairly State the Facts which were alleged against
me, and then, according to a deer bought Distinction, return Answer to them in
a double respect:

I. I shall make Answer to them, as they are Alleged to set forth matter of
Scandal and Defamation upon the Reverend Dr. Charlett, and the Reverend Mr.
Tanner; and so relate my Expulsion: II. As they set forth an Objection against
my good Manners and Behavior; and so relate my Reprobation.
The Depositions are as follow.

1. Mr. Woods Swears (to comprise the strength of his Evidence in as few Words
as I can) That sometime after I had missed a Fellowship of University-College,
which happened on Feb. 23 9 6/7 [ almost Two Years agoe] he heard me at Table
in our College-Hall say, That Arthur (meaning the Master) did ride Tom. Tanner
(meaning Mr. Tanner Fellow of All-Souls-College) and made Mr. K. a second Tom.
Tanner; these Words he heard me repeat frequently, for near a Month together,
insomuch, that Mr. K. who sat at Table with me at the same time, blushed, and
asked me, If I was not ashamed to talk so? By which Expressions he understood,
that I meant the Master B -- 'd, these Two Gentlemen; for so the Word Ride, in
his Judgment, and that of Debauched Persons, as applied to Men does import. And
further added, That when I was charged with the Words, as above Sworn to,
before the Fellows, I denied indeed the Words, but said, I could produce my
Author.

2. Mr. Denison backs his fellow Evidence Mr. Woods in every particular,
saving, he was not present, when I said, I could produce my Author. And
moreover, Swears, he heard me use the Word Clapperclaw, as well as Ride, and
the one, as well as the other, in his Judgment, signifies to B -- r: And
another thing, That he had heard me call the Master Roger.

3. Pricket Swears, I used to call him Pimp, and particularly one time Pimp
Master general to the Lodgings; and he thereby understood, I meant he was
turned Procurer for the Master.

4. The Honorable Warden of All Souls Deposed, That I said before the
Delegates, in these, or such like Words to this effect; If I had said the Words
above mentioned, I had my Author for them; and again, That when I was asked by
one of the Doctors, Whether I would clear my self upon Oath, I answered, I
would not.

The Depositions being thus set down, I am first to make Answer to them as they
are Alleged to set forth matter of Scandal and Defamation upon the Reverend
Dr. Charlett, and the Reverend Mr. Tanner.

I. To begin with the last Witness first (for if, what this Honorable
Gentleman says, seems to imply, I have either confessed, or could not deny the
Charge, there is an end of the Dispute.) As to the Story about the Editors, I
owned both before the Fellows, and before the Delegates, I had heard it, though
not any time this 4, or 5 Years, and for that, I told them my Author, Mr. M.
but that I ever mentioned such a Story my self, or heard these Words the Two
Witnesses Swore to, either from Mr. M. or any body else, so applied, I always
flatly denied.

1 That I did not say this Clause [ If I had said so, I had my Author for't]
before the Delegates, with respect to the Words Sworn against me, as Mr. Warden
would have it, is evident, because, this is the very thing some misinformed one
of the Reverend Doctors of, at the Visitation, and he earnestly taxed me with;
I was very positive in my Answer, That I never had said such a thing, and
complained to Mr. Hinckley, and he to Mr. Smith, of the misinformation given
in against me: Mr. Smith owned it a Mistake, and went, very honestly, when all
was over, to have it Corrected: And it cannot be supposed, that I should make a
confession of a thing, and at the same time vouch and prove a denial of it too.

2. That I did not say so upon my Examination before the Fellows, as Mr. Woods
Alleges, and as some misinformed one of the Reverend Doctors, is likewise
evident because, Mr. Smith and Mr. Hudson, besides the Two other Fellows, Mr.
Naylor and Mr. Hinckley, who both agree I said no such thing, at the time
spoken of, being called to deliver upon Oath, what past before them in the
Master's Lodgings, did neither of them, agreeably to what Mr. Smith had before
owned to Mr. Hinckley at the Visitation, mention a Syllable of this particular,
which if I had said, they could not in that time have forgot it, nor would have
omitted to relate what was so apposite to the purpose.

3. As to the Second Clause of Mr. Warden's Evidence, It Is true, I was asked,
and Mr. Warden himself, as I remember, whether I would clear my self upon Oath?
I returned, and the Reverend the Principal of Jesus was pleased to join with
me, I conceived I was not obliged to answer to that Question; and so I answer
still, because if I should swear, and that never so righteously, I should not
perhaps escape Censure, which notwithstanding the ill Opinion some are pleased
to harbor of me, I should be very loath to incur for a Fellowship.

II. As to Pricket the Butler (that I may dispatch him out of the way) this is
the Man that I more than suspected did always abuse and misrepresent me to the
Master; and I ever did, and still do from my Conscience believe him to have
been the occasion all along of the Master's Prejudice, and Aversion toward me,
and the better part of the College, when they dare once talk freely, will tell
you the same. Whether hereupon, I might be apt sometimes to call him Pimp, I
cannot justly say; but that he should understand, or at least I mean the Word
in the sense set down, neither will any body believe, when I have told the
Passage which he at large related to the Court.

I came (he says) into the Buttery one time, about a Year and a half ago, and
finding myself Sconced Six Pence by the Master's Order, I fell immediately a
scolding very furiously with him, and told him, he was always running to the
Master with one idle Story or other, and I supposed this was the result of one
of them? But I vowed I would not ask it off, and he might tell the Master so,
if he would, for he was Pimp Master General to the Lodgings. The Expressions,
which I here in a passion, and upon a surprise threw out, I must with shame
own, are Rude and Disrespectful; but no body, I dare say, would make any doubt,
what I meant here by the Name Pimp, the foregoing Words too plainly show, I
meant, he used to carry Stories to the Master, and had just been telling some
one or other of me, which caused the Master to Sconce me: And Pricket too, to
be sure, understood it aright, for he had but upon Election Day, when he was
purposely Examined, as to what he knew, concerning this Particular, given under
his own Hand, That he knew nothing at all relating to it, but what he had heard
from Mr. Woods, and Mr. Denison. But he ventured it seems, to strain a Point,
to serve his Old Friend at parting, and kindly help me forwards when I was
going.

3. These Two being dispatched, I come to Examine the joint Depositions of Mr.
Woods, and Mr. Denison. which before I enter upon, I cannot but complain to
you, that I should be obliged to Answer to any thing the later of these Two
Gentlemen thinks fit to Swear against me: For when he Swore against me before
the Delegatas, What was he doing but Swearing me out of the Fellowship to make
room for himself? This the Right Reverend the Late Bishop of Oxford was very
well aware of, and therefore, as I am told, asked at that time, Whether if the
Fellowship should happen to be be declared Vacant, Mr. Denison would not become
a Candidate for it? And it was answered by the Master, or some of his Friends,
No, no: But 'twas observed, when Mr. Denison was afterward Elected That, that
Worthy Person, with some others, did not come to approve of him. And now again
when he appears a Witness against me in the Vice-Chancellor's Court, What does
he else but Swear me out of the University, the better to secure himself in his
Fellowship? It Is doubly hard upon me therefore, that he should be allowed not
only to Swear me out of the Fellowship to make room for himself, but suffered
to Swear to keep himself in it: But before all be done, you will easily perceive,
without my telling of you, that Mr. Denison is more than ordinarily interested
in the matter.

Allowing then, that Mr. Denison, and his intimate Cronie Mr. Woods, heard
Words repeated for near a Month together, at a public Table, which no body
there present, besides themselves too, ever heard once, no not that very
Gentleman, who, they say, made answer to them, and rebuked me for them (though I
must own at the same time he told me so, he added, what I cannot very well tell
whether it makes more for, or against me, That if he had heard them, he should
not have thought it worth his while to have remembered them:) allowing, I say,
what I can by no means grant to be true, yet neither do these Words of
themselves signify what the Witnesses would make us believe, nor are there any
Circumstances, or Reasons sufficient for their wresting of them to such a
signification: And lastly, If all this was granted, yet the term of Time
limited for the Action, is already elapsed, the Words having been spoken above
a Year ago.

1. Who those Loose and Debauched Persons are, with whom to Clapperclaw and
Ride, pass current for such Obscene Practices, Mr. Woods and Mr. Denison, it
seems, know best. To Clapperclaw, wherever I read, or heard the Expression,
signifies no more than to Whip and Beat one. So Hudibrass, 2 Can. 2 Part p.
280. -- The inward Man,
And outward, like Clan and Clan,
Have always been at Daggers drawing,
And one another Clapperclawing.
Not that they really Cuff and Fence, etc.
and you shall commonly hear Nurses or Mothers, especially in the North of
England, cry out to their Children I Will Clapperclaw you: So to Ride, is often
transferred from its common and usual signification of managing a Horse, to
that of managing a Man, or ruling him, ad libitum and arbitrium, as Priest
Ridden, The Rich Ride the Poor; and what makes the Expression more proper in
this Case, is, the Master himself has been heard to use it, saying, He could
Ride such an one. Since the Words then do not of themselves signify what the
Witnesses suggest, where are the Circumstances and Reasons for the wresting of
them to such a signification?

1. Say they, The Words were spoken about a Month or six Weeks after Mr.
Clavering' s Election, and it is to be supposed, you might speak them in the
Sense alleged, out of Resentment, and by way of Revenge upon the Master,
because you was at that time laid aside. In Answer to this, I must observe to
you, That these Two Witnesses Swore before the Delegates* to about a Year and
half ago, without any relation, or reference had to Mr. Clavering's Election,
or so much as mentioned: But before Mr. Vice Chancellor, Mr. Denison, to bring
them nearer to Mr. Clavering's Election, Dated the Words in April 97. a Quarter
of a Year higher than before, and Swore to them with express reference to that
Election; I say, Mr. Denison, for though Mr. Woods did equally advance the Date
of the Words with Mr. Denison, and say, The Words were spoken indeed, after Mr.
Clavering's Election. Yet he would not suggest that they bore any relation to
that Election; whereas Mr. Denison was pleased to say, I was vexed, he
believed, because the Master at that time did not Vote for me, and thence I
came to utter such words against him: But Mr. Denison, you must understand, by
this time was Elected into the Fellowship, therefore no wonder if he thought
himself obliged to go beyond his Brother Witness, and do something
Extraordinary upon his Promotion. However it is well known, if I had reason to
Quarrel with any body upon that Election, it was myself, or some of my best
Friends; I had had long ever this too too great Experience of the Master's
Aversion toward me, ever to hope for his Vote at the Election of a Fellow, and
it is not probable, that I should be much vexed to find I had missed of that,
which I durst neither hope for, nor expect. Besides, if I had been so wickedly
minded, as Mr Denison gives out, I think, I should scarce have chosen either
those Words, or that Place, he talks of, to have expressed my malice in, but
Words more serious, and a Place more private, and judged it more both for my
purpose, and safety so to have done. Last of all, Would I have brought in a
Man, whom all the College so deservedly Esteem, and whose intimate Acquaintance
I still pride myself so much in, to have been a sharer in this Scandalous
Report; for such is the Gentleman, they tell you, I I directed my Discourse to
at Table, and whom, as well as Mr. Tanner, it seems, I said the Mr.
Clapperclawed. The frank and open manner then in which, they say, I delivered
myself, and the tenderness and regard every body has for the Reputation of his
Friend, might have sufficiently declared the innocence of my Thoughts, whatever
sense, or interpretation they had thought fit to put upon the Words.

2. Say they, And what does plainly demonstrate your meaningin these Words, you
confess that Mr. M. told you, That the Master B -- 'd the Editors, and what he
calls B -- ing, you call Clapperclawing. You, see Sir, what advantage they are
pleased to take of my Honesty and Simplicity, and just such use would they have
made of my Submission. But to the purpose; Mr. M told me once an idle Jest of
the Master and Editors, which neither he, nor any body else, took any further
notice of: About Two, or Three Years after, I happened to talk concerning the
Master, Mr. Tanner, and another Person, must I therefore needs allude to a
Story told me so long ago, wherein neither Mr. Tanner, nor this Gentleman's
Name, was so much as mentioned, and in such Words too, as are confessedly
Proved to imply no such thing, as this Story expressed. If this does any way
demonstrate my meaning, it must demonstrate it to be somewhat else sure, than
what these Gentlemen would have it.

What remains therefore, but that the Words, if spoken, should be construed in
their usual and common acceptance, which, as before proved, will amount to no
more than this; Here Is one Scholar falls to Rally another of his Acquaintance,
and tells him, The Master governs and manages him as he pleases, just as he
does Mr. Tanner (for Mr. Tanner was ever known to be very observant of the
Master, but there was no such Report as now there is, till Mr. Woods and Mr.
Denison misconstruing these Words of mine, as they pretend, found it of late
for their interest, to set it about, and in very express Terms) he gives him
gentle correction to keep him in due order and submission: And what is all this
but some Taunts and Jeers, such as pass often merrily and innocently enough
amongst Young Scholars, which the Gentleman being offended at it, asks the
the other, Whether he is not ashamed to talk so? And in this, or the like Sense
must the Witnesses too, after all, have understood the Phrases above mentioned,
for Mr. Woods, and he indeed is the only Person to be regarded, being asked in
Court, Whether during the several times he heard me repeat them at Table, he
always took them in a loose, immodest Sense? Answered, as will be Attested by
Three credible Persons than present, Sometimes he did, and sometimes again he
did not; Notwithstanding all the Circumstances and Reasons which they pretend
to.

3. And to conclude this part, Admitting that the Words were never so express,
yet the Civil Law, which is the Rule of their Judgment in the Vice-Chacellour's
Court, says, Injuria verbalis solvitur spatio anni utilis; the term of time
then limited for the Action is already elapsed, the Words, according to their
own Evidence, having been spoken almost two Years ago, unless the Master can
first make it appear, that he never heard of them till sometime within this
Year: I say, and I crave leave to insist upon it, though the Words were never so
Express yet the Master, before in Law he can recover any Damage, or exact any
Punishment of me for speaking of them, must first make it appear he never heard
of them till sometime within this Year, which if he can do it, is one great
Argument to me they never were spoken at all.

Thus much then for the Words as they are Actionable, and relate my Expulsion:
come I to the Second thing proposed, Namely;

II. To make Answer to them as they are alleged to set forth an Objection
against my Manners and Behavior, and so relate my Reprobation. And here I
might justly be thought to have prevented all further trouble in this
Particular, since what is not proved can be no reasonable Exception against me;
and how far their Proof falls short, I have already observed to you: But
because the Learned Dr. Boucher says, That Visitors in this Case need not wait
for a strict and legal Proof, but may proceed Juxta conscientias, and according
to their Belief, I shall, allowing all my Adversaries urge in this Particular
to be true, fairly state the Matter, and leave the Convocation to agree what
Rule they had best be guided by, the Law, the common Standard of Justice, or
their own private Opinions; and whether, if they do perchance believe me guilty
of a few nonsensical Words, they may not notwithstanding, in Reason and
Discretion admit me Fellow of a College.

To allow then what my Prosecutors were never yet able to prove, I happened
unluckily in jesting now and then with a certain Acquaintance of mine, (a
Gentleman who wants neither Sense of Honor nor Gratitude to vindicate either
his own or the Master's Reputation where he should perceive them injured) to
allude in some odd comical Language to a foolish Story, which I had once heard
of the Master and Editors; and is this then such an unpardonable Offense in
Youth, sometimes to have talked rashly and indiscreetly by way of Merriment and
amongst his Companions, that, almost two Years, after he shall for this, and
for this alone, be turned out of a Fellowship which he has honorably and
fairly been Elected into? If I had reported such a thing as this of the Master
abroad, or by secret Whispers and sly Suggestions insinuated the truth of it,
but amongst our selves, and in our own College, well might I then have been
deemed an unworthy Member of a Civil and Ingenuous Society: but since, at
worst, I happened only to throw out a few odd ridiculous Words, which no Body
ever after so much as remembered, except Mr. Woods and Mr. Denison, nor they
think fit to inform of them till at length for their own private advantage more
than for any disrepute, which, they saw, had befallen the Master; as I have
already shown: In a Word, since it appears that, if I did speak these Words, I
neither designed nor intended any harm, either to the Master or any body else,
nor accordingly did they ever receive any, I think I have done enough, if not
to satisfy Dr. Charlett, yet, to wipe away the Objection, and acquit my self
as a good Christian in that, when the Master thought sit to insist upon this
Offense, I offered more than once to ask his Pardon in what manner he pleased,
or submit to any punishment he would inflict; Nay, after he had got me turned
by the Fellowship, and for one and the same Fault, was going to Expel me the
University, nevertheless I readily consented to as fair a Character of him and
Mr. Tanner, as their Friends thought fit to give them, and publicly declared
in open Court, I never thought or imagined them guilty of the Crimes they were
pleased to think themselves accused of: And now, if either of these Two
Gentlemen will please to prescribe me any other method whereby I may clear
their Reputations in this particular more effectually than hitherto I have
done, I promise them, after all, instantly to set about it; for God forbid that
it should be said, that I in any wise, in any manner had occasioned such a
groundless Report to be spread abroad of any Man, and should not be willing by
all means possible to clear him of the Scandal of it: But it is easy for any
to observe that Dr. Charlett needed neither to have broke the Peace of the
College, nor been thus injurious to me, if he had not designed something more,
than the vindicating his own Reputation.

I have now I think, at length gone, thorough all the Objections brought to
prevent my being Approved, saving, that the Two Witnesses last mentioned, do
somewhere or other add, That they have heard me talk against the Discipline of
the House; Mr. Denison, for instance, at the Three Tun- Tavern; (for as to that
particular, of saying, The Master Rogered such an one, which Mr. Woods Swore to
before the Delegates, but Mr. Denison and he, do both contradict afterward in
Court, saying, I called the Master only bare Roger, I shall wave my Answer to it
till they Swear a Third time, to fix the Allegation) what it was those
Gentlemen heard me talk against the Discipline of the House, since they have
not thought fit to tell, I am not able to shall only therefore, in the
Conclusion, observe to you, how severely I am dealt with, when every idle Word,
which Two Designing Persons have at one time or other heard to drop from me
concerning the Master, or the Discipline of the House, should pass current, for
a mighty Exception against me, whilst my constant Obedience and Submission both
to the one and the other lie all the while unregarded.

The Sum of the whole is this, The Master, as a certain Gentleman, if you will
not take my Word for it, in due time and place will make it appear upon Oath,
was resolved Three Years ago and upwards, that I shoud never succeed Fellow of
University College, if he could hinder. Hence, no doubt on it, came all that
Rigor and Severity which, as I have said, upon little, or no occasion he used
to Treat me with, that, since the ordinary Course of my Life and Conversation,
was not greatly to be complained of, he might happily provoke me by ill Usage,
to say, or do what he might afterward take advantage of: And hence it was,
after all his Pretenses, he did not stick to deny me my Degree, which at the
Expense of my Time and Fortune, I was now become capable of, because that would
have been one good argument more at the Election, for my preference to Mr.
Denison; insomuch, that it is justly questioned, Whether or no, a Bachelor of
Arts is capable of being Elected at all? And now when Examinations, with which,
he had threatened me so severely, were happily concluded, and all his other
Slanders and Reproaches of me (for so, I hope, I may safely call all his other
Objections, since every Fellow in the House accounted them such) were laid
aside and disregarded, pursuant to his former Resolution, he casts about, and
enquires after such Stuff and Giberage, as you have heard: I say Enquires after
for I cannot conceive, with what Confidence, Wanly, Denison, or whoever of them
was the Informer, could go and pretend, as he must do, great damage and injury
done the Master's Reputation by a Story which he himself had knowingly, and
wilfully concealed for so long together, unless the Master had first inquired
after this or the like matter, or given him some private Encouragement so to
do; nor would he, when he had once found what he thought he could make an
Objection of, admit of any Satisfaction, or Submission, of what kind soever;
No, not when it was offered him by all the Fellows of the House; nor would he
by any means be prevailed upon amicably to Adjust, or Comprimise the Matter
within his own Society, but must hurry me away before the Heads of Houses, to
have me turned out of my Fellowship, and Expelled the University, for a
Ridilous Story which, in spite of all I could do, or say, he would both Prove
and Publish to his own Discredit.

Being therefore put by my Degree, if for any at all, for a Reason which, if I
had been Heartily dealt with, should rather have hastened than have stopped my
promotion to it; and being for a Reason as good as the former, i. e. for Words
of a general and doubtful signification, and such, as by the Construction of
all the Law in the World, can never be made Criminal, deprived of my Freehold,
Expelled the University, and turned out into the World to seek my Fortune; I
have purposed, as I at first told you, to Prosecute my Appeal to Convocation,
who alone can do me Right: Hoping that, that Venerable Body, will, as their
Predecessors in like Cases, have done before them, Exercise their Privilege to
their own Honor, and the comfort and satisfaction of the Injured. Nor does
Expulsion, as far as I can understand, at all weaken my Right of Appealing, how
craftily soever it was designed to destroy it. The University, and a College, I
am told, are Two distinct Corporations, and I may forfeit the Privilege of the
one, and retain the Right of the other. The King has Power to Found a College
in the University, but he cannot make the Members of his College, Members of
the University; that requires an Act of the Convocation, to Receive and
Incorporate them into the University. We have a Modern Instance of this,
Worcester-College has all the Rights of a College, that is, By the King's
Letters Parents it is become a Corporation; but the Fellows of that College, as
such, are not Members of the University: So that the Privileges of the
University, and of a College may subsist apart, and the Right of the one, may
be enjoyed by him who is no Member of the other. Otherwise indeed, a Fellowship
would be a very precarious thing, if a Man must be deprived of it whenever a
Master of a College in his Passion, or Prejudice, resolved to have him
Expelled. But this, with the Right of Convocation, which otherwise, I had
designed herewithall to have sent you, being to be Argued speedily in
Westminster Hall, I shall not further enlarge upon it, but patiently expect the
Determination of the Court. Wishing therefore, whatever becomes of my Appeal,
that Unanimity and Concord may for ever flourish in that Society to which, upon
many Accounts, I am so much obliged to, and, that none ever after me may have
the like Reason to complain of Dr. Charlett, I conclude,

Yours to command, C. U.
THESE are to Certify, whom it may Concern, That we, the several Fellows,
Masters, Batchelors, and Commoners of University-College in Oxon, whose Names
are here subscribed, Have for some time known C. U. [A. B.] Member of the said.
College, most of us Five, or Six Years, some more or fewer according to our
several standings, and that we can safely, and with a good Conscience Testify,
That he the said C. U. according to the best of our several Observations, has
behaved himself soberly and honestly in his Conversation, diligently and
industriously in his Studies, and has been ever held of good Repute, as well
for his Learning, as Manners: In token whereof we set our several Hands.

Fellows
John Naylor. John Hinckley. Alb. Bertie. John Nevile. Robert Clavering.
Bachelors.
Ryley. Greenwood. Burlton. Nicholson. Cobden.
Masters
Tho. Coney. George Carter. Late of University. John Potter. Late of
University. Matthew Holbech. Late of University.
Commoners.
Ibbetson. Thornhill. Nash. Banner. Burman. Heyward.





