The Vnbiassed STATESMAN, Laying the Government in an equal BALANCE.

BEING A SEASONABLE WORD For the Commonwealth, In a seasonable time, from a
well seasoned. Friend, viz. A real Lover of his Country. Published for the
begetting a right understanding between the People, their Representatives, and
the Army.

LONDON: Printed for Livewel Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-Head-Alley. 1659.

The Vnbiassed STATESMAN.
HOW miserable the State of these three Nations has been for many years, and
still is, most men are sensible; and how far the remedies prescribed for its
recovery, have fallen short of working a good effect, our present Calamities,
unsettledness and distractions, are too clear a proof. All remedies hitherto
for the curing of our distempers, have wrought no other effect, but to
distemper and make sick the body Politic; only raise and cause the peccant
humors to boil up, and not e^^ate. But that which is worse then the former, is
this: the remedies used are so far from true and sound curing, that they become
in the peoples apprehensions Symptomatical, and by them accounted of the nature
of the disease it self; they are so for from removing the Oppressions,
Tyrannies, and sore Evils, under which the good people groan, that they are
reckoned among the Number of our Calamities. This Nation has been sick and in
a languishing condition for some ages: We had a Parliament called in 1640. who
we believed were able and willing Physicians to cure our Maladies; with them
did the good people of the Nation engage, and fa^^ened their expectations (and
thought they had firmly anchored) upon their endeavors: but alas, the
foundation proved sandy; our Ship tossed up and down, could find no harbor:
and poor sick England grew sick of the cure, and weary of her Physician.

How far the offense taken against the then Ser^^^^s, was just or unjust, I
shall not now make Enquity; or how far they followed their own wills, and
pursued their own ends more then the desires and wellfares of them who
entrusted them with their power, I shall not here determine, knowing how many
severe judges there were, and are of their actions. But true it is, that after
much blood and treasure spilt, the King and the common Enemy conquered, and a
change made in the form of Government, a new Image and superscription put upon
it, which was a matter of great concernment to the three Nations, most men grew
unsatisfied. To wave the complaints and outcries of such as unjustly
complained, viz. of such as cannot be pleased unless others be crushed; whose
desires, hopes, endeavors and ends are various and contrary, and so are their
welfares; for which way soever the scale turns, a considerable part sinks,
groans, and complains of the oppression, Tyranny and hardship which they
undergo by the ease and exaltation of others; As if there were no common good,
where all honest interests might meet; No superiority, dignity for some,
without slavery and contempt for Oaths. Must one man's reason become another
man's rule, or arm him to destroy him? Had we more true wisdom amongst us,
contrariety would be better ordered, that it might no longer harshly jarre, but
make up a sweet Harmony. Many, even too many complain of unrighteousness
abroad, yet consider not how they nourish, cherish, dung, and water the root
thereof in themselves; and are unrighteous, in judging others for
unrighteousness. Can such men expect, that God should make their superiors just
toward them in their actings, whilst they are so unjust in the interpretation
of their actings? Or, is it not consentaneous to Justice and Equity, that every
man in his turn and season should meet with that force, oppression, and
injustice, which he in his desire, reason and judgment, has measured out to
other?

Waving, I say, the complaints of such men, let us not shut our Ears to the
complaints, to the fears and jealousies of the good people, who willingly
served the Parliament, and freely offered up their Lives, Blood and Estates,
for them and the Cause, who after the expense of their Lives, Blood and
Treasure, grow jealous of their new-erected Government, and could but expect and
desire, that they should give the people security; that this new mold of
Government should not prove as burdensome, tyrannical and oppressive as the
former. For wise men saw that multitude of affairs, and prolixity of their
motions, were like to eat up the benefit of the Parliament, and swallow up
their credit with the people. Whilst they tired both themselves and the
people; they complained of their work, and the people complained of their
burdens: the work grew upon them, and the burdens still lay upon the people.
The attendance, the seeking, waiting for relief, eat up the sweetness of that
which the people get from them. Oh how could the people be pleased with these
their actions? Whilst their groans and complaints under their afflictions,
pierced not their ears and hearts, though their consciences could not but tell
them, that they ought to have eased them of their pressures.

Here, good people, may you behold the beginning of our backsliding and
Apostasy: for whilst the spirits of most men were elevated, with contempt and
disdain of their then too lofty Senators, whom a little before, they had in
much a we and reverence; The Grandees of the Army (whether intending to advance
the good Old Cause, or their own fortunes, I know not) put a period to their
sitting. But mark what followed: the contempt of the people toward that famous
Parliament, gave opportunity to aspiring and ambitious spirits, to bring about
their own designs, and to make the good Old Cause, and her Servants, as a bawd
and her panders to cover and obscure their whoring after honor and Kingly
dignity; so that by this means the late diverted stream, was almost brought
into its former chanel of Monarchy; and the good Old Cause, not only neglected,
but reproached and denied; and such as continued faithful to the same, became
the most contemptible of mankind.

Thus did the common Enemy gain advantage over the good people, and the good
Old Cause, till they were even upon the brink of destruction, and ready to be
rent and torn by their hungry and greedy jaws, and swallowed into their endless
gut of malice; Till the Army were awakened from their drouzy and careless
security, and in tenderness to their awakened consciences, or to their own
welfare and security (which had got wing, and was flying from them;) took
courage to cut down the Sucker, which otherwi^e in a short time had grown as
high as the former lofty Cedar, from whose root it sprang; and to evidence (in
part) their repentance, called that famous Parliament, who before had changed
the Government from Kingly to a Commonwealth.

Thus stands the Estate of this Commonwealth, we hope freed from Monarchy, and
delivered from her Aristocratical Ape: and that the foundation of Democracie
may be firmly laid, and our State free indeed, give me leave to offer a word or
two to the People, to the Parliament, to the Army. I hope I may make bold to
begin with the people, the ground, root, and foundation of all power, whose
representatives Parliaments are, who are entrusted with the peoples Liver,
Liberties and Estates, as P^offees in trust; as Stewards or Servants, not
Lords, nor unbounded and unlimited Masters. To the good people, who have
adhered to the good Old Cause who have been instrumental to bring the Nation
out of its Egyptian, Monarchical bondage, and have continued faithful to this
day, I say, that by you are and oug^t Parliaments to be constituted; or you,
your interest, our ends, and to fulfill your intentions, ought they to act; and
as they receive their being, so ought they to be bounded by you: Therefore in
all humility, I offer these things to the serious consideration of the good
people.

First, that you would all unanimously declare from every Corner of the Nation,
that the Legislative power lies in you, and in your representatives, by you
Legally chosen, whom you have entrusted with this power, not entailed it upon
them and their heirs for ever; and for this end, and no other, that the act and
do your wills, and not their own.

2. That you would all with one consen^ declare what your wills are, and what
are the oppressions you groan under; that the Parliament may know what they
ought to do; and if they neglect, be left without excuse.

3. That your trust be not abused, nor the power you have given to the
Parliament (inftead of preserving your liberties) made use of to instinge them;
And that the privileges of Parliament swallow not up your rights and
Liberties, which they ought to defend and maintain; that you would with one
heart endeavor, that there may be some bounds and Limits set before the
Parliament, beyond which they ought not to pass: Let there be some standing
Privileges, Principles of Reason, or Rules of Law extant, whereto any person
doubting, might address himself for satisfaction, and to which the actions and
acts of Parliament ought exactly to answer.

To the Parliament I say, O that you would be wondrous watchful over your
selves, and wary in the managing of yours and the peoples affairs: for there is
a far severer Eye upon you now, then formerly. Labor to be faithful Stewards
in that which the people has entrusted you with. You have (and that justly
too) blamed your predecessors for unjustice, and you have seen the Judgment of
God follow them; you have been also sensible of your own unjustice, and the
Judgment of God upon you, in so much that (after you had been owned by the good
people, had in reverence, awe, love, esteem, and fear of all) you became
suddenly a scorn, and reproach to all sorts of people, and in conclusion, cast
out with scorn and reproach; scarce one among all your friends that had one
dram of pity for you. You have since seen the Judgment of God fall upon your
interruptors, for their unrighteousness and unjustice; And the Lord has been
so merciful to you, as to set you once more in a capacity to act for the
peoples good. Which if you do, O how will good men bless God for you, and
Chronologize you to posterity, and your faithfulness to God and your Country be
founded forth from one generation to another. On the contrary, if you slight
the Cause of God, and the peoples good; the affections of your friends will
soon decay^* the presence of the Lord will depart from you, and the Judgment
of God, which you already have had a sense of, will inevitably fall upon you.

Oh, now consider what opportunities you have had, what you now do enjoy to do
the people good: do your work thoroughly, go to the bottom, let the Nation be
free indeed; you have thrown down one power for its arbitraryness, do not set
up another; but let a foundation of freedom and Righteousness be laid; in the
laying of which, singly eye the good and welfare of the people in general, not
particular persons and interests.

For the effecting of which, I conceive three things principally to be minded;
The first, is good Laws; The second is proper and fit hands for the executing
those Laws; And thirdly, an exact rule or way, whereby their hands may be
guided to a due and speedy execution of those Laws.

Let the Laws be bounds of right and Liberty, and determine what every man
shall enjoy for his own, what he may act for himself, and what he must act for
the Public* Let the Laws be certain, and suited to the State of the Nation;
Let them be clear, and easy to be known by the people; Lest a foundation of
injustice and misery lie at the bottom, that they become not Snares to them,
whom it should preserve from ensnaring; nor give occasion to cunning and crafty
heads, to crush and perplex the plain, hearted.

The next thing is execution, without which the Law signifies nothing: it is
the life of the Law, without which, the Law is neither terror nor
encouragement. For the best Laws are to little purpose, if they be not placed
into fit hands, for the faithful execution of them: And indeed, we are subject
more to complain, (and have most cause so to do) concerning the Non-execution
of the Laws we have, then the Non-addition of the Laws we want.

After good Laws, and fit hands to execute them, it is meet that there be a
clear Rule prescribed to them that are to execute; lest being left to their own
wills in the determination of things, to follow their own apprehensions and
judgments, being furnished with corruption, to draw them aside, and advantages
of security beyond others, (as authority, power, and greatness do always
afford) they lay an arbitrary foundation, and rear a Tyrannical Government.
Therefore the people are bound, in respect to their own safety, and those they
entrust in matters of Government, First, to provide good Laws for themselves to
be governed by; Secondly, due bounds to keep them in, who are to execute those
Laws.

For the making of good Laws, to provide for execution, and to keep the
executors within due bounds, the people have provided workmen, and given them
authority, viz. to wit, Parliaments: they have as yet had but a slender account
of their Stewardship; much do they expect from this present Parliament, or a
strict account for the breach of trust, from every particular member.

Right honorable, you are the Supreme Authority, you have an extraordinary
power entrusted you with, for extraordinary ends and purposes; and if you do
safely apply it, it may produce excellent effects, but if it be extended too
far, and to cases contrary to the good peoples appointment, it will produce a
great mischief, instead of a remedy; for the greatest power misapplyed, must
needs be the greatest oppression. I pray you consider, that a Parliament may
more easily Err, then a King or Ordinary Council: for they have or ought to
have a rule to walk by; but you act by mere Supremacy, from your own
determinations, where you do but vote, and it shall be so, and the people are
bound to stand to it: Therefore if you go out of the Circumference, if you step
without the bounds of clear Reason and Justice, you do unavoidably make the
people Slaves. Therefore it is much to be bewailed, that Parliaments are not
bounded, that the trust reposed in them, is not clearly known, either to the
people or to themselves; that they have so large a road to walk in, that they
may easily err: nay it is almost impossible for them to walk aright; for the
heart of man is deceitful and prone (though he has a rule) to bend it to his
miscarriages, much more when he is left to his Liberty: it is ill trusting
unbounded power; it is so sharp a tool, it quickly eats up all, but its own
Soverainty, and hard keeping limited power within its bounds. Few men there are
that know any thing of themselves, that are not sensible that they have in them
a principle to mislead them; and he that knows it, and is not willing to be
chained up (as a Lion or Wolf is from doing harm) nourishes up in himself a
desire to be a Tyrant. And the people by calling persons to office, without
bounds or limitations, and a standard to measure their Actions by, do carelessly
sow the seeds of Tyranny, and to their sorrow too soon reap the fruit.

Though the people of this Nation have been too negligent of their own
security; do not you that are their Representatives (I beseech you) take an
advantage thereat, but put them in a way now, and join with the good people
that will be ready to advise with you, that they may have somewhat whereunto
they might have recourse in matter of controversy between them and the
Parliament, upon whose faithful discharge of trust the welfare of the people
does depend, and by whose care they may be set and preserved in a flourishing
condition; when on the contrary, they may easily be impoverished and enslaved.
Equity allows, wisdom and self-preservation teaches all to look after the
managing of their trust, and have satisfaction whether it be managed
faithfully, speedily and carefully for their advantage. How shall the people
know this? how can they be satisfied, if any controversy arise about it? and
how can you gainsay, when the people charge you with slighting and betraying
your trust, and swallowing up their Rights and Liberties by your Privileges?
how will it be decided, whether the reproaches cast upon you by the people, be
true or false; or whether you have faithfully discharged your trust, or
betrayed it, if there be not some standing privileges and Rules of Law extant,
to which the people may have recourse for satisfaction? The want of this,
without doubt, was the bottom root of all our disturbances and distractions.
The want of this made the case between this present Parliament and the late
King so difficult: you charged him with violating the Laws, and extending his
Prerogatives, even to the extirpating of the privileges of Parliament, and
much to the damage and hurt of the people. He charged you with overturning the
Laws, and extending your privileges to the hurt both of him and the people,
etc. this made a great clashing between those two great powers; neither had any
standard to determine which were truly guilty; each justify themselves, as it
is usual with men so to do: for want of this standard, the people took part
with one, or with the other, as their minds led them. The same difference may
happen between the Parliament and People, as did between the King and
Parliament: the people may declare their thoughts and minds, that the
Parliament does not discharge their trusts, that they do meddle with things
with which they were not entrusted, and neglect that which they were entrusted
with, etc. and so make use of an Army to throw them out of the House. The
Parliament on the other hand, may justify themselves, and say, They have been
faithful to the people, ran great hazards for them, and have denied themselves
much for the people, and therefore are ill requited by them, from whom they
deserved better things: what then? shall the Parliament make use of an Army to
stop the peoples mouths, or curb their insolence? or were it not better that
there should be a standard between them, by which any man though of a mean
capacity, might end the controversy? Therefore in all Humility, I do present
these three things to this present Parliament.

First, that you will publish to open view a true measure of Parliamentary
trust, from the principles of Law and reason; whereby the members of Parliament
may know, what they ought to do, and what not to meddle with; and the people
know what to expect, what not; when to complain, and when they ought to be
silent. And that these principles of reason, and rules of Law, may be so plain,
that it may not be easy to wrest it to the favor of any particular person: and
not to be abrogated by Parliaments, without a general consent of the good
people. Secondly, that a Committee be appointed by the Parliament, to hear all
persons, who are capable of advising them, and the Parliament; and men known to
be sensible of public dangers, and ready to improve their utmost abilities
for the public good, to advise them in the framing these fundamental
principles of reason, and rules of Law; and that the Parliament will take care
that this Committee may meet at such times, and take such care in hearing all
addresses, that the persons attending on them, be not tired with over-tedious
waiting. Thirdly, that you will appoint a certain limited time for the sitting
of Parliaments, and that they be chosen by the good people, and no others; and
that in the interval of Parliament, the Laws may be executed by a Council of
State, made up with the Members of Parliament of the Peoples Electing, and that
they every year be removed: And that especial care may be taken, that the work
of Parliaments may be dispatched with more ease and speed, that their work grow
not faster upon them, then it can be dispatched by them. By this means, the
safety and prosperity of the people might be preserved; the Parliaments
privileges preserved and maintained, and their persons honored and respected;
and all people fearing the Lord, will have cause to bless God for your faithful
and honest endeavors, and the fruits thereof.
I cannot pass by the Army, and take no notice of them, who the Lord has made
use of to do great and mighty things, in the throwing down of his and our
Enemies, and freeing us of the Norman yoke, under the pressure of which we so
long groaned. Yet dear friends, as we cannot but love you, so we dare not but
mind you of your backsliding, slighting the good Old Cause, and forgetting your
faithful friends, whom (after all our familiarity and Godly Society) you have
(like Joseph's Brethren) sold us to the Ishmaclites; and truly we might have
remained in Egypt for ever, had not the Lord provided dangers and necessities,
as strong motives to you, to fetch us out, and deliver your selves. You are
members of the body, and are and must be sensible of its joy and sorrow. You
cannot say (because you wear the Sword) that you are unconcerned in the affairs
of State; Let not your interests stand in Antipathy to the interests of the
good people; but labor to be faithful to your own, and the peoples just
interests, and the Parliaments Privileges.

We earnestly desire you to join with the good people of these Nations, in
addressing your selves unto the Parliament, and assisting both them and the
people in establishing of peace, righteousness, and justice among us; that as
we have labored, so we may rejoice together, and reap the fruit of our labors
in peace and tranquillity; which that we may do, I make bold also to offer
three things to you: 1. That as we have cause to bless God for the largeness of
your power, so for the preventing of any evil effects which may be likely to
spring therefrom, we desire to have, see and know a standard, bounds and limits
of your power also; that as you ought not to hold up your Sword in vain, so
that you may so hold it up, as to hold up the honest interest and privileges,
both of Parliaments and People. 2. That you will advise with the good people,
and join with them, and present to the Parliament what may be thought meet, as
principles of reason and Rules of Law, to be bounds and Limits for future
Parliaments; and hedges and fences for them, you and us. 3. And that you will
make use of your power, only to see the fundamental principles, and Rules of
Reason, and Law performed, and be ready to join with the people, when their
Liberties and just rights are likely to be infringed; and that you will not
without the consent of the good people, and upon apparent breach of the
Parliamentary trust, intermeddle with their affairs, or disturb their
proceedings: Nor on the other hand, we desire you not to act any thing against
the people, or any particular person, contrary to the civil Law or Limits set
to you by Parliament; nor suffer any to be persecuted, who have not
transgressed the Civil Law, entrenched upon the Parliaments Privileges, or
fundamental principles, as aforesaid.


This may be useful, both in respect of Parliament, People and Army; for want
of which, all three have been drawn to act things displeasing to each other,
which otherwise they would not have done. This is the way to make the three
parts Sympahetically labor to build up the body, and to employ the power of
each, for the good of all. This is a way to take away all occasions of
differences, which now continually do arise, when every man is left to his own
(perhaps misbyassed) reason and judgment, and has no clear rule to guide his
eye and thoughts by. This is a triple Cord, which if well woven and twisted,
will not easily be broken; but be of great use as a fagot-band to hold the
little and great, short and long, and sorts and sizes together.

Thus far have I vented my self, partly for my own, but principally for the
public good, of which I have been a long time full. I conceive it a needful
subject: how well it may be relished or find acceptance, I patiently wait, and
cheerfully submit, let the Lot be good or bad: part of my end I have already,
viz. the publication thereof: if it find acceptance, be a means to do good, or
set abler heads, and deeper brains, to perform something which shall be more
excellent, and worthy of public view, I have my whole end. If it does neither,
I desire in patience to possess my soul, and rest content, till the times be
more capable of hearing and submitting to reason, or I enabled from above to
judge of things better, and more effectually to declare them.

An End.

