THE GREAT NECESSITY OF Unity and Peace AMONG ALL PROTESTANTS, AND THE Bloody
Principles OF THE PAPISTS MADE MANIFEST.

By the most Eminently Pious and Learned BISHOP USHER, Sometime Lord Primate of
Ireland.

HEB. XI. iv. -- He being Dead, yet Speaks.

LONDON: Printed and Sold by J. Wallis in Whit (...) 1688.

1 Cor. 10. Verse. 17: We being many, are one Bread, and one Body: For we are
all Partakers of that one Bread.
OTher entrance I need not make unto my speech at this time, than that which
the Apostle himself presents unto me in the verse next but one going before
my Text: I speak to wise men. The more unwise might I deem my self to be, who
being so conscious unto my self of my great weakness, durst adventure to
discover the same before so grave and judicious an Auditory; but that this
consideration does somewhat support me, that no great blame can light herein
upon me, but some aspersion thereof must reflect upon your selves, who happened
to make so evil a choice; the more facile I expect you to be in a cause,
wherein you your selves are some ways interested.

The special cause of your assembling at this time, is, first, that you who
profess the same truth, may join in one body, and partake together of the same
blessed Communion: and then, that such as adhere unto false worship, may be
discovered and avoided: You, in your wisdom, discerning this holy Sacrament to
be, as it were, ignis probationis, which would both congregare homogenea, and
segregare heterogena, (as in Philosophy we use to speak) both conjoyn those
that be of the same, and disjoyn such as be of a differing kind and
disposition. And to this purpose have I made choice of this present Text:
Wherein the Apostle makes our partaking of the Lords Table to be a testimony,
not only of the union and communion which we have betwixt our selves, and with
our Head, (which he does in the express words, which I have read) but also of
our disunion and separation from all idolatrous worship: as appears by the
application hereof unto his main drift and intendment, laid down in the 14. and
2 verses.

The effect therefore of that which St. Paul in express terms here delivers,
is the Communion of Saints: which consists of two parts, the fellowship which
they have with the Body, laid down in the beginning; and the fellowship which
they have with the Head, laid down in the end of the verse: both which are thus
explained by St. John, That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you,
that ye also may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1. 3. Let them therefore that
walk in darkness, brag as much as they list of their good-fellowship: This
blessed Apostle assures us, that such only as do walk in the light, have
fellowship one with another, 1 John 1. 6, 7. even as they have fellowship with
God, and Jesus Christ his Son, whose blood shall cleanse them from all sin. And
to what better company can a man come, than to the general Assembly, and Church
of the first born which are enrolled in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all,
and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the
new Covenant: and to the blood of sprinkling, which speaks better things than
that of Abel? Heb. 12. 23, 24. No fellowship (doubtless) is comparable to this
Communion of Saints.

To begin therefore with the first part thereof, as the Apost. in Gal. 3. 27.
28. makes our being baptized into Christ, to be a testimony that we are all
one in Christ: so does he here make our partaking of that one bread, to be an
evidence that we also are all one bread, and one body in him. And to the same
purpose, in Chap. 12. following, he propounds both our Baptism and our
drinking of the Lords Cup, as seals of the spiritual conjunction of us all into
one mystical body. For as the body is one, (says he) and has many members,
and all the members of that one body, being many, are one body: so also is
Christ. For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we he Jews
or Gentiles, whether we be bound or free: and have been all made to drink into
one Spirit. 1 Cor. 12. 12. 13. Afterward he adds, that we are the body of
Christ, and members in particular, Ibid. v. 27. and in another place also, that
We being many, are one body in Christ, and every one members one of another.
Romans 12. 5.

Now the use which he teaches us to make of this wonderful conjunction
(whereby we are made members of Christ, and members one of another) is twofold:
1. That there should be no schism in the body. 2. That the members should have
the same care one for another, 1 Cor. 12. 25. For preventing of Schism, he
exhorts us in Ephesians. 4. 3, 6. to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace: and to make this bond the firmer, he puts us in mind of one Body, one
Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all,
who is above all, and through all, and in us all: by this multiplication of
unities declaring unto us, that the knots whereby we are tied together, are
both in number more, and of far greater moment, then that matters of smaller
consequence should dissever us: and therefore that we should stand fast in one
spirit, with one mind, striving together for the faith of the Gospel, and in
nothing terrified by our adversaries, Phil. 1. 27, 28.

But howsoever God has thus marshalled his Church in a goodly order, terrible
as an Army with Banners: yet, such is the disorder of our nature, that many,
for all this, break rank, and the enemy labors to breed division in Gods
House, that so his Kingdom might not stand. Nay, oftentimes it comes to pass
that the Watchmen themselves, Cant. 5. 7. who were appointed for the
safeguarding of the Church, prove, in this kind, to be the smiters and wounders
of her: and from among them who were purposely ordained in the Church, for the
bringing of men into the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of
God, Ephesians. 4. 13. even from among those, some do arise, that speak perverse
things, to draw away disciples after them. Act 20. 30.

Thus we find in the Ecclesiastical History, that after the death of Julian the
Apistate, Questions and Disputes concerning matters of Doctrine were freshly
set afoot by those who were set over the Churches. Whereupon Soz^men makes
this grave Observation: That the Disposition of men is such, that when they are
wronged by others, they are at agreement among themselves; but when they are
freed of evils from abroad, then they make insurrections one against another.
Which as we find to be too true by the late experience of our Neighbor
Churches in the Low Countries: So are we to consider with the Wiseman, that
What has been; is now, and that which is to be, has already been, Eccles. 3.
15. and be not so inquisitive, why the former days were better than these? for
we do not enquire wisely concerning this. Ibid. 6. 10. When like troubles were
in the Church heretofore, Isidorus Pelusiota, an ancient Father, moves the
question, what a man should do in this case? and makes answer, That If it be
possible we should mend it, but if that may not be, we should hold our peace.
Lib. 4. Epist. 133.

The Apostles resolution, I think, may give sufficient satisfaction in this
point, to all that have moderate and peacable minds. If in any thing ye be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you: nevertheless, whereto we
have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same
thing. Phil. 3. 15. 16. It is not to be looked for, that all good men should
agree in all things: neither is it fit that we should (as our Adversaries do)
put the truth unto compromise, and to the saying of an Achitophel, whose
counsel must be accepted, as if a man had inquired at the Oracle of God. We all
agree that the Scriptures of God are the perfect rule of our faith: we all
consent in the main grounds of Religion drawn from thence: we all subscribe to
the articles of doctrine agreed upon in the Synod of the year 1562. for the
avoiding of diversities of opinions, and the establishing of consent touching
true Religion. Hitherto, by Gods mercy, have we already attained; thus far
therefore let us mind the same thing; let not every wanton wit be permitted to
bring what fancies he list into the Pulpit, and to disturb things that have
been well ordered. I beseech you brethren (says the Apostle) mark them which
cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned,
and avoid them. Romans 16. 17.

If in some other things we be otherwise minded, than others of our brethren
are; let us bear one with another, until God shall reveal the same thing unto
us: and howsoever we may see cause why we should dissent from others in matter
of opinion; yet let us remember, that this is no cause why we should break the
Kings peace, and make a rent in the Church of God. A thing deeply to be thought
of by the Ismaels of our time, whose hand is against every man, and every man's
hand against them; who bite and devour one another, until they be consumed one
of another; who forsake the fellowship of the Saints, and by a sacrilegious
separation brake this bond of peace. Little do these men consider, how precious
the peace of the Church ought to be in our eyes (to be redeemed with a thousand
of lives) and of what dangerous consequence the matter of schism is unto their
own souls. For howsoever the schismatich secundum affectum (as the Schoolmen
speak) in his intention and wicked purpose, takes away unity from the Church;
even as he that hates God, does take away goodness from him, as much as in him
lies: yet secundum effectum, in truth, and in very deed, he takes away the
unity of the Church only from himself: that is, he cutteth himself off from
being united with the rest of the body; and being dissevered from the body, how
is it possible that he should retain communion with the Head?

To conclude therefore this first use which we are to make of our communion
with the Body: let us call to mind the exhortation of the Apostle: Above all
things put on love, which is the bond of perfectness, and let the peace of God
rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are called in one Body. Col. 3. 14.
15. Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell together
in unity: Ps. 133. 1. What a goodly thing it is to behold such an honorable
Assembly as this is, to be as a house that is compact together in it self, Ps.
122. 3. holding fit correspondence with the other part of this great body, and
due subordination unto their and our Head! Such as wish not well to the public
good, and would rejoice at the ruin of our State, long for nothing more, then
that dissensions should arise hete, betwixt the members mutually, and betwixt
them and the Head.

Hoc Ithacus velit, and magno mercentur Atridae. They know full well, that
every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to desolation; and every house
divided against it self, shall not stand: Matthew. 12. 25. nor do they forget the
Politicians old rule; Divide and impera, make a division, and get the dominion.
The more need have we to look herein unto our selves; who cannot be ignorant
how dolorous Solutio continui, and how dangerous Ruptures, prove to be unto our
bodies. If therefore there be any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the
Spirit, fulfill our joy: That ye be like minded, having the same love, being of
one accord, of one mind; and doing nothing through strife or vain glory. Phil.
2. 1, 2, 3. Remember that as often as we come unto the Lords Table, so often do we
enter into new bonds of peace, and tie our selves with firmer knots of love
together: this blessed Communion being a sacred seal, not only of the union
which we have with our Head by faith, but also of our conjunction with the
other members of the body by love.

Whereby as we are admonished to maintain unity among our selves, that there be
no schism or division in the body: so are we also further put in mind, that the
members, should have the same care one for another. For that is the second use
which St. Paul teaches us to make hereof, in 1 Cor. 12. 26. which he further
amplifieth in the verse next following, by the mutual sympathy and
fellow-feeling which the members of the same body have on with another For
whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member be
honored, all the members rejoice with it. And then he adds: Now ye are the
body of Christ, and members in particular: showing unto us thereby, that as we
are all concorporated (as it were) and made copartners of the promise in
Christ: so we should have one another in our hearts, to die and live together.
2 Cor. 7. 3. And hereupon is that exhortation in Heb. 13. 3 grounded: Remember
them that are in bonds, as bound with them, and them which suffer adversity, as
being our selves also in the Body: it being a perilous sign that we be no
lively members of that body, if we be not sensible of the calamities that lie
upon our afflicted brethren. We know the Woe that is pronounced against such as
are at ease in Sion, and are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph, Amos 6.
1, 6, 7. with the judgment following. Therefore now shall they go captive, with
the first that go captive. We know the Angels bitter curse against the
inhabitants of Meroz. Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) curse ye
bitterly the inhabitants thereof: because they came not to help the Lord, to
help the Lord against the mighty. Judge. 5. 23. Not as if the Lord did stand in
need of our help, or were not able, without our assistance, to maintain his own
cause, but that hereby he would make trial of our readiness to do him service
and prove the sincerity of our love. If we hold our peace and sit still at this
time, deliverance shall arise to Gods Church from another place, Esther 4. 14.
but let us look that the destruction do not light upon us and ours.

I need not make any application of that which I have spoken: the face of
Christendom, so miserably rent and torn, as it is at this day, cannot but
present it self as a ruful spectacle unto all our eyes, and (if there be any
bowels in us) stir up compassion in our hearts. Neither need I to be earnest in
exciting you to put your helping hands to the making up of these breaches: your
forwardness herein has prevented me, and instead of petitioning (for which I
had prepared my self) has ministered unto me matter of thanksgiving. A good
work is at all times commendable: but the doing of it in fit time, adds much
to the luster thereof, and makes it yet more goodly. The season of the year is
approaching, wherein Kings go forth to battle, 2 Samuel 11. 1. the present supply
and offer of your Subsidy was done in a time most seasonable: being so much
also the more acceptable, as it was granted not grudgingly, or of necessity,
but fr^ely, and with (...) mind: God (...) giver: and he is able to make all
grace abound toward you, that ye always having all sufficiency in all things,
may abound to every good work. 2 Cor. 9. 7, 8.

And thus being by your goodness so happily abridged of that which I intended
further to have urged from the conjunction which we have with the Body: I pass
now unto the second part of the Communion of Saints, which consists in the
union which we all have with one Head. For Christ our Head is the main
foundation of this heavenly union. Out of him there is nothing but confusion;
without him we are nothing but disordered heaps of rubbish: but in him all the
building fitly framed together, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord; and in
him are we builded together an habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.
21, 22. Of our selves we are but lost sheep, scattered and wandering upon every
Mountain. From him it is, that there is one fold, and one shepherd, (Joh. 10.
16) God having purposed in himself to gather together in one all things in
Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth, even in him, Ephesians.
1. 10. This is the effect of our Saviors prayer, Joh. 17. 21. That they all
may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one
in us, etc. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one.
And this is it which we find so often repeated by St. Paul: We being many, are
one body in Christ, Romans 12. 5 Ye are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. 28. And
in the Text we have in hand: We being many, are one bread, and one body. Why?
because We are all partakers of that one bread: namely, of that bread, whereof
he had said in the words immediately going before: The bread which we break, is
it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? 1 Cor. 10. 16.

Under the name of Bread therefore here is comprehended both Panis Domini, and
Panis Dominus; not only the bread of the Lord, but also the Lord himself, who
is that living Bread which came down from heaven, Joh. 6. 51. For as St. Peter,
saying, that Baptism does save us, 1 Pet. 3. 21. understands thereby both the
outward part of that Sacrament, (for he expressly calls it a figure) and more
than that too (as appears by the explication presently adjoined: not the
putting away of the filth of the flesh) even the inward purging of our
consciences by virtue of the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ: So St.
Paul here making the reason of our union to be our partaking of all this one
bread, has not so much respect unto the external bread in the Sacrament
(through he exclude not that neither) as unto the true and heavenly Bread
figured thereby; whereof the Lord himself pronounces in John 6. 32. 51. The
bread that I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world: and (to show that by partaking of this bread, that wonderful union we
speak of, is effected:) He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood,
dwells in me, and I in him. Joh. 6. 56.

It is a lamentable thing to behold, how this holy Sacrament, which was
ordained by Christ to be a bond whereby we should be knit together in unity,
is, by Satan's malice, and the corruption of man's disposition, so strangely
perverted the contrary way; that it is made the principal occasion of that
woeful distraction which we see amongst Christians at this day, and the very
fuel of endless strifes, and implacable contentions. And forasmuch as these
mischiefs have proceeded from the inconsiderate confounding of those things
which in their own nature are as different as may be: for the clearer
distinguishing of matters, we are in the first place to consider, that a
Sacrament taken it its full extent comprehends two things in it: that which
is outward and visible, which the Schools call properly Sacramentum, (in a more
strict acception of the word:) and that which is inward and invisible, which
they term rem Sacramenti, the principal thing exhibited in the Sacrament. Thus
in the Lords Supper, the outward thing which we see with our eyes, is bread and
wine, the inward thing which we apprehend by faith is, the body and blood of
Christ: in the outward part of this mystical action, which reaches to that
which is Sacramentum only, we receive this body and blood but sacramentally; in
the inward, which contains rem, the thing it self in it, we receive them
really: and consequently the presence of these in the one is relative and
symbolical; in the other, real and substantial.

To begin then with that which is symbolical and relative: we may observe out
of the Scripture, which says, that Abraham received the sign of Circumcision,
a seal of the righteousness of the says which he had being uncircumcised; that
Sacraments have a twofold relation to the things whereof they be Sacraments:
the one of a sign, the other of a seal. Signs, we know, are relatively united
unto the things which they do signify; and in this respect are so nearly
conjoined together, that the name of the one is usually communicated unto the
other. This cup is the new Testament, or, the new Covenant, says our Savior
in the institution of the holy Supper, Luke 22. 20. This is my Covenant, says
God in the institution of Circumcision in the old Testament, Genesis 17. 10. but
how it was his Covenant, he explainerh in the verse immediately following; Ye
shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall be a SIGN of the
Covenant betwixt me and you. So words being the signs of things, no sooner is
the sound of the word conveyed to cur ears, but the notion of the thing
signified thereby is presented unto our mind: and thereupon in the speech of
the Scripture nothing is more ordinary, than by the term of Word to note a
thing. We read in 1 Samuel 4. that the Philistines were afraid and said, God is
come in the Camp. ver. 7. when the Israelites brought thither the Ark of the
Covenant of the Lord of Hosts, which dwells between the Cherubims, v. 4. and
yet was that no other but this relative kind of presence whereof now we speak:
in respect whereof also the Shewbread is in the Hebrew named, the bread of
faces, or, the presence bread. We see with us, the room wherein the Kings
Chair, and other Ensigns of State are placed, is called the Chamber of
presence, although the King himself be not there personally present. And as the
rude and undutiful behavior of any in that place, or the offering of any
disrespect to the Kings Pourtraicture, or to the Arms Royal, or to any other
thing that has relation to his Majesty, is taken as a dishonor done unto the
King himself: so here, he that eats the bread, and drinks the cup of the
Lord unworthily, is accounted guilty of offering indignity to the body and
blood of the Lord. 1 Cor. 11. 27.

In this sort we acknowledge Sacraments to be Signs; but bare signs we deny
them to be: Seals they are, as well as signs of the Covenant of grace. As it
was therefore said of John the Baptist, that he was a Prophet, and more than a
Prophet: Matt. 11. 9. So must we say of Sacraments, that they be signs, and
more than signs; even pledges and assurances of the interest which we have in
the heavenly things that are represented by them. He that has in his chamber
the picture of the French King, has but a bare sign; which possibly may make
him think of that King when he looks on it, but shows not that he has any
manner of interest in him. It is otherwise with him that has the Kings great
Seal for the confirmation of the title that he has unto all the lands and
livelihood which he does enjoy. And as here, the wax that is affixed to those
letters Patents, howsoever for substance it be the very same with that which is
to be found every where, yet being applied to this use, is of more worth to the
Patent, than all the wax in the Country beside: so stands it with the
outward elements in the matter of the Sacrament. The bread and wine are not
changed in substance from being the same with that which is served at ordinary
tables: but in respect of the sacred use whereunto they are consecrated, such a
change is made, that now they differ as much from common bread and wine, as
heaven from earth. Neither are they to be accounted barely significative, but
truly exhibitive also of those heavenly things whereto they have relation, as
being appointed by God to be a means of conveying the same unto us, and putting
us in actual possession thereof. So that in the use of this holy ordinance,
verily as a man with his bodily hand and mouth receives the earthly creatures;
so verily does he with his spiritual hand and mouth (if any such he have)
receive the body and blood of Christ.

And this is that real and substantial presence, which we affirmed to be in the
inward part of this sacred action. For the better conceiving of which mystery,
we are to inquire, first, what the thing is which we do here receive; secondly,
how and in what manner we are made partakers of it. Touching the first, the
truth which must be held, is this: that we do not here receive only the
benefits that flow from Christ; but the very body and blood of Christ: that is,
Christ himself crucified. For as none can be made partaker of the virtue of the
bread and wine to his bodily sustenance, unless he first do receive the
substance of those creatures: so neither can any participate in the benefits
arising from Christ to his spiritual relief, except he first have communion
with Christ himself. We must have the Son, before we have life, 1 John 5. 12.
and therefore eat him we must, Joh. 6. 57. (as himself speaks) that is, as
truly be made partakers of him as we are of our ordinary food, if we will live
by him. As there is a giving of him on Gods part (for unto us a Son is given,
Esa. 9. 6.) so there must be a receiving of him on our part; for as many as
received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God. Joh. 1. 12. And
as we are called by God unto the communion of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, 1
Cor. 1. 9. so it we do hear his voice, and not harden our hearts by unbelief,
we are indeed made partakers of Christ, Heb. 3. 14. This is that great mystery
(for so the Apostle terms it) of our union with Christ, whereby we are made
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians. 5. 30, 32. and this
is that eating of the flesh of the Son of man, and drinking of his blood, which
our Savior insisteth so much upon, in Joh. 6.

Where if any man shall demand, (that I may now come unto the second point of
our inquiry.) How can this man give us his flesh to eat? Joh. 6. 52. he must be
ware that he come not pre-occupied with such dull conceits as they were
possessed withal, who moved that question there; he must not think that we
cannot truly feed on Christ, unless we receive him within our jaws: for that is
as gross an imagination as that of Nicodemus, who could not conceive how a man
could be born again, unless he should enter the second time into his Mothers
Womb: Joh. 3. 4. but must consider, that the eating and drinking which our
Savior speaks of, must be answerable to the hungring and thirsting, for the
quenching whereof this heavenly Banquet is provided. Mark well the words which
he uses, toward the beginning of his discourse concerning this argument. I am
the bread of life, he that comes to me, shall never hunger; and he that
believes in me, shall never thirst. But I said unto you, that ye also have
seen me, and believe not. Joh 6. 35, 36. And compare them with those in the
end: It is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing: the words
that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life. But there are some
of you that believe not. Now observe, that such as our hungring is, such is our
eating. But every one will confess, that the hunger here spoken of, is not
corporal, but spiritual: Why then should any man dream here of a corporal
eating? Again, the corporal eating, if a man might have it, would not avail any
thing to the slaking of this hunger, nay, we are expressly told, that the flesh
thus taken (for so we must understand it) profits nothing, a man should never
be the better, nor one jot the holier, nor any whit further from the second
death, if he had filled his belly with it. But that manner of feeding on his
flesh, which Christ himself commends unto us, is of such profit, that it
preserves the eater from death, and makes him to live for ever, Joh. 6. 50,
51, 54, 58. It is not therefore such an eating, that every man who brings a
bodily mouth with him may attain unto: but it is of a far higher nature,
namely, a spiritual uniting of us unto Christ, whereby he dwells in us, and
we live by him.

If any do farther inquire, how it is possible that any such union should be,
seeing the body of Christ is in heaven, and we are upon earth? I answer, that
if the manner of this conjunction were carnal and corporal, it would be indeed
necessary that things conjoined should be admitted to be in the same place: but
it being altogether spiritual and supernatural, no local presence, no physical
nor mathematical continuity or contiguity is any way requisite thereunto. It is
sufficient for the making of a real union in this kind, that Christ and we
(though never so far distant in place each from other) be knit together by those
spiritual ligatures, which are intimated unto us in the words alleged out of
Joh. 6. to wit, the quickening Spirit descending downward from the Head, to be
in us a fountain of supernatural life; and a lively faith (wrought by the same
spirit) ascending from us upward, to lay fast hold upon him, who having by
himself purged our sins, sits on the right hand of the Majesty on high.

First therefore, for the communion of the Spirit, which is the ground and
foundation of this spiritual union; let us call to mind what we have read in
Gods Book: that Christ, the second Adam, was made a quickening Spirit: Cor. 15.
45. and that he quickens whom he will, Joh. 5. 21. that unto him God has
given the spirit without measure, Joh. 3. 34. and of his fullness have all we
received, Joh. 1. 16. that he that is joined unto the Lord, is one Spirit, 1
Cor. 6. 17. and that hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because
he has given us his Spirit, 1 John 3. 24. 4. 13. By all which it does appear,
that the mystery of our union with Christ consists mainly in this: that the
self same Spirit whch is in him, as in the Head, is so derived from him into
every one of his true members, that thereby they are animated and quickened to
a spiritual life. We read in Ezekel 1. of four living creatures, and of four
wheels standing by them. When those went, (says the Text) those went; and when
those stood, these stood: and when those were lifted up from the earth, the
wheels were lifted up over against them. He that should behold such a vision as
this, would easily conclude by that which he saw, that some invisible bands
there were by which these wheels and living creatures were joined together,
howsoever none did outwardly appear unto the eye: and the holy Ghost, to give
us satisfaction herein, discovers the secret, by yielding this for the reason
of this strange connection; that the spirit of the living creature was in the
wheel, Exek. 1. 21. From whence we may infer, that things may truly be
conjoined together, though the manner of the conjunction be not corporal: and
that things distant in place may be united together, by having the spirit of
the one communicated unto the other.

Nay, if we mark it well, we shall find it to be thus in every of our own
bodies: that the formal reason of the union of the members consists not in
the continuity of the parts (though that also be requisite to the unity of a
natural body:) but in the animation thereof by one and the same spirit. If we
should suppose a body to be as high as the heavens, that the head thereof
should be where Christ our Head is, and the feet where his members are: no
sooner could that head think of moving one of the toes, but instantly the thing
would be done, without any impediment given by that huge distance of the one
from the other. And why? because the same soul that is in the head, as in the
fountain of sense and motion, is present likewise in the lowest member of the
body. But if it should so fall out, that this, or any other member proved to be
mortified, it presently would cease to be a member of that body; the corporal
conjunction and continuity with the other parts notwithstanding. And even thus
is it in Christ; although in regard of his corporal presence, the heaven must
receive him, until the times of the restitution of all things, Act. 3 21. yet
is he here with us always, even unto the end of the world, Matt. 28. 20. in
respect of the presence of his Spirit; by the vital influence whereof from him,
as from the Head, the whole body is fitly joined together, and compacted by
that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the
measure of every part. Which quickening Spirit if it be wanting in any, no
external communion with Christ or his Church, can make him a true member of
this mistical body: this being a most sure principle, that He which has not
the Spirit of Christ is none of his, Romans 8. 9.

Now among all the graces that are wrought in us by the Spirit of Christ the
soul (as it were) of all the rest, and that whereby the just does live, Habak.
2. 4. Romans 1. 17. Gal. 3 11. Heb. 10. 38 is Faith; For we through the Spirit
wait for the bope of righteousness by faith, says St. Paul to the Galatians.
Gal. 5. 5. And again: I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the life
which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved
me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2. 20. By faith it is, that we do receive
Christ: Joh. 1. 12. and so likewise Christ dwells in our hearts by faith.
Ephesians. 3. 17. Faith therefore is that spiritual mouth in us, whereby we eat the
flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, that is, (as the Apostle
expresses it without the Trope) are made partakers of Christ, Heb. 3. 14. he
being, by this means, as truly, and every ways as effectually made ours, as the
meat and drink which we receive into our natural bodies.

But you will say, If this be all the matter, what do we get by coming to the
Sacrament? seeing we have faith, and the quickening Spirit of Christ before we
come thither. To this I answer: that the Spirit is received in diverse measures,
and faith bestowed upon us in different degrees; by reason whereof our
conjunction with Christ may every day be made straiter, and the hold which we
take of him firmer. To receive the Spirit not by measure, Joh. 3. 34. is the
privilege of our Head: we that receive out of his fullness, Joh. 1. 16. have
not our portion of grace delivered unto us all at once, but must daily look for
supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. Phil. 1. 19. So also, while we are in
this word, the righteousness of God is revealed unto us from faith to faith,
Romans 1. 17. that is, from one degree and measure of it to another: and
consequently we must still labor to perfect that which is lacking in our
faith, 1 These. 3. 10. and evermore pray with the Apostles, Lord increase our
faith, Luke 17. 5. As we have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so must
we walk in him, rooted and built up in him; and stablished in the faith, Colos.
2. 6, 7. that we may grow up into him in all things, which is the Head. Ephesians.
4, 4. 1. And to this end God has ordained public officers in his Church for
the perfecting of the Saints for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a persect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. and has accordingly made
them able Ministers of the Spirit that quickens, 1 Cor. 3. 6. and Ministers
by whom we should helieve, even as the Lord shall give to every man, 1 Cor. 3.
5. When we have therefore received the Spirit and Faith (and so spiritual life)
by their ministry, we are not there to rest: but as new born babes we must
desire the sincere milk of the Word, that we may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2. 2. and
as grown men too, we must desire to be fed at the Lords Table, that by the
strength of that spiritual repast we may be enabled to do the Lords work, and
may continually be nourished up thereby in the life of grace, unto the life of
glory,

Neither must we here with a fleshly eye look upon the meanness of the outward
elements, and have this faithless thought in our hearts, that there is no
likelihood, a bit of bread, and a draught of wine should be able to produce
such heavenly effects as these. For so we should prove our selves to be no
wiser than Naaman the Syrian was, who having received direction from the man of
God, that he should wash in Jordan seven times, to be cleansed of his Leprosy,
2 Kings 5. 12. 13. replied with indignation, Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers
of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? May I not wash in them. and
be clean? But as his servants did soberly advise him then: If the Prophet had
bid the do some great thing, would thou not have done it? How much rather
then, when he says to thee, Wash and be clean? So give me leave to say unto
you now: If the Lord had commanded us to do some great thing, for the artaining
of so high a good; should not we willingly have done it? How much rather then,
when he bids us to eat the bread, and drink the wine that he has provided
for us at his own Table, that by his blessing thereupon we may grow in grace,
and be preserved both in body and soul unto everlasting life?

True it is indeed, these outward creatures have no natural power in them to
effect so great a work as this is, no more than the water of Jordan had to
recover the Leper: but the work wrought by these means, is supernatural; and
God has been pleased, in the dispensation both of the Word and of the
Sacraments, so to ordain it, that these heavenly treasures should be presented
unto us in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power might be of God. 2
Cor, 4. 7. As therefore in the preaching of the Gospel, the Minister does not
dare verba, and beat the air with a fruitless sound, but the words that he
speaks unto us are Spirit and life; God being pleased by the foolishness of
preaching, to save them that believe: so likewise in the administration of the
Lords Supper, he does not feed us with bare bread and wine, but if we have the
life of faith in us, (for still we must remember that this Table is provided
not for the dead, but for the living) and come worthily, the Cup of blessing
which he blesses, 1 Cor. 10. 16. will be unto us the communion of the blood of
Christ, and the bread which he breaks, the communion of the body of Christ;
of which precious body and blood we being really made partakers, (that is, in
truth and indeed and not in imagination only) although in a spiritual and not a
corporal manner, the Lord does grant us, according to the riches of his glory
to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man, that we may be
filled with ad the fullness of God. Ephesians. 3. 16, 19. For the Sacraments (as well
as the Word) be a part of that ministration of the Spirit. which is committed
to the Ministers of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 36, 8. forasmuch as by one
Spirit, (as before we have heard from the Apostle) we have been all baptized
into one body, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit. 1 Cor. 12, 13.

And thus have I finished the first part of my task, my Congregatio
homogeneorum, (as I call it) the knitting together of those that appertain to
the same body, both with their fellow members, and with their Head: which is
the thing laid down in the express words of my Text. It remains now that I
proceed to the Apostles application hereof unto the argument he has in hand,
which is Segregatio heterogeneorum, a dissevering of those that be not of the
same communion; that the faithful may not partake with Idolaters, by
countenancing, or any way joining with them in their ungodly courses. For that
this is the main scope at which St. Paul aims in his treating here of the
Sacrament, is evident both by that which goes before in v. 19. Wherefore my
deatly beloved, flee from Idolatry: and that which follows in the 21. Ye
cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils; ye cannot be partakers
of the Lords Table, and of the Table of Devils.

Whereby we may collect thus much, that as the Lords Suprer is a seal of our
conjunction one with another. and with Christ our Head; so is it an evidence of
our dis-junction from Idolaters, binding us to disavow all communion with them
in their false worship, And indeed, the one must necessarily follow upon the
other; considering the nature of this heinous sin of Idolatry is such, that it
can no ways stand with the fellowship which a Christian man ought to have, both
with the Head, and with the body of the Church. To this purpose, in 2 Cor. 6.
16, 17. we read thus: What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? for ye
are the Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and
walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Wherefore
come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the
unclean thing; and I will receive you. And in Colos. 2. 18, 19. Let no man
beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels,
intruding into those things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his
fleshly mind: and not holding the head, from which all the body by joints and
bands having nourishment ministered and knit together, increases with the
increase of God. In which words the Apostle shows unto us, that such as under
pretense of humility were drawn to the worshipping of Angels, did not hold the
Head, and consequently could not retain communion with the Body, which
receives his whole growth from thence. Answerable whereunto the Fathers
assembled out of diverse Provinces of Asia in the Synod held at Laodicea, (not
far from the Colossians) did so solemnly conclude, that Christiana ought not to
forsake the Church of God, and go and invocate Angels, and pronounced an
Anathema against any that should be found to do so, because (say they) he has
forsaken our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and given himself to Idolatry:
Declaring plainly, that by this Idolatrous Invocation of Angels, a discession
was made both from the Church of God, as they note in the beginning, and from
Christ the Head of the Church, as they observe in the end of their Canon.

For the further understanding of this particular, it will not be amiss to
consider what Theodoret, a famous Bishop of the ancient Church, has written of
this matter in his Commentary upon Colos. 2d. that is, They that defended the
Law (says he) induced them also to worship the Angels, saying, that the Law
was given by them. And this vice continued in Phrygia, and Pisidia for a long
time: for which cause also the Synod assembled in Laodicea the chief City of
Phrygia, forbid them by a Law, to pray unto Angels. And even to this day among
them and their borderers, there are Oratories of St. Michael to be seen. This
therefore did they counsel should be done, using humility, and saying, that the
God of all was invisible, and inaccessible, and incomprehensible; and that it
was fit men should get Gods favor by the means of Angels. And this is it,
which the Apostle says; In humility, and worshipping of Angels. Thus far
Theodoret, whom Cardinal Baronius discerning to come somewhat close unto him,
and to touch the Idolatry of the Popish crew a little to the quick, leaves the
poor shifts wherewith his companions labor to obscure the light of this
testimony, and tells us plainly, that Theodoret, by his leave, did not well
understand the meaning of Paul's words: and that those Oratories of St. Michiel
were erected anciently by Catholics, and not by those Heretics which were
condemned in the Council of Laodicea, as he mistook the matter. As if any wise
man would be persuaded upon his bare word, that the memory of things done in
Asia so long since, should be more fresh in Rome at this day, than in the time
of Theodoret, who lived 1200 years ago.

Yet must I needs confess, that he shows a little more modesty herein than
Bellarmine his fellow-Cardinal does; who would make us believe, that the place
in Revel. 19. where the Angel says to St. John that would have worshipped him,
See thou do it not, I am thy fellow servants, Worship God: makes for them; and
demands very soberly, Why they should be reprehended, who do the same thing
that John did? and, whether the Calvinists knew better than John, whether
Angels were to be Adored or no? And as for invocation of them, he tells us,
that St. Jacob plainly prayed unto an Angel, in Genesis 48. when in blessing the
sons of Joseph, he said, The Angel which delivered me from all evil, bless
those children. Whom for answer we remit to St. Cyril, (in the first Chapter of
the third book of his Thesaurus) and entreat him to tell us, how near of kin he
is here to those Heretics, of whom St. Cyril there speaks. His words be
these: That he does not mean (in that place, Genesis 48. 16.) an Angel, as the
HERBTICKS understand it, but the Son of God, is manifest by this: that when he
had said, (The Angel,) he presently adds, (who delivered me from all evils.)
Which St. Cyril presupposes, no good Christian will ascribe to any but to God
alone.

But to come more near yet unto that which is Idolatry most properly: An Idol
(we must understand) in the exact propriety of the term, does signify any
Image; but according to the Ecclesiastical use of the word, it notes such an
Image as is set up for religious adoration. And in this later sense we charge
the adherents of the Church of Rome with gross Idolatry: because that contrary
to Gods express Commandment they are found to be worshipers of Images. Neither
will it avail them here to say, that the Idolatry forbidden in the Scripture,
is that only which was used by Jews and Pagars. The Apostle indeed in this
place exhorting Christians from Idolatry, propounds the fall of the Jews in
this kind before their eyes: Neither be ye Idolaters, says he, as some of them
were. 1 Cor. 10. 7. 8. And so does he also add concerning another sin, in the
verse following: Neither let us commit fornication as some of them committed.
As well then might one plead, that Jewish or Heathenish Fornication were here
only reprehended, as Jewish or Heathenish Idolatry. But as the one is a foul
sin, whether it be committed by Jew, Pagan, or Christian: so if such as profess
the Name of Christ, shall practice that which the word of God condemns in
Jews and Pagans, for Idolatry, their profession is so far from diminishing,
that it augmenteth rather the hainousness of the crime. The Idols of the
Heathen are silver and gold, the work of men's hands, says the Psalmist, and so
the Idols (of Christians, in all likelihood, mentioned in the Revelation, are
said to be of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood; which
neither can see, nor hear, nor walk. The description of these Idols (we see)
agrees in all points with Popish Images: where is any difference?

The Heathen, say they, held the Images themselves to be Gods, which is far
from our thought. Admit, some of the simpler sort of the Heathen did so: what
shall we say of the Jewish Idolaters, (of whom the Apostle here speaks) who
erected the golden Calf in the wilderness? Can we think that they were all so
senseless, as to imagine that the Calf, which they knew was not at all in rerum
natura, and had no Being at that time when they came out of Egypt, should yet
be that God which brought them up out of the land of Egypt, Exodus 32. 4. And
for the Heathen: did the Romans and Grecians, when they dedicated in several
places an hundred Images (for example) to the honor of Jupiter, the King of
all their Gods, think that thereby they had made an hundred Jupiters? or when
their blocks were so old, that they had need to have new placed in their stead;
did they think by this change of their Images, that they made change also of
their Gods? without question they must so have thought, if they did take the
very Images themselves to be Gods: And yet the Prophet bids us consider
diligently; and we shall find that the Heathen Nations did not change their
Gods, Jer. 2. 10, 11. Nay, what do we meet with, more usually in the writings
of the Fathers, than these answers of the Heathens for themselves? We Worship
the Gods by the Images. We fear not them, but those to whose Image they are
made, and to whose names they are consecrated. I do not worship that stone, nor
that Image which is without sense. I neither worship the Image nor a spirit in
it; but by the Bodily Portaiture I do behold the sign of that thing which I
ought to worship.

But admit they did not account the Image it self to be God, (will the Papist
further say;) yet were those images set up to represent either things that had
no being, or Devils, or false Gods; and in that respect were Idols: whereas we
erect Images only to the honor of the true God and his servants the Saints and
Angels. To this I might oppose that answer of the Heathen to the Christians: We
do not worship evil spirits: Such as you call Angels, those do we also worship,
the powers of the great God, and the Ministers of the great God: And put them
in mind of St. Augustines reply: I would you did worship them; you should
easily learn of them not to worship them. But I will grant unto them, that many
of the Idolatrous Jews and Heathens Images were such as they say they were: yet
I deny that all of them were such, and confidently do avouch, that Idolatry is
committed by yielding Adoration to an Image of the true God himself. For proof
whereof (omitting the Idols of Micha, Judge. 17. 3, 13. and Jeroboam, 2 Kings
10. 16. 29, 31. which were erected to the memory of Jehovah the God of Israel;
as also the Athenians superstitious Worship of the Unknown God, Act. 17. 23.
if, as the common use of Idolaters was, they added an Image to their Altar:) I
will content my self with these two places of Scripture; the one whereof
concerns the Jews, the other the Heathen. That which touches the Heathen, is
in the first Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans: where the Apostle having
said, that God had showed unto them that which might be known of him; and that
the invisible things of him, that is, his eternal Power and Godhead, was
manifested unto them by the Creation of the World, and the contemplation of the
Creatures: he adds presently, that God was sorely displeased with them, and
therefore gave them up unto vile affections, because, they changed the glory of
that uncorruptible God, into an Image made like to corruptible Men, and to
Birds, and Four-footed Beasts, and creeping Things. Whereby it is evident, that
the Idolatry condemned in the wisest of the Heathen, was the adoring of the
invisible God, whom they acknowledged to be the Creator of all things, in
visible Images fashioned to the similitude of Men and Beasts.

The other place of Scripture, is the 4 of Deuteronomy: where Moses uses this
speech unto the Children of Israel.

The Lord speak unto you out of the midst of the fire: ye heard the voice of
the Words, but saw no similitude, only ye heard a voice, verse 12. And what
does he infer upon this? Take ye therefore good heed unto your selves, (says
he in the 15. verse) for ye saw no manner of similitude on the day that the
Lord speak unto you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire. Lest ye corrupt
your selves, and make you a graven Image, the similitude of any figure, the
likeness of Male or Female, the likeness of any Beast that is on the Earth, the
likeness of any winged Fowl that flies in the Air, the likeness of any thing
that creeps on the ground, the likeness of any Fish that is in the Waters
beneath the Earth. Where we may observe: first, that God, in the delivery of
the Law, did purposely use a voice only; because that such a creature as that,
was not to be expressed by visible lineaments, as if that voice should have
said unto the Painter, as Echo feigned to do it the Poet.

Vane, quid affectas faciem mihi ponete, pictor? Si mihi vis similem pingere,
pinge sonum.

Secondly, that when he uttered the words of the second Commandment in mount
Sinai, and forbad the making of the likeness of any thing that is in Heaven
above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Waters under the Earth; he did at
that time forbear to show himself in any visible shape, either of man or woman,
either of beast in the earth, fowl in the air, or fish in the waters beneath
the earth: to the end it might be the better made known, that it was his
pleasure not to be adored at all in any such forms; and that the worshipping of
Images, not only as they have reference to the creatures whom they do
immediately represent, or to false gods, but also as they have relation to
himself (the true God, who was then speaking unto them in the Mount) did come
within the compass of the Idolatry which was condemned in that Commandment.

In vain therefore do the Romanists go about to persuade us, that their Images
be no Idols: and as vainly also do they spend time in curiously distinguishing
the several degrees of worship; the highest point whereof, which they call
Latreia, and acknowledge to be due only unto God, they would be loath we should
think that they did communicate to any of their Images. But here we are to
understand, first of all, that Idolatry may be committed by giving not the
highest only, but also the lowest degree of religious adoration unto Images:
and therefore in the words of the Commandment, the very bowing down unto them,
which is one of the meanest degrees of worship, is expressly forbidden.
Secondly, that it is the received doctrine of Popish Divines, that the Image
should be honored with the same worship, wherewith that thing is worshipped
whose Image it is: and therefore what adoration is due to Christ and the
Trinity, the same by this ground they are to give unto their Images. Thirdly,
that in the Roman Pontifical published by the authority of Clement the 8. (to
omit other testimonies in this kind) it is concluded, that the Cross of the
Popes Legate shall have the right hand, upon this very reason, quia debetur et
^atria, because the worship proper to God is due to it. Now whether they commit
Idolatry, who communicate unto a senseless thing, that worship which they
themselves confess to be due unto God alone: let all the world judge.

They were best therefore from henceforth confess themselves to be Idolaters:
and stand to it, that every kind of Idolatry is not unlawful. Their Jesuit
Gregorius de Valentia will tell them for their comfort, that it is no absurdity
to think that St. Peter, when he deterreth the faithful by name ab illicit is
Idolerum cultibus (St. Peter calls them, that is, abominable Idolatries) does
insinuate thereby, that some worship of Images is lawful. John Monceye the
Frenchman in his Aaron Purgatus (dedicated to the late Pope Paul 5.) and in his
20 questions propounded to Visorius, stretches yet a strain higher. For
howsoever he cannot away with the name of Idols and Idolatry; yet he likes the
thing it self so well, that he undertaketh to clear Aaron from committing any
error in setting up the golden Calf, and labors to purge Laban, and Micha;
and Jeroboam too, from the imputation of idolatry: having found indeed, that
nothing had been done by them in this kind, which is not agreeable to the
practice of the Roman Church at this day.

And lest the poor people, whom they have so miserably abused, should find how
far they have been misled, we see that the masters of that Church do in the
Service books and Catechisms, which come unto the hands of the vulgar,
generally leave out the words of the second Commandment that make against the
adoration of images: fearing lest by the light thereof, the mystery of their
iniquity should be discovered. They pretend indeed that this Commandment is not
excluded by them, but included only in the first: whereas in truth they do but
craftily conceal it from the peoples eyes, because they would not have them to
be ruled by it. Nay, Vasquez the Jesuit does boldly acknowledge, that it
plainly appears by comparing the words of this Commandment, with the place
which has been alleged out of Deuteronomy. 4. that the Scripture did not only forbid
the worshipping of an image for God, but also the adoration of the true God
himself in an image. He confesses further, that he and his fellow Catholics
do otherwise. What says he then to the commandment, think you? Because it will
not be obeyed it must be repealed, and not admitted to have any place among the
moral precepts of God. It was (says he) a positive and ceremonial Law: and
therefore ought to cease in the time of the Gospel. And as if it had not been
enough for him to match the Scribes and Pharisces in impiety, who made the
Commandments of God of none effect, that they might keep their own traditions:
that he might fulfill the measure of his fathers, and show himself to be a true
child of her who bears the name of being the mother of harlots and
abominations of the earth; Rev. 17 5. he is yet more mad, and sticks not to
maintain, that not only a painted Image, but any other thing of the world,
whether it be without life and reason, or whether it be a reasonable creature,
may (in the nature of the thing, and if the matter be discreetly handled) be
adored with God, as his image; yea, and counts it no absurdity at all, that a
very wisp of straw should be thus worshipped.

But let us turn yet again, and we shall see greater abominations than these.
Ezekiel. 8. 15. We heard how this blessed Sacrament, which is here propounded by
the Apostle, as a bond to unite Christians together in one body, has been made
the Apple of strife, and the occasion of most bitter breaches in the Church: we
may now observe again, that the same holy Sacrament, which by the same Apostle
is here brought in as a principal inducement to make men flee from Idolatry, is
by our Adversaries made the object of the grossest Idolatry that ever has been
practiced by any. For their constant doctrine is, that in worshipping the
Sacrament they should give unto it, ^atriae cul^um qui vero Deo debetur, (as
the Council of Trert has determined,) 'that kind of service which is due to
the true God; determining their worship in that very thing which the Priest
does hold betwixt his hands. Their practice also runs accordingly: for an
instance whereof we need go no further than to Sanders book of the Lords
Supper; before which he has prefixed an Epistle Dedicatory, superscribed in
this manner: To the Body and Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, under the forms
of Bread and Wine, all honor, praise, and thinks, be given for ever. Adding
further in the process of that blockish Epistle: Howsoever it be with other
men, I adore thee my God and Lord really present under the forms of Bread and
Wine, after consecration duly made: Beseeching thee of pardon for my sins, etc.

Now if the conceit which these men have concerning the Sacrament, should prove
to be false (as indeed we know it to be most absurd and monstrous) their own
Jesuit Cosler does freely confess, that they should be in such an error and
Idolatry, qualis in orb terratum nunquam vel visus vel auditus fuit* as never
was seen or heard in this world. For the error of them is more tolerable,
(says he) who worship for God a Statue of gold or silver, or an Image of any
other matter, as the Gentiles adored their Gods; or a red cloth lifted up upon
a spear, as it is reported of the Lappians; or living Creatures, as did
sometime the Egyptians; than of those that worship a piece of bread. We
therefore who are verily persuaded that the Papists do thus, must of force (if
we follow their Jesuits direction) judge them to be the most intolerable
idolaters that ever were.

Nay, according to their own principles, how is it possible that any of
themselves should certainly know, that the Host which they worship should be
any other thing but bread? seeing the change does wholly depend upon
consecration duly made, (as Sanders speaks) and that rependeth upon the
intention of the Priest, which no man but himself can have notice of.
Bellarmin, disputing against Ambrosius Catharinus, one of his own brethren,
that a man has no certain knowledge of his own justification, can take
advantage of this, and allege for himself, that one cannot be certain by the
certainty of faith, that he does recive a true Sacrament; for as much as the
Sacrament cannot be made without the intention of the Minister, and none can
see another man's intention. Apply this now to the matter we have in hand, and
see into what intricate Labyrinths these men have brought themselves. Admit the
Priests intention stood right at the consecration, yet if he that baptized him
failed in his intention when he administered that Sacrament, he remains still
unbaptized, and so becomes incapable of Priesthood; and consequently,
whatsoever he consecrateth is but bread still. Yea, admit he were rightly
baptized too: if either the Bishop that conferred upon him the Sacrament of
Orders, (fot so they hold it to be) or those that baptized or ordained that
Bishop, missed their right intention; neither will the one prove Bishop, nor
the other Priest; and so with what intention soever either the one or the other
does consecrate, there remains but bread still. Neither does the
inconvenience stay here, but ascends upward to all their predecussors: in any
one of whom if there fall out to be a nullity of Priesthood (for want of
intention, either in the baptizer, or in the ordainer) all the generation
following, according to their principles, go without their Priesthood too; and
so deliver but bread to the people, instead of the body of Christ. The Papists
themselves therefore, if they stand unto their own grounds, must needs confess,
that they are in no better case here, than the Samaritans were in, of whom our
Savior says, Ye worship ye know not what, Joh. 4. 22. but we know, that what
they worship (be the condition or intention of their Priest what it will be) is
bread indeed; which while they take to be their God, we must still account them
guilty of spiritual fornication, 'and such fornication, as is not so much as
named amongst the Gentiles.

These then being the Idolaters with whom we have to deal, let us learn first
how dangerous a thing it is to communicate with them in their false worship.
Rev. 18. 4. For if we will be partakers of Babylons sins, we must look to
receive of her plagues. Secondly, we are to be admonished, that it is not
sufficient that in our ownpersons we refrain worshipping of idols, but is
further required, that we restrain (as much as in us lies) the practice
thereof in others; lest by suffering God to be dishonored in so high a manner,
when we may by our calling hinder it, we make our selves partakers of other
men's sins. Eli the High Priest was a good man, and gave excellent counsel unto
his lewd sons: yet we know what judgment fell upon him, because his sons made
themselves vile, and he frowned not upon them, (that is, restrained them not;)
which God does interpret to be a kind of idolatry, in 'honouring his sons above
him. The Church of Pergamus did for her own part hold fast Christ's name, and
denied not his faith: yet had the Lord something against her; because she had
there them that held the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a
stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things facrificed unto
idols, and to commit fornication. So we see what special notice our Savior
takes of the works, and charity, and service, and faith, and patience of the
Church of Thyatira: and yet for all this he adds, Notwithstanding, I have a
few things against thee, because thou suffer that woman Jezebel, which
calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and to sedue my servants to commit
fornication, and to eat things sacrificed untoidols. Revel 2. 20.

In Judges 2. God tells the children of Israel, what mischief should come
unto them by tolerating the Canaanitish idolaters in their Land. They shall be
thorns in your sides (says he) and their Gods stall be a snare unto you. Which
words contain in them the intimation of a double danger: the one respecting the
Soul, and the other the Body. That which concerns the Soul is: that their
idols should be a snare unto them. For God well knew that man's nature is as
prone to spiritual fornication, as it is to corporal. As therefore for the
preventing of the one, he would not have a common harlot tolerated in Israel,
Lest the Land ss^ould fall to whoredom, and become full of wickedness, Levit.
19. 29. so for the keeping out of the other, he would have provocations taken
away, and all occasions whereby a man might be tempted to commit so vile a sin.
The bodily danger that follows upon the toleration of idolaters, is: that
they should be in their sides, that is, (as in another place it is more fully
expressed) they should be pricks in their eyes, and thorns in their sides, and
should vex them in the Land wherein they dwelled. Now in both these respects it
is certain, that the toleration of the Idolaters with whom we have to do, is
far more perilous than of any other. In regard of the spiritual danger,
wherewith simple souls are m^re like to be ensnared: because this kind of
Idolatry is not brought in with an open show of impiety, (as that of Pagans)
but is a mystery of iniquity, a wickedness covered with the vail of Piety; and
the harlot, which makes the inhabitants of the earth drunk with the wine of
this formcation, is both gilded her self, and presents also her abominations
unto her followers in a cup of gold. Rev. 17. 2, 4. If we look to outward
peril, we are like to find these men, not thorns in our sides to vex us, but
daggers in our hearts to destroy us. Not that I take all of them to be of this
furious disposition, (mistake me not: I know a number my self of a far
different temper:) but because there are never wanting among them some
tutbulent humors, so inflamed with the spirit of fornication, that they run
mad with it; and are transported so far, that no tolerable terms can content
them, until they have attained to the utmost pitch of their unbridled desires.
For compassing whereof, there is no treachery, nor rebellion, nor murder, nor
desperate course whatsoever, that (without all remorse of conscience) they dare
not adventure upon.

Neither do they thus only, but they teach men also so to do: arming both Pope,
and Bishops, and People, and private persons, with power to cast down even
Kings themselves from their Thrones, if they stand in their way, and give any
impediment to their designs. Touching the Popes power herein, there is no
disputing: one of them tells us, that there is no doubt, but the Pope may
depose all Kings, when there is a reasonable cause so to do. For Bishops,
Cardinal Baronius informs us by the example of Dacius the Bishop of Millayn,
his dealing against the Arrians, that those Bishops deserve no blame, and ought
to suffer no envy, who roll every stone, (yea, and rather than fail, would blow
up stones too) that they may not live under an heretical Prince. For the
People, Dominicus Bannes, a Dominican Priar, resolves that they need not, in
this case, expect any sentencing of the matter by Pope, or other; but when the
knowledge of the fault is evident, subjects may lawfully (if so be they have
sufficient strength) exempt themselves from subjection to their Princes, before
any declaratory sentence of a Judge. And that we may understand that the
Proviso which he inserteth of having strength sufficient, is very material; he
putreth us in mind, that the faithful (the Papists he means) of England, are
to be excused hereby, who do not exempt themselves from the power of their
superiors, nor make war against them. Because that generally they have not
power sufficient to make such wars against Princes, and great dangers are
eminent over them.

Lastly, for private persons, we may read in Suarez, that an heretical King,
after sentence given against him, is absolutely deprived of his Kingdom, so
that he cannot possess it by any just title: and therefore from thence forth
may be handled altogether as a Tyrant; and consequently, he may be killed by
any private person. Only the Jesuit adds this limitation: that If the Pope do
depose the King he may be expelled or killed by them only to whom he shall
commit that business. But if he injoin the execution thereof to us body, then
it shall appertain to the lawful successer in the Kingdom: or if none such be
to be found, i^ shall belong to the Kingdom it self. But let him once ^e
declared to be a Tyrant; Mariana (Suarez his Countryman and fellow Jesuit) will
tell you better how he should be handled. That a Tyrant (says he) may be
killed by open force and arms, whether by violent ^^eaking in into the Court,
or by joining of battle, is a matter confessed: yea, and by deceit and ambushes
too, as Ehud o^ in killing Eglon the King of the Moabites. Indeed it ^^uld
argue a braver mind to profess open enmity, and publikly to rush in upon the
enemy of the Commonwealth: ^ut it is no less prudence, to make advantage by
fraud and ambushes, because it is done without stir, and with less dan^er
surely, both public and private. His conclusion is, that it is lawful to take
away his life, by any art whatsoever: with this proviso (...) be not
constrained either wittingly or unwittingly to be the cause of his own death.
Where the tenderness of a Jesuits conscience is well worth the observing. He
makes no scruple at all to take away the man's life: only he would advise that
he be not made away, by having poison conveyed into his meat or drink, lest in
taking hereof (forsooth) he which is to be killed, should by this means have
some hand in procuring his own death. Yet poison him you may, if you list, so
that the venom be externally applied by some other, he that is to be killed
helping nothing thereunto: namely, when the force of the poison is so great,
that a seat or garment being infected there with, it may have strength to kill.
And that such means of poisoning has been used, he proves by diverse practices
of the Moors: which we leave to be considered of by Fitzherbert, who to prove
that Squires intention of poisoning Q. Eliz. in this manner, was but a mere
fiction) would persuade us that it is not agreeable to the grounds of nature
and reason, that any such thing should be.

Thus we see what pestisent doctrine is daily broched by these incendiaries of
the world: which, what pernicious effects it has produced, I need not go far
to exemplify; this assembly and this place cannot but call to mind the memory
of that Barbarous Plot of the Powder Treason. Which being most justly charged
to have exceeded all measure of cruelty; as involving not the K. alone, but
also his Children, and the States of the Kingdom, and many thousands of
innocent people in the same ruin: a wicked varlet (with whose name I will not
defile this place) steppeth forth some 4 years after, and with a brazen
forehead bideth us not to wonder at the matter. 'For of an evil and pernicious
herb, both the seeds are to be crushed, and all the roots to be pulled up, that
they grow not again. And otherwise also, for a few wicked persons it falls
out oftentimes that many perish in shipwreck. In the later of which reasons we
may note these men's insolent impiety toward God: in arrogating unto themselves
such an absolute power for the murchering of innocents, as he that is Lord of
all, has over his own Creatures; the best of whom, if he do enter into
^udgment with them, will not be found righteous in his (...). In the former, we
may observe their deadly man toward Gods Anointed. which they sufficiently
dec^^re will not be satisfied but by the extirpation of him and all his Roal
progeny.

And whereas for the discovery of such wicked spirits; his Majesty in his
Princely wisdom did cause an Oath of a^legiance to be framed; by the tendering
whereof h^ might be the better able to distinguish betwixt his lo^al and
disloyal subjects, and to put a difference betwixt a seditious and a
quiet-minded Romanist: this companion derideth his simplicity, in imagining,
that that will serve the turn, and supposing that a Pap^st will think himself
any whit bound by taking such an Oath. See (says he) in so great oraft, how
great simplicity does bewray it self. When he had placed all his security in
that Oath, he thought he had found such a manner of Oath, knit with so many
circumstances, that it could not, with, safety of Conscience, by any means be
dissolved by any Man. But he could not se, that if the Pope did dissolve that
Oath; all the tyings of it, (whether of performing fidelity to the King, or of
admitting no Dispensation) would be dissolved together. Yea, I will say another
thing that is more admirable. You know (I believe) that an unjust Oath, if it
be evidently known, or openly declared to be such, binds no man; but is void
ipso facto. That the Kings Oath is unjust, has been sufficiently declared by
the Pastor of the Church himself. You see therefore, that the obligation of it
is vanished into smoke: so that the bond, which by so many wise Men was thought
to be of Iron, is become less than of Straw.

If matters now be come unto this pass, that such as are addicted to the Pope,
will account the Oath of Allegience to have less force to bind than a rope of
straw; judge ye wether that be not true which has been said, that in respect
not of spirituall-infection only, but of outward danger also to our State,
Idolaters may be more safely permitted than Papists. Which I do not speak, to
exasperate you against their persons, or to stir you up to make new Laws for
shedding of their blood. Their blindness I do much pity: and my hearts desire
and prayer to God for them is, that they might be saved. Only this I must say,
that (things standing as they do) I cannot preach peace unto them. For as John
said to Joram, 2 Kings. 9. 22. What peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy
Mother J^zabel, and her witchcrafts are so many? So must I say unto them: What
peace can there be, so long as you suffer your selves to be led by the mother
of harlots and abominations of the earth, who by her sorceries has deceived
all nations, and made them drunk with the Wine of her fornication? Let her put
away her Whoredoms out of her sight, and her Adulteries from between her
breasts; let her repent of her murders, and her sorceries, and her Idolatries:
or rather, because she is past all hope, let those that are seduced by her
cease to communicate with her in these abominable iniquities; and we shall be
all ready to meet them, and rejoice with the Angels in heaven for their
conversion. In the mean time, they who sit at the Helm and have the charge of
our Church and Commonwealth committed to them, must provide by all good means,
that God be not dishonored by their open Idolatries, nor our King and State
endangered by their secret trecheries. Good Laws there are already enacted to
this purpose: which if they were duly put in execution, we should have less
need to think of making new. But it is not my part to press this point. I will
therefore conclude as I did begin: I speak as to wise men; Judge ye what I say.

FINIS.

