THE VN-DECEIVER.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Gellibrand, and are to be sold at his shop at the
sign of the Brazen-Serpent in Paul's Churchyard. 1643.

The Un-deceiver.
ALl Neuters are in a state of Enmity, and therefore in an accursed condition;
He that is not with me, is against me, says our Savior, Luke 11. 23. And,
Curse ye Meroz, said the Angel, curse them bitterly, because they came not to
the help of the Lord against the mighty, Judges 5. 23. Solon made a law, that
in such unnatural divisions as we are too well acquainted with, all that
would not apply themselves to one side or other, should be put to death,
because they would not adventure their private persons for the public good;
for men not to declare themselves at such a time, was not accounted Moderation,
but Treachery; because it is clear and evident, that men of that strain did but
wait for an opportunity to advance themselves, and betray the Commonwealth, by
going over to the stronger side, as some have lately done since the taking of
Bristoll: Pity it is that Solons law is not in force.

But there are diverse who are startled out of their Neutrality and
indifferency, who are still at their Wits end, and know not which side to
take; if they take part with the Parliament, they are afraid they shall resist
the Ordinance of God; and if they go over to the King and Queen, they are
afraid they shall join with those who labor to overthrow the Church and
Kingdom, by bringing in of Popery and Slavery both at once.

For the satisfaction of these ignorant and perplexed souls, it concerns them
to peruse the Parliamentary-Covenant, and the Court-Covenant, for one of these
Covenants must now be taken by every Man in the Kingdom.

The Court-Covenant:
First, for the Court-Covenant, there is nothing in it to assure us of the
Princely Truth and Goodness of Prince Rupert, or Prince Maurice, who have a
greater command in the Army, then His Majesty himself: 2. We are not yet
assured of the Queens Truth and Goodness, nor of the Truth and Goodness of
those Papists, English and Irish, who vow and swear, that they will maintain
the true Protestant Religion: 3. We cannot be assured, much less rest assured,
and fully assured of His Majestics Princely Truth, who has broken so many
solemn Protestations; nor of His Goodness, who sets His hand and seal to such
unmercifull and bloody Commissions, witness that Commission never to be
forgotten, which was sent to Tompkins the Queens Agent, to bear him and his
fellows out in a Plot as black as that of the Gunpowder-Treason.

Secondly, Moreover, every man that takes the Court-Covenant must say, I do
believe that the raising and employing of Forces by His Majesty, for the
purpose and cause before mentioned, to be most just and necessary. But all the
question is, Whether the King did raise, and does employ all His Forces and the
Queens, for the purpose aforesaid, that is, the maintenance of the Protestant
Religion; or rather it is out of question, that He does not employ them to that
purpose.

Thirdly, it is to be wondered at, that the Cavaliers, Negro's, Welsh and Irish,
etc. should endeavor to procure the re-establishment of the Peace and quiet of
this Kingdom; and that they should help His Majesty's Subjects to recover, nay
enjoy their Liberty and Property, according to the Law of the Land; for they
imprison the persons of good Subjects; Is that the way to help them to their
liberty? They take away their Estates; Is that the way to make them enjoy their
Property? And is all this done according to the Law of the Land?

Fourthly, they vow that they will not hinder or prejudice the Designs of His
Majesty, in the conduct or employment of His Army. Now, what Designs His
Majesty had upon Bristoll last March, and what Designs He had upon London but
the other day, is well known; And shall any Man bind himself from hindering
such black and bloody Designs, nay bind himself by a Covenant made with God,
from hindering Designs so extremely displeasing to the God of Heaven? Let even
Heathens judge in this particular; for it is against the very light of Nature,
to promote this unnatural War, and such unchristian, nay inhumane and
barbarous Designs.

Fifthly, it is very strange that any Englishman should believe, that the
Subjects of England are not bound by any Order or Ordinance of Parliament; for
an Order of the House of Commons does oblige all the Commons of England; and an
Ordinance of Lords and Commons does oblige all the Subjects of England.

Sixthly, it is beyond admiration, that the Roysters or Cavaliers vow that they
will not obey any Act or Declaration made by the Kings Majesty solely, which is
not according to some known Law, Custom of the Realm, or Statute enacted by
the King, Lords and Commons in Parliament: When as their taking up of Arms
against the Parliament, and such as are quiet in the Land, is directly contrary
to the Laws of the Land, and to all enacted Customs, as shall be shown anon;
nay sure they are not able to prove, that it has been a Custom to take up
Arms against the Parliament, we need not put them to prove that it has been a
Legal Custom.

Finally, though the Covenant did declare but now, that a Declaration made by
the Kings Majesty solely, does not oblige, yet here in the close there is a
shrewd intimation, that His Maj^st^es Warrant is sufficient to justify a man's
bearing of Arms; their practice does declare their intention; for if they have
but the Kings Warrant, they presently take up Arms, and are not so vain to stay
till the Lords and Commons give them leave to take up Arms against the
Parliament. But as wise as they are in framing a Covenant, a Parliament-Captain
may assent to the last words of the Covenant; for he that takes up Arms by the
Authority of Parliament, does take up Arms by Authority justly derived from His
Majesty's immediate Warrant; for they are His Majesty's highest Court and
Council, called by His Majesty's Writ, and what they do as the Supreme Court,
they do by the Kings own Authority.

So much for the Court-Covenant, taken by the Roysters, Cavaliers, Papists,
Delinquents, etc. in the Kings Army, and by too many simple and cowardly men,
who are under the power of the Army of the King or Queen.

The Parliamentary-Covenant:
In the next place, I shall give clear satisfaction to such Objections as are
urged against the Parliamentary-Covenant; some stumble at the Penitential,
others at the Civil part of the Covenant.

First, they say they are not prepared to enter into so strict a Covenant. To
this it is answered; 1. That they have above twice as much time given them to
prepare, as is usually given to prepare for the Sacrament. 2. Our Covenant of
Reformation, is a Covenant of Grace; and therefore we do not enter into this
Covenant, presuming upon our own, but trusting upon the free and effectual
Grace of God.

Others there are, who tell us that a Believer need not, nay ought not to
repent: Sure these men know not what Faith or Repentance means, for it is
impossible for any man but a Believer to repent. From whence do penitent
purposes arise, or penitent tears flow, but from the love of God, and hatred of
Sin; now no man but a Believer can love God, or hate Sin; and therefore no man
but a Believer can repent. It is clear and evident that no man will repent,
till he does believe that it is to some purpose to repent. He repents of his
sin, who repents from his sin, Heb. 6. 1. Now no man but a Believer can repent
from his sin.

And the self-same men are not ashamed to say; that the sins of Believers are
not charged upon their own persons, much less upon the Kingdom or Nation, and
therefore they should lie and be forsworn, if they should say and swear that
the Nation fares the worse for their sins.

To which I answer, that it is one thing to say that God does inflict
satisfactory punishments; and another to say, he does inflict exemplary
chastisements upon Believers, nay upon the Kingdom for their sake; for God may
pardon the sin of a people, and yet take vengeance of their inventions, Psalm.
99. 8. The anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, 2 Samuel 24. 1. and God
smote the people with pestilence, and yet David a penitent Believer, cries out,
Lo I have sinned, and I have done wickedly, but these sheep, what have they
done, in the 17. Verse of that chapter. If it may go ill with a Believer for a
rash word, because he speaks unadvisedly when his spirit is provoked, Psalm.
106. 32, 33. If God may visit their iniquity with stripes, from whom he does
not take his loving kindness, Psalm. 89. 32, 33. then certainly God may so far
impute iniquity to Believers, as to afflict them with temporal chastisements.
I read that the heart of Asa was perfect all his days, and therefore he was a
Believer, 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. but I read likewise, that the Kingdom was troubled
with wars, because Asa dealt foolishly, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. and therefore the whole
Kingdom may fare the worse for a Believers sake. If you ask why the sword did
not depart from David's house, the reason is given, because he despised God, and
took the Wife of Vriah, 2 Samuel 12. 10. Has not God written bitter things
enough against his people of late, to recall them from this error? God has
put it past dispute, that the Kingdom fares the worse for the carnal
confidence, security, unthankfulness, and unfruitfulnesse even of Believers.
And if any do yet make it a question, Whether or no they should be humbled in
these days of Humiliation, God will soon put it out of question. Oh let us
tremble under the hand of God, and say with David, Psalm. 119. 120. My flesh
trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments.

Another Objection is, That the King has vowed to be revenged on the
Parliament, and therefore we must not Covenant to defend the Parliament;
because by this means our Oath would be contrary to the Kings.

Sol. It is answered in a word, When Saul swore that Jonathan should dye, the
people swore he should not dye, 1 Samuel 14. 44, 45. And yet Doctor Fern grants
that these were good Subjects, because they used only a loving violence; and
yet here was not only a Resistance, but a Rescue and resistance with an oath,
and an oath contrary to the Kings oath. We may then swear, that if we can
prevent it, none of our Ionathans, no good Parliamentman, or Common-wealths-man
shall be put to death, unless he be legally condemned, but that if it lie in
our power, we will rescue them, as the people rescued Jonathan.

It is farther Objected, That this Covenant is not only against the Kings
Oath, but against our own Oath, the Oath of Allegiance.

For answer, be pleased to observe, That the Law does direct as well as oblige,
and we are obliged to follow the direction of the Law; our duty then according
to our Allegiance, is nothing else but our duty according to Law; if that the
King command any thing against Law, obedience to such a passionate command is
not Allegiance, but Dislegiance or disobedience; for he that disobeys the Law,
disobeys the King. Now it is clearly against the known Laws of the Land, to
join with those Forces which labor might and main to overthrow the Laws of the
Kingdom, and the Religion established by Law, under a pretense of defending the
King. 2. The Oath of Allegiance concerns our resistance of Foreign force; and
therefore the valiant Governor of Gloucester denied to give up the city to
Prince Rupert or Prince Maurice, because it was against his Oath of Allegiance,
to subject himself and the City to any Foreign Prince. 3. The
Parliament-Forces were raised for the defense of King and Parliament. 4. The
King is our Liege-Lord, as well as we are his Liege-people; and therefore He is
to command according to Law, and we to obey His Legal commands. That the
illegal Summons of a King is not to be regarded, is evident, 2 Kings 1. from
the ninth verse to the sixteenth, here is a Royal command sent by Military
Officers, the Summons was peremptory, Thou man of God, the King has said, Come
down: And yet the Prophets refusing to obey this command, is justified by two
miracles from heaven. 5. In the Oath of Allegiance we promise to defend the
Authority of the King; now we are ready to obey the Kings Authority, but we are
not bound to obey the Kings pleasure. If the King command a thing which He has
no Authority to command, and enforce His command upon His goods Subjects by an
Army, they that resist, do not in this case resist the ordinance of God, but
the violation of his ordinance; and though it be a resisting of the Supreme
Person, yet it is not a resisting of the Supreme Power; because the King has
no Power or Authority to give, much less to enforce that command. 6. In the
Oath of Allegiance we promise to defend the Government of the Kingdom; now the
King himself in His answer to the Nineteen Propositions tells us, That the
Kingdom is not governed by himself alone, but by the Lords and Commons also;
for though in one place he says, The Commons were never intended for any share
in Government; yet he says, The House of Commons is an excellent Conserver of
Liberty, and solely entrusted with the first Propositions concerning the
Leavies of Money, the sinews of War; and with the Impeaching of those, who for
their own ends have got a command from the King to break the Law: Nay farther,
that there is a Power legally placed in both Houses, which is more then
sufficient to prevent and restrain the power of Tyranny. This Power of the two
Houses, this sufficient, this more then sufficient power of restraining
Tyranny, must be defended by us, according to our Oath of Allegiance; for the
Kingdom is governed by the Courts of Justice, and if the highest Court the
Parliament be overthrown, what Justice is there to be hoped for in lower
Courts; The Government of the Kingdom will be overthrown. His Majesty adds in
the place forecited, page 20. That if one Estate be suffered to encroach upon
the rest (and the King is now most likely, nay does most dangerously encroach
upon the other two Estates) there will be a total subversion of, or overthrow
of the Fundamental Laws, and that excellent Constitution of this Kingdom,
which has made this Nation so many years both famous and happy. Finally we are
bound by our Oath of Allegiance, to defend the Subjects as well as the King,
and therefore we are perjured, if we do not now defend our Fellow Subjects from
that violence which is daily offered them, by those who pretend some Commission
from the King. We are therefore much encouraged by the Oath of Allegiance, to
defend the Parliament and our Country from all illegal oppressions, and by the
grace of God we will keep our Oath.

Their next Objection is, That there is nothing in this Covenant concerning the
Defense of the Kings person.

To which it is answered, That we have already engaged our selves to defend the
Kings person in a former Covenant, when we took the Protestation, and therefore
there was no necessity of repeating it in this Covenant. 2. The Kings person is
most endangered by those very forces who call themselves the Kings Guard; for
they put the King upon most dangerous attempts, they urge him to go into the
field, which if they loved him, they would never do. David was beloved of his
Subjects, and therefore his Subjects would not suffer him to go down into the
Battle. The King said unto the people, I will surely go forth with you my self
also. But the people answered, Thou shall not go forth, for thou art worth ten
thousand of us, 2 Samuel 18. 2, 3. It is true, the Kings person is in danger, but
who is in the fault? Not the Parliament, for they have like his great Counsel
advised him, like Christians prayed for him, like Subjects petitioned him, like
States treated with him, but all in vain. The Delinquents then are in fault,
who cried out, that the King was in danger, and now indeed they have made it
good, for the King was in no danger till he came into their hands, only they
themselves were in danger of a Legal Trial, and therefore under pretense of
protecting the King, the truth is, they endanger the King, to protect
themselves from a Court of Justice. If they did not love themselves better then
the King, they would adventure themselves, and keep the King out of danger.

It is farther objected, that it seems unlawful to enter into Covenant against
those Forces which are raised by the King.

There are three things very considerable for the satisfying of this doubt; 1.
Whether the Forces which are raised by the King, have been legally raised. 2.
What kind of Forces they are which are raised. 3. Against whom they employ
their strength now they are raised.

For the first, It is the known Law of the Land, that the King ought not to
raise any Forces, whilst a Parliament is sitting, without consent of
Parliament. 2. The Ports, Forts, Navy, Ammunition of England, belong to the
Kingdom in point of Interest and Propriety, and to the King only in point of
Trust, for the use, service, and defense of the Kingdom. 3. It is against the
intent and scope of the late Law of Press or Levy, made this very Parliament;
The King himself then has delivered His deliberate Judgment concerning this
point, and declared the raising of Forces without consent of Parliament, to be
Illegal. What scruple then can remain? It being most lawful to defend our
selves from unlawful force.

The second point considerable is, what kind of Forces they are which are
raised: First, there are two Foreign Princes called in, who do plunder, rob,
murder, domineer at pleasure: and all wise men will confess, that the nearer
they are to the Crown, and the better they are esteemed and beloved in the
Army, the more danger there is to the King and His Royal Issue. Some
Statesmen, not long since, were so jealous of that Family, that they would not
have had it mentioned in our Prayers; but we are now grown so secure, that they
may be trusted with an Army. But we have not only Foreign Princes, and
barbarous Welsh-men, but wild Irish, professed Rebels, and more black
Regiments then one. 2. There are Delinquents up in Arms, some that broke
prison, others that fled beyond the Seas to avoid the stroke of Justice; now
these are protected contrary to Law, they cannot be pardoned before trial, nor
should they be kept from trial, nay it is a question whether the King alone
can pardon them after trial, for they who have offended against the three
Estates, must be pardoned by all three, if Equity and Reason may prevail. 3.
Papists are armed, contrary to Law. Now whether the Commonwealth of England,
legally assembled in Parliament, may not protect the Kingdom against an Army of
Malignants, Fugitives, Delinquents, evil-Counsellors, Papists, Rebels,
Foreigners, we appeal to the conscience of mankind, let the world judge.

We are engaged by that solemn Protestation which was taken all England over,
by the Kings consent, to use our utmost power and diligence to bring such
persons as these to their deserved punishment; and the wisest of Kings assures
us, that this is the only means to establish the Kings Throne, and
consequently to quiet the Kingdom, Prove. 25. 5. Take away the wicked from
before the King, and His Throne shall be established in righteousness. The
direction is especially given to Magistrates and Courts of Justice, and
therefore to the highest Court the Parliament; for the King being blinded and
seduced by them, is not likely to put them away, but rather to protect, prefer
them. Now the Parliament has used all fair ways to take away these Malignants
from before the King, they have presented an humble Petition, they have
presented a Legal Summons, they are now forced to send a Legal Army, that
these protected Delinquents may be brought to a Legal trial; for their Legal
Summons was derided, the Messenger committed and abused, witness the Summons
sent to the Fourteen Yorkshire Gentlemen for disturbing the Peace; the
Gentlemen being cited to appear before the Parliament, refused, and alleged
His Majesty's Warrant for their stay. We need say nothing of the protection and
rescue of Beckwith that Iesuited Papist, the Story is sufficiently known.

The third thing considerable is, against whom these Forces; raised by the King
and Queen, employ their strength; The King has now declared, That he will not
Treat any more with the Lords and Commons under the notion of a Parliament, and
His Soldiers presently shoot or apprehend any man that declares himself for
King and Parliament, and some of them drink Healths upon their knees to the
confusion of the Parliament.

Now to fight against the Parliament, is to fight against the King and the
Kingdom both at once; against the King, because the Parliament is the Kings
Court, His highest Court, from whence there is no appeal, and therefore they
who oppose that Court, are guilty of the highest Rebellion, because they oppose
the Kings highest Power and Authority: The Parliament then fighting for the
maintenance of the Kings Authority in that Court, and the Cavaliers fighting
against it, is clear and evident, that the Parliament fight for the King, and
the Cavaliers against Him, because they that oppose the Kings Authority in His
Courts, do manifestly oppose the King. And if the King in person be so far
seduced, as to oppose the Authority of that Court, we ought not to assist the
King, in opposing of His own Authority; for by that means we should disobey His
Authority, that we might obey His pleasure, which every wise man and good
Subject will count most absurd. Malignants and Cavaliers might learn by the
Lord of Straffords case, That the Kings personal or verbal command will not
bear them out against the Kings Legal Power and Authority in His highest
Court. Moreover, to fight against the Parliament, is to fight against the
Kingdom, for the Parliament is the Representative Body of the Kingdom, and if
that Court be overthrown, then farewell Religion, Liberty, Law and all.
Finally, the Kings Army employ their strength against all strict and pure
Protestants, they do either plunder, imprison, or murder them in all places
where ere they come; whereby it is evident, that they fight against the
Religion established by Law, and endeavor by force and violence to root all
cordial and sincere Protestants out of the Kingdom: In a word, they would by
an absolute Conquest make all the Subjects of England slaves, to that so much
affected absolute and Arbitrary Power, and make all the wealth, etc. of the
Kingdom a present booty to their Pride, Lust, Malice, Covetuousnesse, and what
not?

But the great question is, Whether the Parliament has Power to raise an Army
without the consent of the King?

First, the King has consented that this Parliament should not be dissolved,
without the consent of Lords and Commons, but should have the full Power and
Privileges of a Parliament. Now the Parliament by its ordinary Power, as a
Court of Judicature, can declare, and enforce Law, and therefore may in case of
resistance, compel stubborn Delinquents by force of Arms to abide a Legal
trial; for this may be done by an inferior Court, and therefore much more by
the highest Court. Now this Power being settled in the Parliament by Law, it is
settled there by the Kings consent; And therefore no man can say, that the
Parliament does raise Forces without the Kings consent. But on the other side,
the King cannot raise Forces by His own personal command, without consent of
the Parliament, because the King in His own person is not a Legal Court of
Justice.

2. In case that the whole frame of the State be endangered, and the
Commonwealth like to be ruined, The Parliament has a privilege to do what in
their wisdom seems meet for the preservation of the kingdom, For the safety of
the people is the highest Law, an higher Law then Statute Law, for all Statutes
must give place to it, and therefore the Parliament need not urge Statute for
those things which they do by Privilege, as the highest Counsel, and the
highest Court; nay when they seem to break Statutes according to their Letter,
they fulfill them according to their scope and intent, for the scope and intent
of all Laws, is to preserve the kingdom, by preserving the Properties,
Liberties, Lives of the people, and preventing or restraining Acts of
Oppression and Tyranny; That the Parliament has such a Power, a Legal and
sufficient Power, to prevent and restrain Tyranny, is acknowledged by the King
himself, as has been already shown.

3. This Privilege of the Parliament tends not only to the preservation of
the kingdom, but to the preservation of the King himself; For as it is in the
natural body, if there be a mortal wound in the body, the head dies as well as
the body; so is it in the Body Politic, if there be a mortal wound given to
the State and Commonwealth, the king and the kingdom will both perish
together, for it is impossible He should be a king without a kingdom.

4. The two Estates of Lords and Commons have more power to preserve the
kingdom, then the king has to destroy it; for the two Estates, by the very
Fundamentalls of Government, are bound to prevent the dissolution of the
established frame, and the primary intention of the frame in such States as
ours, justifies the exercise of any Power conducing to the safety of the
community and Government established, as is proved at large in a modest
Treatise of Monarchy, lately published by an earnest desirer of his Countries
Peace, in the Second and Fourth Chapters of the First Part, and in the Third
and Fifth Chapters of the Second part. For it is clear and evident, that the two
Estates were purposely Ordained to prevent or restrain the excesses of the
third, and therefore their Power is not wholly dependent upon, and derived from
the third, because then their Power would be insufficient to compass that very
end for which they were Ordained; For to go about to restrain and limit a
Governor, by a Power wholly subject to, and depending on himself, is all one,
as to leave him at large without any limitation at all. Besides, it is manifest
that the two Estates have a share in the highest act of the highest Power, to
wit, the making of Laws, and therefore they have a share in the highest Power
it self, and by virtue of that Power may supply the defects, and curb the
wilfulness of a Passionate King, who affects an Absolute or Arbitrary
Government.

5. The Parliament has a Power to re-call all the Illegal Commissions which
the King has granted to Foreign Princes, Papists, Delinquents, Cavaliers, or
any other, and to disanull or damn them, by pronouncing them to be void in Law,
and therefore of none effect. And, nothing is more usual, then for a
Parliament to damn Illegal Commissions, Patents, Writs, etc. and therefore no
Commission of Array can justify the proceedings of those hot spirits who are
risen in Rebellion against the Parliament, the State and Commonwealth of this
Realm.

But you will say, that in this Vow you do likewise promise to defend and maintain
others in whatsoever they shall do in purfuance of this Vow and Covenant, and
you do not know what excesses your Confederates may run into.

The answer is easy, You are bound to assist them according to your power or
vocation; if then they demand some assistance that is beyond your power, you
are not bound to an Impossibility, this yoke is easy, and burden light.
Again, if they call upon you to do any thing that is sinful, that is not a
Vocation, but a Temptation, you may refuse. Besides, you are to assist him in
the pursuance of this Vow; now every man that takes this Covenant, does in the
beginning of it, Covenant to amend his ways; and therefore you may remember
your friend or neighbor, that he must set upon a work worthy of a Reformed
Protestant, because he has entered into a Covenant of amendment or Reformation,
and then you will, according to your power and vocation, assist him in the
pursuance of his Vow of Reformation, though it cost you your life; for that
Text must in these times work powerfully upon all tender consciences: We ought
to lay down our lives for the brethren, 1 Ioh. 3. 16. not only for our
Brethren in a spiritual sense, but for our brethren in civil respects; If I
would have my brethren of the same Town or City, my brother-Subject, my
brother-English-man, to lay down his life for me, I am bound by the Law of
Nature, To do as I would be done by; namely, to lay down my life for him: Let
us therefore in obedience to the Law of God, the Laws of the Land, and the
Authority of the highest Court of the Kingdom, according to our power and
vocation, take away the wicked from before the King; if we love the King let us
do it, for by that means the Kings Throne will be established: Let us lay down
our lives for God and our brethren, that Religion, Kingdom, Throne, Law,
Liberty, Peace and all may be established;

Amen, Amen.
Imprimatur

Ja: Cranford.

FINIS.

