THE UNANIMITY and LOYALTY Of the Famous TOWN of Kingstone upon Hull.
SIR Michael Wharton Knight, and William Gee Esquire, Burgesles for the said
Town in the last Parliament, having given Intimation to the Magistrates of
their willingness to serve them and their Country in the ensuing Parliament,
the Mayor and Aldermen immediately thereupon assembled, and came to a
Resolution of accepting their Generous Offers, and to return them thanks for
their past Services; which was seconded by another of the Eminentest Burgesses,
and others the Electors, in the words following.

Worthy Gentlemen,
WE understand you have signified to our Magistrates your willingness to
represent us in the ensuing Parliament, and that they have gratefully accepted
of your generous Offer, which if they had communicated to us, our joint
compliance would have been readily manifested; for we are sensible of your
integrity in the late Parliament by your indefatigable care and pains in
endeavoring the security of his Majesty's Sacred Person, as also our Religion
and Property, that we cannot but rejoice that you are pleased again to offer us
that kindness, which your former good Service has engaged us to become Suitors
for. We do therefore return you our hearty thanks, and you may be confident,
without your appearance, or the least charge, to have all our Suffrages Nemine
contradicente, and will, as our Obligations binds us, stand by your
proceedings, as becomes loyal Subjects and true Englishmen; subscribing our
selves,

Your obliged and affectionate Friends and Servants, etc.

Which was subscribed by Matthew Johnson Esquire Sheriff of the said Town, and 122
more.



