THE PROPHECY OF Bishop Usher. Unto which is Added TWO LETTERS, ONE FROM Sir
WILLIAM BOSWELL (Ambassador at the Hague) To the Most Reverend WILLIAM LAUD,
Late Archbishop of Canterbury. The other from the Reverend JOHN BRAMHALL,
Bishop of Derry in IRELAND, To the Most Reverend JAMES USHER, Late Archbishop
of Armah.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1687.

THE PROPHECY OF Bishop Usher.
THE Prediction of the most Learned and Pious Archbishop Usher, is very
remarkable, as it was Printed about seven years ago with License, and the Truth
of the matter of Fact therein delivered, never that I know of denied, but
confirmed by many, which in short was thus. -- That the year before this holy
Primate died (who was Buried in the Abbey at Westminster 17 of April, 1656. The
Usuper Cromwell allowing 2001. toward his Funeral, so great his Worth, that it
even charmed that Tyrant, otherwise far from being a Friend to any of his
Profession:) An intimate Friend of the Archbishop's asking him (amongst other
discourse) what his present Apprehensions were concerning a very great
Persecution which should fall upon the Church of God in these Nations of
England, Scotland and Ireland, (of which he had heard him speak with great
confidence many years before, when we were in the highest and fullest state of
outward peace and settlement) and whether he did believe those sad Times to be
past, or that they were yet to come? He answered -- That they were yet to come,
and that he did as confidently expect it as ever be had done. Adding, That this
sad Persecution would fall upon all the Protestant Churches of Europe. His
Friend arguing, that he hoped the afflicton might now be over, and be intended
of our late calamitous Civil Wars. The Reverend Prelate turning toward him,
and fixing his Eyes upon him with that serious and severe Look which he usually
had when he spoke God's Word, and not his own, and when the Power of God seemed
to be upon him, and to constrain him to speak, said thus: Fool not your selves
with such hopes, for I tell you, all you have yet seen, has been but the
beginning of sorrows to what is yet to come upon the Protestant Churches of
Christ, who will ere long fall under a sharper Persecution than ever yet has
been upon them; and therefore (said he to him) Look you be not found in the
outward Court, but a Worshiper in the Temple before the Altar, for Christ will
measure all those that profess his Name, and call themselves his People; and
Outward Worshipers he will leave out, to be trodden down by the Gentiles. The
Outward Court (says he) is the formal Christian, whose Religion l^es in
performing the outside duties of Christianity, without having an inward Life
and Power of Faith and Love, uniting them to Christ, and th^se God will leave
to be trodden down, and swept away by the Gentiles: But the Worshipers within
the Temple, and before the Altar, are those who do indeed Worship God in Spirit
and in Truth, whose Souls are made his Temples, and he is honored and adored
in the most inward thoughts of their Hearts, and they sacrifice their Lusts and
vile affections, yea, and there own Wills to him; and th^se God will bide in
the hollow of his Hand, and under the shadow of his Wings? and this shall be
one great difference between this last, and all the other preceding
Persecutions, For in the former, the most eminent and Spiritual Ministers and
Christians did generally suffer m^st, and were most violently fallen upon, but
in this last Persecution, these shall be preserved by God as a Seed to partake
of that Glory which shall immediately follow and come upon the Church, as soon
as ever this storm shall be over; for as it shall be the sharpest, so it shall
be the shortest Persecution of them all; and shall only take away the gross
Hypocrites and formal Professors, but the true Spiritual Believers shall be
preserved till the Calamity be over past.

His Friend then asked him, By what means or Instruments this great Trial
should be brought on. He answered, by the Papists. His Friend replied, That it
seemed very improbable they should be able to do it, since they were now little
countenanced, and but few in these Nations, and that the Hearts of the People
were more set against them than ever since the Reformation. He answered again,
That it would be by the hands of Papists, and in the way of a sudden Massacre,
and that the then Pope should be the chief Instrument of it.

He also added, That the Papists were in his Opinion the Gentiles spoken of,
Rev. 11. to whom the Outward Court should be left, that they might tread it
under Foot* they having received the Gentiles worship in their adoring Images,
and Saints departed, and in taking to themselves many Mediators: And this (said
he) the Papists are now designing among themselves, and therefore be sure you
be ready.

This gracious man repeated the same things in Substance to his only Daughter
the Lady Tyrril, and that with many Tears, and much about the same time.

A Letter from Sir William Boswell, to the most Reverend William Laud, late
Archbishop of Canterbury, remaining with Sir Robert Cotton's choice Papers.
Most Reverend;
AS I am here employed by our Sovereign Lord the King, vour Grace can testify
that I have left no Stone unturned for his Majesty's Advancement; neither can I
omit (whenever I meet with Treacheries or Conspiracies against the Church and
State of England) the sending your Grace an Account in General. I fear Matters
will not answer your expectations, if your Grace do but seriously weigh them
with deliberation. For be you assure, d, the Romish Clergy have gulled the
misled Party of our English Nation, and that under a Puritanical Dress; for
which the several Fraternities of that Church, have lately received Indulgence
from the Sea of Rome, and Council of Cardinals, or to educate several of the
young Fry of the Church of Rome, who be Natives of his Majesty's Realms and
Dominions, and instruct them in all manner of Principles and Tenants contrary
to the Episcopacy of the Church of England.

There be in the Town of Hague, to my certain Knowledge, two dangerous
Impostors, of whom I have given notice to the Prince of Orange, who have large
Indulgences granted them, and known to be of the Church of Rome, although they
seem Puritans, and do converse with several of our English Factors.

The one, James Murray a Scotchman, and the other John Napper, a Yorkshire
Blade. The main drift of these Intentions is, to pull down the English
Episcopacy, as being the chief Support of the Imperial Crown of our Nation: For
which purpose above sixty Romish Clergymen are gone within these two Years out
of the Monasteries of the French King's Dominions, to Preach up the Scotch
Covenant, and Mr. Knox his Discriptions and Rules within that Kirk, and to
spread the same about the Nothern Coasts of England. Let therefore His Majesty
have an inkling of these Crotchets, that he might be persuaded, whenever
Matters of the Church come before you, to refer them to your Grace, and the
Episcopal Party of the Realm: For there be great Preparations making ready
against the Liturgy and Ceremonies of the Church of England: and all evil
Contrivances here and in France, and in other Protestant Holdings to make your
Grace and the Episcopacy odious to all Reformed Protestants abroad: It has
wrought so much on diverse of the Foreign Ministers of the Protestants, that
they esteem our Clergy little better than Papists. The main things that they
hit in our Teath are, our Bishops to be called Lords; The Service of the
Church; The Cross in Baptism; Confirmation; Bowing at the Name of Jesus; The
Communion Tables placed Alter-ways; Our manner of Consecrations: And several
other Matters which be of late buzzed into the Heads of the Foreign Clergy, to
make your Grievances the less regarded in case of a Change, which is aimed at,
if not speedily prevented.

Your Grace's Letter is carefully delivered by my Gentleman's own Hands unto
the Prince.

Thus craving your Graces hearty Prayers for my Undertakings abroad, as also
for my safe arrival, that I may have the Freedom to kiss your Grace's Hands,
and to tell you more at large of these things; I rest,

Your Graces most Humble Servant, W. B.
Hague, June 12. 1640.

A Letter from the Right Reverend J. Bramhall Bishop of Derry; (afterward
Primate of Ireland) to the most Reverend James Usher Archbishop of Armagh.
Most Reverend;
I Thank God I do take my Pilgrimage patiently, yet I cannot but Condole the
Change of the Church and State of England. And more in my Pilgrimage than ever,
because I dare not witness and declare to that straying Flock of our Brethren
in England, who have misled them, and who they are that feed them. But that
your Lordship may be more sensible of the Churches Calamities, and of the
Dange^s she is in of being ruined, if God be not Merciful unto Her, I have sent
you a part of my Discoveries, and it from credible Hands, at this present
having so sure a Messenger, and so fit an Opportunity.

It plainly appears, that in the Year 1646, by Order from Rome, above, 100 of
the Romish Clergy were sent into England, consisting of English, Scotch, and
Irish, who had been Educated in France, Italy, Germany, and Spain; part of
these within the several Schools there appointed for their Iustructions. In
each of these Romish Nurseries, these Scholars were Taught several
Handicraft-Trades and Callings, as their Ingenuities were most bending, besides
their Orders, or Functions of that Church.

They have many yet at Paris a fitting up to be sent over, who twice in the
week oppose one the other; one pretending Presbytery, the other Independency;
some Anabaptism, and other contrary Tenants, dangerous and prejudicial to the
Church of England, and to all the Reformed Churches here abroad. But they are
wisely preparing to prevent these Designs, which I heartily wish were
considered in England among the Wise there.

When the Romish Orders do thus Argue Pro and Con, there is appointed one of
the Learned of those Convents to take Notes and to Judge: And as he finds their
fancies, whether for Presbytery, Independency, Anabaptism, Atheism, or for any
new Tenants, so accordingly they be to act, and to exercise their Wits. Upon
their Permission when they be sent abroad, they enter their Names in the
Convent Registry, also their Licenses: If a Franciscan, if a Dominican, or
Jesuit, or any other Order, having several Names there Entered in their
License; in case of a discovery in one place, then to fly to another, and there
to change their Names or Habit.

For an assurance of their Constancy to their several Orders, they are to give
Monthly Intelligence to their Fraternities, of all Affairs wherever they be
dispersed: so that the English abroad, know News better than ye at home.

When they Return into England, they are Taught their Lesson, to say (if any
enquire from whence they come) that they were poor Christians formerly that
fled Beyond Sea for their Religion-sake, and are now Returned, with glad News,
to enjoy their Liberty of Conscience.

The 100 Men that went over 1646; were most of them Soldiers in the
Parliament's Army, and were daily to correspond with those Romanists in our
late King's Army, that were lately at Oxford, and pretended to Fight for His
Sacred Majesty: For at that time, there were some Roman Catholics who did not
know the Design a contriving against our Church and State of England.

But the Year following, 1647, many of those Romish Orders, who came over the
Year before, were in consultation together, knowing each other. And those of
the King's Party asking some why they took with the Parliament's side, and
asking others whether they were bewitched to turn Puritans, not knowing the
Design: But at last, secret Bulls, and Licenses being produced by those of the
Parliament's side, it was declared between them, there was no better Design to
Confound the Church of England, than by pretending Liberty of Conscience. It
was Argued then, that England would be a second Holland, a Commonwealth; and
if so, what would become of the King? It was answered, Would to God it were
come to that point. It was again replied, your selves have Preached so much
against Rome, and his Holiness, that Rome and her Romanists will be little the
better for that Change: But it was answered, You shall have Mass sufficient for
100000 in a short space, and the Governors never the wiser. Then some of the
mercifullest of the Romanist said, This cannot be done unless the King Die:
upon which Argument, the Romish Orders thus Licenced, and in the Parliament
Army, Wrote unto their several Convents, but especially to the Sorbonists,
whether it may be Scrupled to make away our late Godly King, and His Majesty
His Son, our King and Master; who, Blessed be God, has Escaped their Romish
Snares laid for him? It was returned from the Sorbonists. That it was Lawful
for Roman Catholics to work Changes in Governments for the Mother Churches
Advancement, and chiefly in an Heretical Kingdom? and so lawfully make away the
King.

Thus much to my knowledge, have I seen and heard since my leaving your
Lordship, which I thought very requisite to inform your Grace; for my self
would hardly have credited these things, had not mine Eyes seen sure Evidence
of the same. Let these things Sleep within your Gracious Lordships Breast, and
not awake but upon sure Grounds, for this Age can trust no Man, there being so
great Fallacy amongst Men. So the Lord preserve your Lordship in Health, for
the Nations Good, and the Benefit of your Friends; which shall be the Prayers of

Your Humble Servant, J. Derensis.
July, 20. 1654.

These two Letters were taken out of that Treasury of choice Letters Published
by Dr. Parr, his Lordships Chaplain, and Printed for Nathaniel Ranew at the
Kings-Arms, in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1686.

FINIS.

