A VINDICATION OF Jesus Christ, The Immaculate Lamb of God, From the Foul and
Blasphemous Imputation of one Thomas Powel a Preacher amongst the Independents,
who affirmed, That Jesus Christ was the Greatest Sinner in the World.

With an Answer to a Paper put forth by him, entitled, A Word to the Wise is
enough.

Also, A Warning to him, that he persist nor abide no longer in Lying and
making Lies his Refuge, lest the Wrath of God break forth upon him, and there
be no Remedy.

By JONH VAUGHTON, in Scorn called a Quaker.

We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous,

1 John 2.1. -- How much more shall the Blood of Christ, who through the
Eternal Spirit offered himself without Spot to God, purge your Consciences from
dead Works, to serve the living God,

Hebr. 9.14. -- For we have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the
Feeling of our Infirmities but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet
Without Sin,

Hebr. 4.15. Printed in the Year, 1676.

Friendly Reader,
THe Reason why this Discourse was published, is to give thee a true Account
upon what Occasion Thomas Powell affirmed, That Jesus Christ was the greatest
Sinner in the World; and may serve for the stopping of the many Lies that he
has told about it.

J. V.

Something of a Discourse that past between one Thomas Powell, who calls
himself a Minister of the Gospel; and John Vaughton* who by many in scorn is
called a Quaker; the 29th of the 2d Month called April, 1676.
T. Powel, YOu Quakers hold Damnable and Erroneous Doctrine.


John Vaughton, What Doctrine is that we hold that is Erroneous or Damnable?


T. P. You hold Perfection.


J. V: We say, that God is perfect, and his Works are all perfect.


T. P. There are none perfect who are not free from Temptation.


J.V. Christ Jesus was tempted, was not he perfect?


T. P. He was the Greatest Sinner in the World.


J. V. Who was the Greatest Sinner in the World?


T.P. Christ Jesus was the Greatest Sinner in the World.


J. V. Will thou give me that under thy Hand?


T. P. Yes [and then he writ these words, Christ Jesus was the Greatest Sinner
in the World, I Thomas Powell Minister of the Gospel affirms.]


J. V. I deny thee to be a Gospel-Minister; for the Gospel Ministers never
preached that Doctrine; for the Apostle said, He did no Sin, neither was Guile
found in his Mouth; and the Apostle John said, We have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ, the Righteous; he did not say, Jesus Christ was the
Greatest Sinner in the World. And I do testify in the Name of God, who is pure
forever, thou art an Enemy to Christ Jesus; for he was and is pure forever: and
blessed be the Name of the Lord, who has brought a Remnant to the Knowledge of
him: and we know, that every Manifestation of him and Appearance of him is
pure, and he stands a Witness against all that is impure and unholy: And
therefore I do say unto thee in the Fear of God, That thou art an Enemy to
Christ Jesus, and art a Minister of the Power of Darkness, and art in the same
spirit as were those Hypocritical Jews, who, when the Man that was born blind
was brought unto them (after Christ had opened his Eyes) they said unto him
that was born blind, Who opened thy Eyes? and he said, Jesus: but said those
Hypocrites to the Man, Give God the Glory, for this man is a Sinner. But thou
have exceeded them; they said, he was a Sinner; and thou say, he was the
greatest Sinner in the World: But the Man who had his Eyes opened by him said,
God hears not Sinners. But God the Father ever heard his Son Christ Jesus; for
he did always those things that were well-pleasing in his Sight.

Note, That when I had given this Testimony T.P. in an Ishmaelite spirit
vaunted and said as follows.


T.P. I have spoken a Thesis, and you are a silly ignorant People, and do not
understand Divinity.


J. V. I am a Plain Man, and do speak as I think, and as I certainly know,
through a good Experience, that Christ Jesus is holy and pure forever, and I
have no Unity with thy Thesis; and this is my Testimony unto thee, Thou art
ignorant of the Divine and Heavenly Power of God, which is Christ Jesus, who is
holy and pure forever; and thou have said, He was the greatest Sinner in the
World: Oh! stop thy Mouth for Shame; for this is my Testimony, God will dry up
the Tongue of the Egyptian Sea.


T. P. What, do you own Revelation in these days?


J. V. Yes, we do own Revelation in these days.


T. P. Then burn the Bible; for if there be Revelation in these our days,
there is no need of the Scriptures; but there is no Revelation in these days.


J. V. Then there is no Knowledge of God; for Christ Jesus has said, No man
knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him.


T. P. You Quakers do own Vision too, do you not?


J. V. Yes, we do own Vision; for, where there is no Vision, the People perish;
for Vision is a Sight or Seeing, and the pure in Heart sees God; but thou art
not in that which is pure, who have charged Christ Jesus to be the Greatest
Sinner in the World.


Then a Young Man of T. P's Hearers asked this Question, Seeing you are but a
People of about Twenty Five Years standing, and you say, that your Way is the
Right Way, What became of the people that dyed before you were a People?

Thomas Powell takes upon him to answer it in the Name of the Quakers thus,
They (said he) believe that they are all damned.

[Mark] So great was his Envy and Malice unto the despised and reproached
Quakers, and so wicked is he, to endeavor to insense his Hearer with this his
Lie and Slander against them, notwithstanding I gave this Answer in the name of
my Friends, whom T.P. had thus belyed, as our testimony that we did believe
according to the testimony of Holy Scriptures, that in every Age and Generation
he that feared God and wrought Righteousness was accepted of him: But he still
did say, and that in a laughing, light and airy manner, That we did believe
that they were all damned; thus did he persist in his Belying and Slandering of
us; such was the Power of Darkness in this Minister of the Gospel, as he calls
himself, that we must believe (or at least he would) if he could make us
believe as he had said, notwithstanding I gave our Testimony to the contrary.

Something in Answer to T.P's Paper, entitled, A Word to the Wise is enough.
With a few words as a Warning to him, that he no longer persist in Lying.
Tho. Powell having spoken these words, and given them under his Hand the 29th
2d Mon. 1676. viz. Jesus Christ was the Greatest Sinner in the World, I Thomas
Powel Minister of the Gospel affirms; which Affirmation of T. P 's was
immediately denied, and he born Testimony against, for this his Blasphemous
Expression; and two days after I did desire him to condemn his words, but he
refused it, and said, Shall I condemn that which I can prove, and most Divines
of our Way hold? and you are Wretches and damned if you do not believe it. Then
it was laid upon me from the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, to go to the
Meetings where T. Powell did preach, and give my Testimony to the purity of
Christ Jesus; and also it was with me, to give the People some Papers, with T.
P's own words inserted in them, with Directions to those that questioned the
Truth of it, where they might see the Original under his own hand; which thing
was not done in a spirit of Prejudice, or with a Design to asperse or cast a
Calumny upon T. Powell who terms himself Preacher of the Gospel, as he falsely
insinuates: But to manifest and to make it appear, that he is not what he
intitleth himself to be, inasmuch as he would not own Jesus Christ to be
perfect, as in the Discourse does plainly appear; but on the contrary, affirms
him to be the greatest Sinner in the World: But T. P. perceiving the
Dissatisfaction of some, and being not able to stand by his Affirmation, about
three Months after put forth a printed Paper, and intitles it, A Word to the
Wise is enough, and says, He thought it convenient to give the World this
satisfaction, that though those words, Jesus Christ was the Greatest Sinner in
the World, were given under his hand to John Vaughton Quaker, yet that was his
Sense, and is his Sense still, viz. by Imputation, and was repeated by him
several times, even before and after he had writ those Words. Now Tho. Bye has
since this Paper was published, declared in the presence of several Persons
that T.P. did not speak nor mention the Word Imputation before he writ those
Words, so that the World may see, that he has abused his Witness. And for his
saying. The Quakers no Christians still made good, is another of his Lies, and
the contrary does appear, not only in Word and Doctrine, but in the Lives and
Conversations of those who are faithful to the Quakers Principle, the Light of
Christ Jesus manifested in them, whose Light is the Condemnation of the Evil
doer, and the Evil-doer cannot escape the Condemnation of it.

But Tho. Powel having now in print declared that he meant by Imputation, then
we must read his Words thus, I Thomas Powel Minister of the Gospel, affirms
Jesus Christ was the greatest Sinner in the World -- by Imputation. Now T. P.
with the rest of the Divines of thy Way, give us plain Scripture that says,
Jesus Christ was (by Peter, Paul, or any of the Ministers of the Gospel)
affirmed to be the greatest SINNER in the World by Imputation, and give us
plain Scripture that says, he took the Guilt of our Sins upon him; for though
it is said, Isa. 53.6. That he laid upon him the Iniquity of us all, or as the
Hebrew Word has it, He made the Iniquities of us all to meet on him, or as in
the 10th verse, it is said, He was made an Offering for Sin (it does not say,
he was guilty of Sin) Now T. P. give us a plain Scripture that says, Jesus
Christ by taking, bearing or suffering for Sinners, that he became guilty of
Sin, and that he was the greatest of Sinners; and give us a plain Scripture
that says, he has more Sins to answer for then any particular Sinner; for
though I have read of the Sins of David, whom I suppose you do believe was an
Elect Person, whose Sins were, as in Scripture recorded, Murder and Adultery,
yet I do not find by any Testimony of Scripture that Jesus Christ was guilty of
David's Sins, nor of Paul's Sins, who was a Persecutor of him in his Members,
nor of Peter's Sin, who denied him. And T. P. I query with thee whether thou be
an Elect Person or nay? if yea, then tell me, whether Jesus Christ be guilty of
thy Lies, some of which are hereafter mentioned, viz. T. P affirmed, that he
had writ the Word [Imputation] but the Original being showed, his Lie appeared,
and then he said, He had writ the Word, Imputation, but that John Vaughton
snatched the Paper from him, and this also was and is testified to be a Lie. Now
it is also to be considered that William Farrendine, one of T. P's. Divines,
said, that it was wicked men that imputed Jesus Christ to be the greatest
Sinner in the World, and that when he had seen what T. P. had writ, he said, he
was a Liar; for said William Farrindine, he told me the Word Imputation was in,
and he said, he would not stand by him for Ten Thousand Worlds, and that he
should not preach in his Meeting House till he had publicly condemned it; but
notwithstanding his Sayings, and fair Pretenses, he has permitted T. P. (who
has affirmed Jesus Christ to be that which he says, Wicked men imputed him to
be) to preach in his Meeting House without numbering him amongst wicked men. So
it appears plainly, notwithstanding the specious Pretenses of Tho. Powel, who
calls himself Preacher of the Gospel, he has not yet left off Lying, nor
forging of Lies.

A Copy of those Words, in which William Farrindine is made mention of, was
showed unto him, and he confessed unto the Truth thereof, and further said, T.
P. had told many Lies about this thing. So I have considered T. P's. Paper, and
perused the Scriptures therein cited, and they do not say, nor allow, that
Jesus Christ took the Guilt of Sin upon him, nor that he had more to answer for
then any particular Sinner, or that be was the greatest of Sinners, but give a
plain and evident Testimony to the Innocence and Purity of Christ Jesus, and to
the Love of the Father manifested in and through him, who gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a Peculiar
People, Zealous of Good Works, Tit. 2.14.

And so T. P. thou have not yet cleared thy self of thy Blasphemous Expression
or Position, as thou calls it, which was by thee affirmed.

And T. P. notwithstanding thou have been exhorted to Repentance, yet thou have
gone on, and persisted in preaching, and telling Lies unto the People, and
saying, The Quakers own Jesus Christ only as an Example, and deny him to be an
Offering for Sin, or a Propitiation for Sin; for which Lies and Slanders, with
many more that have and might be mentioned, God's Hand will meet with thee, and
if thou Repent not, will certainly appoint thee thy Portion with the Father of
Lies in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone; and therefore this is sent
as a Warning unto thee, in the Name of the Lord, and in Good will to thy Soul,
that thou no longer make Lies thy Refuge, and that thou no longer sell nor give
thy Lies and false Conceivings unto the people, lest the Wrath of God break
forth upon thee, and there be no Remedy. And thou have denied Revelation in
these days, by which only and alone the Knowledge of God comes to be attained.
And thou have denied Perfection, and said, its a Damnable and Erroneous
Doctrine, which manifests thy Ignorance of the Gift of God, for the Gift of God
is perfect, and Christ Jesus in the Gift of God, who is pure and holy forever,
that is our Testimony, and it shall stand over the Heads of all Opposers and
Gainsayers, and is that Stone which certainly shall grind them to Powder, who
falls not upon it so as to be broken by it from Sin, which separates man from
God, and withholds good things from the Soul. And notwithstanding I had been
at thy Meeting, yet these things did remain with me to write unto thee, that
thou might be left without Excuse, and that I might clear my Conscience in the
Sight of God, who have Good Will in my Heart unto all the Sons and Daughters of
men. And thou vain Boaster, who in the Pride of thy Heart, and in the
Exaltedness of thy Spirit said, Thou would throw down our Foundation; in that
also thou art found to be a Liar, and an Enemy to Christ Jesus; for he, to wit,
Christ Jesus, is our Foundation who abides pure and perfect forever, and in the
Strength of his Power we were enabled in the midst of thy Meeting, and that
before thy Face to bear a Testimony to his Purity, and thou wast then made to
confess to the People, Thou did not know what to do with us, except thou
should Thresh us, and Whip us, and put us into the Stocks; but the Lord our
God was with us, and his Power was felt by us, which carried us over all
Opposition; and thou could not stand that day before it (to wit, God's Power)
which remains with us, and is our Preservation; to whose Power be the Glory for
evermore.

John Vaughton.

POSTSCRIPT.
AND so dear and tenderhearted People, cease from having and Dependency on
Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils, and come to the Fear of the Lord, which
is the Beginning of true Wisdom, and a good Understanding have all they that
depart from Iniquity, and such will join no more with T. P. in those Duties
which he calls holy, Confusion; that which is holy is not sinful.
and yet says, they are Fly-blown with Sin (and that is a Shame to any People)
and his best Performances, which he has said in our Hearing were Bed ridden;
and we are sure the Spirit of the Lord led not to those Performances, but the
Spirit of the wicked One, which is called the Prince of the Power of the Air,
which rules in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience, which moved him at
Farrindine's Meeting to pray, that they might have no Dependency on Jesus
Christ within them; the Word Christ signifies Anointed; and the Apostle said to
such as believed in Christ, You have the Anointing in you, which will teach you
all things, which is Truth, and no Lie; and surely if it be sufficient to
teach, as we firmly and truly believe and know, that Christ, the Anointed of
God, being able, is worthy to be depended on for Teaching, who has said,
Without me ye can do nothing: Much more might be spoken to show and to make it
appear, that T. P. is no Gospel-Minister; but we being not willing to enlarge,
and also certainly knowing, that those who are faithful to the Manifestation of
God's Spirit in themselves, will certainly come to see him to be no Gospel-
Minister, but to be such an one as runs, and God never sent him; for had he
been sent of God to preach the Gospel, he would have known Christ to have been
revealed in him, and so to have had a Dependency on him, and a reverent Esteem
of him, as the Apostles and Ministers of Christ Jesus had, as you may read in
the holy Scriptures of Truth; for said the holy Apostle, When it pleased God,
who separated me from my Mother's Womb, and called me by his Grace, to reveal
his Son IN ME, that I might preach him among the Heathen, immediately I
conferred not with Flesh and Blood, etc. Gal. 1.15, 16. So that it is plain and
evident, that the Ground of the Apostle Paul's preaching Christ, was from God's
revealing him IN HIM: And this is my Testimony (whether you hear or forbear)
that none are sent of God to preach Christ Jesus, but such as know him to be
revealed IN THEM, and to live IN THEM; for that was the Ground of the Apostle's
preaching Christ, even from his knowing of him to be revealed IN HIM; and it is
not Flesh and Blood that reveals or gives the Knowledge of Christ Jesus, but
the Father, as you may read in Mat. 16.16, 17. where it is left upon Record,
that Christ said unto Peter, when he had confessed him to be the Son of God,
Flesh and Blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in
Heaven; and the Apostle Paul also said unto them that sought a Proof of Christ
speaking IN HIM, Examine your selves, whether you be in the Faith, prove your
own selves, know you not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is IN YOU,
except you be Reprobates? 2 Cor. 13.5. And in Romans 8.9. it is said, If any Man
has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his: So People consider these
Things, and compare the Prayer of your Priest (who would have no Dependency on
Christ within) and the Apostle's Testimony, who said, Even the Mystery which
has been hid from Ages and Generations, but now is made manifest to his
Saints, to whom God would make known what is the Riches of the Glory of this
Mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ IN YOU, the Hope of Glory, whom we
preach, warning every Man, and teaching every Man in all Wisdom, that we might
present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus, whereunto I also labor, striving,
according to his working, which works IN ME mightily, etc. Col. 1.26. to the
End: And so it is plain and evident, that the Apostle labored to present every
Man perfect in Christ Jesus, who also knew Christ to work mightily IN HIM for
that End; and surely he depended on him, as he was revealed in him, which made
him also to say, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives IN ME, and the Life that I
now live is by Faith in the Son of God, and this was the Treasure that they of
old witnessed in their earthen Vessels; and blessed be God forever, there is a
Remnant in this our Day, who have believed in Christ, and have had their
Dependency on him, as revealed in them, and do count him their chiefest
Treasure, having known the Drawings of the Father, in and through the Son of
his Love, who is known and witnessed to make his Abode in and among us,
according to his Promise in Days past unto his Disciples, when he told them,
that it is expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter
will not come, but if I go away, I will send the Comforter, the Spirit of
Truth, and it shall lead you into all Truth, and it shall reprove the World of
Sin, of Righteousness and of Judgment; so that it is plain, that the same Spirit
that is the Saints Leader and Comforter is the World's Reprover; and it is also
said, The Reproofs of Instruction is the Way to Life; so that if ever you come
to know Life and Peace to your immortal Souls, you must believe in, and obey,
and be subject unto the Spirit of Truth IN YOUR SELVES, that does reprove you
for Sin in your own Particulars; for we do testify in the Name of God that
lives forever, that the Spirit of Truth is come INTO the Hearts and Consciences
of People, not only to reprove for Sin; but those that do receive it, and
believe in it, come to know it to lead them out of Sin, and such come to know
the Sanctification of the Spirit, through believing in the Truth; and said
Christ Jesus, I am the Way, the Truth and the Life, and the Light of the World,
and there is no Man comes to the Father, but by me; who also said unto his
Disciples, He that is with you, shall be IN YOU; and as Christ said, We will
come (speaking of his Father) and make our Abode with you -- He that has the
Sen has Life, and he that has not the Son of God has not Life -- He that
believes on the Son has everlasting Life, John 14.23. 1 John 5.12. John. 3.36.
and he that believes not the Son shall not see Life, but the Wrath of God
abides on him; and Christ said unto his Disciples, I am the Vine, ye are the
Branches, he that abides IN ME, and I IN HIM, the same brings forth much
Fruit, for without me ye can do nothing; and to others he also said, Behold I
stand at the Door and knock, if ANY MAN will open unto me, I will come INTO
HIM, and sup with him, and he with me; so the Spirit says Come, and the Bride
says Come, and he that is athirst let him come, and drink of the Waters of
Life freely, that is the Desire of our Souls, who have tasted of the Goodness
of the Lord, that you also might come beyond all vain empty Profession to a
living Possession, and to have an Earnest of that Inheritance in that Life
which will endure, when Time here shall be no more.

From us who desire the Good and Welfare of all your Souls. John Vaughton John
Field.

Let Thomas Powel (and all others to whom these Lines may come) know, that our
owning and preaching Christ within, as the holy Apostles did, does not at all
gainsay or oppose Christ as he was manifest without in the Days of his Flesh;
for we have a dear and honorable Esteem unto our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
in all his Manifestations, both within and without; and he who professes and
talks of him only or wholly without, denying him any Place within Man, is a
Deceiver and an Antichrist.



THE END.

