Practica WALLIAE; OR THE PROCEEDINGS IN THE Great Sessions OF WALES:
Containing the Method and Practice of an ATTORNEY there, from an ORIGINAL to
the EXECUTION.

Whereunto is added, The Old Statute of Wales at large; And an Abridgement of
all the Statutes uniting Wales to England: with Tables of the Fees, and the
Matters therein contained.

By Rice Vaughan, late of Grays-Inne Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Twyford, John Streater, and Eliz. Flesher, Assigns
of Richard Atkins and Edward Atkins Esquires. 1672

Cum Gratia and Privilegio Regiae Majestatis.

Academiae Ganwbrigiensis Liber


To the Honorable Sr. JOB CHARLETON, Chief Justice of Chester. ROBERT MILWARD
Esquire One of the Commissioners of the Privy Seal. Sir THOMAS JONES, Sergeant at
Law. KENRICK EATON Esquire
Honored Sirs,
THIS Tract how little soever, yet contains within its Circuit the Interest and
Concerns of many worthy and Honorable Persons, to whom the late Author was in
hopes it would be no less acceptable then beneficial; especially if admitted
into your protections, who for the greatest Reason understand the management of
all Affairs therein discoursed. You cannot but know the many alterations that
happens in those Counties upon the uniting thereof unto the Crown of England;
for the better understanding of the then settlements there, upon which the
proceedings of these Courts are grounded, there is now added the effects of all
the Statutes yet remaining in force. So that in this short view, you see the
basis and superstructure of the Law, as it stands settled by Statutes, and the
usual and ordinary proceedings thereupon, with the just Fees, all reduced to
our modern Scale, which in the dead Author's behalf I offer to your Honors,
desiring to approve my self in all things,

Your Honors devoted Servant, T. M.

THE TABLE.
A.
ACtion, how to commence it in the great Sessions of Wales. page 2. Actions,
real proceedings therein speedy. p. 6, 7. Attorney must take care to understand
his Clyents business rightly. p. 7, 8. 36, 37. 70, 71. Alias dictus, where
necessary, and. e contra. p. 9. Account, proceedings therein. p. 26. Actions
upon Penal Statutes, how to be brought. ibid. Audita Querela, where it lies,
and, for what. p. 28, 29. Accedas ad Curiam, where it lies, and the nature of
it. p. 29, 30.
B.
Bill and Queritur how they differ. p. 2, 3. The return thereof speedy, and the
reason and effect of it. p. 3, 4. Bayl, who appears upon Bayl must be
discharged upon Bayl. p. 16. 35.
C.
Charges in a Suit in Wales, where the Debt exceeds not 40 d. p. 6. Concessit
solvere, the nature thereof, and Plea therein. p. 13, 14. Cape Petit, when to
be awarded, and when the grand Cape. p. 16, 17. 51. Costs, where it shall be
paid p. 17. 22. 26. Curia claudenda, the nature thereof, proceedings therein.
p. 27. Certiorari, the proceedings therein. p. 32, 33. Challenge, where it
lies, and why. p. 38, 39. 40, 45.
D.
Defendant not prejudiced but by his own Laches, and why. p 5. Declaration when
it must be b ought in, and filed. p. 11. Damages, a Writ of Enquiry of Damages,
where it lies. p. 15, 16. Distringas, Alias, Pluries, and Plus Pluries
Distringas, where to be sued out. ibid. Dower, the proceedings therein. p. 16.
Where a Writ to assign it shall be granted. p. 17. Detinue, the nature of the
Action, and the proceedings therein. p. 25.
E.
Execution how attainable. p. 5, 6. 60. ad 71. Essoyn without Warranty, the
ground of an Iterum Summoneas. p. 9. Error, Writs of Error where they lie, and
for what. p. 29. Proceedings therein. p. 30, 31. Executions, several sorts
thereof. p. 60. ad 70.
F.
Formedon, the Tenant may vouch therein. p. 19, 20. False Judgment, Writ of
false Judgment where it lies, p 29. Proceedings therein. p 31, 32. Fees of the
Prothonotary of North- Wales, in Causes real and mixed. p. 83, 84. Fees in
Personal Actions. p. 85, 86, 87. Other Fees rated and settled. p. 93. ad 100
H.
Homine Replegiando, where it lies. p. 25.
I.
Judgments by default, how obtained. p 4, 5. 9, 10, 11. Iterum Summoneas,
where grantable. p. 9. Judicium si, what it is. ibid. Issues, where to be
returned, p. 14, 15. Imparlance, where grantable, which in Latin is called, Li.
Lo. p. 20. Special and general, their difference. p. 21. Jury, their duty. p.
49. ad 60.
M.
De Muliere abducta cum bonis viris, the nature of it, and proceedings therein.
p. 27.
N.
Nonsuit, where it shall be entered. p. 17, 22. Nihil inde, when and where to
be entered. p. 21. Ne recipiatur, where it may be entered. p. 33.
O.
Original in what cases necessary. p. 10, 11. Oyer where it may be demanded. p.
12.
P.
Plaintiff, what he must do to obtain excution. p 5, 6, 9, 10. Pleas dilatory
seldom admitted in the Courts of Wales. p. 6. Pleadings usual in an Action of
Debt. p. 11, 12. Pleas in other cases. p. 12. Proceedings at the second
Sessions, when Issue is not joined at the first. p. 21. Partition, the
proceedings therein. p. 25, 26. Proceedings general in all causes. p. 38.
Q.
Queritur, the words thereof in diverse cases. p. 14. Quod ei deforceat, the
Writ and proceedings therein. p. 16, 17.
R.
Rule general and peremptory, p. 11. Right, Writ of right is conclusive, and
the Tenant may vouch therein. p. 19, 20. Replevin, the nature of the Action,
and the proceedings therein. p. 24, 25. Returno habendo, where and when to be
granted. p. 24 25. Rationabili part bonorum, the nature of it, and proceedings
therein. p. 27, 28. Recordare, where and for what it lies. p. 30. Rules settled
for businesses at the great Sessions. p 75, 76, 77, 78. Rules in the Chancery
there. p. 79, 80, 81, 82. Recovery, common Fees therein. p. 88, 89, 90.
S.
Sessions, great Sessions in Wales, the time of the summoning thereof. p. 1, 2.
The proceedings therein, p. 2. They have a Chancery in themselves. p. 7.
Summon^ and pledges to be returned. p. 9. Summons only in some cases, p. 11.
Sequatur sub suo periculo, a Writ where it is grantable. p. 19. Summons, ad
sequendum simul cum, where necessary. p. 19, 20. Summons and severance where
necessary. p. 20. Similis Narratio, what it is. p. 23. Statuta Walliae temp. E.
l. p. 101, ad 149. Statutes for uniting Wales to England. p. 150, ad finem.
T.
Titlixg of Actions truly very material to the Cause. p. 8, 9.
V.
Variance, where pleadable and why. p. 8. View of Lands where demandable. p.
23.
W.
Wager of Law where admitted. p. 11, 12. Withernam, the Writ where and why
grantable. p. 25. Waste, the proceedings therein. p. 26. Wales, Statutes of
Wales in the time of Ed. I. p. 101, ad 149. Wales united to England by several
Statutes, and the Abridgement thereof. p. 150, ad finem.
The Manner of the Proceedings in the Courts of the Great Sessions in the
Counties of Montgomery, Denbigh, and Flint, within North Wales, as it now is.
ABOUT three Weeks before every Great Sessions (by Warrant from the Chief
Justice of the Circuit) a general Writ of Summons is sent forth by the
Prothonotary to the Sheriff, by which the Sheriff is Commanded to Proclaim
throughout his County, that the general Great Sessions for the County is to be
holden at such a day and place: And that he Summon and give Warning to all
Justices of the Peace, etc. Officers, and other Persons whom it does concern,
that they appear at the day and place limited by the said Writ. Which
Proclamation being made on a Marketday, all Persons whatsoever (by the course
there holden) whether Plaintiffs or Defendants in Suits before depending, or
others who intend to Commence any Suits, and also all such who suspect any
Suits may be brought against them, are at their perils, according to the
general Summons before mentioned, to have their Attorneys in Court to prosecute
and defend the said Suits.

The Sessions being begun, The Plaintiffs who are to Commence Actions, do
retain their Attorneys, and bring their Actions, either by original Writ (as is
usual for all kind of Debts not finable upon the Original) which Writs are made
returnable the first day of the Sessions, and dated fifteen days before the
Sessions, or else by Bill or Queritur, which may be either for Debt, Trespass,
or upon the Case. And whether it be by Original, or else by Bill, or Queritur
the Defendant upon the Original, and first Bill, or Queritur, and all Process
(before appearance) thereupon awarded, is ever called in open Court, to come
forth and answer to the Plaintiff in such or such an Action (as the Case is)
and if by Original, the Defendant being thereupon called, and not appearing,
then a second Writ of Summons is awarded, returnable the next day after, which
being made by the Prothonotary, and sealed with the Judicial Seal of the Court,
and returned by the Sheriff, the Defendant is thereupon a second time called
openly in Court. And if then the Defendant appear not, the Plaintiff has
Judgment by Default.

So it is also in case the Action be brought by Queritur, or Bill, saving only
that Judgment is not in that case had before a third Writ of Summons issue,
and thereupon the Defendant being the third time called, do make Default:
whereas if by Original, there needs but one Writ of Summons, besides the
Original it self.

The first Bill or Queritur, commonly bears date the first day of the great
Sessions, or the day when the Attorney sueth it forth, and is returnable the
next day after the date of it; whereupon if the Defendant, being openly called
in Court, appear not, then a second Writ to Summon the Defendan-again is
awarded; whereupon if the Defendant being the second time called, appear not,
then a third Bill or Queritur, to Summon the Defendant, is awarded; whereupon
if the Defendant being called a third time, appear not, then the Plaintiff has
Judgment by Default. And these Writs are successively awarded, and made
returnable de die in diem, and the Judgment had in three days at the most, in
cases of debt, if the Defendant appear not, but if the Defendant appear, then
the Plaintiffs Attorney declares, and upon the Defendants pleading, and not
confessing the Action, then issue is joined the same Sessions, and tried the
next Sessions after.

And it is here to be observed, that the awarding of these Process, and
obtaining of these Judgments by Default, depend upon the Sheriffs return of
any ^^e said Writs, whether the Actions be brought by Original, or by Bill, or
Queritur: For if the Sheriff return a Summons (as usually he does in all cases
of Debt, because of the general Summons of the Sessions upon the Writ first
before mentioned, by which the Sessions was proclaimed) then those Judgments
are obtained as is before expressed. But if the Sheriff return, that the
Defendant has nothing in his Bailiffwick, whereby he may be Summoned (or
Attached) as usually he does in cases of Trespass, and upon the Case, then a
Capias to Arrest the Defendant is awarded; and a Writ of Distringas also ad
infinitum in cases of Trespass, and issues thereupon returned by the Sheriff,
until the Defendant do appear.

Neither is the Defendant in case of these Judgments thus obtained by Default,
any way prejudiced, but by his own Laches or wilfulness: For in all cases of
Debt, if he or his Attorney tender an Appearance any day within the Sessions
(or after, with consent of the Plaintiffs Attorney, before the Debt sworn) the
appearance is accepted. And if he neglect so to do, so that the Judgment
stand, yet no Execution can go forth until the Plaintiff do first swear his
Debt, and Damages for the forbearance of it, either before the Judges in open
Court, or else by special Commission, in which Case also execution of the Writ
by the Sheriff (though gone forth) is stayed in the Attorneys hand by Order,
till commonly six Weeks or two Months after the Sessions, to the end that the
Defendant may satisfy the Debt before the delivery of the Writ to the Sheriff,
if he please.

In prosecution of all which kind of Actions in Debt and Trespass (which are
almost the whole business of the Sessions) the parties are not delayed above
one or two Sessions, unless by some dilatory Pleas and Demurrers (which seldom
happen) and for taking away whereof, some provision may be made: and the
Charges, unless in Cases where and issue is pleaded, and trial thereupon had,
not commonly above thirty shillings, except where the Debt being above forty
pound, is finable to the King, in case the Action be brought by Original.
Neither are the People in prosecuting and defending these Actions, enforced to
travel out of their own Counties.

Also in Cases of real Actions (which are very few) the proceeding is speedy,
unless it happen by multiplicity of Pleadings, occasioned by the intricacy of
Titles, and variety of Conveyances to be pleaded, which for the most part is
avoided, the Conveyances being given in Evidence.

Those Courts of the great Sessions have a Chancery within themselves, and have
had power to relieve in Cases of Equity ever since H. 8, time.

A Tract or Directory touching the Practick of an Attorneys profession in the
Court of the great Sessions in Wales.
IN the first place it concerns an Attorney partly as well as the Lawyer to
understand (at least) the nature, if not the whole cause and ground of his
Clients Action or Suit, before he undertakes to follow it, without which he
will not be able to do his Client any great benefit, more then suing out of
Process, and going from Office to Office, which every ordinary fellow that can
but write and read is able to do as well as he.

Then to ease his Council, Common Actions at the Sessions.
and not to trouble him to do every ordinary plain thing, he is to draw his
Titling for to have out his original Writ, or Queritur, as the case requires,
and the most common and ordinary Actions in the Sessions are.

Actions of Debt, of Trespass, of Trespass on the Case, Trespass and Ejectment,
Writs of Dower, and Quod ei deforceats.
These Titlings are usual things. To instance in one of Debt; which is the
commonest, The Defendant must be named in the first place according to the
truth of his name, dwelling place, and addition, and in the second place, or
alias dictus, if by specialty, according to the words of the Obligation,
verbatim and literatim; for if the words of the Writ and the words of the
Obligation do not agree, the Defendant may plead variance between the words of
the Writ, and the words of the Obligation, and so abate the Writ, which must be
after appearance, and before Declaration be put in; but if there be no
Obligation for the debt, then there needs no Alias dictus in the Writ, and in
that and other Actions there be presidents for the Titlings, which therefore
need not be insisted on here.

In every Writ where the Sheriff is commanded only to summon the Defendant to
appear, the retorn therein must be pledges and summons to answer the Writ, and
if the Defendant neither appears nor essoigns on the original Writ in debt, and
if he essoigns and warrants not his Essoign within the next day after he casts
the Essoign, an Iterum Summoneas is to issue out, upon which Writ, in default
of appearance or Essoign, there is Judgment granted by default, which is
commonly called Judicium si, etc. (but not entered so upon the Roll) which is a
conditional Judgment, for (before the Judgment be entered) the Plaintiff is to
swear his debt, and thereupon to recover only what he swears to be due, with
ordinary interest and costs: And if the Iterum Summoneas be essoigned (which
may be when the first is not) it is but a days delay, and then if no
appearance be, Judgment is to be had, as formerly is said.

But if you sue upon a Bond for performance of Covenants, Articles, Awards, or
any other collateral matter, being not absolutely for payment of money, the
Plaintiff is also therein to recover by default for want of appearance, and yet
not swear his debt or damage; but (upon motion and showing the special matter)
he shall have Judgment entered absolutely (after calling the Iterum Summoneas)
for the whole penalty of the Bond, without any Oath as aforesaid.

If the debt be due within fifteen days of the Sessions, or the case otherwise
lies (as several ways it may) so that the Action cannot be begun by an
Original, then there must be a Queritur or a Bill had from the Prothonotaries
Office, upon which you must have a second and a third Bill, and them called,
the first one day, the second the next day, and the third the third day, before
you can recover by default, and then Judgment is to be had (in the same manner
as if it had been begun by Original) in default of appearance. And on these
last mentioned Writs the Sheriff is to retorn only Summons, as well upon the
Queritur as upon the second and third Bill, for the Plaintiffs Pledges are
always inserted of Course within the Queritur or first Bill, and there is no
prejudice or any great matter or difference whether the Plaintiff sue by
Original or Queritur, but that he cannot proceed to Outlary against the
Defendant upon the Queritur.

After you have gotten an appearance upon any Writ or Bill, then the Plaintiff
must declare, and call or move for a Rule for the Defendant to answer, the
first Rule is general, and the second in all those personal Actions is
peremptory, and if the Defendant pleads not before the peremptory Rule be out,
then the Plaintiff is to recover upon a Nihil dicit.

The common and most usual pleading to an Action of Debt upon a Bond for
payment of money in this part of Wales, is non est factum, and to an Action of
Debt without specialty, is nihil debet per patriam, etc. whereunto the
Plaintiff replies to join up the Issue, but for a Debt without specialty the
Defendant may wage his Law, and say Nil debet per Legent, in which case the
Court will assign the Defendant a day to come to wage his Law, which commonly
is the first sitting of the next Sessions following, and cannot be delayed
further, where the Defendant must swear he owes the Plaintiff nothing, and
produce twelve men to swear that they believe it, which is called Duodena manu,
but the Court accepts of three or four with the Defendant, as I have seen it,
but if the Defendant comes not to wage his Law, the Plaintiff is to recover.

There be indeed several other Pleas to be pleaded to Actions of Debt due by
Bond, as per Minas, per Dures, Imprisonment, Release, Nonage, etc. which may be
seen in the Books of Entrees.

If the Bond be with Condition the Defendant may demand Oyer of it, which must
be done between the first and second Rule, and then Conditions performed may be
pleaded, which are usually and fittest to be done by Council, and Oyer may be
demanded of all other Bonds and Writings pleaded, if the Defendant plead in
manner as aforeaid.

In all or most Actions of Debt without out Bond, or Specialty upon simpl
Contracts, there is (at the great Sessions in Wales) a far shorter and less
intricate way to declare, and so ground an Action, then in the Courts above at
Westminster, by the ancient Custom of North Wales, had and deduced from those
three Northern Counties that were Shire-grounds time beyond all memory, and are
(indeed) rightly and properly the very North Wales, which way is by a mere and
plain Concessit solvere, and no matter expressed besides the time and place of
the Contract, and the day of payment, whereunto the Defendant most commonly
pleads the aforementioned general Issue of Nil debet per patriam, and at the
trial the whole matter and consideration will be given in Evidence, so that
thereby the Plaintiff saves what often falls out, by declaring specially in an
Action upon the Case for every Debt upon small Contracts, wherein the Plaintiff
will be more closely held to prove all Circumstances mentioned in the
Declaration, for all Actions upon the Case are strict, and therefore more
subject to miscarry, and by several ways overthrown then those general ways
of Concessit solvere, which are constantly used and approved by the privilege
of the Custom aforesaid, which are often very beneficial to the Plaintiff in
many things, for the Defendant hardly (till the Trial) (knows if many Bargains
passed between him and the Plaintiff) upon which of them the Plaintiff will
produce his proof, and if the Plaintiff can make proof but of part of the Debt
declared, he shall recover so much, for the Defendants Plea (upon which the
Issue is joined) says he does not owe that Debt or any part thereof, and so it
is beneficial in many things else, but not in Actions upon the Case for Debt,
where the proof must be punctual with the Declaration.

In all Actions of Trespass, Trespass upon the Case, Trespass and Ejectment,
the words of the Writ or Queritur to the Sheriff are, Quod ponet per vadios and
salvos plegios, and on every Writ where these words are, the Sheriff is to
retorn Issues, which must be more or less, as the nature, greatness, or
condition of the Cause requires, which if he does not, the Court upon motion
will command to heighten or increase the Issues, thereby to compel the
Defendant to appear, and to expedite the Plaintiffs Cause to Trial, because it
is well known, that in all these Actions the Plaintiff cannot recover by
default for want of appearance, but after appearance if the Defendant pleads
not, the plaintiff may have a Writ to enquire of Damages, as hereafter
appears: If the Defendant appears not, the Plaintiff must sue forth a
Distringas, an alias, a pluries, and a plus pluries Distringas, and so in
infinitum till appearance be had, and upon every Distringas the Sheriff is to
increase the Issues, or rather at least to double them; but if the retorning of
Issues will not compel the Defendant to appear, then the Sheriff may be
compelled to retorn a Nihil habet in Balliva mea per quod distringi possit,
etc. and upon that Retorn a Capias may be had to apprehend and attach the body
of the Defendant to answer, etc. And if thereupon the Sheriff retorns a Cepi
Corpus, etc. the Defendant being brought to the Bar, shall upon motion be
ordered to remain in the Sheriffs Custody, till he find Bayl or Pledges to
answer such Recovery as shall be had against him, for it is an observed Rule,
he who comes in or appears upon Bayl, must go out or be discharged upon Bayl.

If the Defendant after appearance plead not, then the Plaintiff is to move in
all the last mentioned Actions for a Writ to enquire of Damages, and then the
awarding of it must be entered, which in some respects is in nature of a
Judgment; and upon the return of it, and of the Juries Inquisition, Judgment
for the Damages and Costs is to be entered, but not used without a special
motion to have it granted; for the Defendant may object many things against the
Inquisition, and thereby prevent the filing of it, and so perhaps put the
Plaintiff to take out a new Writ.

In Writs of Dower and quod ei deforceat, the second Writs are Summons, and the
third is a grand Cape, upon which if the Defendant appears not, the Demandant
is to recover by default, and to have a Writ of Seizin of the Lands; but the
Tenant may appear upon the grand Cape, and save or excuse his default, which is
very seldom, and not so easily done, if the Demandants Council will urge all
that is just and requisite by Law for his Client to demand and require, before
the Tenant be admitted to appear.

If after Appearance, and Declaration put in, and three Rules past, the Tenant
pleads not, a petty Cape is to be awarded against him and thereupon Judgment
shall be entered of course and execution awarded.

When the Plaintiff or Demandant after Declaration put in do not proceed, the
Defendant or Tenant may call him to proceed; and if he makes default, a
nonsuit will be entered; and the Defendant, or Tenant, shall then have Costs in
all Actions, wherein the Plaintiff, or Demandant, ought to have had them, if he
had recovered.

In a Writ of Dower, where the Husband died not seized, there is no Costs for
Demandant, or Tenant; but where the Husband died seized, the Demandant recovers
as well Dower, as Costs and Damages, which the Jury always finds, viz. the
value of the Profits of the third part of the late Husbands Lands since his
death, as the Jury shall have Evidence to find the worth or value; but where
the Recovery happens to be by Default and so without Jury, then there is a Writ
to be directed to the Sheriff, as well to assign Dower to the Demandant, as to
enquire by a Jury whether the Husband died seized or not, and if he did, to
enquire of the value of the Lands, and upon retorn of that Writ, (if the dying
seized be found) the Demandant shall have a Writ of execution for the third
part of the Profits according to the Verdict, and for her Costs of course. The
common and ordinary Writ of Dower says in the close thereof, Vnde nihil habet,
but in a Writ of right of Dower, as where one received part of her Dower, and
sues for the rest in the same Township, these words of Vnde nihil habet must be
left out, which difference is to be usually read and seen in several Books,
which an Attorney should necessarily learn, that he may know which Writ to take
out when his Clyent tells his Case to him, lest his Council may undervalue him
for his ignorance in common and ordinary things.

Upon every Writ of Quod ei deforceat, the Demandant after appearance may
declare either in the nature of a Writ of Entry sur disseizin, or in the nature
of a Writ of Right, or in the nature of a Formedon, which are of diverse sorts.
If the Demandant recover in a Writ of Entry, he recovers also Costs and
Damages, and so shall the Tenant, if the matter pass with him, but in the two
other last mentioned Writs there are no Costs to be had on either side, and on
the Writ of Entry there lies no view, but in the rest it does, as hereafter
shall be more fully declared.

A Writ of Right is a concluding Action, because it is of the highest nature,
and in it and in a Formedon the Tenant may vouch, and then a Writ of Summons
goes to the Sheriff to summon the Vouchee, whereon if he retorns Nihil habet,
etc. there goes out an alias and a pluries, and then a Sequatur sub sue
periculo: And in some Cases in these, Quod ei deforceats, and in other Actions,
where the Actions cannot be well laid or commenced, but in the name of several
persons, whereof some of them will have no mind to bring or prosecute the same,
it will be requisite to take out Writs of Summons ad sequendum simul cum, and
Summons and Severance, which Council must direct, and in all Cases of that high
nature there is indeed nothing to be done without his directions, which the
Attorney will be the better able to observe and prosecute, if he understands
them as in some measure he should. And in some cases the Demandant may vouch
and become Defendant, when he shall defend his Estate against such Recovery as
shall be pleaded against him, so that there are diverse other thing; wherein
there is a great deal of learning in those Formedons and Vouchers, worth any
man's knowledge toward the Law, and though fit and requisite for an Attorney to
know, as much as is in relation to his practice, yet I durst not presume to
proceed to enlarge thereon, lest I should be justly rebuked.

In some Cases there will be no Plea put in, or Issue joined the first
Sessions, but the Defendant upon some occasions must move for an Imparlance,
which is called Licentia interloquendi, (for brevity Li. Lo.) being a granting
of time to imparle between that and the next Sessions, or to plead by the first
day of the next Sessions, or some day in the Vacation, as the Court shall think
fit to appoint, or both parties agree to be entered tunc pro nunc, for there is
a general and special Imparlance, and sometimes the Plaintiff will have cause
to imparle as well as the Defendant, when after the Defendant has answered or
pleaded, he is not ready to reply, for in all or most Actions begun at a
Sessions, there must be Recovery by Default, or after appearance and
Declaration either an Issue, Imparlance, or a Nihil dicit, if the Plaintiff do,
as he may, call for proceedings without both parties, will be at a stay by
consent, wherein commonly a Nihil inde is for that time entered on the Writ or
Declaration, in which Cause the Plaintiff (if he please) may proceed the next
Sessions after, as formerly he might.

And in such Actions, wherein Issue the first Sessions is not joined, if the
Plaintiff will proceed the next Sessions, he must then look the Docket, to know
how the matter stood the Sessions before, and continue the same unto the Book
of Imparlance, according to the words of the Docket, which may also be done the
second Sessions, but paying the Prothonotory for the continuance.

If Causes have slept after appearance, and before Declaration be put in, and
the Plaintiff will not appear to proceed, the Defendant if he desires to go on,
must move the Court to appoint the Plaintiff a time to declare or reply, etc.
as the Case requires, and in default thereof, that a Nonsuit may be entered,
which the Court of course will grant, and the same Rule being entered and not
performed, then the Nonsuit will be entered; and if it be after the Plaintiff
has declared, the Defendant will have his Costs, and an Execution for it, if
it be not in such Actions wherein Costs do not lie, for seldom or never any
Costs is had by the Defendant, if the Plaintiff become Nonsuit before he
declares, for I knew never any had or granted

I should toward the end of the foregoing leaf, where I mentioned view, lay
not in a Writ of Entry Sur Disseizin declared, that it did lie in the other
Writs, as of Dower, Writ of Right and Formedon, wherein after Declaration is
put in, and a Rule given to the Tenant to Answer, the Tenant may demand view of
the Lands, which must be done in Court, or Office, before the Rule be quite
out; which view so demanded is granted, which excuses the Tenant of making any
Answer till the Demandant sues out the Writ of View, whereunto as well the
Tenant must appear, as the Demandant declare de novo, by a Similis Narratio;
and the Tenant must be careful to observe his time to demand the view; for it
is not grantable after a general imparlance, and if the Tenant slips the time,
he shall not come to it again: and he must be more careful to appear, or
essoin, for an essoin will lie at the calling of the Writ of View; else the
Demandant will then recover seizin of the Lands, and have a Writ of seizin; and
if the Defendant essoins, he will gain a day longer to appear, and then must
appear; whereupon the Demandant declares by Similis Narratio (mutat. mutandis)
as is aforesaid.

There are at the great Sessions sometimes other Actions, as of Replevin,
Detinue, Account, Rationabili part bonorum, Partition, Waste, Actions upon
Penal Statutes, Curia Claudenda, de muliere abducta cum bonis viri, Audita
Querela, and others, which have but ordinary proceedings, as has been treated
in some other Actions before spoken of, whereupon I will only speak a word or
two of the nature of each of them.

Replevins (most commonly) are brought in inferior Courts, and afterward
removed to the Sessions, wherein the Plaintiff declares, and the Defendant
avows, as his Case requires; and afterward the Plaintiff is to put in his bar,
which is called a Replication in another Action.

And in this Action both Parties are Plaintiffs, and may recover: for the
Defendant, if he makes good his Avowry, is to recover his Rent, or what else he
distrained for, with his Costs and Damages at the Trial: but if the Plaintiff
be nonsuited, the Defendant is to have a Returno habendo to restore the Cattle
distrained by him to his custody, as they were before replevied, whereby to
satisfy his demands. But then the Plaintiff, if he will, may have a second
Deliverance, and go on again to Trial: but if the Defendant recovers in this,
he is to have a Returno habendo unrepleviable: but if the Plaintiff recovers,
he is to have only Damages for the wrongful distraining of his Beasts; and in
case the Goods cannot be replevied, a Withernam may be had to take the Parties
own Goods (that did distrain) in value, etc. there is also a homine repligiando
for releasing a man detained by another person, except for some offenses which
are mentioned in the Writs; and there is sometimes a Capias in Withernam that
issues out: it is too tedious to express all things concerning them, and
therefore I leave the Reader, if he be ignorant, to take pains to learn them
out of better Authors, as I did.

In detinue the Plaintiff is to recover the things detained, and in default
thereof, the value of the same in money, which the Jury usually finds.

The same Process is in Partition, and in Waste, and Account, which is Summons
and Distress; but in Partition and Waste, the Demandant will recover by default
upon the third Writ, if the Tenant appears not, as in some other former Actions
treated of appears. And in these two Actions of Partition and Waste, there lies
no Costs, but treble Damages, and the place Wasted is recovered in a Writ of
Waste. And in Partition there be two Judgments; one after the Verdict, which
is no more then (siat inter eos partitio) and the other upon Return of the Writ
awarded to the Sheriff to make the Partition, which must be upon motion, and is
quod partitio praedicta firma and stabilis teneatur imperpetuum. And in a Writ
of Waste, the Demandant may, depending the Action, move for a Writ of
Estrepement; and is ordinarily granted, being a Writ to the Sheriff to restrain
and prevent the making or committing any further waste upon the Land. Whilt the
Action is depending, Actions upon penal Statutes are usually brought by way of
Information, wherein a Distringas is the next Process, and the Issue, Verdict,
and Judgment therein, if found by the Prosecutor, are as the several Statutes
do direct, or else a not guilty.

The Action of Curia Claudenda, and do muliere abducta cum bonis viri, are in
some respects, especially that of de muliere abducta, etc. in the nature of an
Action of Trespass; the Curia Claudenda being an Action brought by one against
another, for not securing or enclosing the Fence or Hedge lying between both
their Grounds, and time out of mind (as urged by the Plaintiff) usually made up
and fenced by the Defendant, and all other Owners of his Lands; the other de
muliere abducta, etc. is for taking away the Plaintiffs Wife, with some part of
the Plaintiffs Goods, without alleging of which Goods: and that also in
particular the Action will not be well laid. In all my time of Practice, I saw
but one Action of each of these, that is one of Curia Claudenda in Flint-shire,
about 30. years ago, and one de muliere abducta, etc. in Denbigh-shire, 24.
years ago, wherein 200. l. Damages were recovered.

The Rationabili part bonorum is, when a Widow upon the custom of North Wales
sues the Executor of her Husband for the moiety of her Husbands personal
Estate; or when a Brother or Sister upon the same custom sues for a share, as
may more at large appear in Law Books, in which Action all is recovered in
Damages, being what the Plaintiffs Witnesses can make appear, the Moiety to the
Wife, or the share of the Brother or Sister, to be really worth, through all
the personal Estate.

Audita Querela lies, when one is apprehended and imprisoned for Debt and
Damages recovered against him, and against another person, who was principally
Bayl or Surety with him for the same Debt, and when that other person had
formerly been apprehended for the self same Debt and Damages, and has
satisfied the same, for it will not lie, without real payment or satisfaction
was made by the other person that was formerly taken in Execution, though he
never lay so long in Goal, and came out some way or other without satisfying
the party Plaintiff, or it will lie for one as became Bayl, or entered into
Recognizance, though the Debt or Recognizance be not really paid and satisfied,
but the Audita Querela ^n that Case must be brought before the parties attain
to the full years, if the Audita Querela be made good, but a discharge out of
the Goal, and from the Recovery, Recognizance, or Execution, there are original
Writs at the Sessions, not spoken of before, (videlic. t) a Writ of of Error, a
Writ of false Judgment, a Certiorari or Recordari.

The Writs of Error is to move the Record of any Recovery had in any inferior
Court, which is a real Court, and so a Court of Record, into the great
Sessions, so that the Errors therein (if any be) may be there heard and
examined.

A Writ of false Judgment, or sometimes called Acced^s ad Curiam, is to remove
the Record of any Recovery in a mean or base Court, which is a Court that has
not power to hold Pleas, but under forty shillings to the Sessions.

A Certiorari for removing any Action depending, before it be tried by Jury in
any real Court or Court of Record, which has power to hold Plea above forty
shillings, which are Courts held by Charter in Corporations or Lordships, and
in some Lordships Marchers by prescription unto the Cost of the great Sessions,
there to be proceeded upon, and go to Issue and Trial, if the Plaintiff when it
is removed will prosecute and follow it.

A Recorda^e is to remove any Action begun, and not tried in the said base
Court under 40 s. to be proceeded on as is aforesaid, touching the Certior. at
the Sessions.

Now for proceedings in the said Writs of Errors, false Judgment, Certiorari,
and Recordari, thus much which follows.

The Writ of Error after it is granted, must be delivered to the Steward, or
Judge of the Court where the recovery was had; and he must certify the Record
to the next Sessions, or an Attachment lies against him: And when it is there
entered, he that put in the Record must assign Errors by his Council, and sue
forth a Scire facias ad audiendum; Errors directed to the Sheriff; at the
return whereof, if a Scire fcci be returned, the Defendant in the Writ of Error
must appear, and plead to the Assignment of Errors; which is In nullo est
erraetum in Common Pleas; and if he does not appear, and plead, the Court may
proceed by default to hear, or rather to examine the Errors: and in both cases
there must be a day appointed for reading the Record; and then after part
thereof is read, the Errors are opened by Council; and if the Cause be argued
on both sides, thereupon the Court will either reverse or affirm the Judgment:
and if Judgment be reversed, the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error shall have his
Costs: but there are no Costs upon reversal of a false Judgment, as shall be
said hereafter. And if Judgment be affirmed, the Party shall have Execution as
well upon his former Judgment, as for what Costs and Damages shall be awarded
by the Court to him for that delay.

A Writ of false Judgment is directed as well for Judgment given in other
mean Courts, as in his own County Court; for such as are Judges in those Courts
have not the return of Writs: but in this Writ there is a far shorter
proceeding when the Record is put in, then in the Writ of Error; for here needs
nothing after it is put in, but Council to move to have it read, which being
done, Judgment is either reversed, or affirmed. If reversed the Defendant in
the Court below (who is the Plaintiff) in the Writ of false Judgment, is to
have a Writ to be only restored to what he has lost, that is, to what he has
paid upon the former Judgment (if any) to have no Costs but the bare sum he
was driven to pay upon the former recovery in the Court below. If affirmed, as
seldom or never it is, then the Plaintiff in the inferior Court is to have
Execution out of the Sessions for what he formerly recovered, without Costs.

A Certiorari is to remove an Action above 40 s. as is aforesaid, out of a real
Court, or Court of Record, before any Judgment or Trial be had therein in that
Court. And in that, and in the Recordari, such as sue them forth, are to
deliver them into the Sessions by their Attorneys, having first called them
from such as are to return them, to wit, the Steward, or Judge of the Court of
Record for the Certiorari, as in the Writ of Error before, and to call to the
Sheriff for the return of the Recordari, to whom the same, as before is said
(...) false Judgment, is directed, and are to be proceeded upon as in all
other Actions of the nature they be from the beginning, only that Writ serves
for an Original, or a Q^ to ground the Action.

And in case where any man (...) sued out any of the aforesaid (...) mentioned
Writs, of purpose to delay proceeding in the Court below, (as often it falls
out) and the Party suing forth the same is slow or negligent to return and put
in the same, the other Party, Plaintiff in the Court below, is to move the
Court to appoint a time to put in the same; or in default thereof, that a ne
recipiatur may be entered, which is entered. And if it be not put in by the time
appointed, the Plaintiff below may take out a Copy of that Rule; or if he
please, take out a Writ of Procedendo, and thereby proceeded in that Court
below, notwithstanding the former Writ procured, or taken out for delay (ut
supra): and if the Writ of Certior. be put in into the Sessions, and the
Plaintiff in the Action will not appear and prosecute, then a non suit will be
entered, wherein no Cost lies, if it be before Declaration. And if the Defendant
appears not, the Plaintiff may proceed, and shall recover by default, if it be
an Action of Debt; if otherwise, he may proceed as the nature of the Action
requires. But if Bail be entered in the Court below to answer the Action, as
commonly there is, and that certified with the Plaintiff, as often it is, and
indeed should be then, when the Writ and Plaint is returned and filed, and the
Plaintiffs appearance entered by his Attorney; the Plaintiffs Attorney is to
move the Court, that the Defendant be ordered to put in there the same Bail as
was in the Court below; all which is usually granted and had. And there be good
Reasons it should be so, that besides the Common-Law-Rules, before mentioned,
which is, That he who comes in upon Bail, or once is driven to find Bail,
should again find Bail; it is fit that the Party Plaintiff should stand in the
superior Court, notwithstanding the Defendants removing of the Action from
below, in as good a condition, and in no worse then he was in the other Court;
for if the Plaintiff should have no Bail found him at the Sessions, the other
Bail that was put in at the Court below being free by the removing here, the
Plaintiff would be in a far worse case then he was, and perhaps (if the
Defendant prove insolvent) be remediless of the fruits and benefits of his
Action at the Sessions. And if Bails were not ordered to be given upon all
Actions removed to the Sessions, where Bail had been formerly given in the
inferior Court, then it were no great matter or prejudice to any loose, mean,
and unthrifty Person to be arrested in any Corporation for any sum of Money,
though never so great and just, for he could readily find some or other
sufficient Bail, if both were assured and knew that, that Bail could presently,
or shortly after free and discharge charge himself, by being at the charge of a
Certiorari, and retorn it into the superior Court, which indeed any Bail would
do to free himself from his first Engagement, and so put the Principal, (were
it not for the Course beforementioned) in the same estate as he stood before
the Arrest, which would be heard to the Plaintiff, but as it is used, as before
is said, if the Principal for all their moving of the Action, be not able to
find at the Sessions the same Bail again as was at the Court below, or another
as good, the Plaintiff shall as aforesaid have a Procedendo to the inferior
Court.

If an Attorney finds himself any way ignorant (as the best many times may be)
what Process to issue out in any of all the Actions beforementioned, or how to
prosecute the same from time to time, let him often attend Council to be guided
and often instructed by him, and he cannot do amiss, for therein few or none do
miscarry in their business, but such as trust overmuch to themselves, and so
neglect the advice of others, which is too common and known a fault. Therefore
I should advise all Attorneys, never so able and knowing, to attend their
Council as often as possibly they can, not only to give him Instructions in
their Clyents Cause, but also to receive Directions how to proceed in the
Cause, and also to bring his Council Copies from time to time (after the Action
is called) of the Writs, and of the Declaration, and all pleadings thereunto,
yea and of all Rules passed in the Cause, were very requisite; for otherwise if
any thing prove amiss, they cannot be faultless, and in observing and doing
what there above is advised, they will not only much further their Clyents
Cause, and gain to themselves more knowledge, but also avoid the blame and
censure which Council too often and sometimes justly, laid upon the Attorneys
for their neglect therein, and so shall they not only preserve but also
increase their good repute and credit with Council and Clyents, which I hope
all discreet Attorneys do or at least should esteem and look upon, far above
their gain and profit. Hereunto touching the proceedings in Actions, till Issue
be joined in them.

Now follows how to proceed, and what is to be done in them after Issue is
joined.

Now for further proceedings in all Causes to trial, after Issue is joined the
Party Plaintiff is to sue forth his Jury Writs, as his Venire facias, and
Habeas corpora, and (if need be) a Distringas Juratores, and for better
expediting of his Trial, and preventing rubbs and obstacles that may come in
his way, he must consider and enquire whether there be any kindred, affinity,
or alliance between him or his Wife; and the Sheriff or his Wife and if there
be, he must put in his Challenge to the Sheriff, and thereby pray Process to
the Coronors to retorn his Jury, and move before any Writs goes out, that the
Defendant may answer it, and thereupon the Court will appoint a time ordinarily
but to the next sitting, and then if he does not answer it by saying,
Vicecomite non obstante, as he may, and usually is done, or pleaded to it if he
please, which is seldom done, or say nothing to it, then the Plaintiffs prays
by having Process to the Coronors is granted; but if the Defendant yields it as
is aforesaid, by allowing the Sheriff notwithstanding that Challenge, the
Process goes to the Sheriff. And so again, if he knows or suspects kindred or
alliance to any of the Coronors, he may put his Challenge to the one, and pray
Process to the other Coronor, and the other which is of kin, not to
intermeddle, or put in a Challenge to both Coronors, if there be cause, and
pray Process to Elizors, which is always the safest course, and in a Cause of
any consequence no man should omit any of these to all those Officers,
notwithstanding the little charge he be thereby at, and the little delay he is
thereby put unto, which seldom is not used to be above one day, for thereby he
may perhaps prevent a greater charge, and a longer delay, the Challenge has
but an ordinary form, therefore I omit it; and though the Pedigree be a little
mistaken, I never found it much material, for it would come to the same, viz.
that the Plaintiff may have his Process either to the Sheriff, Coronors, or
Elizors, and avoid all inconveniences that falls out by omitting it: But in
these Challenges there must be observed what the form of Law requires; as if it
be for Kindred, to the Sheriffs Wives, then to mention that she is living, if
the case be so; if she be dead, to mention her death, and that the Sheriff has
Children alive by her, (if he has) and many such things; that if the Wife be
dead, and no Children living by her, there needs no Challenge. And if Process
is to go to Elizors, the Court must be moved to nominate them, and then swear
them: but if otherwise, then you are to take out your Process of first
Jury-writ to the Sheriff, or Coronors, or one of them, as the Defendant admits
it; and he shall have no benefit of any Challenging to quash the array, though
there were Kindred: but if you omit this course as is said, and take Process to
the Sheriff when he is of kin, then the Defendant may, (when you have retained
and instructed your Council, and been at charge with your Witnesses, and so be
ready for Trial) put you off that Sessions, by challenging and quashing the
Array upon that Kindred or Alliance, suggested by that Challenge made to quash
the Array; which Challenge to quash the Array must be moved and put into Court
by the Council of the Defendant, after the calling and appearing of the Jury,
and before they be sworn. And that challenging may be twofold: the one as
principal; as for Kindred and Alliance between the Plaintiff or his Wife, and
the Party who returned the Jury; the other for favor; as where the Sheriff, or
his Officers, returned the Jury by nomination of the Party, or where the Lessor
in an ejectione firm is of kin: for as I should have said before, if there be
no Kindred at all between the Lessee, who is the Plaintiff in the Action, and
the Sheriff; and if you find there is Kindred between his Lessor and the
Sheriff, it behooves you before you take out your Jury-Writ, to put in (as
before is showed) a Challenge to the Sheriff for Kindred to the Lessor; or
where there is Kindred between the Plaintiff or his Lessor, and such as
returned the Jury by bastardy; that (as I heard) is no principal Challenge, but
a Challenge to the favor. And so if that Challenge to the Array be made good
upon good Oath punctually, the Array (as aforesaid) will be quashed, and the
Plaintiff be put to begin de nove with Jury-Writs, which cannot be brought
about that same Sessions; for the Defendant may cast an essoin to the Venire
facias the first Jury-Writ: but to all such Challenges to the Array the
Plaintiff is called to speak to it, and he must either confess it, or deny it:
And so both Parties join issue upon it, if confessed, then the Array is
quashed; if denied, then Triers are sworn to try, whether the Kindred be as is
said; which Triers will be two or three of the Jury that had appeared. And if
they find the Kindred, the Array is quashed; if not, the Array will be
affirmed, and the Plaintiff shall go on with his Trial, and the Jury that were
called, and appeared, will be sworn to try the cause: but if the Array be
quashed as for Kindred to the Sheriff, the Plaintiff must take a Venire facias
to the Coronors, though the next Sheriff be no way kin or allied to him. And if
the Jury writ whereon the Array was quashed was returned by the Coronors, the
Plaintiff must begin, and take his Venire facias to Elizors, though there were
new Coronors sworn that were neither kin nor allied to the Plaintiff; because
the Plaintiff taking out his Jury-Process de novo cannot go backward, but must
still go forward. If the 24. Men returned on the Venire facias, are returned by
a Sheriff that has no relation to the Plaintiff, and a succeeding Sheriff that
will be of kin to the Plaintiff returns the december tales on the habeas Corpora,
in that case the Defendant, if cause be to Challenge the Array, is to say
nothing to such as appears on the principal Panel, till those appear who were
returned on the docem tales by the last Sheriff, and not before a Challenge may
be put to the rest of the Array from that place forward, (ut supra) when Triors
are named by the Court (as is aforesaid) to try whether the Array returned
stand indifferent, by reason of the Kindred proved between the Plaintiff and
such as returned it, the Plaintiff or Defendant may twice challenge or accept
against those Triors, without showing any cause for it; but the third Challenge
is peremptory, which must be allowed at the Partiesown peril when the Plaintiff
has made and put in his Challenge, (as is aforesaid) or is assured that he
needs not, he is to take out his Venire facias, and return it, or file it in
Court; which the Defendant may, if he please, Essoin, and thereby gain a day
longer to prepare himself; but the Essoin must be cast at the Challenge of the
Writ, or else too late when the Essoin is not allowed or not Essoined at all,
then a Habeas Corpora, with a December tales, is to be taken out, and so (if cause
requires) a Distringas Juratorum, with an Octo tales.

Upon Challenge, the Habeas Corpora, or Distringas Jurat. the whole Jury
therein returned will be called; and after they are all called, if twelve
appear, they will be sworn: but before they be sworn, any of the Parties may
challenge any one of them, or all, (if there be cause) by the Poll, if any
Party dislikes any of the Jury by reason of Kindred, or favor to the other
Parties Attorney, must say, when that Jurors come to the Book to be Sworn, I
challenge him for the Plaintiff, or for the Defendant, which will in the
margin of the Pannels be entered. And then he that is challenged is not sworn,
till twelve be found out, if so many indifferent men appear upon the Panel, or
till all the names in the Panel be called. And if full twelve be not found to
appear upon the Panel, and after the Panel is perused and gone through, then
the Party which challenged any is called to show his cause of Challenge against
such and such; and then must his Council or Attorney manifest the Cause, which
is most commonly for Kindred, or Alliance to the other Party; or that the Jury
challenged is Tenant, Servant, or within the Plaintiffs destress, if the
Challenge be put in by the Defendant; and so e contrario if the Challenge be
put in by the Plaintiff: if you name at first but one of those Causes of
Challenge, and the Juror upon Oath deny it, you are not allowed to go back and
name the rest of the Causes of Challenge. And therefore for fear of the worst,
all those Causes are usually named at first; for the Juror challenged is to be
examined upon the Voyer dier to all those exceptions, and if he does confess or
acknowledge any of them, he is put by and excused; if not, he is sworn to try
the Cause: and very often when the Party challenging, will not allow the bare
denial o^ the challenged, but will produce proof to make good the Causes, or
one of them, for which challenged; whereupon two of them that will be already
Sworn to Try the Cause, will be again Sworn to try whether the Party challenged
is an indifferent man, as he stands unsworn, to be of that Jury or no? if they
find, or say he is, or stands indifferent, he is presently Sworn to Try the
Cause; and if they say he is not, he is put by, as is said before. And if a
Challenge be made by Plaintiff or Defendant to any of the Jury for corruption,
or any other miscarriage in him, as may be, then you must prove it by
Witnesses; for the Juror will not be compelled to his Oath in this as in other
cases, to accuse himself in such case; and as good not challenge any, or rather
better upon that score, if it cannot be palpably proved; for if not proved, he
will be Sworn to Try the Cause: and perhaps when he is amongst his Fellows
debating the Cause, think of the ignominy which was spoken and offered him, and
could not be proved, and then do the Party as challenged him a discourtesie, if
not a mischief.

If there do not appear full twelve upon calling of the Panel, after they are
twice called, then the Plaintiff is told by the Clerk as called the Jury, that
there is not a full Enquest, and asked what he prays, and then Council prays a
tales, but it is in the Plaintiffs choice to pray a tales de Circumstantibus,
or a tales at Common Law, which is had upon further Process. But if he prays a
tales de Circumstantibus, as most usually it is, then the Sheriff, Coronors, or
Elizors, or some of them that made retorn of that Panel, is presently to
retorn as many of the standers by as will make up a full Jury; but if you pray
a tales at Common Law, you may take out your further Process at that or the
next Sessions; if you sue out a Venire facias one Sessions and do no more, then
you are to take out the Habeas corpora the next Sessions, and continue the
Cause, if the Cause be stayed upon Habeas corpora, to continue the Cause the
next Sessions after, and sue forth a Distringas Juratores; if after Issue
joined the Plaintiff will not proceed in the Cause, then the Defendant upon any
default made by the Plaintiff, may go on (if he please) by moving the Court
that he may proceed with a Proviso, which of course the Court grants, and the
same Rule being entered, the Defendant shall proceed and take the matter in the
same place where the Plaintiff left, (to wit) if the Plaintiff left it after
Issue joined, before any Writs taken out, the Defendant is to take out a Venire
fac. with Proviso, which is no more then to prohibit the Sheriff to retorn one
Writ of the same nature, in case two came to him, one from the Plaintiff, and
one from the Defendant, so that the Sheriff is to retorn only the first that
comes to him, and if the Venire facias be taken out by the Plaintiff, the
Defendant upon the Plaintiffs default may take out the Habeas corpora with a
Proviso, and so forward in all Processes with a Proviso, and the Court shall
proceed thereon to Trial or Nonsuit, let the Plaintiff appear or not appear;
but if the Plaintiff please he may appear, and give Evidence as well upon that
Writ of the Defendant, as if it had been sued out by the Plaintiff, and
challenge the Jury or the Array. Co. lib. Intr. 340.
As for kindred between the Defendant and the Sheriff, but if the Plaintiff
appears not as soon as the Jury are sworn, the Plaintiff will be called, and
upon his nonappearance nonsuited.

When a Jury is called, and after full appearance of twelve, and are ready to
be sworn, the Defendant before any be sworn will be called to appear, and will
be told in all personal Actions, that if he does not appear, the Jury will be
taken in his default, whereupon the Defendant either appears by his Attorney or
not appears, if he does not appear, the Plaintiffs Council prays that the
Defendants default may be entered, and the Jury taken by default, which is
accordingly done, and though the Defendant makes default, and appears not by
his Attorney, (yet if he please) his Council will be admitted to speak for him,
and manage his Evidence if there be any, as far forth as Council can in the
Defendants defense, but an Attorney will not be admitted to speak or act any
thing for him, but in a real Action when the Tenant is called (ut supra) he is
told that if he appears not, a Pettite Cap. will be awarded against him, and
upon his nonappearance or default, the Demandants Council will move that the
default may be entered, and the Pettite Cap. awarded, which the Court grants,
and the Trial stayed, and the Pettite Cap. issued out, and when it is returned
and called, which will be ordinarily the next day after the default, the
Demandant shall have Judgment, and recover seizin of the Lands, unless there
be a receipt in the Case; but before I speak thereof, I will end with the manner
of Trials; for at some Trials, after the Jury are sworn, and after some
Evidence given, or before any Evidence given, the Cause is by both parties
consents referred or stayed, wherein in such a Case to prevent a Verdict or a
non. Suit of either sides, a Juror is withdrawn, which will be the first,
second, third, or last, or any other that were sworn, of them that appeared on
the Panel, as the Court shall direct, and then is stricken out of the Panel,
and the Jury discharged, and paid equal by both parties Plaintiff and
Defendant; the withdrawing of a Juror must always be with the consent of both
parties, and cannot be by an Act of the Court, without consent of the Plaintiff
and Defendant, and where a Juror is withdrawn, if the Cause be not comprised
and ended by the next Sessions following, the Plaintiff may go on if he please,
and if he will not, the Defendant may go on with a Proviso, as is before said,
and if it stood upon the Habeas corpora, there will issue out a Distringas
Jurat. wherein all that were named upon the former Panel, will be named in the
Distringas, saving him who was withdrawn, and stricken out of the former
Panel, and commanded to retorn eight more unto him, and so proceed to Trial
again in all points, as formerly has been said of first Trial.

Now a Receipt spoken of a little before, is where one is admitted to appear
upon the Pettite Cap. where a Quod ei deforceat or a Writ of Dower, is brought
against Husband and Wife for Lands, wherein the Wife has some title or
interest, if the Husband makes default after the appearance of full Jury, and
suffer a Pettite Cape to go out against him, the Wife if she please upon
calling of the Pettite Cape, shall be admitted to appear if she please upon the
very calling of the Writ, either in proper person or by Attorney, having had
out a Commission, whereby her Warrant was taken to make that Attorney, as it is
in all Cases of Common Recovery, wherein any Tenant or Vouchee appears not in
person, but by an Attorney; and if she also have her Plea ready or forthcoming,
to be put into the Court, and so save her and her Husbands default: and she may
also so do in case her Husband alone were sued for some Lands, wherein after
the death of her Husband she has an Estate for life, and save her Husbands
default, by stopping and preventing the issuing out of a Writ of Seizin against
him, so that her Plea be issuable, and put in manner aforesaid, and then the
Demandant will be forced to proceed to Issue and Trial against her de novo. And
if a real Action be brought against a Tenant for life, and he makes default
(ut supra) he in the remainder shall in the like sort be admitted and received,
having his Plea ready as aforesaid, showing his Estate in remainder, but the
Tenant in Receipt is after bound in Recognizance with pledges, to answer the
mean Profits before it be received, in case the matter pass against him, if it
be required of him, but very many have been and still are admitted, without
requiring any such ties. These proceedings which indeed are very good, and
which the Law as I conceive has provided to save the right of a Stranger to
the Action, if he comes in, are very often used for mere delays to the
Demandant, in my judgment some of these Receipts upon what experience I found,
might be abrogated in some Cases, as when a Tenant for life is sued, after he
appears and comes to plead, he may pray in him that has the Estate in
remainder, and thereupon a Writ of Summons ad auxiliandum will be issued out
against him in the remainder, whereupon he may come in and appear, and plead
his Title, and at the Trial give it in Evidence, which is as much as he can do
when he appears upon the Pettite Cap. and if the Law be so to save that trouble
to the Demandant, of going round about upon the Receipt, when the Jury are gone
together, and have deliberated and considered of their Evidence, and to come to
yield and deliver up their Verdict, after they are asked whether they are
agreed on their Verdict or no, or who shall speak for them, the Plaintiff is
called to know whether he stand to his Writ or Plaint, and if his Attorney
appears, the Verdict is taken and entered, if he does not appear, the Defendants
Council prays that a Nonsuit be entered or recorded, which accordingly is done,
and upon every such Nonsuit the Defendant shall have Execution for his Costs,
if the Law give Costs to the Plaintiff, had he recovered in that Action, and
there falls sometimes in some Cases a special Verdict as well as a general
Verdict; a general Verdict is, when a Jury finds in general the matter in
Issue, either for the Plaintiffs side, or Defendants side, no points or matter
in Law opposing it: but a special Verdict is, when upon the Evidence the whole
matter of Fact on both sides is apparent to the Jury; save that a point or
question in Law falls out to appear upon the whole Evidence, which the Jury
cannot resolve: wherefore the Court assents, and Council on both sides agree,
that a special Verdict be drawn in that case. And thereupon the Council on both
sides agree, and consider forthwith at the Bar upon the main material points,
or heads to be agreed and delivered up by the Jury, which is afterward drawn
at large in form: and that Verdict will be, that the Jury find all matters of
Fact material to make the Case on both sides, and make a doubt in some points
in Law which fall to be in the whole case and matter, and conclude, that if the
Law in such points be thus and thus, they find for the Plaintiff, and cess him
Damage and Costs, or otherwise, as the Action requires: but if the Law in that
point be thus and thus, or otherwise, they find for the Defendant; and after
this Verdict is drawn and perfected, and both Parties Council assent to the
truth thereof, it is entered, and Copies thereof made for the Judges, and a time
appointed to argue it; for the Court is to Judge and determine all points and
questions doubtful in Law to the Jury, though the Jury be to determine, and
accordingly to deliver up their Verdict on all matters of Fact as be given them
in Evidence, and leave the doubt in Law to the Judges determination and
judgment: and at the time appointed, Council on both sides argue the Case that
falls out to be the point of Law in the Verdict, by citing as many Cases as
they can produce to make the stronger for the Law in the Case to be on their
Clients behalf, and by enlarging with their own Reasons and Expositions upon
the same Cases; and then, or perhaps another time, the Judge make each of them
an Argument, upon what Cases as were cited, and on all as had been said on both
sides; and then, or what other time they are disposed, deliver their opinion in
the point in Law, either for the Plaintiff, or for the Defendant, and
accordingly Judgment shall be entered. And for every Sessions from the time of
giving up the Verdict by the Jury, till Judgment be given, there is an Entry of
Curia advisare vult, which is in the nature of a continuance.

It falls out sometimes, but indeed very seldom, that a Jury after they are
Sworn, and hear their Evidence, are discharged without delivering any Verdict
at all, and none of them wihdrawn, as is before spoken of, when Causes are
referred after Evidence heard; but an absolute discharge entered by the Court,
wherein yet there is always mentioned ex assensu partium, and this falls out to
be when Council of the one side demurs on the Evidence given on the other side,
and the Council from whom the Evidence is given joins in demurrer; whereupon
the Evidence that was given to be drawn up with the demurrer to it, and then
the Jury, as aforesaid, discharged, and the points that falls out were in Law
upon the Evidence left to the Judgment and, Determination of the Court, which
sometimes after Argument is given and entered for Plaintiff or Defendant, as is
before spoken, where a special Verdict is given; and therefore I will not
enlarge further thereon, having stood somewhat longer on manner of arguing, and
determination of a special Verdict then altogether concerned, my purpose being
to direct an Attorney how far he was to act in that and in this; It is the
Councels part to manage all things.

Again, when a Jury after they heard their Evidence, and deliberate thereon,
comes to deliver their Verdict, if the Plaintiff when he is then called becomes
nonsuit, it is requisite that the Defendants Attorney have care (which I
omitted to speak of when I formerly spoke of a nonsuit, where it had been more
proper) that is to say, a special Entry made of that nonsuit, that it was
after Evidence; whereby the Record may be, as several Presidents are for it,
drawn up accordingly; for there is a very great difference and strong one, when
occasion is to be urged between a common ordinary Nonsuit before Evidence, and
a Nonsuit after full Evidence on both sides given, for it is near as good as a
Verdict for the Defendant. And in so doing the Attorney may perhaps benefit his
Client far more then what he had formerly done for him in this Cause, if the
Plaintiff should afterward stir therein, and bring his Cause about again to
another Trial.

After Recovery or Nonsuit, there may be several Writs of Execution had by the
party that recovers, though but one at a time, for to attain the fruits of his
Recovery, which Writs in Debt and all other personal actions, are either a
Capias ad satisfaciend. a Ficri facias, or an Elegit, the one being to take the
body, the other to seize on the party, goods and chattels, the third to find
the moiety of his Lands that he had at the time of the Judgment given, and all
his Cattle, except the Cattle of his Plow. If an Elegit be taken out, the party
can resort to no other Writ: ^till the time expires that he must sue forth a
Sci. fac. for to renew his Judgment, if a Capias be taken out, he cannot
resort to a Sci. fac. but after a Fi. fac. there may be a Cap. had upon retorn
of Nihil habet in Balliva mea, etc.

After an enquiry is made upon an Elegit, and Lands found, the party that sued
it out, if he conceives that what is done upon it it may satisfy his Recovery,
is to retorn it, and have it filed in the Prothonotary Office, or else keep it
with him, and accept a time to take out another Elegit or another Writ, if it
be to be obtained; for if he files his Elegit, he is thereby concluded and
barred from having any further Execution, though by that which he filed, he
could never attain to the third part of his Recovery.

If a Sheriff upon a Capias retorns, Non est inventus, the party may have an
alias if he please, or an Exigent, which is to the Sheriff, to proclaim the
Defendant at the fourth or next County Court, and at the fourth County he is to
be outlawed by the Coronors Judgment, and when the Exigent is returned, then
will issue out a Capias ut legatu^; which is either general or special, the
general is to take the body only, and the special is as well to take the body,
as to find or to seize on the party his Lands and Goods to the Kings use, till
the party clears himself of the Outlary. But I never understood in all the time
of my experience, and upon all my enquiry, how, or in what manner legally a man
upon an Outlary had out of the Sessions and Lands found thereon, may come to
reap the benefit thereof, by satisfying his Recovery; though it is ordinarily
done in England, for no Inquisition upon an Outlary was ever returned to our
Welsh Exchequer, which is an Office belonging to the Sessions for making of
Original Writs there, and how it may be transmitted; or Cognizance taken of
them at the Exchequer above forth, I leave them to signify, that have reason
to be more knowing then my self therein; for there was no such proceedings in
all my time, and never before for ought I heard. There are also in Actions of
Dower, and on other real Actions, a Habere facias seisinam, as an Execution, to
be taken out, to obtain possession of the Lands recovered, and in it sometimes
a Writ to enquire of Damage, as in Dower, which is recovered by default, or
where it appeared not what the Damages were, and a Capias or Fieri fac. for the
Costs, wherein Costs lies, which Writ when executed, is to be returned and
filed, and in Ejectione firmae, an Habere facias possessionem is the Execution,
for to put into possession with a Cap. or Fieri fac. as is aforesaid included,
or by it self, for the Costs and Damages, which likewise are to be returned and
filed after they are executed.

If Execution be not taken out till a year be expired, since the last Execution
upon any Judgment was sued forth, then the Plaintiff should have no Execution,
though Prothonotories use to do it, by continuing the Cause before he takes out
a Scire fac. to the Sheriff, to sum non the party Defendant to show cause
wherefore the Plaintiff should not have Execution, and if the Sheriff retorns
thereupon a Scire feci, as there is a Rule given by the Court to show cause,
etc. but in some Courts there be two, or in some three Rules to appear, and the
like to plead, which in Sum seems to be too favorable to the Defendant, and
in great delay to the Plaintiff, which may tend to his prejudice, but in
default of appearing and pleading something to it, Judgment is entered, which
is Quod fiat Executio, and then Execution awarded, the Defendant may plead
thereunto what the Law admits; and as his Case stands, Null tiel record, and
several other things. But some hold that that Plea holds not in the same Court
where the Judgment was obtained, others I found of opinion it would, but when
it is admitted, as soon as the Record of the Judgment is produced and read,
there is an end of it, and Execution is presently awarded; if the Sheriff
retorn upon the Fieri facias, Nihil habet per quod, etc. the party Plaintiff
must take out another Scire fac. and if the Sheriff retorns the same Retorn on
that, then those two Nichils amount to a Scire feci, and the party shall have
Execution, as if a Scire feci had been at first returned, in case the Defendant
appears not, or afterward plead not. There be several Causes wherein a Scire
fac. is requisite after Judgment, before Execution be made or taken out, as if
the Plaintiff or Defendant died after Judgment, there must be a Scire fac. for
the Plaintiffs Executor or Administrator of the Defendant, if the Defendant
die, or against the Son and Heir of the Defendant, or against the ter-Tenant of
the Lands, which the Defendant held at the time of the Judgment. And also when
a single Woman marries, after she recovers she must have a Scire fac. in her
and her Husbands name, or where there are two Plaintiffs, and one died after
Judgment, and before satisfaction, there the Survivor must have a Scire fac.
and it is very fit a Scire fac. be where two are such jointly, and one of them
died after Judgment, and before satisfaction that a Scire fac. be had against
the Survivor Defendant, that the future Execution be only against the surviving
person; for otherwise it mu^^ be issued out against him that is dead as well as
against him that is living for otherwise no Record will warrant the issuing of
any Execution for or against them, who before that Scire facias were therein
never mentioned, in all which Scire facias the^^ must be a mention or
suggestion (...) the Cause thereof.

In a Scire facias against one Executor or Administrator, for a Debt recovered
against the Testator or Inte^state, he may plead as he might to as Action
commenced for the same thing against him, Ne unques Exec. etc. o^ Administratio
nunquam Commissa fuit but his safest course will be, Plene administravit, but
if there were an^ Judgment against the Testator (...) Intestator, that must be
pleaded i^ special, or otherwise he shall have (...) benefit thereof, when he
comes (...) discharge the Assets that shall be charged upon him, upon his
general Plene Administravit.

The Scire facias against the Heir is, where any Heir has any Lands fallen
upon him from Father or Kinsman, without any conveyance formerly made to him
thereof, or against the ter-Tenant, is where any one does occupy, and has
purchased Lands, that were the Lands of him against whom any Recovery was had,
at the time of the Judgment given, for all such Lands are liable to the
Judgment, and in these Cases the Defendants in the Scire fac. are to appear
and defend themselves if they can, the ter-Tenant by pleading some Conveyance
made of the Lands before Judgment, or something else, as his Case requires,
and the Heir defends himself most commonly by pleading, Riens per descent,
which is sometimes generally, and some other times specially pleaded; now to
plead it specially, is to say he has nothing by descent praeter etc. (to wit)
save ten acres of Lands, or such a quantity in such and such Townships, for if
the Heir be sure the Plaintiff cannot fasten that he has any Lands by descent,
he may safely plead the general Riens per descent. but if he has not from his
Father or Ancestors some thousand acres, and but one acre or two by descent,
and all the rest being a thousand or two thousand are not, so he must except
the two acres in his Plea, without which the Plaintiff upon the general Issue
pleaded, if he prove; the Defendant has one or two acres by descent, shall
have a Writ not only to extend that, but all the rest of the Land that he
holds, as were the late Lands of him against whom the Judgment was, though he
held them by conveyance, and came not by descent, whereof he must be seized in
Fee-simple at the time of the Writ brought against him, or else he is not
liable, and upon Judgment had against Heir and ter-Tenants, the Plaintiff is
to have Execution, to extend the whole Lands thereto liable, till the whole
money recovered be thence levied.

If Judgment in any Action, or on a Scire fac. against an Executor or
Administrator, the first Execution is a ^ieri facias de bonis testatoris for
the ^rincipal Debt, and bonis propriis for ^he Damage thereon, if the Sheriff
^o return, that the Executor or Administrator, has no Goods unad^inistred,
then the Plaintiff is without remedy against the Party, but is ^y an Action
upon the Case to take is remedy against the Sheriff; for ^^e return is not held
sufficient, or any good return in Law: but if the ^heriff returns a Devastavit,
etc. then Fieri facias de bonis propriis goes out ^o leavy the whole, as well
the Debt ^^s the Damage out of the Executor or Administrators own Goods which
return also proves sometimes very dangerous to the Sheriff; for ^n returning of
a Devastavit against ^ome Executor or other, wherein ^evera it lies not, that
Executor may ^^ring his Action against the Sheriff, and recover very great
Damage against him; therefore the Sheriff is ^n a strict case, and he should do
nothing rashly, but all things warily and advisedly, and so he cannot do amiss.
And upon that Fieri facias bonis propriis, if the Sheriff return nib^habet,
etc. then the Party Plainti^^ shall have a Capias ad satisfaciend, against the
body of the Executor o^ Administrator.

There are many other things which are requisite for an Attorneys knowledge, as
the knowledge in the solicitation of quashing or traversing of Indictments or
Presentiments, a^^ in levying of Fines, and suffering common Recoveries for
better assuring of Lands, and some other things which would prove too tedious
to insist upon: for I confess have been in some things before ove^ tedious
already, therefore I sha^^ leave them to learn, and to seek o^^ by their own
industry the knowledge of them, if they conceive the pleasure in them, or the
gain gott^^ thereby will countervail their pain^ And indeed I rather omit to
speak any thing touching the quashing and traversing of Indictments, for it
matters not much what such Person (...) gives occasion to be presented o^
indicted, may suffer for defect o^ knowledge that way in his Attorney for
Council (if well paid) as such Person to avoid their conviction, and
consequently their penalties and punishments will, or at least should do, will
sufficiently direct them. And for the knowledge in suffering of common
Recoveries, and levying of Fines, it belongs altogether to Council to be
managed and directed, without an Attorney be in something able to ease the
Council; as by Drawing Titlings and Concords, which an Attorney who that way
obtained good experience may do, otherwise I hold him not fit to meddle
therein; or to be instructed, least trusting to his Instructions, without
further knowledge, he may spoil his Clyents Conveyances, and thereby do him
therein more harm perhaps, then by his negligence or ignorance in dealing, for
his Clyent in several petty Causes. It is very behoovefull for an Attorney to
know at least the forms, if not the nature of all Writs, and the Retorns of
them, especially of such Originals, second Writs, Jury Writs, and Writs of
Execution, as be most used and expedient for his practice. And to know well the
Fees of the Prothonotory, and the rest of the Officers of the Court; for
without some knowledge in these Writs and Retorns, his Clyents Cause may be
delayed, and perhaps sometimes overmuch prejudiced, because all Clerks of an
Office or Undersheriff are not so perfect and knowing, but some may commit a
fault now and then, and those that are knowing may be subject (by reason of
negligence or over-hastiness) to write false. And if any Attorney, if he
suspect any such thing, cannot apprehend it, his Clyents as aforesaid may
suffer by it, if the Attorney of the other side be more knowing and
apprehensive. And if any Attorney knows not perfectly all Fees, he cannot
choose but in making of Bills of Costs for his Clyent after Sessions, or when
he takes out Execution for them, prejudice and wrong himself or his Clyent.
Neither is it handsome for an Attorney when he is paying some Fees to an
Officer, to be enquiring of him, or of another, what the Fees are; lest he
gives occasion to some standers by to suspect his ignorance in other things as
well as in those Fees. All which ordinary Writs and their Retorns, I would have
done here: but far better then I could do, are to be had and read in several
printed Books; wherein if Attorneys please they may be fully instructed, and
their Fees they may soon attain to know in a short time, if they be but
diligent in observing, and willingly learning, and also careful to remember
what they observe and learn, that I need not here give any Catalogue of them;
for an Attorney, though he were bred up an Apprentice his time under an able
Attorney, which I conceive is a very good way to bring him up, and make him
able, and if he had never so good instruction from him in writing, and by long
experience, will never for all this I think prove thoroughly perfect and able in
his profession, no more then I also think any of another profession will do,
without he be as earnest and desirous to learn and know the same, as much or
more for the delight and pleasure he shall take and receive in the knowledge
thereof, as in the profits and gain he expects to attain by it: but the
over-hastiness and forwardness to come too soon by that gain, has made many
one a bungler, not only in that, but in several other professions, which Error
were well to be by others hereafter shunned and avoided.

Ad magnam Sessionem Domini Regis, Com. Caernarvon tent. apud Conwey in Com.
predict. coram Petro Mutton Ar. Justiciar, Domini Regis magn. Sessionis suae
Com. pred. and Edvardo Littleton Ar. uno alter. Justiciar. etc. die Lunae
(viz.) decimo quinto die September. Anno Regni Dom. Caroli Dei gratia Angliae,
Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, fidei Defensor. etc. quarto.
Certain Rules agreed upon at the said Sessions, for the settling of business in
the Court of the said Sessions, within the three Shires of North Wales.
1. Imprimis, Every Essoin to be east upon the calling of the Writ, or else not
to be allowed. 2. Item, An Essoin is to be allowed upon the Iterum Summoneas,
second or third Bill, Distringas, etc. if there be no Essoin cast before upon
the Original, and that before Issue, but after Issue one Essoin upon the Venire
fac. only. 3. Item, No Essoin to be allowed upon a Scire fac. brought upon a
former Judgment. 4. Item, After Appearance and Declaration, three Rules in
every real Action, and two in every personal, mixed, or popular, and the last
peremptory, after a Plea one Rule for Replication, Rejoinder, Surrejoynder,
Rebutter, Surrebutter. 5. Item, The Petit visum or auditum in real Actions to
be demanded between the second and third Rule, and the Petit auditum in
personal Actions between the first and second Rule. 6. Item, An Essoin to cast
one day only, ( viz.) the next day after Essoin cast, as if a Writ be essoined
upon a Monday to put off Tuesday, so that no Writ can be called until
Wednesday morning, and the party to wave or warrant the Essoin, the day
essoined, sitting the Court. 7. Item, If there be no appearance upon the day of
the Retorn, nor upon the calling of any Writ sitting the Court, or upon that
day, the appearance not to be allowed, but upon the next Writ or Process. 8.
Item, Upon a similis Narratio, upon a Writ of View, Sum. ad Warran. ad
auxiliand. and upon a Challenge one Rule only, and that peremptory. 9. Item,
After Imparlance one Rule. 10. Item, Upon every Sc. fac. upon an old Judgment
in personal Actions two Rules to appear, and after appearance two Rules to
plead, and that peremptory, but upon real Actions three Rules to appear, and
three to plead, but upon a Judgment of ten years past no Sc. fac. is to be
granted without motion in Court, unless it be continued by Process. 11. Item,
No Judgment to be given upon a Bond for performance of Covenants, Award, or
Agreements upon default, without motion in Court. 12. Item, An Executor or
Administrator to make Oath that he received no part of the Debt, nor any other
for him, since the death of the Testator, nor the Testator himself to his
knowledge. 13. Item, No Judgment entered by default, or taken of the same
Sessions, unless the Defendant plead in Bar the same Sessions. 14. Item, Upon
the general Issue tendered, the Similiter to be entered for the Defendant without
Rule, but upon any special pleading, or a Similiter for the Plaintiff, one Rule
to be given. 15. Item, Upon a Demurrer tendered, one Rule to join, and upon
refusal Judgment to be given. 16. Item, If a Plaint be removed by Recordare,
Pone, Certiorari, or otherwise, from an inferior Court to the great Sessions,
the Defendant appearing by Attorney, and giving Rule, and the Plaintiff
thereupon nonsuited, the Defendant ought not to have Costs, the Amerciaments
of 3 d. or that Amerciament to be increased.
The certain and known Rules to be observed in the proceedings of the Chancery
Court of the great Sessions of the Counties of Anglesey, Caernarvon, and
Merioneth.
1. IMprimis, If any Party served with a Subpoena to answer does not appear,
and enter his appearance with the Register, before the sitting of the fourth
Court next after the said service, the Plaintiffs Attorneys may sitting, or
after the fourth Court upon filing the Bill, and the Oath of the Service of
Course, without motion, cause the Register to enter and pass an Attachment: And
the legality of it, and the validity of the Oath, to be disputed upon the
Defendants appearance; and no Subpoena shall issue into a foreign County
without order of Court; and by the entry of appearance it is to be expressed,
whether the Defendant appear in person, or by Attorney, and for how many
Defendants the appearance is given. 2. If no Answer, Plea, or Demurrer be put
in before the sitting of the fourth Court next after the entry of appearance,
the Register ex officio to enter and grant an Attachment, and upon the due
return of any Attachment to enter and issue forth an alias Attachment; and upon
the return thereof (if cause require) to enter and issue forth Proclamation of
Rebellion, but no sequestration without motion in Court, and every of these
Processes to bear test from day to day, and all contempts are to be cleared or
paid, for before answer be received, and all Bills and Answers to be subscribed
by Council. 3. If no Bill be filed against the Party, served within three
Courts after the entry of his appearance, he shall upon the producing of the
Subpoena, or Ticket, wherewith he was served, and filing of it with his
Affidavit of his service be of course dismissed with vj. s. viij d. costs, and
if after answer no exceptions or reply be filed and entered, or other
proceedings given within four Courts, the Defendant is of course to be
dismissed with 13. s. 4. d. costs, having first by himself or his Attorney
moved the Plaintiffs Attorney to give proceedings. 4. After replication entered
and received, and issue joined, and at any time before publication either Party
is at liberty to examine witnesses before the Register giving notice of the
witnesses names in writing to the Attorney of the adverse party, and for want
of notice the examinations to be suppressed, and the first interrogatories to
be ministered to all the witnesses without any alteration, without special order
of Court. 5. That in all causes wherein witnesses have been examined in the
Registers office, or by Commission returned and certified publication shall
without motion pass, if cause be not showed by the Plaintiff or Defendant
before the rising of the second Court on Wednesday in the Sessions week, in the
County wherein such causes arise, and both parties if present, or such of them
as appear there in person, or by Attorneys, that present Sessions, at their
peril, without service of any Process in that behalf; otherwise if absent, and
not appearing as aforesaid, to be served with a Process to hear Judgment
therein at such time and place as the Justices of the same great Sessions shall
appoint. 6. If a Bill of Costs awarded upon any hearing, or otherwise, be in
difference between the Attorneys, the Register is indifferently to tax and
allow the same, and the order to pass according to his approbation therein
without motion. 7. That no motion in any cause after appearance entered be made
by Council or Attorney, without notice first given of the purpose and intention
thereof to the Council or Attorney for the Party against whom such motion is to
be made; and that if any such motion shall be made before notice, the same
shall be of no effect, and at every motion the last Rule in that cause to be
produced. 8. Where any Person shall be brought in by Process, or shall appear
gratis to be examined upon a Contempt, he shall give notice of such his
appearance to the Attorney of the other side; and if within three Courts after
such appearance, or notice given, Interrogatories shall not be exhibited to
examine him; or if being examined, no reference shall be procured of his
Examination, then the Party so examined shall be discharged of the Contempts
without further motion, and attend the Register for taxing of Costs, which the
Register is to tax without further order.
Montgomery and Denbigh.
A Note of the Fees belonging to the Pr^^^ thonotary of North Wales in Causes
real and mixed.
FOr every mean Process before Appearance, ij s. For every Warrant of Attorney
and Essoin severally, iv d. For every Declaration, Plea, Reply, Rejoinder,
Surr. Demur. and joining in Demur. ij s. For every Issue joined of either
Party, ij s. For every Pet. visum, ij s. For every Imparlance, ij s. For every
Writ of Grand Cape, ij s. Petty Cape, ij s. View, ij s. Sum. ad aux. ij s. Sum.
ad War. ij s. and other Judicial Writs, ij s. For every Continuance ij s. viij
d. For every Challenge to the Sheriff ij s. the like to either Coroner ij s. to
all three in all vj s. For Challenge unto the Array, ij s. For Affirmation, or
Quasat. thereupon, ij s. For every Ven. fac. ij s. q. For every Hab. Corp.
Distring. etc. ij s. viij d. For every Tales de Circumst. ij s. For calling the
Jury j s. For every Adjournment of Jury, Remanet, or Juror withdrawn by Assent
of Parties, ij s. For Verdict and Judgment, iv s. For every privy Verdict, v
s. For Reading the Record, ij s. For Reading the Evidence, ij s. For every
Nonsuit, iv s. For every Capt. by default, ij s. For every Writ of Seisin, ij
s. For Slander the Fees for the most part concur with the precedent Fees, as
experience will inform.
Fees in Personal Actions above 40 s. Debt or Damages.
FOr the first Bill, or Pone, x d. For every second, third Sum. or Distr. vj d.
For every War. of At. and Essoin severally, iv d. For every Adjourn, ij d.
For every Decl. viij d. For every Pet. Audit. viij d. For every Li. lo. xij d.
For every Bar, and other Pleas, xij d. For every long Plea, entering Indent. and
Awards in heo Verba, for every sheet viij d. For every ordinary Issue of either
Party, xij d. For every Non est factum, xij d. Similiter inde. iij s. For every
Demurrer, xij d. For Issue thereunto, xij d. For every Continuance, j s. iv d.
For every Ve. fa. j s. ij d. For every Challenge, Plea, Quasat. or Affirmat. as
before, per piece ij s. For every Hab. Corp. j s. viij d. Voc. Jur. j s. Tales,
ij s. For every Adjournment of Jury, Remanet. or Juror withdrawn, ij s. For
Reading Record, j s. For Verdict and Judgment ij s. For Nonsuit, ij s. For
Capt. by default, j s. For Ca. Sa. or Fi. fa. vj d.
Personal Actions under 40 s.
FOr every Summons, Pone, and Writs thereupon issuing, iv d. Warrant Attorney,
iv d. Declaration, iv d. Every Issue, iv d. Continuance, viij d. Judgment,
viij d. After Issue joined the Fees are taken as in the former Action above 40
s. For Awarding upon Record, and making of every Writ of Retorn. Habend. ij s.
Second. Deliver. ij s. Ca. in Wither. ij s. Privilege, ij s. Procedendo, ij s.
Certiorari, ij s. Elegit. ij s. Scire fac. ij s. Inquir. de dam. ij s. Ha. Cor.
cum Causa, ij s. Duces tecum, ij s. Distr. Ballium, ij s. Distr. nuper. vic. ij
s. Sum. and severans, ij s. Restitution, ij s. Diminution, ij s. Extent. ij s.
Mittimus, ij s. Cap. ad Respondendum, j s. Exigent. j s. Cap. ult. j. s, For
Recording the Appearance of every Person Arrested, ij s. iv d. For every
special Bail, ij s. iv d. For Entering upon Record an Infants Admission to his
Guardian, or Procheyne Amy by the Court, ij s. iv d. For a Deed Enrolled, for
every side of a Roll, v s. For entering every Attorneys name in the Roll when he
is Sworn, iij s. iv d.
The Fees of Common Recovery with a single Voucher.
NArr. verse. tenant. ij s. Res. inde, ij s. Narr. verse. Vouch. ij s. Li lo. j
s. Jud. verse. tenant. ij s. vj d. Jud. verse. Vonch. ij s. vj d. Hab. fac.
seisinam, ij s. vj d. Entry Return, ij s. Exemplific. vj s. viij d. j l. v s.
ij d. li
With double Voucher.
Narr. verse. tent. ij s. Res. inde. ij s. Narr. verse. vouch. ij s. Res. inde.
ij s. Narr. verse. 2. vouch. ij s. Res. inde. ij s. Li. lo. 1 s. Sum. ad War.
ij s. Jud. verse. tent. ij s. 6 d. Jud. verse. vouch. ij s. 6 d. Jud. verse. 2.
vouch. ij s. 6 d. Habere fa. seisinam. ij s. 6 d. Entry retorn. ij s. 6 d.
Exemplification. 6 s. 8 d. 1 l. 14 s. 2 d.


For receiving and recording every Fine. vj s.

The Goal Fees.
For every Prisoner that appears upon Bail for recording of appearance. ij s.
For every Commitment per Court. ij s. For every non Cul. pleaded. ij s. For
every Acquittance by Procl. or otherwise. i s. v d. For every Bail over. ij s.
For every Writ. De Pace. ij s. De bono gestu. ij s. Hab. corp. prisonarii. ij
s. Deliberes co. prisonarii. ij s. Restitution. ij s. Scire fac. ij s.
Excommunicat. cap. ij s. Excommun. deliband. and other special Writs. ij s.
For recording every Mittimus and Signific. iiij s. For certifying every Record
for every sheet. viij d. Every Attachment. xij d. For enrowling every Pardon,
according to the length xx d. a sheet. xx d. For certifying of every
Recognizance. ij s. For every Travers to an Indictment. ij s. For every
Recognizance to prosecute in Travers. ij s. For every Ve. fa. thereupon. xiiij
d. q. For every Hab. cor. or distr. xx d q. For every Non cul. thereupon by
Jury. ij s. For every person indicted upon Trespass, that submits himself ^o
the Fine upon the Ve. fa. i s. vi d. Upon the Cap. ij s. vi d. Upon the Al.
Cap. iij s. v d. Upon the Plur. Cap. iij s. v d. Upon the Exigent. vi s. v d.


Other Fees there are, which experience will best inform.

Fees upon a Writ of Error.
For certifying the Record. 1 l. Prothonotory for entering upon Record. vi s.
viii d. Copia Record. xiij s. iiij d. Consil. x s. Pro quolibet Error. ij s. a
piece. Feod. Attorney ij s. 2. 14. 0.
Sessio secunda.
Council. x s. Writ of Restitution. iij s. vij d. Continuance. 1 s. Feod.
Attorn. ij s. 16 s. 7 d.
Kings Silver, and post fines. xl s. pay vi s. viij d. iij l. x s. iiij l. xv
s. v marks. xiij s. iv d. v l. xx s. For filing a Writ of Habere facias
possessionem, vi s. viij d.

Quinto die Aprilis Anno Regni Domini Jacobi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensor. etc. Angliae, Franciae and
Hiberniae sexto, and Scotiae quadragessimo primo.
A Rate of all and every the Fees and Duties to be received by the
Prothonotary, and Clerk of the Crown of the Counties of Denbigh and
Mountgomery, and his Clerks, as belonging to his said place and Office,
assessed, rated, and appointed, according to the Statute in that behalf made
and provided.
1. FOr every Queritur. 4 d. 2. For every Writ upon a Queritur under 40 s. 4.
d. 3. For every Writ upon a Queri^^r, and second Writ for 40 s. and ^^ove. 6 d.
4. For every Writ upon a Queri^^r, in Actions upon the Case. 12. d. 5. For
every second or third Writ in plea of Land Ejectione firm. Trespass on the
Case, and such like. 12 d. 6. For every Writ of View Sum. ad Warran. Sum. ad
anxiliand. are such like. 12 d. 7. For every Venire facias under 40 s. 12 d. 8.
For every Venire facias for 40 s and above. 14 d. 9. For every Venire facias in
ple^ of Land Ejectione firm, Trespass o^ the Case, Appeals, and the like. 2 s.
4^ 10. For every Hab. corpora, Distringas, Alias distringas, under 40 s with a
Tales. 1 s. 4 d. 11. For every like, in plea o^ Land Ejectione firm, Trespass
on the Case, Appeals, and such like. 2. s. 8 d 12. For every Petty Cape and
Grand Cape. 2 s. 13. For every Tales de Circumsta^tibus. 2 s. 14. For entering
every Challenge. 2 s. 15. For joining every Issue t^ the Challenge. 2 s. 16.
For entering every not Suit. 2 s. 17. For entering every Verdict in Debt. 1 s.
18. For entering every Judgment in Debt. 1 s. 19. For every the like Entrees
under 40 s. 6 d. 20. For every the like Entrees in plea of Land Ejectione
firm, Appleals, Trespass on the Case, and such like. 2. s. 21. For Adjournment
of a Jury after appearance. 2. s. 22. For every Execution under 40 s. 4 d. 23.
For every Execution of 40 s. and above. 6 d. 24. For every Writ of Seisin. 2 s.
25. For entering of Seisin. 6 s. 8. d. 26. For every Elegit. 2 s. 27. For every
Sc. fac. Excommuni^ato Capiend. Exigent, Capias, Vtlegat. Writs for certifying
of Matrimony or Bastardy, Supersedeas, Writs of Restitution, Procedendoes, and
such like, for every of these. 2 s. 28. For entering every Declaration under 40
s. 4 d. 29. For the like of 40 s. and above, Trespass, Detinue, and the like. 8
d. 30. For entering every Declaration in plea of Land Ejections firm. Trespass
on the Case, and Appeals, and such like, not exceeding two sheets. 2 s. 31. For
entering every Plea under 40 s. 4 d. 32. For entering every Plea for 40 s. and
above, not exceeding two sheets of Paper. 1 s. 33. For entering every such like
Plea, in plea of Land Ejectione firm, and Trespass on the Case, and such like.
2 s. 34. For entering, filing, and enrolling in parchment of all Writs,
Declarations, Answers, and every other Plea, if the Copy thereof be above two
sheets of paper, as Copies are usually written in his Majesty's Court of Common
Pleas or Kings Bench, then for such sheet of paper 12 d. and after that rate. 1
s. 35. For entering the Tenants demand of View. ij s. 36. For every Habear
corpora, Dlstringas, and alias Distringas, for 40 s. and above, with a Tales i
s. viij d. 37. For joining every Issue in Debt under 40 s. iv d. 38. For
joining every Issue in plea of Debt of 40 s. and above Trespass, Detinue, and
such like. i s. 39. For joining every Issue in plea of Land Ejectione firm,
Trespass on the Case, Appeals, and such like. ij s. 40. For every Scriptum de
Dom. ij s. iv d. 41. For entering every Warrant of Attorney. iv d. 42. For
entering every Essoin. iv d. 43. For entering every Adjournment unto an Essoin.
ij d. 44. For every Rule. iv d. 45. For search for every Sessions. iv d. 46.
For every continuance before Issue joined. iv d. 47. For every continuance in
Debt after Issue joined, for entering the same upon the plea Roll. 1 s. 48. For
every such Entry in Plea of Land Ejectione firm, Trespass on the base Appeals,
and such like, for every such Entry as aforesaid, ij s. 49. For entering every
Imparlance in Debt. i s. 50. For entering every Imparlance in plea of Land,
Ejectione firm, Trespass on the Case, Appeal, and such like. ij s. 51. For
drawing and entering every special Order. i s. 52. For entering every Fine with
Proclamations, and for entering Kings Silver. vi s. 53. For the Chirograph of
every Fine. ij s. 54. For entering and enrolling in parchment of every Recovery
by consent of parties, for every Declaration, Plea and Judgment, 2 s. and such
other Fees, as in real Actions is set down and rated before. ij s. 55. For
Exemplyfying of Fines with Proclamations. vi s. 56. For Exemplifying of every
Recovery, or other Record whatsoever, according to the length thereof, (viz.)
after the rate of 1 s. a sheet as aforesaid. i s. 57. For certifying of every
Record, upon a Writ of Error, or otherwise for entering of every such Record,
certified into the Prothonotaries Office, for every such 1 s. 2 sheet. 58. For
the reversal of every Indictment and Judgment. ij s. 59. For every Copy of
Writ, Declaration, or other Record, for every such sheet. viij d. 60. For the
Prothonotaries hand to every such Copy, or any other in paper, if the said hand
be desired. ij s. 61. For every Recognizance, Plege of Fine, Plege of Traverse,
Plege tam de respond. quam de satis faciendo, for every such. ij s. 62. For
recording every appearance of such as are bound to answer. ij s. 63. For every
prisoner discharged upon Proclamation. i s. 64. For every such acquitted by
Jury. ij s. 65. And for his Plea of not Guilty. ij s. 66. For every Warrant of
the Peace, Warrant of the good Behavior, or Subpaena ad testificand. for every
such. ij s. 67. For the Prothonotaries Clerk, for the writing of every Venfac.
4 d. 68. For their other Jury. Writ, and Writ of Execution. vi d.
Ra. Eure. H. Towneshend. R. Lewkner.
We whose Names are subscribed, have seen these Fees before recited, for many
years received and taken by James Garnons Esquire late Deputy Prothonotary of the
Counties aforesaid, as Fees belonging unto the said Office.

Richard Mitton. Robert Lloyd. Evan Lloyd. Aug. 13. 1660.
This last Copy of Fees I have written with my own hand out of the Original,
under the aforementioned Judges hands, viz. Sir Ralph Eur^, Sir Richard
Lewkner, and Sir Henry Towneshend, attested by the persors abovementioned,
under their hands also, viz. Richard Mitton then Secondary, Robert Lloyd and
Evan Lloyd. then Attorneys there.

Rice Vaughan^

Statuta Walliae
EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae omnibus
fidelibus suis de terra sua de Snodon, and de aliis terris suis in Wall. Sal.
in Domino. Divina providentia, quae in sua dispositione non fallitur, inter
alia suae dispensation is munera, quibus nos and regnum nostrum Angliae
decorari dignata est, terram Walliae cum incolis suis prius nobis jure feodali
subjectam, tam sui gratia in proprietatis nostrae dominium, obstaculis
quibuscunque cessantibus, totaliter and cum integritate convertit, and coronae
regni praedicti, tanquam partem corporis ejusdem annexuit and univit. Nos
itaque intuitu divino volentes praedictam terram nostram Snodon, and alias
terras nostras in partibus illis, sicut and caeteras ditioni nostrae subjectas,
ad honorem and laudem Dei and Ecclesiae sanctae, ac zelum justitiae sub debito
regimine gubernari, and incolas seu habitatores terrarum illarum, qui altae and
bassae se submiserunt voluntati nostrae, and quos sic ad nostram recepimus
voluntatem, certis legibus and consuetudinibus sub tranquillitate and pace
nostra tractari: leges and consuetudines partium illarum hactenus usitatas,
coram nobis and Proceribus regni nostri fecimus recitari. Quibus diligenter
auditis, and before intellectis, quasdam illarum de consilio Procerum
praedictorum delevimus, quasdam permisimus, and quasdam correximus, and etiam
quasdam alias adjiciendas and faciendas decrevimus: and eas de caetero in
terris nostris, in partibus illis perpetua firmitate teneri and observa^i
volumus in forma subscripta.

Providimus, and decernendo statuimus, quod Justitiarius Snoudon habeat
custodiam and gubernationem pacis nostrae regiae in Snoudon, and terris nostris
Wall. adjacentibus: and justitiam exhibeat quibuscunque juxta brevia regia
originalia, leges etiam and consuetudines infrascriptas.

Volumus and statuimus, quod Vice-Comites, Coronatores, and and Ballivi
commotorum sint in Snoudon and terris nostris partium earundem: Vicecomes de
Angliseia, sub quo terra nostra tota Anglisei, cum cantredis, medis, and bundis
suis: Vicecomes de Kaernarvam, sub quo cantreda de Arvan, cantreda de
Artlentoyth, commotum de Crukvn, cantreda de Thlen, and commotum de Invenyth:
Vicecomes de Meronyth, sub quo cantreda de Meronyth, commotum de Ardudo,
commotum de Pentlyn, and commotum de Irmony, cum metis and bundis suis:
Vicecomes de Flint, sub quo cantreda de Englesende, terra de Meillor, Seisnek,
and terra de Hope, and tota terra conjuncta castro nostro and ville de Ruthlan
usque ad villam Cestriae, de caetero intendant Justitiarij nostri Cestriae, and
de exitibus eorundem comitatuum respondeant ad Scaccarium nostrum Cestriae.

Coronatores sint in eisdem commotis per breve regium elegendi, cujus tenor
invenietur inter brevia originalia Cancellariae.

Sint etiam Ballivi commotorum, qui fideliter officia sua faciant and
exequentur, and eis diligenter intendant secundum quod per Justic. and Vicecom.
eis injungatur. Vicecomes de Kermerthen cum cantredis, commotis and metis ac
bundis suis antiquis, Vicecomes de Kardygan Lampader, cum cantredis, commotis,
and metis ac bundis suis.

Coronatores sint in eisdem commotis, and ballivi commotorum ut prius

De Officin Vicecomitis in Wallia, and modo Com. tenendorum.
Vicecomes officium suum exercere debet sub hac forma: scilicet cum quis sibi
conquestus fuerit de quacunque transgres. sibi facta contra pacem Domini Regis,
sive de captione, and Injusta detentione averiorum, sive de namio vetito, aut
de debito, aut de alio contractu non observato, and de consimilibus, per breve
vel sine brevi: Primo capiat pleg. de prof. clam. suo vel per fidem, si fuerit
pauper: and postea faciat executionem, prout before declaratur hoc modo.
Defendentes in quolibet casu summoneantur, quod sint ad proximum com. respons.
conquerentibus: Ad quem com. facta summonitione and testisicata. si non
venerint, per considerationem com. iterum sum. quod sint ad alium prox. com.
respons. ut prius. Ad quem com. si non venerint, ex tanc conquerentes per
considerationem com. tam in placitis per brevia quam querimoniis sine brevi
recuperent petitiones suas cum damnis suis sive emendis, tam in rebus mobilibus
quam immobilibus prout actiones requirunt. Et per hujusmodi defaltis poena
secundum legem and consuetudinem Wallensicam Domino Regi incurratur. Et cum
parts comparuerint ad placitand. utraque pars suam narrando veritatem
admittatur sine occasion, and secundum petitiones respondeat, and allegeat:
hinc inde per considerationem com. ad judicium pro Queren. vel Defend.
procedatur: and secundum quantitatem and qualitatem delicti puniatur. Et
sciendum est, quod hoc modo debet com. teneri, sc. de mense in mensem, in loco
ubi Dominus Rex ordinaverit, and hoc per diem Lunae in unum com. per diem
Martis in alium com. per diem Mercurii in tertium com. and per diem Jovis in
quartumcom. and non per alios dies. Et Vicecomes ad com. suum tenendum sic
procedat.

In primis audiatand recipiat coram eo and coronat^, and sectatoribus com.
praesentationes feloniarum and casuum, qui contigerint inter duos com. de morte
hominis hoc modo. Quod quatuor villatae propinquiores loco, ubi casus homicidii
vel infortunii contigerit, veniant ad prox. com. una cum inventore and
Wallesheria, id est parentela hominis interfecti, and ibi praesentent factum
feloniae and casum infortunii, and modum utriusque ita pronunciando, quod tali
die and tali loco contigit, notus aut ignotus, inventus fuit occisus per
feloniam vel submersus, vel alio modo mortuus per insortunium, and talis eum
invenit, qui presens est, etc. Et ista praesentatio tam in rotulo Coronatorum
quam in rotulo Vicecom. statim irrotuletur. Et si ibi fuerit homo vel foemina,
quae appellum sequi voluerit, slatim recipiantur plegii de pros. and deducatur
appellum in illo com. Ita quod si appellati comparuerint, statim capiantur, and
in prisona Domini Regis usque adventum justic. detineantur, and salvo
custodiantur. Et si non comparuerint, tunc ad prosecutionem appellantis
exigantur de com. in com. Et si ad quartum com. non venerint, vel manucapti non
fuerint, utlagentur, and foeminae weymentur: Et ad primum com. ad quem
exigentur, si non comparuerint, statim eorum terrae and catalla capiantur and
seisientur in manum Domini Regis, and tradantur custodiend. villatis, ut infra.
Eodem modo procedat in appello de plaga, mahemio, raptu, incendio, and roberia
contra appellatos, si non comparuerint. Et si comparuerint, and pleg.
invenerint sufficientes, sex ad minus vel plures, standi recto in adventu
Justic. statim replegientur.

Et sciendum est, quod contra appellatos de vi. praecepto, missione, vel
receptamento, non est procedend. ad utlagar. quousque de facto aliquis
convincatur.

Vicecomes faciat turnum suum in singulis commotis suis, bis in anno, in aliquo
certo loco ad hoc assignato: se. semel post festum sancti Michaelis, and semel
post Pascham. Ad quem turnum omnes libere tenentes, and alii terram tenentes,
in commoto illo residentes tempore summonitionis turnum tenendi, exceptis
religiosis, clericis and foeminis, ibidem venire debet. Et Vicecomes per
Sacramentum. xii. libere tenentium de discretioribus, and legatoribus, vel
plurium pro discretione sua diligenter inquirat de capitulis coronam Domini
Regis tangentibus subscriptis.

De seductoribus Domini Regis, and Regni Dominae Reginae, vel liberorum suorum,
and eorum consentaneis: De finibus: de homicidiis: de roberatoribus: de
murdritoribus: de incendiariis, incendia felonice facientibus, and little
receptatoribus, and eis consentientibus: de macegrariis carnes furatas
scientibus, vendentibus, and ementibus: de whittawariis scilicet quod coria
bovina, and equina furata scienter albificant, ut sic non agnoscantur: de
redubbatoribus pannorum furatorum, eos in novam formam redigentibus, and
veterem mutantibus, ut de mantello tunicam vel super tunicam facientibus, and
similia: de utlagatis, and illis qui regnum abjuraverunt reversis: de his qui
contra adventum. Item Just. se subtraxerint, and post iter Justic. redierint:
de raptoribus virginum, sanctimonialium, and matronarum honest viventium: de
thesauro invento: de cursu aquae diverso: de via obstructa, vel restricta, vel
arctata: de muris, domibus, portis fossatis, and marleriis levatis and fact is
intra iter publicum, ad nocumentum ipsius itineris, and periculum transeuntium:
and de praedicta levantibus and facientibus: de salsariis monetae, and sigilli
Domini Regis: de malefactoribus in parcis, and vivariis: de frangentibus
prisonam Domini Regis: de capientibus columbas volantes de columbat: de
facientibus poundbreche, hoc est de fractoribus parcorum in quibus animalia
impercantur: de forstali, hoc est de recussu averiorum: de hampsonkne, hoc est
de invasione domorum: de thefbote, hoc est de emenda furti capta sine
consideratione curiae Domini Regis, de imprisonantibus liberos quoscunque, de
usurariis de amoveribus, vel corrumpentibus divisas, de assisa panis and
servisiae non observata, and de eam infringentibus. de bussellis galonibus and
aliis mensuris injustis and per ea vendentibus. De ulnis and ponderibus
injustis, and per ea vendentibus, de hospitantibus ignotos ultra duas noctes:
de sanguine effuso, de hutesio levato, de tondentibus multones noctanter in
ovilibus, and eos excoriantibus, vel etiam alia animalia, de capientibus and
colligentibus noctanter blada in autumno, and ea asportantibus, and de omnibus
hujusmodi malefactoribus.

Inquiratur etiam de juribus Domini Regis subtractis, ut de custodiis, Wardis
maritagiis, releviis, feodis, advocationibus Ecclesiarum, si quae fuerint,
sectis commitatum and commotorum, quis ea subtraxit, and a quo tempore, and de
his qui sibi appropriaverint jura regalia absque warranto, ut furcas emendas,
assisae panis and servisiae fractae, placitum de vetito namio, and alia
hujusmodi jura, quae ad praerogativam pertinent and coronam. Domini Regis.

Vicecomes aut in visu and turno suo faciendo statim in principio convenire
faciat coram eo omnes totius commoti, and eos jurace faciat, quod verum
presentabunt. xij juratoribus vel pluribus per vicecom. electis, and nullum
verum celabunt, vel aliquod falsum dicent de his, de quibus ab eis inquiretur
ex part Domini Regis. Et facto sacramento, exponant eis capitula suprascripta,
and injungant eis, quae de singulis diligenter veritatem inquirant, Et si quos
invenerint, qui ob eorum malefactum vitam amittere debeant vel membra, eorum
nomina in secretis vic. intiment, ne forte hujusmodi indictati, li presents
essent in turno, affugerent, li in publico indictarentur. De caeteris autem
articulis been poterunt palam and public respondere and veredictum suum
reddere, and tunc dictatur eis quod singuli seorsum vadant, and tractent
diligenter and inquirant de his, quae eis sunt injuncta: Et cum been certiorati
suerint, redeant, veredictum suum reddant and presentent.

Vicecomes vero in veredictis and recognitionibus admittend. non querat
actiones verfus presentantes, nec capiat ab eis fines, per sic quae non
occasionentur. Recepto autem veredicto seu praesentatione praesentantium,
Vicecomes statim, vel quam cito poterit, indictos de maleficiis, quorum poena
est mors, vel amissio membrorum, capiat, and in prisona detineat, vel per
plegios dimittat sufficientes. Et de caeteris capitulis secundum quod
inquisierit statim fiat correctio and debita executio in omnibus and singulis
supradictis.

Ballivi autem commotorum de caetero teneant commotos suos, and justitiam
faciant and exerceant inter litigantes.

De officio coronatorum, videlicet de placitis coronae in partibus Walliae
provisum est, quod in quolibet com. Wall. si un us coronator ad minus per breve
Domini Regis in forma inter caetera brevia regia subsequent. contenta, qui in
pleno com. eligatur, and coram Vic. ibidem fac. sacram. quod erit fidelis
Domino Regi, quod fideliter faciet and exequet. omnia quae ad officium
coronatoris pertinent. Eritque officium ejus, quod stacim postquam ab aliquo
fuerit requisitus veniendi ad mortuum interfectum per feloniam, vel subversum,
aut quocunque alio modo mortuum per infortunium, and etiam ad viend. hominem
enormiter vulneratum, de cujus vita desperatur, quod statim mandabit Vic. vel
ballivo commoti, quod ven. fac. coram eo certis die and loco oc. xij. annorum
and ultra de villa illa, in qua casus contigerit, and de quatuor villatis
propinquioribus: and quod per eorum sacram. fideliter caute and secret ac
diligenter inquiret de felonia, de felonibus, and eorum catallis, similiter de
facto and de modo facti videlicet quis fuerit culpabilis de facto, quis de vi,
and cujusmodi vi quis de praecepto seu missione, quis etiam de receptamento
post factum, and de catallis eorundem hujusmodi qui per inquisitionem inde
culpabiles inventi fuerint. Inquirat etiam quis interfectum primo invenerit,
and nomen ejus irrotuletur, and attachietur per pleg. quorum nomina
irrotulentur veniendi ad prox. commotum, and etiam coram Justic in adventu suo.
Et quae facta inquisitione illa eam statim distinct and aperte irrotulari fac.
una cum nominibus eorundem, quae inventi fuerint culpabiles and little catallis,
and quae nomina scripta vic. si praesens fuerit, vel ballivo commoti liberabit
secret praecipiendo ex part Domini Regis, quod corpora eorum statim
capiantur, and in prisona Domini Regis salvo custodiantur, donec inde steterint
recto in cur. Domini Regis. Et quod catalla eorundem fideliter appreciari fac.
and tam catalla particulariter quam precium eorundem, in rotulo suo ponet, and
eadem catalla per visum vic. vel ballivi, and aliorum fidelium Domini Regis,
qui interfuerint singulis villatis, in quibus catalla praedicta inventa
fuerint, interim liberari fac. ut in adventu Justic. fideliter inde Domino Regi
respondeant.

Coronator vero cum fecerit inquisitionem super mortuum, interroget
Walesheriam, scilicet parentelam interfecti: Et si quis ex part patris, and
alius ex part matris apparuerint, dicendo, quod fuit de parentela sua, and hoc
per fideles Regis presents testificatum fuerit, nomina eorum in rotulo suo
statim irrotulari fac. Si autem nullus de parentela comparuerint, irrotuletur
similiter in rotulo quod nullus comparet, ut Justic. in adventu suo evidentius
facere possit, quod in hac part fuerit faciendum. Coronator etiam diligenter
inquirat casum infortunii and modum and secundum quod invenerit per
inquisitionem distinct irrot. fac. Inquirat etiam de inventore and nomen ejus
irrotulari fac. ut supra.

Praeterea cum latro vel homicida, seu alius malefactor fugerit ad Ecclesiam,
coronator quae cito constiterit sibi, mandet ballivo Domini Regis illius
commoti, quod certo die venire faciat coram eo probos and legales homines de
visu. and in praesentia eorum facta recognitione feloniae, fieri fac.
abjurationem hoc modo, quod felo duc. usque ad portam Ecclesiae and assignetur
ei portus per coronatorem, and ex tunc abjuret Regnum, and secundum quod
assignabitur ei portus propinquus vel remotus praeligatur ei terminus exeundi
Regnum praedict. Ita quod in eundo versus portum illum deferens quandam crucem
in manu sua, non declinet a via regali ullo modo scilicet a dextris nec a
sinistris, sed semper eam teneat, quousque regnum exierit.

Forma brevinm orig. plac. in Wall.
Bre. de No. diss. de libero ten. de quo quis liber homo injuste and sine
judicio fuerit disseisitus. Rex Vic. Anglisci salutem. Questus est nobis A.
quod B. and C. injuste, etc. disseum de libero ten. suo de N. post pacem
nostram in Wall. proclam. An. Regni nostri. xi. Et ideo tibi praecipimus, quod
si praedictus A. fece. rit te, etc. tune fac. ten. illud de catallis, quae in
ipso capta fuerunt, and ipsum ten. cum eatallis esse in pace usque ad certum
diem, q. Justic. nostri tibi scire fac. Et interim fac. xii. liberos and leg.
homines de vis. sum illo videre ten. illud, and nomina eorum inbreviari. Et
sum. eos per bonos sum. quod tunc sint coram praefatis Justic. nostris parati
inde fac. recognic. Et pone per vad. and salvos pleg. praedictos B. and C. vel
ballivos suos, si ipsi inventi non fuerint, quod tunc sint ibi and. illam
recogn. Et habeas ibi sum. nomina pleg. and hoc bre. Dat. apud Kernervan, vel
alibi, tali die and tali anno.

De no. disseisina de communia pastura fiat breve sic.
Questus est nobis A. quod B. and C. injuste, etc. disseis. eum de communia
pasturae suae in N. quod pertinet ad liberum ten. suum in eadem villa, vel in
alia, si casus hoc velit, post pacem, etc. Et ideo tibi praecipimus, quod si
praedictus A. fecerit te, etc. tunc fac. xii. liberos, etc. videre pasturam
illam and ten. and nomina eorum inbreviari. Et sum. eos per bonos sum. quod
tunc sint coram Justic. etc. parati inde facer. recogn. Et pone, etc.
praedictos B and C. vel ballivos suos, si ipsi inventi non fuerint, quod tunc
sint ibi and. illam recogn. Et habeas ibi, etc. Dat, etc. vel sic. Questus est
nobis A. quod B. etc. levavit vel prostravit quandam septem, vel quoddam
fossatum, vel obstruxit, vel arctavit quandam viam, vel divertit cursum
cujusdam aquae, vel levavit, vel prostravit, vel exaltavit quoddam stagnum in
N. ad nocumentum liberi tenementi sui in eadem villa, vel in alia si casus sit,
post pacem nostram in Wall, etc. Et ideo tibi praecipimus, quod si praedictus
A. fecerit, etc. tunc fac. xii. etc. videre sepem illam, vel fossatum illud,
vel viam illam, vel cursum illius aquae, vel stagnum illud and ten. and nomina
eorum inbreviari. Et sum. eos, etc. quod sint coram Justic. nostr. etc. Et
pone, etc. praedictum B. vel ballivum, etc. quod sit, etc. Et habeas, etc. Dat,
etc. Et mutentur formae brevium secundum diversitatem casuum.

Breve de morte antecessoris.
Rex Vic. salutem. Si A. fecerit te secur. etc. tune sum. per bono^ sum. xii.
liberos. and leg. homines de vis. de N. quod sint coram Justic. nost. etc.
parati sacr. recognoscere, si B. pater praedicti A. fuit seisitus in Dominico
suo ut de feodo, de manerio tali cum pertin. vel de tanto terrae cum pertin. in
N. die quo obiit, and si obiit post pacem nostram in Wallia proclamatam, Anno
Regni nostri undecimo. Et si idem A. propinquior haeres ejus sit. Et interim
manerium illud, vel terram illam videant, and nomina eorum inbreviari fac. Et
sum. per bonos sum. B. quod manerium illud, vel terram illam tenet, quod tune
sit ibi and. illam recogn. and habeas ibi sum. and hoc bre. Et fiant brevia
patentia sub his verbis, quousque Dominus Rex aliud inde ordinaverit.

Rex Justic. suo salutem. Sciatis quod constituimus vos Justic. nostros una cum
his, quos vobis assoc, ad assisas no. dis. and mortis antec. in partibus
Walliae capiend. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod ad certos dies and loca, quos ad
hoc provideritis, assisas illas capiatis. Factur. inde, quod ad Justic.
pertinet secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni nostri. Salvis nobis
amerciamentis, and aliis ad nos inde spectantibus. Mandavimus enim
Vicecomitibus nostris, quod ad certos dies and loca, quos eis scire fac.
assisas illas coram vobis ven. fac. In cujus rei test. has litteras nostras
fire. sec. patent. Dat, etc. Et fiat bre. clausum dirigend. vic. sub hac forma.

Rex Vic. salutem. Praecipimus tibi, quod omnes assisas no. diss. and mortis
anteces. coram Justic. nostro arraniatas per brevia nostra venire fac. coram
eodem Justic. ad certos dies and loca, quos tibi scire fac. cum brevibus
origin. and omnibus aliis adminiculis dictas assisas contingentibus, and hoc
bre. Dat, etc. Et mutet. forma brevis secundum diversitatem casuum vid. si
pater vel matter, frater vel soror, avunculus vel amita fuit seisitus in
Dominico suo, ut de feod. de repetita per viam mortis anteces. die quo obiit.
Et quum plures coher. participes unius hered. petunt ipsam her. videlicet
quando unus eorum petit de more patris vel matris, fratris vel sororis,
avunculi vel amitae, and alius vel alii ex ipsis coher. petunt de mort. avi sui
vel aviae suae vel consanguineae suae, fiat eis bre. mortis anteces, in
casusuo, quia illa pars dicti brevis, quae tangit naturam mortis anteces. juxta
articulum inde usitatum attrahit ad se naturam aliorum articulorum tangentium
coheredes in gradibus remotioribus.

Breve commune quod in aliquo casu tangit jus, and in aliquo possessionem.
Rex Vic. salutem Praec. A. quod just, etc. reddat B. manner. de N. cum pertin.
quod praedictus A. ei deforciat, ut dicit. Et nisi fecerit, and praedictus B.
fec. te secur. etc. tunc sum. etc. praedictum A. quod sit coram Justic. ostens.
quare non fecerit. Et habeas ibi sum. and hoc bre. Dat. etc. Vel sic. Praec. A.
quod just, etc. reddat B. tantum terrae cum pertin. in N. ut supra. Et
similiter conced. istud bre. coram Justic. de banco, si petens voluerit.

Breve de dote in Wallia.
Rex Vic. salutem. Praec. A. quod just, etc. reddat B. quam fuit uxor C.
rationabilem dotem suam, quae eam contingit de libero ten. quod fuit praedicti
C. quondam viri sui in N. unde nihil habet, ut dicit; and unde queritur, quod
praedictus A. ei deforceat. Et nisi fecerit, and praedicta B. fec. te secur. de
clam. suo pros. tunc sum. etc. praedictum A. quod sit coram Justic. nostro,
etc. ostens. quare non fecit. Et habeas ibi, etc. Dat. etc. Et mutetur forma
brevis secundum diversitates casuum, videlicet si mulier dotata fuerit ad
hostium Ecclesiae de assensu and voluntate patris, vel alterius antecessoris,
cujus haeres esse poterit, vel esse debet.

Breve de Debito.
Rex Vic. salutem. Praec. A quod just, etc. reddat B. cent. solidos, quos ei
debet, and injuste detinet, ut dicit. Et nisi fecerit, and praedictus B.
fecerit te secur. de clam. etc. tune sum. etc. praedictum A. quod sit coram
Justic. nostro, ostens. quare non fecerit. Et habeas ibi sum. and hoc breve
Dat. etc. Et si catalla vel sacci lanae exigantur, fiat eis breve subscriptum.

Rex Vic. sal. Praec. A. quod just, etc. reddat B. unum sacc. lanae precii
december mercarum, quem ei injuste detinet: Vel eatalla ad valenciam. x. mercarum,
quae ei injuste detinet, ut dicit. Et nisi fecerit. etc. ut supra. Et fiant
formulae consimilis brevis secundum ostensiones petentium, and diversitates
casuum. Et non fiant hujusmodi brevia coram Justic. plac. de minori summa, quam
xl. s. sed placita de debito, quae summam xl. s. non attingunt, in com.
placitentur, and in commoto similiter. Et si forte petens placitare voluerit de
hujusmodi in com. tunc fiat ei tale breve, quod vocatur Justicies.

Rex Vic. salutem. Praecipimus tibi, quam Justicies A. quod injuste. etc.
reddat B. cent. solidos, quos ei debet, ut dicit, sicut rationabiliter
monstrare poterit, quod ei reddere debeat. Ne amplius inde clam. and. per
defectum Justitiae. Dat. etc. vel lic. Quod reddat B. unum faccum lanae precii.
x. mercarum, vel catalla ad valentiam. x. mercarum, quae ei injuste detinet, ut
dicit. Sicut rationabiliter. etc. Ne amplius. etc. Dat. etc. Et fiat inde Pone,
si petatur, sub hac forma.

Rex Vic. salutem. Pone ad petitionem petentis coram Justic. etc. tali die
loquelam quae est in com. tuo per brev. nostr. inter A. and B. de debito centum
solidorum, quod idem A. a praefato B. exigit. Et sum. per bonos sum. praedictum
B. quod tunc sit ibi praefato A. inde responsurus. Et habeas ibi. etc. Dat. etc.

Breve de Conventione.
Praecipe A. quod injuste. etc. teneat B. conventionem inter eos factam de uno
messuagio cum x. acris terrae and v. acris bosci cum pertin. in N. Et nisi
secerit. etc. tunc sum. etc. praedictum A. quod sit. etc. ostens. etc. Dat.
etc. Et fiant conventiones secundum voluntates contrahentium and diversitates
casuum, sive coram Justic. vel in com. juxta petentium voluntatem. Et si
voluerint placitare, fiat eis breve quod vocatur Justitias, and postmodum inde
fieri poterit pone, si petatur.

Forma brevis de Atturn.
Rex Vic. salutem. Sciatis quod A. atturnavit coram nobis loco suo B. and C. ad
lucrand. vel perdend. in loquela quia est in com. tuo per breve nostr. inter
ipsum A. petentem, and D. tenentem, de uno messuagio cum pertin. in N. Et ideo
tibi praecipimus, quod praedictus B and C. vel alterum ipsorum, si ambo
interesse non possint, loco ipsius A. ad hoc recipias. Dat. etc. Eodem modo
fiant brevia de atturn in aliis casibus secundum diversitatem casuum and formam
brevium.

Forma brevis de Coron. eligendo.
Rex Vic. salutem. Praecipimus tibi, quod in pleno com. tuo, de assensu ejusdem
com. eligi fac. unum Coronatorem, qui praestito Sacramento, prout moris est,
extunc ea fac. and conservet, quae ad officium Coronatoris pertinent in com.
praedicto. Et talem eum eligi fac. quia melius sciat and possit officio illi
intendere. Et nomen ejus nobis scire facias. Dat. etc. Et si ipse infirmetur,
vel moriatur, vel ob aliquam aliam causam officio illi intendere nequierit:
tunc fiat illud breve, mutatis mutandis.

Placitorum quadam habent terminari per assisam, and quaedam per juratas.
Per assisam habent terminari cum quibus seisitus de liber. ten. postea per vim
dissesitus petit seisinam sibi restitui: and in hoc casu provisum est bre. de
nova disseisina in forma inter alia brevia originalia Cancellariae subscripta.
Similiter de communia pasturesve pertinente ad liberum tenementum suum petat
seisinam sibi restitui: and in hoc casu providetur idem breve de nova
disseisina per mutationes quorundam verborum in forma inter alia brevia
originalia Cancellariae subscripta. In quibus brevibus sic est procedendum.
Primo receptis a quaerente duobus plegiis de praec. Vic. fac. eliger. xij.
liber. and leg. etc. de vis. ubi ten. vel pastur. existit, and fac. eo, videre
ten. and similiter pasturam, and attachiet disseisitores, prout continent in
brevi. Postea cum parts and assisa venerint coram Justic. quaeratur a
quaerente de quo libero tenemento, vel de qua communia pasturae quaeritur
disseisiri, and secundum ejus quaerimoniam and responsionem partis adversae,
procedatur ad captionem assisae, nisi disseisitus aliquid sciat dicere, quare
assisa debeat remanere. Et si assisa fac. pro quaerente, recuperet quaerens
seisinam suam simul cum damnis taxatis per assisam versus disseisitorem. Et
disseisitor remaneat in mis. Domini Reg. vel committatur jail redimendus, si
disseisina facta fuerit enormiter and vi and armis.

Sunt quaedam alia brevia, quia per ass. habent terminari, videlicet de stagno
levato, prostrato, exaltato, de fossato levato, vel prostrato, saepe levata vel
prostrata, de via obstructa vel arctata, de cursu aquae diverso. Et secundum
diversitatem casunm diversificent brevia originalia: quae quidem brevia, cum
brevibus de no. diss. superius continentur, and eodem modo sicut supradictum
est in brevi de libero ten. and de communia pasturae, est procedend. in eisdem.

In supradictis brevibus ass. no. diss. nullum jacet essonium seu dilatio, sed
prima die procedat ad justitiam fac. Aliud est brev. assisarum, quando
aliquispetit seisinam ten. unde antecessor suus obiit seisitus, videlicet,
pater, matter, frater, soror, avunculus, aut amita, in quo casu provisum est
breve mortis antecess. in forma inter caetera brevia originalia superius
contenta.

Contingit etiam aliquando, quod petitur seisina antec. in casu quando
antecessor non obiit seisitus, sed fuit seisitus die quo habitum religionis
suscepit, vel iter peregrinationis arripuit, in quo itiner. obiit. Ponatur
dies, quo habit. religionis suscepit, vel iter peregrinat. etc. in quo itinere,
etc. Et li itur. etc. In isto brevi mortis antec. sic est procedend. Primo
inventis pleg. de pros. and ass. electa, and visu facto a juratoribus,
summoneatur tenens per duos bonos and leg. sum. quod sit coram Justic. ad
certum diem, etc. and contineat summonitio. xv. dies, ad quem diem si venerit.
procedat Justic. in suo officio exequendo. Et si ad alium diem non venerit,
puniatur, pro defalta sua secundum quod continet. in lege Wallensica, videlicet
per tres vaccas, vel per precium earundem: and resummoneatur per alios duos sum
summonitione similiter continente spacium. xv. dierum, sicut praedictum est, ad
quem diem sive venerit, sive non, procedatur ad judicium, vel procedat Justic.
ad officium suum faciend. nisi fecerit se essoniari de ultra mare: and tunc
dabitur ei spacium. xl. dierum, ut possit habere cb and flode. Sed caveat sibi,
qui se sic essoniat, quod si existens infra quatuor maria de ultra mare falso
se essoniaverit, and super hoc convincat. per bonam probationem, vel per bonam
inquisitionem, puniatur, tanquam pro defalta, primo per mis. secundum quod
continetur in lege Wallensica, and praecludatur ei via aliquid dicendi contra
assisam nisi vocare possit ad warrantum.

Et sciendum, quod nec in brevi mortis antec. nec in aliquo brevi de placito
terrae jacet aliquod esson. nisi tamen esson. de ultra mare, and hoc antequam
tenens vel deforcians appareat in cur. and esson. de servitio Domini Regis,
quod jacet in omni lco placiti, quum Rex illud war. voluerit. Sed caveat sibi
quod non falso fac. se esson. de servitio Domini Regis. Quia si deficiat de
warranto Regis, puniet. pro defaltis per mis. Domino Regi dandam secundum legem
Wallensicam, and versus partem adversam de expensis sibi refundendis de illa
jorneta secundum discretionem Justic.

In istis brevibus mortis antec. sic est procedendum. Lecto primo brevi, in quo
continent. petito petentis, quaeratur a defore. si quid sciat dicere, quare
assisa debeat remanere, quod si nesciat, capiat Justic. ass. per juratores,
quia melius sciant veritatem, secundum formam brevis. Et si assisa transeat pro
petente, adjudicet. petenti seisina cum damnis taxatis per juratores, and
remaneat deforcians in mis. Domini Regis. Multa quidem potest deforciator
dicere contra assisam. Potest enim vocare ad warrantum, and tunc expectandus
est adventus warranti, quem Justic. faciat venire primo per unam summonitionem,
and si necesse sit per resum. sicut dictum est de principale deforciante, and
pro defalta puniatur sicut dictum est. Post resum. si nondum venerit, nec se
essonaverit, procedat assisa versus eam per defaltam. Et si assisa transeat pro
petente, adjudicetur petenti seisina rei petitae, and defendens habeat de terra
warranti ad valentiam. Et si warrantus venerit, and petat sibi ostendi, per
quod debeat warrantizare. oportet, quod vocator ostendar cartam, quae faciat
mentionem de warrantia vel de dono facto a warranto, vel antecessore suo, cujus
haeres ipse est: in quo fiat mentio, quod de deforciatore and haerede tenere
debeat: Vel quod ostendat, quod warrantus sit seisitus de homagio suo pro ten
petito, quod habet inquiri, si dedicat. per eos, in quorum praesentia dicet se
fecisse hom simul cum aliis liberis and leg. hominibus juratis; Vel quod teneat
ten. illud in excambio pro alio ten. si per ista poterit defore, dacer. war.
suum ad warrremanebit in mis. Domini Regis, quia dedixit war. and nihilominus
considerabit, quod war. and respon. deat ad assisam, si voluerit. Multa alia
potest deforciator dicere contra ass. videlicet quod antecessor, de cujus
morte, etc. fecit feloniam, pro qua suit suspensus, and utlagatus, vel tanquam
publicus latro fugiens and juri non parens decaptatus, vel si consitens
feloniam coram Coronat: Walliam abjuravit.

Potest etiam deforcians obicere petenti bastardiam, and tunc mandet Episc.
loci, quod rei veritatem super hoc inquirat, and certificet inde capitalem
Justic. Wall. Et secundum quod Episcopus certificavit, procedat ad judicium
sine captione assisae. Et si Episcopus mandet, quod bastardus est praecludat
omni via petendi. Et si mandet, quod legitimus est, Justic. fac. venire deforc.
per sum. and si necesse sit per resum. reservata Regi mis pro defalta. Et saepe
dictum est, post resum. sive ven. sive non recuperabit petens demandam suam per
testim. Episcopi: cujus testim. non creditur in contrarium, and remanebit in
mis. Regis. Multa alia potest deforcians dicere, quod difficile esset
enumerare: sicut antecessor, de cujus seisina ass. arraniata est, suit
villanus, and terram tenuit in villen. vel quod tenuit ad voluntatem, vel ad
terminum vitae, vel annorum. In quibus casibus ass. mortis antec. non jacet.
Non debent autem supradictae ass. no. diss. and mortis antec. capi, nisi in
propriis com. ne propria laboribus and expensis fatigetur: sed per Justic.
capiantur assisae bis, ter, vel quater in anno.

Dictum in part de brevibus ass. and de processu eorundem, modo dicendum est
de placitis, quae terminari habent per inquisitionem seu per juratam: quorum
quaedam sunt de rebus immobilibus, sicut de ten. sive de mobilibus, sicut de
debitis and catall. quaedam de utrisque, sicut de transgressione. Sed primo de
ten: and immobilibus aliquid est dicendum, de quibus provisum est breve, cujus
forma inter caetera brevia partium illarum continetur. Processus istius brevis
est talis. Primo inventis pleg. de pros. Vic. fac. sum. per bonos sum. ten.
quod sit ad certum diem, ad quem si non venerit, fiat alia summonitio ad alium
diem: Et si ad secundum diem non venerit, summoneatur, quod sit ad certum diem:
ad quem si non venerit, nec se essoniari secerit, adjudicabitur petenti seisina
per defaltam, and deforcians remanebit in misericordia Regis, reservata Regi
misericord. pro qualibet defalta, sicut praedict. est.

Cum vero deforcians compar. quia per verba brevis non potest sciri petitio
petentis, eo quod multae, and quasi infinitae sunt rations petendi, necesse
habet ille, qui petit, quod narret versus deforciantem, and exprimat rationem
petitionis suae, and hoc per verba veritatem continentia, sine calumnia
verborum non servata illa consuetudine: Qui cadit a syllaba, cadit a tota
caussa.

De rationibus petendi quales sint and esse debeant, expedit quod aliquid sub
brevitate dicat. Multoties habet petens jus, per hoc quod anrecessor suus
tenuit terram and fuit seisitus, ut de jure and de feodo, and tunc necesse
habet petens narrar. descensum parentele descendendo ad ipsum. Contingit etiam,
quod aliquis dimittit terram suam ad terminum vitae vel annorum, post quem
terminum, ad ipsum vel ad heredes suos terra debet reverti, vel etiam debet ad
ipsum reverti post mortem mulieris tenentis in dotem vel tanquam escaeta post
mortem tenentis sui felonis. In quatuor casibus praedictis, vel post mortem
alicujus debet terra remanere alii per formam donationis. In istis casibus and
similibus exprimat petens petitionem suam secundum casum suum. Et in casibus
illis and consimilibus, quibus utendum brevi praedicto, illo, and non alio
utatur: and audita ratione petentis, habeat tenens visum terrae, si petat: and
det, dies: infra quem fiat, visus. Et ad diem datum post visum respondeat
deforcians, qui vocare poterit ad warrantum per auxilium cur. sicut dictum est
in brevi mortis antec. Et justic. fac. venire warrantum, sicut venire fecit
principalem deforc. per unam summonitionem, and si necesse sit per secundam and
tertiam, ad quam si non venerit, puniatur: tamen pro qualibet defalta (ut
praedictum est) adjudicabit petenti seisina rei petitae per defaltam warranti,
and deforcians habeat de terra warranti ad valentiam, and warrantus sit in mis.
Si warrantus venerit, and gratis warrantizaverit recipiet ad responsionem and
placiti defensionem sine visu terrae habendo. Si autem warrantizare dedixerit,
deducatur placitum de warrantia inter eos, secundum quod dictum est supra in
brevi mortis antec. Si autem deforcians excipiat contra petentem, quod
antecess. suns, de cujus seisina petit, vel aliquis in descendendo fuit
bastardus: ita quod ab ipso, vel per medium ipsius nihil potest ei descendere,
audiatur, vel ostendat cartam antecessoris sui de feoffamento, vel alicujus in
descendendo de quieta clamantia: and per unius partis affirmationem and
alterius negationem descendant parts ad leg. inquisitionem, and per veredictum
inquisic. terminet placitum: quia placita de terris in partibus istis non
habent terminari per duellum, neque per magnam assisam. Eodem modo si excipiat,
quod antecessor vel aliquis in descendendo commisit feloniam, per quam sibi non
competit actio: In quo casu si ille, cui hoc opponitur, neget: potius habet
negotium terminari per recordum Justic. vel per inquis. patriae: De suspensione
and de-captione, and etiam per recordum Coronatorum de utlagaria and
abjuratione. Similiter in petitione ten. quod debet reverti post terminum
praeteritum, vel per modum donationis per affirmationem unius partis, and per
negationem alterius descendatur ad inquisic. patriae: and per veredictum ejus
adjudicetur.

De articulo alio sc. de mobilibus debitis sive catallis est dicendum. Super
quo provisum est breve de debito in forma praescripta. In hoc bre. sic est
procedendum. Primo inventis pleg: de pros. summoneat. debtor sive reus, quod
sit coram Just. ad certum diem, ad quem si non venerit, nec se essoniaverit,
adjudicet debitum petenti per defaltam simul cum damnis per discretionem
Justic. vel per inquisitionem patriae pro voluntate Justic and debtor remaneat
in mis. Domini Regis, reservata semper Regi mis. pro qualibet defalta. Si vero
debtor venerit, necesse habet actor exprimere petitionem and rationem suae
petitionis, videlicet quod tenet ei in centum marcis, quas sibi accommodavit,
cujus solutionis dies praeteriit, vel pro terra, vel pro equo, vel pro aliis
rebus seu catallis quibuscunque sibi venditis: vel pro arreragiis redditus non
soluti provementis de ten. vel de aliis contractibus super quibus necesse habet
producere sectam vel cartam obligationis, vel talliam oftendere. Audita and
intellecta petitione, and etiam ratione petentis, respondeat debtor: quia si
recognoscat adjudicetur and levatur de terris and catallis, etc. Si neget
debitum, and proferat contra eum obligatio sua oportet scriptum verificari per
testes nominatos in oblig. si sint superstites simul cum patria. Et si non sint
testes nominati vel si fuerint mortui, verificetur solummodo per patriam: and
secundum veredictum patriae procedatur ad judicium. Si quaerens non babet
obligationem, sed tantummodo producat sectam vel talliam, poterit pars adversa
oftendere se ei in nullo teneri, and hoc defendere per legem, scilicet per
proprium Sacramentum cum xij. secum jurantibus, vel per patriam, prout eligere
voluerit.

Contingit aliquis, quod debtor confitetur, quod aliquis debuit ei debitum,
and allegat solutionem: tunc oportet oftendere quietantiam de solutione. Vel
potuit petens defendere per legem, se nihil recipisse, vel etiam per patriam,
etc. Istud bre. de debito non concedat de minore summa quam xl. s. quia de
minori debito placitant in com. sine brevi, and per bre.

De tertio articulo, in quo provisum est breve de Conventione, per quod
aliquando petuntur mobilia, aliqua immobilia per vim conventionis initae inter
parts, quae legi derogat. Proceslus istius brevis est talis. Inventis pleg. de
pros. summonebie reus semel, and si necesse sit secundo. Et si ad secundam sum.
non venerit, nec se essoniaverit: audiatur and ratio petentis, and capiat res
petita, si sit ten. in manum Domini Regis. Et si s^erit catallum: illud vel
ejus valor capiat in manum Domini Regis, and ^etur alius dies. Et si infra xv.
dies replegiaverit rem in manum Regis captam and ad diem sibi datum venerit:
admittatur ad responsionem and defensionem. Sin autem adjudicetur petenti sua
petitio per defaltam, simul cum damnis taxatis, sicut supra dicitur in brevi de
debito: and remaneant in mis. Domini Regis: salva semper Regi mis. pro qualibet
defalta, ut praedicitur. Audita quaerimonia petentis, and ratione suae
petitionis, respondeat defendens: and per affirmationem unius partis and
negationem alterius procedi poterit ad inquisitionem. and per inquisitionem
patriae poterit negotium terminari. Et sciendum est, quod per breve de
Conventione aliqua petitur liberum ten. ut in casu quando aliquis dimittit
terram alteri, reddendo inde quandam certam firmam, apposita condition in
scripto conventionis, quod nisi ei fuerit satisfactum de firma: liceat ei
terram, quam dimisit, ingredi and ten. si ille, cui terra illa fuerit dimissa,
non satisfecerit de forma: and ille, qui dimisit, non habeat potestatem,
secundum tenorem scripti sui ingrediendi terram, quam dimisit, propter
potentiam sui adversarii. In hoc casu per breve de conventione recuperare debet
ten. simul cum damnis. Aliquando cum conveniat inter aliquos, quod unus
feoffabit alium de aliquo ten. and ad certum diem ei seisinam faciet, si post
modum transtulerit illud ten. in tertiam personam ipsum feoffando, cum non
poterit illud feoffamentum per priorem contractum ad effectum non perductum
infirmari: Non poterit in isto casu ei, cui sit injuria per breve de
conventione subveniri, nisi in hoc tantum, ut satisfaciat ei de damnis in
pecunia. Et si in casu competit actio petendi ten. per breve de conventione,
and in casu pecuniam seu damna sive ten.

Et quia infiniti sunt contractus conventionum, difficile esset facere
mentionem de quolibet in speciali, sed secundum naturam cujuslibet conventionis
per affirmationem unius partis, and negationem alterius partis, aut perveniet
ad inquisitionem fac. superfacto negotii, aut perveniet ad eognitionem
scriptorum latorum, and secundum illam cognitionem erit judicand. aut negabunt
scripta, and tunc perveniet ad inquiren de confectione scriptorum per testes in
scriptis nominatos, si fuerint, simul cum propria. Quod si testes non fuerint
nominati, vel etiam mortui, tunc solummodo per patriam.

De quarto articulo, videlicet de transgressionibus personalibus, de quibus
provisum est, quod omnes transgressiones, de quibus damna non excedunt xl. s.
placitent coram Vic. in com. sine brevi per vad. and pleg. Transg. quae
excedunt summa xl. s. placitentur coram Justic. Wall. sub hac forma. Quod
antequam Justic. eum audiat, juret quaerens, quod actio sua exced. valor. xl.
s. and hoc facto, and pleg invento de pros. praecipiat Justic. vel ballivo,
quod in brevi termino fac. venire coram eo eum, de quo fit quaerimonia: Et
audita quaerimonia actoris, respondeat reus. Et cum vix in placito transg.
evadere poterit reus, quin defendat se per patriam, de consensu partium
inquirat veritatem Justic. per bonam patriam. Et inquisita veritate si
invenerit reum culpabile: castiget eum per mis. vel per prisonam, vel per
redentionem, and per damna laeso restituenda secundum qualitatem and
quantitatem delicti. Ita quod castigatio illa sit aliis in exemplum, and
timorem praebeat delinquendi. Et quia dictum est supra de consensu partium,
contingere poterit, quod reus refutabit inquisitionem patriae. In quo casu si
actor transg. sibi factam offerat verificare per patriam, and reus patrlam
refutaverit: habeatur pro convicto, and puniatur sicut si convictus esset per
patriam.

Et quia mulieres hactenus non extiterant dotatae in Wallia, Rex concedit quod
dotent. Duplex est dos mulieris: una assignatio tertiae partis totius terrae,
qui fuit viri sui in vita sua, super quo fiat bre. de rationabili dote, alibi
in suo loco cum caeteris brevibus Wall. expressum. Processus istius brevis est
talis. Inventis pleg. de pros. sum. deforcians, quod sit ad certum diem, ad
quem diem si non venerit, adjudicetur mulieri dos sua sc. tertia par etc. simul
cum damnis. Si vo. defendens venerit, admittitur ad responsionem sine visu
terrae habendo: and format. petitione mulieris, dicat. tenenti, quod
respondeat, si sciat aliquid dicere quare ipsa dotem habere non debeat: qui si
nihil sciat dicere, recuperet mulier, ut supra.

Si forte objiciat, quare non debet dotem habere, co quod nunquam fuit talis
quem ipsa vocat virum legit. matrim. copulata: tunc mandabit Episcopo, quod
super hoc inquirat veritatem, and inquisita veritate, certificet Justic. Wall.
Et secundum certil. Episcopi procedat ad judicium in hac forma. Si Episcopus
certificet, quod non fuit legitima, praeclusa erit ei via habendi dotem. Si
certificet, quod fuit uxor legit. sum. tenens, quod sit ad certum diem audiendi
judicium suum: ad quem diem si non venerit, iterum sum. tenens, quod sit ad
alium diem. Ad quem diem sive venerit sive non, nullo esson. allocato recuperet
mulier dotem suam, and damna, and sit ten. in mis. salva semper Regi mis. pro
defaltis, Si vero objiciat, quod non debet doter habere, eo quod vir suus die
quo eam desponsavit, nec unquam postea tenuit ten. unde petit dotem in feodo:
ita ut eam inde dotare poterit: hujus rei veritas solummodo per patriam est
inquirenda, and per veredictum patriae ad judicium erit procedend. Si
objiciatur ei, quod non debet dotem habere, eo quod vir suus commisit feloniam:
tunc si constiterit de felonia: dotem non recuperabit. Similiter si objiciatur
ei, quod vir suus amisit terram, de qua petit dotem, per judicium, ut illam, in
quo jus non habent, hoc convicto per recordum Justic. si dedicatur, coram
quibus terra illa fuit amissa, vel per patriam, si in com. vel minore cur. fuit
amissa, praeclusa erit sibi via de dote habenda.

Alia dos est, quando filius dotat uxorem suam de voluntate patris sui. Forma
cujus brevis inter caetera invenietur, cujus processus talis est. Summoneatur
deforcians sicut in alio brevi de dote, and eodem modo puniatur contumacia
sicut in alio brevi de dote. Si vero ad diem sibi^datum venerit, tunc formata
petitione mulieris respondeat. Et si dedicatur dotatio facta in dicta forma and
consensus dotationis, and convinci poterit per patriam, quod vir dotavit eam ad
hostium Ecclesiae de ten. patris sui, and quod pater personaliter, vel per
specialem nuncium ad hoc missum consensit illi dotationi: recuperabit mulier
dotem and damna.

Sciendum est etiam, quod in utroque brevi potest tenens vocare ad warrantum
per auxilium Cur. and procedetur in placito warrantiae, sicut praedictum est.
Sed est differentia in casu isto de dote and in casu superius per Praecipe, ubi
terminatur modus procedendi in warrantia: Quia ibi in illo casu petens semper
recuperat rem petitam, and tenens de terra warranti ad valentiam dotis petitae.
In casu de dote alio modo est, quod tenens tenebit in pace, and mulier habebit
de terra warranti ad valentiam dotis petitae, dum tamen tenens habeat de terra
viri sui ad valentiam, unde hoc fieri possit alias vero non, De modo dotis
aliter assignando, nihil ad praesens: quia aliter usitatum est in Wallia quam
in Anglia quo ad successionem haereditatis^ eo quod haereditas partibilis est
inter haeredes masculos, and a tempore cujus non extiterit memoriae partibilis
extitit. Dominus Rex non vult, quod consuetudo illa abrogetur: sed quod
haereditates remaneant partibiles inter consimiles haeredes, sicut esse
consueverunt: and fiat partitio illius sicut fieri consuevit. Hoc excepto quod
bastardi non habeant de caetero haereditates, and etiam quod non habeant p.
parts cum legitimis nec sine legitimis. Et si forte haereditas aliqua ex tunc
pro defectu haeredis masculi descendat ad legitimas mulieres haeredes ultimi
antecessor. sui inde seisiti, volumus de gratia nostra speciali, quod eodem
modo mulieres legitimae habeant p. parts suas inde sibi in Cur. nostra assign.
licet hoc sit contra consuet. Wallensicam ante usitatam. Et quia Wall. nobis
supplic. ut eis concedamus, quod de rebus suis immobilibus veluti de terris and
ten. iuquiratur veritas per bonos and leg. homines de visneto de consensu
partium electos, and de mobilibus sicut de contractibus, debitis,
fidejussionibus, conventionibus, transgressionibus, catallis, and omnibus allis
hujusmodi mobilibus uti possint lege Wallensica, qua uti consueverunt, quae
talis erat. Quod si aliquis conquereret de alio de contractibus vel factis in
tali loco, quod posset intentio, quaerentia probari per. videntes and
audientes. Cumque petens per hujusmodi testes, quorum testim. reprobari non
posset, probaverit intentionem suam, recuperaret rem petitam, and condemnaretur
pars adversa: and in aliis, quae non possit probari per videntes and audientes,
esset pars defendens ad purgationem suam, aliquando cum pluribus, aliquando cum
paucioribus secundum qualitatem and quantitatem rei vel facti: and in furto si
furtum inven. in manu, se purg. non posset, sed pro convicto haberetur.

Nos pro communi pace and quiet dicti populi nostri terrae nostrae Wall.
praemissa eis concedimus. Ita tamen quod in furtis, latrociniis, incendiis,
murdris, and roberiis manifestis and notoriis locum non habeant, nec ad ea
aliquatenus se extendant: in quibus volumus, quod utantur legibus Angliae,
prout superius est expressum. Et ideo vobis mand. quod praemissa de caetero in
omnibus firmiter observetis. Ita tantum quod quotiescunque, and quandocunque,
and ubicunque nobis plac. possimus praedicta statuta, and eorum parts singulas
declarare, interpretari, addere, sive diminuere pro nostrae libito voluntatis,
prout securitati nostrae, and terrae nostrae praedictae viderimus expedire. In
cujus rei testimonium praesentibus sigillum nostrum est appensum. Dat apud
Rothelan. die dominica in medio quadragessimae. Anno Regni nostri xij.

An Abridgement of the Statutes uniting Wales to England, and establishing the
Courts of the Great Sessions there.
I. STat. 26. H. 8.4. Forthwith upon the charge given to an Enquest in Wales or
the Marches thereof, upon any traverse against the King, or trial of any
recognizance broken, or any forfeiture due to the King, or upon trial of any
murderer, felon, or accessory, an officer or other person shall be deputed and
sworn in open Court for the true keeping of the Jurors, who (without special
order of the Court) shall not suffer them to have any bread, drink, meat, fire,
or light, nor to speak to any person whatsoever; nor speak to them himself,
before they are agreed upon their verdict, unless it be only to ask them,
whether or no they are agreed; and all this such Keeper shall observe, in pain
to be imprisoned and fined, at the diseretion of the Court. II. Here if the
Jurors give any untrue Verdict against the King, contrary to good and pregnant
Evidence, or otherwise misdemean themselves, the Lord President and Council
(upon complaint thereof) have power to convent them before the said Council,
and to punish them at their discretion. III. Stat. 26. H. 8.6. All Persons
dwelling in Wales, or the marches thereof, upon warning of any Court to be kept
within their respective limits, shall appear there in proper person to do their
service, in pain of such fines, forfeitures, and amerciaments, as shall be
assessed upon them by the respective Courts where they owe such service, to be
levied by distress, to the use of the King within his Lordships there, and of
other Lords marchers within theirs. IV. If any Steward or other Officer there
do feign any untrue surmise against any person that shall so appear, as
aforesaid, and thereupon commit him to prison, contrary to Law, or the Custom
of that Lordship, the Commissioners or Council (upon complaint) have power to
send for such Steward or Officer, and if upon good proof it be found that the
party was so imprisoned without lawful cause, they shall assess such Steward or
Officer to pay him 6 s. 8 d. for every day of his imprisonment, or more (at
their discretions) as the damage shall deserve: the Commissioners shall also
fine him to the Kings use, whether he appear or not, and may compel him by
imprisonment to pay such fines and penalties both to the King and the party
grieved. V. Courts in Wales and the Marches thereof, shall be kept in the most
sure and peaceable places of each Lordship Marcher, where the Justice, Steward,
or other Officer thereof shall appoint. VI. Justices of Peace and Jail-delivery
in the Counties next adjoining to Wales, where the King's Writ runs, may
hear and determine the offenses of Counterfeiters, Washers, Clippers, or
Diminishers of Coin, and all Felonies, and their Accessaries, committed in
Wales or the Marches thereof: And acquital or fine making for any of the said
offenses in any Lordship Marcher, shall be no bar for any Person or Persons
indicted for the same within two years next after such offense committed. VII.
The said Justices of Peace and Jail-delivery have power to award all manner of
Process, as well of Outlawry as otherwise, against every such offender, and
shall send to the Lord or Officer of the Lordship where the Offender is
resident, a Certificate under the Seals of two of them at least, of any such
Outlawry or Attainder, commanding him under the pain of 100 l. to be forfeited
to the King, to apprehend or cause to be apprehended the body of such Offender,
and safely to keep him, until such convenient time before the next Goal
delivery of the County where he was so outlawed, as shall be thought fit for
his conveyance thither, and then he shall be conveyed from Marcher to Marcher
by the Lords or Officers thereof, to the said next Sessions of Jail-delivery of
the County where he was so outlawed, as aforesaid: And here the Lords Marchers
and Officers aforesaid, by whom he is so to be conveyed, shall not be negligent
herein, in pain to forfeit (each of them so making default) 100 l to belevied
to the King's use: Also the said Lords, or other Officers, shall at the said
Sessions make due return of such Certificate, upon the like pain. Howbeit here
all Traverses, Challenges, Exceptions, Advantages, and all other Pleas upon any
such Outlawry are saved to the Offender. VIII. Here an Offender attainted of
Felony as principal or accessory upon surety found for the good behavior may
(for one time only, by the assent of the President and two Commissioners) be
discharged, and admitted to a fine, to be levied for the Kings use, so as no
appeal be then depending against him for such offense. IX. Provided that this
Act shall not extend to abridge the liberty of any Lord Marcher, unless such
Offender be outlawed, or attainted by force of this Act within two years after
the offense committed. X. All Felonies and their Accessaries committed in the
County of Merioneth shall be inquired, heard and determined in the Counties of
Carnarvan, or Anglesey, before the Justice of North- Wales, or his Deputy, by
Enquest of Carnarvan and Anglesey, or otherwise at the discretion of such
Justice or his Deputy. XI. All Officers and their Deputies upon command of the
Commissioners, or Council, shall bring, send, or deliver every Offender in
Felony to the Officer of the Lordship Marcher, or other place where the offense
was committed, upon the bounds of such Lordship, or to the said Commissioner or
Council, as such Officers shall be commanded, in pain of 40 l. which command
shall be so sent by a Sergeant at Arms, or a Pursuivant, then Attendant upon
the said Council. XII. Stat. 27. H. 8.26. Wales shall be incorporated, united,
and annexed to and with England; and all Persons born there shall enjoy all
Liberties as other Subjects in England do: also Lands shall descend there
according to the English Laws, and not after the form of any Welsh Laws or
Customs. XIII. The Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and none other, shall be
had and used, and executed in Wales, in like manner as in this Realm, and as
shall be further declared by this Act. XIV. Diverse Lordships Marchers are
united to English Counties, others to Welsh Counties, and the residue are
divided into new particular Counties by themselves, viz. Monmouth, Brekenoke,
Radnor, Mountgomery, and Denbigh. XV. The County of Monmouth shall consist of
these Lordships, Townships, Parishes, Commotes, and Cantredes, viz. Monmouth,
Chepstow, Maherne, Llamnihangel, Magor, Goldecliffe, Newport, Wenlong,
Llanwerne, Caerlion, Vske, Trelecke, Tinterne, Skinfreth, Grousmount, Wite
Castle, Regian, Calicote, Biston, Abergavenny, Penrose, Greenfield, Maghen, and
Hochuystade; all which said places shall be hereafter guildable, and reputed as
parts and members of the County of Monmouth, whereof Monmouth shall be reputed
the Shire-Town: And the Sheriff of the County shall keep his Country Court at
Monmouth and Newport alternis vicibus. XVI. All Actions for Lands and other
things may be laid and sued in the County of Monmouth, and tried there by
Assize, or Nisi prius, and Venire facias; and all other Process may be awarded
thither by the Justices: Also the Inhabitants there shall be obedient to the
Kings Officers and Laws, and the Sheriffs and Escheators of that County shall
perform their duties, and render account in the Exchequer, as is used in or for
any other County of England. XVII. The Lordships, Towns, etc. to be reputed
members of Brekenokeshire shall be Brekenoke, Crekehowell, Tretoure, Penkelly,
English Talgarth, Welsh Talgarth, Dians, the Hai, Glinebogh, Broyulles,
Canterbely, Lando, Blainlinby, Estrodew, Buelthe, and Lingros: Also the
Shire-Town shall be Brekenoke, and the Shire Court shall be kept there. XVIII.
The Lordships, Towns, etc. of Radnorshire shall be New-Radnor, Elish^rman,
Glawdistre, Mihelles Church, Meleneth, Blewagh, Knighton, Norton, Preston,
Commorhader, Rayder, Gwethronyon, and Stonage: Here also New-Radnor shall be
the Shire-Town, and the County or Shire-Court shall be holden at New-Radnor,
and Rother Gwy in the same County alternis vicibus. XIX. Those of
Mountgomeryshire shall be Mountgomery, Cedwenkery, Cawryland, Arustely,
Kiviliocke, Doythur, Powesland, Clunesland, Balisle, Temycester, and Alcestre:
Whereof Mountgomery shall be the Shire Town, and the County Court shall be
holden there, and at Maghenteth in the same County alternis vicibus. XX. Those
of Denbighshire shall be Denbyland, Ruthin Saint Kiynllethowen, Bromfield, Yale
Chirk, Chickland, Molesdale, and Hopesdale: The Shire-Town also shall be
Denbigh, and the County Court shall be holden at Denbigh and Wrixham in the
said County, alternis vicibus. XXI. The King shall yearly appoint Sheriffs,
Escheators, and other Officers accomptants for the Counties for Brekenoke,
Radnor, Mountgomery, and Denbigh, and shall have a Chancery and Exchequer at
Brekenoke, where the said Officers of the Counties of Brekenoke and Radnor
shall yearly account before such Auditors, Chamberlain and Baron, as the King
shall appoint for that purpose. There shall be also another Chancery and
Exchequer at Denbigh, where the said Officers of the Counties of Montgomery and
Denbigh shall also account before such Auditors, Chamberlain, and Baron, as
aforesaid. XXII. Justice shall be administered and executed in the Counties of
Brekenoke, Radnor, Mountgomery, and Denbigh, according to the Laws and Statutes
of England, and such other Customs and Laws now used in Wales, as the King and
his Council shall allow, by such Justice, or Justicers, as shall be thereunto
appointed by the King, and after such manner as Justice is administered in the
Counties of North Wales. XXIII. In the Marches of Wales there shall be made
guildable, and annexed to the County of Salop, the Lordships, Towns, Parishes,
Commotes, Hundreds, and Cantredes of Oswestrie, Whetington, Masbroke, Knoking,
Ellesiner, Down, and Cherbury Hundred: Here also Oswestrie, Whetington,
Masbroke, and Knoking shall be known by the name of the Hundred of Oswestrie,
and the Inhabitants thereof shall be attendant at Sessions, Assizes, and
Jail-delivery, as the Inhabitants of other Hundreds within the said County of
Salop use to do. Also Ellesmer cum membris shall be united to the Hundred of
Pimhill in Com. Salop. and the Inhabitants thereof shall be attendant, as
aforesaid. Likewise the Lordship of Down cum membris shall be united to the
Hundred of Cherbury in Com. Salop. and the Inhabitants thereof shall give their
attendance, as aforesaid. Howbeit, neither the said Hundreds of Cherbury or
Oswestrie, nor the Lordship of Ellesmer shall be hereby otherwise privileged
then as Hundreds annexed to the County of Salop, as other Hundreds be within
the same County. XXIV. In like manner the Lordships, Towns, Hundreds, etc.
annexed to the County of Hereford, are Ewyas Lacy, Ewyas Harold, Clifford,
Winforton, Yerdosley, Huntington, Whitney, Wigmore, Logharneis, and Stepluton,
whereof Wigmore and Logharneis, with their members, shall be called the Hundred
of Wigmore; and Ewyas Lacy, cum membris, the Hundred of Ewyas Lacy: but Ewyas
Harold shall be united to the Hundred of Webree in Com. Hereford and Clifford,
Winforton, Yerdlesley, Whitney, and Huntington, shall be called the Hundred of
Huntington: Here also the Inhabitants shall be attendant at Sessions, Assizes,
and Jail-delivery holden for the County of Hereford; but these Lordships, etc.
shall claim no privilege but as Hundreds, or Members of Hundreds of the same
County. XXV. Likewise the Lordships, Towns and Parishes of Wollaston, Tidnam,
and Becheby, and all Honors, Lordships, Castles, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments lying between Chepstow bridge and Glocestershire, shall be
annexed to the County of Gloucester, as part thereof, and shall be parcel of the
Hundred of Wesebury in that County: Also the Inhabitants thereof shall be
attendant, as aforesaid, and shall claim no privilege but as Hundreders of the
Hundred of Wesebury aforesaid. XXVI. Cowerwisney, Bishops Town, Landaffe,
Signithe supra, Signithe subtus, Miskin, Ogmore, Glencothney, Tallagarn,
Ruchien, Tallavan, Lamhelthion, Lantwid, Tyerial, Avan, N^th, Landway, and the
Clays shall be guildable, and united to the County of Glamorgan; and Justice
shall be administered in Glamorganshire (so united) according to the Laws of
England, (as in the three Counties of North Wales) and not according to the
Welsh Laws. XXVII. Lanemthevery, Abermeles, Redwely, Elkenning, Cornwolthon,
Newcastle, Emlin, and Abergoyly shall be guildable, and annexed to the County
of Caermarthen, where also Justice shall be administered as aforesaid. XXVIII.
Haverford west, Kilgaran, Lansteffan, Langherne, alias Tellanghern,
Walwinscastle, Dewis land, Lanny baddein, Lanfrey, Herbirth, Slebeche,
Rosmarket, Castellan, and Lland of Loute shall be guildable, and annexed to the
County of Pembroke, wherein Justice shall be administered as aforesaid. XXIX.
Tregarn, Generglin, Landwy and Vrency shall be guildable, and united to the
County of Caraigan, and there also Justice shall be administered as aforesaid.
XXX. Mountway shall be guildable, and annexed to the County of Merioneth in
North Wales, as a commote or part thereof. XXXI. All Justices, Commissioners,
Sheriffs, Coroners, Escheators, Stewards and their Lievtenants, and all other
Officers and Ministers of Law shall proclaim and keep Sessions, Courts,
Hundreds, Leets, County-Courts, and all other Courts in the English tongue, and
all Oaths of Officers, Juries, and Enquests, and all Affidavits, Verdicts, and
Wagers of Law shall be given and done in the same tongue. XXXII. None that use
the Welsh language, shall have or enjoy any Office or Fees in any of the Kings
Dominions, but shall forfeit them unless he use the English. XXXIII. The
Sheriffs of Monmouth, Brekenoke, Radnor, Mountgomery and Denbigh, shall put
every unruly person under common Mainprize, as the Sheriffs of the three
Counties of North- Wales use to do. XXXIV. The Sheriff of Monmouth shall
certify such Recognizances, common Mainprize, and Surety of Appearance at every
Quarter Sessions of that County, and the persons so bayled shall appear at the
two Sessions holden at Easter and Michaelmas, until they be released. XXXV. The
Sheriffs of Brekenoke, Radnor, Mountgomery, and Denbigh shall certify such
Recognizances, etc. before such Justice as the King shall appoint, at every
Sessions to be holden in the said Counties. XXXVI. All persons under Bail for
appearance in the Counties of Brekenoke, Radnor, Mountgomery, Denbigh,
Glamorgan, Caermarthen, Pembroke, and Cardigan, (either by the Sheriffs or
Justices of those Counties) shall appear before the said Justices at every
Sessions, as is used in the three Counties of North- Wales. XXXVII. The lay and
temporal Lords Marchers shall have the moiety of every such Recognizance
forfeited within their respective Precincts, to be paid them by the Sheriff,
(if he can levy them) who is also to answer the other moiety to the King in the
Exchequer upon his account. XXXVIII. The Lord Chancellor shall (forthwith after
this Parliament) direct a Commission under the great Seal for the division of
the Counties of Caermarthen, Pembroke, Cardigan, Monmouth, Brekenoke, Radnor,
Mountgomery, Glamorgan and Denbigh into convenient Hundreds to be returned into
the Chancery, and there to remain of Record, which shall be of like force as an
Act of Parliament. XXXIX. Commissions also shall issue forth to enquire after
the Welsh Laws and Customs, and such of them as shall be thought fit (by the
King and Council) to be continued, shall stand and be in full force,
notwithstanding this Act. XL. Two Knights for the County, and one Burgess for
the Borough of Monmouth shall be chosen to serve in Parliament. XLI. Also, one
Knight shall be chosen for each County of Brekenoke, Radnor, Mountgomery, and
Denbigh, and for every other County in Wales, and for every Borough, being a
Shire-Town, (except the Shire-Town of Merioneth) one Burgess. XLII. The said
Knights and Burgesses shall be elected, and enjoy like Privileges and Fees, as
Knights and Burgesses of England: And the Knights Fees shall be levied of the
Commons of each County, and those of the Burgesses, as well of the Shire-Towns,
whereof they be Burgesses, as of all other ancient Buroughs within the said
respective Counties. XLIII. All Lords Marchers shall enjoy all such Liberties,
Mises, and Profits as they had, or used to have at the first entry into their
Lands in times past, notwithstanding this Act. XLIV. The Laws and Customs of
the three Counties of North- Wales, and of the County Palatine of Lancaster are
saved. XLV. This Act shall not extend to derogate any other Act heretofore made
for the trial of Treason, Murder, or Felony, or accessaries thereunto;
committed in any Lordship Marcher in Wales, or in any Court of England next
adjacent thereunto. XLVI. Lands by the Custom partable amongst males shall so
continue, notwithstanding this Act. XLVII. The King has power (within three
years) to suspend or repeal this Act: As also (within five years) to erect as
many Courts (of Record or others) and to appoint as many Justices and other
Officers in Wales, as he should think fit. XLVIII. Stat. 33. H. 13. Hope,
Asaph, Hawarden, Moldesdale, Mereford and Oseley, shall be reputed to be within
the County of Flint, as part thereof, and not in any other County. Howbeit,
they shall pay their Taxes with the Inhabitants of such Shire or Shires, as
has been formerly accustomed. XLIX. Also Hope, Modesdale, Mereford, Oseley,
and Hawarden, shall be called the Hundred of Modesdale, in the County of Flint;
and Asaph shall be reputed parcel of the Hundred of Ruthland in the same
County. L. Stat. 34, 35. H. 8.26. Wales shall be divided into twelve Counties,
whereof eight were ancient Counties, viz. Glamorgan, Caermarthen, Pembroke,
Cardigan, Flint, Carnarvan, Anglesey, and Merioneth; also four other were made
by the Statute of 27 H. 8.26. viz. Radnor, Brekenoke, Mountgomery, and Denbigh,
besides the County of Monmouth, and diverse Lordships united to the Counties of
Salop, Hereford and Gloucester. LI. The limitations of Hundreds lately made
within the said Counties by Commission out of the Chancery, and again returned
thither, shall stand in force, except such of the same, as have been since
altered by any Act, and shall be altered by this. LII. There shall remain a
President and Council in Wales and the Marches thereof, with Officers and
Incidents thereunto as has been used, which President and Council shall hear
and determine such Causes, as shall be assigned to them by the King, as
heretofore has also been used. LIII. Sessions shall be kept twice a year in
the Counties of Glamorgan, Brekenoke, Radnor, Caermarthen, Pembroke, Cardigan,
Mountgomery, Denbigh, Carnarvan, Flint, Merioneth, and Anglesey, which Sessions
shall be called the Kings great Sessions. LIVE. The Justices of Chester shall
hold Sessions twice a year in the Counties of Denbigh, Flint, and Mountgomery,
for his old Fee of 100 l. per annum. LV. The Justices of North Wales shall do
the like in the Counties of Carnarvan, Merioneth, and Anglesey, and shall have
a Fee of 50 l. per annum. LVI. A person learned in the Law (to be appointed by
the King) shall be Justice in the Counties of Radnor, Brekenoke, and Glamorgan,
and shall likewise hold Sessions twice a year, and have for his Fee 50 l. per
annum. LVII. Another such person (to be appointed as aforesaid) shall be
Justice in the Counties of Caermarthen, Pembroke and Cardigan, and shall hold
Sessions, and have Fee as aforesaid. LVIII. The said Justices shall have
Commissions under the Great Seal for their Offices, to be executed by
themselves or their Deputies. LIX. These Justices may hold Pleas for the Crown
in as large manner as the Lord Chief Justice, or the other Justices of that
Bench may do, and also Pleas of Assizes, and all other Pleas and Actions, real,
personal, and mixed, in as large manner as the Chief Justice of the Common
Place, or the other Justices of that Court may do. LX. They shall also enquire,
hear, and determine, all criminal offenses whatsoever, committed within their
several limits, and administer common justice to all the Kings Subjects there,
according to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs of England, and this present
Ordinance. LXI. The said Sessions shall each of them hold six days, as has
been used in North- Wales, and notice thereof shall be given (by Proclamation)
fifteen days (at least) before they keep the same. LXII. Days shall be given
in all Pleas, Plaints, Process, and Adjournments from day to day, and Sessions
to Sessions, at the discretion of the said Justices, for the good and speedy
administration of Justice. LXIII. The Seal for the three Counties of North-
Wales, viz. Merioneth, Carnarvan, and Anglesey, shall remain in the custody of
the Chamberlain of North Wales. The Seal for Carmarthen, Pembroke, and
Cardigan, with the Chamberlain of South Wales. That for Brekenoke, Radnor, and
Glamorgan, with the Steward and Chamberlain of Brekenoke. That for Denbigh and
Mountgomery, with the Steward and Chamberlain of Denbigh. And that for Flint,
with the Chamberlain of Chester. LXIV. The said Stewards and Chamberlains shall
with the Seals seal all original Writs and Process, returnable before the
Justices at the Sessions as aforesaid, and shall answer the Profits thereof to
the King: But none of them, or any Chancellor shall by occasion of keeping such
Seals, compel any person, inhabiting in any of the said twelve Shires, to
appear before themselves or their Deputies, or hear or determine any Pleas or
Causes whatsoever, otherwise then as by this Ordinance is limited: And such
Writs and Process shall be returned before the said Justices, as has been used
before the Justice of North- Wales. LXV. All that shall be Stewards,
Chamberlains, or Chancellors within any of the said twelve Shires, having
Offices of Receipt, Collection, or account of any of the Kings Rents, Revenues,
or Profits there, may direct Process under the said Seal (being in their
charge) within the limits of their Authorities, against Bailiffs, Reeves,
Fermers, and other Ministers accomptant, to appear before themselves for any
such Rents, Revenues, Farms, or Profit, as has been heretofore used: But for
nothing else, nor to any other person. LXVI. The Stewards also may hold Leets,
Law-dayes, or Court-Barons of the Lordships whereof they are Stewards, and also
Pleas by Plaint under 40 s. in every such Court Baron, and have and enjoy all
Authorities and Profits thereunto belonging, notwithstanding any Law or Custom
in Wales to the contrary: Howbeit neither they nor Sheriffs shall have power to
enquire of Felonies in any such Leet, Law-day, or Turn: Neither shall they keep
any Leet or Law-day, but in such places where they were used to be kept, before
the Statute of 26 H. 8.6. So as the place be convenient for the keeping of such
Courts. LXVII. Majors, Bailiffs, and Head-Officers of Corporate Towns in Wales
may hold Pleas, and determine Actions; so as they observe the Laws of England,
and not Welsh Laws or Customs; They may also try Issues by six men, (as in
diverse places has been used) notwithstanding this Act. LXVIII. The King may
within seven years dissolve Boroughs in Wales, and erect others there by his
Letters Patents. LXIX. Officers certain Fees (appearing in the Kings Letters
Patents) shall continue, but not their casual Fees, claimed by color of their
Offices, any Custom in Wales, or this Act to the contrary notwithstanding. LXX.
Each Justice shall also have a judicial Seal to seal all Bills and judicial
Processes sued before them in the Sessions, whereof the first shall remain with
the Justice of Chester, for Flint, Denby, and Mountgomery: The second with the
Justice of North- Wales,: The third with the Justice of Glamorgan, Brekenoke,
and Radnor: And the fourth with the Justice of Pembroke, Caermarthen, and
Cardigan: Also every such Justice shall account and answer to the King the
Profits of the Seal in his custody, as shall be hereafter declared: And the
Test of every Bill and Process, that passes under such Seal, shall be under
the name of the Justice, that issues it out, as is used in the Common Place in
England. LXXI. All Actions real and mixed, Attaints, Conspiracies, Assizes,
Quare impedits, Appeals of Murder and Felony, and all Actions grounded upon any
Statute, shall be sued by Original Writs sealed with the Original Seal, and
returnable before the Justices at their Sessions; but all personal Actions, as
Debt, Detinue, Trespass, Account, and the like, amounting to the sum of 40 s.
or above, shall be sued by such Writs Original, or by Bills, at the election of
the Plaintiff, as is used in North Wales. LXXII. All personal Actions under the
sum of 2 l. may be sued by original Bill, (as is also used in North Wales)
sealed by the Judicial Seal, remaining in the custody of the Justice. LXXIII.
The Fee for sealing every original Writ upon the Causes aforesaid, and for
every Bill in Actions personal (when the Debt and Damages amount to 2 l. or
above) is 6 d. and for every Judicial Process, sued upon any such original Writ
or Bill 7 d. whereof the King shall have 6 d. and the Justice 1 d. And for
every Bill in personal Actions, when the Debt and Damages amount not to 2 l.
and for every Judicial Process to be sued upon the same 3 d. whereof the King
is to have 2 d. and the Justice 1 d. LXXIV. All Writs of Scire facias, and
Writs of Good Abearing, or for the Peace, or Writs of Supersedeas upon the
same, and all other Process sued before the Justices upon any Record or
Suggestion shall be sealed with the Judicial Seal, for which the Plaintiff
shall pay 7 d. whereof the King is to have 6 d. and the Justice 1 d. LXXV.
Every Exemplification upon any Record shall be sealed by the Judicial Seal, for
which the Plaintiff shall pay 1 s. 8 d. whereof the King is to have 1 s. 4 d.
and the Justice 4 d. LXXVI. Recoveries and Fines, Concords and Warrants of
attorney for the same, may be taken before the said Justices of Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments within their Authority, by force of his general
Commission, without any dedimus, as is used before the Chief Justice of the
Common Place. LXXVII. All Fines levied before any of the Justices, with
Proclamation made the same Sessions: it shall be engrossed, and in two other
great Sessions then next following shall be of the same force as Fines levied
with Proclamations before the Justices of the Common Place. LXXVIII. Every
Person suing Writs of Entry in the Post, or Writs of Covenant; or any other
Writs, for any recovery to be had (by assent or otherwise) or for any Fine to
be levied, shall pay Fines to the King's use for the same (as well Fines pro
licentia concordandi, as all other Fines) as is used in Chancery, or elsewhere
in the King's Courts of England; which Fines shall be paid to such Persons as
shall seal the original Writs for that purpose, who shall account for the same
as they do for the profits of the said original Seal. LXXIX. Also the King's
silver (upon every such Fine) shall be paid as is used in the Common Place of
England, viz. 2 s. and shall be received by the Justice before whom such Fine
is levied, whereof the King shall have 1 s. 4 d. the Prothonotary for entering
it 2 d. and the Justice the rest, who shall account for the King's profit, as
he does for the profits of the Judicial Seal. LXXX. The four said Justices
shall have each of them a Prothonotary to attend upon them, for the entering of
all Pleas, Process, and matters of Record in Sessions, to be holden before the
said Justices. LXXXI. There shall be a Marshal and a Crier in every of the said
Circuits, to be named by the said Justices, as Justices of Assize in England
use to do; which Officers shall attend upon the said Justices in their Circuits
in proper Person, and not by Deputy LXXXII. The Marshal shall have upon every
Judgment, and every Fine 4 d. and the Crier 1 d. and the like Fees shall be
paid upon the acquital of Felons, and of such as be delivered by Proclamation,
or out of Common Mainprise. LXXXIII. Here also are set down the Fees that the
Prothonotaries shall take for Writs, Entries, Judgments, etc. for which see
the Statute at large. LXXXIV. The King shall have all Fines, Issues,
Amerciaments, and Recognizances forfeited, which the Prothonotaries shall
yearly estreat into the Exchequer appointed for that limit, that Process may be
awarded to the Sheriff to levy them for the King's use; which Sheriffs shall
yearly account before the King's Auditors to be thereunto assigned. LXXXV.
Besides the President, Council, and Justices aforesaid, there shall be Justices
of Peace and Quorum, and also one Custos Rotulorum in every of the said twelve
Counties, who shall be appointed by the Chancellor of England, by Commission
under the great Seal, with the advice of the President, Council, and Justices
aforesaid, or three of them, whereof the President to be one. LXXXVI. There
shall not be more then eight Justices of Peace in any of the said twelve
Shires, besides the President, Council, and Justices aforesaid, and the King's
Attorney and Solicitor, all which Persons shall be also put in every such
Commission. LXXXVII. These Justices of Peace shall be of good name and same,
and may exercise their Office albeit they have not 20 l. per annum, or be not
learned in the Law: but before they shall execute their Commission, they shall
take such Oath as Justices of Peace in England use to take before the
Chancellor of England, or else before the President, or one of the same
Justices of Wales by dedimus, or before some other to be appointed by the Lord
Chancellor for the purpose. LXXXVIII. The said Justices of Peace, or two of
them at least, (1. Qu.) shall keep their Sessions four times in the year, and
at other times also upon urgent cases, as Justices of Peace in England use to
do; for which they shall also have such allowances for themselves and their
Clerks as the Justices in England have. LXXXIX. Here the Fee for a Warrant of
the Peace, or good Abearing is 6 d. for entering of Pledges to pay the King a
Fine upon an Indictment 9 d. and if it be with Protestation 12 d. for a
Supersedeas 8 d. and for a Recognizance 12 d. XC. These Justices of Peace shall
certify Recognizances taken before any of them for the Peace and good Abearing
into next Sessions; but Recognizances taken before them for suspicion of
Felony, shall be certified before the Justices at the next great Sessions
without concealing them, upon such penalties as be therefore ordained. XCI. All
Fines and Amerciaments lost before the Justices of Peace shall be asserted by
two of them at least, (1. Qu.) and shall be duly set without partiality. XCII.
All such Fines and Amerciaments, as also all Issues lost, forfeited
Recognizances, and other Forfeitures before the said Justices of Peace, shall
be yearly estreated by the Clerks of the Peace into the Exchequer appointed for
that limit, to the end that Processes may be thereupon awarded for the levying
of them for the King's use to the Sheriff of every County; who shall account
before such Auditors as shall be thereto assigned, which Auditors shall make
due allowance unto the Sheriffs upon their accounts for the Fees of the
Justices and Clerks of the Peace, as is used in England. XCIII. The President,
Council, and Justices of Wales, or three of them at least, (whereof the
President to be one) shall yearly nominate three able Persons in every of the
said twelve Shires, to be Sheriffs thereof, and shall certify their names to
the Lords of the Privy Council Crast. Animarum, to the end the King may appoint
one of them in every of the said Shires to be Sheriff for that year, like as is
used in England: And thereupon the said Sheriffs shall have their Patents under
the great Seal of England, and shall make Oath, and acknowledge Recognizances
before the President and Justices, or one of them, by a Dedimus, for the due
execution of their Offices, and for their just account before the Kings
Auditors assigned for Wales. XCIV. The said Sheriffs have power to use their
Offices as Sheriffs of England do; shall be observant to all lawful commands
and precepts of the President, Council, Justices of Wales, Justices of Peace,
Escheators, and Coroners, and every of them in all things appertaining to their
Offices; shall yearly account to the Auditor, or Auditors, assigned by the King
for Wales, and shall each of them have yearly for his Fee 5 l. XCV. All
Officers and other Persons in Wales, shall be obedient, attendant, and
assisting to the President, Council, and Justices of Wales, and shall obey the
Kings commands, and Process from any of them directed, and all lawful and
reasonable precepts of them, and every of them; and also shall be obedient to
all Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, and Escheators, within their several limits,
in all things appertaining to their duties and offices. XCVI. Also Escheators
shall be named in every of the said Counties by the Treasurer of England, with
the advice of the President, Council, or three of them, whereof the President
to be one; which Escheators shall make oaths, and acknowledge Recognizances
before the President; or one of the Justices, by a Dedimus, for the due
execution of their offices, and for their true account before the King's
Auditor, or Auditors, to be assigned for that purpose, which Oath and
Recognizance shall be agreeable to those used for Escheators in England. XCVII.
Such Escheators shall yearly have their Patents under the great Seal, shall
exercise their Offices as Escheators in England, and shall be bound to all Laws
and Statutes of England: But they need not have above 5 l. per annum freehold,
and shall account yearly before such Auditor, or Auditors, as the King shall
assign for Wales. XCVIII. There shall be also two Coroners elected for each of
the said twelve Shires, by the Writ De Coronatore Eligendo, awarded out of the
Chancery of England; which Coroners shall exercise their Offices, and have like
Fees as in England: Only the Writ de Cor. elig. for the County of Flint, shall
be directed out of the Exchequer of Chester. XCIX. The Justices of Peace, or
two of them (1. Qu.) shall appoint in every Hundred (within their limits) two
substantial Gentlemen, or Yeomen, to be chief Constables of the Hundred where
they dwell, who shall preserve the Peace, and use their Offices, and be bound
in all things as High-Constables in England. C. The Sheriff shall have a Goal
in a place of the Castle of the Shire-Town, or such other convenient place, as
by the President, Council, and Justices, or three of them, (whereof the
President to be one) shall be appointed, any Patent or Grant notwithstanding.
The Sheriff also shall make Bailiffs of the Hundred, who shall attend upon the
Justices at their Courts and Sessions. CI. Sheriffs shall keep their Counties
monthly, and their Hundred-Courts for pleas under 2 l. and shall take for
entering of Plaints, Process, Pleas, and Judgments there, as is used in
England, and not above. Also all Trials in such Courts, or before Stewards in
Court Barons, shall be by Wager of Law, or Verdict of six Men, at the election
of the Party, Plaintiff or Defendant, that pleads the Plea. CII. Sheriffs shall
hold their Turns yearly after Easter and Michaclmas, as is used in England.
CIII. The King shall have all Fines, Issues, Amerciaments, and Forfeitures lost
in the said Courts and Turns, to his own use, and the Sheriff shall account for
the same accordingly, having been first afferred by the Justices of Assize of
that Circuit, before they be levied; And the Sheriff shall not levy them before
they be so afferred, in pain to forfeit to the King 40 s. Also the Sheriff upon
every Judgment in his County or Hundred Court, may award a Capias ad
satisfaciendum, or a Fieri facias, at the election of the Plaintiff. CIV.
Certain Fees, which the Sheriff is to have for the return and execution of
diverse Writs, For which see the Statute at large. CV. Every Sheriff within this
limit may put suspicious persons under common Main-prise, according to the
Statute of 47 H. 8.26. (which see before) binding them with two sufficient
Sureties by Recognizance, to appear before the Justices at the next great
Sessions, and shall then also certify the names of the parties so bound,
without concealment. CVI. The Sheriffs Fee for taking such common Main-prise is
2 d. but he shall take no Fee for the return of any Writ of Execution, unless
he return the same executed. CVII. The Fees of Sheriffs, Escheators, and
Coroners, and their Ministers, Prothonotaries, and their Clerks, and other
Ministers of Justice in Wales, shall be rated, augmented, and diminished by the
President, Council, and Justices, or three of them, whereof the President to be
one, from time to time at their discretions. CVIII. None for Murder or Felony
shall be put to his Fine, but suffer, according to the Laws of England, except
it please the King to pardon him; And if the Justices see cause of pity, or
other consideration, they may reprieve the prisoner, till they have advertised
the King of the matter. CIX. The Statute of the 26 H. 8.6. (which see before)
is confirmed, notwithstanding this Act; and from henceforth shall be put in
execution. CX. Abertannad heretofore reputed parcel of the County of Merioneth,
shall now be annexed to Salop, and be reputed parcel of the Hundred of
Oswestry. CXI. If any sorreign Plea or Voucher be pleaded or made before any of
the Justices of Wales, tryable in any other County in Wales; in this case, the
said Justice shall send the Kings Writ, with a transcript of the Record, unto
the Justice of the County where the matter is tryable, commanding him to
proceed to the trial thereof, according to Law, which trial being had, he shall
remand it with the whole Record unto the Justice that sent it, who thereupon
shall proceed to Judgment, as the Cause shall require: but if such Plea or
Voucher be tryable in England, the Justice of Wales, before whom they are
pleaded or made, may proceed to trial thereof in such County of Wales, where
they are so pleaded or made, such foreign Plea or Voucher notwithstanding.
CXII. All Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments in Wales, and in the Lordships
and places annexed (by the Statute of 27 H. 8.26.) to the Counties of Salop,
Hereford, Gloucester, or any other Shires, shall be English tenure, and not
partable amongst Heirs males, according to the Custom of Gavelkind. CXIII. No
Mortgages of Lands, etc. made in any of the said Counties or places, shall be
hereafter allowed or admitted, otherwise then after the course of the
Common Law and Statutes of England. CXIV. It shall be lawful for all persons
to alien their Lands, etc. in Wales, the County of Monmouth, and other places
annexed as aforesaid, from them and their Heirs, to any person or persons in
Fee-simple, Fee-tail, for life, or years, according to the Laws of England,
notwithstanding any Welsh Law or Custom to the contrary. CXV. If any person
having Lands in Wales be bound in England by a Statute staple of Recognizance,
and pay not the Debt accordingly, in such Cases, upon Certificate into the
Chancery of England, Processes shall be made to the Sheriffs of Wales out of
the said Chancery, for the due levying of the said Debt, as is used in England:
Howbeit for such Recognizances as are taken in the Kings Bench, or Common Place
of England, Processes shall be pursued immediately from the Justices of the
said Courts, as in England also is used. CXVI. All such Writs, Bills, Plaints,
Pleas, Process, Challenges, and Trials shall be used throughout all the Shires
aforesaid, as are used in North- Wales, or as shall be devised by the
President, Council and Justices, or three of them, whereof the President to be
one. CXVII. Where there shall be some Suits in Pleas personal, which cannot be
well tried before the Justices in the great Sessions, for shortness of time,
such Issues may be tried at the petty Sessions before the Deputy Justices, as
is used in the three Counties of North- Wales, save only for such Suits, as by
the discretion of the said Justices shall be necessary to be tried before
themselves: Howbeit, there shall be no Suit taken before any of the said
Justices by Bill, under the sum of 20 s. CXVIII. No other Liberties,
Franchises, or Customs shall be used or claimed in any Lordship, which was
anciently part of Wales, (whosoever be owner or owners thereof) but only such
as be given to the Lords thereof by force of the Statute of 27 H. 8.26. and not
altered by this Act, notwithstanding the Stat. of 32 H. 8.20. which see in
Franchises. CXIX. If any Murder or Felony be committed in Wales, the party or
parties grieved shall make no agreement with the offender, or with any other in
his behalf, unless he first acquaint the President, Council, or Justices
therewith, in pain of Imprisonment and grievous Fine at the discretion of the
President, Council, and Justices, or two of them, whereof the President to be
one, the like punishment also they shall incur, that labor or procure such
agreement, although it never take effect. CXX. If any person, or they whose
Estate he has, have peaceable possession of Lands in Wales by the space of
five years, without interruption or lawful claim, such person shall continue
the same, until they be recovered from him by Law or Decree of the President
or Council there. CXXI. If in personal Actions pursued before the Justices,
nine of the Jury be sworn, and the residue make default, or be tried out, in
that Case the Sheriff may return other names de circumstantibus, until the
Jury be full, as is used in North- Wales, and elsewhere in such Cases. CXXII.
No sale of Goods or Cattle stolen in Wales, and sold in any Fair or Market
there, shall alter the propriety thereof, such sale notwithstanding. CXXIII. No
person shall buy any quick Cattle in Wales out of the Fair or Market, unless he
can produce credible witness of the person, place, and time, he so bought the
same, in pain of such punishment and Fine, as shall be set by the President and
Council, or any of the Justices in his Circuit, and to answer it at his further
peril. CXXIV. If any Goods or Cattels be stolen in Wales, the Tract shall be
followed from Town to Town; and Lordship to Lordship, according to the Laws and
Customs heretofore used in Wales, upon such penalty as has been heretofore
accustomed. CXXV. Any man (being a Freeholder) may pass upon a Jury in all
Causes both criminal and civil, Attaint only excepted, saving to every man his
lawful Challenge, according to the Laws of England: Howbeit none shall pass in
Attaint, unless he have Freehold of 40 s. per annum. CXXVI. Tenants and
Resiants in Wales shall pay their Tallage at the change of their Lords in such
places, and after such form, as has been accustomed in Wales. CXXVII. The
Kings Subjects in Wales shall find at the Parliaments in England, Knights for
the Counties, and Citizens and Burgesses for the Cities and Towns, to be chosen
by the Kings Writ, according to the Statute of 27 H. 8.26. and shall also be
chargeable to all Subsidies, and other Charges granted by the Commons of the
said Parliaments, and pay all other Rents, Farms, Customs, and Duties to the
King, as has been accustomed, Fines for redemption of Sessions only excepted,
which the King is pleased to remit. CXXVIII. Haverford-west shall find one
Burgess for that Town, whose Charges shall be born by the Major, Burgesses, and
Inhabitants of the said Town, and by none other. CXXIX. The King shall have all
Felons Goods, Goods of persons outlawed, Waifs, Estrays, and all other
Forfeitures and Escheats, and shall be answered thereof by the Sheriffs, saving
the right of all others, having lawful title thereto. CXXX. Errors and
Judgments before any of the Justices in their great Sessions, in Pleas real
and mixed, shall be redressed by Writ of Error out of the Chancery of England,
returnable before the Justices of the Common Place, as other Writs of Error be
in England: but Errors in Pleas personal shall be reformed by Bill, before the
President and Council, and if the Judgment be affirmed good, in any of the
said Writs or Bills, then there to make Execution, and all other Process
thereupon, as is used in the Kings Bench of England, and that the Plaintiff in
every such Writ or Bill, pay for the same like Fees as is used in England.
CXXXI. No Execution of any Judgment given in any base Court, shall be stayed
by reason of any Writ of false Judgment, but Execution may be had at all times
before the reversal of such Judgment; and if such Judgment shall after be
reversed, the Plaintiff shall be restored to what he has lost by such
Judgment. CXXXII. All Process for urgent and weighty Causes, shall be directed
into Wales by the Chancellor of England, or any of the Kings Council, as
heretofore has been used, notwithstanding this Act. CXXXIII. The Town of
Bewdley in the Parish of Ribsford, in Com. Wigorn. is made parcel of the County
of Wigorn, and united to the Hundred of Dodingtree in that County, saving to
the Burgess and Inhabitants of Bewdley their ancient Liberties and Franchises.
CXXXIV. Llanstissan, Vsterloys and Langham, with their members, are united to
the County of Caermarthen, and made parcel of the Hundred of Derries in that
County. CXXXV. The Shire-Court of the County of Radnor shall be holden one time
at New Radnor, and another time at Preston, alternis vicibus, and never at
Rather Goway, notwithstanding the Statute of 27 H. 8.26. CXXXVI. The Kings
Farmer of the Subsidy and Aulnage of Woollen Cloths in the County of Monmouth,
and the other twelve Counties of Wales, shall take for sealing such Cloths as
follows, viz. for every whole piece of Frise 1 d. a half piece, ob. a piece
of Cotton or Lining, (24 yards and under) ob. a piece of the same (above 24
yards) 1 d. a broad Cloth, 1 d. a piece of Kersey (18 yards or above) 1 d. and
for a piece of Kersey, (under 18 yards) ob. Howbeit this shall not extend to
Cloth made in private Houses, and not put to sale, but to their Servants.
CXXXVII. The Aulnager in Wales shall be bound and subject to the Laws and
Customs of England, in like case provided. CXXXVIII. The Town of Haverford west
is made a County of it self, whose Justice shall be the Justice of the County
of Pembroke, and the Judicial Seal of Pembrokeshire shall be also used there,
with diverse other Privileges; for which see the Statute at large: Howbeit,
this Article was but to continue in force during the King's pleasure. CXXXIX.
This Act shall not be prejudicial to any man's Inheritance, nor to any of the
King's Officers for their Offices or Fees. CXL. No Land in Wales shall be
Gavelkind, but discendable according to the course of the Common Law. CXLI. All
Liberties of the Duchy of Lancaster shall continue as they were before the
making of this Act. CXLII. Stat. 18 El. 8 The Queen and her Heirs and
Successors may (at her and their pleasure) name and appoint two or more Persons
learned in the Law to the Justices in each of the Circuits in Wales, which had
but one Justice before, or may grant Commissions of Association to such Person
or Persons to be associate to the Justice, or Justices of the said Circuits,
who shall have like authority and power as the one Justice had by the Statute
of 34, 35. H. 8.26. CXLIII. Stat. 27. El. 9. All Fines and Recoveries taken or
suffered in the Courts of Assizes or Sessions of the twelve Shires of Wales,
the Town and County of Haverford-west, and the Counties Palatines of Chester,
Lancaster, and Duresme, and in every of them, and all Writs, Returns, Warrants,
and other proceedings concerning the same, now remaining, or which hereafter
shall remain in the said Courts or Sessions, or in any of them, or in the
custody of any of the Officers there, may (upon the request, and at the
election of any person) be enrolled in Rolls of Parchments by such persons, and
for such considerations, as are hereafter expressed, and such Inrolments shall
be as good in force in Law (for so much as shall be so enrolled) as the same so
remaining are or ought to be. CXLIV. No Fines, Proclamations, or Recoveries
there, shall be reversable by Writ of Error, for false Latin, rasure,
inter-lining, misentring of any Warrant of Attorney, or of any Proclamation,
misreturning, or not returning of the Sheriff, or other want of form in words,
and not in matter of substance. CXLV. The person there that shall hereafter
take the acknowledgement of any Fine, or any Warrant of Attorney, of any Tenant
of Vouchee, for suffering any Recovery, or shall certify them or any of them,
shall with the Certificate of the Concord or Warrant of Attorney, certify also
the day and year, wheren the same was acknowledged, but shall not be enforced
to certify them, except within the year next after they were taken; And no
Clerk or Officer there shall receive any Writ of Covenant, Writ of Entry, or
other Writ, whereupon any Fine or Recovery is to pass, unless the day of
acknowledgement thereof shall appear by such Certificate, in pain of 40 s.
CXLVI. No Attornment upon any Fine there, shall be entered upon Record, except
the party mentioned to attorn, have first appeared in Court in person or by
Attorney, warranted by the hand of one of the Justices of the same Court, upon
any Writ of Quid juris clamat, quem redditum reddit, or per quae servitia, as
the cause requires; and every Attornment otherwise entered shall be void,
without Writ of Error or other means to avoid it. CLXVII. There shall be in
the said places an office of Inrolments crected to continue for ever, for the
inrolling of Fines and Recoveries, as aforesaid; and the Justices there shall
(within their several limits) enjoy the said Office, and the disposition
thereof, and carefully see to the execution of the same by the due examination
of such enrolments, and for their pains and care therein shall have certain
Fees allowed them; for which see the Statute at large. CXLVIII. Unto every Roll
by any Justice so examined, he is to subscribe his hand, in pain of 40 s. and
any of the said Justices may take order in all things needful for the said
Inrolment, and upon examination may in the said Courts assess such Fines and
Amerciaments, or any Clerk, Sheriff, Attorney, or other Person, for misprision,
contempt, or negligence, in any thing concerning such Fines and Recoveries, as
to them or any one of them shall seem meet which Fines and Amerciaments shall
be estreated as others use to be out of the said Court. CXLIX. The
exemplification of any such Record of any Fine or Recovery thereof, or any part
thereof (in the said twelve Shires of Wales, and the Town of Haverford-west)
under the Judicial Seal, or (in the said Counties Palatine) under the Seal of
the respective County Palatine shall be of as good force as the original Record
it self. CL. The Justices Clerks may write out and enrol the said Records, but
shall not carry them out of their Offices. CLI. No Fine or Recovery heretofore
levied or suffered shall after exemplification be amended.
THE TABLE TO THE RULES of LAW.
A.
AFter Appearance and Declaration, three Rules in Real Actions, two Rules in
Actions Personal, mixed and popular, and the last Peremptory. Rule 4. After
Pleas one Rule for Replication, etc. Rule 4. Amerciament where it shall be upon
Nonsuit, and no Cost to the Defendant. Rule 16. Appearance when to be allowed.
Rule 7. Administrator, vide Executor. Rule 12.
D.
Demurrer upon it one Rule to join, upon refusal Judgment. Rule 15.
E.
Essoin upon calling the Writ. Rule 1. Essoin to be upon Iterum sum. 2 d. and 3
d. Bill, Distringas, etc. if none be upon original before Issue. Rule 2.
Essoin, one after a Ven. fac. Rule 3. Essoin to be cast for one day only. Rule
6. Executor to make Oath that he, etc. received not the Debt, nor any part
thereof, nor his Testator, to his knowledge, in his lifetime, etc. Rule 12.
I.
Imparlance after it, one Rule. Rule 9. Issue general, upon it the Solicitor to
be for the Defendant, without Rule; but upon special pleading or a Solicitor
for the Plaintiff, one Rule. Rule 14. Judgrment none to be given upon Bond for
performance of Covenants, upon Award, or upon Agreements, without motion. Rule
11. Judgment by Default to be taken of the same Sessions, unless the Defendant
plead in Bar at the same Sessions without Rule. Rule 13.
N.
Nonsuit where Amerciaments upon it and no Costs. Rule 16. Narratio similis
upon Writ of View, Sum. ad Warran. ad Auxiliandum, and upon Challenge, one
Rule. Rule 8.
P.
Petit. visum and auditum to be demanded between 2 d. and 3 d. Rule. Rule 5.
Petit. auditum in Personal Actions, between the first and second Rule. Rule 5.
Plaint removed by Certior. etc. from inferior Courts to the great Sessions,
the Defendant appearing, and the Plaintiff Nonsuited, the Defendant not to
have Costs. Rule 16.
S.
Scire fac. upon an old Judgment in Personal Actions, two Rules to appear, and
after Appoarance two Rules to plead upon Real Actions, three Rules to appear,
and three to plead. Rule 10. Scire facias none to be allowed upon a Judgment
of ten years standing without motion, unless it continned by Process. Rule 10.
THE TABLE TO THE Rules in Chancery.
A.
APpearance after Subpoena to Answer is served, must be before the sitting of
the fourth Court, or Attachment to issue. Rule 1. Appearance must be entered
whether the Defendant appear in Person or by Attorney. Rule 1. Answer, Plea, or
Demurrer, must be put in before the sitting of the fourth Court, or an
Attachment to issue. Rule 2. Alias Attachment to issue upon Return of the
first, and upon return of that a Proclamation. Rule 2.
B.
Bills to be filed against Parties served within three Courts after Appearance,
or else a Dismission of Course, with Costs of 6 s. 8 d. Rule 3.
C.
Contempts to be cleared before Answer be received after Attachment regularly
issued forth. Rule 2. Costs, Bills of Costs to be indifferently taxed by the
Register if Attorneys differ. Rule 6. Costs for not putting in Exceptions or
Reply, is 13 s. 4 d. Rule 3. Costs. v. Bill Regula. Rule 3. Costs to be taxed
upon References on Contempts, etc. by the Register. Rule 8.
E.
Exceptions, or Reply to be filed within four Courts, or else the Defendant to
be dismissed of Course, with 13 s. 4 d. Costs. Rule 3.
I.
Interrogatories the same to be administered to Witnesses to be examined before
the Register, as upon common Return, without alteration, unless upon order of
Court. Rule 4. Interrogatories upon Contempts to be put in within three days.
Rule 8.
M.
Motions in Court notice to be given of them. Rule 7.
N.
Notice to be given of motion in Court to the Attorneys of the other side,
otherwise to be of no effect, and the last Rule to be produced upon every
motion. Rule 7. Notice to be given to the other side upon Appearance on
Contempts, and Interrogatories to be put in within three Courts, or else the
party to be discharged. Rule 8.
P.
Publication after Witnesses examined to pass of course, unless motion in Court
be made to the contrary second Court on Wednesday in the Sessions week. Rule 5.
Proclamation to issue upon Return of an alias Attachment. Rule 2. Process to
hear Judgment not to issue if Parties be present at the Sessions, or their
Attorneys, otherwise if absent. Rule 5.
R.
Reference upon Examinations on Contempts within three Courts, or else the
Party to be discharged. Rule 8. Reply, v. Exception Regula. Rule 3.
S.
Subpoena none to issue into a Foreign County without order of Court. Rule 1.
Sequestration not to issue without motion in Court. Rule 2.
W.
Witnesses may be examined before the Register at any time before Publication,
upon notice by either Party, but upon no notice given to be suppressed. Rule 4.
FINIS.
Law Books Printed, and Sold by Henry Twyford in Vine-Court Middle Temple, with
the usual Prizes.
In Folio.
PVlton's Statutes at large, price 2 l. 10 s. Manby's Continuation of Pulton,
12 s. Shepand's Epitomy. 1 l. 10 s. Wngat's Maxims of Law, 14 s. Herne's
Pleader, 18 s. Manby on Cowell's Interpreter, 8 s. Lord Cook's Reports in
French, newly printed, 3 l. L. Cook's 12th and 13th Report, English, 7 s 6 d.
Ryley's Records of the ^ower, 18 s. Leonard's Reports, 2d Vol. 6 s. Leonard's
Report, 3d Vol. 7 s. Latche's Reports, 7 s. Judge Owen's Reports, 5 s. Judge
Hutton's Reports, 6 s. Lord Leyes Reports, 4 s. 6 d. Bridgeman's Reports, 5 s.
Judge Crook's Reports first Part, K. Chapter 12 s. -- Second Part, King James, 14
s. -- Third Part, Queen Elizabeth, 18 s. Lord Cook's Reports, English, 2 l. 5
s. Lord Cook's Declarations, in English, 8 s. Judge Bulstrod's Reports in 3.
Vol. 1 l. 3 s. Styles's Reports. 10 s. Hobart's Reports, 10 s. Judge Winches
Reports, 4 s. 6 d. Lane's Reports, 4 s. 6 d. Ashe's Tables to Lord Cook's
Reports, 6 s. Dalton's justice of Peace, 8 s. Dalton's ^ffice of Sheriffs, 11
s. Townsend's Tables, 12 s. Sergeant Bendlows Reports, 6 s. Lord Dyer's Reports
with Tables, 18 s. Lord Cook's Boo of Entries, 3 l. Rastall's ^ook of Entry, 3
l. Lord Cook's Littleton, 18 s. Magna Charta, 14 s. Ple s of Crown, 6 s.
Jurisdiction of Courts, 8 s. Practical Councellor, 12 s.
In Quarto.
Brownlow's Reports, Part 1. 3 s 6 d. Brownlow's Reports, Part 1. 4 s.
Gregory's Moo^e Book in English, 10 s. Hughes Commentary on Original Writs, 4
s. Hughes Grand Abridgement in three Volumes, 2 l. 10 s. Placita Latinae Read
vive, 6 s. Complete Clerk, 12 s. Brownlow's Judicial Writs in English, 4 s.
Brownlow's Declarations, 4 s. Shepard's Marrow of Law, Part 2. 3 s. 6 d.
Godboult's Reports, 6 s. Touchstonc of Assurance, 6 s.
In Octavo.
Wingat's Abridgement, 6 s. Kitchin's Jurisdiction of Courts, 5 s. 6 d. Hawks
Grounds of Law, 3 s. 6 d Hernes Law of Conveyances, 2 s. Modern Assurances, 2
s. 6 d. Book of Judgments, 2 s. 6 d. Sir Jo. Davis of Impositions, 1 s. 6 d.
Ireland's Abridgement of Lord Cook's Reports, 2 s. 6 d. Trotman's Abridgement
of Cook's Reports, 4 s 6 d. Shepard's Sure Guide for His Majesty's Justices, 3
s. 6 d. Parson's Law, 2 s. 6 d. Irevia selecta, by Antrobus and Imp. 1 s. 6 d.
Complete Attorney, 3 s. Plowden's Abridgement, 2 s. Office of Executors, 2 s.
Abridgement of Cook's Littleton, by Davenport, 2 s. 6 d. Perkins in English, 2
s. Layman's Lawyer, 2 s. Wingat's Body of Law, 1 s. 6 d. Wilkingson's Office of
Sheriffs, 2 s. 6 d. Abridgement of Doctor and Student, 1 s. Horns Mirror of
Justice, in French, 2 s. Law of Corporations, by Shepard, 1 s. Stones Reading
on Bankrupts, 1 s. The Judges Resolution on the Statute of Bankrupts, 1 s. 6 d.
Brook's Reading on the Statute of L^mitation, 1 s. Practice of the Exchequer, 1
s. The Exchequer opered, 1 s. Complete Solicitor, 3 s. 6. Clark's Cabinet, 1 s.
Judge Dodaridg's Law of Nobility and Pearage, 1 s. 6. d. Fitz. Not. brevium
Eng. 5. s Calthrop's Reports, 1. s. 6. d. Shephard's Justice, 3 s. Dr. and
student, 2. s. Manby's Abridgement of Coke's 12th part of Reports, 1 s. 6. d.
Complete Copyholder, 1 s. 6. d. Clarke's Companion, 1 s. Clark's Tutor, 1 s. 6
d. Terms of Law, 4. s. Law of charitable Uses, 2 s. Clark of Assize, 1 s.
Lambert's duties of Constables, 1 s. Elsuceer's Observations, 1 s. Lord Leye's
of Wards and Liveries, 1 s.
In Twelves.
Survey of Justice, 1 s. 6. d. Justice restored. 1 s. Vade mou^ or Justice, 1
s. Principles of Law by Phillips, 1 s. Littleton's Tenures French and Eng. 2 s.
6 d. Exact Constable, 1 s. Parsons Guide or Law of Tithes. 1 s. Complete
Justice, 2 s. Clarke's Tutor to Arithmetic and writing, 1 s. Practica Walliae,
1 s. 6. d.

