'AN'EKDOTA 'ETEPOYIAK'A OR, THE SECRET HISTORY OF THE HOUSE OF MEDICIS.

Written Originally by that Famed Historian, the Sieur de Varillas.

Made English by FERRAND SPENCE.

LONDON, Printed by R. E. for R. Bentley and S. Magnes, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, 1686.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY, EARL of PEMBROKE, etc.
My LORD,
I Am sensible that this Mortification of your Triumphs, by so unseasonable an
Address, when your Lordship has hardly had time to breathe, after Victory over
Rebels, to be engaged in the so formidable Rencounter, as that of a Dedication,
may, at first, seem a Crime not to be expiated. But if it be considered, that
your Lordship has exerted your Loyalty in such a manner, that your Actions bear
that Face and Character, as challenge, not only our present Admiration and
Eulogies, but stand as Glorious Examples, as well to all Posterity, as the
present Age, and will, undoubtedly, prove the greatest Embelishments of the
English History, it cannot, in the least, be wond'red that I strike in with the
public Celebrations. Freedoms and Presumptions of this nature, are the
inevitable Attendants of such like Performances as your Lordships; and since
the Advantages, we reap thence, are so great, it seems unreasonable to debar us
of our Acclamations. The Generous and Brave must either lie Idle, and not
furnish us with such Charming Subjects for Discourse, or they must suffer us to
exult for the Benefits we thence derive, and not hinder us from giving open
expressions of our Delight and Satisfaction.

These Considerations have, I hope, wherewithal to plead my Excuse, for the
boldness of this Offering, and give some reasona^le Varnish to the Ambition of
being the f^^st that has this way taken to blaze the

Insigne recens, ad huc
Indictum ore alio.
Besides, I do not a little pride my self in the Value and Quality of what I
Consecrate to your Lordship: This is not like most of the Books, now commonly
published, that resemble those Eggs incapable of Generation, Sunt Ova Zephyria,
that produce nothing in the Mind, and from whence we cannot derive the least
Profit and Instruction; No, My Lord, this is the Masterpiece of one of the
acutest Pens of this Age, though the Author had already, by other his Works
obtained the name of a finished Writer, and a perfect Historian.

How well he has merited this Title, your Lordship will find, all along; by his
exquisite taste, as to what can please, or displease, tire, or divert; and
though he omits nothing necessary, yet is he Concise or Copious, as is most
Consistent with the due beauty of his Work. Nothing of Prejudice appears in
him. He is not warped nor cainted by Passion, or Interest, or Faction, He
blames not, nor Commends, so as to make a Satyr, or an Encomium, He suffers not
Fear or Hope at his Elbow, to jog him on to sooth the Moderns, or curry-savour
with Posterity. His Impartiality being such, that from his Relations, there is
no guessing at his Country, or his Religion, or his Friends, or his Party. He
is far from imitating even those Great Men, that make Speeches for Persons long
since dead, which is degenerating History into Romance; though some will have it,
that though it be not Truth, it will serve out turn as well. But this is the
Banner of Novels and Poetry, and not the Essential of History. Besides, such
Decorations and Flourishes, are only capable of dazzling and amusing the Mobile;
and a Plain, Blunt, Downright Truth shall, in a solid Mind, obscure all their
Luster. Not but that his Truths have often the Air of Fiction, but the ushering
in of such, are the Prerogative of an Ancedoto-grapher. He does not here and
there, by starts, make Parade of Wit, but enchases it throughout the whole
Piece. Nor does he lie perdue, on all occasions, to be sh^rging in an Elegancy,
but sometimes expresses a mighty Thought in one single word, or hints it
without saying it. Yes, my Lord, these (...) all along speak a nice and general
Knowledge of Men and of Things, a Profound, Subtle and Penetrating Wit, capable
of unveiling the true Causes of Humane Actions, from their Pretexts and Colors
They are a sort of Cabinet, Historical Inquisition, carrying along a Fancy
quick and judicious, conceiving Things aright, and Midwifing them afterward
answerable to the Conceptions. When my Author's subject leads him near a
Battle, he has so prepared his Readers, that they themselves seem slusht for
Engagement, though the quality of his Writing obliges him to wheel 'em off. When
he speaks of a Treaty, of the Passions of a Prince, or of a Minister, his
Readers imagine themselves entered into Negotiation, are agitated with the same
desires, the same uneasinesses and disquiets. The style of the Original is
neither too negligent, nor too pondered, but Plain, Chaste, Perspicuous and
Familia^, yet without being low and crawling, and throughout accompanied with
Dignity, yet rather lofty in Sentiments than Words, though speaking all the
Delicacy of the most Polite Courtiers. For he is still mindful that he
entertains all Nations and Ages, that he has the whole Earth for his Audience,
and to Eternity speaks before the whole Congress of Humane kind, where nothing
ought to bolt from him, but what bears the Character of Modesty, of
Recluseness, of Respect and Good Manners. And he has herein manifested how
infinitely he has refined upon Procopius his Pattern, who has most nauseously
violated this Rule in more than a thousand Passages. And take we him only as he
is purged and retrenched by Nicolas Alemannus, yet Monsieur Varillas has
infinitely the Preference over that Ancient, without needing to supply the
befitting Vacuities he has made, by the Vatican Copy, to applaud the Invectives
that Balthazar Boniface, Trivorius, le Mothe-le-Vayer, and sundry other
Critics have uttered against that Historian. Indeed the Genius of an
Ancedoto-grapher being the same with that of a Plain-dealer, will not bias him
to Employ, and his Labor and his Industry, or innocently or designedly, to
abuse future Ages. And herein my present Author has had, as well the good
Fortune, as the Ability and good Will, to do the World Justice; his quality of
the French King's Library Keeper advantaging him above any other, to strife
into Modern Antiquity. And this he has achieved with that Perfection, that
there is not a Person he introduces, but he appears to be acquainted with his
every Inclination, and Aversion, and Failure, and weak side. He shows us whence
proceed the Complaisances, the Insinuations, and all the curious measures that
make an Art of winning Hearts, or, at least, of currying Good Will. In fine, my
Author, in this his Performance, has the Gravity of Livy, the Politeness of
Salust, the Policy of Tacitus; and had it been the Province of an
Ancedoto-grapher, could, doubtless, have shown as large a knowledge in Tacticks
as Polybias.

But, my Lord, to be more particular, and instance the Union M. Varillas has
made of the Talents of Taritus and Salust, in these his (...), and thereby his
Advantages over those two Authors, Tacitus, has been observed to convert every
thing into Policy, that he suffers Nature and Fortune to have little share in
Occurrences, and often gives far fetched Causes for Actions altogether Plain,
Common, and Natural. Thus out-going Affairs by too much Depth and Sagacity:
that his Pieces are too finished* through overmuch Art, and too little Nature;
and sometimes too curious and too sinical Speculations interpose fine
glittering Ideas, in the room of true Objects, without considering that Nature
is never so curbed, and under the Hatches, but that it still as much Influences
our Actions, as we can regulat^^ns Movements. For Irresolution and Passion
prevail equally in the Great, as in the Vulgar. And often a little
Cabinet-pique, or Bed Chamber Quarrel, occasions a rumbling World, and is the
soures of the greatest Transactions. Something of the Parties Temper does
evermore tinge the most concerted Designs. And this my Author has accurately
observed, in his Relation of the Imprisonment and Exile of Cosme de Medici,
Sir-named the Old, occasioned through Envy at his Great Power and Riches,
acquired by his Universal Traffic from Pers^^ into Andalusia, there being
nothing finer ^ain know of these Gentlemen, what St^m, however Holy, what
Dignities and Offices, however August and Sacred, but have been tarnish'd by
unworthy Members. Our Savior himself, though he culled his Twelve, yet had he a
Judas. How often did the Race of David degenerate? How often was the High
Priest's Office, among the Jews, blemished by unworthy Officiates? The Richest
of Humane Blood Ebbs and Flows, Stagnates and Corrupts; and since the whole
Race of Mankind is subject to these Infirmitions, no wonder that the House of
Medici has, in some of its Offspring, participated of the Frailties incident
to the state of Man.

And this, I suppose, is sufficient to urge is behalf of my Author and his
Book. And I will only now crave leave of your Lordship, to drop a Word in
excuse of my self, his Interpreter. Some will, perhaps, carp at me, for calling
my Traduction a Secret History, whereas the Original had already made the
matter Public; but against this, and other Cavils and Objections, that might
be raised on the same account, I shall not stand to make a Defense, having, for
what I have done, the Authority of all Procopius his Translators. As to my
Version, I l^bour'd under some Difficulties through an imperfect Copy; but when
we have the whole complete, I am in hopes of laying it at your Lorships Feet,
rectified from such failures.

I have nothing farther to add, but to beg your Lordships Pardon, for aspiring
to the Honor of your Protection to this foreign Production. And as I do not
design this for a Panegyric, but as an Humble Address for your Lordships
Patronage, I will not pretend to resine upon the Public, that is purpetually
Celebrating your Lordship for a perfect Model of Honor and Virtue. But though
a Relation of their Praises might seem an Attack upon Modesty, yet that of
their Blessings must needs be satisfactory. Yes my Lord, all Loyal Hearts bless
you, for having so very conspicuously, and advantageously distinguished your
self in the Defense of the Sacred Blood of England, and the true Interests of
the Kingdom. Yet, as if Fame thought us not sufficient for your Eulogies, she
has occasioned your being Courted to accept of the Best and most Honorable
Posts and Employments beyond the Seas. But though other Nations, as well as our
own, speak a most peculiar regard for your Lordships Merit and Gallantry, yet,
I am sure, no Man can be with a more profound Respect and Passion, than my self,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble, Most Devoted, and Most Obedient Servant,
F. Spence.

The AUTHOR'S PREFACE.
IF Procopius, the only Author from whom we have (...) remaining to us* had
left behind him the Rules of that kind of Writing; I should not lie under the
Obligation of Penning a Preface, being the Authority of that excellent
Historian, whom the French King's Press has lately presented so Correct to the
World, would be sufficient to screen me from all sorts of Reproaches, supposing
I had observed them with exactness.

But as the Art of writing secret History is still unknown, almost in its whole
Extent, and no Philosopher, hitherto, has taken the pains to draw up the Method
of it, nor Critic dared to show its Defects, I think my self reduced, like
those who engage in new Paths, viz. that I take all the Precautions necessary,
to prevent being damned at the entrance of my Work; and therefore mean to
impose Laws on my self, according to which, I pretend to be tried by an
equitable Reader, on Condition I neither borrow them from my Reason nor
Caprice, but only from the Examples of Procopius, whom I will ever have in ken,
seeing I cannot find any other Guide.

Thus it is, with his Approbation, that I lay down for a Foundation of this
Discourse, that it is not so easy a matter to write (...), as People may
imagine, because, on one side, a Man cannot dispense himself from any of the
Rules that Aristotle, Cicero, Plutarch, and other the Masters of the Art have
so judiciously prescribed for Public History; and on the other, there are many
others, which I shall relate in the Series of this Preface, which he is no less
indispensably bound to observe; from whence I draw two inferences, holding of
the Paradox. The first is, what Liberty soever, not to say Libertinage, that is
attributed to (...), there is no kind of Writing more constrained, nor more
reserved, since it has not a quarter of the Extent which the most scrupulous
Historians propose to themselves. The second is, That there is no kind of
Slavery greater, for an Anecdoto-grapher, than to be tied to tell the truth in
all its Circumstances, even when he handles the nicest matters.

I explain my meaning by so known and memorable an Example, that it cannot be
questioned. Certain it is, that Procopius has performed the Duty of a perfect
Historian, when that seeking into the Cause that made the Emperor, Justinian,
recall Belisarius out of Africa, from whence he had drove the Vandales, in
three Months space, though the presence of that Great Captain was absolutely
necessary to settle his new Conquest. He writes, that this Service was of such
Consideration, that Justinian, not finding himself capable of rewarding it, was
afraid lest Belisarius, having his Arms in hand, might do himself Justice.

Procopius stopped there, as thinking he had satisfied the Laws of History; and
certainly there would have been injustice in demanding o^ him then any thing
further. But when he be thought himself, long after, to labor upon those
(...), h^ fancied there was no more Disguise to be used upon so fantastical a
matter, that its most concealed Minutes ought to be laid open, and that his
Readers Curiosity would not be fully satisfied, without at least revealing to
him that Court Mystery, which though he had caused to pass in the second Book of
the War of the Vandales, for an effect of a Sovereign's Ingratitude and
Jealousy toward one of his Subjects, whom Fortune lifted too high, was,
properly speaking, only an Intrigue of Love of Antonina, Belisarius his Wife,
she being Cock-a hoop to return to Constantinople, there to see again the
infamous Object of her Passion.

Procopius took the same Course in his Books of the Gothic War, when he had
spoken of the same Belisarius his second or third Disgrace; for after having,
with all the vigor of his style, exagerated the Prejudice Justinian did his
own Concerns, by degrading that brave General, in the very instant he came from
taking Rome, and delivering Italy from the Lording of the Goths, by winning of
a Battle, wherein the King and all the Royal Family remained Prisoners; he was
contented with writing, that Belisarius his Enemies were sufficiently powerful,
at the Imperial Court, to procure his Repeal.

But he speaks much more home in his (...), wherein he maintains, that the true
and principal Cause of his Degradation, came from the Empress Theodora,
Justinian's Wife, who being desirous to make Belisarius purchase the
Continuation of his Employment, caused him to return to Constantinople, where
she proposed to him the obtaining his re-establishment, on condition that his
Daughter, who was to be the only Heiress of the immense Riches he possessed,
should Marry the Empress's Nephew, having nor Estate nor Virtue, nor Birth,
Belisarius Sacrificed his Daughter to his Ambition, and recovered the
Generalship at that price; But he kept it but two years: And in this place do I
make a third Observation upon the Conduct of Procopius.

For though he owns Belisarius to have surpassed himself by recovering the City
of Rome, and the rest of Italy, which the Barbarians had seized on during his
absence, though he declaims against the harshness of Justinian and Theodora's
Infidelity, who recalled him unseasonably for the third time, yet was not he
wanting however, when he examines the occasion of it, toward the end of his
second Book, to have recourse to the same Calumny, he had made use of, to
explain the foregoing Disgrace. And it is only in his (...), that representing
Belisarius once again upon the Precipice, he draws the Curtain, and downright
avers, that what absolutely pusht him in it, was, that the Empress had got a
Fancy to have his Wife return to Constantinople, to have a Confident, nay, and
a Companion in her Disorders. The reason of so different a Conduct, in one and
the same Author, proceeds, if I be not mistaken, from that the Historian
considers almost ever Men in Public, whereas the Anecdoto-grapher only
examines 'em in private. The one thinks he has performed his duty, when he
draws them such as they were in the Army, or in the tumult of Cities, and the
other endeavors by all means to get open their Closetdoor; the one sees them
in Ceremony, and the other in Conversation; the one fixes principally upon
their Actions, and the other would be a Witness of their inward Life, and
assist at the most private hours of their leisure: In a word, the one has
barely Command and Authority for Object, and the other makes his Main of what
occurs in Secret and in Solitude.

Not but that the Writer of (...) draws a Picture of Persons, as exact, and as
faithful, at the least, as can be done by the Historian; but he does it after
his own Mode. He represents only as much of the Man's Outside, as is necessary
to know his Inside; and as the good and bad dispositions of the Mind, are only
to be disclosed in the Manners, it is also for the Manners that he reserves his
liveliest Colors, and finest Materials.

So scrupulous is he in this point, that he minds not provoking the Anger, or
incurring the Indignation of the Persons Concerned. But he is commonly so
unhappy, that what ought to pass for a Virtue, is imputed to him as a Crime. He
supposes for one of his Principles, that fine Secret which Plutarch first
discovered in Moral Philosophy, namely, That there is no state in Life, wherein
a Man is more careless to conceal what passes in the bottom of his Heart, than
when the passion that Lords him is arrived to excess.

However, when he follows the diverse Agitations occasioned, for example, by the
fury of Love, and the despair of Jealousy, he is forthwith aspersed as a
Detractor; and that he only writes a Satyr, wherein his Condition is much more
unhappy, than that of the Painter, who is fully justified, if he can show that
his Pourtraict altogether resembles the Original, whereas the Writer of (...)
has never more reason to fear being ill treated, than when what he relates of
Viciousness is most true.

I insist upon this point, it being, perchance, that which has diverted
Historians, before and since Procopius, from this kind of Writing, and which,
by Consequence, must needs set me a trembling. I undertake to draw the Picture
of Pope Clement the 7th, and if I design to do it to the Life, I must detect
his Ruling Passion, and examine to its least Symptoms. Not a Man, that I know
of, has yet said what it was; and I am the first that maintains it to have
consisted in a blind and whimsical desire, with which he was ever possessed, of
ravishing his fellow Citizens of their Freedom, to raise to the Sovereignty of
Florence, two Bastards of his House, though it did not then want several
Legitimate Children, whose Heroic actions might have merited the Choice, and
whom all Mankind judged, beyond Comparison, more capable of filling that place.

I do not fear being Cavill'd upon this Proposition, as being sure there cannot
any material Circumstance be found in the Life of that Pope, but what alludes
to this Assertion. Nay, I fancy, that if I proceeded no further, I should be so
happy as to escape the onset of Critics. But have I not reason to lie under
dismal Apprehensions, when the necessity of my subject shall oblige me to grope
on, and put Truth in all its Light? When the sad Destiny of (...) that cannot
endure any thing mysterious, should be left to Posterity without explaining it,
or any thing secret without revealing it, shall engage me insensibly to take
off the Paint, with which Historians fucuss'd most of Clement's Actions, to
show how many weaknesses and faults against true Policy, budded from this first
irregularity, and to explain the minutes of those failings, which past, at
length, even to the preference of the youngest of those two Bastards, to the
eldest, though the youngest had not any of the qualities necessary for Command
and Government, and that the Eldest possessed them all, by the consent of those
who knew him, and even to the exposition of Catharine, only Daughter, and sole
Heiress of his House, in a Curbed, Headstrong, and Rebellious Town, whose
Inhabitants he had reduced to despair, by a Siege of eighteen Months.

Moreover the Writer of (...) makes a scrupule of charging himself with pompous
matters, and as he principally aims at knowing what is peculiar in the
Inclinations, he stops sometimes, to glean up such matters as were neglected
and flung aside by the Historian. An unforeseen Answer serves him to penetrate
into the bottom of Peoples Intentions. If he had been at Florence with
Alessandro de Medici, one bare word of that Duke, would have sufficed him to
make his Pourtraict. He would have supposed that the impenetrability of his
Secret, his being his own sole Confident, was it self his true Character, as
soon as he had heard him say, that he was himself the Keeper of his own
Designs; but a Keeper so Jealous, that he did not allow 'em to stir one moment
out of his heart, to take the Air upon the brink of his Lips.

I ingenuously own, that the Historian does not do the like, and willingly do I
leave him in possession of that fine Maxim of Adrianus Marcellinus, Discurrere
per Negotiorum Celsitudines non humilium minutias indagare Causarum. I take it
kindly of Lucian, for having rallied those who would go another way to Work,
and I blame Guichiardini for having so often violated this Rule; but I pretend
likewise to be left in my turn, to enjoy, peaceably, the Privilege of (...),
and to relate with a serious Air, the smallest trifles, when they have been the
Origin or occasion of the greatest Matters.

Perhaps I shall have the Validity of these Privileges denied me, upon that
Procopius, who has advantaged himself of 'em so often, has no where taken the
pains to establish them. But I answer, in the first place, that though it were
so, I should still have left a Possession of above twelve hundre^ years, which,
in good Law, equal^ at least a new Title. And in the second, I maintain, that
Procopius hi^ silence cannot turn to my disadvantage, since it is contradicted
by the contrary use of the same Author, following the Maxim of Philosophers
who give force to the Negative Argument only, when there is nothing opposite in
the same Place, from whence it is drawn. And I observ^ in the third, that a Man
cannot b^ well grounded, to draw an Inference of that Nature, from Procopius
hi^ Books of (...), because this Wor^ has not been preserved absolutely entire,
as is easy to judge, by the Passages cited in Suidas and Evagrius that are not
now a days found in any of our Editions, or Manuscripts Which would give me
always occasion on to pretend that Procopius might have spoken in the Fragments
which we want, of what People will needs have him to have forgotten and omitted.

But, after all, though I should be deprived of Procopius his Authority, I should
still have a reason left, which ought, in my Opinion, to pass for Fundamental,
in the matter now in hand; namely, That notwithstanding the Writer of (...) is
no less obliged, than the Historian, to tell the Truth, yet he is not obliged
to tell it in the same manner; for the Historian is not properly bound to tell
it, but when the Transactions he relates are so true, as that they are
probable; and Guichiardin will be ever blamed for having related In the Fifth
Book of his History.
the Case of two Rival Brothers, the one of whom having known that the other
was better beloved, because he had finer Eyes, tore them out from him, and sent
them in a Box to his Mistress. There should he have stopped, and not have added,
that these same Eyes were remitted in their place, by so delicate a hand, that
they recovered the use of sight.

Yet am I not of their Opinion, who think this single Instance sufficient to
make Guichiardin's Process, and Convict him not only of Falsehood, but likewise
of manifest Error against common Sense. I am willing to suppose, with the
Adorers of this Historian, that the two Persons, of whom he speaks, were
sufficiently Eminent in Italy, to be known, and that the Place of the Blindness
and of the Cure, which they are minded to maintain, was not so remote from
Florence, but that a Man might be informed of it in a short time, and without
difficulty. What I now find fault with is, that so Tragical and Capricious an
Event, though it may be true, was not probable, at least in its utmost
particularity, which ought to be omitted, or related with the due Precautions,
for the persuading the Reader, that there was no design to impose on his
Credulity.

On the contrary, the Writer of (...) has, for Object, Truth in all its Extent;
he considers it equally, either that it be probable, or not probable; and the
same Procopius who had taken such pains to be believed, when herelates, In the
first Book of the Gothic War.
in his History, that one single Isaurian Cavalier had put to rout a whole Army
of the Goths, the self same Procopius says, I use neither Precaution nor
Preamble in my (...), when the thing in hand is to describe the strange
Postures of the Emperor Justinian in the Night time.

After his Example shall I take the freedom to examine all the Symptoms of the
Great Cosmo de Medici his sickness, and endeavor to sift, by what accidents of
Fatigue or of Debauchery, that Princes Body lost the three Functions of the
Mind, one after the other, during the three last years of his Life, and was
deprived, by a successive alteration of his Organs, first of Reason, then of
Motion and of Sentiment, and at last of Life.

But if the Writer of (...) has on this side, more Liberty than the Historian,
he has it not on another which would be much more material to him: for he
cannot propose to himself or Interest or Glory, for the end of his enterprise,
and the Field he cultivates is to him so useless, that it produces him only
Thorns and Briars: He runs a risque of losing all, instead of profiting; and
the same Conastagio, who had been promised ten thousand Crowns, besides an
ample Pension for Life, for writing the History of the reunion of Portugal to
the Crown of Castile, was threatened with Bastinadoes, as soon as it came to be
known, that he elsewhere than at the Spanish Ambassadors House at Genoua,
sought after Memoirs for writing the late Revolutions of the Low Countries.

He would not so much as dare to hope to raise his Name from Oblivion, by
causing others to revive: and in the Most Christian King's Library, have I read
several Manuscripts, which Infallibly will be never Printed, because they draw
the Picture a little too much to the Life, of some Illustrious Persons, in whom
History has not hitherto found any Defects, or at least was not willing to find
any.

He can neither make his Wit nor his Eloquence glitter nor sparkle, by reason
those sorts of Truths that fall within his Sphere, ought necessarily to appear
stark naked, and I do not think there hardly can be found in Antiquity, a more
careless style, in that kind of Writing, than is that of Procopius.

In fine, he obliges neither the Age, whose Errors he recounts, nor that
wherein he lives. Those who ought to gain most by his Instructions, are those
who are most provoked in reading them; and if the state of Venice had not
offered an Azylum to the unfortunate Boccolini, there would not have been any
safety for him in the Old or New World, so dreadful was then the Power of
those, whose hatred he had incurred Pietra del Paragone Politico.
by his Touchstone.

I launch out much farther, and assert, that there is hardly any Paradox in the
Stoic Philosophy, but what, by a contrary sense, is verified in the Destiny of
a Writer of (...); he searches after Truth with an indefatigable Care, but ever
pursues he it unprofitably, he thinks to attain to Felicity, by attaining to
Truth, and yet bears off and distances himself from his own Happiness
gradually, as he approaches Truth; he Combats for it with a world of Pains and
Trouble, and yet he never Triumphs after having Vanquished. In short, he is the
Slave of Truth, as Epictetus was of Virtue, he must cherish it for its own
sake, and never complain of the Mischiefs it makes him suffer, provided he is
Soothed and Cocker'd with the hopes of possessing it.

Excellent Painters are there, who make Pourtraicts according to all the Rules
of Art; and yet those Pourtraicts are not altogether resembling they add ever
something to the Faces they represent; and though they do not omit any of the
Features or Lineaments, they so raise and set off the Air and Coloring, that
they are found much handsomer on the Cloth, than they are in the Original. I do
not think there ever to have been any Historian, that has entirely avoided this
Defect: and this hinders me from calling it a Fault. And I could quote an
infinite number of Ancient and Modern Examples; but I Will reduce my self to that
of Leo the 10th, as sharing in my Subject.

Three Celebrated Historians are there, who have employed all the Strength and
Delicacy of their Style, to express that Popes Genlus to the Life; namely,
Paulus Jovius, Guichiardin, and Padre Paolo Sarpi, of the Order of the Servi.
Yet they go so different a way to work, that the three principal Heroes of
Italy are not more different among themselves in Manners and Conduct, than Leo
the 10th is from himself, in the Writings of those three Authors.

In his Book and in his particular Eulogy of Leo the 10th.
Paulus Jovius makes him pass for a Man Arrogant and Stately, and ever
endeavoring to carry things with a high hand. To him does he impute the same
Warlike humor that possessed Giulio the 2d, his Predecessor. He made him
conceive, even before his Exaltationy a disdainful Contempt of all the rest of
the Sacred College; founded upon an imaginary precedence of the House of
Medici over other the Families of Italy; he causes that Contempt to intervene
in all the signal Actions, and even in the most august Ceremonies; he takes him
for the Source and Foundation of the obstinate War against the Duke of Vrbin,
and of other the Quarrels that arose in the Pontificate; in a word, he will
needs have that Vanity; but a haughty shocking Vanity was his predominant
Inclination.

If you are concerned to know how Paulus Jovius has penetrated so far into
Leo's Bosom, to pronounce of him so decisive a Judgment, he himself obviates
your question, by declaring that he was that Pope's Creature, that this
Holiness caused him to lay aside the Profession of Physic, and the pretension
of a Chair at Padoua, to engage himself in an Ecclesiastical state, made him
Bishop of Cosmo, chose him to be his Confident, and to assist at the Councils,
wherein the most important, and most secret Resolutions were taken, engaged him
to write the History of his time, interposed in his behalf in France and in
Spain, that he might have Communicated to him the Authentic Pieces, he might
think needful for the Perfection of his Work: and laid himself wholly open to
him, in frequent and familiar Conversation. Would not a Man say, to hear him
talk in this manner, that he has made the true Pourtraict of Leo the Tenth.

Nevertheless, Guichiardin, In the 12 (...) Art of his History.
who wrote upon the same subject, at the same time, has made one directly
contrary. He gives us this Pope for a finished Model of Modern Policy, and for
the greatest Cabinet-Man of his Age; he places him above King Ferdinand the
Catholic, and makes him Triumph, in his Youth, over that old Usurpers
Stratagems. To him it is he attributes the secret of making the Council of
Spain, willy-nilly, back and further all his Designs.

After having laid down these wonderful Principles, no glittering Virtues are
there, but what set off Leo the 10th's Picture. He frames from ten years old,
when first made Cardinal, those vast Projects he since executed, when exalted
to St. Peter's Chair. He negotiates with the States of Venice, for the saving
and retrieving the Wrecks of his House, that had run a ground on the Fortune of
Charles the 8th. He does not alter his Resolution, by having seen his brother
perish at the Passage of a River. He has no other thoughts than for the
advancement of the only Son that Brother left in the Cradle, and thereupon he
returns to Rome, where his Intrigues give him access to Pope Giulio the
Second's Favor, and procure him to be Elected Legate in the Army designed to
drive the French out of Italy; he is taken Prisoner at the Battle of Ravenna,
but he makes his escape in a Conjuncture fatal for himself, since that Giulio
was newly expired: He enters the Conclave, where he so improves the young
Cardinals Caprice, they having whirled their Heads with a Design of making a
Pope of their own Age, that he works their Suffrages to turn in favor of
himself. He joins with the Spaniards, and husbands their Friendship, as long as
it is of use to him, for the re-instating his House in the principal Functions
of the Magistracy of Florence; but as soon as Fortune turns her back upon 'em,
and that he finds their Council not of a humor to suffer that he usurp the
Duchy of Vrbin, therewith to invest his Nephew; he treats with the French on
that Condition, draws up the famous Concordate, wherein he Fools and Bafles the
Wiles and long Experience of Chancellor du Prat; he Caresses Francis the
First, as long as that King is in a Condition to do him good; but he has no
sooner rookt and wheadled him out of all he aimed at, but that he gives him the
slip, to reconcile himself with Charles the Fifth. He projects with this
Emperor, for the re-establishing the Sforza's in the Duchy of Milan. He
succeeds sooner than he expected, and receives such tidings that so transported
him with joy, as occasioned his Death.

Now this is Guichiardin's Leo the 10th, a Piece not in the least resembling
that of Paulus Jovius. Yet it is past all doubt, that he was at least as well
informed; for he came of a Family entirely devoted to that of Medici; he was
almost of the same Age with Leo, he had been Educated with him, he had
accompanied him in good and bad Fortune, he had managed the most subtle
Intrigues of his Exaltation, he had received extraordinary Honors and Benefits
from him, then, by his Order, did he return to Florence, where he completed
the Downfall of the popular Faction, and managed the Dispositions of his
Countrymen, with so much Address, that this Pope, by his means, Commanded nine
years in that City, in spite of its Liberty. His Holiness had called him
thence to honor him with an Office, wherein he was obliged to confide in him
the most important of his secrets, by making him Commissary General of the
Armies of the League against the French, which he officiated at the very time
of that Pope's dying.

After this, can Guichiardin be reproached, with having wanted sufficient
Instructions? And shall we not find other Historians in the last Century, much
inferior to him in this point, far from being in any wise to be compared to
him? Yet Padre Paolo, who has labored at Leo the 10th's Pourtraict, after
Paulus Jovius and Guichiardin, has imitated neither of their Strokes and
Lineaments; he represents him as a Voluptuous Person, that pampered himself
with the enjoyment of all the Sweetnesses of the Popedom, and waved all its
Bitternesses, that troubled his head with no knotty nor difficult Affair,
referred to Subaltern Ministers those which demanded Time and Application,
enriched his Relations and Servants, not out of kindness, but that he might be
the better served, and the more Caressed; made an incurable Wound in the
Church, by the Concordate with Francis the First, and empoverish'd St. Peter's
Patrimony by his Profusions; Ravished his Country of its freedom, out of a
Caprice, and minded not to restore it, when, after his Brother and Nephew's
death, departing this Life without Male Children, there was no one of his
Family capable of gaining by the Mischiefs he had done; made a Present to his
Sister of the Money, which the Piety of the Germans had designed for the waging
War upon the Infidels, committed the distribution of Indulgences in the Duchy
of Upper Saxony, to the most avaricious of his Courtiers, neglected the Heresy
of Luther in its beginning, and did not set about stopping the Gangrene, till
when it was become incurable; had too Libertine Sentiments of Religion, and
troubled his head little about another Life.

I dare not speak my mind of the Resemblance of this Picture, but yet I know
that Padre Paolo wrote after the Relations of Ambassadors, which the State of
Venice sent to the Court of Rome, in the time of Leo's Popedom, and that those
Relations are commonly very exact, and very true, as we have newly seen, by
that of Correro, though even Cardinal Pallavicino's History, who has undertaken
to refute that of Padre Paolo, and says nothing against what respects Leo's
Person, were not a tacit Approbation of what I have newly noted.

What will then the Writer of (...) do, such as I may be? He will take the
Pencil after Paulus Jovius, Guichiardin, and Padre Paolo, but he will use
neither their Colors nor Ideas. His manner will be wholly new, and whereas
others had painted Pope Leo in his Habit of Ceremony, he will represent him in
his Undress. He will slip in among ten or twelve of the Polite and Topping
Wits, who commonly assisted at his Private Recreations, and at his Couzening
himself into a sleep, and will take him in his gay Humor, wherein he was, for
Example, when he flusht them the Design of the It was Printed in Germany, in
the Collection of Ornarius.
fine Grammar, and of some other such like Pieces, which have not perhaps been
sufficiently valued, either in their own Age, or in ours, considering the
delicacy of their Invention. He will go and seek him in a Vasari, but the
Vasari of the first Edition: For what I am going to say, has been retrenched
from the others. He will go and seek him, I say, when he sometimes delighted in
thwarting, and at others in condescending to Michael Angelo's capricious
humor, when he would see, against his will, his Work before it was finished,
and that he exposed his Person to the being crushed under a Scaffold, which
Michael caused to fall upon him out of spite; whereupon this Painter having
betaken himself to his Heels, and not daring to return, he was forced to make
him Ambassador of the State of Florence, for the re-incouraging him by that
inviolable Character, and that at the first Audience he gave him in that
Quality, in a Gallery where the Pope received him with his Cane in hand,
Angelo's Fear redoubled, but needlessly, because all Leo's Anger and Cudgelling
were discharged upon a Chamberlain, who would needs show himself impertinently
Arrogant in so odd a Conversation.

In fine, the Writer of (...) will make Extracts out of the excellent Letters,
of the Cardinals Bembo, and Sadolet, and those of Peter Martyr, and Silvius
Antonianus.

Hence he will borrow Secrets, that have escaped the knowledge of the most exact
Historians, and from all those Irradiations together, he frames a Character of
Leo the 10th, which if it be not as beautiful as the foregoing, will be, at
least, as Curious.

But thanks to his Most Christian Majesty's Library; I am not reduced to be
contented with a small matter; and I have found Memoirs still more Ample, and
more Authentic Instructions. Well known it is, that the first Sovereigns of
the House of Medici, could not so well conceal their principal Adventures, nor
under the Ashes so well cover the flames of their Amors, and the smoke of
their Ambition, but that there has flown thence some sparks, even to this side
the Alps: They never acted without Witnesses, and though they had used all the
Precautions imaginable to delude Posterity, the intestine War that has
sometimes been kindled in their Family, has hardly left us Strangers to the
least of their Intrigues.

Strozzi's there have been, who have taken refuge in France; and as their
Mother was the nighest Heiress of Leo the 10th, their Father, the best Friend
of Clement the 7th; and that they had themselves been concerned in most of the
Revolutions that happened under Cosmo the Great, they have Collected such
particular Memoirs, that the World has reason to exult for their exactness.

Not but that these Memoirs ought to be in some wise suspected, and that they
even bear, in several passages, the Impressions of the Hatred, Spite,
Jealousy, and Revenge, wherewith, it cannot be denied, but that the Authors
were possessed. But it is on this score that I have distrusted them, and that I
have never believed them in the least Circumstance upon their bare words. I
have ever confronted them with their Adversaries answers, and have only allowed
them so far Credence, as it has not appeared to me that those answers were
sufficient. In a word, I assert nothing, without having examined the
Contradictions, and whosoever shall take the pains to read the Works of Ceri,
Adiani, and Manuce, three the most famous Panegyrists of Cosmo the Great, he
will find therein wherewithal to justify me on that point.

Now if I have the advantage of the Illustrations, which one of the two Parties
gives me, to the disadvantage of the other; if I have weighed the diverse
Interests and different Motives, if I have compared them with the
Circumstances, and if groping along, and walking warily, I have endeavored to
attain to the knowledge of secret Transactions, by the means of those with
which I was unacquainted, I have done in this but what is daily done by Judges,
when they are about pronouncing upon the Life, or the Reputation of the
accused, whose Crimes are not sufficiently averred.

And indeed an Anecdoto-grapher, has hardly any other secret, by the report of
It Is the Sophist Marcellinus.
him, who has left us in writing the Life of Thucidides, to set to Rights the
confused Memoirs he has Collected, than by examining diligently the matters
they agreed upon, and to make use of them afterward, as Principles for the
judging of the truth of others, of which they do not jump in an accord. But
though he does not appeal to Historians, what Authorities soever they may have;
nay, though he makes profession of writing almost ever Transactions, or at least
Particularities that were unknown to Historians; yet he does not meddle with
reproving them, or loading them with Invectives; or as Thimeus did, who
palliates them instead of blackening them. He would dissemble their Faults, if
he could do it without betraying his own Knowledge; and when that truth, which,
following Tertullian's expression, is the most imperious of Virtues, forces him
to bring them into Light, he never does it without extenuating them, or
excusing himself before hand, for what he is going to do. He knows that there
is nothing that scapes so soon, nor so easily as that truth, that he who first
taught us that it was in the bottom of a Well, might be suspected of having
buried it there all his Life, and that the proneness and slooping of Corrupted
Nature to false-hood, is no less slippery than that it has to Love.

The reason which obliges him to take this Course, In the second Book of his
Library.
is drawn from Diodorus Siculus, who maintains, that as there are feeble
Geniusses that are tempted to do Mischief, as soon as they know the manner of
committing it, there are likewise strong ones, with whom it is sufficient to
represent Vice in its most lively Colors, to divert them from it. It Is for
Minds of this last stamp that a Writer of (...) labors, as the Historian, for
those of the first. They both tend to the same end, though they take opposite
Paths: and the Chemist, who gives Antimony to drink, after having Corrected its
Malignity, obliges the Public no less, than he who composes a Medicine of the
most innocent Simples.

The Judgment is formed and fashioned as well by the Contemplation of Evil, as
of Good; and if Morality was deprived of this sort of Instructions, it would be
in a worse Condition, than the young Greek Gentlemen, that went to Thebes, to
Ismenias his House, to learn to play upon the Flute, because that great
Personage, after having showed them the secret of Mouthing it, made them hear a
Man that played very sorrily, that he might make them know the defects of his
Art, at the same time he gave them its Precepts.

Quintilian took the same Course with the Roman Knights and Senators Children,
In the 5th Chapter of the Second Book.
who came to his House to learn Rhetoric; for he as often led them to hear the
bad Declamers as the good. He made them observe the Vices of the Harangues
which the Vulgar most admired, the improper Words, the obscure ways of
speaking, the Fustian, Sordid, and Effeminate styles, and those which shock
Chaste Ears.

(...) are the Mirors which do not flatter, In his second Book
and the same Diodorus, who shrifts after their Origin with the utmost
exactness, remarks, that Egypt enjoyed a very long and most profound
Tranquillity, as long as they were in use in that Kingdom; for as soon as the
King was dead, his Body was exposed in the midst of the public place, where
every one had the freedom to praise him as much as he deserved, and to upbraid
him with all the evil actions he had committed, they put into the Scales the
Complaints and Acclamations, and if his Vices were found to have over-ballanc'd
his Virtues, his Memory was detested, and his Body refused the honor of
Burial. His Successor made his advantage of an Example he had been Eyewitness
to, and Governed the State with all the Justice necessary, for the having
nothing to fear from the public Odium after his Death.

Certainly it would not be a little Contributing, to the Felicity of Ages to
come, as to make him see things after the same manner they were in ours, or in
that of our Forefathers, without thereto adding any thing diminishing or
changing. Those who have escaped, through good Luck or Cunning, the Punishments
they had merited, would not escape the Infamy; and those, whom their Example
might attract into the like Crimes, would accustom themselves betimes to have,
for Posterity, some sort of Fear mingled with Respect. They would dread the
Judgment of their Nephews, and fall to doing such actions as would challenge
Approbation. They would be afraid, as well as Cicero, of what would be said of
them six hundred years after; they would, like him, beseech Modern Authors not
to treat them ill in their Writings; and for the giving them occasion of doing
it, without prejudice of Truth, they would put into their hands sincere Acts
and authentic Instructions.

There has been found People sensible to the stroke of a Pen, though they were
not so, or to the remorses of Conscience, or the severity of the Laws; and a
Prince was seen in the beginning of the last Century, who, not being to be
diverted from committing an Incest with his own Daughter, by all the Maxims of
the Christian Religion, was efficaciously so, by the Reflection he was wrought
to make, that the thing could not be so well concealed, but that it would be
known by Posterity.

Not but that, ever and anon, there has been found Men generous enough, as not
to be influenced to disguise the Truth, either by the quality of the Presents
that were made them, or by fear of the Punishments, wherewith they were
threatened. But yet there has been so few of them, principally in the two last
Ages, that I have been able but to find out a pair, whose Example it will not
be perhaps amiss to relate in this place, for the rarity of the matter.

Never was there a King that was more concerned, for what would be said of him,
after his Death, than the last Alfonso, that wore the Crown of Naples. He not
only labored at winning of Battles, and doing those sorts of actions which
savor of the Romance, but he was likewise solicitous to find out Pens worthy
of writing them, and capable of embelishing them. Not one famous one was there,
but he endeavored to gain or corrupt, and all such as were in Repute, received
from him Pensions or Presents, in whatever Country of Europe, Birth, or Fortune
had confined them; yet never was yet never was there a Monarch whose
Infirmities have been better particularized than his. We are not strangers to
the least of his Frailties, and what avails it to read in Pontanus, Panormus,
Benedicti, and in sixty four other Historians, that he possessed all the Noble
qualities that form Heroes. No body believes 'em, and the World is rather
inclined to give Credit to Bernardino Cerico, who attributes to him only very
common Affections, though this Cerico is otherwise a very piteous Historian.

Castruccio Castracani, on the contrary, has been defamed by thirty celebrated
Historians of Italy, ten of whom are of Florence. He has been reproached with
all the excesses whereof Tyranny is capable, when above the reach of Fear: And
Machiavel has writ a piece on purpose, in so terse, malign a style, that he
turns into Ridicule, all the actions he cannot blame. Yet has he not been
believed no more than his Countrymen; and though Nicolas Tegrinus, who made at
the same time that Great Captain's Apology was inferior to Machiavel, in all
the other parts that make up a perfect Historian: Nevertheless People have
jugd'd Tegrinus to be the sincerest of the two. They have approved the
Contradictions he puts in his Preface, for the undeceiving those who had been
prepossessed to the Prejudice of Truth; and it is now allowed on all hands, that
neither the Testimony of Machiavel, nor that of the other Florentines, is
receiveable in what relates to Castracani, as being suspected of designing to
revenge their Country, at least with the Pen, for the Affronts, which it had
received from a General of an Army, who had been its most formidable Enemy,
though they were convinced, that this General had no other failures, than what
proceeded from his living in a Conjuncture, wherein it was not possible to
exercise Military Virtues, by lawful means.

But as the two Events which I have newly related, are perhaps those only,
wherein rigorous Justice has been done to oppressed Truth, ever since History
was written, it is not to be expected, but by a due course of proceeding. The
shelve is to be avoided, which commonly wrecks those who do not fancy, that too
much exactness can be used, in detecting the most secret matters. You must
remember, that though a Writer of (...) is more often, and more strictly bound
to speak the Truth, than an Historian, yet he is not so in all occasions; to
speak without exception, on the contrary, he ought to suppress it all along,
where it is not possible to reveal it, without acting against good Manners.

Town that Procopius has failed against this Principle, and I am too sincere
not to abandon him in thi^ point. I do not undertake either to excuse him, or
defend him; and (...) should go my self astray, as well a^ deviate my Readers,
if I followed hi^ steps. I take it kindly of tha^ Man's Modesty, The German
Doctor.
causing his (...) to be Printe^ has retrenched such Passages, wherei^ the
Infamies of the Empress Theodora, when she assisted at the Public^
Divert^sements, were too lively represented. I wish this Vacuum man be never
filled, and that those wh^ are able to do it, may have neithe^ the Will nor the
Leisure.

This Priography is in the Galle^y of the French King's Library.
I have little less Aversion for the Impudence of Petrus Candidus December, who
wrote two hundred years agon, the Lives of the Dukes of Milan, and People would
have been well enough satisfied, without knowing why Filippo Visconti caused
the young Gentlemen of Milan to play at Tennis so often in his presence.

The art of the most Infamous Prostitution, ought not to be learnt in (...), no
more than in History, and the Laws of Decency well deserve to be as
scrupulously kept in the one, as in the other. Dangerous thoughts ought not to
be imprinted in Peoples Minds, under the Cant of rendering to them Vice the more
abominable, nor fill 'em with shameful Ideas, when the business is to ammate
them to the pursuit of Glory, by laying before them the most eminent Virtues.

Neither ought it to be suffered in (...), or in History, that in public there
appear things, as would not be heard without a Horror, in a well regulated
Conversation, and if the Ordures that are read in the Old Romances, are not
wanting to produce pernicious effects, though we are forewarned of their
false-hoods, what will not those do, which the memory shall endeavor to
retain, because they are true.

Never was there any Republic, that has given a Right to private Persons, over
another Reputation, and but has punished those who went to disturbed the Dead
in their very Graves. The Morals of the Fathers, and Councils will have us hold
him for an honest Man, who had the repute of so being, at the Moment he ceased
living, when that there is no evident proofs to the contrary; and it is
principally for this last Consideration, that I shall draw the Curtain over the
Amors of Cosmo de Medici with Camilla Martelli, and over those of Duke
Francisco his Son with Bianca Capello. I shall leave the principal
Circumstances of them, in the Memoirs wherein I have seen them, and shall only
thence cull those that have so peculiar a Connection, with the most notable
Events of those two Princes Lives, that for want of having chosen them, neither
Manuce, nor Civi, nor the other Historians are intelligible, in the passages of
their great Volumes which are ferreted with too much Curiosity. But its too
long stopping the Reader at the entrance of this, I must introduce him within
doors, and render him Judge, whether I have put well in practice the
Speculations, wherewith I have been entertaining him.

THE CONTENTS OF THE BOOKS.
The First Book.
THE great Riches of Cosmo de Medici, Surnamed the Old, acquired by Traffic,
rend'ring him suspected to the Florentines, four of the most Illustrious
Families Conspire against him, and got him clapped into Prison. The Design is
laid to Poison him, but he avails himself of the Goalers Irresolution, and of a
Boufoon's Address, by whose means he gains the Gonfalioniere, who nicks his
time, and dexterously sets him again at Liberty. He withdraws to Venice, from
whence he contrives his return to Florence, and causes his Enemies to be
banished. He ends his Life in quiet, and leaves but one Son, called Piero, of
small Sense, but a sequestered Health. The Pitti's Conspire to assassinate him,
and lay their Measures competently well; but he scapes 'em through a Caprice
that happily came into his mind. Their Conspiracy is discovered, they are
banished. The Venetians support them. They invade Tuscany with an Army, but the
design of surprising Pisa being ill concerted, makes them lose the occasion of
entering Florence, and of taking the advantage of Piero de Medici's death,
occasioned by the Gout.

The Contents of the Second Book.
LOrenzo de Medici rallies his Fathers Friends, and restores the Affairs of his
Family. He goes and joins the Florentine Army with fresh Troops, and is present
at the Battle, wherein Fieldpieces are first put in use, and where the
Servants, one both sides with Flambeaus, light their Masters, while a Fighting.
Federigo d'Urbino wins one of Coglione's Quarters. The Republic of Venice
abandons the Pitti's, and the Marquess of Mantoua reconciles them with the
State of Florence, The Volterrans Revolt. Lorenzo de Medici causes the Siege of
the Town to be raised, and pardons them, after having constrained 'em to
surrender at discretion. He demands of the Pope is Cardinals Cap, for his
Brother Giuliano, but is refused. He takes his Revenge, by causing the Army of
the Church to moulder away before Tiferno, and by hindering the Pope's Nephew
from acquiring the Sovereignty of Immola, from whence is framed the Pazzi's
Conspiracy. Giuliano de Medici is therein killed, and Lorenzo escapes. All the
Accomplices are punished, and the Archbishop of Pisa is trussed up at a Window
of the Palace, in his Pontifical Vestments. Bandini only gets into Turkey. But
Sultan Bajazet delivers him to Lorenzo de Medici's Factors.

The Contents of the Third Book.
COmmissioner Nardi concludes a League between the Pope and the King of Naples,
against the Florentines. Lorenzo de Medici sustains the War; but seeing himself
abandoned by his Allies, takes a bold Resolution. He causes the choice of the
young Florentine Nobility to follow him, under the Pretense of a Hunting Match.
Goes aboard a Gally. Bears away directly for Naples. Amazes King Ferrand, by
this Heroic Act of Trust. Breaks all the Measures of Resalli the Ambassador.
By new ways disconcerts the Practices of that Old Minister. Ruins him in the
Kings good Opinion. Enstates himself in his room. Enclines the King to all he
aims at. Makes him break his League with the Pope. Procures Peace to the
Florentines. Causes their Towns to be restored them, and a Treaty of Guaranty
to be signed with them. Two years after, the King of Naples is almost oppressed
by his Nobles Conspiring with the Pope, and the Venetians, who meant to share
his State. Lorenzo de Medici succors him without staying to be desired to
do it. Lends him Money. Debauches the Troops that had overcome him. Causes the
Orsini's to declare for him, and restores him to all Intents. After which, all
his Thoughts tend only to maintain Peace in Italy,

The Contents of the Fourth Book.
THE famous Astrologer Leoni, the Topping Physician of all Italy, comes to
Carrego, to prescribe to Lorenzo de Medici, during his Sickness. Is mistaken as
well in his Predictions, in quality of Astrologer* as in his Prescriptions, in
quality of Physician. The Patient dies through his Fault; and Piero de Medici,
out of rage, throws him into a Well, wherein he is drowned, as was
Prognosticated, by the Calculation of his own Nativity. The Eulogy of the Wits,
that were Friends, or received Gratifications from Lorenzo de Medici Aretin
thinking there to be no other Manuscripts than his, of Procopius his History,
burns it, and has it Printed in his own Name, but his Larceny is discovered.
December prostitutes the Reputation of the Duke of Milan, who sets him to write
his History. The Academicks of Rome take a fancy to travesty their Name in
Greek. The Pope imagines it a cover to a Conspiracy they had contrived against
him. He causes 'em to be secured, and some of 'em put upon the Rack. Platina is
of this number. The Cardinals of the Conclave go to Bessarion's Cell, to make
him Pope. His Conclavist, Perroti, sends 'em away for fear of diverting his
Master from his Studies. They take pet, and choose another. Politianus dies of a
transport of Love. The Prince of Mirandola writes against Astrologers. They
meet, Calculate his Nativity, and send him word, he will dye, as young as he
is, before his Work is finished. Their Prediction is fullfill'd.

The Contents of the Fifth Book.
THE Calamities of the House of Medici proceeded from the same Lodovico Sforza,
who ruined that of Naples, and his own. A curious Recital of Piero de Medici's
Imprudences, that are found mingled with the Artifices of his Enemies. He flies
away from Florence. He is upon the point of being restored by a French
Intrigue, who foster designs of supplanting Cardinal Brissonnet. He is sought
after, but not found. The true Causes of Savonarola's Advancement and Downfall.
The Ursini's labor in vain to re-establish the Medici's, and reveal to them
Valentinois's design of delivering them up to the Florentines. Valentin finding
by whom his Design was detected, kills the Ursini's at the Feast of Senegaglia,
which plunges Piero de Medici into a Despondency. He sides with France, and is
drowned at the Mouth of the Garigliano. His Brother, the Cardinal, withdraws to
Rome, where he sharps it until his Legation. The secret Circumstances of his
taking at the Battle of Ravenna, and of his escape. Soderim's Brother's
Covetousness, gives him occasion to bribe the Officers of the Spanish Army,
which restores him in Florence. He has Machiavel there put to the Rack, then
receives him into favor; but Machiavel broods his Revenge, and not finding the
occasion, procures his own Death, by a Doze unseasonably taken.

The Contents of the Sixth Book.
ERasmus the Astrologer, and Ficino the Philosopher, Prognostic are that Cirdal
Medici should be Pope, though not any appearance of it then. He is carried to
Rome in a Litter, by reason of an Imposthume he had in a place, the Modesty
forbids mentioning. He enters the ^^clave. The Imposthume breaks and exhales
such a stink, that the Old Cardinals fancied, upon the Relation of bribed
Physicians, that he will suddenly dye, and so leave off crossing his Election.
A Dream of his Mother, which he remembers of himself, makes him take the Name
of Leo. He repairs his Cousin Giulio's defect of Birth, and gives him his Cap.
Massimiliano Sforza falls distracted, and puts it into Leo's Head, to make his
Brother Giuliano Duke of Milan; but is deluded by Fregossa, who accomodates
himself with the French, Giuliano dies, young Lorenzo succeeds him, and does
not resemble him. The French pass the Alps. The Pope's afraid, and sends them
an Agent, who falls into the hands of the Spaniards, and makes 'em jealous. The
Pope stops the Progresses of the Conquerours, by his interview with Francis the
First, at Bologna, where he paulmes upon the sincerity of that Prince. He
despoils the Duke of Urbin, who recovers his State. The Pope Debauches that
Duke's principal Officers, he prevents them, and causes their Soldiers to
punish them. Leo, though indebted for the Popedom to Cardinal Petrucci, drives
his House out of Sienna. The Cardinal Conspires against him, is discovered and
strangled in a Dungeon, by an Ethiopian. A strange Conference of Cardinal
Cornetan with a Magician, who tells him nothing but the Truth, and yet deludes
him. The Sacred College is animated against the Pope, who, out of spite,
creates one and thirty Cardinals in one day; but the greatest Enemy of his
House happens to be of the number. He frames a League against the French, and,
beyond all hopes, drives them out of Italy; but in the very moment he receives
the Tidings, Malespina poisons him with Pills* The Rats eat off his Nose the
Night following, by having but one Servant left with him, who falls asleep.

The Contents of the Seventh Book.
EVlogies of the Wits that were honored with Leo's Friendship, or received
Gratuities from him. Which is the best writ History we have, since those of the
Ancients. The Astrologer Tibertus foresees his own Death, and the most
extraordinary manner, by which it was to happen, without its being in his Power
to avoid it. Cocles, of the same Profession, has the same Destiny, and yet not
mistaken in any of the Nativities he had Calculated of his Friends, no, not
even in those that were to happen after his Death. Young Strozza ventures to
Marry a Miss, kept by the Duke of Ferrara. His Master has him Assassinated.
Crimittus dies of a Shivering, occasioned by a Pail of Water thrown upon him by
one of his Scholars, out of mere jest. Cardinal Bibiana, being above thirty
years older than the Pope, takes measures with Francis the First at Paris, to
procure his being Elected Pope, at the first Conclave at Rome. The Pope is
informed of the Design, stays him to Dinner, and presents him with a Bit.
Bibiana fancies it to be poisoned, and yet dares not dispense himself from
swallowing it. He returns home, and takes a Counter-poison, which does not
hind^ him from breathing his last three hours after. Pompone Gauric vanishes in
his traveling along the Po, and is never more heard of, through the Revenge of a
Lady, to whom he had presented a Declaration of Love in Verse. Count Baltazar
Castiglione, in his Practice, contradicts the Rules he had laid down for a
perfect Courtier. He is assured that he will dye at Mantoua. He carefully
avoids going thither* but accepts of the Embassy of Spain, not dreaming that
Madrid is called Mantoua in Latin. There he dies.

THE SECRET HISTORY OF THE HOUSE OF MEDICIS.
IT is a surprising thing, that none of the Authors who have written the
History of Florence, have kept themselves within the bounds of Moderation, when
they speak of the House of Medicis, before it was raised to the Sovereignty.
Those whom either Jealousy or ^ll-will have animated against that Family, ^ave
endeavored to give it an Original so ^ow, and little answearable to its
present Greatness, that it were more advantageous not to be known at all, than
after such a manner. Others thought flattery justifiable, in a Subject, which
those that wrote before them had handled so Satyrically, and have represented
the Condition of Old Cosmo de Medici his Ancestors so far above his fellow
Citizens, that we should hardly believe they had ever lived as Private Men, if
we were not informed so from other Hands.

Some there were, toward the middle of the last Age, who to make their Court
the better with Katharine of Medicis, would have persuaded her she was of
French Extraction both by Father and Mother, and that not above three hundred
years before, one Julian of Medicis went out of Poictou into Tuscany, with a
Troop of Horse, which he carried into the Service of the Commonwealth of
Florence.

For my own part, as I have no other design, than to collect those Truths which
other Histories have either purposely, or (...) of Ignorance omitted, I cannot
choose but say, that the House of Medicis has always been accounted Noble, since
Florence purchased its freedom of the Emperor Rodolphus the First; of which
their Profession of Merchandise, wherewith they are reproached is a Proof,
since all the Florentine Historians agree, that almost all the Gentlemen of
their Country were engaged in Commerce, and that the most considerable Families
had Factors in the best Towns of Europe.

It was by these means that Cosmo de Medici, sirnam'd the Old, came to be much
richer than any Prince in Italy of his time: for though some suppose that the
famous Balthazar Cossa, who was deposed from the Popedom, discovered to him at
his Death where he had hid his Treasure; this good luck might perhaps lay the
Foundation of his Fortune, but did not raise it to that height, to which it
arrived ten years after, when there was no part of the World, from Persia to
Andaluzia, that was not subservient to his Traffic.

The difference of Religions hindered him not from treating with Infidels; and
the constant correspondence he kept with the Turkish Emperors then regnant,
caused those Princes to let his Factors settle themselves in the room of those
of Genoa, and Venice, whom for Reasons of State they expelled out of the most
trading places of Thrace, and the lesser Asia. The Emirs of Babylon, and the
Mamalukes of Egypt facilitated his Transportation of the Silks and most
precious Commodities of the Mogols Country, and he made so good a hand of the
needy Condition to which the Paleologi, Emperors of Constantinople, were
reduced, that they sold him the best part of the Jewels, and splendid
Furniture, the remainders of the Luxury of the Justinians, and Porphyrogeniti,
at very low rates. In a word, he arrived at that Wealth, and Power, that his
Contrymen, though used to the same immoderate gain, grew Jealous of his
Greatness.

The Government of Florence at that time was Popular in appearance; but so
tempered, that the Ancient Families, which were the Strozzi, Peruzzi,
Barbadori, and Albizzi, bore the principal sway. They were not indeed very well
united among themselves, but yet agreed in their obedience to him that was
eldest among them, and performed his Commands with as much Zeal as if he had
been their Sovereign. Hence it came, that their Head found it so easy to
engage them in the ruin of Cosmo de Medici. After they had resolved themselves
to destroy him, they assembled the People on the sudden, and told them, Cosmo
was the sole author of the misery to which the Republic of Florence was then
brought; that it was he who kept Men at work at Lions, and Antwerp, upon those
Manufactures which France, Spain, and England were wont to send for out of
Tuscany, and who by consequence, under pretense of selling better pennyworths,
took the Bread out of his fellow Citizens Mouths, to enrich Strangers; that
there was not a Merchant in Florence, let his credit be never so good, whom he
did not ruin, by advancing of prodigious Sums beforehand to those that had
occasion, and by his crafty buying up of the finest Silks, and best Spices upon
the place, and Transporting them at less charge, which made him more
considerably a gainer, though he sold at cheaper rates; his Factors affording
their Goods for less by one Third then others, which brought them in so much
Custom, that all other Warehouses besides their own were shut up.

There needed no more then thus to touch upon the Peoples weak side, who were
extraordinary covetous, to stir them up against Cosmo de Medici; he was
presently ordered to be arrested, and clapped up in Prison, where he was
carefully guarded to prevent his escape. His Enemies stopped here, because they
had not at first plotted to do him any further mischief, imagining, that by
keeping him from acting, they should sufficiently interrupt his Commerce, and
establish their own. But when they considered, that no Euripus was more subject
to ebb and flow than the inconstant humor of the Florentines, who never
continued a week in the same mind, nor were likely to do otherwise now, and
that in all events, their chie^ Magistrate, whom they call Gonfalonier,
changing every two Months, it might very well come to pass, that the Peoples
Votes might fall upon some Friend of Cosmus, who would be sure to set him at
Liberty. Upon these and the like reflections, the Prisoners Death was resolved
on, and the fittest means to effect it long sought for.

Some of the Assembly proposed to try him before the People; and undertook to
find out Crimes, and Witnesses sufficient to take away his Life. But others,
who were more numerous, thought that way of Proceeding would be too tedious;
and that while they were about it, some Disturbance or other would infallibly
happen in the Town, which would be a Means to let him out of Prison. They
resolved therefore to dispatch him as soon as possible; and because Poison was
the secretest Means, that was approved of. In order to this, Rodolp Peruzzi,
the Head of that Family, and the most Considerable of Cosmus his Enemies, was
employed to visit and tamper with Frederig^ Malavolti, the Keeper of the
Public Prisons, and to engage him not to let Cosm^ have any Meat brought him,
but what they should send him. Malavolti, in plain terms, was a Man
indifferent, neither Good not Bad; and being neither Cosmus his Friend, nor his
Enemy, seemed not to decline an Opportunity of making his Fortune, provided it
might be so contrived, that he might have more Profit to hope for, than Danger
to fear. Perruzzi sounded him a good while before he opened the Business, which
he thought not fit to do, till he saw him disposed to receive it calmly. But in
doing this, he committed a Fault, which Novious in such Intrigues are very
subject to; he spoiled the Business, by betraying too much eagerness to have it
succeed. He offered Malavolti so considerable a Sum of Money at first dash,
that, though it were not extravagant in respect of the vast Riches of Cosmo's
Enemies, yet it easily suggested to him whom it was offered to, that what they
asked of him was of mighty importance, since they were so very liberal to
obtain it. Upon these grounds he answered Perruzzi in such Terms, as though
they were something doubtful, yet made him guess, if he were not gained the
first time, the second or third Onset at most would make sure of him. Perruzzi
satisfied to have advanced so far, gave the rest of the Conspirators an account
of what he had done. But while they were thus preparing the Money and the
Poison, Cosmus himself was strangely disturbed in his Thoughts. He was of a
penetrating Wit, as usually all the Florentine are; and the perfect knowledge
he had o^ the Genius and Temper of his Enemies, made him quickly apprehend they
would practice upon his Life the very same way on which they had pitched. Upon
this Supposition he had not eaten one bit of what had been dressed for him in
four days; which long Abstinence so weakened him, who was other wise of a good
strong Constitution, that Malavolti, who visited him from time to time was
afraid he would starve himself, and so make him lose the Money which was
offered him. To prevent this, he went into Cosmo's Chamber, whither he caused
his Supper to be brought, tasted the Meat before him and with a cheerful
Countenance invited him to take part. After they had eaten, they had some
Discourse, in which Cosmo failed not to insinuate to his Host, That though his
Enemies were possessed of his Estate, yet he had Treasure still concealed in
Florence, enough to enrich any man who durst set him at liberty These Words
made so much the more Impression on Malavolti, because he was not ignorant of
the common Report, That his Prisoner, for fear of appearing too rich in (...)
Popular Government, had not yet taken al^ the ready Money out of the Ground,
which Balthazar Cossa discovered to him at his death. And as weak Minds are
always persuaded by those who set upon them last, Malavolti was easily
convinced, there was more to be got by Cosmo of Medici, than by Perruzzi, For
this Reason he made it his Business now to cheer up his Prisoner; and Cosmo, in
Complement to him, told him, he could the rather wish to be rid of his
Melancholy, that he might likewise contribute something of his side to their
Entertainment. Malavolti replied, he would soon cure him if he pleased, by
bringing Farganaccio to dine with him next day, whose Company was so diverting,
that it was impossible to be weary of it. This Farganaccio was a Fellow of very
mean Birth, but the pleasantness of his Conversation had gained him a
Familiarity with the best Citizens of Florence. He always made one in Designs
of Mirth and Pleasure; and though he was of an Humor in some things passionate
enough, yet he was for the most part so supple and complaisant; that he never
made any Quarrel. He mimickt all sorts of People admirably well; and his
Raillery, which he made use of upon all Occasions, never carried him so far as
to speak ill of any body. However, this Talent did not gain him that Esteem
with People of Quality which he seemed to deserve, because he was quite another
Man when he kept company with those of his own Rank: for then (...) gave
himself all manner of Liberty, and would be drunk with them several days
together; which rendered him contemptible to the Best of the Citizens, those
especially who had Power in the Election of Magistrates, in whose opinion he
passed for a Buffoon, that without great indiscretion was not to be trusted
with any thing of Moment. Cosmus of Medicis, who knew him better, thought
otherwise of him, distinguishing him from those Gluttonous Bruits, who are so
merely to gratify their Appetite, whereas he only indulged himself sometimes,
to banish troublesome and afflicting thoughts; and as such, looked upon him not
unfit to be employed in so hazardous an Affair; and therefore told Malavolti,
he should be glad to be diverted by him next day at noon. Fargenaccio came, and
was as facetious as what he could invent, or had learnt of that kind, could
make him: Cosmo seemed not to be at all moved with it at first, but by degrees
gave way, and was so taken with him at last, that Malavolti before he went his
ways immediately after Dinner, to dispatch away some Letters in his Closet, and
not judging it Civility to leave his Prisoner so soon alone, told him, that he
begged his Pardon, because he was going to leave him for a quarter of an hour,
but that in recom^ense, he left him with Farganaccio, whose ^y and jocund
humor would afford him a much better entertainment. This wholly jumping with
Cosmo's desires, he thanked him for his Courtesy, and as soon as he was gone,
accosting Farganaccio, he caressed him, and let him know, that it was in his
power to be his Deliverer, and assured him, that he should want neither Money
nor Jewels, if he would undertake a Work both so just and glorious.

Farganaccio would at first have complimented off the Business, waving it with
excuses of its not lying in his power, but Cosmo de Medici let him see, that he
knew him much better than he imagined. He discoursed him upon the secret
Alliance he long had had with Bernardo Guadagni, who was at that time Grand
Gonfaloniere, that is to say, the Sovereign Magistrate of Florence. He added,
that as Guadagni had already been a Month elected, and that by Consequence he
had but one Month more to be in his Office, there was no time to be lost for
the saving an honest Man; that his Innocence was so obvious, that his very
Enemies were persuaded of it, and that all his pretended Crimes were summed up
in his having by lawful means rendered himself the richest Subject in Italy.

Afterward he fell to exaggerating the malice of those who designed his Ruin,
h^ ran over the means they had of bringing (...) to pass, and without affording
Farganaccio the leisure of making any answer, he concluded his Discourse with
slipping into his Hand half a Ring, in order to his carrying (...) to the Prior
of the Jacobins, who would no sooner see it, but he would give him a hundred
Crowns of Gold, which he besought him to accept for the first Present; and a
thousand others, which he desired him to present to Guadagni on his behalf.

I cannot say which most pleased Farganaccio, the Liberality of Cosmo de
Mediet, or the extreme confidence he put in him; but this I know, that either
the one or other of those two Qualities staggered him so much, that he had
alread pouched the half Ring and swore secrecy and fidelity to his new
Benefactor, when that Malavolti came in to 'em again, and obliged them by his
presence to behave 'emselves after a less serious manner.

They stayed not long together, and Farganaccio took his leave of 'em as soon
as he could, under color of a meeting he had appointed for the Evening, but in
effect, to return unto his own House, and there concert what he had to do. He
examined all the Motives capable of tying him to keep or di^^^t him from his
Word with Cosmo; But (...) sin^, the hopes of becoming Rich, made him, fully
resolve upon sticking to his Promise. The next Morning at break of Day ^e went
to the Monastery of the Jacobins, where he saw the Prior, and leading him
in^ensibly into a by place, he showed him the half Ring, and instantly received
the Sum that had been promised him, and that which was to be presented to
Guadagni.

Then he marched directly to the Gonfaloni^re's Palace, and tho the Porter let
him know his Lord was still asleep, yet he went into his Chamber, a long
familiarity having acquired him that Privilege. He waited till Guadagni was
awake, and the first thing he did after having Goodmorrow'd him, was telling
over before his Face the Charming Crowns of Gold which he brought. Guadagni
surpised at this novelty, asked him, who had made him so Rich; and Farganaccio
reparteed, that he was only his Treasurer. And thereupon, putting on his
Gravity, he told the Gonfaloniere his Days before adventure, without the least
Disguise. He was allowed a more favorable hearing than he expected: For though
Guadagni was none of Cosmo's Friends, yet neither was he his Enemy, and as he
had never had any difference with him, he waved entering into the League that
^^formed for his Ruin.

This Consideration joined to the Iust^^ces of Farganaccio, and the glory of
fre^^ out of danger an innocent Person of Cosmo de Medici's Merit, who was
capable of acknowledging most magnificently the Services th^^ were done him,
made him accept the thousand Crowns, and engaged him by consequence to set all
Hands at work for his Deliverance He wisely foresaw, that in case he gave (...)
least time to the Prisoner's Adversaries, the^ would press Malavolti to poison
him; a^^ that if Malavolti persisted to fence off the Undertaking, they had
sufficient Credit (...) Florence to raise a dangerous Sedition, by engaging all
the Mobile of their Dependency (...) take Arms, and by leading 'em directly
(...) the Prisons; which it would be easy for the^^ to force, and there
massacre Cosmo, aft^^ the Magistrate could use any Prevention Wherefore this
Stroke was to be parry (...) off by a subtle Counter-stratagem. He pretended
to lend an Ear to those that sollicted him to declare himself against Cosmo de
Medici, and persuaded 'em so cunningly th^^ he was as keen as they upon this
Prisoner that they fancied, they had drawn him in^^ their Enterprise.

Of this an Account was given in their Assembly, where Malavolti's I
resolutions ^eing balanced with the new Face the As^^^ took, by Guadagni's
pretended Declaration, they changed the Resolution of poy^^ning Cosmo, and
renewed that which had been rejected, of ruining him by Form of Law. Guadagni
desiring nothing more than the having reduced them to this Point, took upon him
to favor 'em in all that should depend on the Magistracy. The Enditement was
drawn up by the Subalternate Judges, and carried afterward to the Council of
Eight, where Matters of State are examined. Cosmo de Medici was there accused
of having plotted against the Liberty of his Country; long Hearings were given
to the Delatores and Evidences: the Witnesses deposed, and were confronted; and
in few days the Affair was in that posture, as cast Cosmo into a strange
uncertainty of his Life, notwithstanding that his Conscience reproached him not
in the least, and from time to time he received from Farganaccio secret Advices
of his having nothing to fear. Guadagni hast'ned the Proceedings as much as
possibly he could, and Cosmo de Medici his Enemies contributed thereunto with
all their might, as being prepossessed with an Opinion, that it was their
Interest so to do. Nevertheless, in this they were deluded, and Guadagni the
more cleaverly bubbl'd their Credulity: for having adjusted his ^^^rigues in
the Council of Eight, and secu^^^ a number of Suffrages sufficient to examp^^
the Defendent from Death, he caused the Process to be summed up two days sooner
than was expected by the Enemies of Cosmo and he himself pronounced a Sentence
which deserves the being warily examined seeing it has no Circumstances but what
are very Curious.

He had judiciously foreseen; that in ca^^ the Prisoner was absolved, he would
be almost in as great danger as if he had been condemned to Death, because his
Enemies were daily making Parties to assassinate him; and this was the Reason
which hindered him from declaring him Innocent. Neither was he ignorant, that it
was the making him run the same hazard, to impose upon him any other sort of
Punishment than that of Exile, by reason of the Power of his Adversaries
throughout all the Territory of Florence. and this it was that brass'd him for
Banishment. He was convinced that if he waited for the Day appointed for the
Sentence; Cosmo's Enemies would appear there with an Equipage capable of doing
Violence to the Magistrates, and so have executed with their own Hands what
should have been wanting to the Rigor of the Sentence; and this made him
anticipate it. In fine, He knew, that at least without going himself, with all
the Officers of Justice, to free Cosmo de Medici out of Prison, and conduct him
to the very Territories of another Sovereign, those who aimed at his Life would
be soon enough on Horseback to snap or kid-nap him upon the Ways; and this made
him put that express Clause in the Sentence, under pretext that Cosmo de Medici
his Friends were sufficiently powe^ful to rescue him from the Rigor of
Justice. Thus he Ordained, That Cosmo should be forthwith banished for ever
from the City and State of Florence; and that the Magistrate should go
incessantly and fetch him out of Prison, and conduct him till the full
Execution of the Sentence.

This was accordingly executed with that Dispatch, as startled the most
vigilant of Cosmo his Friends, and his very Enemies too. The Prisoner knew
nothing of the Sentence, but by the signification that was made to him thereof,
though he had scouting abroad a great number of trusty Spies; and the Keeper
Malavolti, was much amazed to see he was robbed of his Prisoner, and deprived
at the same time of all the advantages he might have reaped from a longer
Custody. But Cosmo de Medici, his Enemies fell into an extreme Consternation,
when they learnt all at a clap, that he had been tried, put out of Prison, and
conducted to the Frontiers.

This News breaking all their Measures, made such an operation in their Minds,
as was extremely propitious to their Enemy: For they left off pursuing him
until they had anew consulted among themselves in what manner to prosecute
their aims; and this little Truce gave Cosmo de Medici timeto draw from
Florence, and the Parts adjacent, the better part of the Effects he had there
lying concealed.

All their fury was bent against Guadagni, and his Posterity still smarts at
this day, for the Losses they made him suffer, though Caterina de Medici, being
become Queen o^ France, transplanted it into that Kingdom, and it lately
Commanded the Armie^ of the French Monarch in Africa. They ruined his Commerce,
they discredite^ him among Strangers, and with the very same People that adored
him before, they so perplexed his Magistracy, that it was more burdensome to him
than useful, and their rag^ proceeded so far, as to endeavor the exciting a
Sedition, in order to the depos^^ him before the expiration of the time
appointed for his remaining Gonfaloniere. But (...) the thought of this only
whirled the youngest Heads among the Faction, it w^^^ not approved by the old
Blades, and they left Guadagni to finish out the Month ordained by the Laws.

However for all this, he came not off at a cheaper rate; for no sooner was he
re-entred into a private Condition, than that he fell under the Prosecution of
the Law. He was summoned to give a severe account of his Administration; his
most innocent Actions were rendered Criminal, and he compelled to undergo the
same Punishment he had imposed on Cosmo de Medici. Some probability there is,
that they would have pusht on farther their Attacks, if those who demanded his
Life, had not found two invincible Obstacles to their Design; the one from the
Relations Guadagni had on his side, who upheld him too powerfully with the new
Gonfaloniere, and the other from the Nobility, who did not consent but with
regret to the Exile of their ancient Magistrate, and declared openly, that if
any thing more was expected from them, they would take up Arms, and disunite
themselves from the Commons. Guadagni being expelled his Country, retired to
Cosmo de Medici at Venice, where they both jointly endeavored to procure their
Re establishment. This was not so difficult a matter for ^^her of them to
compass in a juncture, when their Interests were joined, as if they had been
separated, because the mutual Friends they had at Florence, having had the
leisure to know, and put an entire Confidence in each other, took more fitting
measures for that purpose, and caused Letters in Cipher to be delivered, ever
and anon to the Exiles, by which they gave 'em to understand, that they needed
only prescribe to them the Method that was to be followed in the pursuit of
their Repeal.

Guadagni, Whose humor was more sincere, but more impatient too than that of
Cosmo de Medici, would have had it gone about immediately, and that by the
wonted ways. But Cosmo de Medici, who better understood the Genius of the
Florentines, to be brought over, and the obstinacy of the Persons that made
Head against 'em, wa^ of Opinion to take a much longer Circuit. He proposed
that his Friends shou'^ assemble with those of Guadagni, that they should pitch
upon the Person of 'em all mos^ proper to manage the Affair in hand, an^
adjust their Intrigues for the choosing a Gonfaloniere, and then start and fall
to urgin^ he Repeal. This Expedient was at leng^^ judged the most healing by
Guadagni himself, who gave way, and writ in Consequence to those of his
Faction. They appointed the Rendezvous to Cosmo de Medici his Friends in the
Monastery de la Reparata. They agreed upon the necessity of procuring a Supreme
Magistrate to be chosen that was of their own Body. They Examined in order the
fittest Persons for that Dignity, and concluded at last upon the Person of
Nicolo Cocco, a Friend of Guadagni's. They Cabal'd for the Suffrages the two
ensuing Months in his favor; and as he was equally beloved by the Nobility and
the People, they found no great trouble in obtaining them. Not but that Cosmo
de Medici his Enemies did oppose the Election, when he was put into Nomination;
but they perceived it so late, that they had not the leisure either to Concert
among themselves, or put in practice the Artifices necessary to elude it.

Thus was Cocco Elected Gonfaloniere, and did not frustrate the hopes which the
Exiles had conceived of his Fidelity. By little and little, he accustomed the
Florentines to hear them named in Public Assemblies, and in good part to hear
them mentioned. Then fell he to offer things in their justification, and
succeeded immediately in what regarded the Person of Guadagni: For as
Farganaccio had acted his part so cunningly, (...) that the World had not had
the least suspicion of his Intrigue, those very Persons who had most
contributed to Guadagni's Banishment, did not reckon him culpable of ought
else, than the being hurried o^ by an excess of Zeal to free out of Prison a
Man he thought Innocent; besides that, they were persuaded, that by slackning
in the Person of Guadagni, they should be the less suspected of Envy and
Partiality, when they should come to struggle against the Repeal of Cosmo de
Medici, which was to them of much other Importance.

But an accident they had not foreseen, surprised in this point the Delicacy of
their Reasoning: For in a short time after Guadagni's return to Florence, Cosmo
de Medici, who tried all possible ways for his being recalled, bethought
himself to settle at Venice the Center and Staple of his Commerce, and there
have the Manufactures wrought, which were before so done by hi^ Orders in the
City and Territory of Florence. From hence ensued two notable Inconveniences to
the Florentines; the one that as there are Connexions and Dependancies in point
of Traffic, which are only well known by those that meddle tha^ way, the
Commerce of Cosmo de Medici coming to change its Principal Place, made a
Cessation to that of the Principal Merchants of Florence, or at least weakened
it in such manner, that these public Complaints were daily heard to ring, Que
Person ne gaignoit plus rien, That Trading's now quite Dead. The other
Inconvenience was, that the common People losing the certain occasion of daily
getting Money by working the Manufactory, and not finding any body that
employed 'em in other Works, there was all of a sudden such a strange
Revolution made in Peoples Minds, that the recalling of Cosmo de Medici was
wished for by all the Corporations which composed the Republic, with so much
eagerness, that his Enemies durst not traverse it any longer.

Thus Cocco had naught else to do, than to put this Repeal into Deliberation,
and cast up the Suffrages of those who were to ordain it. Cosmo de Medici
thanked the Senate of Venice for the Protection they had afforded him, and
returned to Florence with Acclamations that already distinguished him from
private Persons. He received Visits from all the Orders, and honest Malavolti
failed not to crowd in with those who went to Congratulate his Return. Cosmo
received him with very particular Caresses, and Malavolti, whether he expected
some reward, or out of an itch usual in Old Men, he would derive a vanity from
what he had waved doing, he chanced to bolt out to Cosmo de Medici, that he was
more obliged to him than he imagined. Cosmo not understanding the ambiguous
sense of these Words; answered him very civilly, that he was sensible he had
favored him with all imaginable Obligations,; and Malavolti replied with some
emotion, but you do not think you are indebted to me for your Life. Cosmo then
perceived that Malavolti had a grudging to inform him of a thing to which he
was till then a stranger, but as he was no^ in a place fitting to receive an
Illustration of this nature, he pretended not to have smelt out any thing new,
and rested satisfied with telling Malavolti, that he knew himself eternally his
Debtor. Then he turned to other Persons of Quality, who came to Complement him
on the occasion and there the Conversation fell. But as soon as Cosmo de Medici
had got rid of his Visits, he went to pay a private one to Malavolti, when
putting him again on the Discourse, which he said they had been constrained to
interrupt, by reason of there being too many Witnesses, he put him so many
Questions, and led him through so many turnings and mazes of pumping, that the
honest Man, after having spent all his put offs and shiftings, was at length
reduced to confess, that Perruzzi had been several times to solicit him, and
had offered him a considerable sum to dispose him not to give his Prisoner any
other Food than what he should cause to be prepared for him. Upon this
Information Cosmo de Medici made his Addresses and Complaints to the
Gonfaloniere, upon which an Order was issued out for the taking Perruzzi into
Custody.

The Barrigel of Florence seized the Person of Perruzzi, who out-fac'd the
Examination, but not his Confrontation with Malavolti. He owned the Fact, and
then seeing they were going to put him upon the Rack, he discovered all the
secret of the Conspiracy against Cosmo de Medici. Nicolo Albizzi, and Palla
Strozzi, were taken up upon his Deposition, being the Heads of three
Illustrious Families of the same Name. The Council of Eight tried the Cause,
and it was past all Question, that the Suffrages of the Judges were leaning to
Death, when that Cosmo de Medici making a serious Reflection upon his own
Interests, resolved and perceived, that if he persever'd to have the Death of
so many Persons of Quality, he should incur an immortal hatred, and would make
so many his Enemies, that it would be impossible for him to live at Florence
t^ence-forward without Guards, which could not be granted him in a Republic
without Magistracy, which however he had proposed to himself never to accept:
Whereas if he contented himself with causing 'em to be punished in a perpetual
Banishment, on the one side he delivered himself from the only Persons from
whom he need to fear a second staggering of his Fortune, and on the other, he
did not push any o^ his Enemies into despair. On the contrary, he reconciled
himself with those wh^ had Souls so Noble, as to be touched wi^^ an Heroic Act
of Gallantry.

This it was which made him take ne^ measures with his Friends, and solicit
for those whose Ruin he had vowed. The Judge^ willingly acquiesced in the
Request he mad^ 'em, there being very little of any other bodies Interests than
his own in this Affair* and besides, they did not without Reluctance go about
to make so great an Example in a Popular State. Thus the Criminals came off
with a perpetual Exil^ after they had been made sensible they would not have
been treated with so much Clemency, if they had not found in the Heart of him
they had offended Sentments contrary to the severity of the Laws.

Cosmo de Medici having rid himself of his inemies under so plausible a
Pretext, had hardly ought else to do, than to reap the fruit which his Fortune
had produced him. All those who pretended to the Magistracy were not satisfied
with Courting his friendship, they affected such a Dependancy on his Will, that
there was now nothing done of moment without having consulted Cosmo. The House
he caused to be built, not very Stately indeed, but very Spacious and
Convenient, was the secret Place where the Resolutions were brooded, that were
afterward to be hatched in the Council of Eight; and here it was that they
concluded to humble the Pride of the Pistoians, who had made an Insurrection,
with a general Destruction of their Houses, and they examined a way to reduce
by mildness the Pisans, who afterward fell into the same fault, that they
might baulk the Neighboring Potentates of a Pretext to intervene and meddle in
those Matters.

Yet this was done with so little Noise and Pomp, that the People of Florence,
though extraordinany Jealous of their Freedom, did not conceive any Umbrage upon
these Motions, because that Cosmo de Medici was become more circumspect by his
own Experience, and lived after a manner as was in nothing different from that
of mean Citizens. He had openly declared that he would not aspire to any
Magistracy, nor would he accept any in case it was offered him and he held so
firm upon this Article, that after having himself quasht diverse Cabals in his
Favor, he obtained the^^ should be no more talk of him in Elections. However
he failed not to appear an^ act efficaciously in Public Assemblies, b^^ it was
ever after a disinteressed manner i^ appearance, and only to support Merit when
it was known, or for the man^festing it when it was not. Otherwise (...) was
seen to walk alone, and on foot in the Streets. His Clothes were plain, and
(...) modest his Table, that there were no other Provisions spent than what his
Country House of Mugello furnished. He had not on useless Domestic, or what
served for State and Ornament; each had his sever^ Employment, and meddled not
with wha^ others did.

It did not appear that Cosmo de Medic^ had any other Application than
Merchandise, and as he had admirable success, a^ he was still introducing some
Flore^^ine by turns into the Society of his Trade and Gain, the more he got,
the more was he blessed in the Town; so far were they from entertaining any
jealousy on that account, though his Gains were great and frequent: For he
perhaps was the only man to whom all those who have trade with him have given
this Testimony, that in so long a Life as was his, and during fifty four years
of continual traffic and sorts of things, in all the noted Marts of the known
World, he had ever had the happiness of never suffering any loss, and of never
losing any opportunity of gaining.

Not but that he expended much, and even more than was suitable to a private
Person in the Alms he distributed, and in the Edifices of Piety which he caused
to be built: But the People, as I have already observed, were so prepossessed
with the thought that it was only with the Money of Balthazar Cossa, and for
the Executing the secret Orders which that degraded Pope had left him, that
what matter though they saw him found Hospitals, re-establish Monasteries
desolated by the Faction of the Guelphs, and build new ones, they commended
Cosmo de Medici his Piety, and did not penetrate farther into the bottom of his
heart. He lived at this rate unto an extreme old Age, without suffering any
inconveniences, and dyed in the Arms of his Friends. He was enterred (...) the
Church of St. Lorenzo which he him self had built, where the Public erecte^
him a kind of Mausoleum, in the Frontispie^ of which there was written in
Latin, Cosmus Medicis situs est decreto publico Pater P^triae. By order of the
Commonwealth, here lie Cosmo de Medici, surnamed the Father of (...) Country.

He left a Son called Piero, who h^^ but one of his Father's good qualities,
namely that of husbanding his Estate. He had neither the Will to acquire any,
nor a Soul ^^pable of Public Affairs. It was too much wound up in it self, and
in his Domestic^ Matters, as if Nature had given it no vast^ Extent. Not that
any thing had been neglected as might serve to enlarge it, an^ make it take a
much higher flight: For the famous Poggio having charged himself with his
Education, had given him the Precep^^ of the Greek and Latin Tongue, he had
endeavored to render him a Philosopher, b^^ seeing his understanding was not
capable (...) serious matters, he humbled the Majesty of his style, even to the
Composin^ Books of Stories at leisure hours.

He did not stick to mingle therein, an infinite number of unbeseeming
circumstanc^ as knowing very well this to be the last ^^cret for the
dissipating the numness and stu^^^action of his Scholar. Nevertheless Pie^^ de
Medici continued still in his Primitive ^^lness. He had only comprehended
things of his own reach, and though he wanted neither Curiosity nor Application
to the most subsume, he never could attain 'em. In a word, he seemed only to be
born for the renewing in his time and Commonwealth the example of old Cato's
Son, whom the Romans made use of, to show the great difference there was
commonly between Great Men and the Children they left behind 'em. And indeed
Piero de Medici not only wanted the Virtues of his Father, but besides he had
neither his Father's good Mien nor vigorof Body. The Gout which had begun to
torment him at fifteen years of age, had almost robbed him of the use of hands
and feet, and reduced him to budge no otherwise from home, than by being
carried in a Litter to Mugello.

His Father had plainly foreseen that these natural infirmities would undermine
all the Foundations of the greatness of his Family, and fell about remedying
them by all the ways his Policy could suggest: For at home he had acquired
Friends in all the Orders of the Republic, and had engaged those Friends to
maintain him by an intercourse of Interests, which could neither be more close
or more necessary. He had Culled out some among 'em to serve him for Counsel,
and others he appointed for the Execution of what should be undertaken most
nice or bold, according to the Diversity of their Genius and Profession. Abroad
he had made alliance with two of the greatest Potentates that were then in
Italy, namely Ferrand of Arragon, King of Naples, and Galeazzo Sforza Duke of
Milan. And as it was certain, that Italy in general had nothing to fear, as
long as those two Princes should act in unanimity and Conjunction, it was no
less indubitable, that the State of Florence in particular would not suffer any
alteration, as long as they wou^^ maintain by their Authority the Government
that was there established.

Yet notwithstanding all these Precautions Cosmo de Medici had no sooner his
Eyes closed but there arose in Florence against his So a Faction more
formidable without Comparison, than had been that of Petruzzi. It (...) not
well known who began it, but the Pi^^ti's were one of the most Illustrious
House of Florence, and the most knowing kne^ not of any more Ancient; they only
yi^^ded in Riches to that of Medici, and (...) jealousy they had of it,
proceeded from th^^ bating that sort of Goods which Chance, Industry, or
Wariness bring, they exceeded it in all those which come fro^m Birth and
Virtue. They were three Brothers, and seven Cousin-Germans of the same Name,
who had all mingled the Profession of Arms with the Study of Polite Learning:
And as the Works in Verse and Prose, which still remain of their Composure, are
authentic Proofs of the Beauty of their Genii; the History of the Civil War,
that ruffl'd the Kingdom of Naples under Ferrand the Old, gives so advantageous
an Account of their Valor, that there is no room for wonder, that they could
not without some uneasiness endure to see preferred before 'em in the
Administration of Public Affairs, such a Man as Piero de Medici, whose Father
perk'd up only out of the Order of bare Gentlemen, that was almost the only
one of his Name, and who had not for his own part neither a Wit strong enough
to give Counsels to the Republic, nor Feet in a condition to go where the
Service of his Country might call him, nor Arms ^^gorous enough to defend it
against its Ene^ies.

This was what made the Pitti's proceed ^^om the Aversion of the Medici, and
the Contempt of Piero's Person, to the Des gn (...) dispatching him cut of the
World. It was impossible to bring this about by any other way than that of
Assassination; and the Measures to that purpose were nicked for the time he
should return from his Country House, whither he had caused himself to be
carried, for the enjoying the Delights of the Fair Season, whose use was not
obstructed by his Infirmities. His House at Florence was situated at the bottom
of the Town near a Gate, which was seized on by the Conspirators, there to do
the Feat. Afterward they were to have put Piero de Medici's Hea^upon the top of
a Pike, to carry it along the Streets, and cry Liberty; to assemble those of
their Faction, and lead 'em directly to the Townhouse, convening the People,
and causing the Magistrates to be deposed, and others put in their room, wh^
should banish all those of the House of Medici that were suspected by them, and
would give them the Confiscation of the Riche^ they had scraped together.

Spies were sent to scout abroad, to discover the Hour and Day of Piero de
Medici Return; and to a Minute was it known The Ruffians took their Post, and
Piero who was in a Litter, followed only by tw^ of his Servants, was going to
stumble into their Hands, when out of a mere Whim, (...) secret Foreknowledge
of the Danger the threatened him, the fancy took him, before he went to his own
Home, to call in at the House of a Friend of his, Lanti by ^ame, who dwelt just
at the Top, that is, ^t the other end of the City, without other Design however
than to surprise him with an unexpected Visit, and with him chat away some
Hours. Wherefore, thither he went, and found Lanti, who would needs make him
stay and sup with him, and sent him away so well accompanied, because it was
Night, that there was now no means of acting any Insult upon him.

The Assassinates, who expected him out of the Gates of the Town, near his own
House, under color of Breathing and Exercising their Horses, seeing the Night
come, bandon'd their Posts, and returned into the City, slipping under the
Avenues of Piero de Medici's House: But as there were several, and that by
consequence they must divide themselves to keep 'em, Piero de Medici returning
home, found only three or four Armed Men, that knew him well enough, but let
him pass without saying any thing to him, because they saw him in too good a
Posture to be attacked. They took their Companions from their several Stations
of ^entinel, and withdrew to the Rendezvous, there it was resolved, that they
should instantly return into Romagna, from whence the Pitti's had sent for 'em,
except one of their Company, whom they left at Florence, to receive the Money
that had been promised 'em. There was a long Contest upon this Payment, because
the Deputy of the Ruffians pretended to receive the full Sum which his
Accomplices had agreed upon for the committing the Murder; and his Reason was,
That it was none of their fault, that it was not done; that they had done their
endeavor to execute it; that they had ran the risque of being taken; and that
as the fault lay wholly at the Pitti's door, that had not rightly laid their
Plot, it was not just that those who had not contributed any thing to their
Fault, should have the less Reward. The Pitti's, on the contrary maintained,
That the Blow not having missed by any Cowardice or Negligence, which they
could be reproached with, but through a mere Caprice of Fortune, that had
robbed 'em of the Victim just upon the point it wa^ to have been sacrificed,
they could only be taxed half the Sum they had promised. They offered however
to pay it all, nay, to consig^ it into a third Hand, in case they would engage
the Performance of the Attempt a^ some other time. The Deputy replied, Tha^ his
Companions did not refuse re-engaging in the same Design; but to that end
another Treaty was to be made, to which he had no Orders to give ear, until
they had been fully satisfied touching the former. The Conversation hereupon
fermented; but as the Match was not equal, the Deputy, being a cunning Fellow,
feared lest the Pitti's, whose Power he knew in Florence, might have him
clapped up, and perhaps procure something worse to befall him, to deliver
themselves at one bout from his Importunities.

And indeed he had engaged himself in a very ticklish Business; but he had the
Address to get out of it. He pretended to grow more tractable by degrees, and
to espouse the Pitti's Sentiments: He only demanded of 'em time to confer
Notes with his Companions, for the disposing 'em to a new Project. The Pitti's
let him go with so much the more ease, as that they were persuaded, that in a
few days he would be glad to come back with his Companions, to earn the Money
he then refused. But in stead of going out of Town, he went directly to the
House of a Man of his Acquaintance, who frequented Piero de Medici, and desired
him to go tell him, That if he would obtain his Pardon, and give him the
Recompense which the Republic had decreed to those who should discover
Conspiracies against the State, he would reveal to him one of great Importance,
and wherein hi^ Person was concerned.

Piero de Medici thought this Offer wa^ not to be slighted, because he was
already well informed, that there had appeared the day before in his Quarters a
considerable number of Armed Horsemen, besides having himself seen his House
invested. He assembled his Friends, who advised him to grant still more than
was asked him. The Remission was dispatched in secret to the Russians Deputy,
who received beforehand the Su^ ordained for Delatores. They let him take all
the Precautions that the Diffidence natural to those sort of Wretches inspired
him with, and then were informed of all the Circumstances of the Pitti's
Project, who were seized, and confronted. They endeavored to egg on the
Magistrates to the utmost Rigor against 'em; but the fear lest their
Punishment might excite a Sedition among the Common People, who adored them,
prevailed over the Quality of their Crime, and over the Solli^itations of all
the Florentines wedded to the Interests of the House of Medici. Nothing availed
their remonstrating to the Magistrates by studied Speeches, That this was not
the first of Crime^ the Pitti's had attempted, and that they had long since
meditated one of the most enormous, which was to plot against the Liberty of
their Country; That there needed no other Proof of this, than the House they
had built in the most eminent Part of the Town, since it had rather the Figure
of a Regular Fortress, than a Retreat for bare Citizens. This only produced a
Decree, That the House should be razed, and its Inhabitants banished for ever
out of the State of Florence, without hopes of their Posterities ever returning
thither. This Sentence, thus moderated, wrought the Effect which commonly
attends things of this nature; I mean, it inflamed the Malady, whereas it ought
to have cured it. It galled the Pitti's in the most sensible Part, which was
that of Honor, to blast them for having conspired against their Country, and
yet only imposed on them the slightest of Punishments, which so Criminal an
Attempt did deserve. It expelled 'em from their House, and constrained 'em to
lead thenceforward a Vagabond-Life, and yet did not retrench 'em of any of the
Conveniences they had of returning thither by Force of Arms. In a word, it
unchain'd the Lions, and let loose the Wild Boars, without having disarmed 'em
of their Paws, their Tushes and Defenses.

Thus the Magistrature of Florence was not long before they perceived the
Blunde^ wherein their false Clemency had engaged it: But it was now too late to
be remedied* for the Pitti's having caused all their Effect* to be transported
to Venice, retired thither with a numerous Train of all the Orders of Florence,
that would not abandon them in their Disgrace. They were joined upon the way by
the Peruzzi, the Barbadori, the Strozzi, the Albizzi, and others whom the
Conspiracy framed against Cosmo de Medici had plunged and abandoned into the
like Misfortune. So many Illustrious Unfortunates together, composed such a
Troop as was not to be slighted, because it had been augmented by the most
Valiant Men of Tuscany, upon a Rumor which the Pitti's had cunningly caused to
be whispered about, That they were not punished so much for their own Crimes,
as for that of their Fathers. 'Twas well known in Italy, that their Ancestors
had ever favored in private the Party of the Guelphs, though the Florentine
State had openly declared for that of the Gibellins. And as there was none in
Tuscany that durst put themselves at the Head of that Faction, since the last
Wound Castracani had given it, those that were of it had not any fixed abode,
but spent their Life in the continual Exercise of Arms and Robbery, that they
might be in the better Posture to defend it against the Gibellins, who without
mercy stripped ^^m of all when they fell into their Hands.

These People had no sooner notice of the Pitti's Exile, but they became
persuaded, that it was for the Common Cause; and what fully confirmed them in
this Opinion, was, that they saw 'em retire toward Venice: For as that
Republic had ever been constant to the Party of the Guelphs, they did not
doubt but that they were going to re-establish 'em, and took the same Road,
that they might go and join themselves to their pretended Deliverers.

But the Venetian Senate had quite different Thoughts, on so favorable a
Conjuncture which Fortune presented it. They had already for some Years been
distasted with their old Policy, which consisted in aggran^izing their selves
Sea-ward; whether they had been palled by the Obstacles they had met with from
the Genoeses in the Prosecution of that Design, or that they already despaired
of maintaining to themselves the Dominion of the Adriatic Gulf, against such
formidable Adversaries as the Ottomans; or that, in fine, they were possessed
with those Desires of Inconstancy in point of Government, with which
Commonwealths are agitated no less violently than Monarchies, though not so often.

They had bent their Designs toward the Terra Firma, and imagined that the
Conquest of Italy would not be impossible for 'em to effect, by attacking it
the same ways the Romans had formerly done, so to render themselves Masters of
it: I mean, by falling in with, and fomenting the Divisions which they found
among the Italians; whereas heretofore they were the first to extinguish them.

I know this Design was unjust, as the Tyrannick Rigours which they used to
execute it, Paulus Jovius, Guichardini, Albertus, and Mongino.
did afterward evince. But methinks the Historians of Italy speak thereof with
too much tartness, when they term it Chimerical: For after all, the Venetian
were then in a better Posture, than the Romans were when they undertook it.
They were absolute Masters of their Gulf, and none, no not so much as the
Emperor and King of Naples, durst cross it without their leave. The Isle of
Candie, which they possessed entirely, was its Key on the side of the Levant,
which was the most dangerous: and Fortune, to skreen 'em the better from the
Enterprises of the Infidels, had newly given 'em the famous Kingdom of Cyprus,
which they had hooked in by Intrigues that would furnish ample Matter to
Anecdota, if there was any Pen bold enough to dare to undertake it. They were
no less Potent on the Terra Firma, since that besides the better part of
Friuli, Istria, and Dalmatia, and the most delicious Territory of Lombardy,
which they held, they had set footing in the Kingdom of Naples, by the means of
some Maritime Places, which King Ferrand had been constrained to pawn to 'em,
for the carrying on the Civil War against his Nobless. They had got near
Ferrara, through the Polerain of Rovigo: They had purchased the strongest
Places of Romagna, by whose means they Check-mated the puny Tyrants that
possessed the rest of that little Province: They had thrown the Marquis of
Mantoua into a blind Dependency on their Wills; and the Republic of Genoua no
longer defended it self against 'em with the same vigor as before, being the
Seditions under which it labored, had constrained it to seek out a Foreign
Protection. The Duke of Milan could not preserve the Sovereignty his Father had
acquired, but by persevering in their Alliance; and if the Duke of Savoy had
nothing to fear directly from 'em, his Territories were not out of the
Irruption of the Troops which they had permission to levy in the nearest
Cantons of Suisserland, and among the Grisons.

There only remained the Republics of Florence, Siena, and Lucca, whither the
Venetians had no admission; and as they expected to get Access thither by the
means of the Pitti's, who courted their Protection, they easily granted it, in
hopes the Civil War that was going to kindle in Tuscany would beget 'em an
Occasion to seize on Pisa, or some other Place on the Tyrrhene Sea, from
whence, by the number of Shipping, which they had much greater than any other
State in Europe, it would be easy for 'em to ruin the Commerce of Genoua, and
make themselves Masters of that which France, Spain, and the Low Countries
drove upon the Mediterranean Sea.

Upon this consideration they received the Pitti's after a more magnificent
Aspect than they were wont to receive other Criminals; and though the Pretext
of their Entertainment was to exert some sort of Acknowledgment to a Family
that had obliged 'em with so many Colonels and Lieutenant-Generals of their
Armies, those however who pretended to dive farther into the Policy of the
Senate, did affirm, That there was Mystery in this Reception, and the
Consideration of the past, was not the only reason for this Carriage.

Be it as it will, the Pitti's were defrayed at Venice at the Public Cost,
until they had settled themselves to all intents; and though nothing positive
was said to them, to confirm 'em in the Resolution they had taken, of carrying
the War into the Center of their Country; yet not any of the indirect ways were
neglected, that could contribute to this Design. They were given to understand,
by Emissaries set privately to work, That the Senate had lived in Peace for
several years with the State of Florence, wherewith it had moreover contracted
an Alliance, which it could not break, without losing the Reputation it had
acquired of Probity, and without exciting a general Scandal, by so manifest a
Violation of the Right of Nations; That this Alliance did indeed mutually
engage the two Republics not to give any Assistance to their Enemies, and not
to meddle (in any manner) with the re-establishment of those they had banished;
but that it did not deprive the Senate of the Freedom that was natural to it to
dispose of its Troops; That it had on foot the bravest and best-disciplin'd
Army in Christendom; and that it had moreover got into its Service, by an
excessive Pension, that famous General Bartholomi Coglione, with whom, since
the Death of Francisco Sforza, not one Person disputed the Quality of the
Greatest Captain in Europe; That though the Senate had all the Reasons in the
World to be satisfied with his Services, there was not, however, any
inconvenience in retrenching him of his Pension, under color of the profound
Peace the Republic then enjoyed both by Sea and Land, or to diminish it in
such manner, as that the General should not be contented with what remained;
That in either of those two Cases, he might handsomely leave the Service, and
close with the Party that should be more advantageous to him; That the same
Pretext would serve for the dismissing the better part of the Venetian Army,
and that they might treat beforehand with the Officers of the Troops which
they designed 'em, and List them against the time they should be Cashiered.

The Pitti's took the hint of what they meant, and being assembled with the
Principal of the Guelphs, they agreed, That the Expedient which had been newly
suggested unto them, was in effect the most capable of re-establishing 'em in
their Country; because that as the Republic of Venice was then the richest
State of Europe, and that it gave its Soldiers larger Pay than was given by any
other Christian Potentate, she had ever, by consequence, the best Troops, and
maintained her self by this means in the reputatition of succeeding in her
Projects. Thus it was resolved, That the Pitti's should lay their Effects in
Tribulation, for the finding out ready Money; and that they should cause
Coglione, and the other Officers of the Companies that had been marked out to
them, to be sounded; and that if he promised to fight under their Colors, with
the same Pension, in case they came to be dismissed by the Venetian State, the
same Emissaries should be employed to retain 'em.

This secret Negotiation had all the Success the Pitti's could desire. Coglione
having already smelt out the Senates Design, gave Assurances of his Service,
and likewise took upon himself to solicit the Officers that should be
Reformed. Then the Exiles beseech'd the Senate to give 'em some Assistance, but
they were positively refused: yet, some time after, the Republic fell to work
on the Reformation of its Army. True it is, that it was not until after having
by a secret Treaty engaged it in their Interests, under whose Ensign it had
newly listed it self. Coglione was degraded, and he took the usual Oath to the
Pitti's. The Soldiers that were Cashiered, sided with the same Party their
General had chosen; and as there were not then any Wars in Italy, those that
had a mind to be instructed in the Trade of Arms, or had no other Profession,
flocked from all Parts, to signalize themselves under so brave a Captain. The
number of 'em was so great, that there was seen in a short time upon the
Frontiers of Romagna and Ferrara the bravest Army that had appeared in Italy
since that the House of Anjou had been drove out of the Kingdom of Naples. But
the Princes of Italy were too jealous, and too deeply concerned, to forbear
taking umbrage at such sudden Warlike Preparations. The Person of Coglione was
so well known to 'em, as to guess to what intent he made no scruple of becoming
the Pitti's Man, who were only mere Citizens of Florence, after having
exercised for twenty years the most Noble and Courted Charge of the Christian
Army. They held him for an Adventurer, in whom Fortune seemed to show how
whimsical she is. He was born in the Neighborhood of Bergamo; and his Family
had been totally put to the Sword in the Quarrels of the Guelphs and Gibellins.
He had begged until eighteen years of age, when that being at Naples, and no
body daring to dispute with him the Prize in Wrestling or Running, by reason of
his prodigious Strength, and incomparable Agility, Joan the Second, Queen of
Naples, who only valued Men for Vigor of Body, had made him her Minion: But
he grew quickly weary of that infamous Exercise, and stealing away from Court,
he went to perform his Apprenticeship in Martial Affairs under the famous
Braccio, and since under Francesco Sforza, with whom he passed through all the
Degrees, and then mounted up to the Lieutenant-Generalship, when his Commander
made himself Duke of Milan. Afterward the Venetians enticed him away, to give
him the Supreme Command of their Armies; wherein he acquired great Reputation,
and so much Riches, that the ready Money, he had scraped together, is said to
have amounted to Two hundred thousand Crowns; and this Sum was then so
prodigious, that the Italians could by no means imagine that Coglione would
have rendered himself the Pitti's Subject, but with design of subduing the State
of Florence to the Venetians, or to conquer it for himself, after the Example
of him that had taught him his Trade, who had newly raised, upon much weaker
Foundations, the most topping Sovereignty in Italy.

This spread a general Alarm from the Alps unto the Adriatic Sea. The
Florentines seeing the Storm ready to pour down upon them, did what they were
wont in the most difficult Conjunctures; I mean, they abandoned the Government
of their City to Piero ^e Medici's Friends, who had the principal Interest in
the Affair. These caused the People to assemble, put them in Arms, drove away
all the suspected Persons, and made the Exiles be declared Enemies of the
Republic. Afterward they levied Troops, and put them into such Places of
their State as they saw were likely to be first attacked. But as it was not
possible to assemble in so short a time an Army powerful enough to keep the
Field against that of the Exiles, or to oppose against Coglione a Leader near
his Equal in repute, recourse was of necessity to be had to those Powers whose
Counterballance maintained at that time what was free in Italy, namely, the
Duke of Milan, and the King of Naples.

I have already noted, That the last Act of Cosmo de Medici's Life was to
acquire to his Son the Alliance of those two Princes. But what had appeared so
easy on the Board, and when there needed only promising, became almost
impossible in the Performance; so many Obstacles did there arise to cross it.
For, on the one side, the King of Naples did indeed consent to grant the
Florentines part of the Troops designed for the Defense of his Kingdom; but he
would by no means yield that they should act jointly with those of the Duke of
Milan, whom he looked on as his Capital Enemy, and forbid them to have any
Communication with them. Nay, he could not so much as endure that they should
encamp near one another; and though they represented to him, that it would be
giving them over to Slaughter, to expose them separated to Coglione's Mercy,
who had the repute of being the most vigilant Captain that Italy had produced
since Julius Caesar, and to spend whole N^ghts on Horseback, for the surprising
of Quarters; though it was very easy for this General to cut them in pieces
after one another, if he came to discover that they acted under different
Orders: This Peril, how evident soever, did not touch the Mind of the King of
Naples after so sensible a manner, as the fear of his Soldiers being debauched
by the Duke of Milan, as they had been in the foregoing Conjunctions for the
making War upon the Infidels.

On the other side, the Duke of Milan spoke with great Pomp of the Succors he
gave the Florentines. He proposed sending into Tuscany Troops in equal number*
and better equipage, than the King of Naples. He proceeded further, offering to
Head them with Federigo d' Vrbino, whom he kept in his Service, with almost the
same Pensions as the Venetians gave Coglione, and who would make War so much
the better upon this General, as for that there was a laudable Emulation
between them, which engaged them reciprocally to practice all the Stratagems of
the Military Art, to surprise, and hinder being surprised. But he pretended
before all things, that the King of Naples should be bound not to send any
Fleet into the River of Genoua, capable of giving any Jealousy to the State of
Milan; with which the Neopolitan was the more loath to comply, in that he was
extraordinarily provoked against the Genoueses, who had backed the Revolt of
his Barons; and besides, it goar'd him very sensibly, in that he must receive
the Law from his Enemy, for the obliging him to defend an Ally.

In the mean while, the Friends of Piero adjusted these Differences sooner than
was expected, and propounded a Temperament which equally fitted the King of
Naples and Duke of Milan's turn. They assured the King of Naples, that his
Troops should only be employed in the defense of Pisa and its Territory, where
they should not be obliged to receive a Companion; which he accepted, and
caused them to depart with all expedition, under the Conduct of Galeazzo de St.
Severini. Afterward, they nicked their time so well to attack his weak side,
which was Vanity, and represent to him how glorious it would be for him to
sacrifice a Desire of Revenge, though it was lawful, to the Safety of his Allies;
and what a Tarnish, on the contrary, his Reputation would receive, if he
hindered the Genoueses to assist the Florentines, in the War he was going to
declare against them; that this Prince gave his Word to suspend his Resentment,
until the Peace was re-established in Tuscany. Thus the Duke of Milan having no
more Pretext to defer the March of his Auxiliary Troops, and the Friends of
Piero having gained him to all intents and purposes, by the Offer they made of
giving him the principal Honor of the Defense, by confiding in his Troops the
keeping of Florence, he dispatched Federigo d' Vrbino with all diligence, to
give order for the fortifying the Suburbs, and caused him to be attended by
choice Companies of Horse and Foot, in so splendid an Equipage, that the like
had not been seen in Italy since it had been ravaged by Barbarous Nations. Not
a Trooper was there, but had his Led-Horse, and his Arms enriched with all that
Luxury had then invented most Rare and Curious. The Helmets and Corselets which
the Infantry made use of were engraven. They had their Trappings decked with
Ciphers and Devices which noted the Amors and principal Adventures of each
Foot-Soldier. Their Swords were adorned with Tufts of Gold in Embroidery; and
the Guidons and Ensigns displayed all the Fineries of Needle Work.

These Soldiers entered Florence in the posture of Triumphers, rather than of
Auxiliaries; and their presence made Coglione change the Design of approaching
it. But Piero's Friends seeing them too curled and finical, and too assiduous
at Balls, to have a good Opinion of their Prowess, thought there was no
trusting so far in their Valor, as not to raise other Troops. They knew that
the Ecclesiastic State had ever been a Nursery of Soldiers, and that the two
most Illustrious Families of that State, namely, the Colonnesi and Orsini, had
accustomed themselves for these three Ages to lead Bodies of Armed Men, into
the Service of those who would attack or defend themselves against their
Enemies, without further troubling their Heads, whether the Cause of the Party
that called them was just, and without examining ought else, than the more or
less Pensions that were offered them. They resolved to gain them to their side,
and began with that of the Colonnesi, who stood not upon much entreaty to enter
into Treaty with them, for two Reasons. The first is, That being wedded to the
Fortune of the Kings of Naples, they equally followed the Inclination and
Interest of King Ferdinand, by declaring themselves for the Republic of
Florence, against that of Venice, because this Prince had proposed to himself,
by all manner of means, to obstruct the Greatness of the Venetians; and wished
moreover, that it should be published through all Europe, That he it was that
maintained the Caim of Italy, by stripping the Ambitious of the Means of
aggrandizing themselves at the expense of others. The second Reason was, That
the House of the Colonna's had ever been the Mark of the Vengeance of the
Popes, since Siccara, one of its most signalized Captains, had surprised
Boniface the Eighth in Agnania. This Persecution had made it close with the
Party of the Gibellins, and treat as Enemies all those that had declared
themselves for the Sovereign Pontiff. Thus it saw it self obliged to act
against the Exiles of Florence, since they were supported by the Guelphs; and
that besides, it could not doubt, but that the new Pope, who had newly taken
the Name of Sixtus the Fourth, would contribute with all his Power to the Ruin
of the State of Florence, which served for an Asyle to so many little Tyrants,
who had seized upon the best Places of Romagna, and of the Duchy of Spoletto.

There was more difficulty to book in the House of the Orsini's; for as it was
an irreconcilable Enemy of that of the Colonna's, it was sufficient for it to
see the Colonnesi engaged in one Party, to go offer immediately their Service
to the contrary Side. Yet they made a shift to bring Virginio, the Head of the
Family, to a Negotiotian, which he did not get out of as free as he entered.
They laid him a Snare which he did not distrust, and proposed to him at first
the Marriage of his Daughter, that was but twelve years of Age, with Lorenzo de
Medici, who was not yet fifteen. Virginio, though the eldest, was not the richest
of his House: His Profusions had utterly squandered what was left of the
ravaging of his Enemies; and the Debts he had contracted, already surpassed the
just Value of his Lands. Thus it was no surprising matter to see him lend an
Ear to a Proposition seasoned with all that could sweeten the Inequality. They
lent him Money absolutely to clear off all Engagements, and stipulated that he
should pay no Interest for ten years. They took his Daughter without any
Portion. They assured to his Family, in case of misfortune, a Retreat near the
State of the Church: And, what was most advantageous to him in the Issue, though
he little valued it then, they gave him a Son-in-Law, young indeed, but who
already seemed to bespeak himself to be one day the First Man of his Age. The
Nuptials were not celebrated with much Pomp, as not befitting the present
Juncture: There was, however, a world of Epithalamiums, among which, that of
Angelus Politianus, who being but of the Bridegroom's years, made Verses worthy
of the age of Augustus, was the best received. In a few days after, the News of
Coglione's Approach kid-napp'd young Lorenzo out of the Arms of his Bride, and
made him take Horse, to go learn the Military Art, under the Discipline of his
Father-in-Law.

However the War was not very warm in the beginning, though the Troops on both
sides were in a state of acting. And those who knew Coglione's impatient and
extraordinary active and fiery Humor, could not con^^ive, why, his Army being
the strongest, and best martialliz'd, he trifl'd away his time in laying waste
the open Country, and taking in little Places, in stead of showing himself in
Battalia in the sight of Florence, and ^arassing the Milanese Troops, who
seemed already on the point of disbanding, since the Guard of the Suburbs had
been committed to them. But they knew not, that Coglione had more than one
String to his Bow, and that he would not use Force, till he had spent all the
Artifices of his Profession.

The Florentines never thought of driving all the Exiles Relations out of the
City; and whether the number of em was too great to be done with safety, or
that they d^^^^ not in so dangerous a Conjuncture act with all the Severity of
the Laws, against Men presumptively innocent, nothing had been said to those
that were not suspected of any Intelligence or particular Engagement with their
Kinsmen. Yet the War was no sooner felt upon the Frontier, but Changes were
perceived among the Populace, that must necessarily be fomented by some
Internal and Domestic Enemies. The People complained of Inconveniences and
Grievances they had not yet felt: they began to speak of the Exile's Power, and
in their Discourse to multiply the Number of their Soldiers. In* word, they
even launched out into Assertions, That they had been punished with over much
Severity, and that it was but very just that those who thwarted their Repeal,
should be at all the Charges of the War.

Too public were these Rumors not to reach Pier^ de Medici's Ear; and as he
had too weak and dastardly a Spirit to remedy it he conceived a kind of Sorrow,
accompanied with Despair, that put him into a Fever. On the contrary, the
Pitti's, who received every moment certain Advices of all Occurence at
Florence, began to flatter themselves with the Hopes of a speedy
Re-establishment They ^ent to Coglione, and informed him of the ^abals of their
own Party and Faction. They ^ld him that the Peoples Discontent was ^st on the
point of breaking our, and that ^ey waited for nothing more than an Occa^ion
for so doing, by the approach of the Army.

Coglione was too complete a Captain to ^iss understanding the Importance of
what was told him, and too self-interessed to re^^se a March which in all
probability must ^^nder him the Richest Adventurer in Eu^^e: for he promised
himself nothing less than the Pillage of Florence, if it continued ^^stinate in
its own Defense; or a mighty contribution, the better part of which would ^owd
into his Coffers, in case it gave ear to any Accommodation. He did not
suffici^ntly value the Troops of Milan, as to ima^^ne they durst make Head
against him; and ^esides, he did not see sufficient Union among ^^e
Florentines, nor Dependency between the ^ew Levies and their Leaders, to
persuade himself, that they were in a state to hold out (...) Siege.

Nevertheless, as he had not so firm an En^^gement with the Pitti's, though
under their Pay, as with the Republic of Venice, that had degraded him, he
took some days delay, under color as if all things were not yet ready in his
Army, for its advancing into the very Center of the Enemies Country; but indeed
to inform the Venetian State of the true Condition and Estate of the City of
Florence, and to ask their Permission to draw near it.

The Letter he writ in Ciphers was examined by the Senate with all imaginable
exactness, but not in the sense that Coglione had writ it; for the General had
no other Design than to serve those from whom he received his Pay, in a
Conjuncture wherein he found his own, as well as they their Advantage: Whereas
the Venetians proposed directly to themselves only the Interest of their
Republic, and considered that of the Pitti's no farther than as it concurred
with their own. They did not judge it advantageous to their Commonweal, for
Coglione to advance into the very Face of Florence, because if he became Master
of that Town, he would be obliged to leave it at the Pitti's Mercy, who in all
probability would not ravish it of its Freedom, so far were they from
subjecting it to the Laws of another Republic. And if Coglione was so bold as
to declare when he was entered the Town, That he pretended to hold it in the
name of the Venetians, besides the horrible Scandal which an Action (...) that
Nature would cause throughout all ^^rope, it would not be possible for him to
^^p his new Conquest long, in regard the Princes of Italy would immediately
take ^mbrage, and endeavor in Concert to re^^tablish the Florentines in the
Freedom they before enjoyed. Which the Venetians would ^e so much the less in a
capacity to oppose, as having no place upon the Tuscan Coast, and ^eing easily
hindered coming thither by Land, Coglione would have only the vexation to see
the Fruit of his Perfidiousness miscarry, and the Venetians the regret of
having to no purpose prostituted their Reputation.

Thus, they thought it fitting to fasten upon some Enterprise of less noise,
and of more ^se to succeed: They thought it best to ^^andon the Florentines,
amazed with their Civil Division, and in the mean while cause Coglione to march
to the Conquest of a Place that might be relieved by Sea after the taking, and
re-victualled from time to time, without their being forced to pass through
mothers Lands. That of Pisa was both the most important of it self, and the
most commodious for this Design. It had a Territory sufficiently big for the
framing a durable Settlement, and Ports sufficiently large to ^nde secure
during the greatest Tempests. Its Inhabitants were born in an irreconcilable
aversion to the Florentines, and consequently disposed to attempt and endure
all, rather than be their Slaves. Moreover the Italian Princes would not be so
much alarmed, hearing it was besieged, because they were accustomed to see it
change its Master; and it would be more easy to persuade them, that it should
be restored in the Accommodation.

These Considerations prevailed in the Senate of Venice over Coglione's
Reasons, to whom they sent a Dispatch, that it was much better to fix upon
Pisa. It was no difficult matter for the General to make the Pitti's condescend
to this Undertaking; for though they clearly saw, that this was not the shortest
way to be taken for their Return into their Country, they durst not however
declare openly all they thought of it, because they found Coglione too firm in
his Resolution to be staggered; and they lay under the fear, by shocking him
unseasonably, to lose the Benefit they expected from his Valor.

Thus the Attack of Pisa was concluded and Coglione's Cavalry, almost all
composed of Epirotes and Albaneses, had order to invest it, while the Venetian
Ships advanced toward the Coasts, to hinder the Succors that might be put
into it by Sea. But whether his Cavalry did not set upon marching as soon as
they were commanded, as being loath to leave their Quarters of Refreshment;
(...) that the Spies that Piero de Medici's ^^ends kept at great Charges in the
Enemies ^^mp, had informed them at the very instant (...) the Resolution taken
in the Council of ^ar, it happened, that at the same time that Coglione's Troops
left their Quarters to go to ^isa, those of Naples quitted likewise theirs,
(...) march the same way. And as they were much nearer, San Severino their
General ^ad the leisure to enter the Town, and range them in Places the most
subject to unfore^n Attacks, before the Exiles Army did appear.

Without this Precaution, the accurate Ken^^s of Military Discipline judged
that the Town would have been forthwith taken: For ^^e Inhabitants stood but
very ill affected to ^^^ir own Defense, and looked upon the ^^mies with as
little concern, as if they had ^^en the Spectators of a Tragedy. They mattered
in public, That the worst that should befall 'em, was the shifting of Tyrants.
And as the Common People are very ingeni^^s in cockering their Noddles with
Hopes, though dull almost in every thing else, they ^^^gin'd, that a Revolution,
let it turn on that side soever, would infallibly change their unhappy Destiny:
from whence it was ^^ie to foresee, that if there had not been an Army
maintained by the Florentines, who should have opposed the Enemies Impetuosity,
the Enemy had easily trod them under foot.

And indeed, San Severino, who had as much Experience as Valor, did not think
there was any safety to trust them with the Guard of the Suburbs. He kept them
in the Main Guard, situated in the midst of the Town, under color that it was
the giving them the most Honorable Employ, as to oblige them to watch over the
Fidelity of the Inhabitants, and disposed the Troops he brought in those Parts
where he judged the Enemy would come. He was not mistaken in his Conjecture,
and Coglione did not lose time in following the Methods of the Captains of his
Age, who never attacked a Place without having made an exact Muster of their
Army to those they pretended to besiege, Pellegrin in his last Book of the Art
Military.
and without having finished the Circuit of their Walls in Battel-array. He
forthwith attacked the Suburbs with great violence, but was repulsed with so
much loss, that he was compelled to change his Design of Forcing the Town, into
that of Reducing it by a Siege. Nor did he persevere long in the Resolution of
making himself Master of it in the Forms; for as soon as he was informed that
6000 brave Soldiers were got into the Place, commanded by an experienced Head,
he judged that it would be the ruining his Army, without much incommoding the
Besieged, to attack them regularly. Thus his thoughts were wholly set upon
retrenching them of their Provisions, and constraining the Neopolitan Troops by
a Blockade to leave Pisa. But while he was heaving and laboring at this, with
that indefatigable Vigilance that made him subdue so many Places to the State
of Venice, Fortune, as it were out of derision to him, begat the Occasion of
finishing the War to his advantage, when he had tied up his Hands, as a Man may
say, and incapacitated himself to profit by it.

Piero de Medici's Gout mounting up again, while he labored under his Fever,
put a period to his days in so short a time, that he had not the leisure to
settle his Affairs. His Friends were so much the more startled at his Death, as
they had the less foreseen it; and owned from Experience, that Men of
Consideration, as well as great Trees, never make more Shadow than when they
fall: For though Piero acted neither with Head nor Hand in the Concerns of the
Florentine Republic, or in his own; though he did not so much as know by sight
the most of those that devoted themselves to his Interests, and exposed daily
their Lives and Fortunes in his behalf; his bare Name, however, was become so
great, and the Reputation of his Riches had acquired him so vast a number of
Persons and Creatures, that it sufficed most of those who received Succors
from him to know that he was in the World, to execute what had been ordained
them on his account. Thus serving for a Band of Union to his Friends, and a
Mediator to the young Gentlemen who Caball'd for the Principal Offices of
Trust, he could not be said to be useless, notwithstanding his continual
Infirmities, and the weakness of his Genius. And, on the contrary, People
foresaw, that his Death would be so much the more injurious to the Republic,
and his Family, for that he left Both in a deplorable Condition.

The End of the First Book.
THE SECRET HISTORY OF THE HOUSE OF MEDICIS. The Second Book.
OF all the Houses that now bear any Sovereign Sway, not one is there that has
been reduced to stranger Extremities than that of Medicis: Nor was the House of
Medicis ever so near its Ruin, as in the sad Conjuncture when young Lorenzo
became its Head. As he had reaped his Father's whole Estate, bating a very
small Portion, which fell to Giuliano his younger Brother, to serve him for
Legitimation, he was likewise to undergo all the Charges, which could not
possibly be more heavy than at that time. Become he was the Head of his Family,
and the most considerable Citizen in Florence, at an Age when others have still
need of ten years Guardianship; and his Youth was almost equally despiseable to
his Friends and his Enemies. He found he was engaged in a War, which the Riches
that came to him by Inheritance could not sufficiently cope withal, though they
were immense. In the mean while, by all likelihood, the Sequels of this War
would be long and troublesome, seeing the Republic of Venice was a Party
concerned.

Besides the declared Enemies of his House, that appeared with Sword in hand,
to the number of above Twenty thousand, there was a great many secret and
unknown ones in the Territory, as also in the City of Florence, who were no
less to be feared. The People had by their Shrugs and Mutterings shown how
weary they were of the War, before they had suffered any Inconveniency from it;
and gave out, that they would make their Accommodation at their Expense who
were the Cause or the Pretext of the Discord.

The Auxiliary Troops thought, that their Engagement was ended by the Death of
Piero de Medici, and acted so faintly, as it was easy to guess, that in a few
days they expected to be recalled. The Gonfaloniere and the Subalternate
Magistrates began to despair of maintaining the War, and did not believe they
were now powerful enough to keep the Factious in Obedience. The Friends of the
House of Medici had newly lost the Foundation of their Union in the Person of
Piero, and durst no longer act in concert, out of an opinion they had of one
another, that each Man meditated the making his Accommodation apart. In few
words, the Danger was so great, and seemed so inevitable, that there needed the
utmost Endeavors of the most Heroic and most Consummated Virtue, to triumph
over so many Difficulties.

Nevertheless, Lorenzo de Medici undertook it for his Trial of Skill. And as he
borrowed from History part of what he was wanting in from Experience, the first
thing he did was to comport himself like a Man that would not only supply his
Father's Place, but likewise that of his Grandfather. The next day assisting at
the Council, he made known to the Adherents of his Name, what might reasonably
be expected from a Man of such a promising Capacity. He spoke his Advice with
such maturity of Wit as was admired, and began with that happy Address, as to
make his Person considered like a Rising Sun. And indeed, that very Afternoon
the Council assembled at his House, where he spoke of the Republick's and of
his own Affairs with so much Prudence, Order, and Neatness, that he fully
persuaded those of his Party, that they had gained more than they had lost in
the Death of his Father.

Then he applied his Endeavors wholly to re-establish the good Understanding
which Piero's Death had altered, and to prevent the Advantages which might have
thence accrued to his Enemies. He caused Money to be dol'd among all the Troops
that served the Republic of Florence, and hindered them by this Gratification
from giving ear to the Pitti's Emissaries, bribed to corrupt them. He spread
about a Rumor, That there were Letters intercepted from the Pitti's, which
named almost all those of their Faction that were left at Florence, to manage
the People in their favor, and that their Persons were suddenly to be seized
on, to be served as Criminals of State; and gave so many Marks that the
Republic would proceed to their Imprisonment, that those who found themselves
culpable, thought there was no Safety any longer for them at Florence, and
sought Retreat elsewhere: Which in two days space caused all the Complaints to
cease, that were made against the Government.

He accustomed the People to despise the Exiles, and no longer to value the
Forces they had assembled, by making them observe the Fault that Coglione had
committed, in setting upon Pisa, in stead of marching directly to Florence; and
started among them Subjects for pleasant Discourses, so to divert them from the
mortifying Tidings they from time to time received, of their Houses of Pleasure
being burnt. And then, when the Storm was over, and the Country was laid
desolate, he made the Parties concerned so well comprehend the importance of
the Injury that was done them, that he rendered them irreconcilable to those
who were the Authors of such Devastations, and made them as many Soldiers
devoted to the Defense of his Party. He with all haste dispatched away
Courriers to Naples and Milan, that the first News of his Father's Death might
be imparted there from him himself; and the Messengers were immediately
followed by Gentlemen of Note and Trust, who obtained, in favor of Lorenzo de
Medici, the Confirmation of the Treaties concluded with his Predecessor, and
brought new Orders to the Auxiliary Troops to act vigorously for his Interests.

The Magistrates he re-encourag'd, by assuring them, that what Soldiers were in
Florence, should be employed to procure them Obedience. He gave the Friends of
his House to understand, that they ought not to seek elsewhere, than in his
Person, for the Foundation of their Union; and made them so agreeable a
Reproach for entertaining thoughts of knocking off their several ways, that
they could not but blush out of mere shame; so that he brought them again to a
good understanding of one another. He made them fall again to their former
Functions, without the least alteration. He obliged them to declare themselves
publicly in his behalf, for the rendering them the more firm, and to take away
from the Pitti's the Hopes of corrupting them. In one word, he adjusted all
things so well, that the Republic did not suffer any of the Revolutions with
which it had been threatened by his Father's Death.

But with all this, it would have been impossible for him to have maintained
himself by his own Virtue, if Fortune had not espoused his Cause, and if his
Enemies, in stead of repairing the Fault they had committed, had not augmented
it by an unseasonable and affected Obstinacy. All the Rules of the Military Art
did required, that Coglione in the very moment he had the News of Piero de
Medici's Death, should have raised the Blockade of Pisa, and caused his Army to
advance toward Florence, to foment the Intelligences which the Pitti's
maintained there, and to be at lurch for nicking the Changes, which according
to all appearance could not miss of happening. The Pitti's conjured him to it
with Instances which might probably have prevailed. They represented to him,
That the Pisan Enterprise was no longer in terms of succeeding; That the
Succors of Naples, that were got into the Town, had removed the principal
Foundation on which it was built, by disarming the Inhabitants, and dispensing
them from all Military Functions; That the Place wanted neither Victuals nor
Amunitions; That there was no expecting any Discord between the Soldiers and
the Citizens; and, That as San Severino was a Man of Order, he would easily
appease the Quarrels which might arise among the Soldiers: From whence the
Pitti's concluded, That they must resolve on spending the whole next Winter
before Pisa, and in the mean while leave the Florentines in a State of
executing all the Enterprises they would frame, after having settled their
Government; or, That they ought to draw nearer to their City, that they might
take advantage of the Tumults, which their Friends would not fail of exciting
there. However, Coglione had no regard to this Remonstrance, and made appear by
his Obstinacy, that there is nothing more dangerous than the putting ones
Affairs into the disposal of a Person that has not the same Interest for their
accomplishment. The secret Orders of the Venetian Senate prevailed over the
General's Duty; and the desire of augmenting his own Renown, to the cost of San
Severino's, and perhaps also of getting by the Ransom of the richest Barons of
Naples, who had put themselves into the Town, reduced all his thoughts to that
of suffering nothing to go in or out.

Lorenzo de Medici being overjoyed at his Adversary's fatal Stupidity, lost
not one moment of the Leisure afforded him. He took care of Affairs abroad,
after his terminating those at home, and gave his Father-in-Law Money, to get
into the Service of the Florentines the Troops appointed for the Guard of the
Ecclesiastic State. He enabled the Colonna's to List those Italian Forces
again, which the French King and the Count de Charellois had Cashiered after
the War for the Public Good; and when he saw himself strong enough to appear
in the presence of his Enemy, he marched out of Florence in Quality of
Comissary-General of the Republic; and leaving all the Honor and Supreme
Authority of the Army to Federigo d' Vrbino, he only reserved to himself the
Care of its Subsistence.

Federigo did not frustrate the Hopes that were conceived of his Valor. He
went directly for Pisa, with so much Resolution, that Coglione (who detached
himself out, for the viewing him the better) doubted the being defeated, if he
suffered himself to be cooped up betwixt the Neopolitan Troops which he held
invested, and the Succors that came to their Relief. To avoid this
Inconvenience, which had made him lose all his Reputation, he raised the
Blockade with great Order, as well as Diligence. And as he had no great opinion
of the Florentines Army, because near half of it were new Levies, he encamped
in such manner as if he designed to present them Battle. Federigo d' Vrbino and
San Severino did not refuse it, after having joined their Forces; and Lorenzo
de Medici was obliged to consent thereunto, though he sufficiently foresaw, that
it was a remitting, to the Disposure of Fortune, the Freedom of his Country,
and the Establishment of his House. The Particulars of this Fight upon the
Banks of the River Riccardi, in the Territory of Bologne, are in all the
Histories of Florence, two excepted, which they have perhaps omitted, because
they properly appertain to a Writer of Anecdota. The first is, That Coglione
having invented a few days before the way of managing Artillery in the open
Field, made use of it the Day of Battle, with a very whimsical Success; for it
had no other Effect upon the Florentine Army, than the taking off Prince
Hercules of Ferrara's Boot-heel; which all Italy complained of to Coglione, as
a manifest Contravention to their Laws and Measures of War, in that distrusting
the Valor of his Soldiers, he had invented the Secret of stealing the Victory,
not finding himself capable of gaining it by legitimate means. The second
Circumstance is, That the Battle not beginning before the Days declension, and
the Night coming on before it was ended, the Black Guards, Grooms, and
Footmen, and other Creatures of that stamp, kindled Flambeaux, and fell to
lighting their Masters, in such manner as they were wont to do at Tournaments.

To neither Side the Victory inclined; and the two Parties having banged
themselves weary, though with the loss of very little Blood, retired with an
equal Advantage. But Federigo d' Vrbino, who would needs refine upon the manner
of making War, which otherwise was then practiced without any Craft or
Artifice, bethought himself of giving but two hours Repose to the Army of
Florence, and to lead it afterward, without any noise, to attack the Enemies
Camp. He came thither at Break of day, and found Coglione's Soldiers so fast
asleep, that it was easy for him to take the Quarter which he assaulted,
before the Troops appointed for the Guard of the other Quarters were awaked,
and put into a Posture of Self-defence. This Conflict was a little more bloody
than that of the Day before: But then, as they did not yet understand in Italy
what it was to kill Men that made no Defense, and asked to be set at Ransom,
the Exiles lost in this Rencounter little more than the Sum of Money, which was
employed in redeeming the Prisoners. The greatest Mischief fell upon Coglione,
of whom the Pitti's had so mean and slight an Opinion, that from that time they
would not confide in him the Command of their Army. But the Venetians
pretending to be more just Estimators of Unfortunate Virtue, reestablished him
in the Generalship, from whence they had outed him, sooner than was necessary
for the retrieving their own Reputation; and by that means persuading the most
incredulous Minds out of the Opi^ion, that he had not so absolutely divorced
himself from their Service, but that he was linked to it by certain
indissoluble Chains.

The Pitti's, that had dismissed him before they had made sure of any other to
supply his Room, did not find out a General so easily as they imagined; because
Borsius of Este, Marquis of Ferrara, on whom they had pitched, did not
entertain the Offers they made him with all the Heat they desired. Too
Judicious he was not to perceive, that the Venetian Senate was really deeper
concerned in the Tuscan War, than it outwardly appeared. And as he was a
Neighbor to that Republic, and had nothing to fear in that Juncture of
Affairs, as long as he stood in good Terms with it, he had no mind to shock it,
in consideration of the Pitti's, who had nor Strength nor Credit to
re-establish him, if he came once to be turned out.

The same Reason of State hindered the Marquis from declaring against the
Florentines, since they were also his Neighbors, and if they had not the same
facility to ruin him as the Venetians, they might lay waste the Land of
Ferrara, by causing part of their Victorious Troops to live at discretion
there, and so reduce his Subjects to Beggary.

Yet the extraordinary Civility which he used even in his Refusals, obliged him
to let the Pitti's know, That though his Affairs did not allow him to declare for
either Party, he should account himself happy, in contribu^ing to the
Accommodation, if he was judg^ed capable of that Province. The Pitti's not
being in an extremely kind Posture, notwithstanding their Advantage, made all
due Reflections upon Borsius of Este's Proposition. They had not in themselves
either the Power to make Peace, or to continue the War. They had so much the
more reason to fear the being abandoned by the State of Venice, in that it had
already despaired of gaining by their Revolt; and the Turks gave it new
^ealousies, by menacing the remainder of those Islands, which they held in the
Archi^elago. Coglione's Disgrace discouraged their ^riends from assisting them:
And as it was maintained for a Maxim in Italy, That Rebellions were commonly
fatal to their Vnderta^ers, when Fortune was wanting to second their first
Endeavors; they had more reason to ^ear the being abandoned by those of their
own Faction, than they had to pretend there were in Tuscany such ill-advis'd
Men, as to en^er with them into new Engagements.

Now this inspired them with the following Request to Borsius of Este; they
conjured ^im to be their Mediator, and remitted their merests into his Hands.
Borsius had too much Sense to take upon him so nice an Affair, without
consulting the Oracle; for such the Venetian Senate was then styled: He
acquainted them with the Request which had newly been made him from the Exiles
of Florence: He communicated to them the full Power they head sent him, and
asked the Advice of the Pregadi upon what he was to do.

Told he was, That the Senate would be very glad to see the Troubles of Tuscany
at an end, though it were only to take away all Pretense from Calumny, of
divulging (as it did) that they were fomented by the Venetians. There needed no
more, to make Borsius apprehend, that the Senate would no longer undergo the
Public Odium, by protecting Exiles, that were become useless to them by their
Misfortune, and suspected by Coglione's Degradation. he took this Answer for an
Allowance, and without losing time, writ to the Florentines, That if they were
in a Humor to hearken to Proposals of Agreement, such reasonable ones should
be made them, as they would be very loath to reject.

Lorenzo de Medici had no sooner notice of this Offer, but he left his Brother
Giuliano in his room at the Army, and returned to Florence, where he examined
with his Friends, whether it was the particular Interest of his own House, as
well as that of the Republic, to conclude the Peace. So divided were their
Sentiments, that there was no appearance of re-uniting them; but Lorenzo, that
had seen more nearly the Mischiefs of the War, and was resolved to put a Period
to it some way or other, brought over those that were of opinion to have it
continued, by representing to them, That things had so changed face since the
War began, that they should be infallibly mistaken, if they reasoned upon the
same Principles; That the Pitti's in truth were not to be feared, since they
had spent their whole Estate, and lost their Credit; That the Guelphs had left
them in the lurch; and, that the State of Venice was so weary of upholding
them, that it only sought after a plausible Pretext to take away its
Protection from them, without noise and scandal; That this Pretense consisted
in the Negotiation whereinto the Marquis of Ferrara desired them to enter, and
that he was of opinion it ought to be accepted; That it would be for the
Florentines to bate something of the Conditions, under which 'twas pretended
they should relax a little of the Severity of the Laws; and that, in the mean
while, they would derive all the Advantages from a Suspension of Arms, without
the Pitti's being disburthen'd from the Charges of maintaining their Troops;
That they would not reap any great Fruit from the Conclusion of the Peace, in
case it was made, as they could hardly become more miserable than they were, by
the continuation of the War; but that the Commonwealth of Florence in general,
and the House of Medicis in particular, ran a risque of losing all, without
having any hopes of advantaging themselves, as long as their Enemies had their
Swords in their Hands.

Lorenzo added other Reasons of as great moment, to those I have now specified,
and made his Friends so well perceive, that it was the Duty of a Republic, to
allow Fortune the least Lock it could upon it self, that he made them
condescend to Peace. They went out of his House with this Resolution, and the
next day caused it to be concluded in the Council of Eight, That the
Intermission of the Marquis of Ferrara should be accepted. The Negotiation was
of no long duration, and terminated, like all others that commence betwixt
unequal Parties; I mean, that it was concluded at the expense of the weaker
Side. The Pitti's obliged themselves to disarm, and remain Exiles for Ten
years; at the Expiration of which, they should be allowed to return into their
own Country, on condition of never more exercising any Magistracy or Public
Office therein: And the Commonwealth granted an Amm^sly to those that had taken
their part, at the Charge of serving against the City of Volterra, then
revolted.

This City, more Famous in Ancient than Modern History, truckl'd to that of
Florence with so much the more impatience, as it had been one of the Last that
was ranged under its Sway. And the Contrariety of Humor evermore most
notorious between its Inhabitants and the Florentines, made them believe, that
there was no Yoke but what was Light, in comparison of that they bore. These
two Causes had engaged them in the Party of all those who had declared
themselves at diverse times Enemies to the Republic, and had made them open
their Gates to Coglione's Army, as soon as it appeared before their Walls. They
had not been comprehended in the Negotiation, whether the Pitti's had not the
Power to do it, or had not much insisted to obtain it, because those of
Volterra had received them without exacting from them the have Engagement,
either by Word of Mouth, or by Writing.

Thus were they condemned by Law-Martial to pay the Charges of the War, and the
Principal Officers of the Florentine Army prepared to lead their Troops
thither. Lorenzo de Medici only waited for the Republick's Order to invest it;
but this Order was not given, for that the Council of Eight could not easily
resolve upon the entire ruin of a Town of that Importance. This Council chose
much rather to dissemble the Fault it had committed, than to apply Fire and
Sword to repair it. And the perfect Knowledge they fancied they had of the
Genius of that stubborn People, persuaded them, by a Subtilty of Ratiocination,
to wink at their Revolt. They also imagined, that it would be losing time, and
putting the Authority of the Republic to the Judgment of Private Men, to
demand of them the Principal Heads of the Rebellion, which they would never
deliver. And as they were neither willing to expose themselves to the Affront
of a Refusal of that nature, nor push on to the last Extremity* against People
they saw disposed to expect it, they were of opinion to treat those of Volterra
in the same manner they were wont, and to show them by this Conduct, that they
had not taken notice of their Revolt.

But Lorenzo made them take up more Generous Sentiments, by representing to
them, That the Crime of the Volterrans could by no mean^ be dissembled, in a
Popular State, without exposing themselves to the Peril of a speedy Revolution;
That there was no City in the Territory of Florence, but would follow, upon the
first occasion, the Example that had been newly set them, if they were not
diverted from so doing by the Quality of the Punishment under which they should
be lashed; and that Clemency was the Rock whereon all Republics, without
excepting that of Rome, had suffered Wrack, because they were not in a
Condition to practice that Virtue with as much security as Kings. He added,
however, That Indulgence should be used toward those of Volterra; but that
they must first of all acknowledge themselves unworthy of it, and in craving
it, exert their Humility.

These Reasons were indeed drawn from the profoundest Policy; but they were not
the sole, not even the principal, that made Lorenzo act in this manner. He had
more particular and more pressing ones, which represented to him, his Honor
and his In^erest were both almost equally engaged in the Enterprise of
Volterra; the Burgers of that City having made mighty goaring Railleries, and
infamous Satyrs, on the Subject of his Youth, and his too great Familiarity
with Angelus Politianus, and the Study of Polite Learning, to which he was a
Pretender, contrary to the Custom of the Italian Gentlemen. Moreover, the War
of the Pitti's had not lasted long enough to handsel his first Arms. There had
been only one Battle, wherein he acted merely in Quality of a Voluntier, and
under the Orders of Federigo d' Vrbino. A Soldier he was known to be; but there
was still room for suspicion, whether he was a Captain, until he was seen at
the Head of an Army, act of himself, and put happily in practice what he had
read in good Books. The Necessity of his Affairs, and the Occasion his Friends
had for his continual Presence in the Country, did not allow him to seek
Employment among Strangers, and all Italy enjoyed at that time a profound
Tranquillity: Wherefore in Tuscany was he to seek whereon to make his
Apprenticeship; and as it was not fitting, or hardly possible in a Private
Person, to raise a new War in his own Country, at least without incurring the
Public Abomination, he was to husband well the Occasion of doing it, that
offered it self, for the attaining the Advantage aimed at, without receiving
any Damage. In few words, Lorenzo knew that the Pitti's had not acted so much
against the Florentine Republic, as against him; and held himself, by
consequence, the more nearly bound to hinder their stirring for the future. Yet
this could not be prevented, as long as they had the Convenience of such a City
as Volterra, very considerable of it self, and near Florence, to serve them for
an Asylum.

Thus, the Siege of Volterra was resolved on; and the same Lorenzo de Medici
who had had sufficient Credit to get that Enterprise undertaken, had likewise
sufficient to procure to himself the Commission of performing it. He Invested
the Place with the Troops which the Florentines kept in Pay, disposing the
Attacks with Regularity enough, at a time when hardly any thing was understood
of Military Architecture. The Besieged, who had run themselves into this
Tempest through their own Imprudence, sustained it with more firmness than was
expected. They spoke neither of Capitulating nor Surrendering, and did on that
occasion what could only have been expected from the most obstinate Citizens
of Old Rome. They defended their Town to the very last Extremity, though they had
not any hopes of being relieved; and when People asked them what they meant to
do, they returned answer, That they intended nothing else than the deferring
their Slavery for some Months. But in short, those who had yielded neither to
the Violence of their Adversaries, nor to Lassitude and Weariness, sunk under
Famine, and delivered all up on Discretion. The Mercenary Soldiers of the
Florentines, who already were all preparing to put them to the Sword, and then
seize on their Estates, were strangely surprised, when they saw they were
frustrated of their Pretensions by their General's Address.

And indeed, it was neither the Interest nor the Genius of Lorenzo to abandon
Volterra to Plunder: For besides the Loss the Florentine Republic had suffered
thereby, that Person would ever have been looked on as Sanguinary, under whose
Orders the Place had been desolated: Whereas by preserving it from the
Licentiousness of the Soldiers, a Man might promise himself the Applause of all
Degrees in the Republic, when the State of Volterra should have put a period
to the Aversion which the Florentines harbored for its Inhabitants.

This Reflection was so much the more solid, in that there was not at that time
any People who with more levity skipp'd from Hatred, apparently
irreconcilable, to Love, than that of Florence. And Lorenzo, who had already
experienced it more than once, in the War against the Pitti's, did of his own
proper motion an Action of Clemency to the Enemy, which he foresaw must needs
be made up and reconciled in process of time, though it was not easy to bring it
to pass in the posture things then were reduced to.

The Army he commanded, was not wholly to be confided in by him; for besides
the Regulated Troops, several Companies in it were of Banditti, who had not
subjected themselves to the Fatigues of the Siege, but in the hopes they had
entertained of Plunder. It could not otherwise be expected, but that these
Banditti would contemn the Orders that should be given them to abstain from
Pillage, and mutiny, so to have a Pretext to enter Volterra in a fury. This
made their General use a Stratagem, which they too late found out, to prevent
being deluded by it. As soon as he was informed, that the Townsmen resolved to
hold out no longer, he feigned a Desire to raise the Siege, and Cashiered the
Men for which the State had no longer any occasion. He caused a general Muster
to be made of his Army, and reformed such Companies as he distrusted. Their
Commanders complained openly, That they were robbed of a Pillage that was their
due, and caused the Assault to be sounded: but they found Troops that Lorenzo
had made sure of, posted upon the Avenues, that stopped them in their Carrier,
and constrained them to be jogging back to Romagna, there to continue their
Robberies.

Then did Lorenzo de Medici enter Volterra, granting the Inhabitants their
Lives and Fortunes, and only excepting out of the General Pardon ten or twelve
of the most culpable, that were hanged. He used the rest with all possible
Moderation and Charity, and constrained them to praise him for having been
their Deliverer, ever against their Wills. The Florentines did for their part
what Lorenzo had foreseen. His Conduct they blamed at first, for having saved
(as they said) their most irreconcilable Enemies: But they did not remain
three days in so unreasonable an Opinion. They quickly owned, That as it had
been necessary to use Severity toward the Volterrans, when they pretended to
cast off the Yoke, it was fitting he should change his Method, after the
Inconveniences of a long Siege had convinced them, by their own Experience, of
the impossibility of avoiding the Domination and Authority of the Florentines.
Thus that People ratified all that Lorenzo had done, and decreed him Honors at
his Return, which he made appear how much the more worthy he was of, in that he
refused them without Disdain, and without so much as Affectation.

Having settled his Reputation by Arms, he bent his Thoughts and Endeavors
during Peace to the Establishment of his own Family. And as he had already two
Sons born, he designed his Brother Giuliano for in Ecelesiastick, though he had
not any disposition thereunto: For bating the time he spent is Tournaments, in
which he commonly won the Prize, Sloth and Impurities shared the Hours of his
Life. Otherwise, he was of Stature tall, of an advantageous Shape, and showed
so much Wit and Courtesy, that his Brother imagined he would infallibly
change, if he came to be exalted to a Dignity which required his carrying
himself with less Licentiousness. That of Cardinal appeared at that time very
commodious for this Design, forasmuch as the Popes having not yet bethought
themselves of conferring it upon the Children of Sovereigns and Imperial
Princes, Magnificence and Luxury had not then got admittance into the Sacred
College, nor did they look upon those Vices as its Principal Ornaments.
Besides, the Highpriests had not yet figured to themselves, that their
Authority was wounded, in putting Affairs of moment into Deliberation in the
Consistory, and resolving upon them by the number of Suffrages: From whence it
came, that each Cardinal had as much Business as was needful for a Person of
his Rank, not to be idle, if he would weigh Matters justly and pertinently,
about which he well knew his Advice would be required.

Thus Lorenzo fell to Intriguing in the Concern of a Cap for his Brother, and
employed such puissant Solicitations to Pope Sixtus the Fourth, as to have
reason to believe, it would be granted him at the approaching Promotion: For he
did not content himself with the good Offices of the Republic of Florence,
whose Recommendation had ever been much regarded at the Court of Rome, in all
such like Conditions of Affairs; but he likewise caused the King of Naples, the
Duke of Milan, and the Genoueses to intercede, whom his Holiness took a pride
to oblige on all Occasions. Nevertheless, the Pope was inflexible, and refused
the Cap in such terms, as took away all hopes of obtaining it, during his
Lifetime. Lorenzo nettl'd at the Affront, which was inseparable from such kind
of Refusals, laid hold on the first Occasion that Fortune presented him withal,
to be revenged; and did it with a Success that had like to have ruined him and
all his House, by the Intrigues and Snares I am going to represent.

Sixtus the Fourth had been a poor Cordelier of Savona, to whom Cardinal
Bessarion's Esteem had acquired the Dignity of Cardinal. The wonderful Talent
and Knack he had at Preaching, and the extraordinary Zeal which carried him to
maintain the Immaculate Conception of the Mother of God, had insinuated him
into the Party of those who valued themselves upon a particular, and (as I may
say) singularis'd Devotion. Afterward, he mounted to the Sea of St. Peter, by
his Alliance with Cardinal Borgia, and the hopes the Latter had of obtaining
the Abbey of Sublac, and other rich Benefices, for the acknowledgment of the
Suffrages of a very powerful Faction in the Conclave, which he disposed of in
Quality of Cardinal-Nephew.

After this, Sixtus never troubled his Head about concealing his Failures, as
being no longer afraid of their injuring his Fortune. And it was observed, a
little while after his coming to the Papacy, that he was agitated with a
Warlike Spirit, directly contrary to his August and Heavenly Character, and
possessed with such an Ambition to aggrandize his Family, that he did not value
violating the Laws, or conniving at the most extraordinary Licentiousness,
provided he raised it out of the Dust, wherein it had been buried.

This Ambition seemed so much the more strange, in that it from the very
beginning passed over the Barriers his Predecessors had put to theirs, in what
regarded their Relations: For, whereas they had rested satisfied with
delivering them out of Misery, in case they were oppressed, or in helping them
to maintain their Family, by Consideration, if it was Illustriot^s; Sixtus his
aim was nothing less, at his coming to the Papacy, than the preferring his to
the Highest Dignities of Civil Life.

He had nine Nephews; namely, five of his own Name, della Rovere, who were
Children of his three Brothers already dead; and four that went by the Names of
Riari^, Basso, and Sanson^o, which were the three Families into which his
Sisters and one of his Nieces had married. Of the five Paternal Nephews, two of
them were Sons of Rafaele his eldest Brother, namely, Giuliano and Gi^vani.
Giuliano had received the Cardinals Cap that became vacant by his Uncle's
Exaltation, and the Title of Saint Peter in Bonds: And because he then
testified an Inclination to France, he was made Bishop of Carpentras, by which
means he insinuated himself into the Amity of King Lewis the Eleventh, who gave
him many Benefices. Giovanni had acquired, at his Uncle's Cost, the
Soveraignties of Sora and Sinigaglia, in Vmbria; and had such a fair Prospect,
as to fancy he was almost secure of succeeding in the Duchy of Vrbin, by his
Marriage with Giovanna only Daughter to the Famous Federico the Fiest, Duke of
that State; for though Federico had a Son called Guidubar, that Son had so little
Health, that the Physicians despaired of his living long enough to leave any
thing of his Name to Posterity. The Pope's third Nephew was his youngest
Brother's only Son, called Leonardo. He had the Trust of ^refect of Rome, and
was allied to the House of Naples, by marrying a Natural Daughter of King
Ferrando. The fourth and fifth Nephews, called Christoforo and Domenico, were
Sons of his Holinesses third Brother, and possessed the Seigneury of Viconovo,
and several other Noble Lands toward the Coast of ^eno^a.

But it was not the Excess only of the Pope's Ambition, which rendered it
insupportable; it being accompanied with a Capriciousness of Humor, that was
built neither upon Interest nor Probability: For, though Sixtus in all appearance
ought to have set a greater value on the five Nephews I have just mentioned,
than on the four others, that only appertained to him on the Women's side; though
all manner of Reasons obliged him so to do; and though Giuliano alone, who was
the eldest, was endued with all the wonderful Qualities which since rendered his
Pontificate so famous, under the Name of Giulio the Second; most certain it is,
that he could never obtain from his Uncle ^^^her to comfort himself as Head of
the House della Rovere, or do the Functions of Cardinal-Nephew; or that his
Brother, or three Cousins, should any more than be profit by what was refused
him.

In a word, Sixtus his strongest Inclinations were ever in favor of his
Sisters Children, and principally of the eldest, who had two, namely, Piero,
and Geronimo Riario* ^iero had been a Cordelier as well as his Uncle, and
deserved perhaps thereby the preference in his Friendship. He was made Cardinal
the same day as Giuliano, but had the advantage over him, in being declared
Cardinal-Nephew, and carrying the Bishopric of Trevisa, which Giuliano had
begged. Afterward, he had the richest Benefices conferred on him, that fell
vacant; and so powerful was he rendered, that he had the greatest Train of any
of the Sacred College. But his Defects were so great, that Fortune alone could
neither correct nor cover them: for, on the one side, he was so prodigal, that
the Revenues of the Papacy could hardly cope with his hideous Expenses; and in
his time it was they first saw at Rome, since the Lording Days of the Ancient
Caesar's, a Man who consumed in two years space Two hundred thousand Crowns,
which he had got from his Uncle, and Sixty thousand he had borrowed. He
obtained for himself the General Legantine Power in Italy, and visited by turns
in that Quality the Princes and Republics, that his Splendour and Magnificence
might be the more seen and adored: but he had so weakened his Health by the
multitude and excess of his Debauches, that he had almost wholly lost the use
of the most necessary Parts of the Body, at Five and twenty years of age.

Contrariwise, his Brother Geronimo, on whom the Pope had cast his Eyes, to
make him his Principal Heir, was more severe, and had no fondness for any other
Divertisement than that of Hunting. He loved Action to that degree, that after
his rate of talking, there seemed not to be any Affairs in the Ecclesiastic
State, of moment sufficient to employ him. He would needs manage all, and was
vexed at those who dutifully offered to ease him; but in return, he burnt with
the same Fire as his Uncle; and the Sovereignty of Forli, which he had
purchased so dear, had only served to give him the greater disgust to a
Private Life. And indeed, he had conceived so much Aversion to it, that he had
prevailed with the Pope to create Cardinals Geronimo Basso his Aunt's Son, and
Rafaele Sansonio his Sister's Son; and could not endure his other Relations,
whom he was constrained to leave in the Obscurity of their Birth. He had been
so cajoll'd by the Duke of Milan, that this Prince had matched him with
Caterina Sforza his Natural Daughter; and the Pope, in consideration of this
Alliance, had sent on the very Wedding Day a Cardinals Cap to the youngest of
the Legitimate Sons of that Duke, called Ascanio.

Riario had nothing more to do to complete his Establishment, than to set
footing in Vmbria, from whence it would have been easy for him to spread
himself into Romagna, and perhaps likewise into Tuscany: but as he had no
Troops, and that a great deal of Money was needful for the necessary Levies,
his Uncle made no scruple of setting to sale the Offices of the Chancery, and
the Court of Rome, which under the preceding Popes had ever been the Reward of
Ability, or Virtue. He created five Colleagues, through whose Hands all
Expeditions of the Datary must pass successively, and nine new Offices in the
Apostolic Chamber, that were purchased at excessive Rates. He made no
Reflection either upon the ignominious Commerce he was going to introduce, on
the honest Liberty he was about to strip the Court of Rome of, or the
Inconveniences that would ensue from the time when a stop would be put to the
Labor and Industry of the most refined Italians, by retrenching gratuitous
Dignities, which served them for a Bait, and enkindled their Emulation. He
augmented the ancient Imposts, and created new ones. He created extraordinary
Tenths, and likewise brought an Army on foot whereof the Cardinal de San Piero
accepted the Legation, rather to satisfy his Warlike Humor, than out of
kindness to Riario, whose Prosperity he could not look upon without Envy.

Federigo d' Vrbin was requested to accept of being General; and to engage him
to act the more heartily, they changed his Generality and Quality of Count,
into that of Duke. They diminished the Duties and Arrears he Annually paid to
the Apostolic Chamber, in Fealty for Vrbino. They fetched him to Rome, to
receive the Honors commonly paid to Crowned Heads; and they caused him to go
with the Cardinal of St. Peter in Bonds, to invest the City of Loddi, it being
designed for the first Flower of Riario's imaginary Monarchy. Loddi held out,
and was taken by Assault, yet without being plundered: They proceeded no
farther than Decimating the Inhabitants, and saved their Estates in
consideration of him who was to be their Master.

The City of Spoletto had almost the same Fate, and was subdued with so much
the more ease, in that those of Riario's Faction prevailed over the other
Burgers, who had set themselves at Liberty; but they met with more Resistance
at Citta di Castello, because Nicola Vitelli, the Proprietor, showed more
Resolution, and was better assisted. His particular Union with Lorenzo de
Medici made him implore the Succors of the Florentine Commonwealth, which
refused him it publicly, at the same time that it granted it in private,
because Lorenzo on the one side would not come to an open Rupture with the
Pope, and on the other, was overjoyed to revenge himself of the Affront he had
received, by supporting a Just Cause, and diverting the Danger wherewith his
Country was threatened, supposing Riario should seize on Vmbria.

Thus, the new Duke d' Vrbino and the Cardinal-Legate were constrained to frame
a Regular Siege before Citta di Castello, and see the bravest Troops they had
raised, moulder away before that Place. However, they gained it at length, though
it was not till after three Months Circumvallation, and on Conditions more
honorable to Vitelli than to the Besiegers, since they were reduced to let him
continue still in the Place, in Quality of a Private Gentleman, by purchasing
at a dear Rate the Lands he possessed in the Neighborhood. He had the Value of
them paid him down on the nail, before the Capitulation was executed; and this
ready Money enabled him to recover some time after, by Surprise, Citta di
Castello, to drive shamefully thence Riario's Garrison, and raze the Citadel
they had begun to build in that Place.

The Pope, who had been long enough Vitelli's Friend, to know him to the very
bottom of his Soul, and judge, that he would not have been capable of making so
subtle a Treaty as his was, or recovering so soon what he had lost, if Lorenzo
de Medici had not assisted and prompted him under hand: the Pope, I say,
conceived such a spite against Lorenzo, as he could not dissemble: So difficult
is it to disguise the Passions, when they are arrived to an Excess. He fell
into a kind of Frantic Fit, at the first news that was brought him thereof; he
turned pale with Fury; he wept; he lost his Stomach, and remained some days
without daring to hold a Consistory.

To the Florentines he complained thereof, in Terms highly injurious to
Lorenzo, which menaced him with something very hideous and fatal: but the
Re-establishment of Vitelli had been managed with so much Cunning and Secrecy,
that the Nuncio residing at Florence could never produce against Lorenzo other
than such weak Conjectures as fell presently of themselves. Thus all the
Satisfaction the Pope obtained, was made up only of most humble and obedient
Complements; and Lorenzo was absolved after a manner sufficiently glorious to
confound his Accusers. Vitelli remained peaceable in Citta di Castello, the
Pope having no more Armies for the Besieging it again; and his Holiness, in
whom this Disgrace had only augmented the Desire of aggrandizing Riario,
understood, that he was to proceed in that Design by such ways as created fewer
Enviers, and were not so subject to Obstructions.

The first that offered it self, was that of the Acquisition of Faenza; and
Fortune only started it, to have the pleasure of shamming Sixius once again.
This City served exactly for a Center to his old Design, for that it was
situated in the midst of the Government, which he pretended to found for his
Nephew, in the Provinces of Romagna, Tuscany, and Vmbria. It had already, for
several Ages, belonged to the House of the Manfredi's: But Astorre, who then
held it with the Title of Sovereignty, had been so prodigal in his Expenses,
that his Revenue being incapable of paying the Interest of what he owed, his
Creditors had had recourse to the Apostolic Chamber, and had caused him to be
summoned in Quality of one owing Fealty to the Holy See, for the being
reimburs'd their Principal.

Astorre appeared by his Attorney, and desired time: But as his Spoil was so
considerable, as to oblige his Judges to become Parties against him, his Estate
was called in by Outcry, and adjudg'd to his Creditors for Thirty thousand
Crowns, in case they were not paid in forty days after the signification of the
Sentence.

The Creditors had agreed with the Pope to make over their Rights to Riario for
the like Sum; but Lorenzo had no sooner notice of it, but he resolved to break
the Bargain. Not but that he foresaw, there needed nothing more to make the
Pope's Fury burst out, and hamper himself in a Business that would last as long
as the Life of him he was going to shock: Nevertheless he proceeded in it;
whether he thought he had already so incensed Pope Sixtus, that no Measures
were any longer to be kept with him; or that he accounted the Acquisition of
Faenza by the Riario's so prejudicial to Florence, that not only his Riches
and his Life, but also the State, were to be hazarded for the preventing of it.
And indeed he underhand procured People to let Astorre know, That if he would
treat with them, and give them a Procuration in right Form, they would
endeavor to acquit it, without making him lose his Sovereignty. Astorre
received them with open Arms, abandoning to them all his Revenues for Twenty
years, in consideration of an Annual Pension of Two thousand Ducats, on
condition to discharge it, and delivering a Power, by whose favor they went
immediately to summon his Creditors to receive their Reimbursement.

The Pope having not in the least dreamed, that Lorenzo durst provoke him once
again, did not believe that Astorre's Engagists acted in good earnest. And as
his Pericranium was easily possessed with certain things, he imagined that
Astorre had made use of this Slight, to obtain some days longer Respite. To no
purpose was Riario's Representation, That it was convenient to have recourse to
some Formalities and Quirks of Law, for the avoiding the Signification of the
Engagists; he continued fixed to have the Creditors taken at their Word, so to
render their pretended Collusion the more ridiculous. But when the Act of their
Consent was taken, and they pressed to agree on the Day and Hour of Payment;
when they had given them the Choice of Species, and told them out the Money;
then the Pope's Hatred against Lerenzo broke out so much the more, in that he
had retrenched himself of all Judiciary means to hinder the Reimbursement.
However, it became him to put a good face on it in Public, and cheerfully
conclude the Affair, waiting for a fitter Opportunity to make Lorenzo feel the
Recoil and Counter-stroke of the Acquisition he had prevented.

Here would be the Place to relate the Pazzi's Conspiracy, which was only the
Product of those two bold Actions Lorenzo de Medici had newly done. But
Politian, the greatest Humanist, and a Man the most skilled in Polite Learning
since its first Reestablishment in Europe, has given us so fine and pathetick
a Descrption of it, that it is almost impossible to add any thing thereunto.
Thus I should be obliged to transcribe it Word for Word, or abridge it, as the
Historians of Florence since have done, without excepting Francisco Nero the
Lawyer, who exercised his Talent upon the same Subject, by Queen Catharine of
Medicis her Order. But as this is denied me by Procopius, I can adventure no
farther than to set down here such Particulars of that Conspiracy as have been
omitted, and borrow from History some Incidents, necessary for the weaving them
all into a Piece.

Francesco Pazzi was such another Man, as Catiline represented by Salust. He
had all the good and bad Qualities of that Roman Adventurer, and principally
that of not having blunted in Debauchery either the Vivacity of his excellent
Wit, or his innate enterprising Humor. His Family was reckoned among the Best
of Florence, and his Father left him vast Riches, which only supplied for some
few years the Luxury of his Table, and his other Diversions. The impossibility
of borrowing anew, reduced him to leave his Native Country, and go to Rome,
where the most extraordinary Genius he had at inventing new Impositions, under
plausible Pretexts, first introduced him into the Knowledge, and then into the
Pope's Intimacy and Trust. By means of this Familiarity, Pazzi stepping from
Concerns of the Bank into those of Policy, and seeing the Pope in the utmost
rage against the House of Medici, and in the fatal Disposition that Hatred must
have attained to, for the becoming inveterate and irreconcilable; he proposed
to him the exterminating it, by an Attempt that might instate the Family of the
Riario's in the Place the Medici's held at Florence. I should not dare to say
this, unless I had Onuphrius for my Warrantee, a Learned Augustine Friar,
entirely devoted to the Interests of the Court of Rome: That Sixtus embraced
the Overture, on condition that after the Murder of Lorenzo and Gluliano de
Medici, a kind of Government should be settled at Florence, in which all
things should be regulated according to the Intention of the Holy See; and that
the Pope to avoid the Scandal all Christendom would receive, if it appeared,
that his Holiness, who ought only to harbor Thoughts of Gentleness and
Lenity, after his Example from whom he derived all his Authority, had trolled
in his Understanding so black a Crime, and of so long Execution, he caused the
Model of it to be drawn up by his Nephew Riario, and commanded him in secret to
concert it with Pazzi, and take all the Measures necessary for the bringing it
about.

Riario and Pazzi agreed, That the Enterprise was of such a Consequence, that
the bare Forces of the Ecclesiastic State were not sufficient to buoy it up;
and that before all things, it was necessary to hook the Duke of Milan and the
King of Naples into the Design. The Duke of Milan would have been much more
proper for such a Business, by reason of the Neighborhood of that Dukedom, and
of the easiness of receiving thence Provisions necessary for the surprising
Florence, and carrying on the War. But this Prince had the Imputation of
keeping his Word with so little exactness, that there was no likelihood of
embarking him in an Affair, of which he would have become the Master, as soon
as he should have been trusted with the Secret; besides, he was so fickle in
matter of Aversion, as well as of Friendship, that there was no relying on his
not treating with his Capital Enemy, an hour after having conjured his Ruin.

The King of Naples was farther distant from Florence, and more bewildred in
Domestic Matters; but, in recompense, had a Sanguinary Disposition, and by
consequence more susceptible of the Design they pretended to inspire him with.
Moreover, he hated the House of Medici, since it had the Confidence to sound
him upon a Match of Lorenzo with one of his Legitimate Daughters, before he
married Clarice Orsini. In short, there were Troops at Naples, which were to be
Shipped in order to their putting in Refreshments into Santori, the Siege of
which Place the Turks had been constrained to raise; and those Troops might
advance toward Tuscany without giving suspicion, because the Patrimony of St.
Peter was bound to defray part of them.

Whereupon, the Pope was besought to send to Naples such a trusty Man, as
should so sweetly tickle King Ferrand's Humor in the most sensible part, by
persuading him, that the Scope of the Revolution they meant to introduce into
the Florentine Republic, was only to re-establish the Kingdom of Estruria,
whose Scepter should be swayed by his Natural Daughter, for whom he had more
affection than for the rest of his Children; that might make him consent to
what was desired of him. The Emissary that was dispatched to him, pushed on the
Point much further: for, to hamper him in such manner as that this timorous
Prince might have no pretext to go back, he made him send the Duke of Calabria,
his eldest Son, into Tuscany, under the Sham of folliciting new Assignations of
the Arrears of Pay owing him from the Commonwealth of Florence; but, in effect,
to be upon the Spot when the Conspiracy should break forth, and to fix by his
Authority, and the Renown of his Valor, those who had not yet determined what
they had to do, or else to draw in the Principal of the Florentine Nobility,
who would refuse declaring against the House of Medici, unless they saw they
were abetted by a Prince of that Consideration.

The Duke of Calabria began the Journey that was enjoined him, without knowing
what he was going about, they having judged him too Sincere and Generous to
take upon him so shameful a Commission, if he had penetrated into the Mystery
of the Business. He was only given to understand, That he went to Head those
Forces, whom the Pope had given good Quarters to in Romagna, that so his
Presence might oblige them to live with more reservedness. But Riario's and
Pazzi's extended still much farther. The Cardinal-Nephew's continual Riots had
squatted him in his Coffin at twenty eight years old; and the regret Riario had
for his Brother's untimely Death, did not hinder him from endeavoring to keep
his Benefices and Dignities in his Family. To that intent, having not yet any
Boys out of the Cradle, he bethought himself of making young Rafacle Sansonio,
his Sisters Son, go by the Name of Riario, and presented him to the Pope to
fill the Place of Cardinal-Nephew, though he was as yet but seventeen years of
age. The Pope, who could deny Riario nothing immediately preferred that young
Man into the Rank he desired; and Riario, to take advantage of the Good he had
newly procured him, sent him into Tuscany, under the masque of perfecting his
Studies at Pisa, which for Law at that time was the most celebrated University
in Italy. But in truth, he had laid his Measures so well, that the young
Cardinal Riario was to take a Journey to Florence, without any other Intention
on his part, than of viewing that fair City; though Riario's aim was for him to
be there just at the time the Conspiracy should be executed, that: so his
Presence might animate such of the Plotters as were irresolv'd or fearful, and
bring all the Authority, which Pazzi judged necessary, for the Consummation of
the Conspiracy.

There remained nothing more than the gaining Francesco Salviati, Archbishop of
Pisa, by reason of using the Credit he had at Florence, and to have upon all
Events and Occasions a Retreat into his Palace. Old Pazzi took upon him this
Commission, and performed it almost without any trouble, by reason that the
Resemblance of their Amors and Fortune had engaged them in so particular an
Union, that they blindly espoused one another Passions and Caprices. They were
both of an age, and they were created Knights on the same day: They made no
Profession of any Virtue, either Moral or Christian; they played perpetually at
Dice, swore confoundedly, and showed no respect to Religious Matters.

But besides this Society of Debauchery and Riot, two Reasons there were, that
fastened the Archbishop of Pisa on the Undertaking. First, Because that in the
pursuit of the Archbishopric, which he had got by Cabal, by Flattery, and
other irregular Courses, which were then more in use in Italy, than they had
been for nine or ten Ages before, this Prelate had met with no greater
Opposition than what came from those two Brothers de Medici, though he had
surmounted them at length, by the Pazzi's Credit at the Court of Rome.

The other Reason was, That to noose this retchless and voluptuous Spirit in an
Enterprise which required so extraordinary an Application, they were forced to
sooth him with the Honor he would acquire by declaring himself the Deliverer
of his Country, and assuring him, moreover, of a Cardinal's Cap at the first
Promotion.

Now, they had nothing more to do, than to assemble, in a Place convenient, for
the drawing up the Model of the Conspiracy; and Giacomo Pazzi offered for that
purpose his House of Pleasure at Montuglio, where the Principal Accomplices
met, under show of a Hunting-Match. There it was concluded, That Francesco
Pazzi, who had lately insinuated himself into the Confidence of Giuliano de
Medici, through the Hopes he had given him of favoring him with a Lady whom he
extremely loved, should mind him to persuade Lorenzo, that though their House had
no great reason to be satisfied with the Pope, yet it was becomingly handsome,
considering the First Rank he held at Florence, to treat the Cardinal-Nephew,
though it were only to testify to the People, That his Resentment was quite
over, for the Rebuff he had met with at Rome.

They supposed Lorenzo de Medici would immediately take the Cue, because they
knew, the two Brothers lived in such Unity, that the one had no sooner
explained his Mind upon Honest, and even Indifferent Things, than the other
consented to them: Besides, his Humor was so naturally prone to Magnificency,
and to paying that sort of Devoirs, that Decorum and Civility exacted frem
Persons elevated above the Common Rank, that there needed nothing else to
dispose him efficaciously thereto, than the furnishing him with the Occasion.
Thus, as they suspected it would be in one of their Country-Houses that these
two Brothers would receive the Cardinal-Nephew, to make him the better relish
the Divertisements of the Season; it was concluded, that his young Eminency
should be conducted by one half of the Conspirators, who should snap the
Opportunity of assassinating the two Brothers in the midst of the Feast; while
the other half, that were to stay behind in the City, should with the
Archbishop's assistance excite the Sedition, and endeavor to riot the People,
by making their Ears ring with the pleasing Word of LIBERTY.

Francesco Pazzi performed his Commission in the very first Visit he paid to
Giuliano de Medici: For, after the Compliment at entrance, he civilly besought
him, with a jocund tone, to tell him the Day that his Brother and he had chosen
for the Regale of the Cardinal-Nephew, because his Uncle being willing to do
them the Honor of being the first to treat his Eminency, was preparing to
invite him on the morrow. Giuliano was a little surprised, and blushed at this
Question, by reason of the Coldness that was between his Brother and the
Riario's on his account; however, he made answer, That his Brother had not as
yet spoke to him of it, expecting the Cardinal-Nephew to tarry some time at
Florence; but that nevertheless they would that Night discourse the Point
together. And indeed, Lorenzo had no sooner notice that the Pazzi were to
entertain the Cardinal-Nephew, but he thought it behooved his Honor to be
beforehand with them. He took his Measures with his Brother for that purpose,
and gave the necessary Orders toward the preparation of a magnificent Feast in
the House of Frejola, which he judged more commodious than his other Seats of
Pleasure. The Cardinal-Nephew was invited, his Day asked, and he obliged to
appoint it, after he had for a long while very handsomely excused his so doing;
and Giuliano de Medici let Francesco Pazzi know it.

The Conspirators made all ready with so much the more ease, in that the very
Persons they meant to assassinate, furnished them in the nick of time with all
the Precautions they needed to keep, by informing them after what manner
Lorenzo de Medici pretended to do the Honors of his House. But the Day being
come, Giuliano was seized with such a Defluxion upon his Eyes, and with so
troublesome an Overflowing of Phlegm upon the Stomach, that it was impossible for
him to quit his Bed. Lorenzo, seeing his Mien strangely altered, was far from
pressing him to rise; but sent for the Physicians, and conjured them to have a
care of a Health that was no less precious to him than his own, taking Horse
immediately, to get to Frejola, before the Company he was there to entertain.

He came out to meet the Cardinal, and accosting him with a Countenance on
which something sad was easy to be discerned, he begged his Pardon for being
there alone to pay him that Office. He accused the Accident that had befallen
his Brother; he expressed his Circumstances in such Terms, as almost madded the
Conspirators, as acquainting them by what whimsical Adventure Fortune had
robbed them of one of their Victims. But as there was no remedy, they were
forced to compose their Looks like Men who had no other Thoughts than those of
Recreation. At the very first they had agreed not to execute their Enterprise
by halves, because that one of the two Brothers remaining alive, would have
been sufficient to maintain the Advantages of his House in the Republic of
Florence. Thus, the Pazzi's having a little recollected themselves from the
Amazement in which they were plunged by Giuliano's absence, had nothing else to
do, than dispatch one of their Accomplices to the Archbishop of Pisa, to let
him know the Disappointment, that so there might be no unseasonable and
ineffectual Commotions in the City.

The Feast at Frejola was very Magnificent, and Lorenzo de Medici spared
nothing of what might serve to persuade the Cardinal-Nephew into an Opinion of
the profound Respect he had for the Pope, notwithstanding all past
Transactions. The Cardinal-Nephew, who knew nothing of the Personage he was put
upon acting, had the less trouble to commend the Delicacy of the Meats, and the
Exactness wherewith they were served. The Conspirators were not able to
constrain themselves with so much Artifice, but that it would have been easy
for Lorenzo to observe that they were extremely unhinged, if his solicitude
for his Brother's Illness had left him all the freedom of Mind that was natural
to him, and if he had had less application to what he did. He acquitted his
Share of it with much politeness, and the Cardinal-Nephew departed from
Frejola, equally satisfied with the Courtesy and Good Cheer of his Harbinger.

By this Disappointment the Conspirators were not discouraged from their
Attempt: And as Giuliano's Fluxion was spent in a few days, they fancied his
Brother and he would not fail of being on the Sunday following, the twenty
sixth of April, at the Great Church, though it were only to accompany the
Cardinal-Nephew, who meant to see its Ceremonies. Upon this, they framed a
second Project, for the assassinating the two Brothers de Medici in the Temple.
The Impiety of the Plot, besides the Majesty of the Place, could not be more
execrable; since they took for a Signal the august moment of the most awful
among the Christian Mysteries; I mean, the time when the Priest should lift up
the Host. Then Antonio Volterra, and the Governor of the young Princes Pazzi,
called Signiore Stephano, engaged to kill Lorenzo de Medici with their
Poigniards, while Francesco Pazzi and Bernardo Bandini should by the same
Course dispatch Giuliano. The Archbishop of Pisa, followed by Giacopo Poggio,
Son to the Tutor of the two Brothers de Medici, and accompanied by the greatest
number of the Conspirators, and all Salviati's Kindred, that were in great
Consideration, undertook to seize at the same time the Townhouse, under
pretext of visiting Cesare Petruzzi, who lodged there in Quality of
Gonfaloniere. And old Giacopo Pazzi, at the very instant he should have word
brought him of the two Brothers Death, was to take Horse, adorned with his
Collar, and march directly to the principal Place, where all the Friends of his
Family should wait for him in the posture of Armed Men, to afford Assistance to
the Archbishop of Pisa, if he stood in need of any, against the Townhouse.

For the better security, Francesco Pazzi would needs know of Giuliano de
Medici, whether his Brother and he would not be at the Temple; and Giuliano
made him answer, That they would not fail of paying their Attendance. And
indeed, the Hour and Day being come, Lorenzo was there one of the first, as
designing to receive the Sacraments of Penitence and the Fucharist: and the two
Men appointed to assassinate him, went and planted themselves by him. But they
had already begun to sing the Anthems Introductory to the Mass, when as
Giuliano did not yet appear; whether his Good Genius had made him change his
Design, or that he had spent too much time in Dressing: The Conspirators were
very uneasy on this account, and they already fancied their Enterprise
disappointed, because that failing the second time, it was morally impossible
to keep it secret, considering the multitude of those that were privy to the
Plot: When that Francesco Pazzi bethought himself of a Trick, which accordingly
did his Business. He took his Companion Bandini along with him, and scoured
immediately to Giuliano's Apartment-door. They found him busy a curling his
Hair, and saluted him with a Countenance that could be neither more jocund, nor
more calm. They checked him after a merry, gay, and facetious manner, for his
Sloth; and Francesco Pazzi taking him aside, told him, his Mistress was at
Church, so beauteous, and well dressed, as challenged the ogling of all the
young Gentlemen. This Hint entirely vanquished Giuliano's Resistance, and
surmounted the last Obstacle that his good Demon interposed to his Misfortune.
He made ready with all diligence; and those two Murderers, under pretense of
seconding his Impatience, served him for Valets de Chamber. Then they took him
under the Arms, and conducted him in that posture to the Church, where they
were no sooner arrived, but the Priest lift up the Adorable Host, and
unwittingly gave a Signal expected by the Conspirators, for the committing the
most hideous of Sacrileges.

Pazzi and Bandini stabbed Giuliano to death with their Poigniards, and did the
like to Nori his Domestic, as he was going to draw his Sword. Lorenzo had not
come off at a cheaper rate, had the others fallen upon him at the same Instant:
But as his Murderers were not so diligent as his Brother's, whom he already
perceived they had Poigniarded, that sad Spectacle made him draw his Dagger
with his Right Hand, and wrap up his Left Arm in his Cloak. When he was
attacked by Antonio de Volterra, and by Steffano the Priest, he defended
himself with a Presence of Mind that wrought his Safety: For, though at the very
first he received a Wound in the Neck, from whence there gushed a great deal of
Blood, he parry'd so long, that his Friends, who being backed by some
courageous Priests, had the leisure to join him, and cant him into a Vestry,
that was accidentally open, shutting the Door upon him before Bandini could
reach him, who ran after to dispatch him outright. In the mean while, the
Archbishop of Pisa came to the Townhouse, and asked to speak with the
Gonfaloniere. The Porter made answer, He had order to let no Christian in, for
that the Gonfaloniere was newly set down to Dinner with the Captains of the
Wards, whom he had invited. The Archbishop was a little startled at this
Accident, which he had not foreseen; and making use of the first Sham that came
into his Head, he replied to the Porter, That he must necessarily speak with
the Gonfaloniere at that very instant, as bringing him Orders from the Pope,
that could not be one moment deferred. The Porter did so much the more easily
believe what the Archbishop told him, in that he saw an extraordinary
Attendance; and without making further Reflection, went to tell the
Gonfaloniere, That the Archbishop of Pisa had a Brief to deliver him from his
Holiness. The Gonfaloniere thought it very strange, that this Prelate should
come and importune him at a time, when People are not wont to treat of Serious
Matters. However, as it was unhandsom to deny him Admittance, he rose from
Table, went to receive him, and led him into an Upper Room. This was done so in
a trice, because the Gonfaloniere was afraid of making his Guests wait, that
the Archbishop had not the leisure either to resolve in himself, or to agree
with his Accomplices, after what manner he should back the Lie they had paum'd
upon the Porter. From thence it came, that when the Gonfaloniere, after the
first Compliments, asked him for the Brief he brought from the Pope, he not
only made no positive Answer, but furthermore, the Crime he was involved in
presenting it self then to his Imagination, with all its Blackness, disturbed
him in such manner, that he could not forbear blushing and turning pale at the
same time, nor showing by frightful Looks, and a stammering ruffl'd Speech,
part of what he had in his Mind.

Then the Gonfaloniere, a Man exceeding distrustful, (as are commonly all
Florentines) suspected that Ambuscades were laid for him; and leaving the
Prelate dumb and astonished, rushed out of the Chamber, to call the Soldiers
which the Republic maintained for the Guard of his Person, and of the
Townhouse. Poggio, who went in with the Archbishop, would have withheld the
Gonfaloniere; but this Magistrate being stronger than he, knocked him down with
his First, and made but two Leaps to get into the Dining Room, and give his
Guests notice to seek their Safety in the Dungeon. He made them pop into it,
and stood upon the Steps, to defend and ward the Passage with a Spit, which
mere Hazard put into his Hands.

The Conspirators that attended the Archbishop, out of respect staid all at the
bottom of the great Staircase, except Poggio, who had taken him under the
Arms, to help and usher him up; and had divided themselves into the Hall of the
first Story, which served for the Meetings of the respective City-Companies or
Guilds, for fear their Multitude should give Umbrage, if they were perceived
all together. Whereupon, a Circumstance is to be remarked, which having been
omitted by the Florentine Historians, renders their Narration obscure and
defectuous; namely, That the Gonfaloniere's, when they entered upon the
Magistracy, were wont to cause all the Wards of the Townhouse Locks to be
changed: And Cesare Petruzzi, who had then that Character, and valued himself
upon being an Engineer, had caused them to be made with so much Artifice, that
the Doors, upon the least touch, shut of themselves, but could not be opened
without the Keys, which by consequence remained ever tied to the Porters
Girdles.

Thus, in the very moment that the Gonfaloniere called for Help with an hideous
Outcry, the Hall-doors of the first Story came to be shut up, and the
Conspirators caught (as it were) in a Trap. The People, naturally inclined to
Superstition, were afterward persuaded that the thing happened miraculously;
and Lorenzo de Medici did not trouble his Head much to undeceive them, because
it was for his advantage, that his Countrymen were of opinion, that Heaven
concerned it self most visibly in preserving the Race of Medici. But it is more
safe to attribute the Cause of this Event either to some one of the
Gonfaloniere's Domestics, who having his Mind less possessed with Fear than
his Camrades, bethought himself of pulling to the Doors; or to the Tumult which
arose in the Townhouse, sufficiently great to make upon the Doors a Motion
capable of shutting of themselves; or to the Conspirators, who at that very
instant they heard the Gonfaloniere call out to Arms, imagined they were
betrayed, that their Conspiracy was discovered, that the Archbishop of Pisa was
a Prisoner, and that People were coming to them to seize upon their Persons.
Thus the Care of their own Preservation, banishing from their Minds the Design
of making thmselves Masters of the Town Hall, they now thought of nothing but
of barricadoing, and making a stout Defense, till their Companions, who were in
the great Church, having massacred the two Medici's, or those that were to
secure the Public Place under the Orders of Chevalier Pazzi, could run to
disengage them.

Not to determine any thing in this Case, There they remained, cooped up, till
Lorenzo de Medici, having been taken out of the Vestry, where the Priests had
bound up his Wound, was brought back to his own House, by a great multitude of
People, of all the Orders of the City, and principally of the Mobile. From
thence he caused himself to be carried to the Townhouse, where all the
Magistrates were immediately convened. Not very long was the Deliberation,
because the Medici's Friends having had the leisure to send unto all Parts, to
inform the Citizens of what occurred, they had exaggerated Giuliano's Murder,
and the Peril with which the Commonweal was threatened, with Terms so pathetick,
that the whole Town had taken Arms, and the Boldest had seized on all Avenues
of the Guild Hall, setting Guards in the Great Place which was before it. Thus,
there was nothing else heard from all Parts, than a Confusion of Voices, which
demanded a good and speedy Justice: And as it was not in the least to be
deferred, without seeing the Great Gate shut up by the number of those who
offered themselves to serve for Executioners, the Magistrates caused Ropes to
be fastened to the Bars of the Windows, where the unhappy Poggio was the first
hanged, and then the other Plotters; who seeing on one side the Fury of the
People extraordinarily animated against them, and the Doors broke down by Order
of the present Magistrates, yielded themselves up on Discretion, because they
could not do otherwise, at least without killing one another.

Never Spectacle was so hideous, and yet never Spectacle wrought less
Compassion. The Malefactor was scarce half strangled, when they cut the Rope
for him, to make room for another; the Body fell down, and the People
immediately tore it to pieces. Not a Man of them was exempt from the
Punishment; and all the Favor that was shown to the most Illustrious among the
Accomplices, was to execute them the last. Francesco Pazzi, the Author of the
Conspispiracy, who had wounded himself dangerously in striking Giuliano de
Medici, could not get out of the Town, and was fain to hide himself in his
Uncle's House, where he was discovered by a Maid, and was conducted to the
Townhouse.

The Curious observed, That he spoke not so much as one word, and there
appeared not any Mark of Reluctance in his Countenance, but only the Signs of
a most disdainful and lofty Fierceness. He was hanged at the Window that is
just above the great Gate, and there immediately appeared the Archbishop of
Pisa to keep him Company. They first induced him to discover the whole Train of
the Conspiracy, and to write it down, and sign it with his own Hand; which that
Prelate was prevailed with to do, upon a belief, that the Magistrates coming to
be moved by this Effect of Condescendency, would show respect to his Character,
and abate something of their Severity. Yet he was served like the rest; and
whether they had a mind to add a peculiar Infamy to the Punishment that was
common to him with his Accomplices; or, the ardour of the Hangman that executed
him was too great to examine what he did; or, in short, that they were glad to
put that Affront upon the Court of Rome, in order to punish it at least in that
manner, for having been fingering in so detestable an Action: This unfortunate
Prelate was noos'd up in the Pontifical Robes he chanced to have on. The
nearest Spectators of his Execution observed, That when he was turned off, he
fastened his Teeth in Pazzi's Body that hung at the next Bar, and bit his left
Pap with so much fury, that the Executioner had much ado to make him let go his
hold.

His Brother, and Cousin-german, who went both by the Name of Giacopo Salviati,
were trussed up by him: but the old Chevalier Pazzi, advancing into the Public
Place, to raise and mutiny the People, seeing they listened to him no otherwise
than by way of derision, and began already to surround him, and pelt him with
Stones from off the Houses tops, spurred on his Horse, that was indeed a
vigorous Steed, made his way through, and got happily out through the Gate
della Cruce: But he retiring toward the Mountains, and having no Money about
him, was constrained at two days end to take Refuge in a Cottage, to get some
Food, and sell his Horse. He was known by the Peasant he addressed himself to;
and that Man being not altogether rustic and dull, immediately harbored a
Design upon the Person of his Guest, for the gaining the Reward which the
Magistrates had appointed for him that should bring him in. He received him
with great appearance of Humanity, and made him the best Cheer he could. He
persuaded him to stay in the same Place, while he went to sell his Horse; but
in stead of performing what he promised, he went and discovered him to the
Magistrates of Florence, who sent immediately to take him up. His Process was
performed in the wonted Formality: and ^^ttering himself with the same Hopes
that made the Archbishop of Pisa reveal all the Secrets of the Conspiracy, he
confirmed that Prelate's Deposition, and added thereto the Names of the
Accomplices, and the Share that each had had in it. In a word, he did all that
Cunning and a base Pusilanimity inspired him with, to save his Life: But when
he saw that they proceeded, however, to condemn him to the Gallows, and that
they sent him a Priest to prepare him for Death, he laid aside the Masque, and
would not hearken to any other Sentiments than those which Corrupted Nature
suggests to Mad and Desperate Persons. He obstinately refused to die as a
Christian, and di'd invoking the Devil. Yet the Magistrates were not wanting to
see him buried in a Church in Florence, where his Ancestors had been Interred;
but the Rabble, whose Fury was augmented by the last Contempt which the
Malefactor showed to the Holy Sacraments, unearth'd his Body, and threw it in
the Laystall; from whence Justice caused it to be taken, and secretly buried in
a Churchyard: But this only served to renew the Tumult; for, discovering the
Place where he was, they opened the Ditch with their Nails, took out his
Carcass, dragged it along the Streets, and after the men were grown weary of
disfiguring it, they abandoned it to Children, who threw it into the River Arno.

Rinato Pazzi, his Cousin, was no more happy, though he had a less dangerous
Commission. He had taken upon him to make the Peasants of Mugello revolt; but
those Bumpkins tied him Hand and Foot, brought him to the Townhouse, where he
found his Process made, and the Hangman ready to execute it. Of all the
Conspirators, only the brave Montesecco had the favor of being put to death
after a less infamous manner.

Montesecco, one of the gallantest Men of Italy, espoused Riario's Interests,
and only out of compliance to him had a hand in the Conspiracy. He promised to
Poigniard Lorenzo de Medici at the Feast of Frejola; but the Execution having
been put off, he fell by chance into Conversation with this Lorenzo, and was so
charmed with his Perfections, that he refused to kill him, under the shift,
that when he had given his Word, 'twas only to commit an Homicide, by
assassinating a Man in his House; and not an execrable Sacrilege, by profaning
the Altars with his Blood. His Excuse was allowed of, because the young Pazzi's
Tutor offered his Service to supply his Place: And as he was neither in the
Great Church, nor in the Townhouse, he had the better Convenience of making
his Escape; but he could not so soon take Refuge in the State of the Church,
but that the Garrison of Radicosano stopped him upon the way, and sent him with
a strong Guard to Florence, where he had his Head struck off.

Seigniore Stefano and Antonio de Volterra, who were to have assassinated
Lorenzo de Medici, having thus missed their aim, thought it high time to slip
out of the Church in the beginning of the Fray; and while those who assisted at
the Mass were too much terrified, and too busy about Giuliano's Body, and
Lorenzo's Person, to mind the Murderers, they stole softly to the Door, and
made their Escape to a Monastery, where they were received by the Religious,
who three days abstained discovering them, whether they took pity of them, or
would thereby maintain their Convent in the Right of Sanctuary, which they
pretended to have obtained from Popes and Emperors. But the Magistrates
ordered a general Search throughout the City, which was performed with so much
exactness, that the said Seigniore Stefano and his Companion were drawn out of
the Place where they thought they were in Safety, and conducted to Punishment.

All the Pazzi's Relations, all their Allies, nay, and all those that had any
Engagement with them, were clapped up in Prison, though there was not any Proof
against them; and Guglielmo de Pazzi was confined for all his Life long to a
Village, notwithstanding he had married Lorenzo de Medici's Sister, and that
this Virtuous Lady had thrown her self at her Brother's and the Magistrates
Feet, to obtain, that her Husband might remain free, since he had been wholly
cleared by all the Depositions of the Accomplices. This was somewhat an
extraordinary thing, that in so great a number of Conspirators, there was but
one that could get out of the Dominions of Florence, without being seized; and
this very Person that escaped, was the most culpable of all.

It Is well enough known, that I mean Bandini. This Assassinate had not been so
very much blinded with the Promises of Impunity, wherewith Riario had soothed
his Accomplices, as not to provide for the Security of his Person in case of
necessity. He had borrowed from his Friends, and from those who engaged him in
the Conspiracy, considerable Sums, which he put into Venetian Merchants Hands,
for the receiving them in Constantinople six Months afterward. Moreover, his
Man waited for him near the Great Church, with a Horse of Value; and some
Banditti's of his Acquaintance were walking in the Porch, to make him way, and
favor his Escape.

With these Precautions, he alone did more than all the other Conspirators
together: He first boar'd Giuliano de Medici with a Poigniard, thrust under the
Left Pap; and seeing that Pazzi stood obstinately giving him an hundred Stabs
when dead, he left him to enjoy so ridiculous a Revenge, and turning toward
Nori, Giuliano's Domestic, he plunged his Dagger into his small Guts; then
turned his Eyes toward Lorenzo, in the very moment he was saving himself in
the Vestry, all wounded as he was. After having rid his Hands of those two
Murders, he ran likewise to dispatch him, and had got up so near him, that he
would have effected his Purpose, but for the Address of an Ecclesiastic, who
repulsing Bandini with his Crosier-Staff, while Lorenzo entered, after having
shut the Door with so much precipitation, that Bandini had not the leisure to
put his Foot within, soon enough to hinder it.

Lorenzo having thus avoided Death, Bandini stole slily away to the
Church-door, from whence, by favor of those who waited for him there, he
reached the Street, and mounting his Horse, got out of the Gate della Cruce,
and in stead of taking the way to the State of the Church, by which he foresaw
they would infallibly pursue him, he fled toward the Sea, where he ran less
risque of being known, because the Country was less frequented, principally in
the State of Sienna. And indeed, he got safe to Corneto, a Port depending on
that Republic, where, by a lucky adventure, he found a Ship ready to set sail
to the Levant. Embarking in this Ship, his Voyage was crossed neither by Pirates
nor by Tempest; but he arrived at Galata, where he received the Money due upon
the Bills of Exchange. He pitched on that City for his Abode, where he had
already almost settled, when he saw himself exposed to the Punishment he thought
he had avoided.

Lorenzo de Medici's Factors discovered him in Galata, notwithstanding all his
Care to conceal his Person; and as they had Access to Cady Bashaw the First
Vizier, they represented to him, That the Sultan his Master was too just, to
suffer any longer in his Dominions the most Criminal of Mankind; That it was
blazed about in Christendom, That his Highness had shown an Horror upon
hearing the Circumstances of the Pazzi's Conspiracy; and that it was not
doubted, but he had so much Goodness, as to refuse his Protection to a Man who
had been its Principal Executioner. This Remonstrance being attended with
Presents capable of affecting a self-interessed Person, as was the
Grand-Vizier, had all the Success intended. Cady Bashaw motion'd the Business
to the Sultan, at that time Bajazet the Second, and made him resolve not only
to drive Bandini out of his Empire, but likewise to deliver him up to the
Florentines.

It was said, That what made him proceed in this manner, was to acquire
Reputation among Strangers, and give them a famous Example of the singular
Virtue he valued himself upon, which was that of exterminating Parricides. They
added, That he was willing to lay hold on the Occasion, to show to all the
Earth, how much he honored Lorenzo de Medici's Merit, which was already famed
in the three known Parts of the Universe.

But those who pried into the Counsels of the Divan, conceived another Opinion
of this Result. They reckoned, that Bajazet did in this, as in all other
weighty Occasions, follow blindly the Sentiments that were suggested to him by
his Prime Vizier. And that Emperor's Son, Selim the First, seemed since to
confirm this Opinion, when being asked, Why he did not wear a long Beard, like
his Father? he said, 'Twas for fear the Bashaws, taking him by it, would lead
him where they listed.

There was likewise more Mystery in this Turkish Civility, than appeared at the
first Blush, to those who made Reflection upon the two Fleets which the Pope had
sent the Years foregoing against the Turks. They easily imagined, that Bajazet
being informed of the Secret of Pazzi's Conspiracy, and having no other Means
then to revenge the Affront he had received, his Fleet not daring to stir out
of the Ports where it was, so long as that of the Christians watched it); that
Bajazet; I say, had delivered up Bandini, in hopes, that being put to the Rack,
he would depose against the Sovereign Pontiff, and thus render him contemptible
to all Christians.

Be it as it will, Bandini was put into Irons, and conveyed to Florence, where
he was hanged at the same Window as Pazzi his Companion, though long after.
However, the Turks had not the Satisfaction they expected, of seeing the Pope
defamed, because Bandini's Process was kept so secret by the Commissioners, who
sat Judges in the Case, that there is not any Light remaining of it.

After a Period was put to the Executions, and that Lorenzo de Medici was cured
of his Wound, he caused stately Obsequies to be performed for his Brother
Giuliano, in the midst whereof there happened this Adventure. A young Lady, that
Giuliano had kept, pretended to be his Wife, and declared her self with Child
by him: Fifty days after was she brought to Bed of a Son, that was mighty like
him; and for this Reason perhaps it was, that Lorenzo caused him to be Baptized
by the Name of Giulio de Medici, without explaining farther, whether he owned
him for a Bastard, or for Legitimate. He was brought up with the Cardinal his
Cousin-german, and succeeded him in the Popedom, by the Name of Clement the
Seventh.

Then Lorenzo making a particular Reflection on the Misfortune that had befallen
him, found it much greater than at first he had imagined. He considered it as
to its Rise; and seeing that those who had drawn up the Platform of the Pazzi's
Conspiracy, might employ against him the Power and Authority of the Holy See,
he judged it became him to make Provision against them beforehand, for fear of
being oppressed. For this Reason it was, that foreseeing what the Riario's
would do in process of time, by what they had already done, he would before all
things bereave them of the Means of covering their Purposes with the Cloak of
Religion, when they levelled them against him. He conjured his Friends, as soon
as ever he had avoided the first Fury of the Assassinates, to take a peculiar
Care of the Person of the Cardinal-Nephew, and sent them to disengage him,
before he stirred out of the Vestry.

They found the young Spark upon the Foot of the Great Altar, in the posture of
a Person expecting Death, and was preparing Christianly to receive it. The
Ecclesiastics, who were little less terrified than the Cardinal, had however
bethought themselves to sorround him, and to make him a Rampart of their own
Bodies. Much ado had they to get him thence, because the People, who fancied
him culpable, already thronged to tear him piecemeal; and the Magistrates were
forced to send their own Guards to his Rescue, and yet would not have been able
to have effected it, but by feigning, that their Order was to conduct the
Cardinal to the Townhouse, there to suffer the same Punishment as the other
Conspirators: But they carried him into the same Palace where he had lodged
since his Arrival at Florence. They so carefully watched all its Avenues, that
his Eminence and his Domestics could not suffer any Insult, during seven or
eight days, which the Florentines past in an horrible agitation.

Lorenzo de Medici's Precaution did not end with doing the Cardinal-Nephew
important Offices in what regarded his Person; but he likewise saved his
Reputation, in a Juncture when it seemed impossible to exempt it from Tarnish.
He suppressed all the Charges and Informations that concerned him and his
Brother Riario. He favored the Rumor which was spread about, That his young
Eminency was wholly ignorant of the Plot. He drew up a kind of Declaration from
the Accomplices, authorized by the Council of Eight, who had instructed their
Process. In a word, he sent to make him from time to time very humble Excuses,
for that he was barred of his Liberty, during the Tumult; and went to pay him a
Visit, as soon as all was calm and hush again in Florence.

As for what regarded the Pope, Lorenzo de Medici writ to his Holiness in Terms
altogether respectful. He craved the Republics and his own Pardon, for the
Discontents the Cardinal-Nephew received on his account. He justified himself,
though no body accused him. He desired, that the Memory of it might be abolished,
and mentioned not in the Letters either his own Wound, or his Brother's Blood,
for fear he might seem to harbor Resentment. In a word, he courted Riario's
Friendship, by a stroke of Politic Prudence, not then in use. He made all the
Paces for it, and made them with an Air that showed neither Fear nor Distrust.
He staid the Orsini's, upon the point of their departing to go and desolate the
Principality of Forli. He took upon him to mediate between them a solid
Reconciliation. He assured him, that the Florentines would no longer concern
themselves in the Conservation of the Petty Sovereigns of Romagna, when the
Pope should have a mind to ruin them. And for the utmost Mark of Confidence,
he offered to go to Rome upon his Holinesses Parole, for the laboring by Word
of Mouth to destroy the dangerous Impressions that had been given him to his
prejudice, without pretending from him any Boon, or for himself, or for his
Friends, in consideration of that Journey.

However, the Pope had not any regard either to Lorenzo's Submission, or to the
Address wherewith he managed the Reputation of the Holy See, and the Honor of
the Riario's, in so nice and Matter. He only viewed the Success of the Pazzi's
Conspiracy, on the Side that could animate him most against a Person whom
Heaven had so visibly protected, in stead of considering it on the Side most
proper to whet his Indignation. He only suffered himself to be transported by
the Motions suggested to him by Spite, for having missed his Aim; and
thenceforward only hearkened to this Chimerical Reason, namely, That the only
Means to cover the Fault he had committed, was to pursue it to the end. He
fancied, that his coming to a Reconciliation with Lorenzo, would at least be
tacitly owning his having had a Hand in the Conspiracy contrived for his Ruin:
And that, on the contrary, by declaring War upon him, and attacking him with
open Force, he would hide, in some manner, the Foxes Skin under that of the
Lion, or fill at least Peoples Minds with so vast an Idea, and so capable of
possessing them by a multitude of Events, which the Sword is wont daily to
produce, that they would have no leisure to think of what had passed before.

Upon this Presupposition, the Pope followed the Counsel given him by Riario,
to levy Troops and not embroil himself a second time in an Enterprise whose
Success might prove contrary to his expectation, by Contingencies his Holiness
could not foresee; he resolved to take his Measures so well, for the Ruin of
Lorenzo de Medici, that Fortune, that had so signally declared in his behalf,
should be constrained to abandon him in spite of her teeth. This made the Pope
send the shrewdest of his Emissaries, called Stefano Noirdi, to the King of
Naples. And that he might be disposed to practice all his Tricks and Artifices,
he had a Cardinal's Cap promised him, if he effected his Negotiation. He was
given in Charge to represent to this King, That the Honor of his Crown was too
far engaged in the Destruction of the Florentines, to leave them at Peace,
since the Conspiracy, wherein the Duke of Calabria his Son had tampered, was
discovered; and to suffer that the Lie should rest with him; That this young
Prince being arrived upon the Frontiers of Tuscany with a brave Army, it ought
to be put into Action, though it were only to prevent its ruining its self in
Sloth, and becoming contemptible by an ignominous Retreat; That it would have
been expedient the Duke of Calabria had not advanced so soon; but that Step
being made, there was no means of going back; That the Florentines seeing him
resolved to subdue them, would acquiesce perhaps out of Prudence, and submit to
the Destiny which then they would look on as inevitable; whereas if he made a
Halt, after having menaced so highly, the Florentines would harbor an
insupportable Presumption, and the other Petty Potentates of Italy, after their
Example, would insensibly be accustomed to despise the Crown of Naples, for
which they before had Deferences little different from Subjection.

These Reasons were too feeble to move so old a Prince, and by consequence so
near his Death, as was the King of Naples. The Blood that thrilled in his
Veins, was too cold, to be fired by so small a matter: And Fame was no longer a
Good he minded the husbanding, since the most Considerable of his Subjects had
aspersed it with such bloody public Reproaches, that it was no longer possible
to repair it. Thus Nardi changed his Design, as soon as he had felt his Pulse,
and pretending to have received new Orders from Rome, demanded Audience, and
proposed the Conquest of the State of Florence, on condition it should be
achieved with the Arms of the Holy See, and those of Naples, both obeying one
and the same General; That this General should be the Duke of Calabria, and
that the War should be carried on at the Pope's Charge only; That Riario
should be put into possession of Florence as soon as it was taken, but that he
should make Oath to the King of Naples, and be bound to hold it of him, as a
Fief depending on his Crown.

The King of Naples had no more regard to this second Proposition, than to the
former; and Nardi was upon the point of returning to Rome, without having made
any Progress in his Pursuits, when an unforeseen Accident concluded his
Negotiation to his Advantage. The Orsini's, unable to remain in Peace, since
they were secured of a Retreat in Tuscany with their Brother-in-Law, took the
Field; and without considering either the Prohibitions of stirring under any
Lure whatever, which they had had from the Pope, or the Protection granted
them, and the Stem of Colonna, by the King of Naples, had laid waste all the
Territories of that House. Their Boldness was augmented by the little
Resistance they had met with in their Design, and by the great number of
Adventurers flocking from all Parts, to reinforce their Troops. They had taken
the Castles by main might, and reduced the Fortresses to Capitulate, without
excepting that of Palliano. The Colonnesi being surprised all they could do was
to retire to Naples, their wonted Asyle, where their Interests engaged them to
become Sollicitors of the Pope's Affairs with the King: For, as they foresaw,
that it would be impossible for them to recover their Places, at least without
procuring such a Diversion on the Side of Tuscany, as should constrain the
Orsini's to go to the Succor of their Brother-in-Law, they concerted their
Measures with Nardi, set a going in his favor all their Intrigues; they
wrought the Duke of Calabria to write to his Father, in Terms which promised
that the Reduction of Florence should cost but some few days Siege, and that
they would oblige themselves to bring thither their Friends as soon as they had
recovered their Lands; and thus reduced the King of Naples to serve as an
Implement to the Pope's Revenge, and the Riario's Ambition.

The End of the Second Book.
THE SECRET HISTORY OF THE HOUSE OF MEDICIS. The Third Book.
COmmissioner Nardi had no sooner adjusted with the King of Naples the
Conditions I have mentioned, than the Duke of Calabria declared War against the
Republic of Florence, with the Formalities then in use; that is to say, He
sent to defy her by an Herald, in the Name of the Pope, and the King his
Father. He prescribed her the time wherein she should prepare for her Defense,
and caused the Reasons he had to attack her, to be given her in Writing.

These Reasons were all reduced to the Outrage the Holy See pretended to have
received in the Person of the Cardinal-Nephew. The Constitutions of Popes were
alleged, and the Privileges granted at diverse times to the Sacred College. It
was maintained, That the Ecclesiastic Purple rendered no less Illustrious, nor
less Inviolable, the Persons invested with it, than the Secular. And they
wrested from these Principles all that the Quirks of Schools was able to
suggest in Passionate Divines, for the blackening the Honor of the Republic
of Florence in general, and of Lorenzo de Medici in particular.

They urged, That the Pazzi's Conspiracy had been contrived only to oppress
the Cardinal-Nephew; That the time of his Journey to Florence was designedly
chosen; That the extraordinary Honors that had been done him, were only to
Will-i'th'-wisp him the more easily into the Precipice; That they had spared
him in the Feast of Frejola, for that Giuliano de Medici could not be of the
Party; and that his sudden Departure pressing the Accomplices to hasten the
Blow, they had made no scruple of attempting it in the Choir of the Great
Church, and in presence of the Holy Sacrament; That the Cardinal-Nephew was
solely indebted for his Life to the Resolution the Ecclesiastics had shown, of
exposing their own, that they might preserve his, by putting themselves in a
Posture, wherein each made him a Buckler of his own Body; That the single
Necessity to which the Assassinates saw they were reduced of cutting the
Throats of so many Persons, before they meddled with that they aimed at, had
hindered them from proceeding further; That the Cardinal Nephew was not fetched
from the Church, till the Magistracy of Florence did not think it seemly to
leave him any longer amidst the Slaughter; That he had only changed the
Danger, by going out of the Cathedral; That the Guards that attended him, under
the Sham of re-encouraging him, had had Order to hinder him from escaping,
before they had consulted anew, whether they should attempt again upon his
Life; That the Railleries, Upbraidings, Imprecations, he had every moment
heard, were as so many Testimonies of it; and, That, finally, though the
Florentines did determine to suffer him to return to Rome, 'twas not that they
had repented of their detestable Project, but only because those who were less
impetuous than others, had made reflection, that all Europe would take up Arms
to revenge this Crime, which would not have had any Example among Christians,
if they suffered it to be Crowned with the Death of a Cardinal-Nephew.

The time the Duke of Calabria had given the Florentines, served the Court of
Rome to finish the Procedures that were to be used, before pronouncing the
Interdict. The Cardinal-Nephew made his Complaint, and the Witnesses were
heard. The Florentines were thrice cited, but for Forms sake only, it being
pretended, their Crime was too notorious, to have need of Confrontation. And
the Censures were thundered our, before the Republic had thoughts of making
her Defense. Her State was given up to Spoil, and the Duke of Calabria named
Commissioner to execute the Sentence.

Nothing of all this startled Lorenzo de Medici, as having expected it, when
the Pope rejected his Excuses. But he had occasion for all his Prudence, and
his Authority in Florence, and in the other Cities of its Dependency, to
dispose the People to suffer the Interdict without murmuring: For this kind of
Lightning was so dreaded in all Parts of the Christian World, that the being
struck with it, was sufficient to become execrable to all the Faithful. They
did not trouble their Noddles with considering whether it was just or no: And
Peoples minds were so prepossessed with this Maxim, That the Punishments of
Hell were inseparable from the Thunders of the Vatican, for what Couses soever
they were darted, that Armies of Sixty thousand good Soldiers had been seen to
desert their General in a Night, and whole Nations revolt against their
Sovereigns, by so general a Defection, that he had left him neither Subject nor
Domestic.

Thus Lorenzo did not make it his Business to combat the Sentiment of the
Vulgar, though he wanted not Reasons, and that the Pulpiteers had past their Word
to Preach in his favor. He took a shorter, and a less bewildered way; and
without speaking of the Authority, or of the Justice of the Person who had
thrown the Thunder, he endeavored to evade it, by showing, that it departed
from a more near, and a less respectuous Hand. He rejected all the Fault of the
Interdict upon Riario, the Pope's Nephew: And communicating to the Florentines
what there was against him in the Informations of the last Attempt, he fully
convicted him to have been its Author.

Afterward he proceeded farther: And having perceived, that the People began
to ferment, he discovered to them all the Particularities, which served to
show, that Riario's Design had been principally to usurp the State of Florence.
He spoke of the Enterprise of Tiserno, when the Ambition of this Nephew of the
Pope had flamed out the last time; of the Reduction of Spoleto, where he had
settled a Garrison capable of inspiring Jealousy to its Neighbors; of the
Conquest of Forli, without having other Right than Bienscance.
Convenience; and of the pretended Purchase of Immola, which he was forced to
traverse by all manner of ways. From these four Principles, Lorenzo inculcated
to the People, That Riario had drawn near Tuscany with no other intent, than to
become its Masters. He made them remark, That the Pazzi's had not conspired
against their Country to become its Tyrants, seeing they had not taken any
Precautions necessary for such a Design, and that Riario had not omitted the
least; That he had been at the Charges of the Plot, exacted peculiar
Engagements from the Persons concerned in it, administered Oaths to them, given
the Principal Orders, and sent his Nephew to Florence to reap the Fruit of it,
with which he had flattered his Head when he framed the Conspiracy. He added,
That the said Riario having missed his Aim, endeavored to effect it by Means,
that were not the more lawful, though they were the less disguised; That
possessing, as he did, the Pope's Heart and Ear, it should not be thought
strange that he inspired him with Thoughts conformable to his detestable
Project, or that he abused the Authority of the Church; but that he was to be
resisted with the same firmness as Vitelli had exerted in Tiferno; and that if
such a Petty Sovereign, who had hardly any other Right over his Country, than
that which his Predecessors had acquired by the Remisness and Desertion of
foregoing Popes, had not been wanting to make a brave Defense against the
Forces of the Court of Rome, before he truckl'd; or of re-enti^ng upon the
first Occasion that was offered, though he had surrendered the Place upon
Capitulation, and had the Money paid him down on the Naib before his
Evacuation; the Florentines, with much stronger Reason, ought to fight to the
last Gasp, for the Conservation of a Liberty whereof they had been Peaceable
Possessors for so many Ages, and which none had ever grutch'd or grappl'd with
them for, before Riario.

These Reasons being artificially insinuated among the People, rendered them in
a few days capable of the Sentiments which Lorenzo was willing to inspire into
them. They heard, without being ruffl'd, the Denunciations and Monitories of
the Court of Rome, and did but rally at the Placarts that were posted up and
down, to excite them to Sedition. They prepared for War with far less noise,
and much more regularity, than when attacked by Coglione. And as States the
most jealous of their Sovereignty, cannot dispense themselves sometimes from
ceding it almost entirely to Particular Persons, in such an extraordinary
difficult Juncture, there was a new Magistrature created in favor of Lorenzo,
which was in nothing different from the Dictatorship of the Ancient Romans.
They rendered him the Arbiter of the Life and Death of his Fellow-Citizens.
They allowed him to put what Garrison he pleased into the Towns and Places, and
abandoned to him even the Power which the Republic was wont to reserve to its
own Management in such like Occasions, which consisted in augmenting the old,
and laying on new Impositions.

In this Dignity was it that Lorenzo found the Occasions to display the
admirable Qualities he possessed for Government, and to put in practice what he
had learned most refined upon this Subject. He took the Rudder in his Hand; but
he took it in such manner, as showed, that he would restore it again as soon as
the Storm was over. Whatever his Independence was on the other Magistrates, he
was not wanting to communicate to them the most important Affairs, or to cause
them to be executed according as they had been resolved on by Plurality of
Voices. He did not depose so much as one of the Commissioners and Officers he
found in Office. He remained satisfied with instructing and encouraging them to
serve usefully their Country. In a word, he only reserved to his own
performance the Drudgery and Prickles of Absolute Authority, and left the Roses
to those whose Genius was more delicious, or less capable of Fatigue.

He derived from this Conduct two great Advantages. The one, That there needed
less time to give the subaltern Orders, which were executed with much more
diligence and expedition by the ancient Magistrates, than they would have been
by newer, through the possession they were in of procuring Obedience. The other
was, That Lorenzo not being enforced to employ in Common Uses the Choice of his
Friends, as he would have been constrained by a general Change of Officers, he
was at liberty to send them to the Potentates of Italy, who had not yet any
Engagement with his Enemies: Which he accordingly so succeeded in that the
Republics of Venice and Genoua, the Dukes of Milan and Vrbini, the Marquisses
of Ferrara and Mantoua, signed a Defensive League with the Florentines.

I shall not stand describing the particular Transactions of that War; for
besides, as they are not worthy of Remark, I am obliged to hint by the Bie,
That it is the Business of a Writer of History, and not mine. I shall only
say, That the most considerable. Succors which the Florentines received, came
from Milan; and that their other Allies assisted them so feebly, that their
Army was never in a state to keep the Field. That of the Duke of Calabria,
composed of the Ecclesiastic Troops, and of those of Naples, invaded the
Territory of Florence, where they found the Places of Importance too well
provided, to be taken by any other means than that of a regular Siege.

Yet it was not his Opinion to lay any at all; for he was so much the less
assured of Success, as that the Florentines might easily, as soon as they had
seen it, draw together the Troops they had dispersed in all the other Places,
and form of them a Body capable of famishing the Besiegers, by retrenching
their Victuals, or introducing into the Place besieged so great Succors, or
such notable Refreshments, as that it would be a madness to continue the Siege.
Moreover, the Summer was too near at hand, for the forming an Enterprise,
which, according to all the Maxims of the Military Art, must end before the
Heats began to be troublesome. And the Pope, who had bound himself to be at all
the Charges of the War, had not a Fund to maintain it long, because the
Revenues of St. Peter's Patrimony had been diminished by the Civil Wars between
the Orsini's and Colonna's; from whence the Duke of Calabria had reason to
foresee, that his Army would infallibly disband, if he engaged his Soldiers in
a long Siege, without having the Means of furnishing to their Subsistence; and
that, on the contrary, he might retain them for some Months under his Ensigns,
by abandoning to them the open Country to pillage, and the little Places that
were not able to make Defense.

From thence it came, that the War was only made, properly speaking, upon the
Hinds and Bumpkins, and that naught but Buroughs and Castles of Pleasure were
forced during the Spring. The Summer succeeding, caused the Troops to return
into Quarters of Refreshment, and produced Events capable of burying the House
of Medici under the Ruins of its Country, if Lorenzo had not conjured down the
Tempest, in the very moment it was going to pour down upon Both, by a Hit of
Prudence, and consummated Generosity, which had not yet had any Example in
Antiquity, and will not perhaps be imitated in future Ages.

That I may be the better understood, necessary it is, that I enquire a little
further into Things, though it cost me a Digression, and that I insinuate some
Revolutions of the Dukedom of Milan, which occasioned those I mean to handle.
Francesco Sforza seized on the Duchy of Milan by an Adventure equally Happy
and Capricious. He was the Issue of the Concubinage of the Famous Sforza with a
young Maiden of Cotignola, and had addicted himself to the Profession of Arms,
wherein he was born. His Father was drowned in going to succor the Cities of
Aquila. The Troops being destitute of that Leader, chose him for their
Commander, though he was at that time but Twenty years of age. The Event
justified their Election, and young Sforza relieved the Place, defeated the
Besiegers, won a notable Battle, and through the highest Felicity caused
Braccio to perish, who had been his Father's Rival, and mortal Enemy. This
Success rooted his Reputation, and retained the old Soldiers under his
Discipline. He led them to the Service of Milan's last Duke, of the Family of
the Visconti's, and obliged by long Labors that Prince, who had no Legitimate
Children, to give him his Bastard-Daughter in Marriage. At first he derived no
other Advantage from this Match, than of possessing a Woman endowed with all
the Graces of her own Sex, and all the Noble Qualities of ours; because his
Father-in-Law was of so fickle a Humor, that he made every year a Will, by
which he instituted him Heir of Milan, and nulled it as often to make a new
one, which left after his Death his Subjects at liberty to choose a Sovereign,
or to change their Government into a Commonwealth.

But at last, the Duke dying at a time he was governed by his Daughter, and
Sforza being in the same Conjuncture at the Head of an Army, which he commanded
for the Duke against the Venetians, he led it on to Milan with so much
diligence, that he prevented his Competitors, and engaged the People by this
Surprise to own him for their Governor. Afterward, his Valor made him
overcome all those who pretended to dispossess him, while his Wife got him the
Hearts of his new Subjects, by her obliging Humor, and the Charms of her
Conversation. But dying of a Dropsy, at a time Galeazzo his eldest Son was
going into France, to the Succor of Lewis the Eleventh, the News that young
Prince received of his Death in his crossing Auvergne, constrained him to turn
back immediately, and pass through the Territories of the Duke of Savoy in a
disguised Habit. His Mother had caused the Milaneses to take the Oath of
Allegiance to him: And the first Arms which the Piomonteses had experienced to
their loss, had acquired him so great a Name, that none durst shock him
afterward.

The profound Peace he since enjoyed, had so far engaged him in Luxury and
Delights, that his Court was become a Seraglio; the Ladies of Quality were
persuaded, that the abandoning their Persons to their Prince, was the doing
nothing contrary to their Honor. But their Husbands were not of the same
Opinion: And there were those among the Gentlemen of the Duke's Train, who on
this score entertained the Design of assassinating him, namely, Andre
Lampoguano, Carlo Visconti, and Geronimo Olgiati. Their Pretexts were, That
Lampoguano had by Inheritance from his Ancestors a Manor holding of the Church
of Cosmo, whereon the Bishop had entered, and the Duke refused to concern
himself in the Business. Visconti unable to endure, that the Duke, not content
with usurping the Duchy of Milan over those of his House, had moreover
introduced Infamy into ^^is Family, by debauching his Sister, and prostituting
her afterward to his Ganimede. Olgiati set Brutus for his imitation, at the
Solicitation of Monte his Tutor, animated for that the Duke had had him lashed
and strappado'd, out of revenge for having whipped him in his Youth. The Duke
was stabbed in St. Stephen's Church: And his Murderers, in stead of receiving
the Applause they expected from the People, were dragged to Execution, after
Lorenzo de Medici had delivered up one of them, who had taken Refuge in the
Caverns of the Apennine. A Will was found of the Duke's, which left his eldest
Son under the Guardianship of his Mother, on condition she should follow the
Counsels of Simoneta. But Ludovico Sforza's Humor, the Child's Uncle, was too
ambitious, to let a long Minority spin out, without endeavoring to gain by it.
He at first disputed the Tutelage; and that not succeeding, he durst pretend,
nay, and declare to some Persons, That the Duchy appertained to him, as being
born when Francesco Sforza his Father was Sovereign; whereas his Brother
Galeazzo popp'd into the World when the same Sforza was as yet in a private
Capacity. This came to the Regents Ears, who was advised to send away her
Brother-in-Law.

He withdrew to Pisa, from whence he formed in Milan so potent a Faction, that
he wrought his Recall in despite of his Sister-in-Law: He expelled her,
instated himself in the Possession of the Guardianship, caused Simoneta's Head
to be struck off, got the Governor of the Castle to an Interview upon the
Drawbridge, seized his Person, had a Gallows set up, and a Wax-Candle lighted,
with an Oath to have him hanged, if the Place was not delivered up into his
Hands, before the Candle was spent. The Garrison being terrified, and touched
with Compassion, opened the Gates; and Ludovico Sforza wanting Forces to
maintain his Ground in a Station he had newly possessed himself of by such
violent Courses, recalled the Milan-Troops which were gone to the Succor of
the Florentines.

Lorenzo de Medici was little less concerned at this Repeal, than if he had
been struck with Thunder. He perfectly knew Ludovico Sforza's Genius, and did
not doubt but that this Prince had such Designs as would control his giving any
Assistance to his Neighbors. And as the Republic of Florence could not be
without it in this Juncture, it was in the most inevitable and nearest Danger
to which it had been exposed since Lorenzo had meddled in the Government.

Her other Allies of Mantoua, Ferrara, and Vrbini, were not in a capacity to
relieve her. And as they had sent her only Troops, as thinking her capable of
making Head against the Duke of Calabria, it was to be feared they would recall
them, and make their Accommodation apart, as soon as they should perceive that
Ludovico Sforza had set them the Example for so doing. For, in short, if that
Prince cocker'd in his Mind the Design of making himself Duke, he was too
cunning to attempt it, before he had gained at least two of the three Powers of
Italy who might traverse it, namely, the Pope by his Censures, the King of
Naples by his Authority, and the Venetians by their Neighborhood. And indeed,
as Lorenzo had Emissaries in all the Courts of Italy, he knew that Ludovico
Sforza entertained a secret Agent to dispose King Ferrand to give him in
Marriage the Princess his Daughter, who was to wed the young Duke of Milan when
he was come to Age.

Thus Lorenzo had reason to suppose, that the Succors of Milan would
infallibly bilk the Florentines in their greatest need; and that if Sforza sent
back Soldiers into Tuscany, it should be no longer as an Ally, but in quality
of an Enemy, since he would not do it but for the obtaining by that Infidelity
the Princess of Naples. However, it was no less indubitable, that the Defection
of Sforza was going to open to the Duke of Calabria in few Months the Gates of
Florence; for the Citizens of that Town, who had showed so much Courage at
first, would begin to pant and stagger, as soon as they perceived that the
Match was not equal, and would divide themselves into as many Factions as there
were Persons of Quality, who wished a Change in the State, for the bettering
their own Condition. Then there would be no longer any Citizen that would
hazard his Life, or contribute to the Charges of the War, and Lorenzo must be
reduced all alone to support the Burden, from which he was so much the more
dissuaded by Prudence, as that he could not do it without ruining himself Root
and Branch, if, after having pumped his Credit, and emptied his Purse by an
excessive Expense, after having kept on foot whole Armies out of his own
Coffers, he should nevertheless sink, and be involved under the Ruins of his
Country, his House would have no longer a Fund to furnish to its Recovery from
such a Calamity, as it had done in the time of Cosmo the Old, nor a Convenience
of taking Refuge in some Sanctuary, till such time as there was a return of
Good-fortune: if he died in the Occasion, he would be accounted rash in the
Judgment of Posterity; and if he preserved his Life, it would be only to spin
it out, and finish it in Poverty, and to reunite in his Person the two most
notable Adversities which can vanquish the Patience of a Man of Heart, viz. an
Infamous Exile, with a Long Beggary.

Whereas, if he used the same Policy which so well accommodated his
Grandfather, and if, like him, he contented himself with hazarding his own
Person, without consuming his Estate by a needless Expense; on the one side, no
other Inconveniences could befall him, than those which would be common to him
with the other Florentines; and on the other, he would have Ressources for his
House, which would be wholly peculiar to it. For, in what part of the World
soever it should retire, after having been expelled Florence, it would there
find a Stock to subsist on at ease, and in such an abundance, as would
distinguish it from others, and make it be ever considered by the Florentines,
that were under the same Misfortune, as alone capable of restoring them to
their own Country on the first favorable Occasion. If he lost his Life in
Banishment, his Wife, being wife and virtuous, would interess the Orsini's to
take care of the Children he should leave under Age, in hopes of partaking with
them the Administration of so many Riches; and if he survived to the Republic
of Florence, he might retire to Venice, and there enjoy the Privileges of a
Noble Venetian, which his Grandfather had acquired him, in expectation that one
of those Revolutions, which never failed happening from time to time in Florence,
should recall him thither with the same Advantages he went thence.

These Considerations inspired Lorenzo with the Design of making his
Accommodation in time. And though it was not impossible for him to conclude a
particular Treaty, by which another less scrupulous would have made up his
Account, he wisely judged, that it would be neither for his Honor, or Surety,
to unhinge his own Interests from off of those of his Country, for two Reasons.
The one, That he it was that had drawn on the Tempest, wherewith it was tossed
and agitated; the other, That in whatever Part Fortune should prepare him a
Retreat, he would never find there what he had left at home.

Wherefore treat he must, and comprehend the Florentines in the Treaty; but in
this consisted the greatest Difficulty, because Lorenzo's Policy, how pregnant
soever in Expedients, did not suggest to him any probable Means of bringing it
about: For, in the first place, there was no hopes from an address to the Duke
of Calabria, who would not be of a Humor to receive a Proposition of Peace,
because he would look upon it as if it were to ravish from him the Glory of the
Conquest of Florence. There was much less likelihood, in the second place, in
courting the Pope; for besides that he appeared too much irritated against the
Republic of Florence in general, and against Lorenzo de Medici in particular,
to receive any Submission on their Part; he was, moreover, too much wedded to
the Interest of his Nephews, to frustrate them of a Spoil of which they were
almost cock-suree, after having spared no Means whatever for the making it fall
into their Hands.

In the third place, there seemed not to be any Remedy on the Side of Naples:
For though King Ferrand was less prepossessed with Passion than the Duke of
Calabria his Son, and than the Pope; yet he was so closely besieged by Nardi,
to whom the Pope had newly sent a Cardinal's Cap, that there was no room for
doubt, but that this Prince would cause all Persons to be clapped up, who
should come to him on the behalf of the Florentines, under pretense, that they
were People with whom he was in War. That if they went about to send Deputies
to those three Potentates at the same time, besides their exposing themselves
to all the Inconveniences I have newly represented, without any prospect of
Success, they must hazard the Lives of as many Persons of Quality, as there
should be appointed to this Commission; and the Republic of Florence would
render it self ridiculous, by a Deputation which would only serve to give its
Enemies solemn Marks of its Pusilanimity.

Of so many Mischiefs that offered themselves to Lorenzo's Imagination, he
chose the least; which was to go himself and negotiate with the King of Naples:
For though he was assured (as I have already said) of concluding naught, yet
there was some glimmering of Hope, that the Surprise that Prince might be in at
such a Sight, would hinder him from treating him at the first blush with the
same Severity which he would have used toward a bare Deputy; and that
afterward it would not peradventure be impossible to slacken and mollify him,
if he gave him Audience. Besides, Lorenzo had a tolerable good Opinion of his
own Fortune, as well as Caesar; he knew, that Chance does commonly produce the
most remarkable Events from weak Beginnings: he knew the Genius of King Ferrand
to be an Enemy of War, and susceptible of all the Proposals of Peace that
turned to his Advantage. He had been fully informed of the Address which Nardi
had used to wrest the Inclinations of this Prince, by making him enter into an
odious Confederation with the Pope; and by consequence, did not despond of
breaking it, provided he had the Opportunity of representing to him by Word of
Mouth the Infamy of it, and of making him observe, That he had been paum'd upon
when he was promised to be made Ruling Lord of Florence, since the thing could
not be effected according to the Terms it had been proposed.

Upon this Proposition, Lorenzo de Medici, through a Result of Heroic
Prudence, resolved to go throw himself into his Enemies Arms, after having
concluded a Suspension of Arms for two Months with the Duke of Calabria. As he
had conceived this design without the Participation of his Friends, he made not
any of them his least Confident in the Matter. He gave secret Orders for the
securing what he had most Precious. He caused two Galleys to ride ready in the
least-frequented Port there was upon the Coast of Tuscany; and casting his Eyes
upon all the Florentine Gentlemen he had reason to mistrust, he found out the
Means to hinder them from stirring during his absence. He invited their
Children to a Match of Hunting, that way-wards where he was to Embarque; and
the Invitation he made them was so much the more attracting, as that there were
no parts of that Country unprovided with a World of Stags and Wild Boars. Not a
Man of them failed the Assignation; for there was no Danger to be feared, (the
Duke of Calabria's Troops being too far off, and there being no coming for them
to the Place of Hunting, without passing upon the Lands of the Republics of
Sienna and of Lucca, which was never practiced in the Military Discipline then
in use.)

The Chase was good and diverting. And Lorenzo, after having conducted
insensibly this young Nobless to the two Galleys, told them, with an Air
wherein there was not the least glimpse of Affectation, That he was going to
take a Voyage for a few days to Naples, upon Affairs of the Republic. These
young Persons seeing him alone, and without Train, fancied there would be
incivility in suffering him to depart in that manner, and offered to accompany
him, without asking him time to inform their Parents, because they saw
themselves too much pressed, and that they moreover fansy'd he would not have
led them so far, without the Permission of their Relations, who had not hinted
it to them, that so the Voyage might be kept the more secret.

Thus Lorenzo de Medici had without any Caballing, and without Violence, the
Hostages he wished for, and was at liberty to apply his Mind wholly to what he
was going about, because he had now no need to fear any Commotions in his
absence. Nevertheless, he obliged his new Squadron to write to Florence, before
he set Sail. And he himself wrote to the Magistrates a pretty long Letter,
whose Abridgment it is here of importance to set down. At first he asked their
Pardon for two things: The one, For having undertaken, without their
Participation, a Business of that Consequence he was going to negotiate. The
other, Of departing Florence without their leave. He alleged but one and the
same Excuse for these two Faults, namely, That the Affair in hand was so nice,
that it could not, nor ought not to be approved of, but by the Success. Then he
exposed, in Terms altogether tender, That he had not been able any longer to
endure, that his Country should be in danger in his Consideration: And as he
owed it all, he likewise hazarded his all for its Deliverance: That he was
going directly to Naples, with design to undeceive King Ferrand, and make him
see into the Injustice of the League wherein the Riario's had engaged him: That
he could not doubt, but that this Prince was his particular Enemy; but that,
notwithstanding, he did not despair of making him condescend to supportable
Conditions: That if he effected this, he should have the Glory of exempting his
Country from the Incommodities of the War; and if God did not in this Point
second his just Intentions, his Imprisonment or his Death would discharge him
from the Envy that was born him at Florence, and Posterity at least would do
him the Justice of putting him in the number of those who had sacrificed
themselves voluntarily for their Country.

This Letter being brought to Florence, had the same effect in all Peoples
Minds, though all People were not inclined alike. In regard of Lorenzo de Medici,
his Enemies no longer doubted of his Loss; and his Friends believed it so
certain, that they began to take their Measures for the establishing themselves
elsewhere. But while the one and other reasoned after their own mode upon this
Transaction, the two Galleys arrived at Naples. And Lorenzo de Medici signified
to King Ferrand, That he was come to have the Honor of paying his Respects to
his Majesty, and discoursing him upon some Affairs, that could not be
negotiated by an Interposer.

Lorenzo's Arrival could not be so secret, but that the News of it was spread
all over the Town, before the Person dispatched to the King could pay his
Majesty the Civilities he had in Charge. Insomuch that the Riario's Deputy, who
was a Florentine by Nation, but otherwise Lorenzo's irreconcilable Enemy, and
called Ressalli, had the leisure to go to the Palace, and be present with the
King, when the Gentleman was introduced. He had likewise the satisfaction to
hear, that not only the King gave him no favorable Answer, but did not so
much as say to him any thing positive, whereon he had reason to take
Confidence. He was so much the more spirited to represent to this Prince, as
soon as the Gentleman was gone, That since Fortune had now popp'd into his
Hands the Means to terminate in a moment the War of Tuscany, to his Glory, and
the Advantage of his Allies, without running any hazard, there was no question
but that he would use them with all the Prudence natural to him: That if
Lorenzo pretended to be come upon the Faith of the Truce then granted by the
Duke of Calabria, he would learn, to his cost, that that Truce only regarded
Tuscany, or at most the neighboring Countries, that lay exposed to the
Inconveniences of the War; but not the City of Naples, which was an hundred
Leagues distant thence: That though all the Dominions of King Ferrand had been
comprehended therein, (which was not however done in any of the Articles)
Lorenzo had incapacitated himself for enjoying the Benefit of it, by neglecting
a Formality, so universally received in all the Countries of the Earth, that
there was reason to maintain, that it appertained to the Right of Nations: That
this Formality consisted in making known to Sovereigns the Desire a Person has
of seeing or crossing their Dominions, or demanding their Passport before the
Journey be undertaken; and that as Lorenzo could not be ignorant of this, he
ought to be treated as Culpable, for having violated it: That nothing more was
there to do, than two things, in his regard; the one, to rid his Person out of
the World; and the other, to seize it: That the former would be the shortest,
and safest; but, that if his Majesty could not so soon resolve upon that, his
Allies hoped from his Prudence and Equity, that he would give his Orders
incontinently for the performing the second.

The King of Naples made no precise Answer to Ressalli: He only gave him to
understand, That this Adventure was so surprising, that it well merited to be
examined with more leisure. And indeed, hardly ever was Prince seen more
puzzled than King Ferrand, when he fell to deliberate in himself upon the
manner he should receive Lorenzo de Medici. The Cruelty he was naturally prone
to, persuaded him to use Violence: And the fair Pretense he had to execute it,
egged him on the more to gratify this Inclination. Moreover, he looked on the
Sovereignty of Florence as a Fief which would hold of his Crown, as soon as
Lorenzo de Medici should be no more; and the Life of a Private Man did not seem
to him sufficiently considerable, to balance such an Advantage. He was engaged
in a War, that might be terminated with one Blow. He had promised the Pope to
put his Nephew in possession of Florence. He knew the violent Humor of that
Pontiff. He foresaw, that he would never pardon him, if he let so fair an
Occasion escape of satisfying his Ambition and Revenge: And the History of
three or four Ages had taught him, that the Popes had taken away and given the
Crown of Naples, almost as often as the Will or the Caprice had whirled them so
to do.

On the other side, the Right of Nations, and good Faith, on which Lorenzo was
come, seemed to be two sufficient Reasons to dissuade his Detention, to
whomsoever should have an abhorrence to notorious Crimes. And as the Genius of
King Ferrand was sufficiently irresolv'd, he felt in his Soul an extraordinary
agitation, when he was to come to a Determination. However, it is not doubted,
but that he had at length chosen the unjust Course, if Curiosity had not
justl'd in to the Succor of what Virtue he had left, to hinder him from
violating the Right of Hospitality. He remembers, that Lorenzo de Medici was
bruited the Worthiest Man in Europe. He remembers the Wonders that were blazed
of him abroad; and comparing them with the Generous Resolution that had
conducted him to Naples, he had a grudging to see this Hero, who was both the
greatest Politician, and the gallantest Man living. He was confirmed in the
Design, by the facility of gratifying this Desire of his, without its being in
the least known. He had Lorenzo whispered, That they might confer together,
provided their Interview was performed without any Witnesses. Lorenzo not
caring in what manner he saw the King, so he had but time to discourse him,
joyfully received the Proposal that was made him, nay, and suggested the Means
of having it effected according to his Majesty's Mind, by offering to be
conducted alone, as soon as it was Night, to any Place appointed him.

Thus was the Interview had in the King's Closet, where Lorenzo having
insinuated into to the Monarch's good Opinion, by all the ways that Decency
allowed of, discoursed him upon the Subject of his Voyage, and made him see
into the real cause of the Tuscan War, which so much care had been taken to
conceal and masquerade, so as that it might not fall within his ken. He
justified himself fully upon all which the Riario's had laid to his Charge; and
perceiving the King took some delight in what he related to him, he staggered
him quite, by declaring to him. That he needed to bring no other Proof of his
Innocence, than the Resolution he had taken, of coming himself to acquaint his
Majesty with the true State of the Case. He added, That he demanded no other
Articles of Peace, than those his Majesty should judge reasonable; and that the
Florentines would receive, without murmuring, the Law he should vouchsafe to
give them, after having had the Honor of informing him of the Quarrel, wherein
they were engaged, maugre their Endeavors and Inclinations for Peace.

As the King of Naples was naturally vain, and that Fortune had never afforded
him the Occasions of satisfying the Inclination he had for false Glory, though he
had already Reigned above Thirty years, he swallowed with avidity that now
offered, of becoming Arbiter of the Florentines Destiny, and footh'd his Fancy
with the Pleasure he should have in giving the Citizens of Naples a Spectacle
approaching that of the Romans, when Tiridates, the King of Parthia's Brother,
came to demand Peace of Nero, for Armenia. In this thought, he sweetened
insensibly, and abated of his Tartness, even to the letting Lorenzo know, That
if he sent to inform him of his Arrival by the most considerable Gentlemen that
accompanied him, and to declare to him he was come as a Deputy from the
Republic of Florence, to negotiate the Peace, under the Sanction of the Truce;
this Overture would furnish him with the Pretext he needed, to give him a
Public Audience, without derogating from the League he had made with the Pope.

Lorenzo accepted this Offer so much the more willingly, as that at his
departure from Florence he had provided himself with a sufficient Power, and
had taken care to bring along with him the Gonfaloniere's only Son, the
fittest Man that could be, to represent the Personage desired by the King of
Naples. Whereupon he sent him the next day to that Prince, to make him the
Compliment agreed on: And the King of Naples took his time to receive him in
Ressalli's Presence. The Gonfaloniere's Son, called Tomaso Soderini, acquitted
himself admirably well of his Commission, and acquainted the King of Naples,
with much Boldness and Confidence, after having paid him the most profound
Respects, That the Republic of Florence, in consequence of a Suspension of
Arms, which she had concluded for two Months with the Duke of Calabria, had
rightly judged, that this Interval was too short to observe all Formalities
necessary for the Conclusion of a Peace; and that to improve these her few so
precious Moments to her best advantage, by justling up to the main of the
Business, without losing time about the Preliminaries, to Naples she had sent
Lorenzo de Medici, the most Considerable of her Subjects, that he might
Personally Treat with his Majesty, upon the Presupposition, That the Pope would
not fail to approve of what should be concluded on at Naples.

The King of Naples, after having made young Soderini withdraw, asked Ressalli
what his Thoughts were of the Business. Ressalli made answer, That he persisted
in the belief, that Lorenzo de Medici ought to be dispatched out of the World,
or at least secured. But things are no longer in the same State (replied the
King); for we thought yesterday he came of his own motion, and as a Private
Person; and now we are informed he comes in the Name of the Commonwealth of
Florence, and has the Character of Ambassador Extraordinary. But though it were
so (replied Ressalli hastily) your Majesty may pretend Ignorance, till such
time as the Florentines have informed you of it by the Ways in use among
Sovereign Powers, in matter of Deputation; and in the mean while, you will have
sufficient ground to act against Lorenzo de Medici, though it were only to
punish him for having neglected these Formalities. The King of Naples rejoined,
When I have practiced this subtle Prank and Cavil, it will not skreen my Honor
from Reproach, in having violated the Right of Nations, in so signal a
Conjuncture. Then he fell to making a long Exaggeration of Lorenzo's Merit, and
concluded it with letting Ressalli know, That if he failed making a favorable
Reception to Lorenzo's Dignity, that alone would be sufficient to render his
Reign odious to Posterity.

These last Words utterly discomposed and nonplus'd Ressalli's Violence. He
manifestly saw the King of Naples fully set upon giving Lorenzo Audience, and
was not ignorant of the Consequences. Nevertheless, as there was no possibility
of preventing it, at least without running the hazard of a Rupture with the
King, from which he was forewarned by Riario above all things. Moreover, if the
King of Naples was resolved to discourse him, the more advantageous was it to
the Pope and his Nephew, that it were done with their Participation, and in
their Deputy's Presence, than if it was performed without their Privity;
because that in the first Case they might find occasion, perhaps, to prevent
its taking effect: And that if it succeeded maugre these Endeavors, they would
be still in a capacity to husband their Interests: Whereas, in the second Case,
the Odds was too great against them, and their whole Stake in danger of being
lost, without hopes of Retrieve, since the King of Naples, after having treated
with Lorenzo, needed only to send word to the Duke of Calabria to lead back
into his own Dominions the Army that acted in Tuscany: For, as that Army
depended almost on three Regiments of Infantry, the Florentines would enjoy
Peace nevertheless, with almost as much Tranquillity, as if they had treated
with the Pope, whose Weakness would be then obvious to all the World, and
tarnish'd with the utmost Affront.

This moved Ressalli to give the Neapolitan King to understand, That if his
Majesty thought convenient to grant Lorenzo Audience, the Pope his Master hoped
he would have the Goodness not to do any thing prejudicial to their Union. The
King of Naples replied, That he would neither see Lorenzo, nor speak to him,
but in the Presence of his Holinesse's Minister, that he might have an
irreproachable Evidence to vouch for the sincerity of his Intentions. Lorenzo's
first Audience passed almost wholly in Civilities on both sides. He appeared as
Ambassador Extraordinary from the Republic of Florence, and said, That his
Superiors had sent him modestly to bewail the Misfortune they had had, of
incurring the Pope's Indignation, without being guilty of any thing to
challenge it; That for overplus of Ill Fortune, they had seen the Arms of
Naples join with those of the Church, to lay desolate their Territory; but that
these Acts of Hostility had diminished nothing of the ancient Confidence which
the Commonwealth of Florence had ever had in his Majesty's Justice, because she
had supposed, that so wise a Prince must necessarily have been prepossessed to
her Prejudice, to treat her as an Enemy without any Lawful Cause; That it was
in order to the destroying so dangerous an Opinion, that he was sent to implore
Peace of his Majesty, and to declare to him, That the Florentines were so
persuaded of their not having offended him in any manner, that they would
submit to all he should please to decree, and humbly to beseech him to be their
Mediator with the Pope.

The King of Naples answered sparkishly, That the Commonwealth of Florence had
found the Secret to make his Sword fall out of his Hand, if he himself had been
only Interessed in the Tuscan War. But, as the Pope was a Party, he could then
make no other Return, than that he already gave his Royal Word, to sacrifice to
the Good of the Peace all his Pretensions, and all the Charges he had been at,
and to employ his Offices with his Holiness, in order to dispose him to an
Accommodation.

This favorable Reception was followed two days after with a Private
Conference between the Neapolitan King and Lorenzo de Medici, wherein Lorenzo
fell immediately to the Business, and unvailed to this Monarch the true Causes
of the War, which the Riario's had so craftily let him see only in disguise.
He showed him the Informations of Pazzi's Case, and the Memoirs written and
signed by the Accomplices own Hand. He made appear, that the Conspiracy had
been hatched at Rome, with Design to mount Riario to the Sovereignty of
Florence. He modestly insinuated, That the Care he had taken to manage the
Sovereign Pontiff's Reputation, that of the Cardinal-Nephew, and Prince Furli,
in the time they themselves prostituted it by the basest of all Crimes, had
drawn the Devastations executed upon the Territory of Florence: But that he
hoped his Majesty would cause them to cease, after he was informed of the Truth
from his own Eyes. Then he represented to him, in a Discourse that was beyond
contest, That since Italy was divided into so many different Soveraignties,
'twas impossible to change any one of them, without hazarding the All it made a
Part of: That this Harmony depended no less of the smallest Powers, than of the
greatest, because none of them was then so weak, but whose Aggrandizement it
was necessary to obstruct: That those whose States were more Considerable, for
their Riches, or Extent, had more Interests than the rest to maintain the
Counterpoise; since by shocking it, they would lose much Advantage: That his
Majesty and the Duke of Milan were of that number; but that the Duke of Milan
was not so much concerned in this Affair: for though the Pope had seized on
Tuscany, he would still have a Refuge left in the Empire, whose Feudatory he
was: Whereas if the Realm of Naples was menaced, after the Republic of
Florence her being subdued, he would be destitute of all Means of Recovery,
since that Kingdom must depend on the same Power which would endeavor its
Oppression, and none would be concerned, or interpose in its Protection: That
his Majesty must needs know, that the Intention of the Popes had ever been to
reunite to their Demesne the Crown of Naples and Sicily: That Sixtus the Fourth
was not of a Humor to neglect pouching the first Occasion offered, since his
Paces did sufficiently evince, that he was at watch for such an Opportunity:
That the Alliance of the Riario's was only a Trap; and the Promise of holding
the State of Florence in Fief of the Crown of Naples. only an Illusion; since
there was no Surety given to keep tack, when the Prince of Forli had once got
Possession. And indeed there was none mentioned in the Treaty of the League;
but though there had been, the Performance thereof was unfeasible and impossible;
because the Prince de Forli having no Children, when once dead, the Pope then
in being would pretend, that the Fief must be reunited to the Ecclesiastic
State, and not to the Crown of Naples, and would clutch it with so much the
more easiness, as that the Demesne of Florence touched on his Lands, and that
the Neapolitans could not send Troops thither without his Permission: That, in
fine, the Safety of all Italy in general, and that of his Majesty in
particular, consisted in impeding Strangers from getting footing amongst them:
But that this their Exclusion was in no wise to be effected by continuing the
War against the Florentines; for if the Florentines were pinched, they would not
fail to accept the Offers of a Puissant Succor made them by the most Christian
King. And besides, well known it was, that they were so inclined, that out of
despair of preserving their Liberty, they would prefer the French Sway, to whom
they were united by Commerce, before that of the Riario's: That in this Case
the Kingdom of Naples might assure it self of being first attacked, because
upon it the French had the most ancient and most legitimate Pretensions.

As all these Reasons were invincible, and that the King of Naples had not made
any Reflection on them when he Confederated with the Pope, they convinced him.
And Timidity, which was his ruling Passion, making him see nearer at hand the
dismal Objects wherewith Lorenzo threatened him, he made no scruple of owning to
him the Desire he had to terminate the Tuscan War, and required of him but two
days time to contrive the Means of bringing it about. Lorenzo, overjoyed to see
so happy a Progress in his Design, returned to his Lodgings with the same
Precautions he came thence, that is to say, without being attended or seen by
any, and left the Neapolitan King to consult and ruminate with himself about
the Course he was to take; for this old Prince communicated nothing of this
Affair to his Ministers, so fearful was he of their being gained and Pension'd
by Riario.

He resolved to send for Ressalli, and sound him, whether it were possible to
prevail with the Pope to slacken in favor of the Florentines. Ressalli at
first made some difficulty to tell his Mind; but being pressed at such a rate,
as that he was compelled to speak, or declare by his silence that the Pope was
inexorable, he freed himself out of this perplexity, by proposing to the King
of Naples, That his Majesty would dispatch a Messenger to his Ambassador at
Rome, to acquaint the Pope with Lorenzo's Voyage and Proposals, and to know of
his Holiness after what manner and on what terms he was willing a Negotiation
with him should be set on foot. He added, That he would dispatch at the fame
time a Courrier to his Holiness, to inform him of what occurred at Naples, and
require his Directions; and that after he had received them, he would not fail
to communicate them to his Majesty.

The King of Naples accepted this Offer, because it tended to his receiving at
the same time a double Illustration of what he had so much a desire to know.
But the Pope, who did not curb his Humor in things wherein he believed
Dissimulation was not absolutely necessary, answered the Neapolitan King's
Ambassador, and sent Orders to his Nuncio, not to listen to the Florentines,
till they talked of yielding at Discretion. He uttered his Mind in this manner
with so much the less scruple, in that he did not as then the least imagine
that the King of Naples was capable of leaving him in the lurch; and that being
much better informed than that Prince, of the Extremity the Florentines were
reduc^d to, he foresaw, that there needed only two or three Weeks delay, to
oblige them to crave Mercy.

However, he was mistaken in his Conjecture; and his Holiness's sturdy Answer
having fully convinced the King of Naples of all Lorenzo de Medici had told
him, that old Prince could no longer resist the Temptation of abandoning the
Pope, and harbored no other Thoughts, than of making his Accommodation apart.
Not but that he saw well enough all the Consequences of the thing; but he had
such an urging to conclude it, that he found out in the same Instant Remedies
to the Inconveniences, furnished by his Imagination being crazed and wounded
with Fear. Thus he thought of nothing now, but of hastening his Design; and in
the very next Audience he gave Lorenzo, he agreed with him not only a Treaty
of Peace, but likewise an Offensive and Defensive League, for Ten years,
between the Crown of Naples and the Commonwealth of Florence.

This so amazed the Pope, that he would neither believe what Ressalli wrote to
him, nor what was owned to him by Baron Rossano, the Neapolitan Ambassador at
Rome: Nor was he to be undeceived, till the Duke of Calabria had restored the
Places he had taken from the Florentines, and brought home the Army he
commanded into his Father's Dominions. Then, as domineering Passions have this
Property common to great Rivers, which overflow with so much the more Rapidity,
as that the Banks which held them in were stronger, or the more Care or
Artifice used to withstand them; the Pope fell into such an Indignation, as
could not have more dangerous Symptoms. He exclaimed against his Ally, and
against his Enemies, at the same rate with those who mean no longer to keep any
measure in their Resentments. He was not content with interdicting the
Florentines, he excommunicated them all in general, and Lorenzo de Medici in
particular. He abandoned their Republic to whoever had a Mind to possess it.
He endeavored to whet the Ambition of the Princes of Italy, by proposing to
them so rich a Booty; and seeing they were palled by the Difficulties of
seizing it, which seemed to them invincible, he solicited Foreign Powers, and
fell to minding the Germans of their ancient Pretensions upon Tuscany.

As to the King of Naples, true it is, he was not excommunicated, nor his Realm
interdicted; for there was neither Reason nor Pretext sufficient to come to
that Extremity. But bating this, a stop was put to all the Graces the
Neapolitans were wont to receive from the Holy See. They were barred all hope
of any in the future. And as it was known, that the Nobless of the Country were
reduced to their Obedience to King Ferrand, merely by the Menaces of being
retrenched from the Communion of the Church, they were solicited to revolt,
under the Lure of Impunity; and a beginning was made to cavil the Investiture
of Naples, which the foregoing Popes had granted to the House of Arragon.

But as the Pope's Humor was nice in matter of Hatred, the Aversion he had for
Lorenzo de Medici proceeded from a Motive so much the more difficult to cease,
as it was the less known by those who might inter-meddle in the Reconciliation:
For though this Pontiff had much ado to digest, that Lorenzo had hindered him from
exalting his House to the Sovereignty of Tuscany; though the same Lorenzo had in
hand Matters sufficient to convict him of the basest and blackest of Crimes,
and had shown the Originals of them to the King of Naples; though he had spirited
this Prince from his Alliance, and had made the Troops of the Church receive
the most sensible Affront, by exposing them to a shameful Retreat, after the
Duke of Calabria's Desertion: yet all this was not precisely what lay heaviest
at the Pope's Heart. He was more ingenious to torment himself, than were his
very Enemies; and laying aside the Interest of his Grandeur and Reputation, he
could not endure that Lorenzo (after having despaired of saving his Republic
by continuing the War) had chose rather to go throw himself into the Arms of
the King of Naples, than into his; and making the due Comparison he might well
in this Occasion, he poised the Holiness of the Head of the Church, and his
Quality of Common Father of the Christians, with the King of Naples's
Character, who was reckoned in Europe for the most Cruel, the most Perfidious,
and the most Self-interessed of all Princes. He from thence concluded, That
Lorenzo de Medici must needs have imagined, that this King (as Vicious as he
was) was still better than his Holiness, since he had preferred him before him
in the nicest Choice that can be made in Civil Life, by confiding in him both
his Life and his Fortune. Thus the Pope would have omitted nothing of what he
judged proper to push on his Resentment, had not the Turks at that time seized
on the City of Otranto, and put therein Troops they had assembled in Epirus. So
sudden an Invasion was more efficacious, than had been all Divine and Humane
Considerations. It reunited the Princes of Italy; it reconciled Lorenzo with
the Pope; it caused the Censures to be taken off that were fulminated against
the Florentines, and the Pope reinstated them in the Communion of the Church,
on condition they would send Fifteen Galleys to block up the Port of Otranto
and maintain them there at their own Charges, as long as the Siege should last
before that Place.

As it does not appertain to a Writer (...) (...) to dwell upon Sieges, I shall
say no^ thing of this, save that the Infidels ther^ taught the Christians to
make regular Fo^tifications; and that the Besieged, after ha^ings shown more
Resolution than the Besiegers, demanded to capitulate, as soon as they were
informed of the Death of their Emperor Mahomet the Second, as if they had
desponded of their Good-fortune under another Head. The Princes of Italy having
no more Common Enemies, fell to sparring with one another: And the Senate of
Venice hearing of the Death of Borso da Este Marquis of Ferrara, imagined it
would be easy for them to seize on his Territory, because Hercule da Este his
Successor was too young, and too voluptuous to support the Fatigues of the War.
But as it was hardly possible to give a specious Color to that Usurpation,
without hooking in the Pope, the Senate had him pumped by their Emissaries, and
proposed to him the sharing that Marquisate with the Republic, after it was
conquered at their mutual Charges. The Pope embraced the Proposition, because
that (well perceiving his Death was near at hand) he would make as much haste
as he could to aggrandize his Nephews. Thus the League was concluded, and the
new Marquis attacked by his two Neighbors, when he only expected from them
Compliments of Condolance upon his Father's Death. The first thought he had,
while a putting himself in a Defensive Posture, was to have recourse to Lorenzo
de Medici, who was become so potent in Florence, by the late Service he had
rendered his Commonwealth, that he disposed of it almost in the same manner as
if he were a Despotick Sovereign. The Marquis caused an Envoy extraordinary to
represent to him the Injustice that was done him, and the dangerous
Consequences of the War newly declared against him.

Lorenzo, who had already foreseen those Consequences, was not satisfied with
assisting him with the Succors of Florence, but moreover wrought him a
Counter-League between the King of Naples, the Dukes of Milan and Vrbino, and
the Republic of Florence, for the Conservation of the Land of Ferrara. Thus,
in a little time after, four Armies appeared in the Field, whose Success was
pretty well balanced: That of Venice, under Roberto da San Severino, who
commanded it since Coglione's Death, and who nicking the unexpected Death of
the Duke d' Vrbino, General of the Troops appointed for the Guard of the Duchy
of Ferrara, dissipated them without hazarding a general Battle, and came
pouring on Victorious to the Gates of Ferrara. But, on the other side, the Duke
of Calabria having advanced too far into the Ecclesiastic State, with the rest
of the Confederated Troops, was defeated at Velitre, by Roberto Malatesta, Lord
of Rimino, General of the Pope's Army. The Principal Lords of Naples were slain
or taken Prisoners in this Action: And the Conqueror was already preparing to
march to the Conquest of that Kingdom, when Riario, far from suffering him to
have still that Occasion of becoming more Famous and Recommendable, having
resolved to dispatch him, three days after the Battle had him poisoned, of
which he died in two hours time. Then Riario was contriving to put into Rimino
such Soldiers as in whom he might confide: But Lorenzo de Medici having notice
of his Intention by his Spies, caused other Troops to slip into it, that
secured the Place for Malafesta's Heirs.

This Precaution, however, mended little the Affairs of the better Party; for
the Army of Venice being become Mistress of the Campagn, after the Duke of
Calabria's Defeat, and the Duke of Vrbino's Death, blocked up so closely the
City of Ferrara, that Lorenzo judged they would infallibly take it, if he had
not recourse to the only Remedy to save it. This Remedy consisted in cutting
off the Pope's Alliance with the Venetians: And to accomplish this Design,
there was no other way, than to threaten his Holiness with a Council. Lorenzo
made the Proposal of it to the Emperor, and to the Kings of England and
France, who backed this Overture with so much heat, that the Council necessary
to unhinge his Holiness was Convened.

The News his Holiness received of it, startled him no less than if he had
already felt the Blow. He remembered the Trouble that another Council, assembled
at the same Place, had put one of his Predecessors to; and as he did not expect
to be so fortunate as that Pope, in parrying the ill Consequences, and that he
saw not the same Dispositions in Peoples Minds that Holiness had met with to
divide them, he fansy'd he was going to be deposed from the Papacy, if he did
not suddenly remove the Scandal of the War of Ferrara, and do with a good Grace
what was desired of him by all the Christian World. From thence it came, that
he was not contented with abandoning the Venetian Commonwealth, without
alleging any cause for his Desertion; but moreover he let her know it by a
Public Declaration, as considerable at least as a Declaration of War. He cited
her before his Tribunal, to give an Account of the Acts of Hostility she had
committed in the Duchy of Ferrara, and of the Pretensions she might have upon
it. He commanded her to restore what she had there taken, and command thence
her Troops; in default of which, he protested he would go join the Confederated
Princes, to constrain her to it.

The Senate of Venice showed more firmness than was expected from a Republic
accustomed to venture her self the least she could with Fortune. They did not
trifle away their time, with vainly reproaching the Pope with his Breach of
Faith, nor with putting him in mind, that he it was that had engaged them in
the Quarrel, which he would now hinder them from deciding. They affected in
that respect a kind of Insensibility, which might pass for a just Contempt, and
answered with a Haughtiness mingled with Respect, That not owning any Superior
Power upon Earth, they were not bound to give any one an Account of their
Actions, nor to deport themselves at another Pleasure, in a War they had
thought just when they undertook it.

Thus the Venetians Stubbornness and Obstinacy, of necessity drawing after it a
long and difficult War, having obliged the Princes of Italy to meet at Cremona,
so to resolve among themselves what Course was to be taken, Lorenzo de Medici
appeared there in Quality of Ambassador from his Republic, and comported
himself in such manner, as finished giving to his Reputation the liveliest
Luster of which it was capable; for though his past Actions, and principally his
Voyage to Naples, had proclaimed him the greatest Statesman then in Italy,
there was, however, some room for doubt, whether he understood War so well as
Negotiation. And the extreme Care he had ever had to appease Quarrels as soon
as they begun, seemed to uphold the Conjectures of some Persons, that he had a
diffidence of his Military Virtue, and not so good an Opinion of himself, as to
think he was capable of executing in the Field, what he had concluded at the
Board. But in the Assembly of Cremona he talked of War with so much sufficiency
and easiness, that the whole Congress went thence persuaded; that he was no
less fit for Arms, than polite Letters; and that he had an admirable knack at
inspiring vigorous Resolutions, when he judged them necessary for the Common
Good.

He represented to this Congress, That Italy had not then any more formidable
Enemies than the Venetians; That they had altered the Design of being wakeful
for the Public Liberty, which they had so happily prosecuted during so many
Ages, into the Resolution of subduing it; and that the War of Ferrara was an
evident Proof of this Assertion: That the Good and Well-meaning might with
convenience suffer them to come out of their Marshes, and take footing on the
Terra firma, while they concerned themselves no farther than to exterminate the
Tyrants of Padoua, and against the Emperors to protect the Holy See; but that
in the present Juncture they could not with Justice approve of their
Enterprises, seeing they tended to the Oppression of Italy: That they had
almost reduced to Extremity the Important City of Ferrara; and that if they
were suffered to press it, there would be no means left to hinder them from
rendering themselves afterward Masters of Modena and Reggio: That they would
find in those two Cities the Keys of all the Places of Romagna, such
Conveniences would they afford them, for the seizing them in the same time
they stripped the right Owners of the Means of making their Defense; and that
after the Conquest of Romagna, the most Potent Princes of Italy would have no
longer any League of Communication, and might be easily subdued one after the
other, by a Republic whose Counsel being Eternal, and ever Uniform, would
still keep her in a posture of nicking the Revolutions which Time and Fortune
should introduce among her Neighbors.

Lorenzo de Medici's Discourse made all Italy take up Arms against the
Venetians, and constrained them quickly to shift the Design of Usurping others
Dominions, into that of defending their own. Hercule da Este, at the Head of a
formidable Army, entered the Territory of Brescia and Bergamo, and forced (by
this Irruption) the Venetians to recall the Troops which had almost reduced
Ferrara to Extremity. Those Troops dispersed themselves after some Skirmishes,
wherein they had the disadvantage; and all the Champion of the Terra-firma was
so absolutely deserted, that not a Venetian Soldier now appeared, to hinder the
Pillage; when the Senate contrived a way to divert the Storm, by which they
were upon the point of being wrecked, by a Device whose Success was answerable
to their Expectations.

They had perceived, that Ludovico Sforza, who governed then the Duchy of
Milan, in Quality of the Duke his Nephew's Guardian, had engaged in the League
rather for Companies sake, than of set Design; because having whirled his Head
with usurping the Sovereignty, of which he had only the Administration, it was
no longer for his Advantage, that the Confederated Princes should weaken the
Venetians, for fear they should turn afterward against him. In this view, they
dispatched from Venice a sly and experienced Senator. He wriggl'd himself into
Ludovico's good Opinion, by making him observe, That he unwittingly contributed
to the Execution of others Affairs, by ruining his own; and that the
Counter-clap of the Mischief he did the Venetians, if he had not a care, would
recoil suddenly upon himself; Th^^ he was engaged in a League which could not
but be prejudicial to him, since whoever pounc'd the State of the Terra-firma,
would render himself Master of the Land of Milan when he pleased; That young
Hercule da Este, to whom that Conquest was designed, had Ambition; and that
when he was become extraordinary Potent, even beyond his Desires and
Expectations, he would still drive at more, and endeavor to bring about his
Aims; That the true Interest of the Duchy of Milan was to hinder Italy from
changing Masters, because while it continued in the same State, that Duchy
would ever be a principal Part of it, and its Masters, by consequence, always
the most Considered Princes of Italy.

This Ratiocination was so much the more agreeable to Ludovico Sforza, in that
it was conformable to his Genius. This Prince, too refined in all things,
suffered his Temper to be cajoll'd with the Vanity of showing his Power, by
obstructing the Accomplishment of an Enterprise so near an issue, as was that
of ruining the Venetians, and in drawing from the Brink of the Precipice the
most Illustrious Republic in the Universe, without doing ought else than
suspending his Concourse, and forbearing to act in Conjunction with those who
were going to push on its Downfall. He abandoned the Confederates, without
giving them notice. He concluded a secret Treaty with the Venetians, without
foreseeing, that this same Treaty would be the Cause of his own Ruin, and of
that of his Family. He recalled his Troops from Hercule da Este's Army, which
made up the better part of it, and reduced him, by this Desertion, to depart
Lombardy, and return into his own State. And thus the War ceased, in the same
manner as a Fire that is retrenched of Fuel; and the Pope conceived such a
Vexation at it, as augmented the Fever, whereof he died the Tenth of August,
1484.

Lorenzo de Medici, after having endeavored to make know to Ludovico Sforza
the Fault he committed, proposed to the Florentines, to employ the Soldiers
they had in the Confederated Army, in recovering the City of Serezana, which
Fregoso had taken from them, and sold to the Republic of Genoua. The Council
of Eight gave their Assent to this Expedition. The Town was besieged, and made
such a vigorous Defense, as required Lorenzo's appearing at the Siege. His
Presence cooled the Courage of the Inhabitants, and of the Garrison: They sent
to present him with a Crown of Olive, and the Town submitted to the Laws he
thought fitting to impose on it. She opened to him her Gates, and received him
with the same Serenity, as if she had no cause for Fear and Apprehension. This
Testimony of her Confidence in him, was not useless to her: And if Lorenzo de
Medici did not treat her altogether as Innocent, he hindered at least her being
sentenced to a Redemption from Plunder, and from being robbed of her Privileges.

At his Return from this Expedition, Fortune furnished him with the Occasion of
repaying with Usury the King of Naples the good Office he had received. The
City of Aquila was now revolted against this Old Prince, whose too great
Severity was ever gravelling him in new Troubles, and had put it self under the
Protection of the Holy See. Innocent the Eighth, succeeding Sixtus the Fourth,
had granted her this Protection with too much precipitation, and without
examining the Consequences it might have. The Neapolitan Nobility, who only
waited for the Pope's Declaration to have a Pretense for Rebellion, took the
Field, and causing al^ the Cities to revolt where they had Authority, reduced
their King to the necessity o^ remaining pent up in his Capital City. Roberto
da San Severino being malecontent, as well as the rest, accepted the
Generalship of the Pope's Armies, though his Brother of the same Name had been
poisoned in that Post, and spirited away the Troops which the Duke of Calabria
was leading from Taranto to his Father's Succor.

So many redoubled Misfortunes did so oppress the King of Naples, that he did
not so much as think of demanding Succors of Lorenzo; when Lorenzo, through an
excess of Generosity, hazarded so many things to rescue and disengage him out
of so great a Peril. And indeed, without having received either Letters or
Courrier from Naples, he had already put the Orsini's his Allies into the
Field, and had given them Money to raise Troops. He had likewise caused Sums to
be distributed to Prosper and Fabricio, Heads of the House of Colonna, to the
very Concurrence stipulated in the secret Treaty, which that House had
concluded with the Crown of Naples, for their mutual Defense against the Holy
See. And these two Clanns, forgetting for a time their Quarrels, acted in
Conjunction, and caused part of the Ecclesiastic State to rise. This forced
the Pope to recall San Severino, who made notable Progresses in Abrussia. San
Severino was not so happy in St. Peter's Patrimony, and behaved himself so
sorrily against the Orsini's and the Colonnesi, that the Pope, whose Humor was
distrustful, suspected him of Correspondence with his Enemies. And this
pretended Collusion gave him occasion to fear, that the two Armies (after
having spent some time in making semblance of fighting) would join, and march
against Rome with Ensigns displayed.

His Holinesses Warlike Temper was chilled of a sudden: He courted Peace with
Precipitation, as he had with Levity declared War; and chose rather to address
himself to Lorenzo de Medici, for the negotiating it, than to any other, it
being in his Power sooner to conclude it, and without observing the wonted
Formalities.

Thus Lorenzo was the Arbiter of Italy, and performed this glorious Commission
with so much Address, that he merited the Pope's Amity, without abating the
least of the Neapolitan King's Interests: For this Pontiff having on one side
acknowledged the Fault he had unseasonably committed; and on the other,
Lorenzo's Moderation not suffering that the King of Naples should derive any
other advantage from the rising and lowering Commotions of the Ecclesiastic
State, than that of Conquering what lawfully appertained to him; His Holiness
was so affected with this Hero's Virtue, that he since raised the House of
Medici to the Sovereignty we now see it stand possessed of.

The Pope had been married in his Youth, and the eldest of his Children, called
Abe, was to be Head of that Illustrious House, and Heir of that of Malespina,
which possessed two Principalities, and other fair Territories in Italy.
Lorenzo de Medici was desired to give him in Marriage Margarita his eldest
Daughter, and the Nuptials were celebrated with such Magnificence as held
nothing of a Private Life. Afterward the College of Cardinals was assembled to
ratify the Intention the Pope had of making Giovanni de Medici, Lorenzo's
youngest Son, Cardinal, though he had not yet accomplished his Thirteenth year of
age. The thing was difficult, in that since John the Twelfth's Papacy, and the
Calamities with which it was attended, all the Sovereign Pontiffs that
succeeded him, to the number of above Fifty, had established for inviolable
Laws, That thenceforward no Person should be admitted into the Sacred College,
before his Majority. However, the Suffrages of the Cardinals were so carefully
hooked in, and they were inspired with so auspicious a Desire to slacken in
favor of the Pope, who had not neglected to solicit them in private, one
after another; and in consideration of Lorenzo de Medici, who had newly freed
them from a War, during which all their Revenues had been sequestered; that at
length they consented to what was required of them, on Condition it should be
by way of Dispensation only, and without turning to a Consequence.

Hitherto Lorenzo's Virtue had appeared more Military than Civil, as having
found little Exercise save in War. But the profound Tranquillity he had
procured to his Country, gave him leisure to lay himself wholly open, and
expose to view the other part of his Soul, which was no less admirable in
Peaceable Functions. He had observed, that the Commonwealth of Florence had
ever been attacked on two sides; namely, on that of Sienna, and on that of
Mount Apennine. By way of Fortifying the former, he caused an Imperial City,
called Poggio, to be rebuilt, upon an Eminence, and Peopled it with the poor
Inhabitants of Poggibonzi, whose Houses the Duke of Calabria had burnt, for
having held too long out against his Army. And to cut off Access to the second,
he repaired Fierosola, situated upon the Highway of Bologna, and enclosed it
with Walls, flanked with new Towers, of the famous Engineer, Mark Anthony de
St. Gal's Invention.

But for fear the Quarrels, which often arose among the Neighbors of his
Republic, might disturb the Repose it enjoyed, by reducing it to side
sometimes with one, sometimes with the other, he made a League between the
Florentines, and the Lords of Perugia, and of Citta di Castella in Bologna, and
of Sienna, whereof the two Principal Articles stipulated, in case there fell
out any Difference between two of the Confederates, they should be bound to
submit it to the Arbitrament of the rest, and comply with the Decision made by
Plurality of Voices; and that he of the two that refused acquiescing in the
Sentence, should be constrained to it by force of Arms, which should be used
against her, till he had executed it to all intents and purposes. This
Confederacy, joined to the Authority Lorenzo had acquired in those Princes
Minds, rendered them so submissive to him, that they did thenceforward nothing
of moment but by his Counsels, and enjoyed a profound Tranquillity during his
Life.

Some of them there were that endeavored to imitate him in the new Order he
put the Affairs of his Republic, and studied him (as I may say) in his so
improving the Juncture, when there was not a Florentine that durst thwart his
Intentions, by bestowing on his Friends, in their several turns, the Principal
Offices of State, with a just Temperament, and without Men of the highest
Quality taking any Umbrage: for though such Persons had not any peculiar
Engagement with him, provided they were not wanting in Merit, he boggl'd not at
employing them in Affairs for keeping up Decorum, and creating Emulation in
others.

As for the Florentines, Lorenzo knew, that to obviate their being Mutinous, it
was necessary to produce them the Opportunities of gaining, and to procure and
exhibit to them from time to time new Subjects of Divertisements. To indulge
the former of these two Passions, he devised putting a Sum of Money into the
Hands of the Overseers, and those having the Superintendency of the Public
Provisions, that they might afford them at a cheaper rate. But after he had
found by experience, that they were less obliged to him for this private
Liberality, and that, in case he continued, he should infallibly incur the
Suspicion and Hatred of the Nobility, he changed his Method, and fell to
building a House of Pleasure at Cajana, where all the Poor of Florence, and
Parts adjacent, might for a long time find occasion of getting their
Livelihood; while at certain Feasts of the Year he took care to have
Horse-racing and Tournaments, whereat the Youth with emulation showed their
Agility.

He had likewise Comedies acted, though they were not then so regular as
afterward under his Son's Popedom; and when his Factors at Grand Cairo had
sent him Wild-Beasts, he made them bait and fight one another before the
Florentines, who were so much the more greedy of this Diversion, as that Italy
had not had the like Entertainment since the Luxury of the first Caesar's.

But as he had a nice Wit in Gallantry, as well as in all other things, he fell
to refining the Carnaval Recreations, and rendering them more ingenious, and
more capable of being rellish'd by Persons of Honor. For the better
understanding of what I am going to say, it is to be supposed, that the
Factions of the Guelphs and Gibellins, by obliging the Citizens of Florence to
rub out Day and Night in Arms, had introduced into their Sports a World of
Libertine Actions, which savored of War; and had at last degenerated into such
a Brutality, as that it was honorable to shun them, and scandalous to frequent
them; for in these Recreations they only combated for infamous Objects,
Feasted only to be drunk; the Balls were followed with Prostitution; and the
Theaters exposed nothing that could be seen by innocent Eyes, or heard by
chaste Ears.

However, Lorenzo de Medici undertook to purify this sort of Festivals; and to
accomplish it the more cunningly, and without being exposed at first to the
Public Raillery, he conferred with all the Gallants, and all the Wits of
Italy, about the Reformation he intended. After which, he framed the Design of
representing at the Carnaval Histories of Antiquity, which were becoming all
sorts of Persons, and instructed at the same time they diverted. Thus they
chose the first time to give the People a Spectacle, whose Representation may
be still seen in a Manuscript of the French King's Library, enriched with Noble
Figures. It was the Combat of Hercules, and of the other Heroes that assisted
at the Nuptial of of Pirithous, against the Centaurs. The Painters, the
Sculpters, and Architects, shared among them the Decoration of the Prospects,
and of the Public Places: the briskest of the Nobility, and of the Citizens,
were exercised by experienced Masters. The Battle was sought with all the Skill
and Artifice imaginable, and the Florentines received so much satisfaction in
this Entertainment, that Lorenzo thought it convenient to continue it, and took
for three Years following the three Triumphs of Petrarch.

His Gallantry was not confined to this Amusement; for as Prizes were given in
the Principal Cities of Italy for Horse-racing, he caused Barbs of a prodigious
fleetness to come from Africa, which were dressed with so much care, that they
won the Day at Rome, at Milan, at Naples, at Venice, and in all other Places
where the List was open to them. The Prizes they gained consisted in Plate and
Precious Stuffs, which were all employed in the Decoration of Altars, that the
People seeing them, might with pleasure call him to mind by whom they were
Dedicated. So many Foresights did he use for improving, even to the least
Occasions of preserving, or augmenting, the Love the People bore him.

He did, however, all those things with an Air, as sufficiently showed his main
drift was in all such Contrivances chiefly to furnish to the Public
Recreations, suffering little of his own time to be cozened with these Shows;
for his most precious Hours were busied in maintaining Peace in his Country in
stifling the Seeds of Civil Wars, which budded from time to time among the
Florentines. And as he could not doubt but that this particular Peace depended
on that of Italy in general, he established a Sanction among the Princes and
Republics of the Country, which lasted as long as his Life. His Closet became
the Rendezvous of all their Deputies. In it, for four Years together, were
terminated all the Bickerings and Differences they had with one another. In it
were the Measures taken, they bound themselves voluntarily to keep, and which
they never broke. In one of those Politic Conferences it was, Lorenzo chanced
to sta^, upon hearing the Marriage of Charles the Eighth of France with the
Heiress of Prittany, That Italy would be in great danger, as soon as France
came to know its own Strength.

Thus the Fable of the Gaul^h Hercules being become a Truth, and there being a
Man in the World, who without Power and Character governed at his own Pleasure
the Part of Europe the most jealous of its Freedom, the most wary and
considerate, and the most difficult to manage. This Miracle equally surpised
Nations the nearest and most remote from Italy, and Bajazet the Second,
Emperor of the Turks, sent to testify to Lorenzo de Medici the Esteem he had
for his Virtue, at the same time that Matthias Corvin, King of Hungary,
rendered him the same Office by a Solemn Embassy.

The famous Cayte-Bey, Souldan of Egypt, caused such Precious and such
Magnificent Things to be presented him at Florence, that never Prince had
received the like in the highest Luster of the Roman Empire; for besides
Jewels, Gold, Balm, Benjamin, Perfumes, and Vestments, there was a
Camel-Leopard, so enormous for his Bigness, and so lovely to behold, for the
Diversity of his Colors, wherewith his Skin was spotted, that People came from
all Parts to view him. The most famous Painters drew him, and the Poets
employed some Months in the Description of this Animal; which served in some
manner to comfort Lorenzo de Medici for the loss of him when the change of Air
and Food had occa^sion'd his Death at eight Months end. And indeed, if we had
not so many ancient Testimonies of this Creature, he would now be^ accounted
Fab^lous, that the Indies being more known, and America discovered, there is
not, however, any Relation that speaks of a Camel Leopard of this Kind. In the
mean while, Lorenzo's Daughter, who had married the Pope's Son, was brought to
Bed of a Male Child, and his Holiness making her a Visit, desired her to ask of
him some Favor. She complied, but not in the manner that was expected; for in
stead of speaking of what might pamper the Ambition of a young Woman, the
Sympathy and Tenderness she had for her young Brother the Cardinal, induced her
to desire only, that he might come and dwell at Rome. The Pope, being no less
charmed with her Virtue, than with her incomparable Beauty, dispatched a
Courrier to Florence, to prevail with Lorenzo to recall his Son the Cardinal
from Pisa, where he completed his Studies, and to send him to the Court of
Rome, with a Promise of conferring on him the Privileges of Cardinal-Nephew,
and of considering him in that Quality. Lorenzo could have been very well
content not to introduce his Son upon so great a Theater of the World, at so
green an Age; however, as he loved him too well to deprive him of a Conjuncture
so propitious to his Fortune, he allowed him to take a Journey to Rome; but he
caused so pompous an Equipage to be prepared for him, that though Luxury was
sufficiently great at the Pope's Court, by the means of the Cardinals of Naples
and of Milan, where they had matriculated it of late years, nothing near his
Magnificence had been seen. Yet this was not what Lorenzo applied his Thoughts
most to; for he was much more sollicitous of his Son's Education, than his
Train. He set about him such Persons only whose Probity was known to him; and
the Governors he had in his Youth, were Men consummated in the Study and
Exercise of Politic Prudence.

Lorenzo de Medici did himself contribute to this Instruction, what Experience
had taught him; and robbing his Sleep of the Hours he could not spare from
Affairs, he wrote a Book after the Example of Tully's Offices, for the teaching
his Son how to acquit himself like a Man of Quality at the Court of Rome, of
all the Duties of Civil Life. He represented the Dignity of Cardinal in all its
Extent; he examined the Talent requisite to maintain it: Withal, admirably well
describing the Genius of those who were then honored with the Sacred Purple,
and of the Principal Persons who made a Figure about his Holiness; he showed
distinctly the Air with which he was to act with each of them in particular.

Now this would be the Place to set down an Extract of that Book; but as it
perished so absolutely, during Lorenzo's long Exile, that there is not the
least Fragment of it remaining, we know nothing more of it, than what I have
newly couched. Lorenzo's other Works, in Verse and in Prose, have not had a^
more propitious Destiny; and we should hardly have known he had been an Author,
if the Printed Letters and Manuscripts of his Friends, whereof I mean to speak
in the following Book, did not make mention of his Odes, Sonets, Gallant
Letters, and a Dialogue of the Nature of Love, divided into Five Parts; and if
Paulus Jovias, his Contemporary, had not filled his Eulogy among those of the
most celebrated Modern Authors.

Hardly had the Cardinal de Medici received and repaid the Visits of the Sacred
College, when he was obliged to return to Florence, by Occurrences I am going
to describe. His Father, being retired to his Country House at Carrego, to
vacate to the Study of Philosophy, with the most Learned of his Friends,
perceived a Comet, whose Influence was so malign to him, that he was taken with
a Fever the same day. On the morrow at Noon (the Weather being altogether
Serene, and none of the fore-running Signs of Thunder appearing the Lightning
fell suddenly upon the Principal Church of Florence, called Santa Maria del
Frore, without causing other Damage, than breaking the Arms of the House of
Medici, that were set upon the highest Pinnacle. Some moments after; a hideous
Noise was heard in the Place where they kept the Wild Beasts for the Peoples
Diversion; and they afterward found, they had all mutiny'd against an
extraordinary great and furious Lion, so as that their Keepers were not able to
hinder them from tearing him piecemeal, and that after this Execution they
were of themselves appeased.

As the Italians easily puzzle their Heads with Thoughts of the Future, they
failed not to make Predictions upon these three Prodigies, which were almost
all justified by the Event. But none, save Savanarola, a Religious of the Order
of St. Dominic, carried the Prophecy to its due Extent, by preaching in the
most famous Auditory of Florence, That the Italians having filled the measure
of their Sins, God, who would no longer defer their Punishment, was going to
bereave them of the only, Man that maintained their Tranquillity; and that
incontinently after his Death, they would worry one another, and be exposed a
Prey to Foreign Nations. Yet however eminent was already Savanarola's Renown,
and though he employed all his Eloquence, the greatest of the latter Ages, to
procure Belief, he hardly persuaded any to give credence to his Assertions; and
those who were most concerned to appease the Anger of Heaven, loved rather to
imagine, that this admirable Preacher threatened them through a prepossession of
Spirit disadvantageous to the House of Medici, than resolve upon doing Penance.

The End of the Third Book.
THE SECRET HISTORY OF THE HOUSE OF MEDICIS. The Fourth Book.
NEver was any Disease more treacherous than that which seized Lorenzo de
Medici, on the very Day the Comet first appeared. It was in the beginning only
a very slight Fever, and so much the less to be dreaded, in that his Friends
thought they knew its Causes. They judged it to be excited by an Obstruction
complained of by the Patient, and that this Obstruction could only be imputed
to the Malignity of the Rhewm, of which he suffered every Moment strange
Defluxions: Yet the Fits continuing, though not augmenting, Lorenzo's Relations
and Adherents sent for Piero Leoni, the most celebrated Physician in Italy,
from Spoleto.

That what I am going to relate, may be the better understood, it is necessary
to presuppose, That this Leoni was the first who since the fall of the Roman
Empire had thought of questing after the Medicinal Art in the Ancient Greek
Authors; whereas those of his time addicted to that Profession, commonly
studied only the Writings of Arabian Physicians. He had translated with so
much fidelity and eloquence the most considerable Works of Galen, and was
become so famous by the Novelty and Importance of this Performance, as to be
offered the Principal Professor of Physick's Chair at Padoua, where he had
taught with applause during several Years. But his ill Genius pushing him into
the Snare wherein most Physicians were then entangled, (I mean) Judicial
Astrology, he was become so expert that way, as to be consulted from all Parts
of Italy. One day the Fancy took him to calculate his own Nativity. He found he
was born under so malign a Constellation, that he must infallibly be drowned by
an unforeseen Accident. The fear he was in of this falling out accordingly,
made him quit Padoua, as being called to Venice, whither he could not go but by
Water: And that besides, by making a long abode at Padoua, he could by no means
have dispensed passing over the Bridge, which he supposed would fall under him.
He had Estate sufficient to subsist on any where at ease; and if he preferred
dwelling in his own Country before others, he did it on the account of there
being neither Torrent nor River.

Whereupon he returned to Spoleto, where he remained Ten years, without setting
Foot over his Threshold. But at length his Renown attracted him so great a
number of Visits, that Civility pressing him to repay some of them, he grew
insensibly weaned from that hideous Apprehension he had harbored of Waters. He
began to pass over the Bridge on Foot, afterward passed in on Horseback. He
since ventured to Ferry over Rivers: He went by Boat on Brooks. But as Hazard
does ever extraordinary things, when Prudence has resolved to bring about some
surprising Contingencies, it came into Lorenzo's Friends thoughts, to commit to
Leoni the Concern of his Cure. They invited him to Carrego, with all the
Reasons and Allurements of Honor and Profit, capable of tempting him; and
prevailed with him at last to undertake the Journey, after having been thoroughly
informed there were no Risques for him to run. He came; saw the Sick Man;
observed all the Symptoms of his Malady with the utmost exactness; joined the
Predictions of Judicial Astrology, to the Indications of Physic; and from all
these things together, unhappily concluded, That there was nothing to be feared
in the Distemper they had in hand; that there needed not any Remedy; and, that
Nature, that would not fail to rouse it self in due time, would have sufficient
strength to loosen and disperse the ill Humors which fed the Fever, and to
reestablish the Patient in perfect Health. Leoni's Advice was followed with the
utmost punctuality: but they likewise perceived, that Nature, in stead of
making its Efforts in the Critical Days, grew still weaker and weaker, and
insensibly sunk and dwindl'd. Ludovico Sforza, having Spies throughout all
Italy, was informed how Matters stood. And as he had an Interest in Lorenzo de
Medici's Life, as thinking him too Pacifick to suffer any Disturbance in the
Tutelage of the Duchy of Milan, though he had usurped the Station, he sent with
all diligence to Carrego, Lazaro de Plaisanza, the most famous Physician of
Lombardy, dwelling then at Pavia. Lazaro visiting the Sick, despaired, of him
at the very first, and plainly declared, it was impossible to cure him. He
showed the Malignity of the Phlegm, which had so seized upon the Noble Parts,
that Remedies were no longer capable of driving it thence. And, or that the
loss of so Great a Person augmented his Indignation, or that he was overjoyed
with having found an Occasion to disparage Leoni, the only Physician that gave
a Jealousy to his Fame, he took delight in demonstrating, by indubitable
Proofs, and even by Trials made upon the Patient's Body, that had he been
prescribed the Common Courses, he would infallibly have recovered his pristine
Vigor.

While the Family of Medici were cursing Leoni's Negligence and Temerity,
Lorenzo being informed that his End was near at hand, appeared no more moved,
than if some indifferent News had been brought him; and carried his steadiness
of Courage to the very last Degree that Philosophy teaches it can go. He
comforted his Friends, gave them all the Orders and Directions he judged to be
necessary after his Death; regulated his Domestic Concerns by a Will, which
could not be more humble, or judicious; and taking his leave of the World,
refused seeing any other than Ecclesiastic and Religious Persons. He expired
in their Arms, after having given. Tokens of a most Christian Submission, and
received all the Sacraments. There wanted three Months of his having
accomplished forty three Years, and it was not known any of his House had died
so young, of a natural Death, since the time of its being in Eminency. His
Death plunged all those of his Family into a Consternation, the upshot of which
was, their falling into a fury.

Piero de Medici his eldest Son, who derived from his Mother all his
Impetuosities and Transports, went out of the Chamber, where, according to
Custom, he had closed his Father's Eyes, when he perceived Leoni crossing the
Courtyard. This Object, offering it self so unseasonably to his sight,
redoubled his Rage: He ran after him to strangle him; but having sound him near
a Well, whose Brink was not very high, he changed his Design; and as he was
extraordinary robust, he seized Leoni about the Waste, and tumbled him into the
Well.

The Skreams of this poor Old Man, and the Noise he made in falling, obliged
some Domestics to run to his Assistance; but the Water had already suffocated
all the natural Heat he had remaining: Which verified the Prediction by which
he had formerly doomed himself to be drowned. The Friends of the House of
Medici spread abroad the Rumor, That Leoni had been so sensible for the loss
of his Reputation, that he fell mad at Caregio, and threw himself into a Well.
But Providence never fails of finding out the Secret to manifest Crimes, when
it has resolved to punish them in Public. They hindered for some time the ill
Effect Piero de Medici's Inhumanity would have had in the World, if it had been
known. But there was no hindering his losing his Life in the same manner he
bereft the unfortunate Leoni of his, as I shall make appear in the Sequel of
this Work.

Now this would be the Place to finish Lorenzo de Medici's Pourtraict; but the
Gratifications which the most Christian King confers on Men of Learning, at
Monsieur Colbert's Recommendation, agreeably invites me to bestow the rest of
this Book on the Merit of the only Personage of the last Century, who since
Mecoenas, in a Private Fortune, has rendered his Name Famous by that sort of
Magnificence.

I say then, That Lorenzo's predominant Inclination was ever for Learned Men.
He nursed up these Squab-Virtuoso's in Literature almost from the very Cradle,
and destined them by a rare Foreknowledge to Sciences and Arts, whereof they
would be one day capable, when as they were yet but learning to read. He
prevailed with the Florentines to build them Schools, and gave them Annual
Pensions out of his own Estate. He was the just Estimator of true Virtue, in
what Place soever it was found. He did not content himself with caressing the
Muses, and receiving them commonly at his Table, (as did then the Kings of
Hungary and of Naples) but he took the pains to exercise them in all such kinds
in which they were best capable of performing, nay, and to spirit them by his
own Example. Into their own Country did he send the Learned Greeks, who had
made their Retreat to him after the taking of Constantinople, that so they
might buy up there the Best and most Ancient Manuscripts, that had been
pillaged; and gave them for that purpose such considerable Sums, that they
brought enough back again to form that famous Library, one part of whose Wrecks
is now what is most Curious in that of the French King. I reserve for another
Place the History of that Library, and of the strange Revolutions it suffered
from the time Charles the Eighth exposed it to Plunder, unto the Regency of
Catharine of Medicis, who got, half by Force, half by Cunning, what we have now
remaining of it, out of the Hands of the English; and would never consent,
during her Lifetime, that those Manuscripts should be mingled with those of
the King's. I shall only here set down one Particularity, which I have seen
several times; namely, That most of those Manuscripts were bought so dear, that
there are those that cost upon the Places a hundred Golden Crowns.

This Library was put into the Palace of Medici, for an Invitation thither of
the Learned Men of Europe. Provision was made for their daily Reception, and
they had the Means afforded them of Studying with their Convenience.
Conferences were held, at which Lorenzo de Medici assisted and spoke in his
turn. And there it was he began the Design of making Physical and Astronomical
Experiments, which are now continued for the Public Benefit, under the
Direction of Prince Leopold de Medici.

They assembled on the same Design all the Antic Monuments which could serve
to fashion young Painters, Sculptors, and Architects. All such were invited
thither, a^ were willing to be instructed or perfectionated in those three
Arts: They had excellent Masters appointed to train them up. Provision was made
for the Maintenance of such as needed it: And Lorenzo's Purse was ever open to
whoever lifted himself above what is vulgar. Assist they did at the Scrutinies
which the Skilful made of their Works. They were brought to note the Defects of
them. In each Piece was shown them what was wanting to its attaining an
ultimate Perfection. And they were much bettered by the Emulation which was
carefully nourished among them, for the finishing them the sooner. From thence
it came, that Michael Angelo improved so well in this Illustrious School, that
he counterfeited at nineteen years of age an Antic Head, in such manner, as
that it was impossible to distinguish the Original from the Copy.

This Application of Lorenzo's in his Palace, did not hinder him from
contributing with the same vigor to the Studies of the Youth in the Cities
subjected to his Republic of Florence. He knew the City of Pisa was
disconsolate for the loss of her Liberty: And to divert her from those gloomy
thoughts, he persuaded the Florentines to found there an University, which
would have become the most flourishing of Italy, had it persever'd in the same
Principles it commenced. There had he Chairs erected for all sorts of Sciences.
Thither had they attracted, by the greatness of the Recompense, the most
renowned Professors of other Universities. There were they maintained with
Luster. And to tempt Strangers to come thither in greater numbers, young
Cardinal de Medici went to study in this place the Civil and Canon Law. Lorenzo
took ever and anon a Journey thither, to judge of the Progress, and distribute
the Prizes to the Students: But he never went, without taking along seven
Learned Men, whom he had culled out from among others, with them to establish a
peculiar Engagement. The first was Johannes Picus de la Mirandola: The second,
Angelus Politianus: The third, Marsileo Ficino: The fourth, Christofano
Laudini: Johannes Lascaris, the fifth: The sixth, Demetrius Calchondilas: And
the seventh, Marcellus Trachamontano. However, I shall not first speak of them.
And lest it be imagined, that I mean to prefer them before the other Wits which
appeared, in that most happy Conjuncture, I rank them according to the Order of
Times they came acquainted with Lorenzo; and I begin with the famous Leonard,
who, for that he was born in the City of Arezzo, upon the Territory of
Florence, took upon him the Name of Aretine. He was already very old, when he
bestowed his Cares on Lorenzo de Medici's first Education, and enjoyed all the
Glory acquired him by his Sufficiency and long Labors. He began to be famous
at eighteen years of age: And as he had got a Fancy in his Head, to
re-introduce in Europe the Study of the Greek Tongue, which had been neglected
since the Inundation of the Barbarous Nations, and that he had succeeded that
way to admiration, he made himself necessary to the Court of Rome, which did
not then refrain keeping secret Correspondencies with the Eastern Bishops, though
separated from their Communion. Thus Aretin was called from Florence, where he
still studied, and Pope Innocent the Seventh made him his Secretary. And as he
was extraordinary parcimonious, he scraped together in that Employment a Fund
sufficient to spend the rest of his Days at ease, and then made an honorable
Retreat into his Country, where he might have enjoyed in quiet the Advantages
of his Fortune, if the same sparing Humor wherewith he was besieged, had not
thwarted his own Happiness. This Infirmity rendered him almost generally
contemptible, and trumpt him up the Aversion of such People as knew not
otherwise his Merit. The facetious Artofe composed a kind of Novel in imitation
of Boccacio, wherein he wittily lashed and railly'd Aretine, by representing
his stroaling, vagabond Humor about hidden Treasures, spending Day and Night
in telling Gold and Silver, and busied with new Contrivances to heap up Pelf.
He also drew him pensive and thoughtful upon extraordinary Usuries, and so
prodigiously thirsty after another Good, that all the Waters of Pago and of
Pactolus, which God Mammon poured into his Mouth, could not quench his Thirst.
Lorenzo, however, did not miss of prevailing with him, by sacrificing something
to his Avidity, to engage him afterward to labor for the Public. And by this
innocent Stratagem was it, that Aretine fell of himself to translate
Aristotle's Problems into Latin with the utmost accuracy, and wrote very
judiciously the History of his own Country. He lived above Fourscore years,
dying however soon enough not to receive in his Life time the Affront he had
merited by a notorious Larceny. He had met with a new Manuscript of Procopius
his Gothique History, and imagining there was never another extant, none having
been found among the Books saved from the Pillage of Constantinople, the Whim
took him to burn it, after having printed the Work under his own Name, without
fearing to pass for an Infamous Plagiary with Posterity. This Changeling, while
Aretine lived, redounded much to his Honor: But scarce were his Eyes closed,
than that Christoforo Persona said, he had got another Manuscript of the said
Procopius, containing the Wars of the Persians and Vandals, besides those of
the Goths, and caused them to be printed, with a Preface so injurious to
Aretine's Memory, that his being no longer in a condition to read it, was
reckoned for none of the least of his Good-fortunes. Moreover his Heirs were so
little careful of the Works he had not yet published, that the better part of
them would be still unknown, if the Learned Monsieur de la Mare, Counselor in
the Parliament of Burgundy, had not taken the pains to poak them out of the
Dust of the most famous Libraries, principally out of that of the most
Christian King, and of the Great Duke of Tuscany, and collected them into a
Volumn.

The gay, facetious Poggio labored at the same time with Aretine on Lorenzo de
Medici's Education, and infinitely contributed to dispel what appeared too
gloomy in his Infancy. He had traveled throughout all Europe, and most
industriously visited the Archives of Monasteries. He was the first that found
out Tully's Books which treat of De Finibus and Legibus.
Laws, and of the Ends of Good and Evil. He had likewise the good luck to
discover Quintilian's Institutions, and his first Nineteen Declamations, as he
was feretting the Shop of a German Grocer, just as he was going to tear them,
to make Wrappers of for his Commodities. And those who know, that this was the
only Copy in the World, will have eternal Obligations to Poggio's Memory.
Eugenius the Fourth, and Nicholas the Fifth, made use of him in Quality of
Secretary. And this Commission would have gained him vast Riches, if he
himself, by the following Adventure, had not contributed to his own Disgrace.
He was naturally Curious, and yet his Conversation extreme diverting, because
never Man proceeded sooner or more imperceptibly, from the starched'st,
severest Gravity, into the freest Mirth and Gaiety. This Quality, which made
him one in all gallant Meetings and Entertainments, would have advanced him
very high, if he had confined within any bounds his easy proneness to
Drollery. But People began to grow weary of affording him Attention, when they
saw him lash out into the most keen and poynant Satyr, and not valuing to lose
a Friend, rather than not have the Pleasure of springing a Witticism. One day
that they were Criticizing the Briefs, (as was customary) in a company of
Learned Men, Poggio could not endure that they commended one drawn up by
Giorgiodi Trebizond, and this Satirical Verse started from him: Graeculus
esuriens ad Coelum jusseris, ibit.

George not understanding Raillery, answered him immediately with a Cuff or two
on the Ear, which were followed with so general a Laughter, that Poggio was
constrained to step aside and leave Rome on the morrow, where he rightly
judged, there was nothing more for him to do, after such an Affront. Thus he
returned to Florence, where he translated into Latin the Greek History of
Diodorus Siculus, and made excellent Tracts on the Infidelity of Princes, on
the Capriciousness of Fortune, and the Contagion of Avarice. But as it was
fatal to him to detract ever to his Cost, he attacked Lorenzo Val, of whom it
was then said, That Nature had kneaded him all of Choler. And indeed, he
answered Poggio with such fell Scurrilities and Execrations, that he made him
quit the Match, to set upon the History of his Country, which he wrote in Latin
competently pure, and Giacomo Poggio his Son translated it with much Elegancy
into Italian. But this Work was happy neither for the Author, nor the
Translator; for they kept so little moderation in their commending the
Florentines, and decrying their Adversaries, that they could neither be
accounted bad Citizens, nor good Historians, as Sannazar twits them by this
excellent Epigram. Dum Patriam laudat, damnat dum Poggius hostem
Nec malus est Civis, nec bonus Historianus.


The Father died a little before the Pazzi's Conspiracy; and the Son being
engaged among those cooped up in the Townhouse of Florence, in thinking to
surprise it, Lorenzo de Medici in vain endeavored to save him from the Rope.

Ambrosio da Camaldoli was the first Religious of his time, who applied his
Mind to the Study of Polite Letters, He translated the Work of the Hierarchy
attributed to St. Denis, with so much eloquence and neatness, that none have
since come near his Style. But he sped not so well in the Translation of
Diogenes Laertius. He was General of his Order, and the Popes Eugenius the
Fourth, and Nicholas the Fifth, could not entice him from his Solitude, by
proposing to him the Dignity of Cardinal, as an Attraction to get him to the
Court of Rome. He persever'd in his Hermitage unto a profound old age, in an
healthful Cheerfulness, which procured him the Visits of the Worthy'st Persons
in Tuscany; and he it was Lorenzo de Medici pitched on to reconcile Lorenzo Val
with Poggio. He endeavored it for a long while, but with so little Success,
that they since gave him reason to averr, in a Letter written to the Prince of
Mirandola, That he had found them neither Christians, nor Men of Reason.

Antonio da Palermo was born at Bologna, of the Illustrious Family of
Beccarelli; but without any Estate. He had Eight hundred Crowns Pension to
teach History to the last Duke of Milan of the House of Visconti, from whence
he went to Naples, to be King Alfonso's Secretary. He accompanied that Prince
in all his Wars and Voyages, and was Eyewitness of most of the Wonders he
relates of him, in a Book that has had the Honor to be enriched and re-touch'd
by Pope Pius the Second. He was very Moderate for the first Sev'nty years of
his Life: but at Sev'nty one, a fair Maid of Naples, called Marcilla, inspired
him with Love, and made him think on Marriage. He had by her several Children,
and died Ten years after, with so little Pain and Distraction, that a moment
before he expired, he made his own Epitaph.

Lorenzo Val was the first Roman in whose Head it came to repair the Damage the
Barbarous-Nations had done the Study of the Latin Tongue. He composed Books of
Elocution, which quickened the Roman Youth with a Desire to hunt in the Works of
the Ancients for the Purity of Expressions, that had been natural to them. He
carefully translated Herodotus and Thucydides, though his Fidelity has since been
much questioned by Henry Estienno, in those two Works. But he was of so malign
a Disposition, that he could not speak of any Man without Detraction. He took
fire on the least occasion; and when he had once begun to ferment, it was
impossible for him to abstain from the bitterest Invectives, or to be brought
to a Reconciliation with those he had offended. Thus finding no longer any one
to Criticize upon in the Court of Rome, he removed to that of Naples, where he
got immediately into Credit, by the Offer he made to write the most Illustrious
Actions of Naples. He went about it with all his might, but with so little
Success, that his Adversaries had reason to upbraid him, That he had fallen
himself into all the Faults, which he had so often reproved in others. This
Disgrace, it is thought, made him banish himself from King Alfonso's Court; and
that the anxiety of surviving his Reputation, made him take pet and die, at
Fifty years of age. And the Romans could hardly be prevailed with to suffer him
to be buried in the Church of Lateran, whereof he was a Canon, for that he had
made way for others to doubt of their Pretensions, by writing against the
Donation of the Emperor Constantine to Pope Sylvester. They would have had
more reason to contest him so honorable a Sepulture, on the score of the
Scandal and Ill Example he had given in the Commonwealth of Learning, by first
publishing whole Books of Invectives and Recriminations.

Fabius Blondus was born at Furli, of the Scum of the People, and earned
Preferment and a Name, by his Courage, in undertaking to write the huge Decades
of the Civil Wars of Italy; whose Memoirs were upon the point of being lost,
because there was not a Person willing to apply his Endeavors to so tedious
and irksom a Subject. He since composed another Piece, of the Revolutions
happening during the Decaydency and Restoration of the Roman Empire, with so
much satisfaction to Pope Nicolas the Fifth, who set him to work, that he made
great Gains by this Achievement; and it is verily believed he would have
attained to the most eminent Dignities, had he not preferred Wedlock to an
Ecclesiastic State. He married a Roman Lady of great Quality, by whom he had
several Children, who had the Misfortune to become miserably poor; he died at
Seventy years old, and was buried at the Door of our Lady of Ara Coeli. I have
sometimes made enquiry how it comes this Author is so little known, and have
found no other Cause, but that he had the misfortune, a hundred years after his
Death, that Carolus Sigonius took a fancy to write upon the same Subject: And
as he was less entangl'd, and more methodick than Blondus, he ravished him of
his Reputation with so much excess, that he now serves only for Parade in
Libraries, though otherwise no Man can deny, but that Sigonius is almost all
along the Plagiary of Blondus.

Candidus December went from Vigevano, where he was born, to Milan. He became
the best Critic in Europe, in Lorenzo Val's Judgment, who never commended any
other Grammarian of his time, save Candidus. He was the first Translator of
Appianus Alexandrinus, which he did not speed in, however skilful in the Greek
and Latin Tongues, because he had made use of so faulty a Manuscript, that he
had been constrained to supply in several Places, upon feeble Conjectures, what
was wanting to the Text. But, in recompense, he wrote the Life of Filippo
Visconti Duke of Milan, in a Style so like to that of Suetonius, that none have
since been able to come near it, no not Paulus-Jovius, though he has endeavored
it in the Life of the Great Sforza, sirnam'd Attendula. True it is, he has
tinged and dashed it with things so highly shocking Modesty, that it is a
wonder, that, this notwithstanding, his Work has been infinitely esteemed. He
died aged Fourscore, and was buried near the Library of St. Ambrosio, which had
been long under his Care.

It is not without some Confusion, that I speak here of that famous Algionus,
though he was the Learned Venetian of his Age, and that we have Letters of
his, written with the utmost politeness, to Lorenzo de Medici. However, those
who know him, have not been able to excuse him from two great Infirmities: The
one, of getting drunk as often as he found the occasion: And the other, of
having deprived Posterity of the most excellent of Cicero's Works, of which he
had got the Manuscript. This wretched Plagiary was under an Obligation of
comforting the Proveditor Cornaro, in the Banishment he was doomed to, for
having been routed in making War upon the Turks, though the Fault was none of
his. Algionus sent him the Book entit'led De fortiter toleranda Exilii fortuna.
And as this Tract was wholly composed of Sentences sorrily tacked and jumbl'd
together, and fitted out of Cicero's Book of Glory, yet was it much esteemed,
though the Judicious easily observed it had not any Connection. Algionus,
overjoyed at the Success of his Work, changed the design he had had of causing
Cicero's Piece to be printed: And as he knew there was no other Copy of it to
be had, he committed it to the Flames, for fear there should be one day found
among his Papers Matter for his Conviction. Nevertheless, he repented it
toward the end of his Life, and made a kind of an attoning Confession and
Apology at the Head of two Harangues, which he composed at Venice, upon the
Desolation of Rome by the Lutherians. The Public is indebted to him for the
Exactness which Aldus Manucius used in the Impression of the best Greek and
Latin. Authors we now admire; for he was all his Life Corrector of that famous
Press.

Never Man became more Learned, with less Health, and more Engagements
incompatible with Study, than Donatus. I speak of him that issued from the
Illustrious Family of the Acagholli at Florence. His Life was very short; being
almost wholly spent in the most weighty and considerable Employments of the
Republic. This notwithstanding, he failed not translating Aristotle's Morals
much more exactly than those who had gone before him in that sort of Labor,
nor of purging them with an admirable Commentary, of ridiculous Interpretations
given them by the Ancients, and new Sophists. Wherein he showed, That whosoever
engages himself in this Labyrinth, without another Guide than the famous
Eustachius, cannot avoid going astray. He found likewise time to translate the
Lives of Plutarch's Illustrious Men, being the best Version we have of them in
Latin; and to write a Book in Praise of Charles-Main, in acknowledgment for
that Prince his having built or reestablish'd the City of Florence. He was a
Confident of Lorenzo de Medici; and 'twas upon his Request he undertook a
Journey into France, to solicit at that Court Succors for his Country,
against Pope Sixtus the Fourth. He died at Milan, aged Thirty eight years, and
three Months after the Pazzi's Conspiracy.

Franciscus Philelphus of Tolentin was so enamored of the Greek Tongue, that
he would needs go view the Ruins of Athens, to try if the Air of the Country
could in any wise contribute to his Sufficiency. From thence he passed through
Constantinople, where he married Emanuel Chrysolorus his Daughter, merely for
her pronouncing admirably well the ancient and new Greek. This Woman being
intriguing, made her Husband known to the Emperor Palaeologus, who sent him in
Quality of Ambassador to the Christian Princes, to demand Succors against the
Turks, Philelphus his Negotiation was of no benefit to the Emperor, but
accru'd to his own advantage; for it brought him acquainted over all Europe,
and principally at Florence, where Lorenzo engaged him to translate the Works
of Hippocrates, and Xenophon's (...). He likewise wrote the Life of Francesco
Sforza in Heroic Verse, for which he received Noble Presents. He was at Naples
when the News came of Constantinople's being taken, and King Alfonso staid him
there by his Liberalities. He had also in that Place a Dispute with a Natural
Greek, called Timotheus, upon the force of a Greek Syllable; and as the Contest
was flushed in good Company, Philelphus adventured to say, That he would bett a
hundred Crowns, that the Opinion he held was true. Timotheus answered, he had
not wherewith to take up his Wager; but that, to show, if he had all the
Treasures in the World, he would make no difficulty of hazarding them to
defend, his Sentiment, he offered to stake his fine Beard, the thing which Men
of his Country preserve with most fondness. Philelphus took him at his Word;
and the hundred Crowns being consigned into a third Hand, the Learned assembled
in the King's Library, where they consuited the ancient Manuscripts, and found
so clearly the poor Timotheus to be under a Mistake, that he gave the Verdict
against himself, nay, and offered Philelphus a hundred Crowns to redeem his
Beard. But this inexorable Conqueror was not to be prevailed upon or by
Entreaties, or by Pity, which any other would have had for poor disconsolate
Timotheus: He cut it off, and exposed it a long while to the view of his
Auditors, for a Mark of his Triumph, on the side of his Chair wherein he
publicly professed. As to the rest, never Man of Letters received more
Gratuities from all sorts of Persons, than Philelphus; and yet never Man died
poorer. He expired at Ninety years of age, and all he had being sold, was
hardly sufficient for the Charges of his Burial. He left a Son, called Marius,
a Man of no less Learning than his Father; but he neither inherited his Fame
nor his Happiness.

Nicolo Perroti came from the same Town of Sassoferrato in Vmbria, where the
famous Bartolus was born. He first contrived putting the Rules of Grammar into
Verse; that Youth might learn and remember them the more easily. His Trial of
Skill was the Traduction of Polybius, which he so acutely well performed, as
made it questioned, whether it was he that did it, or if he had not found some
ancient Translation of the said Polybius, and caused it to be printed under his
own Name. The most Judicious durst not however arraign him of Plagiarism: They
chose rather to produce him at the Court of Rome, which then did Justice to the
Merit of all the Learned. Perroti became, after some years. Archbishop of
Manfrediana, and Governor of the City of Perrouza, and of the Province of
Vmbria. Nay, he would have been Cardinal, had he not bubbl'd himself of the
Cap, by debarring Cardinal Bessarion his Patron from being Pope, through an
Adventure I shall hereafter relate. He quickly solac'd himself for this Loss,
and cheerfully spent the rest of his Life in a House of Pleasure he had fitted
up to his Fancy, and called Fugicura. There did he compile a Commentary upon
Martial, Learned and Curious in truth, but a little too Lascivious and too
Libertine for an Archbishop; which perchance hindered him from publishing it in
his Lifetime. He died very old; and the Author of his Epitaph had reason to
use these Words only, Here lies the Translator of Polybius: For if the Work is
Perroti's, none of all those who have made the Greeks speak Latin, not only
can be compared to him, or in any wise come near him.

Platina came to Rome from Cremona, the Place of his Birth, under the Popedom
of Calixtus the Third. Cardinal Bessarion provided for his Subsistence, and set
him a writing the Popes Lives; whose Style is pure, and Narration ingenious.
Paul the Second made him afterward his Secretary, and wrongfully suspecting
him of having betrayed him, caused him to undergo the Irons, Dungeon, Rack, and
other Mischiefs; which he himself relates with a most pathetick Air* In
reparation of which, Sixtus the Fourth made him Library Keeper of the Vatican,
where he composed Dialogues of True Good, True Nobility, The Perfect Citizen,
and of Honest Pleasure. He died almost without Pain, and left by Will his House
of the Quirinal to serve for an Academy, and the Coronation of Poets. His
Epitaph, which he himself made, is but of three Verses, sorrily enough turned,
and desires no other Favor of Passengers, but that they would not stir his
Bones.

Giacomo Cardinal of Pavia was a poor Boy, for his Merit adopted, and made
Cardinal-Nephew by Pope Pius the Second. He was employed in all the Importent
Negotiations of his time; and nothing it wanting to the Letters he has left
behind him, but the Politeness and Purity of the Tongue. He passed for the most
worthy Subject of the Sacred College pretending to the Papacy, when falling ill
at Bolcenna, at the persuasion of an ignorant Physician he took a kind of
Nellebore called Veratro, which suffocated him in a trice.

Domitius Calderi^ was fetched from the Tetritory of Verona, his Native
Country, by his Mecoena^ Cardinal Bessarion. His principal Talent lay in
interpreting the most difficult Passages of the Poets, which he explained with
so much neatness, and by such acute, ingenious Guesses, that never Professor
had a more Illustrious Auditory, so thronged was his with Persons of the First
Quality in Italy. This encouraged him to commit some of his Observations to the
Press. But as he was naturally ambitious, and that he affected to bottom his
own Repute by disclosing the Ignorance of others, he created so great a number
his Enemies, that he would have found it a hard push to answer all the Writings
drawn up against him, if he had not been relieved by a Fever, which cut him off
very young. His Death inspired Pity into his very Adversaries, and Politianus
caused stately Verses to be engraved upon his Tomb, which serve to evidence,
That Envy among Wits does not extend beyond the Grave.

Antonius Campanus his Fortune was no less capricious than his Genius. An
unknown Country-Girl was delivered of him under a Tree, where she bilkt him. He
was found there by a Sexton Priest of the Church, who put the Bantling out to
Nurse, through a pure Principle of Charity; for he had more the Form of an Ape,
than of a Child. This Priest taught him to read, and put him afterward into
the Service of a young Gentleman going to Study at Naples. Campanus attended
his Master to the College, and became a Man of such Learning, as at his return
he stood for and obtained a Public Professors Chair at Perruza. This Exercise
brought him to the knowledge of Pope Pius the Second, who made him Bishop of
Iterano; and Paul the Second since conferred on him other Benefices. But he
could not avoid being disgraced under Sixtus the Fourth, because that Pope
having vowed the Ruin of the Race of Vitelli, for Reasons I have inserted in
the Second Book, thought it needful before all things to rid Campanus out of
the way, he having too strict an Engagement with this House. And indeed, he
sent him into Exile, wherein he died of the Falling Sickness. He left several
Works, the most considerable of which would be the Life of the famous Captain
Braccio, had he not blended it with so many Fables, that the most knowing in
the History of Italy in the Fifteenth Century, can in it hardly distinguish
Truth from Eiction.

Cardinal Bessarion was a Man so accomplished, that the Sacred Purple had never
clad his like. He merited the Cap in the Council of Florence, and wore it so
worthily, that he set his Fortune above Envy. He was tall, and of Noble
Deportment; his Manners were regulated according to all Christian Severity; his
Conversation charming, and Knowledge Universal; his Palace the Sanctuary of the
pincht, uneasy Greek and Latin Muses; and at his Table has been seen at once,
several times, George de Trebisondo, Gaza, Argiropilos, Pleton, Philelphus.
Blondus, Aretine, Poggio, Valla, Sipontinus, Campanus, Platina, and Calderin.
The Popes Eugenius the Fourth, Nicolas the Fifth, and Pius the Second, declared
on their Deathbeds to the Sacred College, That Bessarion was the most Worthy of
being their Successor; and it is well known, that he would have been Pope after
Paul the Second, but for the Imprudence of Nicolo Perroti, the same I have
already mentioned, who served him for Conclavist. One Evening, that Bessarion
was studying, as was his Custom, without troubling his Head with the Intrigues
of his Colleagues, three Cardinals, the Heads of as many Cabals in the
Conclave, having at length agreed for the Election of him, went to his Cell,
and asked to speak with him. Perroti fancying all their Business was to hedge
in the Suffrages of his Patron; and as he knew him well enough to be persuaded,
that these Cardinals Solicitations would (as to that) be ineffectual, he
thought it his Duty not to interrupt Bessarion's Study. Wherefore he
obstinately refused to introduce them, or to acquaint his Patron of their
asking to come to his Speech. And what was most capricious in this Adventure,
the more Perroti was entreated, pressed, conjured, threatened, the more stiff
and refractory he was to keep the Door shut; all this so much the more
confirming him in his Chimerical Presupposition, That they were so earnest for
admittance, only to mump the only Voice they wanted for him among them they
had agreed upon. The Contest lasted so long, that the three Cardinals Patience
being tired, they said to one another, A fine Business truly would it be, to
exalt a Man to the Holy See, who not only would not con them any Thanks for
his Election, but also make them depend on the Caprice of his Domestics, when
they should have occasion to Discourse him. Then Spite and Indignation made
them take other Measures; and as Cardinal Riario was the He most flattered
their Imagination in that instant, they elected him Pope, though they had
concerted before not to give their Voice to any Religious, and that Riario had
been a Cordelier. The Pleasure they expected to reap from Cardinal Bessarion's
Regret, for having mist the Papacy through his Conclavist's Fault, set them
agog to let him know how the thing had passed: But this neither changed
Bessarion's Countenance or Carriage to them, and he only told Perroti, That he
had hindered him from dubbing him Cardinal. The new Pope having a mind to reduce
the Popedom into a Monarchy, could no longer endure sight of a Person he knew
to have been so near the Place he held, and merit it much better than his
Holiness. He contrived, for the getting him out of the way, an honorable Sham,
which was, to send Bessarion in Quality of Legate into France, where he resided
a long while, and gave Budoeus the first Tincture of the Greek Tongue; for that
Kingdom had not a Man that understood it at that time. In his Return he died in
Ravenna, where the House of Medici caused a Mausoleum to be erected him.

George de Trebisonde was one of the Principal Men of Letters that came from
Greece into Italy, after the Revolution of Constantinople. He translated the
Works of Eusebius of Coesarea, part of those of Aristotle, and the Rhetoric of
Hermogenes. He was indefatigable in Labor; but besides his having the Mien and
Manners of a Pedant, he lost his Fame by the unjust. War he made upon Plato: He
had got a Fancy, that the only way to exalt his own Repute above that of other
Learned Men, consisted in defaming that Philosopher: and as he was
extraordinarily virulent in all he went about, he wrote against him such
invidious, Satirical Libels, as rendered himself altogether ridiculous. He
received likewise the displeasure of seeing, that among the Learned, all those
making Profession of Virtue, defended the Doctrine of Plato with the same Zeal,
as if it had been (as I may say) the Outworks of the Christian Religion.
Cardinal Bessarion of his Mecaenas became his Adversary, and answered him with
so much Solidity and Eloquence, as stopped his Mouth. He did not desist,
however, after this Quarrel, teaching at Rome, where he married; but some years
after he had a Fit of Sickness, which made him so universally forget what he
had learned, that he retained not so much as his own Name. He did not recover,
without becoming again an Infant; and died, after having tired out his Children
and Domestics for above ten years together, with following him where ever the
Fancy put him upon going, for fear of his insulting those he met; for
notwithstanding all his Imbecility, he would never endure to be shut up Day or
Night.

Theodore Gaza departed very young from the City of Thessalonica, the Place of
his Nativity, and came into Italy, where he was immediately observed to have a
Wit prodigiously quick and pregnant, He attained in a short space the Delicacy
of the Latin Tongue, and became so nice, as gave occasion to doubt, if he
understood it not better than the Greek, though it was not questioned but that he
admirably well knew the Tongue of his own Country. And indeed, he was the only
Person, of whom People have not hitherto been able to judge which he translated
best, Greek into Latin, or Latin into Greek; for, if we on one side examine the
Version he made of the Problems of Aristotle's History of Animals, of that of
Plants of Theophrastus, and of the Aphorisms of Hippocrates, we shall find,
that he has not only expressed the Thoughts and the Character of those
Authors, but has likewise retained all their Graces, which seemed as if they
could in no wise be divorced from their Expressions: And if, on the other side,
we consider the Air wherewith he makes Cicero speak Greek, it will be more
difficult (without comparison) to comprehend the inimitable Turn he found the
way to give to that Orator Travesty'd, to make him retain all the Majesty of
his Eloquence, without having enfeebl'd the Beauty of his Sentiments, or the
Purity of his Style. Cardinal Bessarion had procured him a Benefice in the
Realm of Naples, on which he might very conveniently have subsisted, if his
natural averseness for all sorts of Menial Cares had not obliged him to refer
them absolutely to his own Country People, who let him almost want all manner
of Necessaries. They made him believe, the Lands had been ruined, sometimes by
Storms, and sometimes by extraordinary Droughts. Honest Gaza loved rather to
believe their Lies, than take the pains to inquire into the Truth of their
Asseverations. However, he did not leave off working with as much Exactness and
Perseverance, as if he had had all his Conveniences. And when he had finished
the Piece he designed for Pope Sixtus the Fourth, he transcribed it himself
upon Parchment, (for he painted admirably well) and presented it to his
Holiness. But the good Man had made his Address in the wrong place; for the
Pope, who had lived Fifty years among the Cordeliers, had depraved his Taste,
by studying the Formalities of Scotus. He received Gaza's Book with as lowering
a Countenance, as if he had offered him a Song: He threw it into a Corner of
the Room, and calling his Chamberlain, bid him give the Author so mean a Sum,
that it was not sufficient to pay for the Velome on which the Work was written.
Gaza being netled with this Affront, the most sensible a Man of Letters can
receive, could not forbear reciting aloud the Greek Proverb, which says, That
Asses have no taste, save for Coals. But wel^ was it for him, the Pope did not
understand the Tongue; for he would not have allowed him to have retired to his
Benefice, where out of vexation, he burnt what he had left of his Work. And it
is to be presumed, that the Pope did the like with the Manuscrip^ presented him
by Gaza; for we have not yet been able to know what it treated of. Gaza lived
some years longer, ever in indignation against the Muses, as if they should
have been Warrantees of Sixtus his dogged humor and moroseness, and died at
above fourscore years of Age.

Johannes Argiropolis having been invited from Constantinople, to instruct
those of the House of Medici, was in effect Piero's, Lorehzo's, and Giuliano's
Tutour. Gaza's Friendship, which he took care to Cultivate, was an infinite
help to his acquiring Reputation when he came to Florence, and still more since
to preserve it; for, setting upon translating Aristotle's Books of Physic,
Gaza, who had also translated them, and incomparably much better than
Agiropolis could do, out of a dis-interessedness and modesty, unexempl'd in the
Republic of Letters, suppressed his Work, in consideration of his Friends, he
well foreseeing that as soon as his own Traduction should come forth, it would
darken that of Argiropolis, who neither knew so much Latin as Gaza, nor had so
neat, easy, and fluent a gift of Explanation, as to unravel Aristotle.
Argiropolis took the advantage of Gaza's Generosity, without troubling his head
about acknowledging it, and thus indulged, at another Cost, his two ruling
inclinations, Ambition and Avarice; for he was ranked among the Wits, and
shared with them the Liberalities annually bestowed on them by the Court of
Naples, that of Rome, and Lorenzo de Medici: He likewise taught in the public
School of Florence with sufficient Applause, while he respected the Authors in
the Latin Tongue. But when he chanced to bolt, Cicero did not well understand
Greek, his Auditors eclipsed themselves insensibly, and the Pestilence,
breaking out in Tuscany, in that juncture, gave him a pretense to depart
Florence with Honor, and retire to Rome, where Cardinal Bessarion procured him
considerable Pentions. There lived he according to his Genius, prone to good
Cheer, and some excess in Diet, with which it was never observed that he had
lost his Reason, or that he blurted any thing unbeseeming him. Nevertheless,
his Stomach was not proof against Melons, for he died in his seventieth year,
by having eat too much of that Fruit: They found among his Papers he had
cozened some of his Moments, by making a Will, in which he bequeathed to his
Friends such considerable Legacies, as if he had possessed all the Riches of
the House of Medici; though universally known not to be worth a Penny; this
Gallantry only served to Convert the Epitaph that was preparing for him into an
Epigram.

Marcilus Tarcaniote came from Greece into Italy* with a company of
Cuirasseers, and mingled all his life long, the Pike with the Pen; the
Profession of Arms, with that of Polite Letters. His fondness for the Latin
Tongue, made him wed the Daughter of Bartolomeo Scula, who understood and spoke
it to an admirable Perfection. She taught it him so accurately, that Lorenzo de
Medici found him capable of translating Plutarch's Moral Works, and conjured
him to do it by Letters still extant. But he had so much averseness for that
sort of Labor, wherein a Man must (said he) render himself a Slave of another
Sentiments, that it was impossible for him to finish the first Page. He loved
much rather to compose Epigrams, whereof there is a Collection still remaining,
wherein a body may see that it was solely his own fault, he did not do much
more. He was drowned in fording the River of Volterra, swelled extraordinarily
by the Rains, on the very day that the unfortunate Lodovico Sforza was confined
to an Eternal Prison.

Demetrius Chalcondile had all the good Qualities of the Greeks, and none of
the bad, He was Knowing and Laborious, never weary of Studying or Teaching,
sincere, and never boasting. He came very aged to Florence, where he must needs
be dabbling in Matrimony. The little disposition he had to meddle in Domestic
concerns, induced him to leave those Sollicitudes to his Wife; and this
freedom, so extraordinary in Tuscany, with that Ladies wonderful Fecondity,
served for matter to a world of Verses, disadvantageous to her Modesty. After
Argiropolis had quit the Greek Chair of Florence, Politian obtained it; and as
he was an incomparable Wit, using all the ways of making him successful in his
Undertakings, he so well brandished his Talent, and so slily coax'd and
flattered his Auditory, that he wrought an Exclusion to all the Greeks, who
offered to dispute for it. Chalcondile, though very humble, and little minding
his own Glory, could not digest the affront that was done those of his Nation.
He made his Addresses to Lorenzo de Medici, who had already pitched upon him to
reach his Children the Greek Tongue, and obtained Permission to teach in
Concurrence, and at the same time with Politian, to see which of the two would
have most Followers. But the harsh accent which Chalcondile could never get rid
of, and the difficulty he had to pronounce some Latin words, rendered him
Contemptible, in comparison of Politian, whose agreeable tone of Voice, and
gallant Expressions, ravished his whole Audience. Lorenzo contriving by all
means to keep Chalcondile at Florence, was forced to procure him Auditors, and
endeavored to oblige Politian to live with him more civilly.

Lorenzo set about several times to reconcile them, but he found by his own
experience, that it was more easy to procure Peace to Italy, than make it
between two Virtuoso's. He hindered them however from letting their Resentment
break out, during his Lifetime, but incontinently after his Death, Chalcondile
being without support, sided with Lodovico Sforza, who gave him the principal
Chair at Milan, where he committed to the Press his Illustrations upon the
Greek Tongue, that have rendered him so famous. There he died, when near a
hundred years old, and yet soon enough not to be informed of the shameful death
of Theophilus, the Eldest of his Children, killed by Night in a bye street of
Pavia, where he was Professor.

Marc-Musurus, a Native of Candia, where he had already signalized his parts,
by his Criticisme upon the Greek Authors, and by the rare felicity of his
Genius, which almost equally accomplished all he undertook, when that the
Republic of Venice made him remove from his Island to the Terra-firma, and
gave him a Chair at Padoua. The number of his Auditors was there so great, that
they were forced to enlarge the public School, and permit Musurus to teach
Grammar in the morning, and Poetry in the Afternoon, to gratify those who had
a mind to hear him unfold those two liberal Arts. He continued to Profess, till
the War deserted his Auditory, and compelled him himself to think of his
Security. He withdrew to Rome, where he composed that wonderful Poem in praise
of Plato, which is found at the beginning of that Philosophers Works. Those who
understood it, and saw him, could (at first) hardly believe Musurus to be the
Author. They were rather inclined to suspect he had found it in an ancient
Manuscript, and published it in his own Name. Their Diffidence was grounded upon
its not being possible for a Man of their time, to compose a piece wherein the
Character, and Grace strokes the Greek Poetry possessed in Alexander's Age,
were restored in the highest point of their Perfection Musurus helped on his
side to confirm them in this thought, when judging of the Beauty of his Poem,
by the Applauses it received from all Parties, he would compile nothing more of
that Nature, for fear of diminishing by a feeble piece, or less finished, the
high Reputation he had attained unexpectedly, and on a sudden. He contented
himself with showing, by explaining to the Romans, the finest passages of
Homer, of Hesiod, of Theocritus, and of Anacreon, that he was able to imitate
their Quaintness, and Excellencies, since he knew so perfectly their Turn and
Delicacy, and by leading so regular a Life, that People came insensibly to
cease suspecting him of injustice. He was at this pass when Leo the 10th was
Elected Pope, that is to say, when the Golden Age of Polite Letters began.
Musurus received of his first Gratifications, and was endowed with the
Archbishopric of Ragusa. But as Dignities expose more in view those by whom
they are possessed, and by consequence their Imperfections are the better
noted; the Mitre only served Musurus, to manifest the Vice he had so long held
concealed; for as hitherto he had not been accounted Ambitious, and they made
this judgment of him, that he had more Repute than he desired. But no sooner
was he Archbishop, than that he fell a Caballing to be Cardinal. He laid aside
his Books, to study intriguing, and had such an ability that way, that the Pope
was amazed at this Change, twitted him with it, and some times railly'd him.
Yet did he not forbear continuing, and took so many new measures with those he
saw Favorites at Court, that they Cock-sur'd him of a Cap at the first
Promotion. But the Pope delighted in frustrating their purposes, for his
greater Diversion at Musurus his future behavior. And indeed, he did not
neglect tricking up his House, augmenting his Train, nay, and preparing the
acknowledgment he pretended to make. But the day of Promotion being come,
Musurus not finding himself of the number of the one and thirty, added to the
Sacred College, his Virtue proved too weak to digest the Affront he fancied he
had received. He complained of it, as of a Contempt done to all the Greek
Nation in his Person; and for the carrying his Resentment as far as it could go
of the Dropsey he sell sick, and died.

Johannes Lascaris was the most Illustrious of the Grecians, that came into
Italy, after the taking of Constantinople; for besides that he reckoned
Emperors in the number of his Ancestors, was he in such repute for Knowledge
and Probity, that the very Insidels had a veneration for his Merit. He took
Sanctuary with Lorenzo de Medici, who received him with open Arms, and
committed to him the care of his Library. As they were one day discouring on
the means for its embelishment, a thought came into Lascaris his head, that
Bajazet the 2d, Emperor of the Turks, had an inclination for Philosophy, and
that having caused Averroes his Commentaries upon Aristotle, to be explained to
him, he would not be sorry that the Peripeteticks were rescued from the
downfall of Polite Letters. Lorenzo promised to furnish him with things
necessary for a Voyage to Constantinople, if willing to go thither on this
Design. Lascaris took him at his Word, and embarked without any other
Credential, than the Letter which Lorenzo gave him for his Factours.
Nevertheless he failed not of getting access to the Grand Seignior's Port, and
of being presented to his Celsitude, who received him much better than he
expected. They had a pretty long Conversation, and Bajazet testified to him all
the Esteem an Infidel was capable of, for the Virtue of Lorenzo de Medici, and
allowed him (in consideration of that Lord) to buy up all the Manuscripts met
with to be fold in his Empire. His Celsitude gave him Men to Conduct and Guard
him to and from such places, where he knew there had been Libraries, and to
hinder those who had plundered them, from selling the Books for more than they
were worth. Thus Lascaris had the convenience of going throughout all Greece,
and of collecting those rare Volumes, which still subsist in the French King's
Library; yet he brought but half of 'em in the first Voyage he made, because
the joy he had to show his Patron the Authors he had retrieved, though held for
lost, made him return to Florence, just two years after he departed thence. But
Lorenzo sent him back three Months after, and desired him to continue his
search through all places that had been the Residence of the Learned. Lascaris
saw Bajazet again, and received new Civilities from this Sultan. He traveled
over all the Peloponesus, and returned as in Triumph, in a Ship freighted with
the rest of the Spoils of the Greek Tongue. But he had not as yet ranged his
Manuscripts in the stately place appointed them, when Lorenzo de Medici died,
and left Italy in a calm of no long Duration. The French Army entered Florence,
and dissipated the Books, as well as other the Movables of the House of
Medici. Lascaris not knowing what to do, sided with Charles the 8th, and being
a Man of the Cabinet, he had given him the Embassy of Venice, which he
acquitted himself worthily of, under the Reign of that Monarch, and of his
Successor, Lewis the 12th. At length, Leo the 10th being become Pope, called
Lascaris to Rome, to be of his Council. He lived there as a Man of Quality, and
spent regularly for his Table and his Equipage, all the Salaries, and
Eccsileastical Pensions he received. He loved good Cheer, and had so much
aversion for what is called Perking up an Author, that they had all the trouble
imaginable, to get him Couch in writing the Aneients way of Encamping,
according to Polybius his Memoirs; and the little we have left of his curious
Verses, was stolen from him by the Pope's order. He was very much troubled with
the Gout in his old Age, and nevertheless attained to his Ninetieth year.

The City of Groninghen, so little known before it had brought Rodolphus
Agricola into the World, began to be celebrated for his Birth. So great was his
Wit, that he learnt at the first, and without pains, all he had a mind to
study, and a memory so vast, that nothing escaped him of what he had once
retained. These two rare Talents, joined to an indefatigable Temperament,
supplied abundantly the lowness of his Extraction, and his Domestic Poverty.
He became Learned to a Prodigy, with borrowed books, and without a Master; and
the very things he confusedly learnt, and according as they occurred in Authors,
that were lent him, were found disposed in a mavelous order and nearness,
when he pronounced them. He began his Studies, where others were wont to smish
them; that is to say, with the Hebrew Tongue. He would know it not only in its
Purity, but likewise with all the Alterations produced by time, and the
Refinements of the Rabbi's. He was also careful to initiate himself into the
Greek Tongue, the principal Authors of which he read with so much Accuracy,
that his Co-Professours have since owned, they could never know of which he was
most Master. At last he fell to Latin, without having regard to the
Remonstrances of those who dissuaded him from that Province, for that the habit
of writing and pronouncing Hebrew, seemed to have introduced in his Mind, an
incompatibility with the Roman Phrases and Expressions. In Latin he made so
surprising a Progress, that the famous Erasmus, an Author so little accustomed
to commend in another, the Riches he enjoyed, could not grow weary of admiring
him, principally, after he had bestowed on the Public his Commentaries so
polite, and so worthy of Augustus his Age, upon Aristotle's Rhetoric and
Logic. He also made Verses, whose Character is so soft and melting, that they
would never have been taken to have been Writ in the bitter Climate of
Friezland, where Agricola dwelt; and those of the Triumph of Love over Reason,
made him known to the Elector Palatine. This Prince having got a Fancy, as well
as Lorenzo de Medici, to form a Library out of the Ruins of those the Turks had
ravaged in Bulgaria, and other the Neighboring Provinces, prevailed with
Agricola to repair to Heidelberg, the Capital City of his Dominions, gave him
the first Chair for Eloquence in the University there Erected, and made him his
Counselor of State. But Agricola was not yet well installed in his new
Dignities, when a Malign Feavour snatched him away in the flower of his Age,
and deprived Germany of the only Man, it could confront to so many Greeks and
Italians, whose Eulogies I here make.

We must render this Testimony to the Infamous Genius of Leo Battisti Alberti,
that never Man labored with more success than he, upon so tiresome and so
difficult a matter. His Family, being of the most Illustrious of Florence, and
allied to that of Medici, wrought the first tie of Friendship he had with
Lorenzo: he communicated to him the Design he had conceived of studying the
ancient Architecture, and received from him the Counsels and Assistance, that
he needed in an Affair which required much Recommendation. And indeed, Lorenzo
de Medici's Letters gave him access at the Courts of all the Princes of Europe
and Asia, where there were old Ruins of Buildings which seemed to have been
Magnificent. Alberti visited them at his ease; he took al^ the measures of
those decayed Fabrics; an^ at his return to Florence, comparing the diverse
Observations he had made with the Precepts of Vitruvius, he owned, this Authors
Obscurity to be one of the principal Causes, that had occasioned Architecture
to be neglected for so many Ages. On which account, he resolved to render that
Author more Intelligible, and make him speak in his own Tongue. He achieved
these two things with so much Order and Clearness, that the Learned had reason
to say, after having scanned the Work he had undertaken, that those who should
read it, would become a skillful and expert, as he himself. Then he bent his
Studies to Optics, as perceiving that the Painters of his time, did not
succeed in making Pourtraicts in Miniature. He found out its Demonstrations and
Rules which he illustrated and rendered Public, and spared neither Industry,
Pains, or Expense to dress up Youth in practicing them From thence it came,
that in his time there was at Florence, a greater number of excellent Painters,
Sculptors, and Architects, than had been known in Greece, even when she boasted
of being the Mother and Nurse of the Liberal Arts. I shall not mention them in
this place, since the Curious may find 'em in Vasari, who has writ three
Volumes in their Commendation. I shall only say, that though Alberti had his Mind
replete with Palaces. Decorations, and Statues, nevertheless he recreated
himself some times with less serious Muses. And whosoever shall take the pains
to examine the Fables he composed, in imitation of those of Aesop, will judge
(if he is equitable) that Alberti falls little short of that Ancient. I have
not so good an Opinion of the Dialogue he afterward Published under the Title
of Momme, though it made at least as much noise, and its Ra^l^ery seems to me so
feeble in several Passages, that a Man must have a great Disposition to Joy, to
feel any in perusing it. Be it as it will, Alberti dyed pretty young in
Lorenzo's Arms; and Politian commended him publicly, by the Recitation of a
Piece, accounted the most finished in all his Works.

Hermolaus Barbarus was the first who showed by Experience, that the most solid
Knowledge, and most exalted, had nothing common with Pedantry: For though all
Europe was persuaded of his being the most Learned of all Men; yet, at Venice,
his Birthplace, was he reckoned for the only Person of all the Nobles, that
made profession of the highest and most refined Gallantry. There needed no more
than the hearing him discourse upon all sorts of matters, to be Convinced (...)
was ignorant of nothing; yet never seen t^ Study. He was never told of any Book
but what he had the Knowledge of, no^ was there any seen in his Chamber, or his
Closet. He had acquaintance with all the^ topping Wits of his time, but would
ente^ into no strict Tie and Commerce with any save Lorenzo de Medici,
Politian, and Pi^^ della Mirandola. At their request he tool upon him the
greatest labor, at that time in the Republic of Letters, by Correcting all
the Manuscripts of Pliny's Natural History, for an acceptable Present to the
Public. As there had been no ancient Work preserved, more useful than this, so
ha^ there none been preserved more defectuous; and of thirty six Books, whereof
it i^ composed, three or four only were Intelligible; nay, and only those,
which spoke o^ Men and Annimals: As for those which trea^ of Stones, of Herbs,
of Gums, and Minerals, the ignorant Copiers had transcribed them with so much
negligence, that the^^ was at least a word in each Line, capable (...)
stumbling and puzzling the best and able^^ Scholars. The trouble was infinite,
and those who had read in young Pliny's Epistles with what both facility and
exactness, the Natural History was compiled, did averr it required twice as
much pains to restore it; nay, and after that too, they despaired of Success.
However Hermolaus effected it in a few years. In his Corrections he only made
use of the Authority of Manuscripts all along, where good Sense could subsist
with retaining them; and when those Manuscripts were not sufficient, he had
recourse to the Greek and Roman Authors, who had writ upon the same matters,
and restored his Pliny upon their Credit. Lastly, in such places where those
two Succors faild him, he put in use his own Conjectures, with so much
probability and happiness, that not one of them was gain-say'd. By this
ingenuous way did he discover, that the same Pliny was born at Cosme, and that
he composed a Disertation on it, which Convinced all those who read it. The
Applauses Hermolaus received on this occasion, made him not have the better
opinion of his sufficiency; and they only animated him to continue to serve the
Public. He daily saw that the Medicinal Art was ill practiced, because two or
three Men only in Italy were passibly instructed in the nature of Medicaments,
and the admirable desire he had to remedy the defect, made him undertake to do
with Dioscorides, the same thing he had achieved upon Pliny. And as his Talent
was as large at furbishing up the Greek, as Latin Authors, he had also the same
success. Now after this, there seemed nothing more left for him to do, than
enjoy, bask, and acquiesce in the honor he had acquired. And his Friends
invited him so to do, when he urged to them on his own accord, that it was no
longer just, that Italy should be entirely indebted to the Greeks, expelled by
the Turks, for the most solid Philosophy, by their Traductions of Plato and
Aristotle: He added, that whatever pains had been taken, to render those two
Authors intelligible, principally the last, yet he was so little to be
understood, that the Books of Rhetoric, Logic, and Physic were not of any
use. That Themistius was the Man, of the Ancients, that had interpreted them
with most Judgment and Neatness, but had not been better treated, than Pliny by
the Copiers: that it was needful to set about purging him of their faults, and
make him speak Latin, so to shrift under his Guidance into all the Secrets of
the Licoeum, and then take a more honorable Repose, by placing himself at the
end of the Carriere, after having opened to others, those of Nature in Pliny,
of Simples in Dioscorides, and of Ratiocination, in Themistius. Hermolaus
accomplished it, according as he had proposed it, and Themistius appeared with
so much Pleasingness and Majesty, that none have since dared to retouch the
Work. The Translators Reputation became then so great at the Court of Rome, his
abode at that time, that Pope Innocent the 8th, being one day informed, that
the Patriarchship of Aquileia was fallen vacant, he conferred it on him with
full Right. It is to be presumed, his Holiness had then no other Intentions,
than to reward the extraordinary Merit of Hermolaus. But the Senate of Venice
was too much upon its Guard, against the Innovations of the Court of Rome, to
want taking notice, that the Pope had made an Encroachment, by Conferring the
Patriarchship of Aquileia: For though the Sovereign Pontiffs pretended, that they
might place in that Station whom they pleased; yet they never did so with that
Sovereign Authority, and were wont to give Bulls only to the Person nominated
to them by the Ambassador of the Republic. Nevertheless, Innocent the 8th had
dispensed himself from keeping this Formality, in the affair in hand, and gave
but too much room for suspicion to People, naturally distrustful, that he had
nicked his time to create Patriarch of Aquileia, a Patriarch and a Personage so
famous, that they would be far from opposing his Installation, for the placing
there afterward Parties, as would not be of the same Consideration. From hence
it came to pass, that though Hermolaus was one of the most Illustrious Gentlemen
of Venice, and possessed besides all the other Qualities, that in another
Conjuncture would have preferred him to the Patriarchship; yet the Senate acted
with as much Rigor and Obstinacy, to hinder his attaining it, as if they had
judged him absolutely unworthy of it. On the other side, the Pope was resolved
to maintain what he had done, and to carry things to extremity, rather than
endure that Hermolaus should not enjoy the Grace he had done him. But this
wonderful Genius did his Commonwealth Justice, in opposition to his own
Interests, and owned she had reason to be against him. He conjured the Pope to
confer the Benefice on the Party that should be presented to him by the
Ambassador of Venice, and formally declared, that he would accept none, if he
must incur (at this rate) the Envy of his fellow Citizens. The Pope was so
affected with his moderation, that he promised to make him Cardinal at the
first Promotion. But in a few days after Hermolaus fell sick of a Pestilential
Fever; the only remedy to Cure him, was giving him Bezoar, neither mixed, nor
sophisticated. There was some at Florence, in an Agate Vessel, which Suldan
Cayte-bay had made a Present of to Lorenzo de Medici, Politian, and Picodella
Mirandola, sent it Post, but the Courier found Hermolaus just expired.

Giorgio Merula, who survived Hermolaus. but four days, had not a Wit so well
turned as his, though little less Vigorous. He was a Lombard by Inclination, as
well as by Birth, and those who knew him intimately, observed in him all the
Vices, and all the Virtues attributed to that Nation. He was Malign, unapt to
Learn, Revengeful, Pittiless; and if he did no mischief, save by Writing, it
was, because that the lowness of his Fortune, and the Employment he followed,
did not allow him to do it in any other manner. He held it for an Honor to
pass for a Pedant; he affected all the Grimaces of Pedantry, for fear he should
be disputed that Quality. All his Life long did he perform the Public
Functions of a Pedant at Venice and Milan. As his main strength consisted in
Criticisme, he retrenched his Wit to that, with it to gore and persecute all
the Learned Persons of his Age. He was ever at War with one or other, and so
implacable, that he would never be reconciled with any Body. He had also this
property of the Mad-dog, which he had taken for his Devise, that his bite was
incurable: Calderin was the first, whose Reputation he took a pleasure in
ruining, not that he desired to gain by it, but only, because it seemed too
well settled to his Fancy. Then fell he to making an Index of the Errors he had
found in Galcote, and used him so severely, that he took pet, and died. These
two advantages, gained in the Grammar Combat, puffed up his Heart. He took up all
the able men in Europe, and published against them his Corrections, which were
read with so much the more avidity, that of so many Persons, whose Ignorance
was marked, there was not one durst set Pen to Paper in his own Vindication,
out of fear of being crushed with a Reply. Merula did not so much as spare
Politian, though Politian had acquired Fame sufficient, as not to have his match.
He showed him, that though Nature had given him all the qualities requisite to
become Learned, she had not however been able to render him so. He noted to him
above thirty egregious faults, that had started from him, and hinted to him
charitably (said he) that out of a desire to pass for the first, in the
Republic of Letters, he must have read more, and studied more than all the
rest together. Ludovico Sforza being amazed at his having so formidable a
Subject in his College of Milan, made a scruple of employing him any longer in
Correcting of Children, and drew him out of the Dust, to cause him to compile
the History of Milan. But it was only to leave to Posterity a memorable
Example, that the being very Learned, and perceiving the least Faults and
Blunders of others, was not sufficient to make a good Historian: For though
Merula has wrote with so much exactness and precaution, the Work prescribed
him, that the greatest Critic could not find any thing in it to carp at; yet
true it is, that his Book is so dry and barren, that those to whom the Authors
Fame had given an itching to read it, seldom but grutch'd the time they had
spent in that amuzement. This did not hinder him from being magnificently
rewarded; but as he was near ninety years of Age, when he had finished it, none
but his Heirs gained by the benefit that accru'd from his Performance. Politian
was the Man that got most by his Death. He had published the first Century of
his Miscellanies; and Merula being scandalized at the audaciousness, which
seemed to be in the word Century, had threatened Politian to detach against him
whole Regiments of Authorities and Passages, to justify the contrary of all he
asserted, but had only the leisure to rough-draw the Project.

Never Man came to be so admired for his Wit, in so green a Youth, as Angelius
Politianus; and never Man knew better how to preserve, by just and unjust ways,
the Reputation he had acquired. He was born at Florence, and his Relations
lived in such woeful Poverty, as constrained him to be of Giuliano's, and
Lorenzo de Medici's Retinue, when they went to the College, and to wear their
Liveries, that he might have the convenience of being there. He had an ugly
Face, a huge big and long Nose, his left Eye squinted; but he had a pliant and
flexible Wit, and was finely and craftily Ambitious. He never used so much
Artifice to disguise himself, save only with those he had most Communication:
He never heard any thing with so much Indignation, as the Praises of others: he
was equally envious of his Friends and of his Enemies. No other Pen composed
any thing to his liking; he loved not to receive Correction, though he did it
importunately to all sorts of Persons. It was sometimes seen that he
acknowledged his Faults, and that it was merely out of Malice, he resisted
Truth. Yet he never owned to have blunder'd. As to his way of living, it was so
corrupted, that Modesty hinders me from speaking of it. What I mean, will be
but too well divined by the Knowledge of his Death, which I cannot steal from
my Reader, because it was too public. Yet after all this, he had so mavelous
a Genius, that the World has not seen the like since Ovid. At twelve years old
he compiled such stately Verses, that a body would have said they were of
Alexander's Age, or of that of Augustus. And when the fancy took him to
surprise the Learned, and make his own Productions pass for Fragments of
Anacreon, or of Catullus, which he had just found by chance, in some old
Manuscripts of the Medici's Library, those who best understood these matters,
were imposed on in their belief. His first famous piece was for Giuliano de
Medici. This young Lord had won the prize of a Turnament, and lay questing
after a Panegyric, not inseriour to Luca Pulsi's, who had signalized himself
in the like occasion, to the advantage of Lorenzo. Politian undertook the
Province, and having perceived that Pulsi's Poem was not all along of the same
Force, through the Authors having only couched in it things purely of his own
Invention; he fancied he needed only (to avoid this inequality) take a quite
opposite Method. He Book-padded the ancient Panegyricks of the noblest thoughts
that suited with his Subject. He travesty'd them after his own manner, and
enchasing them with such Passages of Poetry, where he was not satisfied with
his own Product; he made so fine a piece, that Pulsi, after having read it,
would have suppressed his own, out of shame and vexation. The same Giuliano
having been killed in the Pazzi's Conspiracy, Politian lying perdue for an
extraordinary occasion, to show he writ as well in Prose as in Verse, drew up
so Pathetick a Description of this Conspiracy, that the Learned, who assembled
in the Library de Medici, avowed that Cicero could have done nothing better.
After these two Essays, the high opinion Politianus had of his Abilities, made
him fall to intriguing for the Profession of the Latin and Greek Eloquence. At
the same time he became the Concurrent of Demotrius Calchondile, and top'd him,
by having a more pleasing Accent, and by strewing his Discourse with Points,
and bloomy, flourishing Expressions, so to recreate his Auditory. Above five
hundred young Gentlemen, of all Countries in Europe, went to fetch him every
morning in his own House, to accompany him, out of Honor, to the very Hall
where he taught, and re-conducted him in like manner, when he descended the
Chair. These Deferences gave him so whimsical an Opinion of his parts, that he
fancied, to keep up so great a Reputation, he must set about more solid Works,
than Verses, or Relations, or at least amuse the World with the expectation of
some great Labor, and yet do nothing all the while. For this reason did he
spend five whole years, without giving the Public ought else than Lessons. But
at length the itch of Writing prevailing over his first design, he caused a
Traduction of Herodian to be Printed, which had not all the effect he
pretended: For though it was generally admired, a rumor was buz'd about, that
Politian had found it among the Papers of the famous Gregorio de Citta di
Castello, which he had bought; and this report was grounded on such
Conjectures, as were but faintly destroyed. Pope Leo, who was then under
Politian, and heard all that was said Pro. and Con at his Fathers Table, being
desired twenty years after, by the Academicks of Rome, to tell them his
Sentiments in the Case, left the thing in suspense, and undecided, and agreed,
that the style of that Translation, had nothing like to that of Politian's
other works, and held more of the Paint, and Artifice, and Luxuriancy, which
Gregorio de Citta di Castello was wont to use in his Compositions: He added
however (as if he had been afraid of having said too much) that this Gregorio
had done nothing comparable to this Version of Herodian. Be it as it will, the
work is so finished and complete, though in some places it is too spruce, and over
abounds with finical trappings, that none have yet dared to decide which is the
best translated, Polybius, or Herodian. Politian, a Man extraordinary nice, in
matters of Honor, spared nothing of what might hinder him from passing for a
Plagiary. He published his Miscellanies and his Poetries: and as he was happy
and persuasive, he would, perchance, have effected it, but for Death, which
lopt him off at forty two years of Age. The Criminal passion he had for one of
his Scholars of high Quality, not being to be satisfied, it cast him into a
burning Fever. In the violence of the fit, he made a Song for the Object
wherewith he was Charmed, got out of Bed, took a Lute, with so tender and
piteous an Air, that he expired in finishing the second Couplet, the same day
that Charles the 8th past the Alps in his way to the Conquest of Naples.

I cannot better finish this Book, than by the Eulogy of Giovanni Pico
Sovereign Prince della Mirandola, and of Concord. This Prince, sirnam'd the
Phoenix of the Wits, with so much justice, that none have grutcht him that
Title, was born in his own state, and the eldest of a Family that boasted being
descended from Constantine the Great. The Prodigies which appeared in Heaven,
and upon the Earth, at the moment of his Nativity, testify there never had
been, and perhaps would never be such another Genius. He studied not any thing,
how difficult soever, but conceived it at first. He found not any Author
obscure enough, to put him to one moments plunge. He penetrated by his own
lights, into Euclid, and the Algebra; he found the secret to reconcile
Aristotle with Plato, and Scotus with Saint Thomas. At ten years old, he
studied the Law at Bologne, and Commented gradually as he studied. At eighteen
years of Age he knew two and twenty Tongues. And at three and twenty, he sent
over all the World, his so celebrated Theses, by which he undertook to
establish such certain Principles, and discuss the principal difficulties of
all Sciences in general, and of each in particular, without using other terms,
than those that were proper to it. He challenged to answer in the same Tongue
he should be questioned; he invited the Poor to the Disputation, as well as the
Rich, and offered to pay the Charges of their Journey. He chose the City of
Rome for the public Convenience; and the Theses were maintained there, with
such a Concourse of Learned men, as had never been so great in any place. The
Respondent was the beautifullest Man of his Age, and such an one, as was
capable of gratifying the Eyes and Ears at the same time. He had (...) noble
lofty mien, tall, and of a transcendant shape, and such as is attributed to
Heroes, and his Body as well fashioned as hi^ Wit. He had also this peculiar to
himself that his Application to the most towering abstruce Sciences, made him
neglect nothing (...) a gallant Garb, and well-dressing, that conduce^ to
heighten Luster, and captivate Affection He had the knack of explaining his
conceptions so easily, and with so good a Grace, tha^ People were never weary
of hearing him He neither confounded the Words nor Phrases of so many Tongues,
wherewith his memory was freighted. The tone of his Voic^ was agreeable. He
sweetn'd the most serious Discourses, with fine and innocen^ Railleries, that
they might go down the more glib. He became the more Eloquent gradually as he
grew warm, and his Answers were so pat and solid, that it cou'^^ never be
observed, whether he had more Wit, or Judgment, or Memory, so many amazing
Testimonies did he give, of his possessing those three Qualities, in a degree
superior to other Men. However, as h^^ admitted all sorts of Persons
indifferently t^^ Disputation, and had inserted in his Positions the Cabala of
the Jews, the Defense of the most exalted Christian Mysteries, by Natural
Reason, and the nicest Passages of the Councils, Fathers, and Ecclesiastical
History; some there were, who unable to attain to the sublimity of his Notions,
taxed him with Heresy, and made such a Noise and Clamor, that the Pope was
upon the point of suspending the Disputes; which, being intimated to the Prince
of Mirandola, he besought his Holiness to give him the leisure to purge himself
of the Crimes imputed to him, and principally of that which most shocked the
Demi-Learned, namely, of maintaining that Origin was saved, notwithstanding his
Definition, contrary to the Fifth General Council; and though busied all day long
in answering, yet he compiled in seventeen Nights that wonderful Apology, which
cannot be read, without a Man's being startled, to see so young a Prince equally
strong upon all sorts of matters. He triumphed over all those, who would have
put his Religion to the arbitrament of each private Noddle, and composed his
own Epitaph, which is only to take it aright, a Commentary upon the first
Chapter of Genesis, wherein the Creation of the World is explained after so
ravishing a manner, that there is no penetrating farther into the meaning of
the Holy Writ. Afterward his strict engagement with Lorenzo de Medici,
rendered them Companions in Study; they daily communicated to one another,
things they had learnt or meditated anew; they sent one another their Works,
they corrected one another Compositions, and from one of their Conversations
have I discovered, how Lorenzo wri^^ a Dialogue of Love and Fortune, so tender
and ingenious, that the Prince of Mirandola (after having examined it) let him
know, when he returned it him, that he had not observed the proportion of Ages
with sufficient exactness, and how Venus had not so many Charms, when she
issued from the Froth of the Sea, as he gave his Cupid, though he only
represented him as a Child newly born. This stroke will suffice to judge, how
quaint and delicate was those two great Men's Criticisms. I have not been able
to find out the true Cause, that set the Prince of Mirandola to write against
Astrologers; nor am I satisfied with that alleged by his Nephew. I lay a much
greater stress upon a Conjecture, which came into my mind, upon reading his
Apology; that it might be the Professors of the Judicial, very rife at that
time, having made their advantage of some Propositions in his Theses, seemingly
in their favor, he thought himself obliged to prevent, by a public
disclaiming of those Tenants, the benefits they might thence derive. Be it as
it will, the Allarm this gave them, was so hot, that they assembled to resolve
what course they had best to take. They calculated the Prince of Mirandola's
Nativity, and found two remarkable things. The one, that he should not put the
last hand to his work against them; and the other, that he should not exceed
thirty two years of Age. They sent to signify this doom to him, at which he
made a mock. But the event justified their Prediction: for as this Prince was
completing to undermine the Foundations of their Science, he was seized with a
Fever, which knocked him off in thirty days space. It has been observed, that
he breathed his last in the very moment that Charles the 8th. entered Florence;
and that the Library de Medici was dissipated, as if hazard had taken him out
of the World, in a Conjuncture, when he was going to be bereaved of the
Originals of the Ancients, without which he could not live. He had been so
concerned at Savanarola's Predictions, that he was upon the point of renouncing
the World, and going (after the Apostolic manner) to preach the Gospel through
the Villages. However, his Work against the Astrologers, (as imperfect as it
is) is nevertheless the best that has been composed, since those of the Fathers
of the Church.

The End of the Fourth Book.
THE SECRET HISTORY OF THE HOUSE OF MEDICIS. The Fifth Book.
ALL the Italian Historians of the last Century suppose, that Piero de Medici's
imprudence undermined all the Foundations laid by his Predecessors, for the
aggrandizement of his Family. But none have yet precisely shown, wherein that
Imprudence consisted, nor its Results and Consequences. I undertake the
representing them here in order; and for my being the better understood, I
begin with the Pourtraict of him, whose Errors I mean to describe.

Never did Son resemble less his Father, than Piero de Medici, and never Father
had so much Antipathy for a Child, as Lorenzo had for Piero. It seemed as if
Nature had only formed the one for the other, to set her self at odds, by a
division of her Provinces, and to invest two contrary Objects with all her
Virtues and Vices, without giving any thing to the Son, of what she had put
into the Father. Piero de Medici possessed all the qualities wanting in
Lorenzo, but had not so much as one of those in him admired. His Body was
incomparably well made, and especially the finest Head that had been ever seen.
He was of so strong and sound a Complexion, that not any excess was capable of
staggering it. So much strength had he at seventeen years of Age, that not a
Man was there, but whom he flung in wrestling. He was extraordinarily expert
and clever in all Exercises, serving to fashion young Gentlemen. His mien was
altogether Martial, when he appeared armed at all points; and the Judges of the
Tournaments owned, no Man knew how to break a Lance with a better Grace than
Piero.

His Wit was vast and piercing, but so ill turned, he could not use it to
advantage. Nor capable was he of Friendship, nor of Secrecy; had no
application but to Pleasures, and only of good humor in Hunting and with
Ladies. The time spent in concernments of the Republic, he reputed as lost,
and went not to the Council, save when he had no shift left to dispense him
from going. He neglected the Complaints made him against the Subalternate
Magistrates, and thought it below him to have an Eye to their Deportments. The
Friends of his House could not get admittance to his Speech, till after having
a long while danced attendance in his Antichamber, that their Zeal had had the
leisure to chill, and other Citizens of Florence could have no access to his
Person. It spighted him infinitely, when People discoursed him upon the Modesty
of his Ancestors. He ridiculed their Economy, principally in what regarded the
Table. Insupportable was his Pride in a Town, where all the Gentlemen thought
themselves one another equals. And his Luxury came to seem the more
exorbitant, when compared with his Fathers and Great Grandfathers Thrift, and
good Husbandry. His Anger no less sudden, nor less dangerous, than that of
Alexander; for instance, poor Leoni, whom, at Careggio, he threw into the Well;
but with more ease appeased, since there needed no more for the putting him
into a good humor, than a Song or Lay of Music, or the Sound of some pleasant
Instruments. His Tutor, Politian, had observed him never to be troubled with
Splenatick Humors, as long as he heard good Verses recited in his Native
Tongue; and to derive advantage from this observation, a sort of Diurnal
Academy was held a^ his House, where the Poets came daily to rehearse their
Works in the Tuscan Dialect and there received the approbatim or censure they
deserved.

With this so whimsical temperament* Piero de Medici found himself encharg'd
with the principal Direction of the Florentine Affairs, and remained not long
in that Capacity, which served for as many steps to^ help him to descend into
the Precipice.

The first is, he had got a fancy of making Love to all the fair Women of
Quality, and was so little discreet and moderate in the assiduous visits he
paid their Ladyships, that their Husbands, and his Friends were almost equally
scandalized.

The second, His Mother, of the Lineage of the Orsini's, thinking it convenient
to marry him, so with Matrimony to extinguish his fickle Flames, she proposed
to him a beauteous and rich Heiress of the stock of Orsini, called Alfonsina,
whom he wedded; but had as much disgust for her, in a few weeks after his
Marriage, as he had shown fondness for the Match. The first time he saw her, he
used her so scurvily, that he was hated for it by all his own People, who could
not (without resentment) see him renew his Libertine way of Living, from which
they had pretended to tie him by this Wedlock.

The third Fault was, That for some Discourses of a double meaning, which
escaped from two of his Cousins, called Lorenzo, and Giovanni de Medici, whom it
behooved him so much the more to have considered, in that they descended from
Male to Male, from a Brother of Cosmo the Old; he caused them to be chastis'd
with a perpetual Banishment, however great his Interest was in their
Preservation, and whatever Remonstrances his Friends had made him upon so nice
a Subject. From whence it came, that these young Gentlemen being retired into
France, were kindly welcomed at the Court of Charles the 8th, where they so
strongly prepossessed Cardinal Brissonet, and other the Ministers, to Piero de
Medici's disadvantage, that when he went to this Prince, the Persons nominated
to negociate with him, did in no wise credit his Proposals and Asseverations,
nor would they trust him, but under good Cautions, which occasioned his
Disgrace.

The fourth Fault was, that Piero de Medici had so good an Opinion of his Wit,
as to fancy, he might cully Lodovico Sforza, Duke of Milan, who cully'd all
Mankind. Sforza, after having seized the State and Person of the young Duke,
under color of Tuition, thought an high Alliance needful to maintain him in
his Usurpation. The Princess Isabella of Naples, seemed to him fittest for his
design, not only on the score of all the House of Arragon's support, at that
time strictly combined, but because this Princess had the blaze of the most
accomplished Beauty in all Europe. But an Obstacle there was to surmount, which
seemed invincible; for that young Princess had been solemnly promised to the
young Duke of Milan, Lodovico Sforza's Nephew, from whence he had in view, that
besides the Breach of word, to which the House of Naples would hardly be
induced, it must likewise be brought to Consent, that the Princess should marry
a Subject, after having been promised to a Sovereign, to which, it was well
known, the high Spirit of that House would in no wise suffer it to hearken.

Not but that Lodovico Sforza did himself sufficiently manifest in his
Discourse, that he meant suddenly to be Duke, and already projected in his
mind, the poisoning of his Nephew, which he since committed, when the Armies of
France had assured him of Impunity. But in short, the thing was not yet
effected, either that the occasion served not yet, or that he had still left in
his Heart some natural tenderness to surmount. Moreover, were the Crime
committed, such a Course was so strange and novel among Christians, that the
King of Naples, already much hated, would not have dared to give his Daughter
to a Man suspected of such an Action; and Lodovico Sforza well perceiving that
he would stand aloof from the same Alliance he must Court by this step, so of
necessity to be made for its attainment.

However, as Ambition finds nothing impossible, when tuned to the key of Love;
Sforza sent his Confident Galeazzo da san Severino to Naples to negotiate
underhand, that the Princess might be granted him, under the Cant of the Duke
his Nephew's being so ill, that he could live but little longer.

The King of Naples had an extreme repugnance to this Alliance, and yet would
have been brought to a Compliance, as laboring under a great dread of Sforza's
Artifices, if it had not been opposed by the Duke of Calabria, his Eldest Son,
a man of less Experience, and more Courage than Old Ferrand* It has been
believed, that this was upon the Princess Isabella's Solicitation, who,
according to her Device, was no less Lofty than Beautiful. They add, that her
Brother and She, treated as Ridiculous Galeazzo da sa^ Severino's Overture, and
in that Envoy's presence made a mock of some Infirmities, to which Sforza was
bruited to be subject.

Galeazzo da san Severino informed Sforza of these Transactions, who took
strange measures to wreak his Revenge on the House of Arragon. He caused his
Nephew to drin^ a Potion, which bereft him of Judgment* and then suffered his
Match to be Consummated with the Princess of Naples, for the giving her the
vexation of having married a Fool, and perhaps likewise for having her in his
Power, when become a Widow. He was contriving the means to exclude the Duke of
Calabria's Succession to the Crown of Naples, and found not out any other way,
than to make him the Conquest of Charles the 8th. He sent to sollici^ this
Prince to come into Italy, and to pursue with his Arms, his Ancestors
Pretention upon the two Sicilies.

France made some difficulty at first to engage, as not having Friends enough in
Italy; and Sforza, after having taken upon him to Conduct in all safety its
Armies, as far as the Territory of Florence, made the Council of France hope he
would attract Piero de Medici into the most Christian King's Interests. This
was no easy matter to effect, seeing the Florentines had, a little time before,
signed a League with the Pope, and the House of Arragon. But the same Galeazza
da san Severino, of whom I have already spoken, had orders to endeavor to
break it. He accosted Piero de Medici, who could not fail of repartying; that
when the French King was Master of Naples, it would be easy for him to subdue
the rest of Italy. Galeazzo, whom Sforza had commanded to break his mind to
Piero de Medici, took him aside, and disclosed to him in Confidence, and under
the Rose, that his Masters Design was indeed, that the French should come into
Italy, but not there to stay; that he knew how to send them packing beyond the
Alps, after having made them his Implements to humble the Duke of Calabria.
Piero de Medici, not being capable of keeping so great a Secret, revealed it to
so many Persons, that it came to Charles the 8th his Ears, and he made heavy
Complaints to Sforza, who found no other way to purge himself, but by
consenting, that the French should put Garrisons into all the Important places
in their Passage. But in recompense, he conceived an irreconciliable hatred to
Piero de Medici.

In the mean while the French advanced, and as soon as they approached Tuscany,
they summoned the Florentines to come to a Declaration. Piero de Medici
committed then a Fifth Fault, which I only glance upon, it being already
registered in History. He went and put himself into their hands, and got not
thence, till after having delivered up the Fortress of Pisa, Leghorn, Seruzana,
and Pietra Sculta. This fired the Florentines with so much Indignation, that
one of them, Verli by name, shut the Door upon his Nose, when he came to take
his Seat in the Council. This Exclusion persuaded him he was utterly lost. Home
went he, took Horse, and without being followed by more than two of his
Domestics, who could not endure to see him go away alone, he departed
Florence, and scoured away to Bologna. So sudde^ and so shameful a retreat,
quite discredited him with his Friends as well as Enemies. Both Fancied he must
needs be more culpable than they had imagined, and so have dreaded the utmost
Punishments, since he fled away in a time when his Country needed most his
Presence. Upon this Prejudice, they passed through all the Proceedings against
him, that are wont to be exerted against Criminals; Arraigned he was of
Contumacy, pursued, his Estate seized, set to sail by Public Outcry; they
sold at a low Price, that prodigious mass of Movables, Pictures, Anticks, and
Manuscripts Collected in the space of sev'nty years, with so much Pains and
Curiosity. And by a Capricious effect, the Grandeur of the House of Medici,
never glittered more, than during the two or three Weeks it was given up to
Pillage.

Said I have, that Piero de Medici had two Brothers, Giuliano, and Giovanni the
Cardinal. Giuliano was in the House, when the eldest departed thence, and
accompanied him; but the Cardinal being out upon a Visit, found more difficulty
to make his escape. At first he thought to take refuge in the Convent of St.
Marco, built and founded by his Ancestors, and lurk there till the storm was
over; but the Religious more timorous than grateful, declined, with Excuses,
giving him a retreat. Then he had recourse to the Cordeliers, who made him lay
aside the Purple, and clad him with one of their Habits, by favor of which, he
passed, without being known, through the Gate of St. Gal, and went to join his
Brothers. The House of Medici seemed now so humbl'd, by so terrible a Squelch,
that it could not of a long time be possible for it to get up again. However,
it was upon the point of being reestablished, in a few days after this
Disaster, if Piero de Medici had not himself thwarted his own happiness, by a
Caprice, which pawl'd Fortune in such manner, that she utterly turned tale, and
never more would she stir in his behalf.

Charles the 8th being informed of the Disorder which happened in Florence,
drew near it, and made his entrance into that Town, in the posture of a
Conqueror. Alfonsina degli Orsini laid her self at the Kings Feet, holding in
her Arms a Son of hers but lately born. Her Tears melted the Hearts of all
present, and made her find Friends in a Court where she was utterly
unacquainted. Two persons were there of the King's Attendants, who shared the
Favor, the one in quality of Principal Minister, the other, as Favorite.
Cardinal Brissonet had the Province of Affairs, and possessed his Masters good
Opinion, without seeking any other support than his own Merit. And the Count de
Bresse, the Duke of Savoyes Brother, having more affinity with the Age and
Temperament of Charles, was one in all his Pleasures, and lay at watch for a
Conjuncture proper to supplant the Cardinal. He knew this Old Minister had
declared an averseness to Piero de Medici, and was prejudiced with the opinion,
that the King's Authority could not subsist at Florence, save during an
equality among the Citizens; that must be extinct when the House of Medici
should be invested with Sovereign Power.

To destroy this supposition, the Count de Bresse (after having backed his
Design with a strong Cabal) represented to the King, that as his Majesty could
not stay at Florence, it became him to think of maintaining that City in his
Party; that the safest and most Commodious way was, not to leave there the
Popular Government, then newly Erected, by reason it would be exposed to
continual Seditions, not to be calmed, save by a Powerful Garrison, which
France was not then in a Condition to leave; that much better it would be, to
recall Piero de Medici, and reinstate him in Affairs with so good a Grace, as
that he might owe to France the whole Obligation of his Restoration, since the
gratitude for so great a benefit, being united with the concern of
Self-preservation, would link him in an inviolable Union with France.

This Reason had the Ascendant, though neither solid nor specious, for that the
King did not then think so much of doing things safely, as of expediting them
with the soonest. A Courier was dispatched away to Bologna, to advise Piero de
Medici to return to Florence, but the Courier found him not. He had taken
exception, for that Bentivoglio, when he received him into his Palace, had
blamed him for being Bug-bear'd with his own Shadow, and for banishing himself
from the best Station in Italy, without being pushed, or laying his hand to his
Sword, he who pretended to so much Bravery. This Correction was unseasonable,
and so much the more harsh to support, as being conscious of its being well
grounded; but it became him to pardon this Irregular Discourse, in such an
impetuous and severe Man as Bentivoglio, who feared the Bolognesi might unite
after the Florentines Example, and constrain him in his turn, to seek out a
retreat, in lieu of affording it to others.

In the mean while Piero de Medici thought Bentivoglio had talked thus out of
Raillery, or to slurr upon him a Bravade And as Persons in distress have more
Diffidence than ordinary, he suspected he might be betrayed, since in his own
Presence he was turned into Derision. Hereupon he projected to seek out another
place of safety, and departed on the m^^^^w without saying whither he went.
Insomuch that the Courier having neither been able to find him, nor get tidings
of him; Charles being oppressed to leave Florence, was obliged to leave it in
the State he found it. Eight days after, Piero de Medici was known to be at
Venice, where Virginio Orsini, his Ally having brave Troops, treated with him
for his re-instation. He advanced Courageously into the very sight of Florence,
but the Correspondence he had in that place not keeping tack at the time
prefixed, compelled he was to return thence, after having advised Piero de
Medici to take his measures better another time. This first Essay did for a
long while dishearten those who were able to form others, and gave all the
leisure necessary to the Enemies of the House of Medici, to put invincible
Obstacles to its re-establishment. But as People are almost ever mistaken in
the choice of Men, when they do it in haste; it happened that Bernardo Neri,
whom the Florentines Elected for Gonfalioniere, was the most ardent and best
intention'd of the Medici's secret Friends. Nevertheless his Magistracy was
continued for three years, but almost wholly spent, without his finding any
occasion of doing them an Office, as being ever obstructed by Savanarola.

This Religious of St. Dominick was very Learned, and the most knowing Man that
had been in Italy, since the Age of the first Caesar's. He lived in great
Austerity, and checked Vices in all sorts of Persons, with a boldness, by some
styled Temerity. He had foretold so many extraordinary things, which falling
out all in the Circumstances he had noted, he passed for a great Prophet: and
the Florentines were so strongly persuaded of his Sanctity, that they even
Canonized him, during his Life time His real and supposed Talents made him act
in Florence, with as much Authority, as if he had been Sovereign, since they
not only deferred to his Counsels in Public Assemblies, but he was moreover the
Umpire of Domestic matters, and decided quarrels arising between Husbands and
Wives, without there ever being any inexecution or complaint against his
Decisions and Decrees. He was prepossessed with the Opinion of the Florentines
being more capable of the popular Government, than of any other; and for this
reason had he endeavored to ruin the Designs of the Medici, as seeing them
addicted to confer the first Offices of the State, on the Principal and Richest
Citizens, that so the People might be dis-accustom'd from exercising them, and
suffer 'em to enjoy them with the more ease, when they came to talon them with
an Usurpation.

Savanarola bottomed his Practices and Interests upon the same Principles, by
calling the vilest Mechanics to the most honorable Functions, nay, and in
willing they should officiate them with Gentlemen; I mean, that he thereby
aimed to take away the ancient Antipathy, reigning between the Nobility and the
Populace. But hence arose two notable Inconveniences; the one, that Gentlemen,
the most capable of exercising the Magistratures, laid them down, as soon as
they had heard their Colleagues named; the other, that Cobblers, for Example,
were daily seen to squat in their Stalls, after having laid aside their Robe of
Magistracy. This appeared so ridiculous at first, and in process of time, so
very much spighted the ancient Nobility, that Neri found the Nobles almost
wholly inclined to uphold their Rank.

The first who unbosom'd their Intentions to him were, Giacomo Ridolphi,
Lorenzo Tournaburni, and Giovanni Bueci. Others declared their Minds as
occasion served; but there was not as yet the least glimmering of success for
any attempt against Savanarola, as long as the People were on his side, and now
this Emergency was expected would bereave him of their Affection. The main
Policy of the Medici had ever been, that the Florentines should never want
either Bread or Divertisements: and as they had neither an Egypt nor a Sicily,
to make largesses of Corn, in imitation of Augustus; they had retrenched their
Craft to effect, that the Grain should cost no more one year than another. For
this purpose they took care to lay up Stores in Granaries, from whence they
were fetched in time and place, when there had been many barren years together.
They took out of the public Treasury, or their own Coffers, the surplusage of
what this Grain cost; and when the Famine was general in Italy, and throughout
all Europe, they encharged their Factours in Asia and Africa to buy up Corn at
Cairo, and on the Coasts of Barbary, to freight with it their Ships, and convey
it safely into Tuscany.

As Savanarola was not in a Capacity to do the like, he felt the Counter blow
upon the first scarcity that happened. His having Prophesied the want, availed
him not in the least; on the contrary, the Florentines took it so much the more
in dudgeon, that he had used no remedy in the case. Many of the Mobile no
longer showed so much Zeal for his Person, and others burst out so far as to
twit him, that he would do better to remain in his Cloister, than be fumbling,
groaping, and fribling in a way he did not understand. Neri, seeing the
Disposition he expected, framed a Party, which seemed sufficiently strong to
re-invest the House of Medici. He gave Piero the necessary Intimation, and
advised him to come with the most Troops he could get together, without making
much noise.

Piero de Medici having not much Credit among the Soldiers, had recourse to
Bartolomeo de Lalviano, newly acknowledged head of the Family of the Vrsini's,
upon notice of Virginio's being poisoned in the Castle of Loeuf, at Naples.
Lalviano, reputed the most active and determinate Adventurer of his Age,
listened to this Proposition, and set about atchieving it. The day was
appointed, and the time of Midnight chosen as the most Commodious. The
Conspirators concerted their Measures with Piero de Medici, and Secrecy was
kept by all Parties. Lalviano's Soldiers used incredible expedition, and met
at the Rendezvous, but four Leagues from Florence, with Piero de Medici, who
set himself at their head. But in the very moment they began to file off in
good Order, there fell so great a Rain, that instead of the six hours they had
reckoned to accomplish their March in, it cost 'em twelve; so as it was already
broad day when they came before the Town. They would nevertheless have
surpised Florence, there being not the least inckling of their Design, and
that the Conspirators were not wanting to keep the Gate, agreed on, open. But
Chance alone frustrated their foresight, Paulo Vitelli commanding the
Florentine's Army before Pisa, had wanted some Directions; and as it was an
Affair of moment, he had thought his Presence necessary, to procure dispatch.
Being on his Journey, but delayed by the bad Weather, he arrived exactly at the
Gate, through which Lalviane and Piero de Medici were going to enter, when he
heard behind him a Body of Horse advancing full speed. He lost neither presence
of mind, nor judgment; and suspecting what might possibly be the Design, he
himself hall'd up the Bridge, shut the Gate, and gave the Allarm. The Citizens
flocked thither, and Savanarola, one of the first, they pointed the Canon
against Lalviano's Gross, who judging, by the Countenance of the Florentines,
that nothing was to be expected from the Faction in his Confederacy, he
persuaded Piero de Medici to a Retreat, both keeping in the Rear of their Men.

For two Months together search was made in vain, after the Authors of the
Conspiracy, nor had they been detected, but for one certain Autelli, whose
Audacity was so great, as to give up to the Magistrates, a Servant of Neri's,
without having any other Evidence, but his seeing him Armed, on the day Piero
de Medici offered to enter. The Servant being taken into Custody, had showed to
him the Instruments of the Rack, told all he knew, and the principal Accomplices
were imprisoned. Their Indictment being drawn up, Savanarola too late perceived
the danger, in punishing so great a number of illustrious Criminals. Francisco
Valeri had most concern in the Sentence, and prosecuted it with more heat than
others. He was Savanarola's best Friend, seconded him in all hardy Enterprises,
had contributed to his gaining the repute of Holiness; but, in recompense,
ruined him, by refusing to Sacrifice to the public Good a petty Interest of
Revenge. Now these are the Circumstances I have been able to find out upon so
delicate an Affair. I omit others, because that, of so many Authors who speak
of Savanarola's Catastrophe, there is not one but is prepossessed with Passion
for or against him.

Valeri was Neri's mortal Enemy, and resolved to ruin him at any rate. The
Conjuncture for the bringing it about could not be more propitious. Neri was
convicted of the Conspiracy; but, not with any Face, could they punish him
singly, seeing he appeared no more culpable than his Accomplices, wherefore they
were all to be Condemned to the same Punishment, or Pardoned; and Savanarola,
contrary to Custom, was of Opinion they ought to be Reprieved. He conjured
Valeri that it might be so; remonstrated to him the Consequence, representing
that all the other Criminals were either his Allies or Friends. But this Bloody
minded Man, merely out of the Pleasure he should take in Neri's Punishment, had
regard nor to Reason nor to Amity. The Sentence of Death was pronounced, and
never, in a small State, were there seen more Eminent Persons Executed in one
day.

This rejoiced the People at first; and at long run, as is usual, turned 'em
tender and compassionate. So many re-doubled Executions created a Horror in
them; they accused Savanarola of the Butchery. And the Nobles not thinking
their own Power sufficient to ruin that Religious, without hazarding the
Government, engaged the Court of Rome for its own Interests, to second their
Endeavors. Savanarola had Preached against the Vices of Pope Alexander the
6th, with the same Freedom he used in snubbing and rebuking those of private
Persons. Had added, in the heat of his Discourse, how he was not afraid of
being Excommunicated for speaking in this manner; and that it was sufficient to
give his Enemies the pretext they had so long expected, to seize his Person, as
not believing that the Head of the Church, could retrench a simple Monk from
the Communion of the Church. They took their measures with the Pope, who sent
them Forces. Savanarola's Monastery was broke open, after a wonderful
resistance of his Friends, who ran in upon the noise. He was found in his
Chamber at the Feet of a Crucifix, put into Prison, sev'n whole days spent in
taking Informations, examining his Case, and drawing up his Indictment, during
which, he made a Commentary upon the Psalms of Penitence, which the most
hardened cannot read, without some sense of Devotion. At last he was Condemned
to the Flames, which he suffered with a Constancy seemingly Christian. Valeri,
the Author of his ruin, merely to gratify his Lust of Revenge, was neither
tunning enough, nor diligent enough to make his escape. Those who went to
invest his Mansion, met him coming out, assassinated him, ran up to his Wife's
apartment, served her in like manner, and plundered the House.

The Florentines were no better inclined, in regard of the Medici; on the
contrary, the aversion of Savanarola's Friends, who charged the Medici's with
his Death, induced the Florentines to redouble and produce new Obstacles to
their return. Giuliano de Medici had taken refuge at Milan, where he acquired
Lodovico Sforza's Friendship, and had engaged him to espouse the Interests of
his House. The Army Sforza had on foot began to act in Tuscany, on that Design,
with much Vigor and Success, when the Venetians unmasked their Intentions a
little too soon, as to the Treaty they managed underhand with the Inhabitants
of Pisa, in order to receive their Hommage, on condition to cause the Siege of
their Town to be raised, which the Florentines had then two years continued.

Sforza had no sooner the news, but he conceived a jealousy: and the
aggrandisement of the Venetians, whom he looked on as his most formidable
Adversaries, made him change Conduct toward the Medici's. He sent one of his
Emissaries to the Florentines, to reunite them among themselves; and his
Forces, which laid Tuscany waste, had Orders to join those of Vitelli, and to
press the Siege of Pisa. They helped that General to ruin the Army of Venice,
that had unadvisedly hampered it self in the Apennine, and were the principal
cause of the Accommodation Hercules, Duke of Ferrara, since negotiated, and
concluded between the two Commonwealths, on Condition, that that of Venice,
should abandon the City and Territory of Pisa, to the discretion of that of
Florence.

The Recoyl of this Accord falling on the House of Medici, (because it
re-doubl'd the Forces of its Enemies) made it despond of being re-instated. The
Eldest of the three Brothers, after having exhausted in the Foregoing
Attempts, the effects his Father had left him out of Florence, was going to
serve in quality of Volunteer, in the Troops of King Lewis the 12th, who
meditated the Conquest of the Duchy of Milan. His younger, Giuliano, of a
humor more sedate, withdrew to the Petrucci's, invested at that time with the
principal Authority in Sienna, where he Cozened his time in Love and
Gallantry. And the youngest taking upon him the Title of Cardinal de Medici
(though it was as yet the Mode to call Cardinals by the Name of their Benefices)
went to travel throughout Europe with Giulio his Cozen, as yet neither passing
for a Bastard nor Legitimate, and a train of twelve Persons. He put himself
into the disguise of a bare Cavalier, to avoid Expense, and would not suffer
any difference to be observed between himself and his Attendants. They were all
mounted and clad alike, had taken Warlike Names, and every morning drew Lots,
who should be owned for head of the Company, and give Orders that day. This
Conduct which they kept out of Precaution, furnished them with so many
occasions for Mirth and Laughter, that the Cardinal since owned, amid all the
Delights of the Papacy, that in all his Life he had never been better Diverted,
not but that new Traverses befell him from time to time; for they were known in
the City of Vlme in Germany, from whence the Magistrate sent them under a Safe
guard, to the Emperor Maximilian the 1st. But the Cardinal de Medici, having
unvailed his way of Traveling to that Prince, who still entertained a Respect
for the memory of Lorenzo, he was received magnificently by his Imperial
Majesty, and got Letters of Recommendation to Philip, Arch Duke of the Low
Countries, that he might see the more commodiously the seventeen Provinces.

At his leaving of Flanders, he had a design to Embark at Calice, for England.
But the Sea was so rough, that those of his Train inclined him to see Normandy,
till it was Calm again. As he was at Havre de Grace, waiting for a Ship for his
Passage, a Frenchman having born Arms in Italy, knew him, and went to discover
him to the Governor of the place. The Governor stopped him with all his
Retinue, and clapped 'em under Guards. Nothing did it avail the Cardinal de
Medici, to declare his Name, and demand to enjoy the Privileges of his
Character; stay he must in Havre, till the King, then at Milan, had consented
to his enlargement. Piero de Medici was happily with his Majesty, and served
for Warantee of his Brothers having no other Design in his Masquerade, than of
Husbanding his Purse.

Thus the General of Normandy had order to write to the Governor of Havre, to
set free the Cardinal de Medici, who changed his Purpose of going into England,
and chose rather to cross France, in order to take Shipping at Thoulon, and
make Sail into Italy. He saw all Curiosities on his way, and being seized with
a storm in the River of Genoua, it constrained him to put in at Savona.

There he found the Cardinal of St. Peter in Bonds, who had made it his
Sanctuary against Pope Alexander the 6th. his irreconcilable Enemy. St. Peter
ad Vincula treated there his Brother, with all the Politeness natural to him,
and would needs have Giuliano de Medici, then beginning to wear the Cross of
Rhodes, to be the third at Table. There they discoursed their Concerns with
more Freedom, and less Reserve, than if they had known they were to be all
three Popes, so little appearance was there of the vicissitude which occurred
in their Fortune.

Cardinal de Medici returned to Rome, under color of attending upon the Pope,
during the Jubilee of the year 1500, just going to begin; but in reality, as
having learnt that the Duke de Valentinois, the Pope's Son, had such Designs,
as could not speed, but by the re-instation of the Medici's. And indeed this
Duke, after having oppressed by an Infinity of unheard of Crimes, all the Petty
Sovereigns in Vmbria and Romagna, aspired to subdue the Republics of Tuscany.
And not being Potent enough to undertake to force them all at once, he
pretended to strike up an Alliance with that of Florence, that she might help
him to subdue that of Sienna. However, there was no likelihood of bringing her
to it by Offices and Persuasions, the Florentines being too subtle and
sagacious, not to penetrate to what end they were to be Implements against
Sienna. Thus they were to be induced to it out of Fear.

This was the Cause of Duke Valentino's receiving the Medici's into his Army,
with all imaginable Civilities, and of his promising them their re-instation.
He drew near Florence with such brisk Troops, as made it not doubted, but he
would reduce it to strange Exigencies, when Piero de Soderini, Neri's Successor
in the Office of Gonfalioniere, devised an Expedient which saved his Country.
He went to find out the Ambassador of France at Rome, and remonstrated to him
so efficaciously the most Christian King's Interest to maintain the popular
Government at Florence, thereby to keep on Foot a League of Communication
between the Realm of Naples, which his Majesty meant to Conquer, and the Duchy
of Milan, which he had already in Possession, that the French Ambassador
pressed the Pope, to make his Son retire into the state of the Church.

The Pope, not daring at that time to deny the French, they being then too
powerful in Italy, wrote to the Duke de Valentinois to decamp from off the
Territory of Florence, Duke Valentino obeyed, as seeing the French would
constrain him to it, unless he did it readily and with alacrity. But as he was
the craftiest Man then living, he tore the Letter in pieces, without reading it
out. He cursed his Father, and declared he would not decamp. Soderini took the
hint, and apprehended that all the Grimaces of the Duke de Valentinois only
tended to hedge in Money, which he durst not demand for fear of offending
France, which Crown would have compelled him to refund. Now to elude his
Pretension, there needed no more than making semblance of not understanding his
meaning; but as the stay of his Troops did more damage in four and twenty
hours, than the sum amounted to, with which he thought he would be content;
Soderini made no difficulty of offering it him, nor the Duke Valentinois of
accepting it, and dis-lodging.

The following year, 1501, the Medici's made their fourth Essay on this
Pretext, that the Florentines had caused their General Vitelli to be beheaded,
because that having clapped him up in Prison on suspicion, found to be ill
grounded, they fancied he was to be bereft of his Life, to hinder him from
taking Revenge. Vitelli, his Brother, had put himself into a posture of
punishing so black an Ingratitude, and the Soldiers flocked from all sides to
second him. He brought an Army on foot, which wrought no less terror to the
Florentine, than Duke Valentino's had done the year before. And indeed Soderini
had no sooner perceived it, than that he took a journey into France, by which
only the Tempest could be laid. He obtained a Dispatch to the Governor of
Milan, whom Lewis the 12th commanded, to compel Vitelli instantly to disarm,
or march against him with all his Forces. Vitelli having no Martialliz'd
Troops, would not stand the brunt, and so pleased the Florentines, by his
Retreat, that they Created Soderini perpetual Dictator.

The vexation this Created to the House of Medici, was so much the more
reasonable, as that Soderini possessed all the qualities capable of obstructing
their return into their Country, as long as the continuation of his Magistracy.
He was Wise, Liberal, Mild, and Provident; never committed any Injustice; and
though obliged to favor the Commonalty, to whom he was indebted for his
Dignity, he so carefully avoided discontenting the Nobles, that not any
Gentleman had reason to complain of him, during his Administration. He
Corresponded with the Court of Rome, by the means of the Cardinal his Brother.
But, as he put his principal Confidence in the Protection of the French, he
lived in such good Intelligence with the Cardinal d' Amboise, the Most
Christian King's Prime Minister, that there must of necessity have happened a
general Revolt in the Duchy of Milan, before the Republic of Florence could
change Face. Nevertheless, not only the Duchy of Milan was then secure, but
moreover France had the most powerful Army in Italy, that had been seen there
for several Ages, in order to take the Kingdom of Naples from the Spaniards.

But what plunged the Medici's quite in despair, was the misfortune which
befell the Orsini's, on their account. This Warlike Family had engaged it self
to serve among the Troops, under Duke Valentino, after having failed
re-instating that of Medici, its double Ally: and as this ill success had
diminished nothing of their Amity, the Orsini's having discovered, that their
General treated with the Florentines, to deliver up Piero, Giuliano, and
Cardinal de Medici, whom he had then in his Possession and Power; they being
all three come to him upon his Word. They gave them notice of it by a Note,
which obliged them to withdraw without taking leave; Duke Valentino, who
expended much in Spies, was at length informed of the Cause, which had hindered
him from earning a hundred thousand Crowns, that were already told out at
Florence, in order to be given him on that score. And as he had resolved, with
the Consent and Connivance of his Father, to exterminate the most eminent Roman
Families, he hastened to invite the Members of the Orsini Clann, to the Feast
of Senegaglia, where they were so ill advised as almost all to meet there, to
perish by a Perfidy well known to all the World.

Their Deaths put the last hand to the undermining all the hopes Piero de
Medici had left for his Restoration, and so flatted his Spirits into a total
Despondency, that from that time forward, he acted as a Man irrecoverably lost.
He took Party in the French Army, a little before its being dispersed at the
Passage of Garillan. He looked upon that Rout, as an effect of the Disasters
that haunted him in all places, and would needs there finish his Life. Nor was
it without Violence; that some of his Friends, faithful to the last, got him to
go with them aboard a Vessel, carrying Artillery, wherein he suffered
Shipwreck at the Mouth of the River, and was drowned. His Brother the Cardinal
received the news of his Death at Rome, being repaired thither, to Congratulate
the Cardinal of St. Peter in Bonds, upon his advancement to the Popedom. He had
met with a fainter Reception than he expected from St. Peter's Successor,
after the protestations of Friendship they had mutually enterchang'd at Savona.
But the impossibility of the good effect of any other Course, compelled him to
pay his Attendance, and make his Court to his Holiness.

Nevertheless, so little affinity was there in their Humors, that the Cardinal
de Medici did quickly perceive, the Pope would never have any Affection for his
Person, how assiduous soever in his Devoirs, for that his Holiness had no other
Inclination, than for Military Virtues, and only valued Men according as he
found them inclined to War. Yet the Cardinal de Medici had no Talents, save for
the Court, and for Intriguing, to which the Pope did not love that any one
should be addicted.

This is the Motive put the Cardinal de Medici upon contriving indirect means
for his Preferment. That which did his business came from the Assiduity he paid
to the Cardinal-Nephew, called Galeotto, much about his Age. He had observed
this young Cardinal to have no Passion, save for Luxury, and to be only Charmed
with what was glittering to his Eyes. He felt in his Heart a like Disposition;
and though he had not the means to indulge it in all its extent; yet, strain he
did, to imitate, as much as possible this Cardinal Nephew, and resolved at the
same time, to supply by Neatness and Politeness, what he wanted in abundance.

He found People who lent him Moneys, to make the bravest, gentilest Train; and
the Equipage of Hunting, which he kept, had I know not what, so peculiar, and
gallant, that bating two or three old Cardinals, whom it scandalized, not a
Person at Rome but esteemed him the more. No place of the Town afforded better
Eating and Treating than his House; for though he had not served upon his Table,
the prodigious number and quantity of Dishes, which the Princes and Cardinals
loved to pile and faggot upon theirs, the Nice found the Ragoo's to be most
exquisite upon Medici's Board, such a Faculty had the Patrons gay, facetious
Humors, at gentilely supplying to Luxury. But what attracted most People, was
his Chamberlain, Bibiana, whose Match had never been, for entertaining of
Company. Well enough made was he of his Person, and retained nothing of the
Village, his Birthplace, save the Name he bore.

His Wit so pregnant in Inventions, upon whatever matters applied to, that
those who knew him intimately, averred him an inexhaustible Fountain of Joy. He
made a pleasing, handsome Reception to all People, had ever an hundred new
Stories, for provoking Mirth and Laughter, without ever bolting ought, or
Impious, or Low, or Immodest. Sometimes the Fancy took him in the midst of the
Repast, to prepare Sauces, which never came into any Cooks head. He set about
it, and ever performed to the gusts, and contentment of the Guests; or that he
was Master of the Art of soothing Peoples Tastes, or that those who judged of
his Performances, helped to deceive their own Palates and Judgments. In a word,
he still furnished, after the meal was done, ingenious ways for Joy and
Recreation, for a whole Afternoon together.

Yet, in this, Bibiana's topping Wit did not consist, nor was it the most
material Service that he did his Master. He had the knack to engage Persons to
lend the Cardinal Money, without giving them Security for repayment, or
furnishing them with other Mortgage, than the Scheme he had caused to be
erected of the Cardinal de Medici's Nativity, which promised this Prelate
immense Riches, and maintained he would owe nothing at his Death, which proved
true. But there was then so little shadow of such a vicissitude, that the
World could not sufficiently admire his own Boldness, and his Creditors
Credulity.

The Learned frequented the Cardinal de Medici's Palace on another Motive; for
though the Library of his Family had been rifl'd, yet it had only lost the
Manuscripts, which the King of England had caused to be bought of the French
Soldiers. The rest clutch'd by the common People, and the Suizzers, were
redeemed at a low rate, by Persons affectionate, to the House of Medici, and
restored to the Cardinal, by Soderini's Connivance, he being overjoyed that he
drew from Florence, all to him belonging, that he might have no pretense left
for returning thither. The Cardinal, after having placed conveniently his
Manuscripts, invited Men of Learning to come study in his Palace. They were
civilly received, Persons were at hand capable of solving their difficulties;
Conferences were weekly held, at which the Cardinal often assisted, and spoke
in his turn with a gracefulness, as Charmed all his Auditors.

But, as his Predominant Passion was Music, and as he Sung, and Composed to
admiration, Consorts were kept, in which the most Expert endeavored to acquire
or augment their Repute. Thus his Home being become the most curious Retreat in
Rome, the Cardinal Nephew meeting only in Medici's Palace, his Darling
Diversions, resorted thither often, and finding the Master's Humor conformable
to his own, struck up with him a strict Union and Friendship. He told his
Uncle, that the Esteem he entertained for the Cardinal de Medici, commenced
from a Discourse he had heard him make, to show how a Worthy Man never wants
any thing, provided he is not first wanting to himself. And the mutual tie of
these two Cardinals became so strong, that the Popes Nephew engaged to promote,
by all possible means, Cardinal de Medici's Election, when the Holy See should
fall vacant. But he knew not of his dying before his Uncle, and that he should
not be in a condition to perform his Promise. A burning Fever, three years
after, cropped him off in the Flower of his Age. His death so sensibly afflicted
Cardinal de Medici, that he would have been disconsolate, but for an advantage
he thence derived, beyond his Expectation.

The Pope, who had an extraordinary fondness for his Nephew, fell to cherish
such things as could sweeten the memory of him, and became more familiar with
Cardinal de Medici. He would needs have him tell him what they had performed
together most gallant, and suffered him insensibly to make some Digressions
upon the Restoration of his Family: Nay, he one day told him, he might
endeavor it without being disowned, provided he did not expose his Purple, or
the Authority of the Holy See. And the Cardinal, who could not then expect to
obtain any thing more, formed in Florence a new Party, by the help of his
youngest Sister. Her Name, Lucretia, and Nature had endowed her with so little
Beauty, as put her under the constraint of Wedding Giacopo Salvieti, a Person
nor the Chief, nor the Richest of his Family; but in recompense, she abounded
so in Wit, that she insinuated her self into the good Humor of all that knew
her. She proved extraordinary pregnant, and the multitude of her Children, made
her afraid of one day wanting necessaries for their subsistence. The means to
provide against such a Calamity, was to contribute (as much as in her lay) to
the re-establishment of her Brothers, but she met very great Obstacles in her
pursuit of this Design For her Husband had been one of Savanarola's Intimates,
and his mind was still prejudiced with the Maxims of that Priest. However, as
there is hardly any thing, but what Women obtain from those who love them, when
they persevere in their colloguing Importunities, Lucretia de Medici at last,
enticed Salvieti to act obliquely and against his own Interests and Sentiments,
and to solicit underhand, the calling back of a Family, which he foresaw must
needs, one day, bereave his Country of its Freedom.

Nevertheless, he went so craftily to Work, as gave not the least hold on him;
for whereas those who had gone before him in this Project, had declared it
openly, he kept his Game close, and only Caball'd in such manner, as to
discredit Soderini, and thwart all he aimed at having done. He found most of
the Nobles in the Disposition he desired, and in three Months space, hampered
the Dictator in such a Perplexity, that any other than he, would have despaired
of getting rid of. The Dictator proposed not any Person to the mind of that
Critical Faction. Whatever a Man's Abilities might be, he was ever put by, when
proposed by Soderini; and if any one suddenly allowed of, it was such an one as
of whom they hoped suddenly to have occasion to make Complaints, so to reject
upon the Government, the Faults he committed. The Dictators best actions were
ill interpreted, and the least aggravated beyond probability. They tang'd the
Good, and added to the Bad, that so they might have the more dangerous effects;
but all this was only Froth of the Sea against a Rock.

Soderini only confronted Patience against so many Contradictions; but this
Patience being ever equal, broak and surmounted, at the long run, all that
jostl'd it. He used this address, of whose Knowledge, it would be a Crime to
rob the Reader. He had still fresh Men to present in the room of those, against
whom Salvieti and his Caball had past the Exclusion, and the Merit of those Men
so Conspicuous, that the Malignity would have been too palpable in rejecting
them. They, as soon as in Employment, were most peculiarly solicitous to commit
no Faults, as seeing themselves too narrowly watched; and when they had tript
and blun^er'd, they chose rather to be their own Accusers in Public, than give
occasion to their Adversaries, to heighten their Failings, by Malevolent
Calumnies and Impeachments.

Soderini protected them, on his part, with an ingenious firmness; he ever gave
the People pertinent Reasons for his Conduct; he kept underhand credible
Agents enough among the Populace, to inform him of News, according as they were
buzzed about; and laying down for Principle, that nothing could alter the
Government of Florence, as long as the French were Potent in Italy. He
maintained his good Understanding with the Majesty of France his Ministers, and
left Vulgar Concerns to take their wonted course. And indeed, though Cardinal de
Medici lay still at lurch, and the number of his Friends augmented daily at
Florence, forrc'd was he to wait for a stronger Machine than his own, to
stagger the Foundation of Soderini's Greatness.

Pope Giulio having banished from his Heart the Inclination he had fostered for
France, above thirty years together, became its greatest Enemy, and graspt at
nothing less, than the recovering from that Crown, all it held beyond the
Alps. To execute so magnanimous a Project, not a more fitting Minister had he,
than the Cardinal de Medici, as being most concerned in the Design, and the
Pope fixed his Eyes on him to be its principal Instrument, by Creating him
Legate of Bologna. The Cardinal de Medici accepted this Commission, rather to
evade the Duns and Importunities of his Creditors, beginning to persecute him,
than out of any prospect he had of Success. In a few days after his Arrival at
Bologna, he performed an important piece of Service to the Ecclesiastical
State, by discovering a Party, framing to restore the Bentivogli's to the
Possession of that agreeable City. Then he fell to observing Soderini, who
seeing France embroiled with the Church, caused the Florentines to declare in
favor of the Most Christian King, though he well enough foresaw the
extraordinary accumulation of Troubles he was going to draw upon his Back.

The French not having found a Holiness hardy enough to thwart them directly,
since Boniface the 8th, who had been so unsuccessful in so doing, showed at
first an irresolution, as redoubled their enemies Courage, then perceiving
their fault, fell of a sudden into the other extremity, which consisted in
keeping no more measures with the Pope. They accused him of having ascended the
Throne of Saint Peter, by two irregular ways, those of Symony and Fraud. To
justify the Simony, they instanced the Benefices and Legations promised in the
Conclave, and given after the Election to the Cardinals, Heads of the Faction,
and specified the sums of Money which the other Cardinals had received for the
price of their Suffrages.

To lay open the deceit, demonstrated it was to the same Pope, that the
Spanish Cardinals being engaged by Oath, to give their Votes only for him who
should be proposed to them by Duke Valentino; the Cardinal of St. Peter in
Bonds, that Duke's sworn Enemy, had him persuaded, by suborned Persons, into a
Belief of his being his Father; that he had had Commerce with his Mother, at
the time she seemed to abandon her self only to Cardinal Borgia, afterward
Alexander the 6th, that the jealousy this same Borgia had conceived of him,
had been the only cause of the Persecution he made him suffer, for above ten
years together; but now the thing in hand, being the Creating another Pope, if
he would favor his Promotion, he would treat him as his Son. Duke Valentino crediting
what had been told him under the Rose, gave so far way, as to consent, that the
Cardinals of the Faction should Elect St. Peter in Bonds, who failed not
immediately after to divest him of all Romagna and Vnbria, instead of owning
him for his Son.

In process of these Mysteries, which the French openly revealed, they formed a
Party of eight Cardinals, the most considerable of the Sacred College. Dean
Carvaial was one, upon a Promise made him, of choosing him, after Giulio was
deposed. And San Severino, who, having ever been a declared Partizan for
France, thought it an Infamy to abandon that Crown, in a Conjuncture, when the
Pope was the Aggressor: but the most esteemed of all, was the Cardinal
Soderini, Brother to the perpetual Dictator of Florence.

This Prelate, in the common vogue, had all the qualities requisite to the
being a Pope. Learned, Serious, Bold, and Staid in all his actions, had ever
lived in such sort, as that he could be upbraided with nothing of Incontinency,
dishonouring Giulio's Papacy. And the severity of Life he affected, gave room
to hope, that, when Pope, he would usefully labor to the reformation of
Manners. Not but that he had two Infirmities capable of balancing so many
Virtues, namely, Ambition, and Avarice; but he masked them with so many
Precautions, that they only seemed a loftiness of Soul, and an inclination to
Thriftiness, which all the Florentines ^^d the imputation of bringing from
their ^others Womb. The consideration of his ^^other, and his own Merits, made
France ^^ve him a greater share in its Concerns, ^^an to the other sev'n of the
Faction. And ^s their Interests were inseparable, France had most influence in
all to him proposed. However, the subtilty of his Wit, had made ^im discover a
way, he judged infallible, for ^he attaining his aim, if it appeared he stood
Neuter: For, if France had the advantage, ^^d the Pope deposed, it would be
obliged to ^^t him in his room, as not being able to ^^nd any Subject in the
Sacred College, in whom that Crown could put so much Con^^^ence, as in him:
and if the Pope remained Conqueror, the firmness he should have ex^^ted, by
remaining with his Holiness (though ^ll his Relations and Friends were in the
Adverse Party) would serve him for a strong Recommendation in the future
Conclave. Upon this Chimerical Ratiocination, Car^inal Soderini gave the French
King's Mini^^ers, in Italy, to understand, and persuaded ^^em, that they must
leave, at least, a Trim^^ing Cardinal, of their Faction, at Rome, to ^ave an
eye to Giulio's Conduct, and to give ^uch true Advices, as that they might
afford them Credence, without fearing to be mista^en. Then he offered to be the
Man, who should act so dangerous and difficult a part Taken, was he, at his
word, as imagining the bare Zeal he had for France, made him say it. Thus
Giulio being departed Rome, to go to Bologna, the seven Cardinals left him on
the Road, and gave out, that their Intention was to hold a Council, after the
Example of that of Constance, for the reforming in it the Church, in its Head
and in its Members. They wanted, for this purpose, a City, on the one side not
too far remote from the Theater of War, and on the other, safe from Surprise.
And S^^erini was desired to lend them that of Pisa. He sufficiently foresaw,
that if he did so, he should render the Pope his irreconciliable Adversary, and
give a plausible Pretext to other his Enemies, to decry his Administration.
Nevertheless, he did not one moment hesitare to grant it, whether the Demand
seemed to him equally just and necessary, or that he was already too far
engaged to go back.

Thus the Council was convened at Pisa And the Pope, a Pretender to
Intrepidity, dreaded it at first; but was re-incourag'd by Antonio de Monte,
the famous Lawyer, whom he had made Cardinal at the first Promotion. This Monte
represented to him, tha^ two notable Flaws were in the Convocation of the seven
Cardinals; one, That the term of four Months, therein prescribed to all Bishops
in Christendom, to come thither, was too short; and the other, the City of
Pisa. Whereupon he exhorted the Pope to avail himself of these two Faults, not
by shunning and declining a Council, which would render him Criminal, in the
Opinion of most of the Faithful; but by Convening another Council, in a place
he was Master of, and where, by consequence, nothing could be decided to his
Prejudice. The Pope followed his Advice, and called, on his side, a Council for
the year following, 1513, at Rome, in the Church of Lateran. This Action
maintained Giulio in the Pontificate, by dividing the Believers into the
uncertainty, of deferring to the one or other Council. Cardinal de Medici made
^dmirable advantage of this, to reconcile, in Tuscany, his Friends with those
who could not brook that the seven Malecontent Cardinals should draw up the
Popes Process. He put so many Men in Arms that the Garrison of Florence, which
guarded the Council, was not sufficient to Ward and Target it from insult.

The Council wrote their Distress to the Most Christian King's Ministers, in
the Duchy of Milan, who sent them immediately, with M. de Lautrec, four
hundred Men at Arms, the briskest of the French Army. This re-inforcement gave
the House of Medici's Friends the occasion* they had so long waited for, to
Spirit from Soderini's Party, the common People of Florence. Their Emissaries
made their Complaints ring from Quarter to Quarter, how Soderini, that
perpetual Dictator, who boasted his being so passionate for the welfare of his
Country, yet made no scruple of delivering up to Strangers, a City, which the
Florentines had not reduced, till after a War of eighteen years.

As the common People of Florence had been furiously Cock-a-hoop and
Passionate, to see those of Pisa reduced under their Laws, the bare
apprehension of Lautrec's setting them again at liberty, though false,
cancelled the Affection they had for Soderini* This change rendered the
Nobility more bold, and made them write to the Friends they had in Pisa, that
they should in no wise brook the French to be strongest in that place. There
needed no more to foment a Sedition, from whence the Pope, and the House of
Medici derived great advantages. The Officers of the Florentine Garrison, at
Pisa, after having represented to their own Soldiers, that their Interests,
and the Honor of the^^ Country, were concerned, to be the only Guards to the
Council, they revived the jealousy of the Citizens, by asking them in way of
Raillery, whether it was to try the Virtue of their Wives and Daughters, that
they Quartered the French in their Houses. Thus the first Contest that happened
degene^^ted into a horrible tumult. The Citizens and Dead-payes nabb'd the
French at unawares, cut 'em in pieces, and Lautrec himself had there lost his
Life, but for the generosity of the Magistrates Son, who disengaged him from
the midst of a Seditious Rout, by whom he was surrounded.

The Council having understood the Hubbub to be general, and that the French
plied and yielded ground, were under apprehensions that the Seditious might
deliver them to the Pope, and as there were no hopes for Mercy, if it so
happened, it dissolved it self, and each Member of it betook himself to his
^eels, flying that way where his wounded ^^agination directed him for safety.
The se^^n Cardinals never drew Bit, till they were (...) the Duchy of Milan;
and the Sedition was appeased as soon as Pisa was cleared of Strangers.
Soderini had too much experi^^ce, not to know the Check his Authority ^eceiv'd,
by so sudden and so eas^^ a Revolu^ion. He set about repairing it. And fain
^ou'd he have persuaded the Cardinals and ^ishops to return to Pisa, where he
offered to have them guarded by Troops Levied in Tuscany, Trusty and Loyal to
him; but he talked to People, whom Fear had bereft of their Judgment.

Soderini made the Proposal of it; but Cardinal de Medici's Friends, having had
the leisure to make their Caball, treated it as ridiculous. The People were
also of Opinion, it to be in no wise for their safety, to incur the Displeasure
of the Court of Rome, nor expose themselves to the thunder of the Vatican; and
the Assembly broke up, without coming to any Result. Thus the Council was
compelled, upon the Adjournment, to continue its Sessions at Milan, while the
Armies acted on either side, to support and to destroy it.

The Cardinal de Medici, being Legate in that of the League formed for the
Pope, caused Siege to be laid to Bologna, where the Bentivoglii's were newly
re-instated. Gasto^ de Foix relieved this place, by the quickest and boldest
Action recorded in History, and fought the Battle of Ravenna, where the
Confederate Army was defeated. The Cardinal Legate being taken Prisoner in tha^
Action, go^d luck would have it, that h^ fell into the hands of Cardinal da san
Severino, performing the same Function in the French Camp. Their ancient
Friendshi^ was renewed in that Conjuncture; and san Severino, more a Soldier
than a Politician, permitted Medici to send a Gentleman to Cesana; whither his
Cousin Giulio, who already took upon him the Title of the Commander de Medici,
had made his escape. This Gentleman carried Giulio a safe Conduct, to go and
come to the French Leaguer in safety.

The Cardinal da san Severino imagined, he of Medici had no other drift, than
to send his Cousin to Rome, there to solicit his Ransom, but this proved a
mistake: For the Cardinal de Medici foreseeing the Consternation, the loss of
the Battle would occasion in Rome, intended to re-incourage the Pope, by giving
him to understand, by a Man of Credence, such an one as the Commander, That the
Concerns of the Conquerours were in a worse Posture, than those of his
Holiness. And indeed, the Commander's Journey was the principal Remedy of the
Popes Affairs. His Holiness being just upon the point of flying from Rome, and
going to embark at Ostia, as having newly discovered, that the Vrsini's were in
treaty with the ^rench to take him, and lead him by main force to the Council.

The certain advices the Commander brought, of the Feebleness of the French,
and the Harangue he made of it in full Consistory, where the Pope would have
him heard, caused the Resolution of scampering, to be changed into that of
setting the Army again on foot. The Expedient broached by Cardinal de Medici,
in his Letter for the compelling the French Troops to disband, was approved in
all points, and Merits being known.

He demanded an absolute Power to be sent him, to absolve the French, who had
fought at Ravenna, without specifying the fruit he pretended to reap thereby,
and the Brief accordingly was forthwith expedited. The Commander carried it to
the Cardinal de Medici, who had been Conducted to Milan; and the Cardinal was
industrious to get it rumor'd among the Soldiers. Such as had tenderness of
Conscience, flocked in Crowds to receive Absolution; and as the only Penance
imposed on them, was not to fall any more into the same Fault, the Companies
began to be very thin and clear in a few days. There happened another
inconvenience, little less to be feared; for those who had been absolved,
valuing themselves, upon despising the Council, received, with hissings, the
Citations made to the Pope, at the Door of the great Church. From hence
proceeded the Entreaties, which the Council made to the Most Christian King's
Ministers, to cause the Cardinal de Medici to pass the Alps, which they did
not grant, till constrained thereto. And indeed the General of Normandy,
Intendant of the French Army, having disbanded almost all the Infantry, out of
an unseasonable piece of Thrift, the Forces of the League being reestablish'd,
by a reinforcement of sixteen thousand Suizzers, which the Bishop of Sion had
Leavy'd upon his own Credit, in favor of the Pope, drew near the Milanese with
such Alacrity and Boldness, as made the Fathers of the Council judge they were
not in safety, in the Capital City of that Duchy. They had permission given
them to go into France, and the same Troops, which served them for Convoy, had
order to Conduct thither the Cardinal de Medici. This plunged that Prelate into
so great a Melancholy, so much the deeper bottomed, in that he could expect no
less, than to languish in an eternal imprisonment, if he passed the Alps: for
as his Quality, and the Function he performed, in the moment of his taking,
induced those who had him, to set his Ransom at an excessive Price, and, that
besides, his House was so absolutely Ruined, that it had no other recovery,
save in his Person. The Pope, whose humor, prone to Tenaciousness, being not
pressed by any Potentate to redeem him, would never do it of his own accord;
and the Cardinals Consideration coming to diminish, a thing inevitable,
according as he should remain longer in Prison, in process of time they would
make no more account of him, than of a Man in his Grave.

This Motive determined him, by all the means possible, to seek the occasion of
making his escape, before constrained to pass the Alps. He conferred about it
with the Abbot Bongalle, taken and left with him, in quality of Chamberlain,
and their Resolve was, the endeavoring to Corrupt some or other to attempt
their rescue. They had, for this purpose, the Money given them, for
Certificates of Absolution, and the sum sufficiently considerable; the number
of those demanding those Certificates, being so great, that the Cardinal and
his Servants had been constrained to drudge at it Day and Night, during their
abode at Milan. They had also some Rings, which the generous Countess Bianca
Rangoni had accomodated them withal, in their passage through Bologna, and the
Cardinal de Medici had, all his Life long, so tender an acknowledgment for this
Obligation that he thought himself still indebted to that fair Lady, after
having made one of her Sons Cardinal, and the other General of the Armies of
the Church. But he met with, on the way, so few Persons proper for the
perpetrating his Design, that he arrived on the brink of the Po, in the
Territory of Florence. The Fathers of the Council still trembling, were
obstinately earnest to pass this River that same Evening, so to put it between
them, and the Popes Men, whom they fancied at their heels. They found Boats
ready, and in they went. But the Cardinal de Medici dreaded passing it, through
a contrary Sentiment; for he foresaw, that after his Passage, no more means
would there be for his escape. The anxiety he lay under, gave him the grudging
of a Fever, which served him for a pretext to ask of the Soldiers, who staid
about him, the permission of passing the Night in the Village of Carro,
standing upon the River, on the Milan side.

Two things made them not deny him this Request; the one, that the Marshall de
Trimulee had ordered they should use him with due Respect, and all possible
Civility; the other, that the Vineyards of Carro being much esteemed, the
Soldiers not attending the Fathers of the Council, did not want much entreaty
to sup there. Thus Cardinal de Medici was left in the Village; and the Abbot
Bongalle, after having had him put to Bed, and taken with him his Money and
Jewels, went to find out a Gentleman of his acquaintance, called Rinaldo Zacti,
at his Castle not far distant. This Zacti was an Old Cavalier, had served till
grown hoary in his Armor, and did not retire home, till after the French, whom
he hated, were become Masters of the Duchy of Milan; he had made semblance of
accomodating himself with them, that he might enjoy in quiet, the beauteous
Lands he possessed along the Po; but, in reality, only waited for an occasion
to injure them, without ruining himself. He received very civilly the Abbot
Bongalle, and testified much joy at the news he told him, that (according to
all appearances) the French were going to be driven out of Italy. Bongalle
finding him in so favorable a disposition, disclosed his Design, withal
proposing Cardinal de Medici's Rescue, after having proved this Cardinal to be
the Worthiest Member of the Sacred College, and so in reason to be the most
considered of those, who pretended to the Papacy. Nevertheless, they were
leading him into France, where sure he was of ending his days in the same
Prison, wherein Lodovico Sforza died at ten years end, if not suddenly snatched
from a score of Drunkards, who began to guzzle and drown their Senses in the
Inn of Carro. The remembrance of Lodovico Sforza, whose Menial Servant Zacti
had been, revived his aversion to France, and the easiness of saving the
Cardinal de Medici, flusht him with the desire.

Nevertheless, he did not positively engage, and gave no other promise to the
Abbot Bongalle, but of going to Communicate the business to a Gentleman, called
Visimbardi, his Neighbor and intimate. Friend, though he had sided with France.
That if Visimbardi would be of the Party, they two together should be strong
enough, with their Domestics, to rescue the Cardinal de Medici, and would not
fail of undertaking it; but if that Gentleman refused him his Assistance, it
was not to be hoped he would hazard alone, a Rescue of that Consequence.

The Abbot Bongalle was little satisfied, with seeing the liberty of his Patron
remitted to the Caprice of a Man of a contrary Faction. However complied, for
want of a better Expedient, and only asked Zacti, by what means he might know if
Visimbardi would second him, or not. Zacti replied, that if this Gentleman did
not espouse the undertaking, no news were from him to be expected, but that if
he did, he would send him word, for a token, by a young Boy, that all was
ready. Bongalle returned to Cardinal de Medici, to render him an account of
what he had done, and gave him not so much Hope as Fear. Zacti, on his side,
found Visimbardi far from the design, he meant to inspire into him.
Nevertheless, he represented to him with so much efficacy, that affairs were
ruined, that no measures were to be kept with People flying and scampering, and
that Wisdom required the reconciling ones self with the Conquerours, by
rendering them an eminent piece of Service, that Visimbardi gave way, and
promised Zacti to meet him about one a Clock at Night, with all the Friends and
Domestics he could get together.

Zacti returned home to make ready, and commanded a young Boy to go to the Inn
of Carro, ask for the Abbot Bongalle, and tell him, all was ready. The Lad, on
the way, forgot half of his Commission, and remembered nothing more, when come
to the Inn, save asking to speak with the Abbot, without adding any proper
name: The Person the Child spoke to, was a French Pedee, who hearing him
mention an Abbot, imagined him to be the same, to whose care the Fathers of the
Council, upon their passing the Po, had recommended the Cardinal de Medici.
They had conjured him not to suffer him out of sight, and to make him pass the
River very early; for that intent the Soldiers of the Guard had a most
peculiar Order to obey him.

The French Boy calls this Abbot; and the Child, not knowing Bongalle, believed
it to be the same then present, thought he was to do his Message, and tell him,
All was ready. Then would the Lad have gone his ways, but the Abbot he had
spoken to, not knowing what he meant, staid him, and asked him several
questions, which he did not so handsomely clear, though he pretended to come from
a poor Peasant, whom he called his Father, but that the French Abbot suspected
some Mystery.

He commanded the Soldiers to redouble their Vigilance, for the guard of their
Prisoner, and went himself to find out the Ferry. Men that they might make
ready to carry over the Cardinal at break of Day, while the Cardinal and his
Chamberlain were under strange disquiets. As they had had no inkling of the
little Boys adventure, they conceived Zacti to have failed in his word to them,
or that Visimbardi refused to second him. They despaired of their delivery,
after having spent the Night without hearing any Noise, or receiving any
Notice. And it was not so much with a set design, as through a kind of
retchlesness, which Persons fall in when destitute of all hopes, that the
Cardinal de Medici was still musing in his Bed, when summoned to make ready to
pass the River. Up got he, mounted his Mule, gave his Benediction to the
Passengers, thronging to receive it at the Inn door, and so suffered them to
lead him where they listed.

The two fore Feet of his Mule were already in the Boat, when he heard a noise
behind him, which made him turn his head. 'Twas Zacti with Visimbardi, who came
full Gallop, crying. Liberty. They surrounded the Cardinal to preserve him from
danger, during the Conflict, which they expected to be sharp; but the French
seeing the March unequal, chose rather to abandon a Prisoner, whom it was no
longer possible for them to keep, and throw themselves into the Boat, just at
hand, than to engage in a Combat, to them unprofitable, even though attended with
Success.

Thus Zacti and his Companion remained Masters of the Cardinal's Person, and
not daring to take him home to their own Houses where they expected search to
be made; Visimbardi urged the Conducting him to Barnabo Malaspino's Castle, as
being a place near enough the State of Genoua, for them there to take Refuge,
in case of pursuit. Malespina being their Friend, at first made them a kind
Reception; but after they had told him their business, and showed him the
Cardinal de Medici, then in disguise, and passing only for a Cavalier of their
Train; then Malespina put on a more serious look, remonstrated to them their
Imprudence, in having ventured their Lives and Fortunes, to save a Person, to
them indifferent; accused them of coming only to his House, to render him the
Complice of their Crime, and using them as Enemies, sent them surlily away,
after having taken from them the Cardinal de Medici,

He shut up the Cardinal in a Tennis-Court, till such time as he had received
directions from the Marshall Trimulee, Governor of Milan, for France, what
course to take with the Prisoner Fortune had put into his Hands. Trimulee
received Malespina's Courier in the very time, that two French Soldiers, of
the number of those who had been pushed by the Confederate Army at the Pass of
Mincio, had put Milan into a Consternation, by divulging, that the Enemy would
be suddenly at the Gates. The mischief proved much greater than reported, for
that the French Army, after this defeat, despairing of retaining Milan, marched
away toward the Alps: So as Trimulee had no more measures to keep with People
that abandoned him, notwithstanding he had sacrificed all for them. He wrote a
Letter to Malespina, to advise him to make a Friend of the Cardinal de Medici,
by letting him go, provided he did it with such Cautions, as not to seem the
having contributed to his Escape.

Malespina followed this Council, and went by night to the Cardinal de Medici,
in the Tennis-Court, let him know the importance of the Service he meant to do
him, and agreed with him that one of his Servants should open the door, and
keep him Company, that Malespina might rumor it abroad, the Cardinal had
Corrupted him. The thing passed as projected; but the Cardinal went not far
without falling into the Banditti's hands, who dismounted him, took what Money
he had, and killed Malespina's Servant for standing on his defense Then the
Cardinal wandered alone up and down the Fields, without wisting where he was,
till he met a Curate, who knowing him led him into his Presbytery, made him the
best Cheer he could, and lent him his Mare to carry him as far as Plaisanza.

He arrived at that City a moment after it had put it self, of its own proper
motion, under the Popes Obedience; insomuch that the Cardinal de Medici, who
entered in disguised laid hold of the Conjuncture to make him self known, and
took upon him again the Badges of his Legation. He dispatched the most urgent
affairs, and departed immediately after for Bologna, with a sufficient Convoy.
There he found the Inhabitants busied with driving out the Bentivoglii's, and
in setting up the Arms of the Church. They accepted him for their Governor,
till the Pope should otherwise Decree. He received the Bull of it with so much
the more joy, as that Fortune could not send him an Employ more commodious, to
lie at catch for his Families re-establishment in Florence. And indeed the
Deputies of the Pope, of the King of Spain, and of Italy, being assembled at
Mantoua, to regulate the Revenge to be inflicted on those who had assisted the
French; Giuliano de Medici being sent thither by the Cardinal his Brother,
demanded permission to return into his Country. Soderini had foreseen this
Request, and dispatched his Brother to Mantoua, to disappoint it. Thus the
affair being of Consequence, and the Parties present, they were allowed to
debate their Pretensions in Public, before the Deputies of the League.

Giuliano de Medici maintained, that the Florentines ought to be treated as
Disturbers of the Peace of Italy; and undergo the Penalties ordained by the
Roman Law, against the Disserters of the common Cause, seeing they had sent
Succors to the assistance of the French, in the Land of Milan. Soderini's
Brother, being a great Lawyer answered pertinently to the Accusation, and
rendered it ridiculous. He owned the point in issue, but showed a Treaty the
Florentines had concluded, long before, with the French, for the giving one
another mutually a limited Succors, if needed by Tuscany on one side, and the
Duchy of Milan on the other.

He added, that the Spaniards, holding the first Rank in Italy, after the Pope,
had so little thought this Treaty prejudicial to them, in what related to the
Kingdom of Naples, that the Republic of Florence had thereunto consented. And
how it was, by virtue of this Treaty, that the Great Captain had received
Cavalry from Florence, when he disputed the Pass at Garillan; that with
exception to the Articles stipulated in those two Treaties, the Florentines had
inviolably observed the Neutrality, that their Colors had neither been
unfolded in the Army of Gaston de Foix, nor in that of Marshal de la Palice,
and that the two Parties had been equally received and furnished with
Provisions, in their passage through Tuscany.

These Reasons were concluding, principally in regard of the Spaniards, the
principal Judges in the Case. And it is not doubted, but that Soderini's Brother
haid gained his Cause, if he had spoke before Judges as dis-interessed, as they
were Intelligent. But as they had to do with Soldiers, who knew not how to do
Justice, without thereby reaping Profit, one of his Friends, advised him
underhand, not to trust so absolutely in the merits of his Cause, that this
should hinder him from distributing, in the Assembly, the Gold and Silver he
had brought along from Florence. He slighted the Advice, and repartee'd, that
if he did it, his Brother would have reason to tax him with Prodigality, and
upbraid him, that he had had a very ill Opinion of his Cause, since he had
offered to Corrupt his Judges.

Giuliano de Medici did not follow the same Course, and poured out whole
handfuls of Gold, which the Cardinal his Brother had borrowed from the
principal Citizens of Bologna. The Assembly was almost wholly composed of
Deputies of the States of Italy, and of Spanish Colonels, who having lost their
Equipages, at the Battle of Ravenna, were contriving to set themselves up
again, and were not affected with the Generous Sentiments, that would have made
Impression upon the Viceroy of Naples, and the Governor of Milan, who had
sent them. Insomuch that Giuliano de Medici taking them by their weak side,
persuaded them, that the affair in agitation, was a thing of Grace, and not of
Justice, and got from them a Sentence, in form of Proscription, against the
Republic of Florence, though they had declared, two hours before, to Soderini's
Brother, that nothing could be more unjust, than the Pretentions of the Medici.

Soderini having received the News of it, did not lose time, in declaming
against his Brother's Imprudence and Parcimony. He took out what was most
precious in the Public Treasury, and putting it into the Hands of his
principal Confident, called Giovanni Giacopo Albizzi, sent him to Raymond of
Cardonna, Viceroy of Naples, to endeavor, by all means, the obstructing the
Execution of the Sentence. Cardonna was a Man not of a humor to violate
Equity, when the Orders of the Catholic King, his Master, did not enforce him
to it. He had disapproved the Result of the Assembly of Mantoua, and made so
kind a Reception to Soderini's Envoy, as conceived a jealousy in the Cardinal
de Medici, who had spies about that Vice-King, and made him not doubt, but that
he would thwart them, if the affair depended on him. And nevertheless, easy
was it to see that he would be Master of the business, in case the least
protracted. Wherefore necessary was it to induce those who had newly proscribed
the Florentines to depart immediately, to go themselves execute the
Proscription, and Giuliano de Medici disposed them to it, by new Presents. The
Duke of Attio and Petro de Padillo, who had been Corrupted, marched thither the
Spanish Infantry, and the Pope's Troops had orders to follow them.

The Duke of Vrbin, the Pope's Nephew, Commanding these Forces, had more
Interest to buoy up Soderini, who could not injure him, than re-establish those
who did not love him. He practiced all imaginable shifts, to dispense his
obeying the Pope, his Uncle, he caused the Artillery to be nailed, and would
needs employ his Soldiers in some other expedition. But the Orsini's led him
thither against his will, and the Spaniards being engaged in the Siege of
Prato, where they met with a vigorous Defense; two Foot Soldiers observed a
Defect in the Wall, and showed it to their Companions, who there forced the
Place. All in it underwent Fire and Sword; and the news being carried to
Florence, occasioned there a pannick Terror. To remedy which, Soderini went
himself to the Houses, and had those seized whom he suspected of Correspondence
with the Medici. The Tumult increasing, compelled him to retire from the
Guild Hall to his own House, where, putting on a disguise, he fled into
Dalmatia.

The Medici's made their entrance into Florence, as in Triumph, and seizing on
the Public Treasure, distributed the better part of it to the Troops that
followed them, and paid their Debts with the rest. They disposed of the
Government, according to their Fancy, and convening the People, obliged them to
abolish all that had been done, during the eighteen years their Exile had
lasted. Then they presented to them sev'nty Persons, such as were at their
Devotion, to supply the Magistracy; and out of this number was it, that the two
Supreme Councils were chosen, the one of eight Senators, who should Judge
thenceforward, and without farther Appeal of Properties and of Life; and the
other Ten, who should resolve the Affairs of Peace and War. They reestablished
the Charge of Gonfalioniere to be officiated, during two Months only, and the
first they conferred it on, was their Brother in Law Ridolfi, who not daring to
act overtly against Soderini's Friends, remaining in the City, devised
retrospecting their past Conduct, so to fright them, and incline them to seek,
of their own Election, another abode. The most considerable of those he
persecuted, was the Celebrated Nicolo Machiavelli. This wonderful Genius was
not of mean Birth, but had wanted Education. He knew so little Latin, that in
writing upon Titus Livius, it is evident he did not well understand the Text he
alleges, nay, and sometimes takes it in a wrong sense. As to the Greek Tongue,
he knew not so much as how to read it; but he had the happiness to serve for an
Amanuensis to the Learned Marcelio Virgile, who made him extract what was most
Quaint in good Authors, and gave him since occasion to enchase in his own
Works, the finest strokes of Plutarch, of Lucian, and other the Masterpieces
of the Greek Tongue, which are found therein, so delicately Translated. Yet was
he not wanting to give an Idea, after his Mode, of a Prince, of a Senator, and
a Soldier. As he had a Libertine Wit, and that his Manners were dissolute, he
ever loved the Anarchical Government, and favored only that of Democracy, as
coming nearer Anarchy than the rest. He was of all the Factions that were
hatched in his time, against the Medici, and Ridolfi having Convicted him of
having been concerned in that of their Exile, caused him to be taken, and put
to the Rack, to make him reveal his Accomplices. He endured it with an
obstinate silence; and Cardinal de Medici not having consented, without regret,
to his being tortured, caused him to be enlarged, and for a reparation, ordered
him to have a great Pension from the Public, in quality of Historiographer.

Thus Machiavell wrote the eight Books we have of the History of his Country,
whose style is so blooming and Correct, that it is taxed with being too Finical
and Tawdry. And principally in this, Boccacio's easiness and soft Liberty, has
got of him the Preference. His Narration is sometimes Malign and Satirical; and
Marc-Musurus convinced him of it so clearly, that he durst not answer him. They
will needs have too, that he has flattered his Countrymen, and exaggerated
their Noble Actions; but I do not perceive that they have plainly shown wherein
and how.

His greatest misfortune lay, in his not being able to rid himself of the
Inclination he had for Liberty, and of having ill practiced the precepts of
dissimulation he gave to others. He bolted now and then, even in his History,
Testimonies of Admiration for Brutus and Cassius, a thing odd and unseasonable,
in a Man designedly set to write, in order to insinuate into Peoples minds, the
Dominion of the Medici. Nevertheless, his allowance was continued to him,
having found the Secret of pleasing the Cardinal de Medici, in diverting him
with admirable strokes and sallies of the finest Raillery, which he invented to
admiration, upon all sorts of Subjects.

One day that he counterfeited the Gestures and irregular Deportments, of some
of the Florentines, the Cardinal told him they would appear very ridiculous
upon the Stage, in a Comedy made in imitation of that of Aristophanes. There
needed no more to set Machiavell to work upon Clitia, wherein the Parties he
meant to ridicule, are drawn so to the Life, that they durst not be angry, though
they assisted at the first representation of the Piece, for fear of augmenting
the public laughter, by betraying themselves. The Cardinal de Medici was so
Charmed with it, that being afterward Pope, he caused the Decoration of the
Threatre, the Habits, and the very Actors themselves, to be removed to Rome,
that so he might afford his Court the Diversion of that Play.

Machiavell found this turn to account, and received extraordinary
Gratifications from Pope Leo, till that the Conspiracy of Ajaceti and of
Almanni, to assassinate all the Medici's being discovered, they had violent
tokens, of its not being contrived without Machiavelli's Participation; but he
had gone so slily to work, that nothing could be proved upon him. They durst
not so much as apply him to the Torture, well knowing he would endure it,
without making any Discovery. They contented themselves with discrediting him,
and abandoning him to the misery a man is reduced, having spent all. He lay
under the Imputation of a Profligate Wretch, and an Atheist. And the little
care he took to purge himself, made what was said of him, genetally believed to
be but too true. He unwitlingly occasioned his own Death, by taking out of
Prevention a Medicine, which stifled him, but I have not found that he would
receive the Sacraments, till after being constrained so to do by the
Magistrates.

The End of the Fifth Book.
THE SECRET HISTORY OF THE HOUSE OF MEDICIS. The Sixth Book.
CArdinal de Medici had not yet been three Months returned to Florence, when
the Death of Pope Giulio the Second obliged him to leave that place, in order
for his repairing to Rome. He made his journey in a Litter, by reason of an
Impothume he had in those parts, which Modesty forbids mentioning, and
traveled so slowly, that the Pope's Obsequies were already performed, and the
Conclave begun, before his Arrival. He remembered Marcileo Ficino, his Father's
intimate Friend, who had Erected his Scheme, at the moment of his Birth, and
had several times affirmed him to be born under a Constellation, promising him
the Papacy. But this Prediction had not so strongly affected him, as that of
Erasmus, the famous German Astrologer, who an hour before the Cardinal de
Medici entered the Conclave, signified to all the Cardinals there, that to no
purpose was it for them to renew their Intrigues, and that infallibly not a Man
of them should be Pope. The Faithful Bibiana would needs be the Cardinal de
Medici's Conclavist, and served him with so much the more application, that his
principa Talent lay for the Negotiation in hand, and indeed no hard matter was
it for him, to gain for his Master the Suffrages of two sorts of Cardinals, who
durst not hope to be chosen; one sort, because they were suspected to the
Sacred College, as being issued from Sovereign Houses; and the other, by
reason of their two green Youth, and the little Account they were in, as to
what concerned the Election. As the Cardinals of Arragon and Gonzaga, Sion,
Corneli, Sauli, and Petrucci Some also of the Pretenders were there, who
promised him their Votes, on condition that Medici would give them his, in case
they only wanted it to have the number sufficient. The first put to the Vote,
was Cardinal Riario, and his Cabal was so much the more powerful, in that
almost all those, who owed their Promotion to Sixtus the 4th, declared in
favor of his Nephew, either that they hoped to share among them so many rich
Benefices falling vacant, by Riario's Exaltation, or that they meant thereby to
testify their Gratitude to the memory of their Benefactor. But two invincible
Obstacles quickly checmated Riario's Fortune; one, that the young Cardinals
were afraid this old Genoese, making Profession of living austerely, would
oblige them to reform the Luxury, wherein the two foregoing Popes had suffered
them to bask; the other, that not one of the Old aspiring Cardinals, could be
prevailed with, to favor him with his Suffrage, so fully were they persuaded,
that he needed but one or two Voices to make up the two thirds. The steddiness
they showed, in not consenting to the Exaltation of any of the Young, made the
Young knit, in their turn, a more strict Combination among themselves, not to
give their Votes to the Ancients, and because they must agree among themselves,
to avert the Public Odium, they resigned their Pretensions to Cardinal de
Medici.

They suffered their Faction to make a noise, as soon as formed, and an hour
after, known was it throughout all the Conclave, that there would be a young
Pope, or none at all. Endeavors were used to disunite them, and he who set
most Wheels a going, to bring this about, was Cardinal Soderini, who had such
just Causes to obviate his most formidable Adversaries becoming his Master. But
finding among them a too good understanding, and knowing besides the weakness
of the Ancients, he did not doubt, but what he most dreaded would come to pass.

I have already noted Cardinal Soderini to have been both the most Crafty and
Self interessed of all the Sacred College; and Bibiana knowing this defect,
attacked him there. He lured him with hopes of an establishment for his
Brother, as advantageous as that of Florence, and proposed the Alliance of the
House of Medici with that of Soderini, by the Marriage of Soderini's Niece,
with the Cardinal de Medici's Nephew. Soderini found this offer to his
advantage; and the Sureties having been given on both sides, he fortified the
young Cardinals Party, by joining it with those of his own Faction.

Thus stood the Affair, when the Conclave was filled with Terror, by slipping
in a Note to it, written from good Hands, intimating, that the Cardinals, who
had convened, and held the Council of Pisa, from whence they were forced to
shift into France, had took Shipping at Thoulon, and were coming full sail to
enter the Conclave, before the Election was over. Certain it was, that their
arrival would create great Troubles, and break all the measures taken by
Bibiana, for the Promotion of Cardinal de Medici, because that, on the one
side, the Cardinals coming from France, had been Excommunicated and Degraded by
the late Pope, who had declared his Resolution, to have them burned before the
Church of St. Peter, if they fell into his hands; on the other side, as they
were Old Cardinals, they foresaw that their Co-Brothers, to fortify their
Faction, and render it, by a new Addition, superior to that of the Young,
would by all means let them into the Conclave. And in order to the taking off
the Censures, and restoring them, would use the absolute Power, which the
Conclave pretends to have, during the Vacancy of the Holy See, which would
infallibly cause a Schism. It must needs be owned that never was Conclave so
much at a plunge, as this would have been, had the Cardinals, they expected,
come. But Providence, that destined the Papacy to Cardinal de Medici, eluded
their Purposes by a furious storm, which seized them at their very putting out
of the Port of Thoulon, and suffered them not to go on shore, in any of the
places they desired to touch at, and left them not, till after having split
their Ships, and thrown their Persons upon the Coast of Pisa, where the
Magistrates were devoted to the Cardinal de Medici. These Magistrates knew that
their Patron would not be chosen, if the Old Cardinals got this new
re-inforcement, and for the preventing it, they seized their Guests, under the
Shams of consulting their Preservation, and the Security of the Town.

They gave them to understand, that their Heads had been set at a Price; and
that as Tuscany was very much infested by the Banditti's, there would be People
greedy enough of the two thousand Crowns, that had been promised to whoever
should bring their Heads to Rome, as to way-lay them with a design to kill
them, if they undertook their Journey before the new Pope, upon the point of
being Elected, had moderated his Predecessors Sentence against them. Little did
it avail the sev'n Cardinals to declare, that they would run the risque of
that, and then protest against the Violence done them, and of the Right of
Nations violated in their Persons; they were penned up in a House, surrounded
with strong Guards.

Notwithstanding all this, the Conclave had not ended yet a while, 'cause the
young and old Cardinals persisted in an equal Obstinacy, without an odd
Adventure, which made them jump in an Accord. Cardinal de Medici being
extraordinarily agitated with the number of Visits he made each Night, to all
the Cardinals of his Faction, his Impost hume opened, and the purulent matter
issuing thence, exhall'd such a stink, as infested all the Cells, separated
only by light Boards. The old Cardinals, whose Temperament being less capable
of resisting the Malign impressions of so Corrupted an Air, consulted the
Physicians of the Conclave, about the Course they were to take; and the
Physicians seeing the Cardinal de Medici, and judging of his Constitution,
rather by the evil Humors that issued from his Body, than of the vigor of
Nature in sending them forth, answered, after they had been bribed by Bibiana's
Promises, that the Cardinal de Medici had not a Month longer to live. This Doom
made him Pope, in that the Old-Cardinals, thinking themselves much Cunninger,
than the Young, were willing to indulge them a satifaction, which they presumed
would not be of long continuance. They went and told them, that they yielded at
length to their Obstinacy, on condition the like Compliance should be returned
them some other time. Thus the Cardinal de Medici was chosen Pope, upon a false
insinuation, having not yet completed his thirty sixth year; and as Joy is the
most Sovereign of Remedies, he quickly after recovered so perfect a Health,
that the Old Cardinals had occasion to repent for having been too Credulous.
The new Pope took care to send a Courier to Pisa, with Orders for the seven
Cardinals Release, being there, under a Complimental Confinement; but without
restoring their Money, or Equipage. Insomuch that those Eminencies being
informed of the upshot of the Conclave, and having not wherewith to return into
France, were too happy in quitting their Purple, trudging to Rome in quality of
Supplicants, and laying themselves at the Popes Feet, who absolved them, and
re-instated them in the Sacred College.

Nevertheless, this was not it that caused him to assume the Name of Leo; and
Historian do not guess better, when they make him choose this Title, our of
Emulation to his two Predecessors, the one of whom was called Alexander, and
the other Julius. The truth is, that the Cardinal de Medici, who gave a little
too much way to Predictions, then remembered a Dream his Mother had, while of
him with Child: She imagined her self delivered upon the great Altar of the
Church de la Reparata, of a Lion, beyond Comparison, bigger and finer than
those the Suldan of Egypt had sent to her Husband, but so gentle, that he did
not roar, and so tame, he suffered himself to be Caressed like any little Dog.

The Treasures Julius had heaped up, in ^he Castle of San Angelo, absolutely to
purge Italy of Strangers, by Chacing the Spaniards way from Naples, served Leo
to pay the ^ebts he Contracted, when no more than Cardinal, and to show his
Magnificence, in ^n expense of an hundred thousand Crowns, which the day of his
Coronation cost him. Triumphal Arches were there, at the end of ^^ch Street.
All the Officers of the Court of ^^^e, appeared there in stately Garbs; and ^^e
first time was it they strove with Emula^^t, who should have the most splendid
E^^ipage. The Dukes of Ferrara and Vrbino ^^ficiated then, their Charges of
Prefect of ^^^^e, and General of the Troops of the ^urch, and the People then
received grea^^^ Largesses than they expected. It was just the end of the year,
that the Battle of Ravenna had been fought, and that day seems to have been
chosen, for the better noting the inconstancy of Humane things. The Pope was
mounted upon the same Horse he had had on the day of Battle; and the Duke of
Ferrara had taken care to redeem him from a Cavalier, that rid in his own
Troop, to whom he fell for his Lot of the Plunder; he was never since made use
of, and was carefully fed and looked to. The main of the Ceremony consisted in
the three different Personages, which Giulio de Medici represented that day.
For in the beginning of this Solemnity, he was seen as a Knight of Rhodes,
carrying the Great Guidon of St. John of Jerusalem. Then the Pope put upon his
Head the Cardinals Cap, fallen vacant by the Exaltation of his Holiness, and
purged his Birth of all the Defects where with it was upbraided, by so
Authentic an Act, that it was no longer possible to make him pass for a
Bastard, without calling in question the infallibility of him who declared him
Legitimate. And toward the end of the Cavalcade, the news being come of the
Archbishop of Florence being dead, the Pope gau^ at the same instant the
Archbishopric t^ Giulio.

The late Pope had ordered, at his Deat that, in the first place, the City of
Mode should be purchased of the Emperor Maximilian; and his Successor had a
color to show, he had not needlessly drained the Churches Coffer. It was no
hard matter to conclude the Bargain for an hundred: thousand Ducats, because
that Maximilian was of the temper of other Prodigals, who take up at all Hands,
and use no more Precautions in selling, than in giving: But when Colonel
Viefrust was required to resign the Place, he Commanding in it a German
Garrison, he demanded Indempnifyings, which mounted much higher than the Place
had cost. The Pope endeavored, at first, to bring him to Compliance, by the
way of Negotiation; but seeing the Colonel abated nothing of his Fierceness, he
mated him with a Martial Man, a Person as brave as himself, and incomparably
more Cunning. This was Count Guido de Rangoni, who took his measures with the
Pope, and had occasion given him of. Offense, that he might pretend Cause to be
Malecontent. Then he went directly to Modena, where Viefrust, his Friend,
received him, and afforded him the means of defecting his Garrison, and
shouldering him out of the Town.

The Recovery of Modena brought the Pope into Repute, and gave him occasion to
think of the settlement of his Brother Giuliano. Charles Duke of Savoy had a
Sister to provide for, who began to grow weary of a single Life. She was
already above thirty years old, but none had yet Courted her in Marriage; for
her Brother was too ill a Husband to give her a Portion suitable to her High
Birth. Under these Circumstances the Pope had her sifted, whether she would be
his Sister in-Law, and sent her such rich Presents, that they exceeded what she
was able to bring into the House of Medici. He offered the Duke of Savoy, at
the same time, to take her without Portion, and promised that Duke to render
him so powerful in Italy, that the Duke, desiring nothing better, than to be
rid of his Sister, without her putting him to Charge, gave his Consent. The
Nuptials were extreme magnificent, and the Pope sent as far as Nice, to receive
his Sister-in-Law, and kept her the Train of a Queen. A Promotion was there of
Cardinals, to honor her entry into Rome; and the Pope, that he might dispose
the People to receive her the more cheerfully, diminished the Impost upon Salt.

The Applauses his Liberality produced excited him to Found a College for the
Instruction of Youth, which he meant, at first, to render the famousest in the
Universe: For with great Charges, he prevailed with Niphus to come thither to
teach Philosophy, Christoforo d' Arezzo for Physic, Butigella for Law,
Partasius for Eloquence, and Chalcondilas for the Greek Tongue. His Holiness
was so afraid of having Critics find barbarous Expressions in his Briefs,
which those of some of his Predecessors were full of, that he chose for his two
principal Secretaries, the two Men in the World who wrote best, namely, Bembe,
and Sadolet. He augmented the Library of the Vatican, whose Inspection he
committed to Beroalde the younger, who understood Books admirably well. He
caused the Penulus of Plautus to be represented in two days, the Expense of
which was excessive, and the Actors Postures too free, yet gave no Scandal. The
Pope had so well divined this to be the way to catch the Romans, and hinder
them from inveighing against Abuses, that they erected him Statues for the very
things, which had set them a writing Satyrs against the other Popes.

But the Design Giulio had bequeathed to his Successors, was too Noble to
remain imperfect. The French had been no sooner driven out of the Land of
Milan, than that they made preparations to visit it again. They laid Siege to
Novarra, and that place was then of such Consequence, that by taking it, in it
would they have found the Keys of all the other Cities of the Duchy of Milan
Massimilian Sforza had raised eight thousand Suizzars to relieve it; but as he
wanted Money, his Soldiers threatened to abandon him, before he had led them
into the presence of the Enemies. The Pope, to remedy this mischief, sent him
five and twenty thousand Crowns, which enabled him to win the Battle of
Novarra, and preserved him his Duchy. Then the Pope changed his Method, in
regard of the French; for as his Design was only to hinder them from settling in
Italy, he could not endure that the English and Flemmings should push them too
much on the side of Picardy, though it was he himself that had invited them to
the Undertaking. He influenced them to an Accommodation, by such cogent
Offices, that the Peace was Concluded between Lewis the 12th, on the one side,
and the King of England, and the Archduke, on the other. But his Holiness had
since occasion, to repent of his Mediation, for that the French, who could not
live at rest, had no sooner secured their Frontiers of Picardy, than that they
bent their thoughts to the recovery of Milan. They went too about it with more
wariness than they were wont; and either that their Ministers were become more
refined, or that they had improved by their Losses; they apprehended, that
their Design would never succeed, unless they acted in Concert with the
Genoueses. Octavian Fregossa had an Authority among those free People, little
inferior to the Supreme. Francis the first, who began to Reign in France, got
his Pulse felt by such skillful Emissaries, that he divorced himself from the
Union of the other Princes of Italy, though he had past his Word to the Pope, not
to enter upon any Treaty without his Participation. The Pope believing him
sincere, had bottomed upon his Faith the most important of his Intrigues, which
Merits being known. Several marks of Folly had 'scap'd from Massimilian Sforza,
as gave occasion to believe, that he might be stripped of the Duchy of Milan
without scruple, seeing he was no longer in a Condition to defend it against
the French, nor so much as to Converse among Men. The Pope then contriving his
Brother Giuliano's Fortune, judged there could never be a more favorable
Opportunity offered for his aggrandisement. He opened his mind to the Duke of
Savoy, whose unquiet humor disapproved of nothing that departed from Ambition.
This Duke fully confirmed the Pope in his Resolution, assuring him that the
French would probably consent, that Giuliano de Medici should have the Duchy
Milan, if they were repelled in the Trial they were going to make for its
Recovery.

Upon this Supposition, the Pope imagined, that the Venetians would suffer him
to act against Sforza, nay, and would second him too, in case he would divide,
with them, the spoils of this Prince. Then made he the Proposal of it to the
Ministers of Spain, who pretended to approve it, though they thought it
ridiculous, because their present Interest was only to hinder France from
re-instating it self in the Duchy of Milan, which they saw plainly the Pope
would oppose, with all his Might, as long as he should Cocker in his Mind, the
Chimerical aggrandisement of his Brother. Thus the Pope, after having sounded
his Confederates, became fully persuaded, that there was nothing more to do to
enter Milan, than a well managing Fregossa. He did him all the Favors that the
Court of Rome can grant, without its costing him any thing; I mean, that he
gave him Benefices for his Brothers, and for his Children. It was thought
Fregossa would have yielded to such solid Testimonies of Friendship, if it had
come sooner in the Popes Head to gain him. But he was already too far engaged
with the French, and only waited for their coming, to declare himself in their
behalf. In the mean while, he used all such Demonstrations, as served to keep
the Pope in good Humor, and so craftily deluded him, that the Pope did not
think he had a better Friend in all Italy, than Fregossa; witness the Plan
which his Holiness Communicated to him, of all the Italians meant to do for the
disputing the Passage of the Alps. Giuliano de Medici was Elected General of
their Troops, and advanced as far as Florence, the place appointed for the
Rendezvous of those of the Church. But as he was there preparing a stately
Equipage, and suitable to the Sovereignty he pretended to go take Possession
of, as soon as he should have repelled the French, a Malign Fever Checkmated
him, and bereft him of Life in six Weeks space. His Death did not Chill the
Popes Ambition, it only changed its Object. Alfonsina, his Sister-in-Law, had
already long complained, that he did naught for young Lorenzo de Medici, his
Eldest Brother's only Son, and Head of his House. His Holiness had ever excused
himself upon the particular Obligations he had to Establish Giuliano before all
things; but Giuliano was no more; Lorenzo was already twenty years old, well
made of his Person, and showed much Inclination for Arms.

The Pope Conferred on him Giuliano's Place, in what regarded the Command of
the Troops of the League, but he had neither the Experience nor the Virtues
necessary for such an Employ. His Genius was too slow, and so little capable of
dis-entangling him from Pleasures, when once in them engaged, that he was still
in the Arms of the Courtezans of Florence, when Trimulee, who Commanded the
Vanguard of the French. Army, having caused a Peasant of Piemont to show him a
Path, by which the light Cavalry might cross the Mountains of Nice, he
acquainted la Palice with it, who took Prospero Colonna, in Villa Franca, and
dispersed all the Forces designed to defend the Inlet of Italy.

There needed no more to unhinge the Pope, and make him lose Courage. He
imagined the French were already in Milan, and dispatched away a Man of
Credence, to Negotiate with them. This Agent fell unhappily into the Arms of
the Spaniards, who distrusting his Journey, treated him as a Spy, that they
might have a Pretense to rifle him. They took from him his Instruction, and
uncipher'd it; they thereby penetrated into the Popes Designs, and not willing
to be the Victims of his Accommodation with France, caused their Army to stop
near Trebia, when advancing in long Marches, to join the Forces of the
Confederates.

Lorenzo de Medici, who was at last departed Florence, upon the rumor of
Prosporo Colonna's being taken, and had put himself into Plaisanza with very
brave Troops, pressed the Spaniards to come and join him, or to appoint him a
place in the Duchy of Milan, that might serve him for Rendezvous: But Cardona,
who commanded them, made no positive answer, under color that it would be
exposing his Quality of Viceroy of Naples, to be in the same Camp with Lorenzo
de Medici, whom he should be obliged to obey, as being General of the League.
Thus Cardona not budging, and Lorenzo de Medici not finding himself strong
enough to March, without the assistance of the Spaniards, the Suizzars remained
alone in the Duchy of Milan.

Nevertheless they pretended to defend it, and their Courage augmenting
proportionably, as their Allies diminisht, they with great firmness expected
the French, and fought them at Marignan. They lost seventeen thousand Men in
this Action, and their heat of Liver being dissipated by this blooding, they
abandoned the Milanese with the Field of Battle to the Conquerours, and their
Retreat made the Spaniards decamp, in haste, from near Trebia, to return into
the Kingdom of Naples. The French would have defeated them with small
difficulty, if they had pursued them, but the Pope amused them by this Artifice.

He dispatched to the Most Christian King, the most cunning of his Emissaries,
called Lodovico Canole; and to dispose his Majesty to receive his Agent the
better, he wrote to Lorenzo de Medici to retire out of Parma and Plaisanza, and
to the Inhabitants of those Cities, to go present their Keys to the Conquerours.

Canole found the King already weary of the abode of Italy, and proposed to him
the Interview of Bologna, as the only means to hasten his return into France.
The King accepted it, without making reflection, that his Enemies only sought
thereby to gain time. The Pope arrived first at Bologna, to receive there the
King, who came thither two days after, accompanied with eight thousand Horse.
Chancellor du Prat drew up there the Plan of the Concordate, with Secretary
Graffis; and this is the only particularity I relate of this Intrigue, because
I have found no other that has escaped the knowledge of the famous Monsieur de
Puits; and besides, the Archbishop d'Aix-Genebrard had made a Treatise of it,
which passes for Anecdote.

Then was brought upon the Board a Project of a League between the Holy See and
France; but the Pope had his Answer ready. He let the King know, that it became
neither the Gravity, nor Decorum of a Sovereign Pontife, to break his Word with
the Spaniards, for the sixteen Months that he was bound to remain still united
with them, but that this time should be no sooner expired, but that he would do
all that his Majesty should desire of him. The King was satisfied with this
Excuse, because that being still young, and without Experience, he imagined
that he should never be soon enough in France, to receive the Applauses, which
the Victory of Marignan, and the reduction of the Duchy of Milan had deserved.

Thus ended the Interview of Bologna; and a Body may say, that the Pope
preserved, by Cunning, his Predecessors Conquest to the Holy See, and the
Kingdom of Naples to the Spaniards. His Holiness would needs pass through
Florence, in his way to Rome; and as his Countrymen had then improved
Architecture, Sculpture, and Painting, to the highest point they could attain,
they made him an entrance that will never have the like. Giacomo de Sandro made
the Triumphal Arch of St. Peter's Gate, where, all that Fancy could add to
History, was so happily employed, that the Pope, who understood Painting
admirably well, upon his viewing it, fell into a kind of Ecstasy, from whence
they had much a do to rouse him, to get him advance. The Work was so much the
more singular, that Baccio de Monte Lupo had had a hand in it, as well as
Sandro. But as their manner was quite different, easy was it to distinguish,
to their very least strokes, and to render to each the Justice he deserved.

Giuliano de Tasso had made another Arch before the Church of St. Felice, whose
Decoration was no less Charming for its oddness, than for its Beauty. As if
this had not been business enough for him, he had undertaken and finished so
lively and capricious a Representation of the Adventures of Romulus, that the
Pope went thither two or three times to see it. Antony de St. Gal made, upon
the place of the Lords, an Octogone Temple, whose Design was new. And the
Giant, which Bandivelli put in the Gallery of the Palace, could not be better
proportioned, notwithstanding his enormous bigness.

The Triumphal Arch of Gramaccis, between the Abbey and Palace of Podesta,
expressed the Marriage of the Arts with the Virtues, and that of Rosso a Canto
di Bissierre was marvelous for the diversity in its Figures. In a word, Andre
del Sarto disguised the Facciata de Santa Maria del Fiore so, as that she
seemed all Marble, by a kind of Mastic applied upon Cloth, which Lorenzo de
Medici had invented.

Alfonsina degrees l'Orsini, residing at Florence, took advantage of the good
humor, the sight of so many inimitable Objects had created in the Pope, to
excite him to the aggrandisement of her Son. She had long already tied the
Duchy of Vrbino as a Prey; and she tormented her Brother-in-Law, to give the
investitute thereof to young Lorenzo, upon the score that this Duchy was
absolutely for his Bienseance, and a Neighbor of the State of Florence. But
she had never been able to obtain any thing in Giuliano de Medici's Lifetime,
because he had ever opposed whoever attempted on that side, whether he had an
abhorrence to the Consenting to so visible an Injustice, or that he pretended
acknowledgment to a Prince, who had given him a Retreat, during his Exile. But
no sooner were his Eyes closed, than that Alfonsina degrees l'Orsini redoubled her
Instances. The Pope had too much Wit, than to be ignorant of the injury he
should do his Reputation, and the Scandal he should give the Christian World,
by diversting one of his Vassals without Cause. He resisted some time, but at
length two things prevailed with him to give way. The first, His
Sister-in-Law's extreme Importunity, who left him not one moment at quiet, till
she had got him to fall out with the Duke d'Vrbino. And the second, That the
Duke had not been careful to improve his Friendship before he was Pope, nor so
much as since. And now follow Circumstances relating to this point, which well
merit being known.

I have already remarked, that he had used his utmost efforts to obstruct the
Medici's from being restored in Florence, but this was not his greatest Crime.
He had filled others to the Account, namely, that being General of the Church,
and by consequence bound to pursue its Interests, he had nevertheless sent into
France, the Count Balthazar Castillonne, for the negotiating there an
Accommodation apart, in Execution of which, he had hindered the Soldiers of the
Confederate Army, from passing upon his Territories, for fear of their being at
the Battle of Ravenna, and had denied giving passage to those that had been
beaten there: Moreover, at the last irruption of the French into Italy, he had
accepted the Lieutenancy of the Troop of the League, under Giuliano de Medici
appointed General: Yet when sickness had hindered Giuliano from Command in
them, and that young Lorenzo had been put into his room, the Duke d'Vrbino had
resus'd to serve under him, and alleged, for excuse, his not having consented
to obey Giuliano, than on the score of Friendship, which gave him reason to
believe, that he would have shared the Generalship with him; but that having no
peculiar engagement with Lorenzo, and their humors, on the contrary, being
incompatible, it was to be feared they would not pass two days together without
a Broil and Disturbance.

This Carriage had extraordinarily mortified the Pope, in that the Duke
d'Vrbino, showed a two visible Contempt of his Nephew: Yet he would not have
dared to complain, if the Duke had not added Injury to Disdain, by detaining in
his state, the brave Companies of Ordonnance, that had been levi'd, instead of
sending them at least to the Rendezvous, since he went not thither himself.
This is what he was upbraided with, in the Manifest published against him, when
War was declared upon him. It was no difficult matter for Lorenzo de Ceri, who
commanded the Army of the Church to despoil him; because that not having at
that time any Soldiers to defend his State, and suspecting the principal aim
was upon his Person, because his Death would have secured the Duchy of Vrbin
to the House of Medici; he durst not Coop himself up in any Place, for fear of
being immediately there invested, and securing what he had most precious,
accepted the azyle offered him by the Duke of Mantoua.

The Pope being flusht with the easiness of this Conquest, undertook another,
which cost him as little trouble, though it failed little of proving fatal to
him. Pandolfo Petrucci, who Commanded at Sienna, had afforded him a Retreat,
during his Exile, and his Son the Cardinal had served for an Instrument, to
advance him to the Supreme Dignity of the Church, by forming the Faction of the
young Cardinals, who obstinately refused having any other Pope than him; yet
the Pope chose rather to fall into the blackest ingratitude, than lose the
occasion that was offered, of joining the state of Sienna to that of Florence:
But he went not about it at first by main force, he contented himself with
kindling in Sienna a Sedition, which, at length, constrained Petrucci to depart
thence, and put in his room his mortal Enemy, devoted to the House of Medici.

The Republic of Lucca had not been better treated, had not the Emperor,
Maximilian the First, been in Italy with an Army, wherein were reckoned above
sixty thousand Soldiers, with design to chase the French out of the Duchy of
Milan, stopped the Popes Progresses. His Holinesses Troops were very brave and
sprightly, he had promised them to the Most Christian King, who had demanded
them with so much the more earnestness, in that he could not so suddenly send
into the Duchy of Milan, Forces sufficient to dispute the entrance of it with
the Germans. But the Pope judged the time of declaring himself not to be yet
come; he re-inforc'd his Troops, and caused them to march into Lombardy, under
Bibiana's Conduct, who then possessed all the Confidence of his Master. The
secret instruction that was given him, boar, that he should rest satisfied, at
the first, with being a Spectator of the Tragedy, then going to be acted: but
that upon the unravelling of the piece, he should not too long defer throwing
himself into the Party that Fortune favored, that so he might boast of having
given the last mortal blow to the Conquered.

Bibiana was a good Player in all kinds, yet he could not shuffle so cunningly,
but that his Game was discovered. The Emperor advanced, without Obstacle, as
far as the City of Milan, where the Constable of Bourbon, and the Marshall de
Trimulee, were resolved to sustain the Siege with their best Troops. The
Germans had laid it, in hopes the Citizens would declare for them, and
constrain the French Garrison to Capitulate. But Trimulee made the Soldiers
live with so much moderation, that they gave not their Hosts any occasion of
Discontent. Thus the Siege spinning out into length, the most Christian King's
Ministers had opportunity to debauch Staff and Puts, two of the principal
Officers of the eighteen thousand Suizzars, that composed the Flower of the
Emperors Infantry. These two Leaders, after having made sure of their
Companions, went to Maximilian's Tent, and demanded of him the Arrears that
were owing to their Nation. Maximilian was so prodigal, that he never had Money
in his Coffers; but, in recompense, he was so civil, that his Creditors had
much ado to deny him time. His Caresses, however, could not in the least
prevail upon the two Suizzars; on the contrary, they put them into a Passion,
and made them let fly such words, as cast Maximilian into a pannique Fear. He
imagined they had contrived to deliver him up to the French, in the same manner
they had formerly sold Lodovico Sforza; and the horror of such a Treatment
being stronger than his Reason, he determined of a sudden to fly away toward
Trent, and did so accordingly, without being followed by more than his
Domestics. His Army, thus wanting a Head, disbanded of it self, and the French
being thus delivered, bent their thoughts to take revenge on the Pope, who had
failed them in time of need.

They helped the Venetians to recover the places, which the City of Cambray had
taken from them; and the Garrisons which evaluated those places, not knowing
what to do, suffered themselves to be persuaded by a French Emissary, who
advised them to side with the Duke d'Vrbino. To these were joined disowned
Troops, Collected from all Parts; and the Duke d'Vrbino placing himself at
their Head, lead them, with an incredible Expedition, before his Capital City.
Giulio Vitelli Commanded therein a Garrison of three thousand Soldiers, for
Lorenzo de Medici; but the Women and their Children had no sooner heard of the
Duke's being at their Gates, but the Sedition taking fire, became so great in a
quarter of an hours space, that Vitelli, in spite of all his endeavors, was
forced to Capitulate to go out with the White Staff.

Lorenzo de Medici received the tidings of this alteration at Rome, whither he
had brought back his Uncle's Troops; he caused them to march, with all
diligence, toward Vmbria, and met with the Duke of Vrbin at the passage of a
River. He might have defeated the half of his Men, if he would have been
content with a Demi-Victory; but as he had a great advantage over Vrbino's
Army, in what related to the Number and Discipline of his Soldiers, it made
him rather inclined to wait for the occasion of giving him a total defeat, but
never after could he meet with such an opportunity, for that the Duke d'Vrbino,
who had many of the parts of a great Captain, whatever is said of him by
Guiechiardin, stood upon his Defense in the Water, with a Pike in his hand; and
holding firm with his choicest Forces, while the rest filed off behind, saved
all to him belonging, even to the very Baggage, and would venture nothing more
afterward, and rested satisfied with having recovered his State. Nevertheless
there was a Rencounter, wherein Lorenzo de Medici, advancing too far, received
so dangerous a Wound in his Head, as compelled him to cause himself to be
carried to Rome, that he might be the better looked to.

His Army had no sooner seen him depart, but that it disbanded of it self; and
the Pope foreseeing his Reputation upon the point of being lost, if thus
frustrated in his Designs upon Vrbin, he used all possible means to accomplish
it in the manner projected. He knew the Duke d'Vrbino had not a fund to pay his
Troops, and that he was even indebted whole Musters to the Spanish Regiments of
Suarez and Maldonet.

These two Colonels had sufficiently uttered their minds, that they only served
for Money, as to be deemed capable of an Infidelity; and several Emissaries had
order to feel their Pulses. In a short time they agreed upon the Reward to be
given them, for delivering up the Duke d'Vrbino; and for fear of their failing
in their word, his Holinesses Emissaries, without their Participation, treated
with a Captain of Horse, of the same Nation, Cabille, by name, who promised to
assassinate the Duke, at the first Review that should be made. Either the one or
the other of these two Conspiracies could not not have missed of speeding, if the
Duke of Atria, having been made privy, had not revealed them to the Duke
d'Vrbino, who showed much Judgment and Courage in so surprising a Conjuncture.
He assembled his Army under Color, of leading it to an Expedition, at that
very instant to be executed. Those of the Conspiracy stood in their Ranks, and
the Duke having perceived them, made an Eloquent Discourse, with design to
reproach them with their perfidiousness. He related all the Circumstances of
the Plot, he read Letters written with their own Hands, which Convicted them to
all Intents, and demanded with a fierce and resolute tone, that those who had
no share in their Crimes, should do him Justice.

This Harangue produced such a hurly burly in the Soldiers minds that heard
it, that the Accomplices might have had time to escape, if they had listed; but
as they were resolute Fellows, instead of being seized with Fear, at the
knowledge of their Plot's being discovered, they made haste to execute this
their enterprise; they fell to uniting their Regiments into a Body, and a
surrounding the place where the Duke was mounted, but they found themselves
environed with the Cavalry they did not in the least distrust.

Federigo Bossolo, a Prince of the House of Mantoua, who Commanded this Horse,
had quitted the Pope's Service, because Lorenzo de Medici had taken from him
the General Lieutenancy of his Army, which had been conferred on him by the
Pope, He feared falling into his hands, as knowing Lorenzo's humor to be
implacable, when it had been once provoked; and this reason engaged him to save
the Duke d'Vrbino. In a moment did he rally his Troops, spurred and fired them
with Honor, animated them against the Criminals, and persuaded them to stop
'em. And the Spanish Infantry seeing they were not strong enough to defend
their Colonels, delivered them up, and the Horse forthwith shot, and put them
to the Sword.

A Month after the Pope ran the same flanger the Duke d'Vrbino had avoided. I
have already noted Petrucci to have been expelled Sienna, though his Son, the
Cardinal had Contributed more than the rest, to his Holinesses Election. The
Father supported his Exile with sufficient constancy; but the Son being
resolved, at any rate, to be revenged, did, for a long while, carry a Dagger
under his Robes, with intent to kill the Pope in full Consistory, whither he
came without Guards, as imagining it would be easy for him to escape through
the Corsi, before they knew of the perpetration of the Fact. But he since
changed his Mind, as to the place; and whether his Heart failed him at the
Execution, or that he found more Obstacles in it, than he had imagined, he
chose rather to dispatch the Pope, when a Hunting, where he sometimes wandered
so far from Company, that he exposed his Person to the possibility of being
stabbed. But there needed so many Circumstances to concur at the same time, to
produce this opportunity, that it was neglected as soon as the former.

Cardinal Petrucci had contrived, in the third place, to form a Faction in the
Sacred College; and the first he sifted was Cardinal Adrian de Corneto, who
fell under the delusion of the most amazing Prediction, that has been heard of,
since Soothsayers were in the World. This Prelate was born upon the shore of
the Tuscan Sea, in the City, whence he borrowed his Name. His Parents were so
poor, as constrained 'em to put him out to Service, but he had the good luck of
meeting with a Master, that caused him to study, and furnished him with the
means to pass through all the Ecclesiastical Dignities, without being otherwise
indebted for his Fortune than to the Charity of the Author of his Education,
and to his own Merit. Not long before had he been to revisit the place of his
Nativity, where knowing a Magician to be in the Mountains of the Appenine, he
had the Curiosity to try, whether there was any certainty in his Predictions.
To him went he in a disguised Garb, and consulted him about some Persons of his
Acquaintance* whose adventures he was as well informed of as his own. The
Wizzard gave him such Pertinent answers, as produced him the occasion of
speaking of himself. He showed him his Horoscope, without telling him whose it
was and asked him what would become of the Person born under such a
Constellation? If it is a Man, (replied the Magician) he will at least be
Cardinal, and if it is a Woman, she will come very near the Throne, if she does
not ascend it.

The Cardinal Corneto desired to know no more upon his own Article, and slily
turning his Discourse, engaged the Magician to speak of the Pope. The Magician
did assure he would dye young, and of an unexpected Death. Then the Cardinal
was tempted to enquire after the Fate of his Successor: And the Devil only
waiting for this, to punish him for his Curiosity, told him, through the
Wizzard's Mouth, That the Conclave that should be held after Pope Leo the
10th's Death, should be long and factious, but that at last they would Elect a
Cardinal, named Adrian; that this Adrian should be of very low Birth, and would
gradually mount to all the Dignities of the Church, without any Recommendation;
and through his own sufficiency; that he would be sixty years of Age at the
Moment of his Exaltation, and not provided with any Benefice.

It must needs be owned, that the Devil was never more ingenuous to deceive,
than in this occasion. All these Circumstances suited admirably well with
Cardinal Corneto, and with him only in the Sacred College. He was of a much
lower Birth than all the other Cardinals; he had mounted through all the Degrees
inferior to that Dignity; he had been Chaplain, Canon, Dean and Bishop,
without ever having had two Benefices at a time; he past, without
Contradiction, for the Learnedest Member of the Consistory* he had never made
his Court to any Man for Preferment, no, not so much as to his first Patron:
Fortune went to seek him in his Chamber, and at his very Books. Those who had
done him good, had had regard only to his Merit; for as to outward advantages,
he was not possessed of any. In a word, his Name was Adrian; and this last
Circumstance of the Soothsayers Prediction, seemed to point him out, as well
as that of his Age, seeing he wanted but three Months, of having accomplished
his sixty'th year.

He took leave of the Magician, more satisfied than he went thither, but was
much more pleased when, after his return to Rome. Cardinal Petrucci solicited
him to enter into the Conspiracy. He imagined that by this means it was, that
Destiny began to labor for his Exaltation, and believed it so much the more
strongly, as that the time drew near, that had been foretold him, and that he
had the hint of the Pope's being to be dispatched after an unexpected manner.
However as Cardinal Corneto was considerate and wary in all his Actions, he
would enter into no positive Engagement, nor give any Token that might serve to
Convict him upon occasion. He contented himself with assuring Cardinal
Petrucci, that he would not reveal his Enterprise to any body, nor would he go
about to cross it.

Cardinal Sauli, who was afterward wheedled to be an Accomplice, took the like
Course, but out of another consideration, he had promised his Suffrage to
Bibiand, for Cardinal de Medici, upon the hopes Bibiana had given him of the
first vacant Benefice, which he should think worthy of his acceptance; and
Bibiana pretended Cardinal de Medici had ratified the Promise, yet it had not
any effect; and though the first Benefice, having been disposed of to Giulio de
Medici, Commander of Rhodes, this did not offend Sauli, as not thinking it
strange, that the Pope had broke his word with him, in consideration of the
only Person of the House of Medici, that was an Ecclesiastic, and designed for
the Province of Cardinal Nephew; but when other Rich Arch-bishopricks sell
vacant, and he had demanded them, and yet were refused him, and conferred on
others, who had indeed served in the Conclave, but not so usefully as he, he
was extremely piqu'd; and Cardinal Petrucci so improved this Resentment of
Sauli's, for his being denied, that he agreed to the Revenge that was brooding
in his behalf, without his meddling in the matter.

Cardinal Riario was the third that entered into the Plot, through a Motive of
hatred against the House of Medici, which lasted since the danger he had run at
Florence, when the Pazzi's Conspiracy broke forth, and through a Sentiment,
common enough among the Italians, that the Pope, how kind soever in his
behavior to him, would never forget his Uncle's Death, nor his Father's Wound,
to which Riario had at least served for a Pretext. Moreover he promised himself
to be Elected Pope, since, being Dean of the Cardinals, and having more
Benefices than any other, to distribute among them, they would give him then
Votes; besides, his having brought himself into Credit at Rome, by his vast
Expense* and by the magnificent Palace he had there caused to be built.

The last was Cardinal Soderini, who suffered himself to be cajoll'd with the
hopes of re-instating his Brother in the perpetual Dictatorship of Florence,
which seemed to him easy, when the Pope was once dead, and that Cardinal
Petrucci's Father should have recovered his Authority in Sienna.

The Conspiracy being thus formed, the measures they took to Execute it were as
follow. They made sure of a famous Operator of Italy, called Verselli, a Man
lucky in Curing Wounds, and handled them so delicately, that he hardly gave any
pain, such subtilty had he in his Fingers, and pleasingness in the performance
of his Profession. This Fellow was extraordinarily Debaucht, and delighted in
committing the blackest Actions, but he did them with so many Precautions, that
they had never been able to surprise him, and his Reputation was whole as yet.
His principal Talent lay for Venerial Distempers, and this it was introduced
him into Cardinal Petrucci's Familiarity. He proposed to him poisoning the
Pope, by a way that could not be discovered. For the better making it
understood, I must repeat that the Pope had had an Imposthume, which burst, but
whose Wound was not wholly closed; and there did remain a hole, through which the
matter gleeted from time to time, either that the Disease had been too great to
be wholly Cured, or that the Physicians had judged, that Nature ought to be
suffered to discharge it self that way, which a had made of it self; and indeed
the Pope died as soon as it closed. Wherefore he needed a very able Chyrurgeon,
that should pay him constant attendance; and as the Bands were to be changed as
often as he was dressed, nothing was more easy than to poison them, without
its being perceived, because the ordure, wherewith they would be covered, would
hinder the Venom from being seen.

Cardinal Petrucci approved the Invention, and set a going his Intrigues, to
work the Popes privy Chyrurgeon out of his Place, so to put Vercelli in his
room. The thing did not seem difficult; for besides that the Pope's Chyrurgeon
was none of the ablest; and that they had it from Persons well informed, that
his Holiness sometimes complained of the roughness of his Hand, he had the
misfortune to displease such of the Servants, as were most in their Patrons
favor. And, in effect, Giulio Blanci, the Chamberlain, took upon him to
procure him his Consent, at the first solicitation made him, by a Man trusty
to Cardinal Petrucci; and the Cardinals who had the most intimacy with the
Pope, did assure, that there was nothing more easy, than the bringing it
about. The Cardinal Nephew, though a Man of great subtilty of Wit, and a
pretender to Sagacity, yet was made a Cully; for they induced him to make the
proposal of it to his Uncle, without knowing its tendency. But the Pope showed
more firmness on that side, than was expected; for he answered, that though his
Chyrurgeon were still more incapable and unskillful, yet would he keep him,
because he could not resolve upon discovering himself before a new Chyrurgeon,
and concluded with saying, That he had rather endure his own, than change.

Nevertheless, they did not despair of making His Holiness condescend to it, at
the long run; and I do not question, but that he would, at length, have
complied with their desires, had they persever'd in their Persuasions. But
while they were contriving new means to introduce Verselli into the Pope's
Family, news came to Rome, that the Duke d'Vrbino, after having quasht the
Factions of his Army, Conducted it to Sienna, in order to re-invest Petrucci in
that Government, in hopes that this re-instation would help him to chase the
House of Medici from Florence.

The Pope, seeing the Consequences of this March, dreaded losing what he had
most dear; and supposing that the Duke d'Vrbino ^ou'd not have framed so hardy
a Project, without the participation of Cardinal Petruc^^ who had not dared to
appear at Rome, and ^^id at a Country House, since the Disgrace befall'^ his
Family. His Holiness had him so narrowly watched, that a Letter was intercepted,
which he wrote to Antonio Nini, his Secretary in the Court of Rome. They found
it all in Cipher; and this Circumstance augmented the Pope's Suspicion and
Curiosity; for without this it had been slighted. The Art of Decyphering was
not yet in use, and the Pope could only learn from Nini the tenor of the
Letter. His Holiness sent for Nini; and he, instead of setting a good Face
on it, gave so many tokens of Surprise and Fear, that the Pope pressed him the
more; and as he continued obstinate, denying Compliance with his Holiness, he
threatened to put him upon the Rack. He appeared then so unhinged, that he gave
occasion to execute upon him, what had been only proposed to fright him; the
Instruments of Torture were brought, and Nini had no sooner seen them, but that
he discovered the place where he had hid the Cipher, which Cardinal Petrucci
had left with him. Thus other Mysteries came to light than those they hunted
after.

Not that the Conspiracy was, in this Letter, so plainly coucht, as to be
understood, but so many Particularities were there, which served to hint it,
that the Pope was advised nevertheless to put Nini to the Rack, though he had
delivered the Cipher. And indeed they began torment him, but on the first pain
he felt, he revealed all he knew; and as his Detention had been so secret, that
his very Servants knew not what was become of him, he having been called out in
the name of one of his Intimate Friends* The Pope did not despair of decoying
Cardinal Petrucci and Verselli, the two principal Accomplices, in the Snare
prepared for them, though absent at that time. And this Contrivance was used to
draw them into ^^e Noose. Inquiry was made, in what place Verselli resided at
that time, and they were informed, that the Gonfalionere of Florence, called
Gori, had sent for him to Cure him of a secret Malady: This Magistrate was
devoted to the House of Medici; and the Pope, who trusted in him, sent him
word, that he might make use of Verselli; but that he should cause him to be
watched with so much diligence, as that he might not escape out of his reach,
that so he might be able to restore him in due time, and when he required him
at his hands.

The Commission was difficult to accomplish, because Verselli was to be
secured, without his knowing of it himself. But Gori was so dextrous, that he
fullfill'd his directions, by causing him to come and lodge at his House, and
by furnishing him with sufficient Recreations in his own Family, so as not to
be obliged to go seek them elsewhere* What made the Pope act in this manner
was, that he had a mind to attract Cardinal Petrucci to Rome, a thing not to be
thought of, if it appeared that he had secured Verselli, by reason that the
Cardinal would instantly have harbored a suspicion of the Conspiracy's being
discovered. Thus, while Verselli was unwittingly a Prisoner at Florence, the
Craftiest Emissary of the Court of Rome was sent to the Cardinal, to prevail
with him to come thither. The Pretext was, that the Pope seeing his Nephew
wounded, and being not able to hinder his Troops from disbanding, or to debauch
those of the Duke d'Vrbino, his Holiness was no longer in a Condition to
maintain his Authority in Sienna, and resolved to re-establish Petrucci with
Decorum in that Town, before he seemed to do it out of Compulsion. This Fiction
was so conformable to the posture of Affairs at that time, that Cardinal
Petrucci, with all his shrewdness took it for truth; and the Pope having sent
to him thereupon, that he only waited his Return, to contrive with him the
manner, by which Old Petrucci was to return into Sienna. He suffered himself to
be persuaded to take a Journey to Rome, and to present himself at the Popes
Antichamber, where he was seized and clapped immediately into a Dungeon. A
Courier was forthwith dispatched away to Florence, where Verselli was nabb'd
playing at Dice, and, under a good Guard, brought away to Rome.

As Cardinal Petrucci's Detention could not be secret, the Pope had given Order
to assemble the Consistory, as soon as he had set Foot in the Palace, and all
the Cardinals, then at Rome, met accordingly, thinking their Convention was to
regulate the affairs of Sienna. But they were very much startled, to see the
Pope's severe Countenance, and to hear his Holinesses Speech, which could not
be more spirited, and more touching. He exagerated the Benefits he had heaped
upon the Sacred College, for the making them the better conceive the
Ingratitude. Then he spoke of a Conspiracy framed against his Life, by some
Cardinals, without further explaining his Mind. He concluded with offering to
pardon them, if they owned the Crime at that very instant, and asked his Pardon
in the presence of their Fraternity; and on the contrary, protesting to abandon
them to the utmost rigours of the secular Arm, if they neglected the moment he
now granted them of Clemency.

Cardinals Soderini and Corneto rose up from their Seats, and prostrated
themselves at the Popes Feet, who pardoned them, in consideration of a Fine of
ten thousand Crowns each. This slight Contravention to his Word, joined to the
signs of Indignation, which appeared in spite of him in his Face, made
Cardinal Corneto judge it convenient, to trust it only with reserve. He went
his ways home to shift his own eminency into a Disguise, he put on the Garb of
a Reaper, and slunk out of Rome thus ridiculously travesty'd. He only beat the
hoof by Night, till he came into his own Country, where he spent the rest of
his days in changing his Forms and lurking Holes, so strongly was he still
persuaded, notwithstanding what had happened, that the effect of the
Predictions I have mentioned, was inevitable. Yet nothing of what he expected
came to pass, though the Magician had not told him one syllable of a Lie; for the
Pope died young, and of an unforeseen Death. His Successor, called Adrian, was
the Son of a Flemming Bear-Brewer, that had raised his Fortune by his Learning,
and possessed but one Bishopric, which the Emperor, whose Tutor he had been,
made him, as it were by force, accept of. All the Equivocation in the matter,
and what deluded Cardinal Corneto, lay in Adrian's not being yet of the Sacred
College, nor was he admitted of it, till the Promotion I am going to relate.

Cardinal Soderini banished himself to Fundi, where he died of Melancholy; and
Cardinal Riario was neither made a Prisoner, nor under the prosecution of the
Law, for the same Reason that had engaged him in the Conspiracy: For the Pope
being afraid that he should be upbraided, with having revenged the ancient
Quarrels of his House, if he put to Death that Old Cardinal, who refused to ask
his Pardon, contented himself with exacting from him a hundred thousand Crowns,
on Condition he should go abide in the Kingdom of Naples, where he had many
Benefices.

Thus Cordinal Sauli was the only Person taken into Custody, at his going out
of the Consistory, and popt into a Dungeon. Thus far the Pope had acted in the
Formalities, but so did he not continue; for instead of Commissioning
Cardinals, for the Trial of their Brothers, or nominating at least two of them,
to assist at drawing up the Malefactors Processes, till it was time to give the
Verdict in the wonted manner, the Sacred College was interdicted the
cognizance of it, and all the Accomplices were indifferently referred, without
distinction of Quality, to the common Judges for Criminal Matters, who in a
little time made them undergo a most severe Justice.

Cardinal Petrucci, after having had his Members dislocated on the Rack, was
strangled in the Dungeon, by an Ethiopian, called Orlando; and his Secretary
Nini underwent the like Fate. The Operator Verselli was drawn upon a Hurdle,
Hanged, his Flesh tort with Pincers, and Quartered. Cardinal Sauli ran a risque
of his Life, if he had been less beloved by the Popes Eldest Sister. This fair
Lady, who had an Almighty Credit over her Brother's Dispositions, threw her
self at his Feet, and would not be got up, till she had obtained Sauli's Pardon.

What absolutely incensed the Sacred College against the Pope was, That
excessive Sums were exacted from the Parties that were Pardoned; for the way to
punish Persons in their Purses, having not been as yet practiced at the Court
of Rome, they imagined that those who were made to redeem their Lives were
innocent, and only put into the List of the Conspirators, as being known to be
Rich, and that the Pope's Coffers wanted Money to continue the War of Vrbin.
The Complaints the Cardinals made hereof, exasperated the Pope, and made him
declare, he would return no more into the Consistory, since it was only full of
his Enemies, till such time as he had introduced such trusty Persons in it, as
that his Life might be therein safety: And, indeed, in a few days after he made
a Promotion of one and thirty Cardinals. In this number eight there were of
high Birth, the principal of whom, was Pompey Colonna, who proved the most
dangerous Enemy, the House of Medici has ever had; the rest were divided; for
some of 'em were barely indebted, for their Dignity, to their own Merit. Others
had the Cap out of Favor, as the Pope's Physician, who proposing his Son the
Evening before the Promotion, and his Holiness excusing it, upon his having
already given his Word to thirty Persons; the Physician replied to him, That as
matters then stood, it would not be thought the more strange at Rome, that the
Promotion was of one and thirty Persons, than if it were just thirty. In short,
some there were that dishonored the Sacred Purple, by having been chosen out
of lower Motives.

In the mean while Cardinal Bibiana, who Commanded what remained of the
Ecclesistick Troops, in the Duchy of Vrbin, called out for Succors. He had to
do with an Enemy, who left him not at quiet; and his Soldiers, spighted at
obeying a Man of such low Extraction, as Bibiana, threatened to kill him, when
he made them undergo the least hardship. The Pope writ throughout all Europe
for a re-inforcement, and at length set his Army again on foot, though it did not
answer the hopes he had conceived of its Performances; for it was beaten before
Pizarro; and the Duke d'Vrbino was upon the point of ruining it to all Intents,
when the Pope renewed the design of spiriting over his Troops. He employed for
this purpose eight hundred thousand Crowns, and the subtle Hugo de Montadez was
his Instrument in this Project. This shrewd Spaniard, if ever there was one,
who began then only to enter upon the great Employments, through which he pusht
on since, by all manner of ways, did so well adjust his Intrigues, that the
Duke d'Vrbino came to be abandoned on a sudden, when he least expected it: and
all the Favor afforded him by the Deserters, was leave to retire, and take
along his Movables and his Library.

Then the Pope invested anew Lorenzo de Medici with the Duchy of Vrbin, and
solicited Francis the First, to give him in Marriage the Heiress of the House
of Bologna, which was granted him. The Duke of Albania performed the
Negotiation, and was promised, in Recompense, to be made General of the first
League, that should be framed against the Turks. A stately entrance was made
the Princess at Florence, where the Match was Consummated; but she dyed nine
Months after in Childbed, of Katharine of Medices, who is to be the principal
Subject of this Work. The News of her Decease was brought to Rome, in the time
a Courier arrived, that with amazement filled the Town. He had been dispatched
by the Republic of Venice, and brought news, that Selim had seized on Egypt
and Syria.

This Augmentation of Power disposed the Christian Princes, to form a League
with the Pope, against the Infidels. The Plan that was drawn of it, could
neither be more Regular, nor more Magnificent. The Emperor living then in a
profound Peace, and, by Consequence, able to bring on foot an infinite number
of Soldiers, was to invade Thrace, through Bulgaria, with the Forces of Germany,
and the Cavalry of Poland and Hungary. Francis the 1st. promised to embark at
Brindi, with the Croisacles of France and Italy, which amounted to above two
hundred thousand Men, for the making a Descent into Albania, where the People
waited for an occasion to Revolt. The English, Spaniards, and Portugals, had
undertook to fit out two hundred Galleys, which should bear away for
Constantinople, where the Pope would go in Person with a hundred other Galleys,
of which he would be at half-charge with the State of Venice. But a Medecin
unseasonably taken, dissipated this vast Project. The Emperor Maximilian had
got a fancy to take a Purge, at his return from Wild-Boar Hunting, and this
cost him his Life; or that his Humors were too much stirred and fermented, or
that he had done too much Exercise the day before. Two Illustrious Rivals put in
to succeed him, namely, Charles his Grandson, and Francis the First. But they
went to work in two different manners. Charles backed his Pretentions with a
good Army, which appeared in the Low Countries; and Francis rested satisfied
with buying with ready Money, the Suffrages of the Electors.

The Pope sent Roberto Orsini to the Diet, to prevent the Election of either of
these Candidates; and Orsini, the most dexterous Negotiator of his time, did
not remain long at Francfort, without penetrating, by his wonderful acuteness,
into the secret of the Affair. He wrote to his Holiness in a Dispatch, that
cannot be sufficiently Commended, that the Germans paulm'd upon Francis the
First, by taking the Gold and Silver of France, and that not one Elector was
there, but would refuse him his Vote, when the time came to give it; that
indeed less Repugnance did they harbor in their Minds for Prince Charles, but
that neither would it go on his ^ide, provided there were upon the Rank, a
German Prince capable of expending at a Rate fitting to uphold the Majesty of
the Empire. Upon this Foundation the Pope endeavored to undeceive Francis the
First, and banish out of his mind his Pretension to the Empire, by showing him
the impossibility of his attaining it. He discovered to him the Elector's
Intentions, and added that he had nothing more to do, than traverse, by all
manner of means, the Election of Charles, because that Italy and France might
well harbor all manner of Apprehensions from a Prince, who could employ all
the Iron in Germany, with the Gold the Indies began to and him in abundance.
His Holiness farther observed, that the surest means to hinder him, was to
Cabal for the Marquis of Brandenbourg, who had already his own Suffrage in
Quality of Elector, and held himself assured of that of his Brother, the
Archbishop of Mentz, that the five other Electors would declare themselves
infallibly for him, as soon as they should see him backed by France, and the
Holy See; but that without these two Protections they would lift up Charles to
the Empire.

The Most Christian King did not receive his Office with the same sincerity it
was paid, so difficult a thing is it, for a Man to be persuaded by the same
Persons, by whom he thinks he has already been deceived. His Majesty fancied it
to be an Artifice used to make him renounce his own Glory. His answer spoke him
a Prince, that thought himself Cocksure of attaining his Aims; and the Pope
seeing his obstinacy, did no longer doubt, but that Charles would be chosen,
and unwilling by Consequence, unseasonably to incense him any longer by
Fruitlesly cross-biting his Election, he wrote to Roberto Orsini, to promote
and favor his Pretenses, which he did with so good a Grace, that Charles was
obliged to his Holiness for his Offices, or at least he so himself expressed.

In the height of this Intrigue, the Popreceiv'd the most sensible Affliction
he was capable of, by losing young Lorenzo de Medici, his Nephew, who dyed of
an Intemperance. He left but one Legitimate Daughter, and a Bastard Son. Thus
there only remained of the Masculine Line of Cosmo the old, the Pope, and
Cardinal de Medici. The Cardinal de Medici was not in a Capacity to raise up
his House again; for besides his being a Priest, his Birth lay exposed to so
much Cavil, that Ecclesiastical Dignities were a much fitter Province for his
Circumstances they being a Sphere which none gainsaid him, than for him to
Usurp a Station in the World, wherein the Popes Legitimation was not sufficient
to maintain him.

Thus the Pope's Ambition having not a Domestic object more to promote, was
thenceforward altogether busied in signalizing his Pontificate, by acts
transcending, or it least equalling that of Giulio the second* his
Predecessor. He sent the Cardinal de Medici to Florence, there to supply
Lorence's Room, commanded him to govern it with as much gentleness, as that
young Man had affected harshness. And indeed, Lorence had been dazzled with his
Uricle's Grandeur. And his Flatterers had made a shift to Corrupt him to all
Intents. He imagined himself the greatest Captain of his time, for that he had
a Body proper to support all the fatigues of War; and in this Conceit, instead
of flattering the Florentines in their Commerce, he only talked of Military
Functions, and had naught imported from Foreign Countries, save Arms and
Horses. The Conquest of Vrbin had inspired him with the ^^sign of
re-establishing the ancient King (...) of Hetraria in the same state, as at the
^ginning of the Roman Commonwealth; (...) as the Republics of Sienna and
Lucca ^^^le a part of that Kingdom, Lorenzo was go^^g to despoil them of the
little Liberty they had left. He had already taken the Draught of a Fortress at
Saumimato of Florence, and that once built, he would have demanded of the
Emperor, to Erect Tuscany into a Kingdom, and if he had been refused, be would
have made his Addresses to his Uncle.

The Florentines being no strangers to this Project, might well fear its being
prosecuted, by the Cardinal de Medici; and Despair was but too capable of
hurrying them to the utmost Extremities against his Person, if he had not at
first expressed his coming, to be only to repair the Failures of their late
Ruler, and re-instate the People in perfect Freedom. He did it not however; for
he remitted nor the choice of Magistrates, but bating that point, he suffered
them to enjoy all the other Privileges, serving to so^^^ and flatter them in
the Opinion the Medici's were glad they should entertain of their pretended
Franchise. The Pope was, in (...) mean time, industrious to improve the P^^lity
of Rome, and made Noble Regulation^ for the removing and rooting out the See^^
of Feuds and Quarrels, transmitted from ^^thers to Children. For since the
Factions (...) the Guelphs and Gibellines, a Man that (...) been another Heir,
was bound to reve^^^ him on all his Enemies, and if he declined (...) doing,
out of Pusillanimity, or a Princip^^ of Religion, slink and retire he must out
of the World, and pass all his Life in Infamy, without daring to appear in
Public. Then his Holiness sertled a Colony in Rome, in the place where the
Field of Mars had been, and Peopled it with poor Lombards, whom the Wars of
Milan had compelled to change their Country.

He easily pardoned all sorts of Crimes, provided they did not disturb the
Public Quiet; and the unfortunate Giovanni Paulo Biglioni could not obtain any
Favor for some Exactions he had Committed at Perouza, though all the Court of
Rome interceded in his be half, and that the House of Medici was ^^incipally
indebted to him for its Restoration in Florence. The Pope sent for him under
so specious a Pretense, that he suffered himself to be noos'd, however Crafty
in other matters, The Orsini, who lost in him their best Refuge, he having
never failed ^^ing to their Succors, with two or three thousand Soldiers,
upon the first Summons, ^^^ain set a going all manner of Engines for (...)
safety. Nevertheless was he beheaded, (...) yet only impeached of the least of
the ^^imes he had Committed: For this execra^e Wretch kept his own Daughter in
the ^^ce of the whole World, and had neither ^^gard to Religion, or to Public
Faith, in a^y other Rencounter.

The Punishment of Sebastian de Trevese, had more affecting Circumstances. This
Man, the most famous Lawyer of his time, having been ^ercht from Padoua to
Rome, to teach the Law. He acquitted himself admirably well of his Profession,
and had not yet been rebuked by Justice, when he came to be Convicted of having
been Concerned in the Falsification of a Public Act. However, the pope would
have him to be proceeded against, with all the Severity of the Laws, and burnt
he was alive in the Field of Flora On the contrary secret Crimes, and those
that did not directly clash the Authority of the Holy See, or the frame of
Government then in vogue; were neither called to account nor punished. In their
regard did his Holiness affect to pass for Debonnairei.

His innate Magnificence ^endred his Pope does so much the more famous, in that
Alexander and Giulio his Predecessors had only (...) Liberal to Soldiers.
People were over joy'd to see them succeeded by a Man (...) hardly stinted or
deni^'d the least (...) their Desires, and he excused himself with such a
Gracefulness, when under the c^^straint of a Refusal, that not a^ Mortal w^^^
discontented from him. All sorts of Person (...) see him during the Repaste;
and if (...) observed 'em to be in necessity, he deligh^^ in making them draw
near, and distributing among them a Purse of Duccates, which he took care to
fill every morning, and never passed a day without emptying it. As he loved
Luxury and Pleasure, People were not wanting to propose to him, all they judged
capable of satisfying those two Inclinations. At this his best Friends
connived, instead of reproving it, and became themselves the Ministers of his
Wantonnesses and Riots, as being assured thereby to keep their Tenures in his
Favor. Besides, most of the Cardinals lived in such Excesses, as were little
different from those of the Pope.

Thus the Sacred College did much degenerate from what it was wont to be; for
heretofore none were admitted into it, save Persons of Ability and Merit; and
these Persons having no other Fund to subsist on, than a mean Pension given
them by the Popes, were remote from Luxury, as much our of necessity, as
inclination. But the Mode being introduced, under the four foregoing Popes, to
present the Cap to younger Sons of Sovereign Houses under Color that those
young Princes did it honor, in ^earing it, and those fame Persons, being
^esides possessed of the best Benefices, that ^ll vacant in States, that so
they might not (...) much Complain of being frustrated of succeeding in the
Temporalty. The abundance of so many Riches and Conveniences had augmented the
Luxury of their House^, and this Luxury appeared in all its luster a^ Rome, for
that their Relations were rather inclined they should there abide, than in
their own Country, where their Residence stood not with so much safety, for
fear they should be whirled with the Fancy of raising Combustions, as had been
experienced in the Cardinal of Ferrara, who, after having been a while
peaceable in that City, yet incontinently after the Death of Duke Hercules, his
Father, was not contented with Conspiring against his Eldest Brother, but had
moreover engaged his two younger in the same Plot, so as Duke Alfonso escaped
not otherwise than by Miracle from the Ambuscades of his three Brothers.

Among the Cardinals of Sovereign Families, were then reckoned those of Naples,
of Ferrara, of Mantoua, of Massa, and of Bisignan. The number of their
Domestics was six times greater, than that of others. They had all Equipages
of Hunting, and Stables, which People went to view out of Admiration, the
Hunting matches they made with the Pope, brought into the Field such a
multitude of Birds, of Dogs, and Huntsmen, that whole Forests and Valleys were
sometimes encompassed with Nets, and depopulated of Game.

Cardinal Bibiana had moreover introduced another Recidation, of no less
Expense, namely, the representation of Plays, in a stately Hall of the Vatican,
wherein the Decorations were changed each Act. Their whole business was to
provoke Mirth and Laughter, and no fault did People find with the Subjects
being too Libertine. The greatest Mischief herein consisted, that the Children
of the best Families, and the Hansomest, were invited to mount upon the Stage,
and serve for Actors.

The Pope had another Infirmity, whereof I shall allege two Examples, since it
is difficult to find, in History, another Person subject to the like. As he was
of a Facetious Humor, and loved to let nothing escape, without turning it to
his Diversion, as soon as he perceived a Man prepossessed with a good Opinion
of himself, he applauded him in all occasions, and made it his business to
flatter him, till such time as he caused this Principle of Vanity, to
degenerate into Extravagance. That Secretary of his, the ablest man alive for
Chancery Expeditions, was called Evangelist Tarasconi: This Person had the
weakness to neglect what he knew to Perfection, and pretended to Sciences he
did not understand. As he could not be ignorant that the Pope delighted more in
Music, than in other Arts, as being therein most skillful and refined, he
applied his mind to it, without other design at first, than the being capable to
talk regularly of Simphony. But as his Talent lay not this way, he mistook the
Bent and Sense of the things showed him by his Masters. The Pope quickly
perceived it, and was not wanting to persuade him, that he made an admirable
Progress, instead of minding him, that a Man ought never to study in spite of
Minerva.

Tarasconi believed the Pope spoke Truth, and so addicted his Thoughts to
Music, that it cracked his Brain. I shall not relate in this place the
particulars of his Follies; I will only say, that they never tired the Patience
of him that occasioned them; for the Pope suffered him publicly to maintain,
that no Man, before him, understood Music, and let him alter all the Rules of
that Art. Nay, his Holiness proceeded still farther; for he made him the
Arbiter of all the Symphony of his House, and promised him, on a day of
Ceremony, to cause the Musicians Arms to be bound, under Color, that their
Nerves being fast tied, they would touch the Strings with more steddiness and
delicacy. At last, the Pope consented to the taking down the Tapistry of the
Hall, where he dined, upon a request presented him by Tarasconi, grounded upon
this, that the Voices of the Musicians, and the sound of the Instruments coming
to strike the Silk and Woolen of the Tapistry, lost thereby their Force, and
soft'ned by the same Reason that the Canon produced so little effect upon the
like Materials, whereas if those Voices, and that sound broke themselves
directly upon the Walls and Marble of the Hall, the Reflection would be more
entire and neat, and would return more shrill to the Ears, and with a more
agreeable sound.

After Tarasconi, Baraballi de Gayeto served for a May Game to the Court of
Rome. A Man, he was of a good Family, and well made of his Person, thought
himself the best Italian Poet of his time, though a thing impossible to make more
wretched Verses than those of his, which nevertheless he rehearsed gracefully
enough. As soon as the Pope had heard him in his way, he perceived his
Selfconceit, and persuaded him; that never in this World, was there such
stately Compositions, as his Verses. Baraballi, at first, fancied his
Holinesses Discourse to be the effect of his Goodness; but the Pope strained so
long to give immoderate Praises to this poor Poet, every time he came to recite
new Pieces to him, that he quite unhinged his Brain. He put it in his Head,
that he was another Petrarch, and whirled him with a desire to Triumph, as that
Poet had done in Rome. The Pope took upon him to be at all the Charge of the
Solemnity, and sent throughout all Europe, to invite the Tribe of Parnassus.
All the Ceremonies that are to usher in an Action of this Importance, were
seriously observed; and the Pope, to render it the more ridiculous, would needs
have Baraballi to be mounted upon an Elephant, a present newly made his
Holiness by the King of Portugal. The Day was appointed, and all the Learned
Men in Italy were invited to honor, with their Presences, a Ceremony that had
not been practiced for three hundred years past, under pretense of paying them
the Expenses of their Journeys, immediately upon their Arrival, and that they
should have a sufficient Allowance for their return home, after having been
treated Magnificently, during their stay.

The News of this being brought to Gaieto, created Fear and Vexation.
Baraballi's Relations hastened to Rome, to divert him from a Project, which
overwhelmed both them, and their Posterity, with Shame and Scandal; but they
could not in the least prevail over so prepossessed a Soul, on the contrary, he
tre^ted them as Enviers of his Glory, and as Heretics, that had not a due
Opinion of the Popes Justice and Sincerity, since they imagined his Holiness
designed to impose upon the World. Thus the day being come ('it was the Feast of
San Cosmo, and San Damiano, which the House of Medici owned as their Protector)
the Poets, fantastically Garbed, went to take up Baraballi at his own House,
and Conducted him to the Feast prepared for him at the Popes.

The Spectacle afforded so much the more pleasure, in that it was hard to find,
throughout all Europe, an Old Man of a better Mien than the Triumpher. He was
extraordinarily tall, and proportionably big, had a fresh ruddy Countenance,
and a venerable ^eard. He had on the Triumphal Robe, and was arrayed in all the
Trappings, and surrounded with all the pomp, wherewith the Ancients had
flattered the Vanity of their Heroes. The Pope, who had an admirable lucky
knack in all sorts of Ceremonies, peculiarly delighted in having this performed
with the utmost exactness. Baraballi recited, with a Tone wherein he was
observed to applaud himself the Essay he had Composed, to stand as his
Masterpiece. All the other Poets pretended to admire it, and protested,
nothing comparable could issue from their Veins. The Judges, upon their avowal,
appointed the Triumph, and Baraballi descended into the Court of the Vatican,
while the Pope stood at a Window to see him mount the Elephant.

This Animal was very docible, and showed some sort of Complaisance for his
Gold Embroidered Saddle, and Purple House, which he was not wont to wear, he
gently suffered Baraballi to get on his back, and himself to be led along
toward the Capitol; but when he came to pass over the Bridge, he fell into
such a Fury, and caused the Triumpher to make so great a Leap, that had not the
Rails saved him, the Triumpher had fallen into the River; then scoured the
Elephant back, and topsey-turvey'd all in his way, from the Bridge to the
Vatican, that is to say, the whole Troop of Poets. What rendered the Scene
still the more diverting was; that the Elephant returned into the Pope's Court
with the same Docility, and without appearing any more moved, than if he had
thrown no body down. He was thought to have been first startled into that
wildness, by the sight of so many People, or by being surpised with the
confused sound of so many Voices and Instruments, ecchoing on all sides.

The Passion the Pope showed for good Cheer, made him love the Conversation of
four the most famous and agreeable Parasites, at that time in Italy, namely,
the youngest of Poggio's Children, Sacramore, the Chevalier Brandini, and Moine
Bousoni Mariani. They invented Sawces for a new fort of Kickshaw, only stuffed
with what was most delicate in the Flesh of Pheasants, and cost so dear, that
the Pope's Successor, could not forbear having him in Execration, when he
examined the Expense of his Table. The Parasites were there received at certain
days, and treated in the manner they desired, on Condition they would endure,
without taking Pet, all the little Malices, that were put upon them by the
Officers in the Kitchen, who made it their whole Contrivance, to impose on
their Taste and Gusto, and caused them to eat the Flesh of Crows and Monkeys,
under the Cover of some other Meats.

The Pope was likewise careful to invite the Cardinals on the first day of
August, and with them while away the Afternoon, in playing at Cards; but all
the Money Gam'd for, and all the Winnings were distributed to the Poor; but he
had an aversion for Dice, yet played so perfectly well at Chess, that none ever
beat him at it. He abstained from Meat on Wednesdays, and eat only Herbs on
Frydays, and never supped on Saturdays. I have but one Circumstance to relate
upon the abuse of his Indulgences, that has escaped Padre Paulo, namely, that
they showed, in Germany, a Bull, which set a Crown Tax for admittance into
Paradise.

He neglected the Fabric of St. Peter, so finish the Gallery of the Vatican,
Painted by Rofaele d'Vrbin, that incomparable Workman, that brought Painting to
a point of Perfection, unknown since Apelles. He died when thirty six years
old, by the Popes and his own fault. He had a promise to be made Cardinal, and
no doubt had been so at the first Promotion. The Pope delighted in Discoursing
him, and almost daily surveyed his Work. He saw him once extraordinarily
heated, and, feeling his Pulse, found that he had a Fever. He commanded him to
get his ways to Bed, and had him blooded by a Chyrurgeon; but he knew not that
this Painters Fermentation proceeded from an over abundant dalliance with a
Lady. And as Blooding is ever mortal in such like Cases, and that Rafaele did
not discover his Infirmity to the Chyrurgeon, he fell into a drooping, which
couched him in his Grave. He had laid the Design, and himself drawn the first
Patterns of the Tapist^y, which the Pope caused to be made in Flauders, and
those Pattern^ were so well wrought and accomplished upon Silk and Woolen, that
the Pope had reason to be therewith satisfied, though the suit of Hangings cost
him sev'nty thousand Crowns.

Nevertheless I must note in this place, that Symony was neither so great nor
so public under the Popedom of Leo, as it had been under those of Alexander
and Julius: For though the great Penitentiary was prepossessed with two Maxims,
which seemed to Establish the Venality of Benefices, though he maintained that
the Pope purged all sorts of Symonies, and could not commit any: I have found
nevertheless in Authentic Memoirs, that Leo did pretty often take the pains to
examine the Expeditions, which this Penitentiary presented him to Sign, and
twing'd him, sometimes with severe Corrections, yet without threatening to turn
him out of his Place, as being in truth the shrewdest Man in Italy for the
Canon Law.

I have likewise found in the same place, that Giulio Blanci, his Favorite,
nicked his time, to make him sign a Request, when his Holiness was so in haste,
that he had not the leisure to peruse it. But Blenci being not wont to concern
himself in such like matters, the Pope suspected some trick, and leaving what
he had to do, read the Request quite over; he found he was petitioned to unite
two Benefices situated in two Provinces remote from one another; and the
Motive of him who solicited the Union, was to raze a Church, that stood too
near his Castle, which none would have opposed, if the Priory of that Church,
with which his Son was endowed, had been joined to another Priory, which the
same Son held in another Province. But the Pope did not trouble himself with
inquiring into the whole matter, he only asked Blanci, how much he had been
promised to get the passing of that Request, and Blanci, thinking he stood well
enough in his Masters mind, to own the truth to him, with impunity, made
answer, he should get two hundred Crowns. He had no sooner bolted these words,
but the Pope ran to a Trunck, wherein he had Money, took out two hundred
Crowns, gave them to Blanci, and tore the Request.

In this manner did the Pope handle particular Affairs, while Fortune was
laboring to embroil him with France. He had not had any tie with the Most
Christian King, since young Lorenzo de Medici's Alliance had prosper'd so ill.
On the contrary, he complained loud enough, that, at Paris, the French Ministry
had spirited from him Cardinal Bibiana, as to take away all shadow of Doubt,
but that he was contriving to be revenged, though the manner of that Cardinals
dying after his return, at his coming from an entertainment, at which the Pope
had presented him a Bit, which he durst not refuse, had not Convinced the most
Incredulous. Besides, he could hardly digest that the French Governor of
Milan, would neither suffer the Benefices of that Duchy to be enjoyed by
others, than those that espoused the Interests of France, nor allow whoever
disputed them, to go plead at Rome, whereas, before the Holy See was in
Possession, of nominating with full Right, and of judging Soveraignly the
Processes which arose in that matter.

The Emperor had then, at Rome; an Ambassador, John Manuel by Name who served
him with so much the more Zeal, in that he had been more a Favorite of Philip
the First, his Father, than any other Spaniard, and had suffered Persecutions
from King Ferdinand, after the death of that young Prince. This Minister had
all the Qualities requisite for Negotiation, and had insinuated himself into
the Pope's Affection, by giving him overtures, which nevertheless ^^d not
speed, for securing of Luther at the Diet of Worms. And as he had discovered
that his Holiness would not be sorry to enter ^^to a War against France,
provided he might (...) furnished with a specious Pretext; he proposed to him,
in his Master's Name, the Plan of a League, that could not be better contrived;
for the Emperor was to be at all the Charges, and run all the risque, without
reaping any apparent advantage. He took upon him to raise and maintain the
Armies: He left to the Pope the liberty of naming their General; he consented
they should receive from his Holiness, the most material Orders, upon what they
should undertake, in short exposed himself to the losing the Kingdom of Naples,
in case they came by the worst. Nevertheless he renounced the Fruits, which the
League might thereby reap, if Fortune favored his Arms; and making before hand
but two Lots of the Spoil and Booty of the French, he gave one of them, namely,
the States of Parma and Plasanza, to the Holy See; and the other, containing
the rest of Milan, was to be restored to the Sforza's, without the Emperor's
exacting ought else, than a new Oath, from him that should be therewith
invested.

The Design was too well laid, for the Pope to resist the temptation of
espousing it. He signed the Articles, that were presented him, without making
the least Alteration; and as there is no being without Money, in the beginning
of a War, he created four hundred Offices of Knights, which were sold at a
thousand Crowns a-piece, by assigning them a hundred Crowns Revenue, upon good
Funds. He pitched his Eyes upon Prospero Colonna for the Generalship, as
supposing the Marquis de Pescairo, Commanding the Spanish Infantry, would
cotton well enough with him, after having Married his Niece. But mistaken was
he in his Conjecture, and the Army of the League had no sooner begun to act,
but that Prospero and Pescairo fell out, and clasht more than if there had been
no Alliance between them.

Their Discord occasioned the raising of the Siege of Parma, and plunged their
Troops into an irresolution, which would not have failed of ruining them, if
the Pope had not devised an Expedient, that fitted his purpose. Though he knew
how necessary the Cardinal de Medici's Presence was at Florence, to contain the
People in due Bounds: Yet he wrote to him to leave that Place, and go with all
expedition to the Army, in quality of Legate, in order to reconcile the two
principal Officers, and put them again upon Action: The Cardinal de Medici
obeyed, though he despaired of ^ccomplishing the Order he received. He ^^nd more
Obstacles (...) ^^^nount, than he had imagined; but yet (...) he more good ^uck
than trouble. He made Prospero re^^ a kind of Com-promise, which left him
hardly more than the bare name of General; and this Pescairo accepted, as
finding it for his turn. Then the Cardinal induced them both to drive on the
War into the Center of Milan. This they consented to; and Lautrec having not
been able to hinder them the passage of Loglio, as being abandoned by the
Suizzers, in default of payment, they were Masters of the Field, and presented
themselves before the Gates of the principal Cities, wherein they were received
by the remains of the Ghibelline Faction. Those of Milan were likewise opened
to them by the Pallivicini's, in revenge for that Lautrec had put two Cavaliers
of their Family to Death, without observing all the forms of Law; and the
French were driven out of Lombardy the second time, with as much ease as the
former.

The Pope received the news of this success, when a Hunting, and had at the
same time a tumultuous Joy, that cast him into a Fever. He was wont to swallow,
at his going to Supper, Aloes Pills, which kept his Body open; and Serapita,
his Valet de Chamber, whose business it was to present them to him, kept them
so negligently in a Box, as rendered it easy to come at them, and take of them
who would: Two days before the Pope fell ill, Lesbi, the Butler, was minded to
steal out a Couple, and swallow them, but was found dead the next morning in
his Bed, though to sleep he went in perfect Health. The Pope took them at his
usual hour, and perceiving they caused in him a thirsty alteration, called for
Drink of Barnaby Malespina, who served him with so bitter a Wine, that the
Pope, who never complained of it at other times, could not refrain from making
Faces, while a drinking; and telling Malespina, I fancy thou have laid a Wager
to make me drink Purle. Malespina made no Answer, and was contented with
pouring out what Wine remained in the Bottle, and with fetching another.

The Pope supped with a good Appetite, and was neither ill that Evening, nor
the Night ensuing; but on the morrow after, having read the Dispatch Cardinal
de Medici wrote him from Milan, he was seen in too violent Impetuosities of
Joy, for People to miss observing, that too much foreign heat was kindled in
his Temperament. Yet not much minded at first, because they did not think there
could be excess in rejoicing at the Disgrace of the French. But the Headache,
which the Pope complained of afterward, caused some reflection to be made,
though it startled them not so much, as the shuddering he underwent, when he asked
for Drink. The Physicians, who observed this shivering, made no account of it;
for besides its being neither great, nor of long continuance, it ended in so
fine a breathing Sweat, that they positively declared, it would cost his
Holiness but that fit. However they had him carried to Rome, but some Miles
distant; and the Malady augmenting still on the way; the first object that
offered it self to the Pope, at his entrance into the Vatican, was an ill Omen;
'twas a Sculptor, who came to show him the Design of a Mausoleum, the King of
England intended to Erect for his Ancestors, of the House of Lancaster, whose
Bones were gathered up throughout all the Countries in Europe, where they died
in Exile. As the Pope understood Sculpture admirably well, he was very curious
that way, and caused Michael Angelo to work on his own Sculpture, which
redoubled his Curiosity for such like works: And indeed he failed not to
examine that of England, and speak his Opinion of it. As soon as in Bed, the
Fever so diminished, that the Physicians believed him Cured. He spent two hours
in receiving the Congratulations of the Cardinals, upon the Prosperity of his
Arms, and felt not any pain, during that Interval. But all of a sudden the
Fever returned, nay, and at the very first, with that violence, that it got
into his Brain. Then did they judge the Distemper to be extreme; all forts of
Remedies were used to bring the Patient back into his right Senses; this they
effected, and he recovered his Reason, after six hours agitation, wherein they
had observed all the symptoms of approaching Death. He opened his Eyes, and
spoke, but no more than only to recommend his Soul to God, and to affirm he
died content, after having recovered Parma and Plaisanza, without shedding of
Blood. Immediately he fell again into his Frenzy, and expired at one a Clock at
Night, on the third of December, Fifteen hundred twenty one, being not yet full
forty sev'n years old.

Never was Pope so lamented, by his Servants, bating Malespina, who, at break
of day, came to the Palace Gate, with an Equipage of Hunting, and asked to be
let out. The Suizzars, on the Guard, being fired with Indignation, to see a Man
pursuing his Recreations, in the midst of the public Desolation, stopped him;
and those who remembered what the Pope had said of the Glass of Wine he had
given him, thought themselves in duty bound to secure his Person, and clap
Guards upon him. He was the more narrowly watched, after that the Body being
opened, in it were found two infallible marks of Poison; one, that the Heart
was marked all over with Black and Livid Spots, and the other, that the Spleen
was so straitn'd and rivell'd up, that much ado they had to find it. The
Cardinal de Medici had an account given him of all these Particularities; and
at his Arrival, all the late Popes Servants threw themselves at his Feer, and
Conjured him to put Malespina to the Rack. But he waved doing it, upon his
being pressed to enter the Conclave. Yet this was not what hindered him; and
those who knew to the very bottom of his Soul, judged he forbore to examine
into the Pope's Death, out of a refinement of Prudence, which made him fear
finding, among the Culpable, Persons so qualified, as were able to break all
the Measures he had taken to mount, in his turn, on the Throne of St. Peter.
Thus Malespina was released, without having suffered ought else than
Imprisonment. He wandered a long time in Italy, and at length settled himself in
the City of Milan, where nine years after Pope Leo's Death, he was Condemned to
be Beheaded for an Assassination. He owned nothing, at his Execution, of what
related to the poisoning the Pope, and his silence has given Historians
occasion to believe, nothing extraordinary to have been in that matter; and
that the Wound remaining of the Ulcer, of which I have already spoken, coming
to close, and the ill humors, which Nature eased it self of that way from time
to time, being barred vent and issue, had thrown themselves upon the noble
Parts: They added to back their Sentiments, that the South Wind blowing at that
time, had raised from the Marshes, near the place where the Pope Hunted, a
Pestilential Exhalation, that had more influence upon his Holiness, than on
those of his Retinue, because that being more heated, the Pores of his Body
were more open to the Contagious Air. But easy it is to answer to the first of
those Arguments, that the Wound had been but too lately closed, to maintain
that the ill humors could have had leisure to Corrupt the Heart and the Spleen
to that degree they were found to be at the opening of the Body, besides that
prodigious Thirst might be attributed to the Pills, which when poisoned is
unknown. It is as easy to answer to the second, in saying, that it is to
divine and form a Chimerical Exhalation, as to conceive one, of which the Popes
Body only to be susceptible; for besides his being not the most fervent of the
Company in the Pursuit, and that commonly he did not over-heat himself; his
Temperament was the most robust, and capable of resisting the Injuries of the
Air, of all those of the Court of Rome: For neither was there a bigger, nor a
more vigorous Man in his Court, and his Humors were in so just a proportion,
that they could not have been disordered, till after a hundred years Conflict,
if there had not been some Poison in the business.

Be it as it will, never Pope died of a Distemper, to which he had less
Disposition. He was neither lean nor dry, and his Brain was too gross to be
offuscated at first, by the bare Vapors of a slight Fever. The much Exercise
he used, should exempt him from an unforeseen Oppression. He had nothing weak,
besides his Eyes, and indeed they were very large, yet was he able to see to
the smallest things, and read a long while, without being incommoded. Moreover
he had got a sort of Spectacles, which he ever carried about him, and
principally a Hunting; they made him distinguish Birds and Beasts at a much
greater distance, than other Persons could do, and afforded him sometimes the
pleasure of shooting and killing them, before perceived by others. Their Matter
was of Crystal, and their Figure Coneave. I have not met with the Workmans
name, nor of him who presented them to the Pope; but certain it is, that his
Holiness had nothing so precious, and were not broken in the most violent
Exercises.

He had a nice and pregnant Wit; and notwithstanding he had chosen for his
Secretaries, the two most Eloquent Men of that Age; yet was he capable of
turning a Letter as well as they, when so minded witness that he wrote to
Cardinal de Medici, upon sending him to Milan, in quality of Legate; and the
agreeable Billets he directed to his Eldest Sister, Married into the House of
Cibo. He likewise composed easy and elegant Latin Verses, but did not so much
delight in them, as in the Italian; and as no man understood better than he,
the finest Delicacy of the Tuscan Tongue, so no Man made more Elegant Sonnets,
nor Elegies better contrived. He had taken the pains to read all the Celebrated
Historians, and though he was too quick and hasty to have the patience to make
extracts out of them; yet he had them so well imprinted in his mind, that he
never failed of Citing their finest Passages, when the occasion so required. He
was so early accustomed to judge of others Works, that his Criticisme was
commonly infallible; and in the debates which arose among the topping Wits,
they appealed sometimes from the Judgment of the Academy to his Holinesses. He
officiated the Solemn Feasts with so much Grace and Majesty, that Spectators
flocked thither from all Parts of Italy. The Most Christian King. Francis the
First, after having seen him say Mass at Bologna, did affirm never to have been
better Convinced of the importance of those Ceremonies, for the lifting up the
mind to God. As the Virtue he most valued himself upon, was Liberality, he
exercised it with an address, wholly peculiar to him. He had studied to the
very Gestures, and to the tone of the Voice, which were to be practiced in
giving, that he might the better win the Heart of him, who received any thing
from him; and never was there observed more Joy in a Face, than appeared on
his, when it chanced him to be able to prevent the Requests that People had to
make him. He affected sadness, when constrained to refuse them; but this
sadness was accompanied with so tender an Aer, that People took his denial in
no ill part. Ten Persons of Quality were once seen to demand of him the
Archbishopric of Ravenna; he had the same Civility for 'em all, discoursed
'em apart, pried, by their Discourse, into the secret of their Interests, and
gave the Benefice to him he had a mind to gratify, without discontenting the
other Nine, because he gave or promised them others, that seemed fitter for
their turns. When he gave, he still made his Excuses, for his not having
opportunity of giving more; and the blushing, which never failed mounting into
his Face, made it believed he spoke sincerely, and gave such vast I dea^ of his
Magnificence, that all the Revenues of the Popedom, would not have been capable
of supplying them, if he had giv'en all from him expected.

He said his Father had enjoined him three Rules for his Conduct, at his
sending him to Rome. The first, to use as much care to keep himself in his
Friends Esteem, as he had taken to acquire their Amity. The second, to repair,
by continual Offices, the Decay, which absence made in the strictest
Engagements. And the third, to live without Distrust, in what regarded his own
Person, but to be ever diffident for the State, of which he made a part. In
fine, he had, during his Life, and after his Death, the two kinds of
Happinesses, which most signalize the Governments of Sovereigns. I mean that
Rome was extraordinarily flourishing, during his Papacy, and so miserable,
under the two following, that the Comparison of them could not be made without
regretting him, more than ever any Man had been. Nevertheless a small Disaster
befell his Body, the night before the Funerals for the Servant, that watched him
alone, falling asleep, the Rats attracted, perhaps by the scent of the
Perfumes, with which he was embalmed, gnawed his Nose, for which Reason his
Face was covered, during the Ceremony of the Obsequies.

The End of the Sixth Book.
THE SECRET HISTORY OF THE HOUSE OF MEDICIS. The Seventh Book.
AS no man understood better than Leo, to gain the Love of the topping Wits, by
doing them good, no man had ever had so great a number of them in his Retinue,
and Interests. Pomponius. Latus was the Brat of a Country Lass, whom the Prince
of Salerno had abused, under the wheedle of Marriage. He was brought up to War,
and 'twas the ruin of the House of San Severino, of which his Father was the
Eldest, that made him desist from that Profession. He was of the number of
those Learned Men, who changed their Names, upon taking their Degrees in the
University of Rome, and was subject to the Persecution that Platina and
Callimachus endured on that account, when Paul the 2d, instead of laughing at
this Whim, imagined it a Cover to a Conspiracy, brooded against his Life.
Afterward his Auditory was so filled, that a Man was forced to go thither by
Midnight to get room. He went from his Lodging before Day, and carried himself
his Lanthorn. A hard matter was it to understand him, when he spoke Familiarly,
but he never stutter'd in his Explications. He Cooked all his Meat himself, and
the most Illustrious of his Scholars sometimes gave him a helping hand, in the
Kitchen, for to ease him, when they had a mind to make advantage of the time he
would have spent in that Office. He has left a Grammar, and the History of the
Emperors, and of the Ruins of Old Rome. He died at sev'nty years of age, by
having drunk Wine with Ice.

Callimachus, after having been put to the Rack, and tormented more than the
other Virtuosi's, because he had assumed a Greek Name, which the Pope did not
at all understand, made his escape into Tuscany, his Native Country, from
whence Casimir King of Poland, called him to be the Tutor of his Eldest Son,
reigning since by the Name of Albert. He was this young Prince's Favorite, but
the Counsel he gave him, to rid his hands of the principal Lords of Poland, by
placing them at the Head of the Army, when a going to Fight the Moldavians,
wrought his Disgrace, and raised him so many Enemies, as put the King under the
Constraint of abandoning him. He found however at Vilna, the Capital City of
Lithuania, a Friend, who hid him in his House, fed him, without making any body
privy, no not so much as his own Wife, assisted him till Death, caused his Body
to be dried in an Ov'n, put it into a Cup-board, and kept it till the anger of
the Nobility being cooled, he had an honorable Burial made him at Cracow,
whither his Bones were transferred. We have nothing left of his, save the Life
of Ladislaus, King of Poland, and of Hungary, who died in the Battle of Varnez,
but it is so fine a History, that whosoever shall take the pains to read it,
will judge, without my giving him the hint, that there never was a better since
that of Tacitus.

Geronimo Savonarola, a Religious of St. Dominick, rubbed out in a prodigious
Austerity of Life at Florence, and made appear what Eloquence can do, when
backed with the repute of Sanctity. He had the gift of Prophecy, and this is,
perchance, the reason, that though he had a great esteem for Lorenzo de Medici,
and for his Children, he would never have any other engagements with them, than
those of Study, as considering them already as Persons that were to subject
their Country. He governed his Republic for the space of four years, and was
the sole Deputy to Negotiate at Pisa with Charles the 8th, whose coming he had
long before prognosticated. He declared publicly, that he would be at Naples,
and maintain his footing there, provided he caused his Troops to observe an
exact Discipline; but that at all adventures he would tread the Italians under
Foot, at his return. It Is somewhat a difficult business to say, what occasioned
the downfall of this new Prophet. Two things did thereto very much Contribute;
one, the Reformation of Manners, which he aimed at, introducing into Florence;
and the other, the Example he gave, for People to declaim Publicly against the
Vices of Pope Alexander the 6th. Armed there were against him, the Relations of
seven Gentlemen, whom he had caused to be put to Death; for having Conspired
against the Government. They set Fire to the Convent Door, hall'd away those
who ran in to his Defense, took him and Condemned him to the Flames, which he
suffered in reciting and beginning the Psalms of Penitence. The best of his
Works are, The Triumph of the Cross, and The Simplicity of a Christian Life.

Marcileo Ficino was such a little dapper Fellow, that he reached not to the
Girdle of a Man of an ordinary Stature, but so well proportioned, so neat, and
of so gay an humor, that none were ever weary of his Company. He was so
possessed with the care of his Health, that he often shifted his black Cap,
nay, six or sev'n times in an hour. He had caused Clothes and Coverlets to be
made him for all the Winds that blowed, and for all the irregularities of the
Seasons. The House of Medici procured him a Prebendary, a House in the Town,
and another in the Country, and gave him likewise a Pension, for Translating
into Latin the Works of Plotinus, of Jamblicus, of Pselle, and of Cinesias. He
wrote with all the easiness imaginable. Yet what he did was so finished, that
none durst venture to touch again and Polish it. He died almost without pain at
sev'nty years of Age, on the same Day that the Florentines, caused Paulo
Vitelli, their General, to be Beheaded, lest he might take revenge for their
having unjustly suspected him of Perfidy.

Galeas Martius served King Mathias of Hungary, at the same time, as Tutor for
Sciences, Secretary for Dispatches, a Captain in War, and Champion in
Tournaments. He composed two Books, under a malign Constellation; the first,
treating of Man, had the misfortune to be so roughly handled by Merula the
Critic, that its Author, of his own proper Election, set about suppressing it;
and the second, treating of the Virtue of the Pagans, made him incur the
Persecution of the Religious, who caused him to be clapped up into Prison, whence
he had been doomed to the Flames, if Pope Sixtus the 4th, who had been his
Pupil, had not interposed all his Authority, to retrieve him out of their
Clutches, and after all, was he forced to undergo a public Penance. He lived
near fourscore years, and became so big and bulky, that not a Horse was there
could carry him. He died of a Rupture.

Elisius Calentius was a Poet famous at the Court of Naples, receiving, from
King Alfonso, the same Pension that Pontan, Artilius, Gravina, and Senesar,
whose business was to judge of pieces presented to his Majesty, or in Verse or
Prose. As he had set Tibullus for his Pattern, so was he of as amorous a
Complexion as that Roman, and made Elegies infinitely passionate, though they
were not all of equal force. He translated into Latin Verse, Homer's War of the
Rats against the Frogs, and being become old, with a Charge of Children, he
repented his having spared nothing, during his Youth, and testified it by this
Epitaph. Vanum post Cineres de me toto Orb legatur,
Scripta quoe sint tumulo Carmina digna meo;
Ingenium natura dedit, fortuna Poetoe
Defuit, atque inopem vivere fecit amor.


Pandolfo Callenucio was a Lawyer by Profession, but so inconstant in his
Study, that hardly had he the first Elements of a Science, than that he fell to
another. However, being well made and Eloquent, and having besides the
Qualities necessary for Negotiation, he was employed in several Embassies. He
composed the Apology for Pliny's Natural History; a Treatise of the Viper, and
a Dialogue completely Boufon, Waggish, and Badeen, between the Head and the
Cap; afterward he wrote the Lives of the Kings of Naples, in the Tuscan
Tongue, upon the request of Duke Hercules of Ferrara, who understood not Latin.
He died at Pesaro, where Giovanni Sforza had got him by Cunning, and caused him
there to be strangled, in revenge, for having intercepted one of his Letters.

Jovianus Pontanus concealed under a stern and damping Mien, a Wit infinitely
agreeable and nice. A Native was he of Carretto, in Vmbria, where his Family
being destroyed by Fire and Sword, he took refuge at Naples. Antonio da
Palermo, Secreatary of State, found him in the Street, and in his Physiognomy
observing I know not what extraordinary, took care of his Education. He
instructed him so well, that he became the most Celebrated of the Poets, and
Orators of his time. He would needs also undertake to write History, but with
so little success, that he accused himself, that all his endeavors of that
kind, had only discovered his Weakness. He succeeded his Benefactor in his
place. He married a Wife, who brought him a vast Fortune, but, toward the end
of his Life, he decayed in his Reputation, by means of his Panegyric on
Charles the 8th, and his Dialogue, Intitul'd Charon, the first of those two
pieces being so stuffed with flattery, and with Detraction the second. He died
when sev'nty sev'n years old, after having caused a magnificent Tomb to be
Erected for his Bones; but forgot to put into his Will, which Epitaph he
designed to be thereon engraved, of the four he had Composed.

Marcus Antonius Coctius Sabellicus was the Son of a Blacksmith, and fell to
keeping School at Tivoli, where he gained sufficient to live on at Rome, for
several years together. Pomponius Latus introduced him into the Academy, which
filled off his Rust, and made him capable of being called by the Senate of
Venice, to write the History of the Republic, and to give Lessons to the young
Gentlemen, for an allowance of three hundred Crowns. He acquitted himself
better of the second of these Provinces, than of the first; for the flattery is
so course and fulsome in his History, that it is perceived by the least refined.
But the most fantastic part in his Conduct was, that after having blunder'd in
his particular History, he fancied he should perform better in the General. He
began that of the World from Adam, and made those great Volumes of Enneades,
which People are far from reading, when once they are informed, that the most
curious Matters almost all are passed over in silence, and the most common
handled with a tiresome Accuracy. When sev'nty years old, he died of a
scandalous Disease, the secret of Curing which being not then known. He left
but one Bastard, to whom he would not commit the care of his Burial, he loved
rather to contrive it himself, and writ this Epitaph, in which I should find no
Fault, had another made it.

Quem non res hominum, non omnis ceperat oetas
Scribentem capit haec Coction urna brevis.
Laurentianus, after having for a long while taught Philosophy and Physic at
Pisa, and Florence, fell to Translating Hippocrates, because Theodorus Gaza did
not, to his seeming, express, with sufficient force, the Canonical style of
that Author; afterward he was minded to do the like with Gallen; and he wrote
with so much assiduity, that it is believed he would have finished it, if he had
not been whirled with a Crotchet to buy a House, though he had not the third of
the Money, requisite to pay the Purchase. The Man who sold it, caused to be
inferted in the Contract, that in case Laurentianus did not furnish the whole
Sum in six Months space, he might enter upon his House again, without being
bound to repay what he had received, and Laurentianus consented thereto, as
making account to have, by that time, wherewithal to clear the Bargain. But
the measures sailed him he had taken, and the term expired, without his being
in a Condition to perform the Clause of the Contract; so that seeing the first
Proprietor take Possession of the House again, he laid it so to Heart, that he
tumbled himself headlong into the Well.

Antiochus Tibertus was brought from Cesene, the place of his Birth, into
France, by a Soldier, that made him study at Paris. He followed his Genius,
which inclined him to the study of Natural Magic though this Profession was them
so dangerous, that since two hundred years that Piero Daponno died, no Man had
dared to be tampering that way. He imagined that it had only been Contemtible,
by not having been hitherto plainly and ingenuously laid down and discovered,
but that it would be infallibly Courted by all Mankind, when it should be seen
decked with the Ornaments of other Sciences. Upon this Principle, he became a
shrewd and learned Professor in Polite Learning, in Natural Philosohy, Physic,
and the Mathematics, and returning into his own Country, where there needed no
more for his living in security, than to seduce some petty Prince; this was the
more easy for him to effect, since during his abode in France, he passed for a
famous Wizzard among the Astrologers of that Kingdom. He gave a reason for most
of his Predictions, which other Soothsayers, nor the very Oracles themselves,
had not yet bethought themselves of doing, and on this score was he consulted
by Persons of all Qualities and Conditions, from the Prince to the Cobbler; and
at all times was there so great a Concourse of People at his Gate, that very
often a body must have waited there several hours, to get to speak to him in
one's turn. He wrote very Curious Books of Chiromancy, or Palmistry,
Phisiognomy, and Pyromancy; and viewing one day Guido de Bogni's Hand, surnamed
Guerra, or War, on the account of his Valor, he assured him, that the best of
his Friends would cause him to be Assassinated, upon an ill grounded
supposition, to which there was so much the less likelihood, that Bogni being
the most determinate Soldier of his time, and Courting, hand over head, the
most dangerous occasions, was, in all probability, like to perish fighting, one
time or other. He likewise foretold, by the same way, Pandolfo Malatesta,
Sovereign of Remini, the Richest Prince of Italy, in ready Cash, that he would
dye of Misery, in the Hospital of Bologna. In a word, the fancy took him to
Calculate his own Nativity, and he found it his Fate to be Beheaded; and thus
all came to pass. Malatesta was under a strict engagement with Bogni, and
trusted him with the Command of his Troops. Bentivoglio, his Father-in Law,
sent him word, that he had committed the Sheep to the keeping of the Wolf; and
that Bogni had treated with the Pope, for the remitting Remini under the
Obedience of the Holy See. There needed no more to dispose Malatesta to invite
Bogni to a Feast, at which Tibertus had Orders to attend. Bogni was stabbed,
while at Dinner, and Tibertus popt into a Dungeon, in the Citadel, his Hands
garnished with Iron Ruffs, and his Feet with Fetters, till such time as they
should put him upon the Rack, for the making him reveal the Accomplices of the
pretended Conspiracy. In the mean while Bogni's Innocence came to light, and
Bentivoglio, thinking him still alive, wrote to his Son in-Law, that he had
given him a false Intelligence. Malatesta repented his having been so hasty,
and was going to Tibertus his Dungeon, to free him thence, when he met with an
account, that this Wizzard had been caught making his escape. And indeed
Tibertus calling to mind his Horoscope, and not knowing his Case to be in good
terms, he had so well cajoled the Goaler's Daughter, that she had let him down
with a Rope into the Ditch, where the jingling of his Fetters discovered him to
the Sentinel: Malatesta coming in just in that nick, fancied him to be
Criminal, seeing he had that way attempted to get out of Prison; and without
other form of Process, had him Beheaded. In a short time after, the Duke de
Valentinois surpised Rimini, and Malatesta, by mere hazard, making his escape,
wandered from Town to Town, till being forsaken by his own very Children, upon
his having endeavored to set them at odds; He found no other retreat, than the
Hospital of Bologna, wherein he died.

Filippo Beroalde acquired Fame by a whimsical way; for whereas other Wits
endeavored to imitate the Writers of Augustus his Age; he imagined Quaint
Latin to consist in obsolete Words, and set about bringing them again into
vogue and usance. Having all good Books, and his Memory being prodigious, he
enterpreted them to admiration, and there being not a person breathing, that
made the like, in any wise comparable, Lessons; he had his Auditory, at
Bologna, so thronged with all sorts of People, principally Strangers, as barred
all access to it. He has left, in this style, a Commentary upon Apuleius his
Golden Ass, containing so much Learning, that it would be the best of all the
works of that Nature, without its Author's ^^range Prepossession for some
ridiculous Opinion. He died at fifty years old, and repented of his Barbarism,
even at the very moment of his Death.

Filippo Beroalde neither followed the steps nor the Genius of his Uncle before
mentioned. He had a nice taste for Quaint Latin, and set his Mind to Poetry.
His Odes are so pure and so well wrought, that the Academy of Rome judged, that
no Man, for this thousand years, has come so near Horace, and it was in virtue
of this Testimony, which it gave to Beroalde's Merit, that Leo the 10th. for
the attracting him to Rome, made him Keeper of the Vatican Library, but he died
at twenty eight years old, when on his Journey to take possession of his new
Dignity.

Titus Sforza was a famous Latin Poet of Ferrara; he Composed several Eclogues,
and put into Verse the History of the House of Este. None would have disputed
with him, the Crown of Laurel he laid claim to, after Petrarch's Example, if he
had not got a Son, that proved a better Poet than himself.

Hercules Sforza made such fine Verses at sev'nteen years old, as created a
Jealousy in his very Father; and as he had no less Qualities for the Court,
than for Parnassus, he became the Duke his Master's Favorite, and made Love to
that Prince's Sister, while he wrote Verses, worthy of Antiquity, for the
Duchess Lacretia Borgia. He was Gallant, and very Ingenuous in Repartees; as
he made a Lady sensible, upon her twitting him with his being Lame; for he
extemporaneously replied, that Venus, who understood her self as well as she,
at least in Love, had nevertheless preferred Vulcan before others. But to his
bane, the Beauteous Toreti, the Duke's Mistress, inspired him with Love. They
agreed to steal a little Matrimony Clandestinely, for fear their Nuptials might
be crossed; and afterward to proclaim their Marriage, as soon as it should be
a time fitting, they supposing the Duke would leave off loving Toreti, when he
came to know she had thrown her self into the Arms of another. But they were
mistaken, for hardly was the business known, but that Sforza coming to sup at
the Palace, was killed without any inquest being since made into the
Assassination.

Barthelemi Cocles studied only Chiromancy and Metoposcopy, but he became so
knowing that no body ever made so many true Predictions. He was more hardy than
other Wizzards; for he caused a Book to be Printed, enriched with Figures,
wherein he revealed all the secret of his Art, explained all the Lines of the
Hand, all the different Features of the Face, and laid open the signification
of each thing in particular. The Learned Achillini made a Preface to it,
equally admired by the Friends and Enemies of the Art of Fortune-telling, and
Cocles confirmed his Positions, by an Experience, which brought him into a
general Vogue. Luca Gaurie, so famous in Judicial Astrology, could not make his
own Horoscope, for want of knowing the day, and hour, and place of his Birth.
He had recourse to Cocles, who, viewing his Hand, foretold him, that he would
suddenly undergo a Punishment, without having deserved it, but yet dye of it he
would not. And indeed Bentivoglio, Lord of Bologna, being informed that Gaurie
had foretold that he should be driven out of his Territory, before the years
end, caused him to be Kidnapt, and commanded he should have the Strapado given
him five times together, which was accordingly executed; but also was he
divested, in the time that Gaurie had noted. As to Cocles, he had no less
foreseen the day and hour of his own Death. He knew it his Fate to be killed by
a blow on his Head, and had Armed himself with an Iron Coif, under his Hat, and
with a two-handed Sword, with which he Fenced Competently well. Yet Hermes
Bentivoglio, the Great Lord of Bologna's Son, had desired him so earnestly to
tell him his Fortune, that he had declared to him he should be banished, and
killed in a Battle, which happened afterward. But then Hermes, the most Brutal
Man of his time, would needs be revenged on Cocles, in causing him to be
assassinated by Caponi, the most resolute of his Father's Guards. Capani
excused doing it a long while, and would never have resolved upon it, had not
the Fancy took him one day to consult Cocles, who, not knowing him, told him;
Alas my Friend, you will commit a detestable Murder before it is yet night. Caponi
being surpriz^d at so unexpected a Prediction, imagined Cocles imposed on his
Credulity, as he had done on that of Hermes, and thereupon took his measures to
kill him. He went and disguised himself in the accoutrements of a Porter, for
the better performing his Design, and returned in the moment that Cocles, who
had been constrained for an indispensable Affair to go abroad, came back, and
was just putting the Key into the Lock of his Door, he gave him so great a
blow, with an Ax, that the Iron Coif could not hinder Cocles head from being
cloven. In his Closet a Book was found, written with his own hand, containing
Predictions for those of his Acquaintance, whose Hands and Countenance he had
observed, and the Event justified 'em to be all infallible, there not being a
Person of that number, but died after him of the Death he had noted.

Johannes Cotta was Catullus his Countryman, and had almost the same Genius. He
gave himself to Barthelemi de Lalviano, and offered to keep him Company, when
the French had taken him at the Battle of Laghiara Dadda, and this Office being
declined, he went to Rome to hasten his Benefactor's Ransom, and died there of
the Plague, at eight and twenty years old. His Epigrams have the turn of those
of Martial, and his Orations show he had already read good Books. He had
likewise Composed a Chorography in Verse, and Observations upon Pliny, but it is
not known what are become of those two Works.

Peter Crinitus was Politianus his ablest Scholar, and succeeded him in the
Chair, and Education of the Youth of Florence.

THE END.
The Printed Authors and Manuscripts whence the First Book is taken.
THE Acts of the Foundation of San Lorenzo's Church at Florence. The Paintings
of the Old Palace de Medici. The Second Tome of Giorgio Vasavii. The Eulogy of
Cosmo the Old, among the little Eulogies of Paulus Jovius. The Rights of the
House of Savoy, to the Kingdom of Cyprus. The Fifth Part of Pogiodes Works. The
First Edition of Coleon's Life. Antonius Campanus, in the Life of Braccio.
Filippo Strozzi and his Childrens Manifest against Cosimo de Medici.

The Printed Authors and Manuscripts whence the Second Book is taken.
SImoneta's Manuscript, in the French King's Library. Senator Moccenigo's
History of Venice. The Memorial of the Seditions that happened at Florence,
under the Government of the Republic. The Topographick History of Volterra.
Onuphrius, in the Life of Sixtus the 4th. Politianus his Pazzi's Conspiracy, of
old Aldus Menuceus his first Edition.

The Printed Authors and Manuscripts whence the Third Book is taken.
CArdinal Nardi's Negotiations with Ferrand of Naples, and the Duke of
Calalabria his Son. Two Italian Letters of Lorenzo de Medici, one to justify
his Voyage to Naples, addressed to the Council of Eight at Florence, and the
other written to all the Magistrates of the Republic, to give them an Account
of the Treaty he had there concluded. the Neapolitan King's War against the
Barons, by an unknown Author in the French King's sixth Library. The History of
Venice, by Sabellieus. Platina's Continuator in the Life of Sixtus the 4th.
Andrea Doria's Life, by Carolus Sigonius.

The Printed Authors and Manuscripts whence the Fourth Book is taken.
THE Tuscan Relation of Aetius Sincerus d'Anazar. The Index of Leonard Aretin's
Works, by Mr. de la Marc. The Saint Denis, and the Diogenes Laertius of Amboise
de Camaldoli. The Fourth Tome of Pontanus his Works, by Aldus Manuceus. The
Decades of Blondus. The History of Filippo Visconti. The Life of Charlemain, by
Achaiolis. The Combat of Philadeste and Timotee in Mirtavis. The Conclave of
Sixtus the 4th. The Greek Poems of Lascaris, and the Latin of Majoranus. The
Epigrams of Marulus. The Preface to Plato's Works. The Eulogies of Politian.
The Corrections and the History of the Visconti's, by Merula. Politian's
Epitaph, by Cardinal Bombe. The Life of Savonarola the Jacobin.

The Printed Authors and Manuscripts whence the Fifth Book is taken.
THE Discourse of the Medici's Exile, by Cardinal Bibiana. The Conclave of
Julius the 2d. The Manifest of Lewis the 12th. against the same Pope. The Acts
of the Council held at Pisa, during the Dissentions of Lewis the 12th. and
Julius the 2d. Pompeo Colonna's Harangue to the Romans, to persuade them to
recover their Liberty, while the Pope was sick. The Relation of the Cardinal
Legat's flight, after the Battle of Ravenna, by Barnabe de Malespina.
Machiavel's Life. Mario Musuoi's Observations upon that of Castruccio.

The Printed Authors and Manuscripts whence the Sixth Book is taken.
LEO the 10th's Conclave. His entry into Florence, by Francisco de Sangallo. A
Memorial of the Offices the Republic of Genoua has rendered, at sundry times,
to France. Gene^rard's, and Mr. du Puit's Observations upon the Concordate. A
Collation of Guichiardini's Errors, by Giovanni Battista Leoni. Lorenzo de
Medici's Negotiation with the Heiress of Bologna, between the Duke d'Albania,
and Cardinal Bibiana. That of the Election of Charles the Fifth, by Adolphus
Vander Marck, Bishop of Liergi. Leo the 10th's Instruction to Roberto Ursini
upon the same subject. The Life of the first Duke of Urbin, of the House della
Rovere. A Journal containing the Secret and Circumstances of Cardinal
Petrucci's Conspiracy. The ten Books of Pope Leo's Epistles.

The Printed Authors and Manuscripts whence the Sev'nth Book is taken.
THE Eulogies of Pontanus and of Domitius. The Collection of Anonymous Authors.
The Life of Duke Valentinois. Pesaro's Topographick History. Guichiardini's
first Book. A Dissertation, by an unknown Hand, upon the Infelicity of Men of
Literature. Floridus Sabinus in his Eulogies. The History of Remini. Beroalde
Senior's Commentary upon Apuleius his Golden Ass. The Eulogies of the Vatican
Library Keepers. Julius the 2d's Manifest against Giovanni Bentivoglio. Cotta's
Eulogy, in Julius Caesar Scaliger. Justinian's History of Venice. Mascardi in
the Art of History. Antonio Possevino, in the History of the Gonzaga's.
Longeuil's Judgment upon Erasmus and Budeus. Paulus Jovius his Dialogue with
the Marquis du Guast. The Neapolitan Families d'Ammirato. The Postscripts of
Budeus, to diverse Manuscripts in the French King's Library.

FINIS.

