An universal prayer for all which regards Salvation.
I Believe in you, O my God, strengthen my belief; I hope in you, secure my
hope; I love you, increase my love: I repent that I have sinned against you,
augment my repentance.

I adore you as my first principle, I desire you as my last end; I thank you as
my perpetual benefactor, and I invoke you as my Sovereign protector.

Uouchsafe O my God, to regulate me by your wisdom, to bridle me by your
Justice, to comfort me by your compassion, and to protect me by your power.

I consecrate to you my thoughts my words, my actions, and my sufferings; that
for the future I may think of you, may speak of you, may act by you, and may
suffer for you.

Make my will, O Lord conformable always, and in every thing, to your most holy
will.

I beg that you may illuminate my understanding, may inflame my will, may
purify my body, and may sanctify my Soul.

Animate me, O my God, to expiate my past offenses, to overcome my future
temptations, to correct my predominant Passion, and to practice virtues proper
to my state.

Fill my heart with affection for your goodness, with aversion to my
Imperfections, with zeal for my neighbor, and with contempt for the world.

Put me in mind, O Lord, to be submissive to my Superiors, charitable to my
Inferiors, faithful to my friends, and indulge^t to my enemies.

Assist me to subdue sensuality by mortification, covetousness by alms, anger
by mildness, and tepidity by fervor.

Render me prudent, O Lord, in undertakings, constant in dangers, patient in
adversity, and humble in prosperity.

Let me never forget to Join attention to my prayers, temperance to my meals,
exactness to my employments, and steadiness to my resolutions.

Inspire in me, O Lord, the care of keeping always an upright conscience, a
modest behavior, an edifiing conversation, and a regular conduct.

That I may incessantly apply my self to overcome nature, to second grace, to
observe the Law, and to merit Salvation.

Discover to me, O Lord, the meanness of the world, and the greatness of
Heaven, the shortness of Time, and the length of Eternity.

Make me prepare for Death, fear your Judgment, avoid Hell, and lastly gain
Heaven. Through the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

St. GERMAIN Printed and Sold by William Weston, Printer, and Stationerto, the
King's most Excelent Majesty, for his Household and Chapel.


