THE VAIN INSOLENCY OF ROME, Challenging SALVATION to her own FACTION;
Discovered in Two LETTERS.

The first whereof was written by a Priest of the Church of Rome to a
Gentlewoman of York, that had got out of the Snares of the Popish Superstition.

The second sent by the same Gentlewoman (instructed by a Divine of the Church
of England) in answer thereunto.

The truth endures, and is always strong; it lives and conquereth for
evermore. 1 Esdras 4. 38. LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, Bookseller to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1673.

TO THE READER.
REader, by the Letter of the Romish Priest, which immediately here follows,
thou will easily perceive, with what craft, and artifice, the Romish Hucksters
endeavor to seduce the people of our Church of England, and generally all of
the Reformation, to the Communion of Rome. They tell them, that they are out of
St. Peter's Fold, and therefore, of necessity, in a state of damnation.

The first greatness of Rome was founded in the eminency of the City, and the
concessions and indulgence of some of the Emperors. But the subtle Popes,
perceiving, that what former Emperors granted, others, in succeeding times,
might revoke, perverted that Text Mat. 16. 18. Tu es Petrus, etc. Thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock, etc. to the founding of a spiritual Monarchy, and
the claim of both Swords, Temporal, as well as Spiritual; or, at least the
Temporal in order to the Spiritual. And all Jesuited Papists (neither see I how
any of them that submit to the third Lateran Council, can be otherwise minded)
hold that Princes excommunicated may be rejected by their own Subjects. What
good effects this New-Gospel doctrine wrought in the World, may appear in the
instances of the murder of those two noble Kings, Henry the Third, and Henry
the Fourth of France, and in that design of the Fifth of November amongst our
selves here in England.

It Is strange that all Princes in the World are not alarmed, as learned, and
perspicacious King James of blessed memory was, with these doctrines. For
whatsoever Allegiance the Romanists pretend to, yet it is evident, that an
instance may fall out, wherein they will be forced to renownce their obedience,
either to their Pope, or King.

Take heed therefore, if thou art disengaged from this seduction, of coming
near to such snares; and if thou art (as alas too many of late amongst us have
been) caught in them, break them with all speed.

That fearful instance of the Learned Latomus (of which thou will read in the
Gentlewomans answer to the Priest's Letter, here annexed, will declare, that
the greatest sticklers for Rome's interest, when they shall most need it, will
find little peace. For that may be said of this spiritual, which Solomon spoke
of the carnal Harlot, Prove. 7. 26, 27 She has cast down many wounded: yea many
strong men have been slain by her. Her house is the way to Hell, going down to
the chambers of Death.

IMPRIMATUR

Tho. Tomkyns.
Ex Aed. Lamb. Martii 6. 1672.
The Priests Letter.
Madam,
SInce my departure from you, I have not forgot your engaging Charity; what
regret may, I well have, that contrary to your promise in the long Gallery, you
have forgot your Soul, so precious to God! Madam, return home. I labor to get
your dear Son Pic. to return home. You may come home again; no loss, Madam,
like the loss of a Soul, I should be glad to suffer death, that you would
accept of life. Some years past, I was in hopes the charitable Boxes of Sealed
with Crosses.
Lozanges you did send me, would bring you in again to St. Peter's Fold, out of
which no Salvation. Sweet Jesus and his unspotted Mother grant you grace to do
well by St. Francis Xaverius his intercession. Cordially wished by, Madam,

Your engaged well wishing Friend and Servant.

The Gentlewomans Answer.
Sir,
I Received your Letter, and, though I cannot despise the zeal of your Charity,
yet (I thank God) that, through his goodness, I can now discern the error of
it. I wish (and truly, I account my self bound thereunto, in requital of the
care which you profess for my Soul) that you were your self in as good a way
for Salvation, in respect of your communion with the Church of Rome, as I am,
upon the account of my return to my dear Mother, the Church of England.

Since I saw you, I have a little better considered the Articles of our Church,
and in them I perceive nothing commended to my Faith, but what is either
expressly contained in the Holy Scriptures, or deducible, by very good
consequence, from them. But I am very well assured by those, that know it, that
in some Councils lately held by your Church, and particularly that of Trent,
there are diverse Canons (to which you will expect my consent) neither agreeable
to the Holy Scriptures, nor consonant to the purer ages of the Church, and yet
your Pope Pius the Fourth, curses all that are not of that Faith, and
excludes all from Salvation, that believe not according to the Tenor of them.
Bishop Morton was a Learned man, and he took pains to examine the grounds of
the peremptory decree of that Pope; the Book wherein he did it, is called the
Grand Imposture of the now Church of Rome. I pray peruse it heedfully and
heartily, and submit to the truths contained therein.

As for my promise in the Long Gallery, whereof you re-mind me, I confess my
error in making it; and I am told that it being unlawful in the matter (I mean
to adhere to your corrupt Church) my sin of rash engagement would be heightened
by performance, whereas it is so far from being any, to break it, that it is my
obligation so to do. David rashly swore to destroy all the Males in Nabals
Family, but, by the good counsel of Abigail, rather broke his oath, than
proceeded to add murder to his passion. And truly, Sir, though you may think it
presumption in me, to give advice to a person of your calling and gravity; yet
when I consider that David, a great Prophet, and a King then anointed, despised
not the good counsel of a woman, but said with all meekness, Blessed be thy
advise, and blessed be thou. (1 Samuel 25. 33.) I shall not repent that I prompt
these intimations unto you, but rather earnestly, yet humbly request you, ay,
and adjure you in the fear of God, to break your engagement to that pestilent
Society, to which, perhaps you are as solemnly under the bond of an Oath, (for
that was, I hear, Pope Pius his injunction to the Clergy, to embrace the Trent
Faith) engaged, as David was to avenge himself.

St. Augustine (I have heard) was entangled in the heresies of the Manichees,,
and we are taught in the sacred History, that St. Paul once persecuted the
faith of Christ. Both these came, by Gods mercy, to the sight of their foul
errors, and at last defended the Faith, which they had opposed.

Some of your present persuasion, and in the same degree of Office, have seen
their Snares, and got (through the goodness of God) their feet out of them; and
publicly given the account of their change; I refer you to their Books, better
known possibly (and I wish accordingly considered) to your self than me. I
cannot urge you upon more weighty terms, than you are pleased to prompt unto
me, the due remembrance of the worth of your immortal Soul.

Sir, I desire to emulate your own Charity to my self, and say in your behalf,
as you say in mine, I should be glad to suffer death, that you would accept of
life. No loss you say (and you say truly in it, for you speak in conformity to
the language of Christ himself, What shall it profit a man, if he should gain
the whole World and lose his own Soul?) like the loss of a Soul. Precious it is
to God, and should it be vile to our selves, to whom the damage will be only
prejudicial? God the Father sent his Son to redeem it, God the Son shed his
blood to ransom it, and the Holy Spirit is plased to seal it with his
signature, as the peculiar treasure of God.

Now then, I beseech you, Sir (...) weigh with your self the dange^ you expose
this precious Soul of yours unto, and not your own only, but the Souls also of
as many, as you win to your own error, whilst you tell them, as you do me,
that Salvation is not to be had out of St. Peter 's Fold, meaning thereby, the
present Church of Rome; in which (to speak my mind freely to you) I think that
Salvation can very scarcely, if at all, be procured by those of it, that dye in
the constant defense of the pernicious errors maintained generally by all that
adhere unto it.

To speak nothing of the manifold, and gross deviations of your Church from
both Sacred Scripture, and primitive antiquity; as half-Communion, the absurd
doctrine of Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Divine Service in a tongue not known
to the people, that should perform it, etc. I say to speak nothing of these,
what strange ^xpressions fall from your own Pen in the little Note, which you
sent me; Sweet Jesus, and his unspotted Mother, grant you grace to do well, by
St. Francis Xaverius his Intercession?

Had you commended me to the grace of Christ alone, you had done it with good
warranty from St. Peter, in whom you boast. Thus speaks he, Epist. I. 5. 10.
The God of all grace, etc. make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you.
Christ with the Father and the blessed Spirit are one God you know; from any of
the blessed Persons, we may ask Grace, and wish it for others, securely. But to
crave it from Creatures (such is the Blessed Virgin, though never so glorious)
is very dangerous, if not blasphemous.

If I be not mistaken, Divines make it an argument of the Divinity of the
second, and third Persons in the Holy Trinity, that in the Scripture style,
Grace is wished from them, in conjunction with the first. Thus the rest of the
Apostles salute, and thus they frequently take their leave of the Churches to
which they write. 1 Cor. 1. 3. 2 Cor. 13. 14.
No mention in these forms of the Blessed Virgin, she is never joined to the
Holy Trinity in such prayers for Grace; and indeed if God (as St. Peter speaks)
be the Author of all Grace, what Grace need we ask of the Blessed Virgin?

And then again, I am a little startled at these words, unspotted Mother, if
you mean no more by it, than that the Blessed Virgin since her death is
discharged from all sin, and defilement incident (through the fall of our first
Parents) or rather unavoidable to our humane Nature, I can easily admit the
term unspotted; but if by the word unspotted, you insinuate our Ladies
immaculate conception, I expect better reasons, than ever yet I have heard
alleged, before I can sign such an Article with my faith. I am told, that
Saint Anselm says, that the Mother of our Lord was conceived in sin, and why
we should not believe him, speaking so agreeably to the language of the Holy
Spirit, which exempts none, but our Lord himself, from the common Contagion, I
see no reason.

What were the Virtues of your Saint Francis Xaverius (to whose intercession
also you think fit to commend me) to me is uncertain; but this I am most sure
of, that the intercession of our Blessed Savior with his Father, is sufficient
for me; that he has commanded all, that labor, and are heavy laden, to come
unto him. Mat. 11. 28. and that such as do come unto him, he will in no wise
cast out, John 6. 37.

I confess, when I made my application to you, I was in great trouble; and for
my sudden ease, was ready to fly unto any profession, that would offer me
present relief. Alas, you know, people falling from an high place, catch at any
thing within their reach; if sharp Swords, or red hot Irons were in their way,
they would lay hold on them. It was (I now perceive) no small stupidity, and
blindness in me, that I did not so fully, as I should have done, consider the
excellent constitution, and pure doctrine of our Church of England. For therein
I now see all the comforts, that can be imagined requisite unto distressed
Souls, are abundantly offered unto me. I have the Scriptures accurately
translated; I have the sense of my dear Mother, in exact conformity to them,
laid before me in our 39 Articles; I may have access unto my Confessor, in all
cases of my perplexities, and I find such of our Priests, to whom I have made
my applications, compassionate, grave, and faithful unto me. But they tell me
(and I am very well pleased to hear it from them) that I must not be
discouraged, though I find not that present ease that I long for. Upon my
profession of repentance, and faith in Christ, they are ready to dispense unto
me the benefit, and blessing of their absolution, but if I find not presently
that transport of rejoicing, which (it may be) I too hastily catch at; they
advise me, not to be too much discouraged, but to wait the Lords leisure; who
will have us, even after he has received us to pardon, sometimes by experience
find the truth of that speech in the Holy Prophet Jerem. 2. 19. It is an evil
and bitter thing that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God and that my fear is
not in thee, says the Lord God of Hosts.

They support me with this assurance, that if I repent, and believe the Gospel,
I shall certainly be saved, and if any offer me Consolation upon other terms,
they do but delude me. Whatsoever my discouragements are, they exhort me to
patience, and the doctrine is the more satisfactory unto me, because I see it
to be agreeable to that meek resolution of the Church in the holy Prophet Mic.
7. 9. Where, in her affliction, I see her pitching upon this conclusion, and
saying, I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against
him.

I am not at all affrighted at your denial of Salvation to all out of Saint
Peter 's Fold; I am sure that all penitent Believers are of the Fold of Christ,
in which, except St. Peter himself had been a Sheep, as well as a Pastor under
the great Shepherd, he had undoubtedly perished. He preached as well, and as
good doctrine at other places as he did at Rome; and the rest of the Holy
Apostles, wheresoever they preached, delivered the same truths, that he did, to
the Church of Christ.

If Rome in succeeding times (by being the seat of the Emperors) became a more
eminent City than her Sisters, and the Bishops of it obtained any extraordinary
privileges by their favors; all these things are extrinsecal to the substance
of the Christian Faith; which, when Rome ceased to deliver in that purity
wherein St. Peter taught it, she can with no better pretensions lay claim to
Saint Peter, than the Jews of old did to Moses. Whom Christ tells
(notwithstanding all their boasting in him) that they did not believe his
writings. And truly I think the same might now be said in several instances, to
those of Rome, in reference to St. Peter, of whom she glories. Had they
believed St. Peter's writings, they would never condemn those Churches, as
Heretical, which in no point deny them.

I do not, Sir, profess my self able to contest with one of your profession,
neither have I, to provoke you to disputation, written so large an answer to
your few lines. But Saint Peter, to whose Fold you invite me, and in whose Fold
(not excluding the rest of his Fellow-Apostles, for the names of all the Twelve
were written in the twelve foundations of the Holy Jerusalem, Apocal. 21. 14.)
because we adhere to his doctrine, we believe that we of the Church of England
now live, gives me warrant to speak what I here declare, when he thus
exhorts us 1 Epist. Chap. 3. Verse. 15. Be ready always to give an answer to
every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness
and fear. In that meekness and fear, thus commended unto us by ours, as well as
your Saint Peter, nay more ours than yours, nay (give me leave to say it) ours,
and not yours, in our matters of difference, I humbly give you this Answer, and
rest,

Sir, November. 27. 1672. Your assured Friend, and humble Servant in Christ.
Postscript.
Sir,
BEcause you tell me, in effect, that I must be damned, if I should die out of
the Communion of your Church, give me leave (in regard, that I am not so well
able to argue rationally, as to observe Historical passages, which sometimes
are Commentaries upon disputable truths) to acquaint you with a short History,
which I minded, when I heard it, the more heedfully, because it discharged me
from that fear, which your Severity is apt to beget in the minds of unsettled
Protestants. It Is this; and you will find it, as my Friend, who translated it
out of Latin for me, assures me, in the third part of Solomon Glassius his
exposition of the Gospels, page 277, and 278. Jacobus Latomus was in exceeding
great reputation amongst the Divines of our time, because he had written
against the Lutherans somewhat more learnedly, than either Clitopheus, or
Eckius, or Roffensis; and all thought him a person of candor, and that he had
written according to the conviction of his own conscience.

This Person, when he drew near his death, commanded our Masters to be called,
and as they stood by him, with groans and deeep-fetcht sighs, said; I therefore
commanded you to be called, that I might testify unto you, that the doctrine
of Luther, which you furiously persecute, is the true doctrine of Christ, the
Apostles, and the Church, and this, which you defend is impious, and
diabolical; and I my self, for certain writings of mine, which I have lately,
against the conviction of my conscience and knowledge, set forth against the
Lutherans, to gratify you, am a damned man.

When in horror and astonishment at this speech, they looked one on another,
and those that were more ingenuous, exhorted him, not to despair of the mercy
of God, although he were persuaded, that he had done wickedly; He,
commemorating many passages concerning the punishments and exile of godly men,
who by his instigation were either slain or banished, at last, with groanings,
added; in vain you labor to comfort me, for I certainly know, that I am
damned, and with these words gave up the Ghost. Glassius affirms that he
received this History out of D. Alesius in his Exposition of the 41 Psalm. And
truly, Sir, though you may perhaps condemn it, as a Fable, yet for my part, I
am so far from distrusting the truth of it, that I wonder, that many of your
best Scholars do not leave this World in the same convictions; and indeed, it
is very probable, that they do, and some times declare as much. But such
confessions are like the Guard of Soldiers Narratives of our Saviors
Resurrection, they are strangled (as the Male-children were commanded to be in
Egypt) as soon as they are born, if not by bribery, yet by interest, which
knows no ingenuity, nor will admit of any discoveries, against its own
concerns, though never so pernicious. I wish you a better temper, and in that
hearty desire, commend you to the God of truth, assuring you, that I will never
be (by Gods assistance) moved from the profession of that holy Religion,
wherein now I stand, though I shall ever be ready to testify my thanks to you,
for your charitable affections, and remain

Yours, in all Christian affection and service.



Sir,
AFter my Letter was written, but before it was sealed, I considered a little,
what your Saint Francis Xaverius his merits might be, unto whose Patronage you
are pleased to commend me. I am informed, that he is a Saint of a late
Canonization; first a Proselyte of, and then a Confederate with Ignatius de
Loyola; and truly, I think, not far from some of his Enthusiastical raptures.
He, with Ignatius, indeed got Pope Paul the thirds approbation to be allowed
with some others, as a Religious Society, in the year 1540. But there is an
expression in that Popes Letters Vid. Regul. Jesuitic.
(of Grant) which may beget a jealousy, that the Pope had an eye to the
service he might have from them, as well as to the devotion of the men, if at
least he thought them devout. His words I hear, run thus. We have lately heard,
that Ignatius de Loyola, and Peter Faber, and Francis Xaverius, etc. inspired
(as it is piously believed) with the Holy Ghost, coming from several quarters of
the World, met together, and being confederate into a Society, have renounced
the snares of this World, and for ever devoted their lives to the service of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and of us, and of our successors, the Bishops of Rome,
etc.

I suppose the Pope might have so much of humane frailty in him, as to take all
in good part, that such sworn Servants of his should enterprise.

Upon these grounds I believe the following Popes, Gregory the fifteenth, and
his successor Vrbanus the eighth, had such high estimation of this Francis;
insomuch that the one declared him a Saint, and the other Canonized him. I am
told, that he had so behaved himself in preaching to the Indians, that he is
called their Apostle. But truly, to speak my mind freely to you, his
achievements there, seem to me very difficult to be believed. I doubt, whether
all the miracles of Christ, and his Apostles recorded in the Scripture may be
equal to those mentioned in Vrban's Letters for the Canonization of your
Xaverius.

It Is said in them that he defixed his eyes, in his exstatick raptures, on the
Heavens; that his whole body, by divine force, would be elevated from the
earth, and his face so inflamed, that it would represent Angelical clarity; and
he would cry out, it is enough Lord, it is enough. And, when he said Mass (the
abomination, as it is now celebrated, of your Romish Service, as the Learned
Doctor Brevint excellently shows us) he would be so alienated from his senses
(which indeed I believe) that the Ministers present in the service could not,
in some competent time, by pulling his Garments, excite him to his attendance
on the Work he had* in hand. And otherwise, the people could observe him
advanced (wondering at the miracle) a Cubit above the earth. He wore such
tattered Rags (and is this a piece of merit?) that the Boys sometimes would
mock, and deride him. Of the like nature is his frequent walkings on the hot
Sands, and on Thorns themselves, drinking the polluted waters, with which he
had washed the soars of diseased people. And then, his ability to speak the
Languages, which he never learnt, and to be understood, some times, by men of
several tongues, when he spoke one, that was strange to the Auditors, till he
began to preach, is as much, if not more, than what was granted to the blessed
Apostles at the Feast of Penticost. It Is strange to me, that he should cast a
Crucifix into the Sea, to still the Waves, and stranger yet, that having lost
it by violence of the storm, it should be brought to him, as he walked on the
Shore, in the mouth of a Sea-Crab.

I marvel (though you read this, and much more as Romantic in the Popes
Letters) that you can credit all this done by a person, about an hundred years
since; especially seeing the Learned Fathers about four hundred years after
Christ, judged the age of miracles to be past, and our belief of those only,
that are recorded in the Holy Scriptures, to be sufficient now for our present
Satisfaction.

Besides, were the miracles reported to have been done by him true, and the man
as good, as you think him to have been, I conceive his intercession for any
particular person to be a point uncertain, and truly, as long as we have the
intercession of Christ, altogether superfluous.

I am resolved therefore, to leave your Xaverius to the quiet enjoyment of the
felicity, which he has obtained (if at least he be in a state of bliss) and to
give him no interruption, in any concerns of my Soul.

FINIS.
Errata.
IN the second Page to the Reader, l. 20. for third r. fourth, vid Council.
Lateran. sub Innocentio 3o cap. 3. de Haeretic.


